THE DOCTRINE OF THE SAINTS PERSEVERANCE, Explained and Confirmed. OR, The
certain Permanency of their 1. Acceptance with GOD, and 2. Sanctification from
GOD.
MANIFESTED and PROVED FROM The 1. ETERNAL PRINCIPLES 2. EFFECTUAL CAUSES 3.
EXTERNAL MEANS
Thereof. IN, 1. The IMMUTABILITY of the 1. Nature 2. Decrees 3. Covenant and
4. Promises Of GOD.
2. The OBLATION and INTERCESSION Of JESUS CHRIST. 3. The 1. Promises 2.
Exhortations 3. Threats
Of the GOSPEL.


Improved in its Genuine Tendency to Obedience and Consolation.

AND VINDICATED In a Full Answer to the Discourse of Mr JOHN GOODWIN against
it, in his Book Entitled Redemption Redeemed.

With some DIGRESSIONS Concerning 1. The Immediate effects of the Death of
Christ. 2. Personal Indwelling of the Spirit. 3. Union with Christ. 4. Nature
of Gospel promises, etc.

ALSO A PREFACE Manifesting the Judgment of the Ancients concerning the Truth
contended for: with a Discourse touching the Epistles of IGNATIUS, The
EPISCOPACY in them Asserted; and some Animadversions on Dr H: H: his
Dissertations on that Subject.

By JOHN OWEN Servant of Jesus Christ in the Work of the Gospel.

OXFORD, Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD Printer to the University, for Tho. (...)
ANNO DOM: 1654.

TO HIS HIGHNESS OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF England,
Scotland and Ireland, with the Dominions thereof.
SIR,
THE Wise man tells us, that no man knows Love or hatred, by all that is
before him. The great variety wherein God dispenses outward things in the
World, with the many changes and alterations, which according to the counsel
of his will, he continually works in the dispensations of them, will not allow
them nakedly in themselves, to be evidences of the fountain from whence they
flow. Seeing also, that the want, or abundance of them, may equally by the
Goodness and Wisdom of Cod, be ordered and cast into an useful subserviency,
to a Good infinitely transcending what is, or may be contained in them, there
is no necessity, that in the distribution of them, God should walk according
to any constant uniforme Law of procedure, all the various alterations about
them, answering one eternal purpose for a determinate end. Of Spiritual good
things, there is another Reason and Condition; for as they are in themselves
Fruits, Evidences and Pledges of an Eternal unchangeable love; so the want of
them, in their whole kind, being not capable of a tendency to a greater Good
than they are, the Dispensation of them, does so far answer the eternal
spring and Fountain from whence it flows, as in respect of its substance and
being, not to be obnoxious to any alteration. This is that which in the ensuing
Treatise is contended for. In the midst of all the changes and mutations,
which the infinitely wise providence of God, does daily effect in the greater
and lesser things of this World, as to the communication of his love in Jesus
Christ, and the merciful gracious distributions of the unsearcheable Riches of
his Grace, and the hid Treasures thereof purchased by his blood, he knows no
repentance. Of both these you have had full experience. And though your
concernement in the former, has been as eminent as that of any person whatever
in these latter Ages of the World, yet your Interest in, and acquaintance with
the latter, is, as of incomparable more importance in it self, so answerably
of more value and esteem unto you. A sense of the excellency and sweetness of
unchangeable love, emplying it self in the Golden oil of distinguishing
spiritual Mercies, is one letter of that new name, which none can read, but he
that has it. The Series and Chain of eminent providence, whereby you have
been carried on, and protected in all the hazardous work of your Generation,
which your God has called you unto, is evident to all. Of your preservation by
the power of God through Faith, in a course of Gospel Obedience, upon the
account of the immutability of the Love, and Infallibility of the Promises of
God, which are yea and Amen in Jesus Christ, your own soul is only possessed
with the experience. Therein is that abiding joy, that secret refreshment,
which the world cannot give. That you and all the Saints of God, may yet enjoy
that Peace and Consolation which is in believing, that the eternal Love of God
is immutable, that he is faithful in his Promises, that his Covenant ratified
in the death of his Son is unchangeable, that the fruits of the purchase of
Christ, shall be certainly bestowed on all them for whom he died, and that
every one, who is really interested in these things, shall be kept unto
salvation, is the aim of my present plea and Contest. That I have taken upon
me to present my weak endeavors in this cause of God, to your Highness, is
so far forth from my persuasion, of your Interest in the Truth contended for,
(and then which, you have none so excellent or worthy) that without it, no
other considerations whatever, either of that Dignity and Power whereunto of
God you are called, nor of your peculiar regard to that Society of men, whereof
I am an unworthy Member, nor any other personal Respects whatever, could have
prevailed with, or emboldened me thereunto. Sancta sanctis. The things I treat
of are such, as sometimes none of the Princes of this World knew, and as yet
few of them are acquainted with. Blessed are they who have their portion in
them. When the urgency of your High, and important Affairs, wherein so many
Nations are concerned, will lend you so much leisure, as to take a view of what
is here tendered, the knowledge which you have of me, will deliver you from a
Temptation, of charging any weakness you may meet withal, upon the Doctrine
which I assert and maintain. And so that may ruune and be glorified, whatever
become of the nothing that I have done, in the defense thereof, I shall be
abundantly satisfied. That is the Shield which being safe, I can with
contentment see these papers dye. Unto your Highness, I have not any thing
more to add: nor for you greater thing to pray, than, that you may be
established in the Assurance and sense, of that unchangeable Love, and free
acceptance in Christ which I contend for: and that therein you may be
preserved, to the Glory of God, the Advancement of the Gospel, and the Real
Advantage of these Nations.

Your Highness Most Humble, And most Faithful Servant, JOHN OWEN.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the Right worshipful, His Reverend, learned, and worthy friends, and
Brethren, the Heads and Governors of the Colleges, and Halls in the
University of OXFORD.
SIRS,
THe dedication of Books, to the names of men worthy, and of esteem in their
generation, takes sanctuary in so Catholic and Ancient prescription, that to
use any defensative about my walking in the same path, cannot but forfeit the
loss of somewhat more, then the pains that would be spent therein. Now
although in addresses of this kind, men usually prevail themselves of the
occasion, to deliver their thoughts as to particulars, in great variety
according as their concernments may be; yet the Reasons which are generally
pleaded as directions for the choice of them, to whom with their labors, and
writings they so address themselves, are for the most part uniforme; and in
their various course, transgress not the Rules of certain heads, from whence
they flow. To express a gratitude for respects and favors received, by
returning things in their kind eternal, for those which are but temporal: to
obtain Countenance and Approbation unto their endeavors in their breaking
forth into the world, from names of more esteem, or at least more known, then
their own: to advance in repute by a Correspondency in Judgment, with men of
such esteem, intimated thereby; are the more ingenuous aims of men in the
dedications of their writings. Though these, and sundry other pretenses of the
same kind, might justly be drawn into my plea, for this address unto you; yet
your peculiar designation and Appointment, through the good hand of the
providence of God, to the defense of the Gospel; and your eminent Furnishment
with Abilities from the same hand, for the performance of that glorious duty,
is that alone, upon the account whereof I have satisfied my self, and hope
that I may not dissatisfie others, as to this present Application. What there
is of my own peculiar concernment, wherein I am like to obtain a more
favorable Condescension in Judgment, as to my present undertaking from you,
then from other men, will in the close of my address, crave leave to have
mention made thereof. Brethren! the outward obligations that are upon you from
the God of truth, with the Advantages which he has entrusted you withal, for
the defense of his Truth, above the most of men in the world, are evident, even
to them that walk by the way, and turn little aside to the consideration of
things of this nature, importance, and Condition. And it is to me an evidence
of no small encouragement, that God will yet graciously employ you in the work
and labor of his Gospel, by his constant giving a miscarrying womb to all
them, who have attempted to defraud the Nation, and the Churches of God
therein, of those helps and furtherances of Piety and Literature, with whose
management, for their sevlice, you are at present entrusted. Of the Jewels of
Silver and Gold, whereof by the Lord's appointment, the Children of Israel
coming out from amongst them, spoiled the Egyptians, did they dedicate to the
Tabernacle in the wilderness; when, the Lord planted the Heavens, and laid the
foundations of the Earth; and said to Sion Thou art my people. Though some
outward provisions, and furnitures of Literature, now, through the good hand of
God, made serviceable to you in your Attendance upon the great Work, and
employment committed to you, were first deposited, when thick darkness was over
the land: Yet that they may be made eminently subservient to the will of God,
in raising up again the Tabernacle of David, that was fallen down, the
Experience of a few years, I no way doubt, will abundantly reveal and
manifest. That in the vicissitude of all things, given them by the mysterious
and dreadful wheels of providence, your good things also, (as every thing else
that is pleasant and desirable, or given of God unto the Sons of men has done)
have fallen into the possession and disposal of men, some enemies, others
utterly useless, and unfruitful to the Lord in their generations, cannot be
denied: But what is there in his ways, or worship, in his works, or word,
that God has not, at some season or other, delivered into the power of the men
of the world, though they have abused and perverted them to their own
destruction? Neither is there any other use of this Consideration, but only to
inform them of the Obligations they lie under, to a due and zealous
improvement of them, to whose Trust and Cate the Lord commit any of his
mercyes, when he rescues them from the Captivity, under which they have been
detained, by ungodly men. This is now your lot, and condition, in reference to
many who for sundry generations, possessed those places, and advantages of
eminent service for the house of our God, which you now enjoy. What may justly
be the Expectation of God from you, under this signal dispensation of his
goodness, what is the hope prayer, and expectation of very many that fear him,
concerning you, in this nation; what are the designs, desires, aims, and
endeavors of all sorts of them, who bear ill will at whatsoever is comely, or
praise worthy amongst us, you are not ignorant. Whatever consideration at any
time or season, may seem to have had an efficacy upon the minds and wills of
men, under the like Sacrament, and designement to the service of truth with
your selves, to incite and provoke them to a singularly industrious and
faithful discharge of their duty, is eminently pressing upon you also; and you
are made a spectacle to men and Angels, as to the acquitment of your selves.
The whole of your employment, I confess, both in the General intendment of it,
for the promoting and diffusing of light knowledge, and Truth in every kind
whatever, and in the more special design thereof, for the defense,
furtherance, and propagation of the Ancient, inviolable, unchangeable truth of
the Gospel of God, is in the days wherein we live, exposed to a Contention
with as much opposition, contempt, scorn, hatred, and reproach, as ever any
such undertaking was, in any place in the world wherein men pretended to love
light, more then darkness.

It is an hellish darkness, which the light of the Sun cannot expel. There is
no ignorance so full of Pride, folly and stubborness, as that which maintains
it self, in the midst of plentiful means of light and knowledge. He that is
in the dark, when the light of the Sun is as seven days, has darkness in his
eye, and how great is that darkness? Such is the Ignorance you have to contend
withal; stubborn, affected, prejudicate beyond expression; maintaining it is
darkness at noonday, expressly refusing to attend to the Reason of things, as
being that alone, in the thoughts of those men, (if they may be so called) who
are possessed with it, wherewith the world is disturbed. From those who being
under the power of this enthralment do seem to repine at God; that they are not
beasts, and clamorously traduce the more noble part of that kind and offspring,
whereof themselves are, which attempts do heighten, and improve the difference
between Creatures of an intellectual Race, and them, to whom their perishing
Composition gives the utmost Advancement; whose eternal seeds, and principles,
are laid by the hand of God in their respective beings, you will not I am sure
think it much if you meet with Oppositions. Those who are in any measure
acquainted with the secret, triumphing exaltations of wisdom and knowledge,
against folly and ignorance; with the principles and conditions, wherewith they
advance themselves in their gloryings, even then, when the precedence of (that
which is bestial in this world) force and violence outwardly bears them down
with insultation and contempt, will rather envy, then pity you in any contest
that on this foot of account, you can be engaged in. You are not the first,
that have fought with men, after the manner of Beasts; nor will be the last,
who shall need to pray to be delivered from absurd and unreasonable man, seeing
all men have not faith.

Men of profane and Atheistical spirits, who are ready to say, who is the
Lord, what is the Almighty that we should fear him or his truth that we should
regard it? whose Generation is of late multiplied on the face of the earth,
crying a Confederacy with them, who professing better things, are yet fi^^ed
with grievous indignations at the sacrifice that has been made of their
Abominations before their eyes, by that Reformation of this place, wherein you
have been instrumental, are a continual goad on the other side, and would
quickly be a sword in your very bowels, were not He, that is higher then the
highest, your dwelling place, and refuge in your Generation. These are they
upon whom God having poured contempt, and stained their glory, who instead of
accepting of his dispensations, are filled with wrath, and labor to make ^then
drink of the cup, which has been offered to themselves. With their reproaches,
sleightings, undervaluations, slanders, do your worth, diligence, integrity,
labors, contend, from one end: of this earth to the other. He that has
delivered, does deliver, and in him we trust, that he will deliver.

What other oppositions you do meet, or in your progress, may meet withal, I
shall not mention: but wait with patience on him, who gives men Repentance,
and chang of Heart to the Acknowledgment of the things, that are of him. This
in the midst of all, has hitherto been a cause of great rejoyoing, that God
has graciously kept off ravenous wolves, from entering into your flocks, where
are so many tender lambs, and has not suffered men to arise from amongst your
selves speaking perverse things, and drawing away disciples after them; but as
he has given you, ac obey from your heart that form of doctrine, which has
been delivered unto you, so He has preserved th^^ faith amongst you, which was
once delivered to the Saints.

Your peculiar designation to the service of the Gospel, and defense of the
Truth thereof, your Abilities for that works, your abiding in it,
notwithstanding the opposition you meet (...) in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation, are as I said before, my Encouragements in this address
unto you; wherein I shall crave leave a little further to communicate my
thoughts unto you as to the matter in hand. Next to the Son of his love who is
the Truth, the greatest and most eminent gift, that God has bestowed on the
Sons of men, and communicated to them, is his Truth revealed in his word. The
knowledge of him, his mind and will, according to the discovery which he has
made of himself, from his own bosom, having magnified his word, above all his
name. The importance hereof, as to the eternal Concernments of the Sons of men,
either in ignorance refusing and resisting, or accepting and embracing of it,
is that which is owned, and lies as the bottom and foundation of all, that we
any way engage our selves into, in this world: wherein we differ from them,
whose hope perishes with them. Unto an enquiry after, and entertainment of
this divine and sacred depositum, has God designed the fruit and labor of
that, wherein we retain the resemblance of him; which whilst we have our
being, nothing can abolish. The mind of man, and divine truth, are the two most
eminent Excellencies, wherewith the Lord has adorned this lower part of his
Creation: which when they correspond, and are brought into conformity with each
other, the mind being changed into the Image of Truth, there is glory added to
glory, and the whole rendered exceeding glorious. By what sutableness and
proportion in the things themselves, (that is between Truth and the mind of
man,) as we are men, by what Almighty secret and irresistible power, as we are
corrupted men, our minds being full of darkness and folly, this is wrought, is
not my business now to discuss. This is on all hands confessed: that setting
aside the consideration of the eternal issues of things, every mistake of
divine Truth, every opposition to it, or rejection of it, or any part of it, is
so far, a chaining up of the mind, under the power of darkness, from a
progress toward that perfection which it is capable of. It is Truth alone that
Capacitates any soul to give glory to God, or to be truly useful to them who
are partakers of flesh and blood with him: without being some way serviceable
to which end, there is nothing short of the fullness of wrath, that can be
judged so miserable as the Life of a man. Easily so much might be delivered on
this account, as to evince the dread of that judgment, whereto some men in the
infallibly wise counsel of God are doomed, even to the laying out of the labor
and travel of their minds, to spend their days and strength in sore labor, in
making opposition to this Truth of God. Especially is the sadness of this
Consideration increased, in reference to them, who upon any account what ever,
do bear forth themselves, and are looked upon by others, as Guides of the
blind, as Lights to them that sit in darkness, as the Instuctours of the
foolish, and teachers of Babes. For a man to set himself, or to be set by
others, in a way wherein are many turnings and cross paths, some of them
leading and tending to places of innumerab^e troubles, and perhaps death and
slaughter, undertaking to be a guide to direct them that travel toward the
place of their intendments, where they would be, and where they shall meet with
rest, for such an one I say, to take hold of every one that passes by, and
pretending himself to be exceeding skilful, in all the windings and turnings
of those ways, and paths, and to stand there on purpose to give direction, if
He shall, withal his skill and Rhetoric, divert them out of the path wherein
they have perhaps safly set out, and to guide them into those by ways, which
will certainly lead them into snares, and troubles, if not to death it self,
can he spend his time, labor and strength, in an employment more to be
abhorred? or can he design any thing more desperately mischievous to them,
whose good and welfare he is bound and promises to seek and promote! Is any
man's condition under heaven more to be lamented, or is any man's employment
more perilous then such an ones, who being not only endowed with a mind and
understanding, capable of the Truth, and receiving impressions of the will of
God, but also with distinguishing Abilities and Enlargements for the receiving
of greater measures of Truth, then others, and the more effectual improvement of
what he does so receive, shall labor night and day, dispending the richest
treasure and furnishment of his ^bule, for the rooting out, defacing, and
destruction of the Truth, for the turning men out of the way, and paths that
lead to rest and peace? I never think of the uncomfortable drudgery, which men
give up themselves unto, in laying the hay and stubble of their vain and false
Conceptions, upon the foundation, and heaping up the fruit of their souls, to
make the fire that consumes them, the more fierce and severe, but it forces
compassionate thoughts of that sad Condition, whereto mankind has cast it
self, by it is Apos^acy from God. And yet there is not any thing in the world,
that men more willingly, with more delight and greediness, consecrate the
flower of their Strength and Abilities unto, then this, of promoting the
del^sions of their own minds, in opposition to The truth, and ways of God. It
is a thing of obvious observation and daily experience, that if by any means
what ever, any one closes with some new, and by opinion, off from the faith
delivered to, and received by the generality of the Saints, that be it a thing
of never so small concernment in our walking with God, in Gospel obedience, and
in love without dissimulation one toward another, yet) instantly more weight
is laid upon it, more pains laid out about it, and zeal dispended for it is
supportment, and propagation, then about all other most necessary points of
Christian Religion. Have we not a deplorable cloud of Examples, of men
contending about some Circumstance or other, in the Administration of an
ordinance, biting and devou^ing all that stand in their way, roving up and down
to gain Proselytes, unto their persuasion, and in the mean time, utterly
ignorant or negligent of the great doctrines and commands of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which are as in him, the head and Life of Souls? How many a man
seems to have no manner of Religion at all, but some one error. That is his
God, his Christ, his worship; that he preaches, that he discourses of, that he
labors to propagate: until by the righteous judgment of God it comes to pass
that such men in all other things wither, and dye away; all the sap and vigor
of their spirits, feeding that one monstrous excrescency, which they grow up
daily into. Desire of emerging and being notable in the world, esteem and
respect in the hearts and mouths of them, whom peculiarly they draw after
them, with the like unworthy aims of self advancement, may without evil
surmizing (when such attempts are, (as in too many,) accompanied with
irregularity in Conversation) be supposed to be Advantages given into the hands
of the envious man, to make use of them for the sowing of his tares, in the
field of the poor seduced world.

That this procedure is also furthered by the burdensomeness of sound doctrine
unto the generality of men, who having itching ears, as far as they care for
these things, do spend their time in Religion, in nothing else, but either to
tell, or to hear some new thing, cannot be denied. Besides to defend, improve,
give and add new light, unto old truths (a work which has so abundantly and
excellently been labored in, by so many worthies of Christ, especially since
the Reformation) in any eminent manner, so as to bring praise and repute unto
the undertakers (which whether men will confess or no, it is evident that too
many are enslaved unto) is no easy task: and for the most part of what is done
that way, you may say, Quis leget haec? The world (says every one) is burdened
with discourses of this nature. How many have we in our days, who might have
gone to the grave in silence among the residue of their brethren, and their
names have remained for a season in the voisinage, where they might have done
God the service required of them in their generation, would they have kept
themselves in the form of wholesome words and sound doctrine; that have now
delivered their names into the mouths of all men, by engageing into some
singular opinions, though perhaps raked out of the ashes of Popery,
Socinianisme, or some such fruitful heap of error, and false notions of the
things of God?

I desire not to judge before the time; the day will manifest all things: and
the hidden secrets of the hearts of men, shall by it be laid open: when all
the wai^s, causes, and occasions of their deceiving, and being deceived, shall
be brought to light, and every man according to his work shall have praise of
God. Only I say as to the present state of things, this is evident (not to
speak of those locusts from the bottomless pit, that professedly oppose their
strength, to all that is of God, his name, word, worship or truth, will, and
commands, rasing the foundation of all hopes of eternity; nor of Him, and His
Associates, who exalts himself above (...) but is called God, being full of
names of blasphemy, sealed up to destruction) very many ^ongst our selves, of
whom we hoped better things, do, some in greater, some in lesser matters give
up themselves to that unhappy labor we before mentioned, of opposing the
truths of God, and exalting their own darkness, in the room of his glorious
light. Vtjugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones;
Vt teipsum serves non expergisceris-


Reverend Brethren! if other men can rise early, go to b^d late, and eat the
bread of carefulness, spend their lives and strength to do their own work, and
propagate their own conceptions, under a pretense of doing the work of God: if
the envious man watches all night and waits all advantages to sow his tares,
how will you be able to lift up your hands with joy, and behold your Masters
face with boldness at his coming, if having received such eminent Abilities,
endowments, and furnishments from him, for his service, and the service of his
sheep and lambs, as you have done, you gird not up the loins of your minds,
and lay not out your strength to the uttermost, for the weeding out of the
field and vineyard of the Lord every plant which our heavenly Father has not
planted, and for feeding the flock of Christ with sincere milk, and strong meat
according as they are able to bear* what you have received, more then others,
is of free grace, which is God's way of dealing with them, on whom he lays the
most unconquerable, and indespensable obligation unto service. Flesh and blood
has not revealed unto you the truth of God, which you do profess but our
Father which is in heaven; you do not upon any endeavor of your own, differ
from them who are given up to the sore Judgment and ever to be bewailed
condition before mentioned. It has not been from your own endeavors or
watchfulness, that you have been hitherto preserved under the hour of
temptation; which is come to try the men that live upon the face of the earth.
It is not of your selves, that you are not industriously disturbing your own
souls and others, with this, or that entrenchment upon the doctrine of the
Gospel, and the free Grace of God in Jesus Christ, which not a few pride
themselves in, with the contempt of all otherwise minded. And does not the
present state of things, require the full disbursing of all, that you have
freely received for the glory of him, from whom you have received it? You are
persons who not only as Doctors and Teachers in an University, have a large,
distinct, disciplinary knowledge of Divinity; but also such as to whom the Son
of God is come, and has given an understanding to know him that is true: into
whose hearts God has shined to give the light of the knowledge of his glory in
the face of Jesus Christ; and therefore may say, what shall we render to the
Lord? how shall we serve him in any way answerable to the grace we have
received? I speak not (this the Lord knows it, before whom I stand) with
Reflection on any, as though I judged them neglecters of the duty incumbent on
them. Every one of us, must give an account of himself to the Lord. The daily
pains, labor and travail of many of you, in the work of the Gospel, the
dilegence and codeavours of others in promoting other useful literature, is
known unto all. Only the considerations of my own present undertaking, joined
with a sense of mine own insufficiency for this, or any other labor of this
kind, and of your larger furnishments with abilities of all sorts, press me to
this stirring up of your remembrance, to contend for the faith so much opposed
and perverted: Not that I would press, for the needless multiplying of books,
(whose plenty is the general customary complaint of all men versed in them)
unless necessity call thereto; Scribimus indocti, doctique -- But that serious
thoughts may be continually dwelling in you, to lay out your selves to obviate
the spreading of any error what ever, or the destruction of any already
propagated; by such ways and means, as the providence of God, and the
circumstances of the matter it self shall call you out unto, is in the desire
of my soul.

Something you will find in this kind attempted, by the weakest of your number,
in this ensuing Treatise. The matter of it, I know will have your Approbation,
and that because it has his, whom you serve. For the manner of handling it, it
is humbly given up to his grace and mercy, and freely left to your Christian
Judgments: The general concernments of this business are so known to all, that
I shall by no means burden you with a repetition of them. The attempt made by
Mr Goodwin against the truth here asserted, was by all men judged so
considerable (especially the truth opposed, having a more practical influence
into the walking of the Saints with God, then any Other by him assaulted, and
the defending of it, giving more advantage into an inquiry after the mind of
God, as delivered in innumerable places of Scripture, then any of the rest
opposed) as that a removal of his Exceptions to our Arguments, and an Answer to
his Objections, was judged necessary by all. Other reasons manifesting this
endeavor to be in order and in season, I have further communicated in the
entrance of the Treatise it self. In my addresses to the work, I could by no
means content my self, with a mere discussing of what was produced by my
Adversary. For he having kept himself for the most part, within the compass of
the Synodal writings of the Remonstr^^ts, which are already most clearly and
solidly answered, (by one especially, renowned (...)) to have tied my self
unto a contest with him, had been merely actum agere, without promoting the
cause I had undertaken in the least. As I account it by no means an ingenuous
proceeding, for men to bear up their own names, by standing upon the shoulders
of others, to deport themselves Authors, when indeed they are (...)
Collectours, and Translatours; So I am very remote from being so far in love
with this way of handling controversies in Divinity, as to think it necessary
to multiply books of the same matter, without some considerable addition of
Light, and strength to the Cause, whose protection and promotion is undertaken.
On this consideration, besides incident discourses, which I hope through the
Grace of him, that supplied seed to the sower, may be of use and have an
increase amongst the Saints of God; I have made it my aim (and what therein I
have attained, is with all submission of mind and judgment cast before the
thoughts of men, whose senses are exercised to discern good and evil) to
place each Argument insisted on, upon it is own proper basis and foundation: to
Resolve every Reason and Medium whereby I have proceeded, into it is own
principles: discovering the fountain and wellhead of all the streams that
run in the field of this contest, as also to give some clearings and evidence,
to our Conclusions from the several Texts of Scripture discussed, by
discovering the Reason of them, and intent of God in them. Some Arguments there
are, and sundry Texts of Scripture, that are usually produced, and urged in the
defense of the cause under consideration, that I have not insisted on: nor
vindicated from the exceptions of the Adversaries. Not that I judge them
indefensible against their most cunning, or most furious assaults, and so
slighted what I could not hold, for indeed I know not any one Text of
scripture, commonly used for this end, nor any Argument by any sober man framed
to the same purpose, that is not capable of an easy and fair vindication: but
merely because they fell not in regularly, in the method I had proposed to my
self, nor would so do, unless I had gone forth to the issue of my first
intendment, and had handled the abode of Believers with God at large, from it is
principles and causes, as I had done, that part of our doctrine which concerns
the Continuance of the love of God with, and unto them; which the growth of the
Treatise under my hand, would not give me leave to do. What has been, or may
yet further be done, by others who have made, or shall make it their business,
to draw the saw of this Controversy, to and fro which Mr. Goodwin, I hope will
give satisfaction, as in other things, so in the particulars by me omitted. As
to what I have to speak, or at least think it convenient to speak, concerning
him, with whom in this discourse I have much to do, and the manner of my
dealing with him, being a thing of personal Concernment, not having any
influencing Aspect on the merit of the cause, I shall, in not many words,
absolve you of your trouble in the Consideration thereof. My Adversary is a
person, whom his worth, pains, diligence, and opinions, and the contests,
wherein on their account he has publicly engaged, have delivered from being
the object of any ordinary thoughts, or expressions. Nothing not great, not
considerable, not some way eminent, is by any spoken of him, either consencing
with him, or dissenting from him. To interpose my Judgment in the crowd, on the
one side or the other, I know neither warrant, or suffcient cause: We all
stand, or fall to our own masters; And the fire will try all our works. This
only I shall crave Liberty to say; that whether from his own genius, and
acrimony of Spirit, or from the provocations of others, with whom he has had
to do, many of his Polemical Treatises have been sprinkled with Satirical
Sarcasmes, and contemptuous rebukes of the persons with whom he has had to do.
So that were I not relieved in my thoughts, by the consideration of those
Exacerbations and exasperations of spirit, which upon other accounts, besides
bare difference of opinion in religious things, have fallen out in the days
and seasons which have passed over us, all of them laboring to exert something
of themselves, in every undertaking of the persons brought under their power, I
should have been ^^terly discouraged from any contests of this nature. Much
indeed of his irregularity in this kind, I cannot but ascribe to that prompt
facility he has, in putting abroad every passion of his mind, and all his
conceptions, not only decently clothed, with language of a full and choice
significancy, but also trimmed and adorned with all manner of signal
improvements, that may render it keen or pleasant according to his intendment
or desire, What the Latin Lyrick said of the Grecian Poet may be applied to
him.

Monte decurrens vel^t amnis, imbres
Quem super notas aluere ripas,
Fervet, immensusque ruit profundo
Pindarus ore.
And he is thereby plainly possessed of not a few advantages. It is true that
when the proof of his opinion by Argument, and the orderly pursuit of it is
incumbent on him, (a course of all other wherein ^ soonest fails,) the medium
he uses, and insisteth on, receives not the least contribution of real
strength from any dress of words, and Expressions wherewith it is adorned and
accompanied: yet it cannot be denied, but that his Allegorical amplifications,
illustrations and exaggerations of the things he would insinuate, take great
impressions upon the minds of them, who are in any measure entangled with the
seeming probabilities, which are painted over his Arguments, by their
sophistry, and pretense of Truth. The Apostle giving that Caution to the
Collossians that they should take heed, (...), manifests the prevalencie of
false reasonings when in Conjunction with Rhetorical persuasions. The great
store also of words and expressions, which for all occasions he has lying by
him, are of no little use to him, when being pressed with any Arguments, or
testimonies of Scripture, and being not able to evade, he is forced to raise a
cloud of them, wherewith after he has a while darkened the wisdom and Council
of that, wherewith he has to do, he insensibly slipps out of the cord,
wherewith he appeared to have been detained, and triumphs as in a perfect
Conquest, when only an unarticulate sound has been given by his trumpet, but
the charge of his Adversaries not once received or repelled. But not any where,
does he more industriously hoist up, and spread the sails of his luxurient
Eloquence, then when he aims to render the opinion of his adversaries to be,
monstrum ^orendum, inform ingens, cui lumen ademptum, a dark, dismal,
uncomfortable, fruitless, death-procuring doctrine; such as it is marveilous,
that ever any poor soul should embrace or choose for a Companion or guide, in
it is pilgrimage toward heaven. Rolling through this field, his expressions
swell over all bounds and limits; metaphors, similitudes, parables, all help on
the current: though the streams of it being shallow and wide, a little
opposition easily turns it for the most part aside; a noise it makes indeed,
with a goodly show and appearance. Herculea non mole minor -- Agylleus
Sed non ille rigor, patriumque in corpore robur.
Luxuriant artus, effusaque sanguins laxo
Membra natant --


This, (as I said,) prompts (I fear) the learned person of whom we speak, to
deal so harshly with some of them with whom he has to do. And it is still
feared, that -- parata tollit cornua;
Qualis Lycambae spretus infido Gener,
Aut acer hostis Bupalo.


It might indeed be the more excusable, if evident provocation were always
ready at hand to be charged with the blame of this procedure, if he said only
An si quis a^ro dente me petiverit
Multus ut slebo puer?


But for a man to warm himself, by casting about his own pen, until it be so
filled with indignation and scorn, as to blur every page and almost every
line, is a course that will never promote the praise, nor adorn the Truth of
God. For what remains concerning him; do illi ingenium, do eloquentiam, and
industriam; fidem, and veritatem utinam colnisset.

The Course and Condition of my procedure with him, whether it be such as
becomes Christian modesty, and sobriety, with an allowance of those
ingredients of zeal, in contending for the trut, hwhich in such cases the Holy
Ghost gives a command for, is referred to the Judgment of all, who are
concerned, and account themselves so, in the things of God. As to any
bitterness of expression, personal reflections by application of Satirical
invectives, I know nothing by my self, and yet I dare not account, that I am
hereby justified. The calm and indifferent Reader, not sensible of those
commotions, which the discovery of Sophistical evasions, pressing of
inconsequent consequences, bold Assertions etc: will sometimes raise in the
most candid and ingenuous mind, may (and especially if he be an observer of
failings in that kind) epsy once and again, some signs and appearances of
such exasperations as ought to have been allayed with a spirit of meekness,
before the thoughts that stirred them up, had been turned out of doors, in the
expressions observed. Although I am not conscious of the delivery of my self
in any terms, intimating a Captivity under the power of such a snare for a
moment, yet what shall to the Christian Reader occur of such a seeming
tendency, I humbly refer it to his judgment, being content to suffer loss in
any hay or stubble what ever, that I may have laid upon the foundation of
truth, which I am sure is firmly fixed by God himself, in the business in hand.

For what further concerns my manner of dealing in this Argument, I have only
a few things to mention, ( Reverend Brethren) and you will be discharged of the
trouble of this prefatory address unto you. The matter in hand I hope you will
find attended and pursued, without either Iocular or historical diversions,
which are judged meet by some to retain the spirits, and entice the minds of
the Readers, which are apt to faint and grow weary, if always bent to the
consideration of things weighty and serious. With you, who are continually
exercised with severer thoughts and studies, then the most of men can immix
themselves withal, such a condescension to the vanity of men^ minds, and
lightness of their spirits, I am sure can find no approbation. And as for them
who make it their business, to run through books of a Polemical nature, in what
subject soever, in pursuit of what is personal, ridiculous, invective, beating
every Chapter, and Section, to find only what ought not to be there, and
recoyling in their spirits, upon the appearance of that which is serious, and
pressing to the cause in hand, I suppose you judge them not worthy to be
attended to, with such an imposition upon the time and diligence of those who
sincrely seek the Truth in love, as the satisfying of their vain humor would
require. It is indeed of sad consideration to see, how some learned men
(forgetting the loss of precious hours, wherewith they punish their Readers
thereby) in discourses of this naturedo, offend against their professed
intendments, by perpetual diversions in long personal H^rang^es, delighting
some for a moment, instructing none, in the mattter inquired into. Some parts
of this Treatise you may perhaps judge not so closely, and scholastically
argumentative, as the regular laws of an accurate disputation would require.
In the same judgment with you, is the Author: where yet he supposes himself
not without just Apology, and that such, as renders his way of procedure not
blame worthy: whereas otherwise he should not think any excuse sufficient to
exp^ate such an error. He is worthily blammed, who had not rather choose to
want a fault, then an excuse. The truth is, neither would the matter treated
of, nor the persons, for whose sakes chiefly this labor was undertaken, admit
of an accurate scholastical procedure in all parts of the Treatise. The
doctrine asserted, and the error opposed, are the concernments of the common
people of Christianity. Arminianisme is crept into the bodies of sundry
congregations, and the weaker men are, who entertain it, the more gross and
carnal are their notions, and Conceptions in, and about it. Pelagius himself
was never so injurious to the grace of God, as some amongst us. Now the souls
of men, whose good is sought in this work, are no less precious in the sight of
God, though they are unacquainted with Philosophical terms, and ways of
arguing, than the souls of the most learned. Besides, that which we account
our wisdom, and learning may, if too rigo^ously attended, be our folly: when
we think to sharpen the reason of the Scripture, we may straighten the Efficacy
of the spirit of it. It is oftentimes more effectual in it is own liberty, then
when restrained to our methods of arguing. And the weapons of it keener in
their own soft breathings, then when sharpened in the forge of Aristotle. There
is a way of persuasion and conviction in the Scriptures, that is more divine
and sublime, then to be reduced to any Rules of Art that men can reach unto.
God in his word, instructs men to make them wise unto salvation. Syllogismes
are not (doubtless) the only way of making men wise with humane wisdom, much
less divine: Some Testimonies, on this account, are left at their own liberty,
improved only by Explanation, that they might lose nothing of their own
strength, seeing no other can be added to them: Where the corrupt Philosophy,
or sophistical arguings, or indeed regular syllo^tical proceedings of the
Adversaries, have rendered a more close Logical way of proceeding necessary, I
hope your favorable judgments, will not find cause to complain of the want
thereof. Whatever is amiss, what ever is defective, what ever upon any account,
comes short of desire or expectation, as I know none in the world more able to
discern, and find out, then your selves, so there are none from whom I can
expect, and justly promise my self, a more easy and candid Censure, a more
free and general pardon, a more favorable Acceptance of this endeavor for
the service of the Truth, then from you. Besides that personal Amity, and
respect, which God by his providence has given me (one altogether unworthy of
such an allay of common perplexities in his pilgrimage) with you, and amongst
you, besides that readiness and ingenuous promptness of mind, unto
condescension, and candid reception of labors in this kind, which your own
great worth, and abilities furnish you withal, exempting you, and lifting you
above that Pedantick severity, and humor of censure, which posseth Sciolists,
and men corrupted with a desire of emerging in the repute of others. You know
full well, in what streights, under what diversions, employments, business of
sundry natures incumbent on me, from the Relations wherein I stand, in the
University, and on sundry other accounts, this work has been carried on. The
truth is, no small portion of it, owes it is rise to Journeyes, and such like
avocations from my ordinary course of studies, and employments, with some spare
hours, for the most part in time of absence, from all books and asisstances of
that nature whatever. Not longer to be burdensome unto you, with things of no
greater concernment, then what may have respect to one every way so unworthy as
my self, what is of the seed which God has graciously supplied, I am sure
will find acceptance with you; and what is of it is worthless Author, or that I
have added, I am fully content may be consumed by the fire, that tryes our
works of what sort they are.

My daily prayer ( Honored Brethren) shall be on your behalf, that in the
days, wherein we see so many fall from the truth, and oppose it, on the one
hand; a great indifferency as to the things of God, leading Captive so many on
the other, so few remaining, made useful to God in their generations, by a
conjunction of zeal for the truth, and ability unto it is defense, and those
for the most part so closely engaged in, and their hands so filled, with the
work of public beseeching Men to be reconciled to God in Christ, and building
up of them, who are called in their most holy faith; You may receive help from
above, and encouragement to engage you by all means possible, to spread abroad
a savor of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to labor continually that the
truths of God, (for whose defense you are particularly appointed) may not be
cast down, nor trampled on under the feet of men of corrupt minds, lying in
wait to deceive, alluring and beguiling unstable souls, with enticing words of
humane wisdom, or any glorious show and pretense whatever, turning them from
the simplicity of the Gospel, and the truth as it is in Jesus: that you may not
faint, nor wax weary, notwithstanding all the opposition, contempt, scorn,
you do, or may meet withal; nor ever be turned aside to corrupt Dalliances with
error, and falsehood, as is the manner of some, who yet would be accounted
sound in the faith; but keeping close to the form of wholesome words, and
answering the mould of Gospel doctrine, whereinto you have been cast, may shine
as Lights, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation; knowing, that it
is but yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry; yea come Lord Jesus, come etc.

So prays

Your unworthy fellow Labourer and Brother in our dear Lord Jesus: JOHN OWEN.

A Preface to the Reader.
READER
IF thy enquiry be only after the substance of the Truth in the ensuing
Treatise contended for, I desire thee not to stay at all upon this preliminary
discourse, but to proceed thither, where it is expressly handled from the
Scriptures, without the intermixture of any humane Testimonies, or other less
necessary Circumstances, wherein perhaps many of them may not be concerned,
whose interest yet lies in the truth it self, and it is precious to their
Souls. That which now I intend and aim at, is to give an account to the
learned Reader, of some things nearly relating to the doctrine, whose
protection (in the strength of him, who gives to his, suitable helps for the
works and Employments he calls them to) I have undertaken, and what
entertainment it has formerly found, and received in the Church, and among the
Saints of God. For the Accomplishment of this intendment, A breife mention of
the Doctrine it self will make way. Whom in this controversy we intend by the
name of Saints, and Beleivers, the Treatise following will abundantly manifest.
The word Perseverantia is of most known use in Ecclesiastical writers: Austin
has a book with the inscription of it in it is forehead. The word in the New
Testament signifying the same thing is, (...). Of them that followed Paul it is
said that he persuaded them, (...), Act. 13. 43. That is: to Persevere. (...)
is of the same import. (...). Math. 10, 23. He that persevereth to the end; The
Vulgar Latin renders that word almost constantly by persevero.(...) is a word
also of the same signification, and which the Scripture uses to express the
same thing: (...) is, sometimes by a Metathesis expressed (...); Thence is
(...), valde: and (...), spoken of him who is of a valiant resolved mind. By
faith Moses left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King, (...). He. 11. 27.
As eying the invisible he endured (his trial) with a constant valiant mind.
(...) from thence is most frequently to persevere. Act. 1. 14. and (...) Act.
2. 42. They persevered in the Doctrine of the Apostles. (...) once used in the
New Testament, is rendered by our Translatours perseverance. Ephesians. 6. 18. In what
variety of Expression the thing is revealed in the Scripture, is in the
Treatise it self abundantly declared. The Latin word is Classical, Persevero,
is Constanter sum severus: In that sense as Seneca says, Res severa est verum
gaudium. It Is extreme in excess is, Pertinacy; if these are not rather
distinguished from their objects, then in themselves. Varro lib 4. de ling:
Lat: Tells us that Pertinacia is a continuance or going on, in that, wherein
one ought not to continue, or proceed. Perseverantia is that, whereby any one
continues in that wherein he ought so to do. Hence is that definition of it
commonly given by the Schoolmen from Austin: Lib 87. qu: 31, who took it from
Cicero (one they little acquainted themselves withal) lib. 2, de Invent: it is
say they, In ratione been fundata* stabilis and per petua permansio. And this
at present may pass for a general description of it, that is used in an
Ethical, and Evangelical sense. Perseverance was accounted a commendable thing
among Philosophers. Morally Perseverance is that part of Fortitude whereby the
mind is established in the performance of any good and necessary work, not
withstanding the assaults and opposition it meets withal, with that tediousness
and wearisomness, which the protraction of time, in the pursuit of any affairs,
is attended withal. Aristotle informs us that it is excercised about things
troublesome, lib. 7. Eth: Nicom: giving a difference between Continence with
it is opposite vice, and forbearance, or perseverance (...). He that abides in
his undertaken work, so it be good and honest, notwithstanding that trouble and
perplexity he may meet withal is (...). Hence he tells us that (...) as well as
(...) is not pleasant to many, lib. 10. cap. 9. And that because so to live,
implies difficulty and opposition. And He also, as Varro in the place above
mentioned, distinguishes it from pertinacy; And of men infected with that
depraved habit of mind, he says there are three sorts, (...): all These are in
his Judgment, (...), Nic^^ lib. 7. cap. 9. Which perverse disposition of spirit
he there clearly manifests to be sufficiently differenced from a stable
resolved frame of mind, what ever it may resemble it in. Now though there is no
question, but that of two persons continuing in the same work, or opinion, one
may do it out of pertinacy, the other out of perseverance, yet amongst men who
judge of the minds of others, by their fruits, and of the Acts of their minds
by their objects, these two dispositions or Habits are universally
distinguished, as before, by Varro. Hence the Terms of pertinacy and obstinacy
being thrust into the definition of herisy, by them who renouncing any
infallible living Judge and determiner in matters of faith, to make way for the
inflicting of punishment on the entertainers and maintainers thereof, they take
no thought of proving it such, but only because it is found in persons
embracing such errors; The same Affection of mind, with the same fruits and
demonstrations of it, in persons embracing the Truth, would by the same men be
termed perseverance. But this is not that whereof I Treat.

Evangellical perseverance, is from the Scripture at large explained in the
Book it self. As it relates to our Acceptance with God, and the immutability
of Justification (which is the the chief and most eminent part of the Doctrine
contended for,) as it has no conformity in anything, with the moral
perseverance before described, so indeed, it is not comprehended in that strict
notion and signification of the word it self, which denotes the continuation
of some Act, or Acts in us, and not the uninterruptibleness of any Act of God.
This then is the cause of perseverance, rather than perseverance it self; yet
such a cause, as being established, the effect will certainly and uncontrolably
ensue. They who go about to assert a perseverance of Saints, cut off from the
absolute unchangableness of the decree, purpose, and Love of God, attended with
a possibility of a contrary Event, and that not only in respect of the free
manner of it is carrying on, whereby he that wills to persevere, may not will so
to do, but also in respect of the issue and end it self, will, I doubt not,
if they are serious in what they pretend, find themselves entangled in their
undertaking. As perseverance is a Grace in the subject on whom it is bestowed,
so it relates either to the spiritual habit of faith, or the principle of new
life they have received from God, or to the actual performance of those duties
wherein they ought to abide. In the first sense it consists in the point of
being, or not being. Whilst the habit of faith remains, there is in respect
thereof an uninterrupted perseverance in him in whom it is; and this we contend
for. As it respects Actions flowing from that Habit and principle; so it
expatiates it self in a large fieild. For as it imports not at all a perpetual
performance of such Acts without Intermission, (which were naturally as well as
spiritually impossible, whilst we carry about us a body of death,) so neither
does it necessarily imply a constant tenor of proceeding in the performance of
them, but is consistent with a change in degrees of performance, and in other
respects also, not now to be insisted on. Perseverance in this sense being the
uninterrupted continuance of Habitual grace, in the hearts of Believers without
intercision, with such a walking in obedience, as God according to the tenor
of the new covenant will accept, upon the whole of the matter, it is in it is
own nature, (as every thing also is that has not it is being from it is self)
liable and obnoxious to Alteration; and therefore must be built and reposed on
that which is in it self immutable, that it may be rendered on that
supposition, immutable also. Therefore is Perseverance in this sense resolved
into that Cause of it before mentioned, which to do is the chief endeavor of
the following Treatise. Of the Groundlessness of their opinion, who granting
final perseverance, do yet plead for the possibility of a final Apostasy, and
an intercision of faith, no more need be spoken, but what upon the account last
mentioned has been argued already. Some discourses have passed both of old,
and of late, concerning the nature of this perseverance, and wherein it does
propperly consist. Many affirm it not really to differ from the habit of faith
and love it self, for which Bradwardine earnestly contends. Lib. 2. de Cau:
dei: cap. 11. Concluding his disputation, that Perseverantia Habitualis, est
justitia habitualiter preservata, preseverantia Actualis, est justitiae
perseverantia Actualis, ipsum vero perseverare, est justitiam preservare.
Whereupon ( su^ more) he inferres this corollary. Quod nomen perseverantiae
nullam rem absolutam essentialiter significat, sed accidentaliter, and relative
Charitatem videlicet, sive justitiam, cum respectu futurae permansionis
Continue usque in finem; and quod non inprobabiliter posset dici perseverantiam
esse ipsam relationem hujus: And therefore in the next Chapter, to that
objection, If perseverance be no more but charity, or righteousness, then every
one that has once obtained these, or true grace, must also persevere; He
returns no Answer at all: plainly insinuating his Judgment to be so; of which
afterward: and therefore he spends his thirteenth Chapter of the same Book to
prove, that the Holy Spirit is that Auxilium, as he called it, whereby any
persevere.

And Chap. 1. He resolves all preseveration from no^ being overcome by
Tentation, or not being tempted to a prevlencie (the same for substance with
perseverance) into the will and purpose of God. Quicunque (says he) non
Tentatur, hoc necessario est a deo, quod non tentatur. Sicut 11^ pars 13^ primi
probat: and per 22um primi, Deus necessario ^abet aliquem actum voluntatis
circa tal^m non tentationem, and non nolutionem, quia tunc per decimum primi
non tentaretur, ergo volutionem, qnae per idem decimum ipsum tentari non sinit,
etc. Others render it as a Gift super-added to faith and love, of which
Judgment Austin seems to have been, who is followed by sundry of the
Schoolmen, with many of the Divines of the reformed Churhes. Hence is that
Conclusion of Alvarez: de Auaeil: lib: 10. disp: 103: secundum fidem Catholicam
asserendum est, praeter gratiam habitualem, and virtutes infusas esse
necessarium, ad perseverandum in bono usque in finem, auxilium speciale,
supernaturale scilicet donum Perseverantiae. And of this proposition he says,
in hac omnes Catholici Convenient. Of the same Judgment was his Master Thomas:
Lib 3. con: Gen: cap: 155. Where also he gives this Reason of his opinion;
Illud quod natura sua est variabile, ad hoc quod figatur in uno, Indiget
auxilio alici^jus moventis immobilis; sed liberum Arbitrium, etiam existens in
gratia habituali, ad huc manet variabile, and flexibile a bono in malum; ergo
ad hoc quod figatur in bono, and perseveret in illo usque ad finem, indiget
speciali Dei Auxilio: The same Argument having been used before him by
Bradwardine, though to another purpose, viz: not to prove perseverance to be a
super-added gift to saving grace, which (as before was observed) he denied, but
to manifest that it was immediately and wholly from God: His words are, lib: 2.
cap 8. Cocol: Sicut secundum primi docet, Omne quod est Natural, and non est
per se tale, sed est mutabile in non tale, si manner debeat immutatum, oportet
quod imitatur continue alicui per se fixo; quare and continue quilibit justus
Deo. The same Schoolmen also (a generation of men exceeding ready to speak of
any thing, though they know not what they spoke, nor whereof they affirm,) go
yet farther some of them and will distinguih between the gift of perseverance,
and the gift confirmation in Grace. He before mentioned, after a long dispute
page (104) concludes, ex his sequitur differentiam inter donum perseverantiae,
and confirmationis in gratia* he means that which is granted in via) in hoc
consistere, quod donum perseverantiae nullam perfectionem intrinsecam
constituit in ipsa gratia habituali, quam tamen perfectionem intrinsecam illi
tribuit Confirmatio in Gratia. What this intrinsecal perfection of habitual
grace, given it by confirmation, is he cannot tell: for, in those who are so
confirmed in Grace, he asserts only in inpeccability upon supposition, and that
not alone from their intrinsecal principle, as it is with the blessed in
heaven, but from help and assistance also daily communicated from without:
Durandus in 3. d. 3. q. 4, assigns the deliverance from sin which those who
are confirmed in grace do obtain unto the Holy Ghost: so far well: but he
kicks down his milk by his addition, that he does it only by the removeal of
all occasion of sin: But of these persons, and their Judgment in the point
under debate, more afterward.

For the thing it self last proposed, on what foot of account it is placed,
and on what foundation asserted, The Treatise it self will discover. That the
thing aimed at, is not to be straightned or restrained to any one peculiar Act
of grace, will easily appear. The main foundation of that which we plead for,
is, The Eternal purpose of God, which his own nature requires to be
absolutely immutable and irreversible. The Eternal Act of the will of God
designing some to salvation by Christ, infallibly to be obtained, for the
Praise of the, glory of hu grace, is The Bottom of the whole; Even that
foundation which stands for ever, having this seal, The Lord knows who are
his. For the Accomplishment of this eternal purpose, and for the procurement of
all the good things, that lie within the compass of it is in tendment, are The
Oblation and Intercession, (the whole mediatory undertaking of Chist) taking
away sin, bringing in Life and immortality, interposed, giving further causal
influence into the truth contended for. In him and for his sake, as God
graciously, powerfully, and freely gives his Holy Spirt, faith, with all the
things that accompany salvation unto all them, whom he accepts and pardons by
his being made sin ^or them, and Righteousness unto them, so he takes them
thereby into an everlasting Covenant that shall not be broken, and has therein
given them innumerable promises that he will continue to be their God for ever,
and preserve them to be, and in b^ing his people: to this end, because the
principle of Grace, and living to him, as in them inherent, is a thing in i'ts
own nature changable, and liable to failing, he does according to his promise,
and for the Acccomplishment of his purpose, daily make out to them, by his Holy
Spirit, from the great treasury and storehouse thereof, the Lord Jesus Christ,
helps and supplies, increasing of faith, Love, and Holiness, recovering them
from falls, healing their backslidings, strengthening them with all might
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with
joyfulness, so preserving them by his power through faith unto salvation: And
in this way of delivering the doctrine contended about, it is clearly made out,
that the disputes mentioned are as needless, as groundless, so that we shall
not need to take them into the state of the controversy in hand, though I shall
have occasion once more to reflect upon them, when I come to the consideration
of the doctrine of the Schoolmen, in reference to the opinion proposed to
debate. The main of our enquiry, is after the Purpose, Covenant, and promises
of God, the undertaking of Christ, the supplies of Grace promised and bestowed
in him: on which accounts, we do assert and maintain; That all true Believers
who are in being so, interested in all those causes of preservation, shall
infallibly be preserved unto the end, in the favor of God, and such a course
of Gospel obedience as he will accept in Jesus Christ.

That, (as was formerly said) which at present I aim at in Reference to this
Truth is, to declare it is Rise and Progress, it is course, and opposition, which
it has found in several Ages of the Church, with it is state and condition at
this day, in respect of Acceptance with the people of God.

It Is rise, with all other divine truths, it owes only to Revelation from God,
manifested in the Scriptures of the Old and new Testament; some of the most
eminent places wherein it is delivered in the old Testament are: Gen: 3. 17.
chap: 17. 1. Deuteronomy: 33. 3. Josh: 1. 5. 1 Saw: 12. 22. Psalm: 1. 3. Psalm: 23. 4,
6. Psalm: 37. 39, 40. Psalm: 52. 8, 9. Psalm: 89. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Psalm: 33. 9,
10, 11. Psalm: 92. 13. etc. Is: 27. 3, 4. Is: 46. 4. Is: 59. 21. Is: 54 9. 10.
Is: 4. 4, 5. Is: 40. 27, 28, 26, 30. Is: 43. 1, 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Jer: 3* 3,
31, 32, 33, 34. Jer: 32. 38, 39. 40. Ezekiel: 36. 25, 26, 27. Hosea: 2. 19, 20.
Zach: 10. 12. Mal: 3. 6: with innumerable other places. In the new Testament
God has not left this truth, and work of his Grace without witness; as in
sundry other places, so it is testified unto, Math; 6. 13. Mat: 7. 24, 25 Mat.
12. 20. Mat: 16. 18. Mat: 24. 24. Luk 1. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75. Luk: 8. 5, 8.
Luk: 22. 32. Joh: 3. 36. Joh. 4. 13, 14, 16. Joh. 5. 24. Joh: 6. 35, 36, 37,
38, 39, 57. Joh: 7. 38. Joh: 8. 35, Joh: 10. 27, 28, 29, 30. Joh: 13. 1. Joh:
14 15, 16, 17. Joh: 16. 27 Joh: 17. throughout: Act: 2. 47. Act: 13 48. To: 6.
14. Rom: 8. 1, 16, 17, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, etc. 1 Cor: 1. 8, 9. 1 Cor:
10. 13, 14. 1 Cor: 15. 49, 58. 2 Cor: 1. 21. Ephesians: 1. 13, 14. Ephesians. 3. 17. Ephesians: 4
30. Ephesians. 5. 23. Gal: 2. 20: Phil: 1. 6. Phil: 2. 13. 1 These: 5 24. 2 Timothy: 4.
17, 18. Tit: 1.1. Heb: 6. 19. Heb: 10. 38, 39. Heb: 12. Heb: 9. 14. Heb: 13. 5,
21. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 John 2. 19, 24. 1 John: 3. 9,19. 1 John 5. 14, 18.
Jude 1 Rev: 20. 6. So plentifully has the Lord secured this sacred Truth
wherein he has enwrapped so much, (if not, as in the means of conveyance the
whole) of that peace, consolation, and Joy, which he is willing the heirs of
promise should receive. Whether the faith hereof thus plentifully delivered to
the Saints, found Acceptance with the primitive Christians, to the most of whom
it was given not only to believe, but also to suffer for Christ, to me is
unquestionable. And I know no better proof of what those first Churches did
believe, than by showing what they ought to believe, which I shall
unquestionably be persuaded they did believe, unless most pregnant Testimony be
given of their Apostasy. That Paul believed it for himself, and concerning
others is evident. To. 8. 38, 39. 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9. Phil: 1. 6. Heb. 6.. 9, 10,
are sufficient proof of his faith herein: That he built up others in the same
persuasion, to the enjoyment of the same peace and Assurance with himself, is
undeniable. And if there be any demonstration to be made of the belief of the
first Christians, of any evidence comparable unto this, I shall not deny but
that it ought to be attended unto. But that we may not seem willing to decline
the Consideration of what those who went before us in the several Ages and
Generations past, apprehended, and have by any means communicated unto us, of
their thoughts about the business of our contest, (having no reason so to be)
I shall after a little preparation made to that work, present the Reader with
something of my Observations to that end and purpose.

Of the Authority of the Ancients in matters of Religion and worship of God, of
the Right use and improvement of their writings, of the several Considerations
that are to be had and exercised by them who would read them with profit and
Advantage, after many disputes and contes^s between the Papists, and Divines of
the Reformed Churches, the whole concernment of that Controversy, is so
clearly stated, Managed and resolved by Mounseiur Dalie in his Book of the
Right use of the Fathers, that I suppose all farther labor in that kind may be
well spared. Those who intend to weigh their Testimony to any head of Christian
Doctrine, do commonly distinguish them into three greater periods of time: The
first of these is comprehensive of them, who lived and wrote before the
Doctrine, concerning which they are called out to give in their thoughts and
verdict, had received any signal opposition, and eminent discussion in the
Church on that acccount. Such are the Writers of the first 300 years, before
the Nicene Counsel, in reference to the Doctrine of the Trinity: and so the
succeeding writers, before The stating of the Mac^donian, Eutichian, and
Nestorian Heresies. In the next are they ranked who bare the burden and heat
of the Opposition made to any Truth, and on that Occasion wrote expressly and at
large on the controverted doctrines. Which is the Condition of Athanasius,
Basil, Gregory, and some others in that Arian Controversy: And in the last
place succeed those who lived after such concussions, which are of less or more
esteem, according as the Doctrines enquired after, were less or more corrupted
in the general Apostasy of the latter days. According to this order Our first
period of time will be with the Rise of the Pelagian Heresy, which gave
Occasion to the through, full, and Clear discussion of the whole doctrine
concerning the grace of God; whereof that in whose defense we are engaged is no
small portion: The next of those whom God raised up to make head against that
Subtle opposer of his Grace with his followers, during the space of an 100
years and somewhat onwards, ensuing the promulgation of that heresy: What have
been the thoughts of men in the latter Ages until The Reformation, and of the
Romanists since to this day, manifested in a few pregnant instances, will take
up the third part of this design. Of the Judgment of the Reformed Churches, as
they are commonly called, I shall speak particularly in the close of this
discourse. For the first of these! not to insist on the paucity of writers in
the first 300 years, sundry single persons in the following Ages, having
severally written three times as much, as we have left and remaining of all the
others, (the names of many who are said to have written, being preserved by
Eusebius Eccles: Hist: and Hierome lib: de script: their writings being
perished in their days) nor in general of that corruption, whereunto They have
almost every one of them been unquestionably exposed, I must be forced to
preface the nomination of them with some Considerations: The first in that
known passage of Hegesipus, in Eusebius: Hist: Eccles:lib, 3. 26. (...) (...). So
far Hell setting out the corruption of the Church even as to doctrine,
immediately after the Apostles fell asleep: whereof whosoever will impartially,
and with disingaged Judgments serach into the writings, that of those days do
remain, will perhaps find more Cause than is commonly imagined, with him to
Complain.

2 The maine work of the writers of the first Ages, being to contend with
Heathenish Idolaters, to convince them of their madness, and folly, to write
Apologies for the worship of God in Christ in General, so to dissuade their
Rulers from persecution, or in contesting with Heriticks, for the most part
appearing to be men either corrupt in their lives, or mad and brainsick (as we
say) as to their Imaginations, or denying the Truth of the person of Christ,
what can we expect from them, as delivered directly and on set purpose to the
matter of our present contest? Some principles may in them possibly be
discovered, from whence by a regular deduction, some Light may be obtained into
their thoughts concerning the points in difference. Thus Junius thinks, and not
without cause, that the whole business of Predestination, may be stated upon
this one principle, that faith is the free Gift of God flowing from his
Predestination and Mercy; and concerning this, (says he) Hoc autem omnes
patres uno consensu ex Christo and Paulo agnoverunt; Ipse Justinus Martyr in
Apolog: 2: and Gravissime ver^ Clemens Alexandrinus, in hac alioquin palestra
non itaexercitatus ut sequentia secula: Hom: lib: 2. Basil^i and Valentini
dogma esse dicit, quod fides a natura sit. Consid. Senten. Pet. Baroni: without
this what Advantage can be taken, or what use can be made for the discovery of
the mind of any of the Ancients; by cropping of some occasional expressions,
from their occasions and aims, I know not. Especially, would I more
peremptorily affirm this could I imagine any of them wrote as Hierome affirms
of himself, that he sometimes did. Epist. ad August: which is among his 892.
Itaque (says he) ut simpliciter fateor, legi haec omnia, and in mente mea
plurima coacervans, accito notario vel mea, vel aliena dictavi, nec ordinis,
nec verborum interdum nec sensuum memor: should any one say so of himself in
these days, he would be accounted little better then a mad man: much then on
this Account (or at least not much to the purpose) is not to be expected from
the fathrers of the first Ages.

3. Another observation to our purpose, lies well expressed in the beginning of
the fourteenth chapter of Bellarmin's second Book de Great: and lib: Arb.
Praeter Scriptur as adferunt alia Testimonia patrum; says he speaking of those
who opposed God's free Predestination: to which he subjoynes: Neque est hoc
novum Argumentum, sed antiquissimum. Scribit enim S. Prosper in Epistola ad S.
Augustinum, Gallos qui sententiam ej^sdem Augustixi de Prede stinatione
calumniabantur, illud potissimum objicere solitos quodea sententia doctrine
veterum videbatur esse contraria.

Sed respondet idem Augustinus inl ib^ de bono perseverantiae, veteres patres,
qui ante pelagium flo^uerunt, quaestionem istam nunquam accurate tractasse sed
incidenter solum, and quasi per transitum illam attigisse. Addit vero in
fundamento hujus sententiae quod est gratiam dei non praevenire ab ullo opere
nostro sed contra, ab illa omnia opera nostera praveniri, it a ut nihil omnino
boni, quod attinct ad salutem sit in nobis, quod non est nobis ex des,
convenire Catholicos omnes; and ibidem citat Cyprianum Ambrosium, and
Nazianzenum, quibus addere possumus Basilium and Crysostomum. To the same
purpose with Application to a particular person does that great, and holy
doctor discourse, de doctrine. Christiana lib: 3 cap: 33: says he, non erat
expertus hanc haeresin Tychoni^, quae nostro tempore exorta, multum nos ut
gratiam dei qua per dominum nostrum Jesum Christum est adversus eam
defenderemus exercuit, and secundum id quod ait Apostolus, oportet haereses
esse, ut probati manifesti fiunt in nobis, multo vigilantiores diligentioresque
reddidit, ut adverteremus in Scripturis Sanctis, quod istum Tychonium minus
attentum minusque sine host solicitum fugit. That also of Hierome in his
second Apology against Ruffinus in reference to a most weighty Article of
Christian Religion is known to all: fieri potest (says he) ut vel simpliciter
erraverint, vel alio sensu scripserint, vel a librariis imperitis little
paulatim scripta corrupta sint: vel certe antequam in Alexandria quasi
Daemonium meridianum Arius nasceretur, innocenter quaedam, and minus ^ante
locuti surt, and quae non possunt perversorum hominum calumniam declinare. And
what he spoke of the writers before Arius, in reference to the person of
Christ, we may of them before Pelagius in refernce to his Grace. Hence Pererius
in Romans c. 8. disput. 22: tells us (how truly ipse viderit, I am not altogether
of his mind) that for those Authors that lived befofe Austin's time, that all
the Greek Fathers, and a considerable part of the Latin, were of opinion, that
the cause of Predestination, was the foresight which God had, either of man's
good works, or of their faith, either of which opinions, he assures us is
manifestly contrary, both to the Authority of the Scriptures, and particularly
to the doctrine of Saint Paul. I am not (as I said) wholly of his mind, partly
upon the account of the observations made by his fellow Jesuit out of Austin,
before mentioned, partly upon other accounts also. Upon these and the like
Considerations, much I presume to the buisness in hand, will not be produced on
either side, from the Fathers that wrote before the Rise of the Pelagian
Heresy. And if any one of the parties at this day litigant about the Doctrines
of the Grace of God, should give that advise, that Sisinniuss and Agellius the
Novatians sometimes gave, as Zozomen reports of them. ( Hist. Eccles lib. 7.
cap. 12) to Nectarius by him communicated to the Emperor Theodosius, to have
the quarrel decided by those that wrote before the Rise of the Controversy, as
it would be unreasonable in it self, so I persuade my self neither party
would accept of the conditions, neither had the Catholics of those days, got
any thing, if they had attended to the advice of those Novatians. But these few
observations premised, something as to particular Testimonies, may be attended
unto.

That we may proceed in some order, not leaving those we have nothing to say
to, nor are willing to examine, whilst they are but thin, and come not in
troops, unsaluted; The first writings that are imposed on us after the Comical
Scriptures, are the eight books of Clement, commonly called the Apostles
constitutions, being pretended to be written by him at their appointment, with
the Canons ascribed to the same persons. These we shall but salute: for besides
that they are faintly defended by any of the Papists, disavowed and disclaimed
as Apocryphal, by the most learned of them, as Bellarmine de script: Eccles. in
Clem: who approves only of 50. Canons: of 85 Baronius An. D^m. 102. 14: who
adds 30 more, and Binius with a little enlargement of Canons, in Tit. Can. T.
1. Con. pi. 17: and have been thoroughly disproved and decryed by all Protestant
writers, that have had any occasion to deal with them, their folly and
falsity, their impostures and triflings, have of late been so fully manifested
by Dallaeus de pseudepigrapis Apostol. that nothing need be added thereunto. Of
him may Doctor H. H. learn the Truth of that Insinuation of his, dissert. de
Episcop. dis. 2da cap 6. Sect. 3. Canone Apostolico secundo (semper inter
genuinos habito:) but of the confidence of this Author in his Assertions
afterward: This indeed (insisted on by Daellaus, and the Learned Usher in his
notes upon Ignatius) is childishly ridiculous in them, that whereas it is
pretended that these constitutions were made at a convention of the Apostles,
as l. 6. c. 14, they are brought in discoursing, (...) etc. They they are made
to inform ns lib. 2. cap. 57. That the Acts written by Luke and read in the
Churches are theirs, and the four books of the Gospel. Whereas the story of
the death of James (here said to be together with the Apostles) is related Act.
12: and John by the consent of all, wrote not his Gospel until after the
dissoluton of his Associates. Also they make Stephen and Paul to be together,
at the making of those constitutions Constable: lib. 8. cap. 4. (whereas the
Martyrdom of Stephen, was before the convesiron of Paul,) and yet also
mentions the stoning of Stephen: lib. 8.46. They tell us whom they appointed
Bishops of Hiesalem after the death of James, and yet James is one of them, who
is met together with them l. 7. c. 48: nay mention is made of Cerinthus, and
that Mark the heritick, Menander, Basilides and Saturnilus were known and
taken notice of by the Apostles, who all lived in the second Century, abought
the Reign of Hadrian, as Eusebius manifests, and Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7.

But to leave such husks as these, unto them who loath Manna, and will not
feed on the bread that our heavenly Father has so plentifully provided for all
that live in his family, or any way belong to his house, let us look onward to
them that follow, of whose Truth and Honesty we have more assurance.

The first Genuine piece that presents it self unto us, on the Roll of
Antiquity, is that Epistle of Clemen's, which in the name of the Church of
Rome, he wrote to the divided Church of Corinth, which being abundantly
testified to of old, to the great contentment of the christian world, was
published, here at Oxford some few years since; A writing full of ancient
simplicity, humility, and Zeal. As to our present business much I confess
cannot be pleaded from hence, beyond a negative impeachment, of that great and
false clamor which our Adversary have raised, of the consent of the primitive
Christians with them in their by paths, and and ways of error. It is true,
treating of a Subject diverse from any of those heads of Religion about which
our contests are, it is not to be expected that he should any where plainly,
directly, and evidenty deliver his judgment unto them. This therefore I shall
only say, that in that whole Epistle, there is not one word, iota, or syllable
that gives countenance to the tenent of our adversaries, in the matter of the
Saints perseverance: but that on the contrary, there are sundry expressions,
asserting such a foundation of the Doctrine we maintain, as will with good
strength infer the Truth of it. Page 4. Setting forth the virtues of the
Corinthiaus before they fell into the schism that occasioned his Epistle, he
minds them that: (...). That God has a certain number of Elect to be saved,
and for whose salvation by his Mercy the Church is to contend with him, is a
principle wholly inconsistent with those, on which the doctrine of the Saints
Apostasy is bottomed. Corresponding hereunto is that passage of his concerning
the will of God, p. 12: (...) (...). A mere consideration of this passage
causes me to recall what but now was spoken, as though the Testimony given to
the Truth, in this Epistle, was not so clear as might be desired. The words
now repeated, contain the very Thesis contended for. It is the beloved of God
(or his Chosen) whom he will have made partakers of saving Repentance; and
hereunto he establishes them (for with that word is the defect in the sentence
to be supplied) by, or with the Almighty will: because he will have his beloved
partakers of saving Repentance, and the benefits thereof, he confirms and
establishes them in it, with his Omnipotent, or Sovereign will. The
inconsistency, and irreconcileableness of this assertion, with the doctrine of
these Saints Apostasy, the Learned Reader needs not any Assistance to manifest
to him. Answerably hereunto he says of God. (...), page 38: and p 66:
mentioning the blessedness of the forgiveness of sins, out of Ps. 32: he adds.
(...) (...). The Elect of whom he speaks, are those, on whom, through, and for
Christ, God bestows the blessedness of Justification: Elect they are of God
anteecedently to the obteining of that blessedness, and through that, they do
obtain it: so that in that short sentence of this Author the great pillar of
the Saints perseverane, which is their free Election, the root of all the
bless^dness which afterward they enjoy, is established: other passages like to
these, there are in that Epistle, which plainly deliver the primitive
Christians of the Church of Rome, from any communion in the doctrine of the
Saints Apostasy, and manifest their Perseverance, in the doctrine of the Saints
Perseverance, wherein they had been so plentifully instructed not long before,
by the Epistle of Paul unto them.

He who upon the Roll of Antiquity presents himself in the next place to our
consideration, is the renowned Ignatius, concernig whom I desire to beg so
much favor of the learned Reader, as to allow me a diversion unto some
thoughts and observations, that belong to another subject, then that, which I
have now peculiarly in hand, before I come to give him a taste of his Judgment
in the doctrine under debate.

As this Ignatius Bishop of the Church at Antioch, was in himselfe^ man of an
excellent spirit, em^nent in holiness, and to whom on the behalf of Christ it
was given not only to believe on him, but also suffer for him, and on that
account of very great and high esteem among the Christians of that Age wherein
he lived, and sundry others following, so no great Question can be made but
that he wrote toward the end of his pilgrimage, when he was on his way to be
offered up through the holy Spirit by the mouths of wild beasts to Jesus
Christ, that he wrote sundry Epistles to sundry Churches, that were of chiefest
note and name in the Countries about. The concurrent Testimony of the Ancients
in this matter of fact, will give as good Assurance as in this kind we are
capable of: Eusebius reckons them up in order, so does Hierome.

After them frequent mention is made of them by others, and special sayings in
them are transcribed: And whereas it is urged by some, that there is no mention
of those Epistles before the Nicene Council, before which time, it is as
evident as if it were written with the beams of the sun, that many false and
supposititious writings had been imposed on, and were received by many in the
Church, (as the story of Paul and Tecla is mentioned and rejected by Tertull:
de Baptis: Hermae Pastor by others) it is answered that they were mentioned by
Irenaeus some good while before, Lib. 5. cap. 28. says he. Quemadmodum quidam
de nostris dixit, propter Martyrium in Deum adjudicatus ad bestias; quoniam
frumentum sum Christi and per dentes bestiarum moler ut mundus panis Dei
inveniar. Which words to the substance of them are found in these Epistles:
though some say nothing is here intimated of any Epistles or writings, but of a
speech that might pass among the Christians by Tradition, such as they had
many among themselves, even of our Saviors, some whereof are mentioned by
Grotius on these words of Paul, remember that word of Christ that it is more
blessed to give then to receive. What probability or ground for conviction
there is in these or the like Observations, and Answers is left to the
judgment of all. This is certain that the first mentioning of them in
Antiquities is to be clearly received, (and that perhaps with more then the
bare word of him, that recites and approves of the Epistles of Jesus Christ to
Abgarus the King of the ( Edessens) or of him that reckons Seneca among the
Ecclesiastical writers, upon the account of his Epistles to Paul) or the
following Testimonies, which are heaped up in abundance by some who think (but
falsely) that they have a peculiar interest enwrapped in the Epistles, now
extant, will be of very small weight or value.

For my part I am persuaded, with that kind of persuasion wherein in things of
no greater moment I am content to acquiesce, that he did write 7. Epistles, and
that much of what he so wrote is preserved in those that are now extant,
concerning which the contests of learned men have drawn deep and run high in
these latter days, though little to the advantage of the most that have
labored in that cause, as shall be manifested in the process of our discourse.

A late learned Doctor in his dissertations about Episcopacy, Unicum D.
Blondellum aut alterum fortasse inter omnes mortales Walonem Messalinum cap.
25. s. 3.
or dispute for it against Salmasius and Blondellus tells us, that we may take
a taste of his confidence in asserting Dissert: 2. cap. 23.: j. that Salmasius
and Blondellus mortalium omnium primi, thought these Epistles to be feigned, or
counterfeit. And with more words Cap. 24. 1. he would make us believe, that
these Epistles of Ignatius where allwaies of the same esteem with that of
Clemens from Rome to the Corinthians of which he treats at large in his fourth
Dissertation) or that of Polycarpus to the Philippians which we have in
Eusebius he adds in the judgment of Salmasius and Blonde^lus, Solus Ignatius
(...) cujus tamen Epistolae pari semper cum illis per universam ab omni av^
patrum nostrorum memoriam reverentia Excipiebantur; nec prius a mortalium
quovis in judicium vocabantur (multo minus ut in re certa and extra dubium
posita inter plane (...) and (...) rejiciebantur) quam Presbyteri Anglicani
patribus suis contumeliam facere caepissent iisque aut suppetias far, aut rem
gratam facere (quibus illecebris adducti nescio) hi duo non ignobiles
Presbyteranae causae hyperaspista in seipsos recepissent. Of his Two learned
Antagonists one is dead, and the other almost blind, or probably they would
have dealt not much more gently with the Doctor for his Parenthesis (quibus
illecebris adducti nescio) then one of them formerly did ( Salmas: de
subscribendis and signandis Testamentis se^ specimen Consula: Animad: Heraldi:
Cap: 1. Page: 19 Nuper quidem etiam nebulo in Anglia, Capellanus ut audio Regis,
Hammendus nomine, libro quem edidit de potestate clavium Salmasse iratus quod
aliam quam ipse sententiam probet ac defendat, haud potuit majus convicium,
quod ei diceret, invenire, quam si Gramaticum appellaret) for his tearming him
a Grammarian, yet indeed of him, (such was the hard entertainment he found on
all hands) it is by many supposed that he was illecebris adductus (and they
stick not to name the bait he was caught withal) wrought over in a manner to
destroy the faith of that, which he had before set up and established.

For the thing it self affirmed by the Doctor, I cannot enough admire with
what oscitancy or contempt, he considers his Readers (of which manner of
proceeding this is very far from being the only instance) that he should
confidently impose such things upon them. He that has written so much about
Ignatius, and does so triumph in his Authority, ought doubtless to have
considered those concernments of his Author which are obvious to every ordinary
enquirer: Vedelius his Edition of Ignatius at Geneva came forth with his notes
in the year 1623 long before either Salmasius, or Biondellus had written any
thing about the supposititiousness of these Epistles: in the Apologic for
Ignatius whereto prefixed, he is forced to labor and sweat in the Answer of
one, whom he delervedly styles Virum Doctissimum; arguing (not contemptibly)
that Ignatius never wrote any such Epistles, and that all those which were
carried about in his name, were false and counterfeit.

But perhaps the Doctor had taken caution of one of the Fathers of his Church,
that a Genevensibus istis Typographis praeter fraisdes, and fucos, and
praestigias non est quod quicquam expectemus (Montacu: Appar: lib. 5. Sect: 46.
page: 19.) and so thought not fit to look into any thing that comes from them.

Especially may this be supposed to have some influence upon him, considering
the gentle censure added in the next words by that Reverend Father of his
Church concerning the endeavor of Vedelius in his notes on that Edition. Neque
Audax ille and importunus Ignatii Censor, quicquam attulit ad paginas suas
implendas praeter inscitiam, and incuriam, and impudentiam singularem (nec
saevi magne sacerdos) dum ad suum Genevalismum antiquitatem detorquet
invitissimam, non autem quod oportuit, Calvinismum amussitat ad antiquitatem.
And what I pray is the reason of his Episcopal censure? That he should deal
with poor Vedelius in that language wherewith no men of his Order, and
Authority were wont to deal with preaching Ministers at their visitations? Why
this poor man in that passage which you have in the Epistle to the Magnesians
(in that Edition: p: 56.) where treating of the Ancient Fathers expectations of
the coming of Christ, retains the common reading of, (...) referring the word
to their expectation of seeing him come in the flesh, which upon the Testimony
of our Savior himself, they desired to see, and saw it not, not correcting it
by a change of (...) into (...), so referring it to their faith in Christ and
salvation by him as in his Judgment, he ought to have done (...)

A little thing would provoke the indignation of a Prelate against any thing
that came from Geneva.

I say I would suppose, that this might divert our Doctor from casting his eye
upon Vedelius, whose defensative would have informed him that these Epistles
had been opposed as false and councerfeit, before ever Salmasius, or Blondellus
had taken them into consideration; but that I finding him sometimes insisting
on that Geneva Edition.

For whereas Cap: 2. Sect: 2: he tells you that he intends to abide only upon
the Edition of Isaac Vossius in Greek, published from the Archives of the
Library of Lawrence de Medices, and the Latin Edition published by Bishop
Usher, out of our Library here at Oxford, yet cap. 8: being pressed with the
Testimony of the writers of the Epistle to the Magnesians, in that Edition
calling Episcopacy (...), plainly intimating a comparative Noveltie, in that
order to others in the Churches, and fearing (as well he might) that his
translation of (...) into, the ordination of a young man, would scarce be
received by the men of his own prejudice (for surely he never supposed, that he
should impose on any other, by such gross figments) he prefers the Vedelian
Edition (where these words are not so used) before it: and informs us that sic
legendum (as it is in the Geneva Edition) suadet tota Epistolae series. Now
this truly is marvelous to me (if the Doctor consulteth Authors any farther,
then merely to serve his present turn) how he could ever advise with that
Edition of Vedelius, and yet so confidently affirm, that Salmasius and
Blondellus were the first that rejected these Epistles, as feigned and
counterfeited.

But yet a little farther I the first Edition of these Epistles in Latin was
Augustae Vindelicorum, an: 1529: in Greek at Basil 1566: Before which time I
suppose the Doctor expects not, that any opposition should be made to them,
considering the heaps of filth and dung, that until about that time, were owned
for the offspring of the Ancient Fathers.

Upon their first appearing in the world what is the entertainment they
receive? One who was dead before either the Doctor, or either of his
Antagonists were borne, and whose Renown among the people of God, will live
when they are all dead, gives them this welcome into the world: Ignatium quod
obtendunt, si velint quicquam habere momenti; probent Apostolos legem tulisse
de quadragessima, and similibus corruptelis. Nihil naeniis istis quae sub
Ignatii nomine edetae sunt putidius. Quominus tolerabilis est eorum impudentia
qui talibus larvis ad fallendum se instruunt. Call. Instit. lib. 1 cap. 13.
Sect: 29.

What ever be the Judgment of our Doctor concerning this man, (as some there
are of whom a learned Bishop in this nation long ago complained, that they are
still opening their mouths against Calvin, who hope them to mouths to speak
with: Abbot: ad Thom:) He will in the Judgment of some, be so far accounted
somebody, as to take off from them the confident. Assertion that Salmasius,
and Blondellus, were mortalium primi that rejected these Epist^es.

The Centuriators of Magdenburg were esteemed to be some bodies in their days:
and yet they ma^e bold to call these Epistles into Question: and to tender
sundry Arguments to the impa^ing of their Credit and Authority. This then they
Cent: 2. cap: 10 De Epi, cop: Antioch: ac primum de Ignatio.

Lectori pio and attento considerandum relinquimus quantum sit illis Epistolis
tribuendum. Non enim dubitamus quin in lectione earum cu^libet ista in mentem
veniant: primum quod se e in omnibus Epistolis; licet satis Copiesis, occasio
scribendi praetermittitur, nec vel divinare licet, quare potissimumad hanc vel
illam Ecclesiam literas voluerit mittere. Deinde ipsius peregrinationis Ratio
non parvum injicit scrupulum considerantibus, quod multo rectiore and
brevioriitinere, Romam potuerit navigare, ut testatur vel ipsius Pauli
Exemplum. -- Expende quam longum sit iter, Antiochia ad littus Aegaei pelagi se
recipere, ibique recta sursum versus Septentricnem ascendere, and praecipuas
civitates in littore sitas usque ad Troadem perlustrare, cum tamen Romanum iter
sit destinatum versus occasum. Tertiores ejusmodi in istas literas inspersae
sunt ut ad eas propemodum obstupescat lector etc. Hac cum alias non somnolento
lectori incidant, non existimaverimus etc.

Thus they at the worlds first awaking, as to the Consideration of things of
this kind.

To them add the learned Whitaker Cont: I ma de perfect: script: quaest: sexta
c: 12: where after he has disputed against the credit of these Epistles,
jointly and severally, with sundry Arguments at length he Concludes, sed de his
Epistolis satis multa, and de hoc Ignatio quid judicandum sit, satis ex its
constable are potest quae diximus. Ista Papistae non audent tueri etc. To whom
sundry others might be added convincing Salmasius and Blondellus, not to have
been Mortalium primi that called them into Question.

I have not insisted on what has been spoken, as though I were wholly of the
mind of them, who utterly condemn those Epistles as false and counterfeit;
though I know no possibility of standing before the Arguments levied against
them (notwithstanding the forementioned Doctors attempt to that purpose,
without acknowledging so much corruption in them, Additions and Detractions
from what they were when first written, as will render them not so clearly
serviceable to any end or purpose, whereunto their Testimony may be required,
as other unquestionable writings of their Antiquity are justly esteemed to be.
That these Epistles have fallen into the hands of such unworthy Impostors as
have filled the latter ages with labor and travel to discover their deceits,
The Doctor himself grants: dissert: 2. cap. 2 Sect: 6: nulla (says he)
quidem nobis insumbit necessitas, ut in tanta exemplarium and editionum
varietate and inconstantia, nihil uspiam Ignatio interpolatum aut adsutum
affirmemus.

And indeed the foysted passages in many places are so evident, yea shameful,
that no man who is not resolved to say any thing, without care of proof or
Truth, can once appear in any defensative about them. Of this sort are the
shreds and pieces out of that branded counterfeit piece of Clemens, or the
Apostles constitutions which are almost in every Epistle packed in, in a
bungling manner, oftentimes disturbing the sense and coherence of the place:
yea sometimes such things are thence transcribed, as in them, are considerable
Arguments of their Corruption, and falsehood: so is that period in the Epistle
to the Magnesians taken from Clemens. Constitut lib. 6 cap. 2. (...). This
Abeddadan being mentioned next after Absolom's dying by the loss of his head,
is therefore supposed to be Sheba the Son of Bickri, but whence that
counterfeit Clemens had that name is not known. That the counterfeit Clemens by
Abeddadan intended Sheba is evident from the words he assigns unto him in the
place mentioned. Abeddadan said, (...). And joins him with Absalom in his
Rebellion* such passages as these they are supposed to have received from that
vain and foolish Impostor: but if it be true which some have observed that
there is not the least mention made of any of those fictitious constitutions in
the three first Ages after Christ, and that the (...) mentioned by Eusebius,
and Athanasius, as also that (...) in Epiphanius, are quite other things, then
those eight books of constitutions we now have, it may rather be supposed, that
that sottish deceiver rather raked up some of his filth from the Corruption of
these Epistles, then that any thing out of him is crept into them. Other
instances might be given of stuffing these Epistles with the very garbidge of
that beast. Into what hands also these Epistles have fallen by the way, in
their journying down toward these ends of the world, is evident from these
citations made out of them, by them of old, which now appear not in them.
Theodoret. Dial: 3. adv: Haere: gives us this sentence from Ignatius: (...):
which words you will scarcly find in that Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, from
whence they were taken: Hierome also, Dial. 3. Con. Pelag: has this passage of
him, and from him. Ignatius vir Apostolicus and Martyr scribit audacter, elegit
Dominus Apostoles qui super omnes homines peccatores erant: which words as they
are not now in these Epistles, so as one observes if ever he wrote them as is
pretended, he did it audacter indeed. But of these things our Doctor takes no
notice.

The style of these Epistles does not a little weaken the credit of them, being
turgent, swelling with uncouth words, and phrases, affected manner and ways of
expression, new compositions of words, multiplying Titles of honor to men,
exceedingly remote and distant from the plainness and simplicity of the first
writers among the Christians, as is evident by comparing these with the
Epistles of Clement before mentioned, that of Polycarpus in Eusebius, The
Churches of Viena in that same Author, and others. Instances for the
confirmation of this Observation are multiplied by Blondellus: my designed work
will not allow me to insist on particulars. In many good words this charge is
waved, by affirming that the Author of these Epistles was an Assyrian, and near
to Martyrdom, and that in the Scriptures there are snndry words of as hard a
composition, as these used by him: Ham: disser: 2. cap 3. And as he says, from
this kind of writing an Argument of sufficient validity may be drawn to evince
him to be the Author of these Epistles. Hierome was of an other mind speaking
of Didymus. Imperitus (says he) sermon est, and non scientia, Apostolicum
virum ex ipso sermon exprimens, tam sensuum nomine, quam simplicitate
verborum. But seeing Ignatius was a Syrian, and near to Martyrdom (though he
writes his Epistles from Troas, and Smyrna, which without doubt were not in his
way to Rome from Antioch: and yet every where he says he is going to Rome: ad
Ephesians: (...) which in the close he affirms he wrote from Smyrna, whither he
was had to his Martyrdom) what is it to any man, what style he used in his
writings, what swelling titles he gave to any, or words he made use of. Who
shall call those writings (especially Ignatius being a Syrian) into question.

But perhaps some farther Question may here arise, (and which has by sundry
been already started) about the use of diverse Latin words in those Epistles,
which doubtless cannot be handsomely laid on the same account of their Author
being a Syrian, and nigh to martyrdom, (...), are usually instanced in: words
to whose use no Roman customs, observations, Orders, nor rules of Government,
do administer the least occasion. Of these the Doctor tells you, he wonders
only that in so many Epistles, there are no more of this kind: And why so? The
Epistles are not so large a Volume; a very few hours will serve to read them
over; and yet I am persuaded that in all that compass of reading, in the Greek
Fathers which our Doctor ownes, he cannot give so many instances of words
barbarous to their language, no way occasioned by the means before mentioned,
as have been given in these Epistles. But he wonders there are no more, and
some wonder that all are not of his mind. But he farther informs us, that a
diligent Reader of the Scripture, may observe many more Latin words in the new
Testament then are used in these Epistles; and for a proof of his diligence and
observation, reckons up out of the end of Passor's Lexicon sundry words of that
kind, made use of by the Sacred writers. I fear unto some men, this will
scarce be an Apology prevalent, to the dismission of these Epistles, from
under the Censure of being at least fowly Corrupted. Of the whole collection of
words of that sort made by Passor, among which are those especially culled out
by our Doctor to Confirm his observations, there is scarce one, but either it
is expressive of some Roman Office, Custom, money order, or the like: words of
which nature pass as proper names (as one of those mentioned by the Doctor is,
and no otherwise used in the new Testament) from one Country and language to an
other, or are indeed of a pure Greek Original, or at least were in common use
in that Age; neither of which can be spoken of the words above mentioned, used
in the Epistles: which were never used by any before or after them, nor is
there any occasion imaginable why they should: Parvas habent spes Epistolae, si
tales habent: I would indeed gladly see a fair, candid, and ingenious
defensative of the Style and manner of writing used in those Epistles,
departing so eminently from any thing that was customary in the writings of the
men of those days, or is regular for men of any generation, in Repetitions,
affected compositions, Barbarismes, Rhyming expressions, and the like; for
truly notwithstanding any thing that hitherto I have been able to obtain for
help in this kind, I am enforced to incline to Vedelius his answers, to all the
particular Instances given of this nature; this, and that place is corrupted,
this is from Clemen's Constitutions, this from this or that Tradition: which
also would much better free those Epistles from the word (...), used in the
sense whereunto it was applied by the Valentinians long after the death of
Ignatius, then any other Apology, I have as yet seen, for the securing of its
abode in them.

It is not a little burdensome to the thought of sober and learned men, to
consider how frequently, causlesly, absurdly in the midst of discourses quite
of another nature, and tendency, the Author of those Epistles (or some body for
him) break in upon the Commendation of Church Officers Bishops and Presbyters,
exalting them with titles of honor to the greatest Potentates on earth and
compareing them to God the Father and Son; where as none of the Sacred writers
that went before him, nor any of those good and holy men who (as is supposed)
followed after him do hold the least communion or society with him. (...)
Epist: ad Tral: whereunto is immediately subjoyned that Doctrine concerning
Deacons, which will scarcely be thought to be exegetical of Act. 6. (...) etc.
And (...). What the Writer of this passage intended to make of a Bishop well I
know not: but thus he speaks of him Epist: ad Magnes. (...) (as the Apostle
speaks concerning God, Heb: 6 10.) (...). Thus indeed some would have it, who
to help the matter, have further framed such an Episcopacy, as was never
thought on by any in the days of Ignatius, as shall afterward be made
evident. And in the same Epistle this is somewhat uncouth and strange. (...).
Whether the Lord Christ has bound any such burden upon the shoulders of the
Saints, I much question; nor can I tell what to make of the comparison, between
God the Father, and the Bishop, Christ, and the rest of the Church; the whole
sentence in word and matter, being most remote from the least Countenance from
the Sacred writings Epist: ad Philadel: (...) (well aimed however) (...). The
Epistle to the Church at Smyrna is full of such stuff, inserted without any
occasion, order, coherence or any color to induce us to believe that it is
part of the Epistle as first written. One passage I may not omit. (...) (in the
language of our Savior repudiating the Pharisees corrupted glosses on the Law)
(...). So Peter's mistake is corrected: his reasons follow, (...) (as was Jesus
Christ) and it is added, (...). How well this suits the doctrine of Peter and
Paul, the Reader will easily discern. Caesar or the King is upon all accounts
thrust behind the Bishop, who is said to be Consecrated to God for the
salvation of the World: him he is exhorted to obey; and in express opposition
to the Holy Ghost, the Bishop's name is thrust in between God and the King, as
in away of pre-eminence above the latter: and to do any thing without the
Bishop is made a far greater crime then to rise up against the King. As this
seems scarce to be the language of one, going upon an Acculation to appear
before the Emperor, so I am certain, it is most remote from the likeness of
any thing, that in this affair we are instructed in from the Scripture.
Plainly this language is the same with that of the false Impostor
Pseudo-Clemens in his pretended Apostolical Constitutions. At this rate, or
somewhat beyond it have you him ranting Lib. 2, cap. 2. (...). All Popes, with
all sorts of Persons whatever Priests, Kings, and Princes, Fathers and
Children, all under the feet of this Exemplar of God, and Ruler over men. A
passage which doubtless eminently interprets and illustrates that place of
Peter's Epistle chapter 5. v. 1. 2. 3. The Elders that are among you I exhort, who
also am an Elder, and a witness of the suffering^ of Christ and also a partaker
of the glory that shall be revealed, feed the flock of God, which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being Lords over God's heritage but
^eing Examples to the flock. But yet as if the man were stark mad, with
wordldy pride and pomp He afterward in the name of the Holy Apostles of Jesus
Christ, commands all the Laity (forsooth) to honor, love, and fear the
Bishop, (...). Lib. 2. Cap 20. And that you may see whither the man drives, and
what he aims at after he has set out his Bishop like an Emperor, or an
Estern-King, in all pomp and glory. He adds, (...). The paying of tribute to
them as Kings is the Issue of these descriptions, that they may have
wherewithal to maintain their pomp and greatness, according to the
institution of our Lord Jesus Christ and his blessed Apostles. But I shall not
rake farther into this dunghill, nor shall I add any more instances of this
kind out of Ignatius, but close into one insisted on by our Doctor, for the
proof of his Episcopacy. Dissert. 2. Cap. 25. 7. Says he Quarto. (...).
Episcopo attendite, ut and vobis Deus attendat, ego animammeam libenter eorum
loco substitui cuperem (quod Anglice optime dicimus, (my soul for theirs) qui
Episcopo, Presbyteris, and Diaconis obsequuntur. I hope I may without great
difficulty obtain the Doctors pardon, that I dare not be so bold with my
soul as to jeopard it in that manner, especially being not mine own to
dispose of.

Upon these and many more the like accounts do the Epistles seem to me, to be
like the Children that the Jews had by their strange Wives. Neh: 13, who spoke
part the language of Ashdod, and part the language of the Jews. That there are
in them many footsteps of a gracious Spirit, every way worthy of, and becoming
the great and holy personage, whose they are esteemed, so there is evidently a
mixture of the working of that worldly and carnal Spirit, which in his days,
was not so let loose as in after times. For what is there in the Scripture,
what is in the genuine Epistle of Clemen's, that gives countenance to those
descriptions of Episcopacy, Bishops, and the subjection to them, that are in
those Epistles (as now we have them) So insisted on? What titles, are given to
Bishops? What Sovereignty, Power, Rule, Dominion is ascribed to them? Is there
any thing of the like Nature in the writings of the Apostles? In Clemens, the
Epistle of Polycarpus etc. Or any unquestionable legitimate offspring of any
of the first Worthies of Christianity? Whence have they their three orders of
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, upon the distinct observation of which so
much weight is laid? Is there any one word, iota, title, or syllable, in the
whole book of God giving countenance to any such distinctions? Ephesians. 4. 8. We
have Pastors and Teachers. Rom: 12. 7.8. Him that teaches, him that exhorts,
him that rules, and him that shows mercy, Philip. 1. 1. We have Bishops and
Deacons: and their Institutions with the order of it, we have at large
expressed. 1 Timothy: 3. 1. 2. Bishops and Deacons without the Interposition of any
other order whatever. Deacons we have appointed Acts the 7. And Elders. Acts
14. 23. Those who are Bishops we find called Presbyters. Titus: 1. 5. 7. And
those who are Presbyters, we find termed Bishops. Acts 20. 28. So that Deacons
we know and Bishops who are Presbyters, or Presbyters who are Bishops we know,
but Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, as three distinct orders in the Church,
from the Scripture we know not. Neither did Clemens in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, know of any more then we do, which a few instances will manif^st:
says he speaking of the Apostles. (...) etc. Bishops and Deacons (as in the
Church at Philippi) this man knows: but the third order he is utterly
unacquainted withal. And that the Difference of this man's expressions,
concerning Church Rulers from those in the Epistle under consideration, may the
better appear; and his asserting of Bishops, and Presbyters to be one and the
same, may the more clearly be evidenced, I shall transcribe one other Passage
from him, whose length I hope will be execused from the usefulness of it, to
the Parpose in hand. Page 57. 58. (...) (for so it seems was the manner of the
Church in his days, that their officers were appointed by the consent of the
whole Church) (...) (or the Bishops of whom he was speaking) (...). etc. And
sundry other discoveries are there, in that Epistle of the like nature: It is
not my design, nor purpose to insist upon the parity of Bishops and
Presbyters, or rather the Identity of office denoted, by sundry Appellations
from these and the like places: this work is done to the full by Blondellus,
that our labor in this kind, (were that the purpose in hand,) is prevented. He
that thinks the Arguments of that Learned man to this purpose are indeed
answered thoroughly, and removed by D. H. in his fourth dissertation, where he
proposes them to Consideration, may one day think it needful, to be Able to
distinguish between words and things. That Clemens ownes in a Church but two
sorts of Officers, the first whereof he calls sometimes Bishops, sometimes
Presbyters, the other Deacons, the Doctor himself does not deny.

That in the Judgment of Clemens no more were instituted in the Church is no
less evident. And this carries the conviction of it is truth so clearly with
it; that Lombard himself confesses, hos solos ministrorum duos ordines
Ecclesiam primitvam habuisse, and de his solis praeceptum Apostoli nos habere.
Lib. 4. Sen. D. 24. Lib. 3. ext. It seems moreover that those Bishops and
Deacons in those days (as was observed) were appointed to the office, by and
with the consent of the People, or whole body of the Church: no less do those
words import, (...). Our Doctor indeed renders these words, applaudente aus
congratulante Ecclesia tota: and adds ( satis pro imperio) nihil hic de
acceptatione totius Ecclesiae, sine qua Episcopos and Diaconos ab Apostolis and
Apostolicis viris constitutos non esse, ex hoc loco concludit Blondellus, quasi
qui ex Dei jussu and Approbatione constituebantur populi etiam acceptatione
indigere putandiessent. Dissert: 4. Cap. 7. 8. 10. And who dares take that
confidence upon him, as to affirm any more, what so great a Doctor has
denied? Though the scope of the place, the nature of the thing, and first most
common sense of the word here used, being, willingly to Consent (as it is also
used in the Scripture for the most part. Act: 8. 1. 1 Cor 7. 12) to a thing to
be done, or to the doing of it, yet here it must be taken to applaud, or
congratulate, or what else our Doctor pleases, because he will have it so.
(...) also, must be Viri Apostolici, men with Apostolical or extraordinary
power, when they are only the choice men of the Church, where such a
constitution of Officers is had, that are intended because it is our Doctors
purpose to have the words so rendered. Ex jussu Dei and Approbatione, as though
any particular command or opprobation of God were intimated, for the
constitution of the Bishops and Deacons mentioned, beyond the institution of
the Lord Jesus Christ, that Elders should be ordained in every Church, because
this would seem to be exclusive wholly of the consent of the people, as any
way needful or required to their constitution: which yet as it is practically
false, no such thing being mentioned by Clemens, who recoutneth the way and
means, whereby Officers were continued in the Church even after the decease of
the Apostles, and those first ordained by them to that holy employment, so also
is it argumentatively weak and Unconcluding. God appointed, designed Saul to
be King, approving of his so being, and yet he would have the people come
together to choose him. So also was it in the case of David. Though the Apostles
in the name and the authority of God, appointed the Deacons of the Church at
Jerusalem, yet they would have the whole Church look out among themselves the
men to be appointed. And that the ordaining of the Elders was with the peoples
Election Act. 14. 23. It will ere long be manifested, that neither our Doctor
nor any of his Associates have as yet disproved. This poor thing the people,
being the peculiar people of Christ, the heritage of God and Holy Temple unto
him etc. Will one day be found to be an other manner of thing, then many of our
great Doctors have snpposed. But he informs us Cap. 4. Sect 3. From that
Testimony which we cited before, that the Apostles in the Appointment of
Bishops and Deacons (for so the words expressly are) are said (...) i: e: Says
he Revelationibus edoctos esse, quibus demum haec dignitas communicanda esset;
that is, that they appointed those, whom God revealed to them in extraordinary
manner to be so ordained, and this is the meaning of (...), and why so? The
holy Ghost orders concerning the appointment of Deacons (...). 1 Timothy 3. 10.
That those who are to be taken into office and power in the Church had need
first to be tried and approved; is granted. And this work the Apostles give to
the multitude of the Church. Act: 6. Where yet after the peoples Election, and
the Apostles Approbation, and the trial of both, one that was chosen is
supposed, to have proved none of the best. And yet of him, and them, are the
Apostles said by Clemens that they did, (...). But how shall it be made to
appear that, Spiritum probantes, trying or proving by the Spirit, or
spiritually proving them to try whether, they were able Ministers of the new
Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, proving them by that spirit,
which was promised unto them to lead them into all truth, must needs signify
they were taught whom they should appoint by immediate Revelation. To prove by
the Spirit, or Spiritually the persons that are to be made Ministers, or
Bishops, is to have their names revealed to us. Stephen is said to speak,
(...). Act. 6. 10. And Paul purposed (...). Act: 19. 21. And we are said to
serve God, (...). Gal. 5.5. and to make supplication (...). Ephesians. 6. 18. With
many more expressions of the like nature. Does all this relate to immediate
Revelation, and are all things done thereby which we are said to do in the
Spirit? Before we were instructed in this mystery, and were informed that,
(...), did signify to be taught by revelation. We had thought that the
expression of doing any thing (...) had manifested the Assistance, guidance,
and direction, which for the doing of it we receive, by the holy and b^essed
spirit of God, promised unto us, and bestowed on, in and through the Lord Jesus
Christ. Yea but he adds, that it is also spoken of the Apostles. (...)
praecognitionem (i: e:) Revelationem (...), they appointed them Bishops and
Deacons, by the helps and presence of the spirit with them, the Apostles
examined, tried those who were to be appointed Bishops, so obtaining, and
recieving a perfect foreknowledge, or knowledge of them before their Admission
into office. This also expresses Revelation ((...)) upon trial it was revealed
unto them) and so must any thing else be allowed to be, that our Doctor will
have to be so, now he is asserting to that purpose. But had the (...), who
appointing Bishops and Deacens after the Apostles time, had they also this
special Revelation? Or may they not be said, (...). If not, how will you look
upon them under the notion of (...), who neglected so great a duty: if they
did, let us know when this way of constituting Church officers by immediate
Revelation ceased: and what was afterward took up in the Room thereof: and
who they were that first proceeded on another account, and on what Authority
they did it? There are a generation of men in the world, will thank the Doctor
for this insinuation, and will tie knots upon it, that will trouble him to
loose.

Before we return, let us look but a little further, and we shall have a
little more light given us, into what was the conditon and power of the people
in the Church in the days of Clemens, speaking of them who occasioned the
division, and schism in the Church of Corinth, or them about whose exaltation
into office, or dejection from it that sad difference fell out, he gives them
this advice. (...). It seems the (...), the multitude, or the people were not
such poor inconsiderable things as they are reported to be, when he advises
them to stop and stay the sedition, by yielding obedience to the things by them
appointed and commanded. If it were in it self evil, disorderly, and not
according to the mind of Christ, that the people should order and appoint
things in the Church, it had been simply evil for Clemens, to have advised any
to yield obedience unto things by them so appointed. Where is now Ignatius his
(...) and (...). etc. Even those who are contending about Rule and Government in
the Church, are advised to stand to the determination of the people, and to
cry, (...). This is also insisted on by Blondellus, who thence argues
potestatem plebis Circa Sacra. Disser. 5. Cap. 8. Sect. 4. Ad verba haec (says
our Doctor) prodigii instar est quod notandum duxit Dav: Blondellus [
potestatem Plebis Circa Sacra] ( de qua tandem integram dissertationem
elucubravit) artificiis quibuscunque asserturus. Hic (inquit) nos monet Clemens
fideles etiam de Episcopatu aut Presbyterio contendentes, non ab Episcopi
singulari (...) nutu, sed a multitudinis praeceptis pependisse. But let not our
Doctor be angry, nor cry out so fast of Prodigies: a little time will
manifest, that many things may not be prodigious, which yet are contrary to
sundry of his conceptions, and Apprehensions. I cannot but acknowledge him to
be provoked; but with all must say, that I have found very commonly, that
reasons ushered in by such loud Clamours, have in examination proved to have
stood in need of some such noyses, as might fright men from the consideration
of them. What is in the next Sections set up to shield the Children of
Episcopacy from being afrighted with this prodigy, may perhaps be of more
efficacy thereunto, then the exclamations before mentioned: He therefore
proceeds. Sect: 5. Certe (says he) si serio rem ageret Da^ Blondellus de
Presbyteris suis (non de Episcopis nostris) actum plane and triumphatum erit,
nec enim ab universo aliquo Presbyterorum Collegie, quod ille tam afflictim
ardet, sed a multitudinis solius Arbitrio, tum contendentes de Episcopo, tum
fideles omnes Corinthios pependisse aeque concludendum erit. If any man in the
world has manifested more desperate Affection toward Presbytery, then this
Doctor has done toward Episcopacy, for my part solus habeto. But though
neither Clemens, nor Blondellus speak any one word about the ordering of
things, multitudinis solius arbitrio, yet here is that said by them both, as is
sufficiently destructive, not only to the Episcopacy the Doctor contends for,
as a thing wholly inconsistent with the power, and liberty here granted the
people, but of any such Presbytery also, as shall undertake the ordering and
disposing of things in the Church of God, without the consent and Concurrent
suffrage of the People. Such a Presbytery it seems Blondellus does not defend.
But yet neither the Doctors Outcry as at a Prodigy, nor this retortion upon
Presbytery, is any answer to the testimony of Clemens, nor indeed is there the
least possible reflection upon an orderly Gospel Presbytery in any Church, and
Over it, by what Clemens here professes to be the power of the People, all the
appearance of any such things is from the term Solius, foysted into the
discourse of Blondellus by the Doctor, in his taking of it up to retortat.
Clemens in the very next words secures us from any thought, that all things
depended a multitudinis solius arbitrio. His very next words are, (...). Our
Doctors and Masters having stuffed their imaginations with the shape, and
lineament of that Hierarchichal fabric, which the Craft, Policy, Subtilty,
Avarice, Pride, Ambition of many ages successively, had formed, and framed
according to the Pattern they saw in the Mount of the World, and the goverments
therein, upon the first hearing of a Church, a flock of Christ, walking in
orderly subjection, to their own Elders concurring with them, and consenting to
them, in their Rule and Government, instantly as men amazed, cry out a Prodigy.
It is not imaginable into what ridiculous, contemptible miscarriages, pride,
prejudice, and selfulness do oftentimes betray men, otherwise of good
abilities in their ways, and very commendable Industry.

But Section the sixth, the Doctor comes closer, and gives his Reason why this
Testimony of Clement is not of any efficacy to the purpose in hand, says He!
At quis (sodes) a fidelibus de Episcopatu (ut vis) contra ipsos ab Apostolis
constitutos Episcopos contendentibus; quis a populo contra principem suum
tumultus ciente; quis verbis ad retundendum seditionem ad plebem factis,
argumenta ad Authoritatem populo adjudicandum principi derogandum duci posse
existimavit? Though many words follow in the next Section, yet this is all of
Answer that is given to this signal Testimony of Clement's. I know the Doctor
for the most part meets, not only with favorable Readers, but also partial
Admirers; or else certainly his Exclamation would scarce pass for an invincible
Argument, nor such Rhetorical diversions as this, be esteemed solid Answers.
There is not by Blondellus any Argument taken from the faithful's tumultuating
against the Bishops (that if appointed by the Apostles which is thrust in,
taken for the persons of those Bishops, is against the express Testimony of
Clemens in this Epistle) nor from the peoples seditiously rebelling against
their Prince, nor from any word spoken to the People to repress their
sedition; neither was any thing of this nature urged in the least by
Blondellus: nor is there any color given to such a collection from any thing
in the words cited from the Epistle, or the context of them. It is the advice
of the Church of Rome to the persons (whether already in office, or aspiring
thereunto) about whom the contention, and division was in the Church of
Corinth, that is insisted on. It is not the words nor plea of them who were in
disorder, there is not any reprehension given to the body of the Church, the
multitude or people who are supposed to tumultuate, to quiet them, but a
direction given (as was said) by the Church of Rome to the persons that
occasioned the difference, how to behave themselves so, that a timely issue
might be put to the division of the Church. To this end are they advised to
observe the (...), the orders, precepts, decrees, or appointments of the
multitude, as (from Acts the fifteenth) the body of the Church is called. It is
not, that they should yield to their tumultuating, but to yield obedience to
their orderly precepts. (...), are by him approved; and had it not been lawful
for them, with the Presbyters (...) in the Affairs of the Church, Clemens
writing this Epistle to the whole Church, could not possibly have led them into
a greater snare.

It is a sad thing to consider the pitiful entanglements, and snares that some
men run into, who will undertake to make good, what they have once engaged
for, let what will come against them.

To return then; It is evident, that in the time of Clement, there were but
two sorts of Officers in the Church, Bishops, and Deacons; whereas the Epistles
of Ignatius do precisely in every place where any mention is made of them, as
there is upon occasions, and upon none at all, insist on three Orders distinct,
in name, and things. With Clement it is not so. Those whom he calls Bishops in
one place, the very same persons he immediately calls Presbyters (after the
Example of Paul. Act: 20. 28. And Titus. 1. 5. 7.) And plainly asserts
Episcopacy to be the office of Presbyters. (...) (says he) (...): viz: Because
they were in no danger to be cast from their Episcopacy. And whereas the fault
which he reproves in the Church of Corinth, is their division, and want of due
subjection to their spiritual Governors, according to the order, which Christ
has appointed in all the Churches of the Saints, he affirms plainly that those
Governors were the Presbyters of the Church: (...) (says he) (...). And in
all places throughout the whole Epistle, writing ((...)) to that particular
Church of Corinth, the Saints dwelling there, walking in the order and
fellowship of the Ghospel, where he treates of those things, he still intimates
a plurality of Presbyters in the Church (as there may, nay there ought to be in
every single congregation, Act: 20. 28.) without the least intimation of any
singular Person, promoted upon any account whatever above his fellows. So in
the Advice given to the persons who occasioned the division before mentioned;
(...). Had there been a singular Bishop at Corinth, much more a Metropolitan,
such as our Doctor speaks him to have been, it had been impossible that he
should be thus passed by in silence.

But the Doctor gives you a double answer to this observation, with the
several parts whereof, I doubt not but that he makes himself merry, if he can
suppose that any men are so wedded to his dictates, as to give them
entertainment: for indeed they are plainly iocular. But learned men must have
leave sometimes to exercise their fancies, and to sport themselves with their
own imaginations.

1 Then, for the mention that is made of many Presbyters in the Church of
Corinth, to whom Clement in the name of the Church of Rome, exhorts to give all
due respect, honor, obedience. He tells you that by the Church of Corinth, all
the Churches of Achaia are meant and intended. The Epistle is directed only
(...), without the least intimation of any other Church or Churches. The
difference it is written about, was occasioned by one or two persons in that
Church only: it is that Church alone that is exhorted to order, and due
subjection to their Elders. From the beginning to the end of the Epistle, there
is not one word, apex, or tittle to intimate the designation of it, to any
Church, or Churches beyond the single Church of Corinth: or that they had any
concernment in the difference spoken to. The Fabric of after Ages lies so
close to the Doctour's imagination; that there is no entrance for the true
frame of the Primitive Church of Christ: and therefore every thing must be
wrested, and apportioned to the conceit of such an Episcopacy as he has
entertained. Whereas he ought to crop off, both head, and heels of his own
imagination, and the Episcopacy of the latter days, which he too dearly
affects, he chooses rather to stretch, and torture the ancient government of
the Church, that it may seem to answer the frame presently contended for. But
let us a little attend to the Doctor's learned arguments; whereby he endeavors
to make good his assertion.

1 He tells you that Corinth was the chief City of Achaia: the Metropolis (in a
political sense and Acceptance of the word) of Greece, where the Pro-Consul
had his Residence: Diss: 5: cap: 2. Sect. 3. Let us grant this to our learned
Doctor, least we should find nothing to gratify him with all; what then will
follow? hence (says he) it will follow ( Sect: 4:) that this Epistle which was
sent, Ecclesiae (...), non ad unius civitatis Ecclesiam, sed ad omues totius
Achaiae Christianos, per singulas civitates and regiones, sub Episcopis aut
praefectis suis ubique callocatas missa existimetur: But pray Doctor why so?
We poor creatures who are not so sharp sighted, as to discern a Metropolitan
Archbishop at Corinth, of whom all the Bishops in Greece were dependant, nor
can find any instituted Church in the Scripture, or in Clement, of one
denomination, beyond a single Congregation, cannot but think, that all the
strength of this Consectary, from the insinuation of such a state of things, in
the Church of God, is nothing but a pure begging of the thing in Question,
which will never be granted upon such terms.

Yea but he adds, Sect: 5: That Paul wrote his Epistle not only to the Church
of Corinth, but also to all the Churches of Achaia, therefore Clement did so
also: At first view this Argument seems not very conclusive, yea appears
indeed very ridiculous: the inforcement of it which ensues may perhaps give new
life and vigor to it: How then is it proved that Paul wrote not only to the
Church of Corinth, but to all them in Achaia also? why says he in the 2
Epistle: 1. chap: 1. v: it is so expressed: he writes, (...). Very good* It is
indisputably evident that Paul wrote his second Epistle to the Church at
Corinth, and all the rest of Achaia, for he expressly affirms himself so to
do, and for the first Epistle, it is directed not only to the Church of Corinth
1: cap: 2. verse, but also (...): that is, says our Doctor, in the whole
Region of Achaia. So indeed says the Doctor's great friend Grotius, to whom he
is beholding for more then one rare notion. I say it not in any way of any
reproach to the Doctor, only I cannot but think, his careful warding of
himself against the thoughts of men that he should be beholding to Grotius,
does exceedingly unbecome the Doctour's gravity, and self denial. This is
complained of by some who have tried it in reference to his late comment on the
Revelation. And in this dissertation, he is put by his own thoughts, (I will
not say guilty) to an Apology cap. 1. Sect. 24 Qua in resuffragi msuum tulisse
Hugonem Grotium (...) ex annotationibus posthumis, nuper editis, and postquam
haec omnia Typographo transcripta essent, cursim perlectis edoctum gratulor.
Let not the Reader think that Doctor Ham: had transmitted his papers full of
rare conjectures to the Printer, before Grotius Annotations upon the
Revelations were published, but only before he had read them. The Doctor
little thinks what a fly this is in his pot of Ointment, nor how undecent with
all impartial men, such Apologies, subservient to a frame of spirit in bondage
to a man's own Esteem and Reputation, appear to be: but let this pass: and let
the Saints that call upon the name of Jesus Christ in every place, be the
Saints in every part of Achaia, though the Epistle it self (written indeed
upon occasion taken from the Church of Co^nth, yet) was given by inspiration
from God for the use not only of all the Saints in the whole world, at that
time wherein it was written, but of all those who were to believe in any part
or place of the world to the end thereof; although the assertion of it be not
built on any tolerable conjecture, but may be rejected with the same facility
wherewith it is tendered; what now will hence ensue? Why hence it follows that
Clement also wrote his Epistle to all the Churches in Achaia. Very good? Paul
writing an Epistle entitled chiefly to the Corinthians, expressly and (...)
directs it to the Saints or Churches of Achaia, yea to all that call upon the
name of God in every place, so that his Epistle being of Catholic concernment,
is not to be confined to the Church of Corinth only, although most of the
particular things mentioned in that Epistle related only to that particular
Church; Therefore, Clement directing his Epistle to the Church of Corinth only,
not once mentioning nor insinuating an intention of extending it to any other,
handling in it, only the peculiar concernment of that Church, and a difference
about one or two persons therein, must be supposed to have written to all the
Churches of Achaia. And if such Arguments as these, will not prove Episcopacy
to be of Apostolical constitution, what will prevail with men so to esteem it?
Si Pergama dextra defendi possent, etiam hac defensa fuissent. And this is the
cause of naming many Elders, or Presbyters in one Church: For my part I suppose
the Doctor might more probably have adhered to a former conjecture of his,
Dissert. 4ta cap. 10. Sect: 9. Concerning two sundry different Churches, where
were distinct officers in the same City: primo (says he) respondeo non usque
quaque verum est, quod pro concesso sumitur, quamvis enim in una Ecclesia aut
caetu plures simul Episcopi nunquam fuerint (pray except them mentioned, Act:
20* 28: and those Act: 14 23) nihil tamen obstare quin in eadem civitate due
aliquando caetus disterminati fuerint. He might (I say) with more show of
probability have abode by this observation, then to have rambled over all
Greece, to relieve himself against his Adversaries. But yet neither would this
suffice. What use may, or will be made of this concession shall else where be
manifested. But the Doctor has yet another Answer to this multiplication of
Elders, and the mention of them with Deacons, with the eminent identity that is
between them, and Bishops through the whole Epistle, the same persons being
unquestionably intended in respect of the same office, by both these
appellations Now this second Answer is founded upon the supposition of the
former: (a goodly foundation!) namely, that the Epistle under consideration was
written and sent not to the Church of Corinth only, but to all the Churches of
Achaia, of which Corinth was the Metropolitan.

Now this second answer is, that the Elders or Presbyters here mentioned, were
properly those whom he calls Bishops, Diocesans: men of a third rank and order
above Deacons, and Presbyters in the Church-Administrations and government. And
for those who are properly called Presbyters, there were then none in the
Church, to give color to this miserable evasion, Disser: 4. chap. 10 11: He
discourses about the government and ordering of Church affairs by Bishops and
Deacons, In some Churches that were small, not yet formed or completed, nor
come to perfection at the first planting of them: how well this is accomodated
to the Church of Corinth which Clement calls, (...): and which himself would
have to be a Metropolitical Church, being confessedly great, numerous;
furnished with great and large gifts, and abilties is seen with half an eye.
How ill also this shift is accommodated to help in the case for whose service
it was first invented, is no less evident. It was to save the sword of Phil: 1.
1. From the throat of the Episcopacy he contendeth for; That Epistle is
directed to the Saints, or Church at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons.
Two things do here trouble our Doctor. 1 The mention of move Bishops then one
at Philippi. 2 The knitting together, of Bishops and Deacons, as the only two
orders in the Church, bringing down Episcopacy one degree at least from that
height whereto he would exalt it. For the first of these, he tells you that
Philippi was the Metropolitan Church of the Province of Macedonia, that the
rest of the Churches, which had every one their several Bishops (Diocesan we
must suppose) were all comprised in the mentioning of Philippi: so that though
the Epistle be precisely directed (...), yet the Bishops that were with them,
must be supposed to be Bishops of the whole Province of Macedonia; because the
Church of Philippi was the Metropolitan: The whole country must have been
supposed to be converted (and who tha^ knows any thing of Antiquity will
dispute that) and so divided with Diocesan's, as England of late was: the
Archbishops so being at Philippi: but how came it then to pass, that here is
mention made of Bishops, and Deacons only, without any one word of a third
order, or rank of men distinct from them called Presbyters or Elders? To this
he Answers, 2ly, That when the Church was first planted, before any great
number were converted, or any fit to be made Presbyters, there was only those
two orders instituted Bishops and Deacons: so that this Church at Philippi
seems to have been a Metropolitical Infant. The truth is if ever the Doctor
be put upon reconciling the Contradictions of his answers one to another, not
only in this, but almost in every particular he deals withal (an entanglement
which he is thrown into, by his bold and groundless conjectures) he will find
it to be as endless, as fruitless: but it is not my present business to
interpose in his quarrels, either with himself, or Presbytery. As to the
matter under consideration, I desire only to be resolved in these few Queries.

1 If there were in the times of Clement no Presbyters in the Churches, not in
so great and flourishing a Church, as that of Corinth; and if all the places in
the Scripture, where there is mention of Elders, do precisely intend Bishops,
in a distinction from them who are only Deacons, and not Bishops also, as he
asserts, when, by whom, by what Authority, were Elders, who are only so
inferior to Bishops, peculiarly so termed, instituted and appointed in the
Churches? And how it comes to pass that there is such express mention made of
the Office of Deacons, and the continuance of it, none at all of Elders, who
are acknowledged to be superior to them, and on whole shoulders in all their
own Churches, lies the great weight and burden of all Ecclesiastical
Administration. As we say of their Bishops, so shall we of any Presbyter, not
instituted and oppointed by the Authority of Jesus Christ in the Church, let
them go to the place from whence they came.

2 I desire the Doctor to inform me, in what sense he would have me to
understand him: Disser. 2. cap. 29. 21, 22: where he disputes that those words
of Hierom. Antequam studia in Religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, Ego
sum Pauli, ego Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consensu ecclesiae gubernabantur,
are to be understood of the times of the Apostles, when the first Schism was
in the Church of Corinth, when it seems that neither then, nor a good while
after, there was any such thing as Presbyters in the Church of Corinth, nor in
any other Church as we can hear of: As also to tell us whether all those
Presbyters, were Bishops properly so called, distinct from Elders who are only
so, out of whom one man is chosen to be a Bishop properly so called. To these
enquiries I shall only add.

3ly, That whereas in the Scripture, we find clearly but of two sorts of
Church Officers mentioned, as also in this Epistle of Clement; the third that
was afterward introduced, be it what it will, or fall on whom it will, that we
oppose. This (says the Doctor) is that of Presbytery, give us the Churches
instituted according to the word of Christ, give us in every Church, Bishops,
and Deacons, (rather then we will quarrel give us a Bishop, and Deacons) let
those Bishops attend the particular flock, over which they are appointed,
preaching the word and administering the holy ordinances of the Gospel, in and
to their own flock: And I dare undertake for all the Contenders for Presbytery
in this nation, and much more for the independents, that there shall be an end
of this quarrel; that they will not strive with the Doctor, no^ any living,
for the introduction of any third sort, of persons (though they should be
called Presbyters) into Church Office and government. Only this I must add,
that the Scripture more frequently terms this second sort of men Elders, and
Presbyters, then it does Bishops, and that word having been appropriated to a
third sort peculiarly, we desire leave of the Doctor and his associates, if we
also most frequently call them so, no ways declining the other Appellation of
Bishops, so that it be applied to signify the second, and not third rank of
men: But of this whole business, with the nature, constitution, and frame of
the first Churches; and the sad mistakes, that men have by their own prejudices
been engaged into, in this delineation of them, a fuller opportunity (if God
will) may ear long, be afforded.

To return then to our Ignatius! even upon this consideration of the
difference, that is between the Epistles ascribed to him, and the writings of
one of the same time with him, or not long before him, as to their language,
and expression about Church order and Officers, it is evident that there has
been ill-favored tampering with them, by them who thought to prevail
themselves of his Authority, for the asserting of that, which never came into
his mind.

As I intimated before, I have not insisted on any of those things, nor do on
them altogether, with the like that may be added, as a sufficient foundation
for the total rejection of those Epistles which go under the name of sgnatius.
There is in some of them, a sweet and gracious spirit of Faith, Love, Holiness
zeal for God; becoming so excellent, and holy a witness of Christ as he was,
evidently breathing and working. Neither is there any need at all, that for the
defense of our Hypothesis concerning the non-institution of any Church officer
what ever, relating to more Churches in his Office, or any other Church, then a
single particular Congregation, that we should so reject them. For although
many passages, usually insisted on, and carefully collected by D. H: for the
proof of such an Episcopacy, to have been received by them of old as is now
contended for, are exceedingly remote from the way, and manner of the
Expressions, of those things, used by the Divine Writers, with them also that
followed after, both before as has been manifested, and some while after the
days of Ignatius, as might be further clearly evinced, and are thrust into the
series of the discourse with such an incoherent Impertinency, as proclaims an
Interpolation being some of them also, very ridiculous, and so foolishly
Hyperbolical, that they fall very little short of Blasphemies, yet there are
Expressions in all, or most of them, that will abundantly manifest that He who
was their Author (who ever he was) never dreamt of any such fabric of
Church Order as in after ages was insensibly received. Men who are full of their
own apprehensions begotten in the^ by such representations of things, as either
their desirable presence has exhibited to their mind, or any after prejudicate
presumption has possessed them with, are apt upon the least appearance of any
likness unto that Church they fancy to imagine that they see the face and all
the lineaments thereof, when upon due examination it will be easily discovered,
that there is not indeed the least resemblance, between what they find in, and
what they bring to the Authors, in and of whom they make their enquiry; The
Papists having hatched, and owned by several degrees, that monstrous figment of
Transubstantiation (to instance among many in that Abomination) a folly,
destructive to whatever is in us, as being living Creatures, Men, or
Christians, or what ever by sense, Reason, or Religion, we are furnished with
all, offering violence to us in what we hear, in what we see with our eyes,
and look upon, in what our hands do handle, and our palats taste, breaking in
upon our understandings with vagrant flying forms, self subsisting Accidents,
with as many express contradictions on sundry accounts, as the nature of things
is capable of Relation unto, attended with more gross Idolatry then that of the
poor naked Indians; who fall down and worship a piece of red Cloth, or of those
who first adore their gods, and then correct them; do yet upon the discovery of
any Expressions among the Ancients, which they now make use of, quite to
another End, and purpose, then they did who first ventured upon them, having
minds filled with their own Abominations, do presently cry out, and triumph, as
if they had found the whole far dell of the mass, in it is perfect dress, and
their breaden God in the midst of it. It is no otherwise in the case of
Episcopacy: men of these latter Generations, from what they saw in present
being, and that usefulness of it to all their desires and interests, having
entertained thoughts of love to it, and delight in it, searching Antiquity, not
to instruct them in the truth, but to establish their prejudicate Opinion
received by Tradition from their Fathers, and to consult them with whom they
have to do, what ever Expressions they find, or can hear of, that fall in, as
to the sound of words with what is now insisted upon, instantly they cry out,
Vicimus Io* Paean ^ what a simple generation of Presbyters, and Independents
have we that are ignorant of all Antiquity, or do not understand what they read
and look upon. Hence if we will not believe that in Ignatius his days there
were many Parish Churches with their single Priests, in subordination to a
Diocesan Bishop, either immediately, or by the interposed power of a Chore^
Episcopus and the like, and those Diocesans again in the precincts of
provinces, laid in a due subjection to their Metropolitans, who took care of
them, as they of their Parish Priests, every individual Church having no
Officer but a Presbyter, every Diocesan Church, having no Presbyter, but a
Bishop, and every Metropolitan Church having neither Presbyter, nor Bishop
properly related unto it, as such, but an Archbishop, we are worse then
Infidels, truly I cannot but wonder whether it does not sometimes enter into
these men's thoughts to apprehend, how contemtible they are in their proofs,
for the fathering of such ^n Ecclesiastical distribution of Governors, and
Government, as indeniably lacquied after the civil divisions, and constitutions
of the times and places, wherein it was introduced, upon those holy persons
whose souls never once entered into the secrets thereof.

Thus fares it with our Doctor, and his Ignatius: (...); I shall only crave
leave to say to him as Augustus of Quintilius Varus; upon the loss of his
Legions in Germany under his command; Quintili Vare read legiones: Domine
Doctor read Ecclestas: give us the Churches of Christ such as they were in the
days of the Apostles, and down to Ignatius though before that time (if
Hegesippus may be believed) somewhat deflowred, and our contest about
Church Officers, and Government, will be nearer at an end, then perhaps you will
readily imagine. Give us a Church, all whose members are holy, called,
sanctified, justified living-stones, Temples for the Holy Ghost, Saints,
Believers, united to Christ the head by the Spirit, that is given to them, and
dwells in them, a Church whose (...), is (...)(...), that does nothing by
it is members apart, that appertains to Church Order, but when it is gathered
(...); a Church that being so gathered together, in one place (...)(...),
acting in Church things, in it is whole body under the Rule, and presidence of
it is Officers. A Church walking in order, and not as some who (...) (of whom
says Ignatius (...), such as calling the Bishops to the Assemblies, yet do all
things without him, (the manner of some in our days) he supposes no^ to keep
the Assemblies according to the command of Christ) give us, I say, such a
Church; and let us come to them when they are (...)(...), such as the Churches
in the days of Ignatius appear to have been, and are so rendered in the
Quotations taken from his Epistles by the Learned Doctor, for the Confirmation
of Episcopacy, and as I said before, the contest of this present digression,
will quickly draw to an Issue. Being unwilling to go too far out of my way, I
shall not,

1 Consider the severalls instanced in, for the proof of Episcopacy by the
Doctor. Seeing indeniably the Interpretation must follow, and be proportioned
by the General Issue of that state of the Church, in the days wherein those
Epistles were writ, or are pretended so to be, if that appear to be such as I
have mentioned; I presume the Doctor himself will confess, that his witnesses
speak not one word to his business, for whose confirmation he does produce
them. Nor

2ly, Shall I insist upon the degeneration of the Institutions, and
Appointments of Jesus Christ, concerning Church Administrations in the
mannagement of the succeeding Churches, as principled, and spirited by the
operative and efficacious Mystery of Iniquity, occasioned and advantaged by the
Accommodation of Ecclesiastical affairs to the civil distributions, and
Alotments of the political state of things in those days, nor

3 Insist much farther, on the exceeding dissimilitude, and inconformity that
is between the Expressions concerning Church Officers, and a^^aires in these
Epistles (whence ever they come) and those in the writings of unquestionable
credit immediately before, and after them, as also the u^^er silence of the
Scripture in those things, wherewith they so abound. The Epistle of Clemens, of
which mention was made before, was written for the composing, and quieting of a
division and distemper that was fallen out in the Church of Corinth. Of the
cause of that distention that then miserably rent that congregation, he informs
us in that complaint, that some ((...)) were wrongfully cast from the ministry,
by the multitude, and he tells you, that these were good honest men, and
faithful in the discharge of their duty; for says he, (...)(...): though they
were unblamable both in their conversation, and ministry, yet they removed them
from their office; To reprove this evil, to convince them of the sinfulness of
it, to reduce them to a right understanding of their duty, and order, walking
in the fellowship of the gospel, what course does he proceed in? what arguments
does he use? He minds them of one God, one Christ, one body, one faith, tells
them that Wicked men alone use such ways and practices: bids them read the
Epistle of Paul formerly written to them, upon occasion of another division,
and to be subject to their own Elders: and all of them leave off contending
quietly doing the things which the people, or the body of the Church delivered,
and commanded. Now had this Person writing on this occasion, using all sorts of
Arguments, Artificial, or inartificial for his purpose, been baptized into the
opinion and esteem of a single Episcopacy superintendent, whose Exaltation
seems to be the design of much which is said in the Epistles of Ignatius in
the sense wherein his words are usually taken, would yet never once so much as
bid them be subject to the Bishop, that Resemblance of God the Father,
supplying of the place of Christ, nor told them how terrible a thing it was, to
disobey him, nor pawned his soul for theirs, that should submit to him, that
all that obeyed him were safe, all that disobeyed him, were rebellious, cursed,
and separated from God. What Apology can be made for the weakness, and
Ignorance of that holy Martyr, if we shall suppose him to have had
Apprehensions like those in these Epistles of that sacred Order, for omitting
those all-conquering Reasons, which they would have supplied him with all, to
his purpose in hand, and pitching on Arguments every way less cogent and
useful. But I say, I shall not insist on any such things as these, but only,

4 I say that there is not in any of the Doctor's excerpta from those Epistles,
nor in any passage in them, any mention or the least intimation of any Church
whereunto any Bishop was related, but such an one, as whose members met
altogether in one place, and with their Bishop disposed, and ordered the
affairs of the Church. Such was that whereunto the holy Martyr was related;
such were those neighboring Churches, that sent Bishops, and Elders to that
Church; And when the Doctor proves the contrary, erit mihi magnus Apollo: From
the Churches and their state and Constitution, is the state and Condition of
their Officers, and their Relation to them to be taken. Let that be manifested
to be such from the appointment of Jesus Christ by his Apostles, or de facto in
the days of Ignatius, or before the contemperation of Ecclesiastical Affairs
occasionally, or by choice, to the civil constitution of Cities, and Provinces
in those days, as would, or possibly could bear, a rural Diocesan
metro-political Hierarchy, and this controversy will be at end; When this is
by any attempted to be demonstrated, I desire it may not be with such sentences
as that urged by our Doctor, from Epist: ad Ephesians: (...). The expression in it
concerning Christ being unsound, unscriptural, concerning Bishops
unintelligible, or ridiculous: But it may be said, what need we any more
writing, what need we any truer proof, or Testimony? The Learned Doctor in
his Dissertations Disser: 4. cap: 5: has abundantly discharged this work, and
proved the seven Bishops of the seven Churches mentioned Revel: 2. 3: to have
been Metropolitans, or Archbishops: so that no just cause remains, why we
should farther contend.

Let then the Reader pardon this my utmost Excursion in this digression, to
whose compass I had not the least thoughts of going forth, at the entrance
thereof, and I shall return thither whence I have turned aside.

Dissert: 4. cap. 5. The Doctor tells us that, septem Ecclesiarum Angeli, non
tantum Episcopi sed and Metropolitae i: e: Archi-Episcopi statuendi sunt. i: e:
principalium urbium (...) ad quos provinciae integrae and in iis multarum
inferiorum urbium Ecclesiae, earumque Episcopi tanquam ad Archiepiscopum aut
Metropolitanum pertinebant.

The Doctor in this Chapter commences per saltum, and taking it for granted
that he has proved Diocesan Bishops sufficiently before, though he has scarce
spoken any one word to that purpose in his whole book, (for to prove one
superintending in a Church by the name of Bishop, others acting in some kind of
Subordination to him, by the name of Elders, and Presbyters, upon the Account
of what has been offered concerning the state of the Churches in those, days,
will no way reach to the maintenance of this presumption) he sacrifices his
pains to the Metropolitical Archi-Episcopacy dignity, which as we must
suppose, is so clearly founded in Scripture and Antiquity, that they are as
blind as Bats and Moles, who cannot see the ground and foundation of it.

But first, be it taken for granted, that the Angels of the seven Churches,
are taken for the Governors of those Churches, then that each Angel be an
Individual Bishop of the Church to which he did belong. 2 Be it also granted
that they were Bishops of the most eminent Church or Churches, in that
province, or Roman political distribution of those countries, in the
management of the Government of them, I say, Bishops of such Churches, not
urbium (...), (as the Doctor terms them) what advance is made by all this to
the Asserration of A Metropolitical Archi-episcopacy, I cannot as yet discover.
That they were ordinary Officers of Christ's institution, relating in their
Office, and ordinary discharge of it, not only to the particular Churches
wherein they were placed, but to many Churches also, no less committed to their
charge, then these wherein they did reside, the Officers, Rulers, Governors of
which Churches, depended on them, not only as to their advise, and counsel: but
as to their power and Jurisdiction, holding their place, and employment from
them, is some part of that, which in this undertaking is incumbent on our
Doctor to make good, if he will not be supposed to pre, varicate in the cause
in hand; To this end he informs us, Sect: secunda, that in the new Testament
there is in sundry places, mention made of Churches in the plural number; as
Gal: 1. 21. 1 These: 2: 14. Acts 9 31. Acts 15. 41. 1. Cor: 16. 1. Gal: 1. 2.
Revel. 1. 11* some times, of Church only in the singular number; as Acts 8. 1,
15, 4. 22. Acts 11. 26. Rom: 16. 1. 1 Cor: 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1. 1 These: 1. 1.
Revel: 2. 1. Revel: 2. 8. Revel: 2. 12, 18. Now this is an Observation, which
as we are not at all beholding to the Doctor for it, no more I suppose will
there be found to be to it, when the reason of it shall be a little weighed and
considered. The sum is, that the name Church, in the singular number, is
never used, but when it relates to the single congregation, in or of one City,
or Town. That of Churches respecting the several Churches, or Congregations
that were gathered in any Country or Province; manifest then is it from hence,
that there is in the new Testament, no Church of one denomination beyond a
single congregation; And where there are more, they are always called
Churches; how evidently this is destructive to any Diocesan, or Metropolitical
Officer, who has no Church left him thereby, of Christ's Institution to be
related to, an other opportunity will manifest. For the present let us see what
use our Doctor makes of this observation.

Sect: 3. Says he Judaea and the rest of the places where Churches are
mentioned, are the names of Provinces, (...) quatenus (...) contradistinguntur.
But if the Doctor takes these words in an Ecclesiastical sense, he beggs that
which will upon such unworthy terms, never be granted him; If no more be
intended but that Judaea, Galatia, and the like names of Countries, were
Provinces wherein were many Churches; Smyrna, Ephesus, of Towns and Cities,
wherein there was but one. We grant it with him:

And how much that Concession of ours, is to his advantage has been intimated.
And this seems to be his intendment by his following words, provinciarum
inquam in quibus plurimae civitates singulae singularum Ecclesiarum seeds,
comprehendebantur, ideoque Ecclesiae in plurali istius sive istius provinciae
dicendae. well, what then? cum tamen unaquaeque civitas, cum territorio sibi
adjuncto ((...)) ab Episcop^ suo administrata, singularis Ecclesia dicenda sit:
ideoque quod (...) factum dicitur, Act: 14. 25: (...) fieri jubetur, Tit: 1. 5.
that in every City there was a singular Church in those Provinces (I speak of
those where any number were converted to the faith) I grant, for the annexed
Territories let the Doctor take care: There being one Church at Corinth, and
an other at Cenchrea. So that every single City, had it is own single Church,
with it is Bishops in it, as at Philippi. The passage mentioned by the Doctor,
concerning the Epistle of Dionysius to the Church at Goryna in Creet, is very
little to his purpose: neither does he call Philip the Bishop of that Church,
the Bishop of all the other Churches in Creet, as the Doctor intimates: but
the Bishop of them to whom especially and eminently he wrote.

Sect: 4. Application is made of the forementioned Observation. Sect: 2, and
the Interpretation given of it Sect: 3, in these words; His sic positis, illud
statim sequitur ut (in imperii cognitione) in provincia qualibet, cum plures
Urbes sint, una tamen primaria, and principalis censenda erat, (...) ideo
dicta, cui itidem inferiores reliquae civitates subjiciebantur, ut civitatibus
regiones, sic and inter Ecclesias, and Cathedras Episcopales unam semper
primariam and Metropoliticam fuisse.

In this Section the Doctor has most ingeniously, and truly given us the
rise, and occasion of his Diocesan, and Metropolitical Prelates, from the aims
of men to accomodate Ecclesiastical, or Church-affaires to the state and
condition of the civil Government, and distributions of Provinces, Metropolitan
Cities, and chief Towns within the several dependencies, (the neighboring
Villages being cast in as things of no great esteem, to the lot of the next
considerable Town, and seat of Judicature,) did the Hierarchy which he so
sedulously contendeth for arise: what Advantage were afforded to the work, by
the paucity of Believers in the villages, and less Towne^ (from which at
length, the whole body of Heathenish Idolaters were denominated Pagans) the
first planting of Churches in the greater Cities, the Eminence of the officers
of the first Churches in those Cities, the weakness of many rural Bishops, the
multiplying and growing in numbers and persons of gifts, abilities and
considerable fortunes, and employments in this world, in the Metropolitan
Cities, with their same thereby, the tradition of the abode of some, one or
other of the Apostles in such Cities, and Churches, with the eminent
Accommodation at the administration of civil Jurisdiction, and other Affairs,
which appeared in that subordination and dependency whereunto the Provinces,
chief Cities, and Territories in the Roman Empire were cast, with which
opportunities Satan got by these means, to introduce their ways, state,
pomp, words, phrases, terms of honor of the world into the Churches,
insensibly getting ground upon them, and prevailing to their declension from
the naked simplicity and purity, wherein they were first planted, some other
Occasion may give Advantage for us to manifest: for the present it may suffice
that it is granted that the Magnifick Hierarchy of the Church, arose from the
accommodation of it is state, and condition of the Remans Empire, and Provinces.
And this in the instances of after Ages that might be produced, will easily be
made yet farther evident; In those shameful, or indeed rather shameless
Contests, which fell out among the Bishops of the third Century, and downward,
about precedence titles of honor, extent of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
subjection to, or exemption from one another, the considerableness of their
cities in the civil state of the Roman Empire where they did reside, was still
the most prevalent and cogent argument in their brawles: the most notable
brush, that in all Antiquity we find given to the great Leviathan of Rome, who
sported himself in those gatherings together of the waters of people, and
multitudes, and nations and tongues, or the general counsels (as they are
called) was from an Argument, taken from the seat of the Empire, being fixed at
Constantinople, making it become new Rome, so that the Bishop of the Church
there was to enjoy equal privilege, with him whose lot was fallen in the old
Emperial City; but our Doctor adds;

Sect: 5. Illud ex Judaeorum exemplari transcripsisse Apostoli videntur: cum
Mosaica id lege cautum esset, ut judices and ministri in qualibet civitate
ordinarentur, Deuteronomy: 16. 18: illi vero in rebus dubiis ad judicem (Mosis
successorem synedrio) Hierosolymitano cinctum recurrere tenerentur, Cap: 179:
and in Section 6: he proves Jerusalem to have been the Metropolis of that
whole nation. Egregiam vero laudem^ But

1 The Doctor I presume knows before this, that those with whom he has to
do, will never give him the thing in question upon his begging, or request.
That which alone falls in under our consideration and enquiry is, whether the
Apostles instituted any such model of Church Order and Government, as is by the
Doctor contended for; to this he tells you, that the Apostles seem to have
done it, from the pattern of Mosaical institutions in the Church of the
Jews; But, Doctor, the Queston is not, with what respect they did it, but
whether they did it at all or no; this the Doctor thought good to let alone
uncil another time, if we would not grant him upon his petition, that so they
did.

2 This then is the Doctors second argument for his Dioc^san, and Metropolitan
Prelates. His first was, from the example of the Heathens, in their civil
Administration and Rule, this second from the example of the Jews. Not to
divert into the handling of the Church and Political state of the Jews, as
appointed of God, nor that dissonancy that is between the Institution of civil
Magistrates, and Evangelical administrations; this is the sum of the Doctors
reasoning in his 5, 6, 7, and 8 Sections. God in the Church and among the
people of the Jews, chose out one City, to place his name there, making it the
place where all the Types and ceremonies which he had appointed for the
discovery, and shadowing forth of the Lord Jesus Christ, were visibly and
gloriously to be managed, acted, and held forth (sundry of them being such, as
whose Typicalness would have been destroyed by their multiplication) and
principally on this account, making that place or City (which was first Shilo)
the seat of the kingdom, or habitation of the chief Ruler for the
administration of Justice, who appointed Judges in all the land, for the good
and peace of the people: therefore the Churches of Jesus Christ, dispersed over
the face of the whole world, freed from Obligations to Cities, or Mountains,
walking before God, in, and with a pure and spiritual worship, having no one
Reason of that former institution, in common with the Church of the Jews, must
be cast into the same mould and figure: I hope without offense I may take leave
to deny the Consequence, and what more I have to say to this Argument I shall
yet defer.

But the Doctor proceeds to prove, that indeed the Apostles did dispose of the
Churches in this frame and order, according to the pattern of the civil
government of the Roman Empire, and that instituted of God among the Jews. The
ninth Section, wherein he attempts the proof of this Assertion, is as follows:

Ad hanc Imaginem, Apostoles Ecclesias ubique disponendas curasse, and in
omnibus plantationibus suit, minorum ab eminentioribus civitatibus
dependentiam, and subordinationem constituisse exemplis quidem plurimis
monstrari possit, illud in Syria, and Cilicia patet, Act: 16.4. cum enim (...),
illud, cap: 15. 2. Hierosolymas reforretur ab Ecclesia (...) Antiochiae, Cap.
14. 26, and 15. 3. and decretum ab Apostolis denuo ad eos mitteretur, v: 22. in
Epistola, qua decretum illud continebatur simul cum Antiochensibus (...)
comprehensos videmus, v: 23. Dein Epistola ista Antiochenae Ecclesiae reddita
v: 30. Paulus tandem and Sylas Syriam and Ciliciam peragrantes, v: 4. cap. 16.
4. (...), singulis civitatibus observanda tradiderunt, ut quae ad hanc
Antiochiae Metropolin, ut totidem subordinatae Ecclesiae pertinerent; ut and
ipsa Antiochia ad Hierosolymas, primariam tam latae (ut ex Philone pradiximus)
provinciae Metropolin pertinebat, and ad eam ad dirimendam litem istam se
conferebat.

This being all that the Doctor has to produce from the Scripture to his
purpose in hand, I have transcribed it at large; for this being removed, all
that follows, will fall of it is own accord.

1 Then the dependence on, and subordination of lesser Cities, to the greater,
is asserted as an Apostolical institution; Now because I suppose the Doctor
will not assert, nor does intend a civil dependence, and subordination of
Cities, as such, among them selves, nor will a dependence as to Counsel,
advice, assistance, and the like supplies which in their mutual Communion, the
lesser Churches might receive from the greater and more eminent, serve his
turn: but an Ecclesiastical dependence and subordination, such as whereby many
particular Churches, with Inferior Officers residing in them, and with them,
depended on, and were in subjection unto some one person of a superior order,
commonly residing in some eminent City, and many of these Governors of a
superior order in the greater Cities were in such subordination unto some one
of high degree, termed a Metropolitan, and all this by Apostolical institution
is that which he aymeth at, which being a most gallant adventure, in a waking
generation, we shall doubtless find him quitting himself like a man in his
undertaking.

2 Then he tells you that the question about Mosaical Rites, and necessity of
their observation, was referred to Jerusalem by the single Church of Antioch.
But how does the Doctor make good this first step, which yet if he could,
would do him no good at all? It is true, that Paul was now come to Antioch, ch:
14, 26: also that he was brought on his way by the Church, chap: 15. 3: but yet
that the Brethren who were taught the Doctrine contested about, v. 1: were only
of the Church of Antioch (when it is most certain from the Epistles of Paul to
the Galatians, Colossians, Romans, and others, that great disturbance was
raised far and wide, in all the Churches of the Gentiles obout this
controversy) nothing is offered. It seems indeed that their disputes grew to
the greatest height at Antioch, whether Brethren from other parts and Churches
did also come, whilst Barnabas and Paul abode there, but that that single
Church referred the determining of that controversy, to them at Jerusulem,
exclusively to others, the Doctor proves not. And it is most evident, from the
return of the Answer sent by the Apostles from Jerusalem, v: 23: that the
reference was from all the Churches of the Gentiles, yea and all the scattered
brethren, perhaps as yet not brought into Church Order, not only at Antioch,
but also throughout Syria and Cilicia. It is then granted what he next
observes, viz: that in the Answer returned from Jerusalem, with them at
Antioch, those in Syria and Cilicia, are joined; the reason of it being
manifest, namely their trouble about the same Controversy being no less then
theirs at Antioch. It is also granted, that as Paul passed through the Cities,
that he delivered them the decrees to keep, that were ordained, by the Apostles
and Elders, ch: 16. 4: and that not only to the Churches of Syria and Cilicia,
which he left, c: 15. 41: but also to those throughout Phrygia, and the Regions
of Galatia v: 6. What now follows out of all this? What? but that Antioch by
Apostolical institution was the Metropolitan See of all the Churches of Syria
and Cilicia. Good Doctor do not be angry, but tell us how this may be proved.
Why doubtless it was so: as Antioch belonged to the Metropolitan Church at
Jerusalem, as he told us out of Philo (who was excellently acquainted with
Apostolical institutions.) What Jerusalem was to the whole Church, and Nation
of the Jews, whilst the name of God was fixed there, we know; But what was
the primitive estate of the Churches of Jesus Christ made of Jews and
Gentiles, tied neither to City, or Mountain, I must be pardoned, if I cannot
find the Doctor making any tender of manifesting or declaring. The reasons of
referring this controversy unto a determination at Jerusalem, the Holy Ghost
acquaints us with, Acts 15: 2. That we have no need of this Metro-political
figment, to inform us in it. And now; if we will not, not only submit to
Diocesan Bishops: but also reverence the grave Metro-Politans, standing upon
such clear Apostolical institution; It is fit that all the world should count
us the arrantest Schismatics that ever lived since Pope Boniface his time. The
sum then of this doubty Argument for the Apostolical institution of
Metropolitans (that none might ever more dare to call Diocesians into question
hereafter) Is this; Paul who was converted about the 3 or 4th year of
Caligula, 5, or 6 years after the Ascension of Christ, having with great
success for 3 years preached the Gospel, went up to Jerusalem with Barnabas,
upon the Persecution raised against him at Damascus Act: 9 22: whence returning
to his work, he went first to Tarsus, Act. 9. 30: thence to Antioch: where he
abode one whole year. Act: 11. 25. 26: and was then sent to Jerusalem with the
collections for the Saints about the 4th year of Claudius, Ver. 30: thence
returning again to Antioch, he was sent out by the command of the Holy Ghost
more eminently, and peculiarly, then formerly, for the conversion of the
gentiles, Act: 13. 1, 2, 3: in this undertaking in the space of a year, or
two, he preached, and gathered Churches (whereof express mention is made) at
Salamis Act 13. 5: in the Isle of Paphosv. 6: at Perga in Pamphilia 13: at
Antioch in Pisidia. 14: at Iconium chap: 14. 1: at Lystra and Derbe. v: 6: and
at Perga, 26: in all these places gathering some Believers to Christ, whom
before they returned to Antioch he visited all over, the second time, and
settled Elders in the several congregations, chap: 14. 21, 22, 23: in this
journey and travel for the propagation of the Gospel, he seems in all places
to have been followed almost at the heels, by the professing Pharisees, who
imposed the necessity of the observation of Mosaical ceremonies upon his new
Converts: for instantly upon his return to Antioch, where during his absence,
probably they had much prevailed, he falls into dispute with them, cap: 15. v.
1: and that he was not concerned in this controversy, only upon the Account of
the Church of Antioch, himself informs us, Gal: 2. 4: affirming that the
false Brethren, which caused those disputes and dissentions, crept in to spy
out his liberty, in his preaching the Gospel among the Gentiles, 2. v: that is
in the places before mentioned throughout a great part of Asia. For the
appeasing of this difference, and the establishing of the souls of the
disciples which were grieviously perplexed, with the imposition of the Mosaical
yoke, It is determined that the case should be resolved by the Apostles, Act:
15. 2: partly because of their Authority in all the Churches, wherein those who
contended with Paul would be compelled to acquiesce, and partly because those
Judaizing Teachers, pretended the commission of the Apostles for the Doctrine
they preached, as is evident from the disclaimure made by them, of any such
commission or command, v: 24. Upon Paul's return from the Assembly at
Jerusalem, wherein the great controversy about Jewish Ceremonies was stated,
and determined, after he had in the first place delivered the decree, and
Apostolical salutation by Epistle to the Church at Antioch, he goes with them
also to the Churches in Syria and Cilicia, expressed in the letter by name, as
also to those in Pamphilia, Pisidia, Derbe, Lystra, Iconium etc. chap: 16. v:
1, 2, 3, 4: and all the Churches which he had gathred and planted in his
travells through Asia, whereunto he was commanded by the Holy Ghost, Act: 13.
1. 2. Things being thus stated, it necessarily follows, that the Apostles had
instituted Diocesan and Metropolitan Bishops. For though the Churches were so
small, and thin, and few in number, that 7 years after this, may we believe
our Doctor, the Apostles had not instituted or appointed any Elders or
Presbyters in them. viz: when Paul wrote his Epistle to the Philippians, which
was when he was Prisoner in Rome, as appears, cap: 1, 7, 13, 14: chap: 4, 22:
about the third year of Nero, yet that he had fully built and settled the
Hierarchical fabric contended for, who once dares question?

Audacia-
Creditur a multis fiducia.
But if this will not do, yet Ignatius hits the nail on the head, and is ready
at hand to make good, whatsoever the Doctor will have him say, and his
Testimony takes up the sense of the 2 next following Sections, whereof the
first is as follows.

Hinc dicti Ignatianiratio constat in Epistola ad Romanos, ubi ille antiochiae
Episcopus se (...), pastorem Ecclesiae quae est in Syria appellet, cum ad
Antiochiam, sci: ut ad Metropolin suam tota Syria pertineret. Sic and Author
Epistolae ad Antiochenos, (...), Eam inseribens totam, Syriam ejus (...) esse
concludit.

But yet I fear the Doctor will find he has need of other weapons, and other
manner of Assistance to make good the cause he has undertaken. The words of
Ignatius in that Epistle to the Romans are, (...), Because he recommends to
them that particular Church in Syria, which by his imprisonment was deprived of
it is Pastor, therefore without doubt he was a Metropolitical Archbishop:
Tytere tu patulae etc: But the Doctor is resolved to carry his cause, and
therefore being forsaken of all fair and honest means, from whence he might
hope for assistance or success, he tryes (as Saul the Witch of Endor) the
counterfeit, spurious Title, of a counterfeit Epistle to the Antiochians, to
see if that will speak any comfortable words, for his relief or no. And to make
sure work, he causes this gentleman so to speak, as if he intended to make us
believe that Syria was in Antioch, not Antioch in Syria, as in some remote
parts of the world, they say they enquire whether London be in England, or
England in Londan. What other sense can be made of the words as by the Doctor
transcribed? (...). To the Church of God dwelling in Syria which is in Antioch:
now if this be so, I shall confess it is possible we may be in more errors
then one, and that we much want the Learned Doctour's assistance for our
information; the words themselves as they are used by the worshipful writer of
that Epistle will scarce furnish us with this learned and rare notion, they are
at length. (...) (for so he first opens his mouth with a lie) (...) What is
here more expressed, then that the latter passage, in Antioch, is restrictive
of what went and before was spoken of it is residence in Syria, with reference
to the name of Christian, first given to the Disciples in that place, I know
not: and therefore it is most certain, that the Apostles instituted
Metropolitan Archbishops (...).

But to make all sure the learned Doctor will not so give over: But Sect: 11,
he adds that the Epigraphe of the Epistle to the Romans, grants him the whole
case that is, (...), ex qua (says he) Ecclesiae Romanoe, eiusque Episcopo
super ecclesiis omnibus in urbicaria regione, aut provinciae Romana contentis,
praefecturam competiisse videmus.

Although I have spent some time in the consideration of men's conjectures of
those suburbicarian Churches, that (as is pretended) are here pointed to, and
the rise of the Bishop of Rom's jurisdiction over those Churches, in a
correspondency to the civil government of the Prefect of the City, yet so great
a Critic in the Greek tongue as Casaubon. Exerc: 16. ad An: 150: having
professed that expression: (...), to be barbarous and unintelligible, I shall
not contend about it. For the presidency mentioned of the Church in, or at
Rome, that it was a presidency of Jurisdiction, and not only an eminency of
faith and holiness that is intended, the Doctor thinks it not incumbent on
him to prove: those with whom he has to do, are of another mind: although by
this time some Alteration might be attempted, yea there was, as else where
shall be showed: and so much for Ignatius his Archi-Episcopacy.

The example of Alexandria is urged in the next place in these words: idem de
Alexandria, de qua Eusebius. Marcum (...), Ecclesias (in plurali) primum in
Alexandria instituisse. Has omnes ab eo sub nomine (...), administrandas
suscepisse Annianum, Neronis anno octavo idem Eusebius affirmat: quibus patet
primariam Alexandriae and Patriarchalem cathedram fixam esse, ad quam reliquae
provinciae illius ecclesiae a Marco plantatae, ut ad metropoliticam suam
pertinebant; doubtless. for 1 There is not any passage in any ancient Author,
more clearly discovering the uncertainty of many things in Antiquity, then this
pointed to by the Doctor in Eusebius. For first, the sending of Mark the
Evangelist into Egypt, and his preaching there at Alexandria what he had
written in the Gospel, is but a report. Men said so, but what ground they had
for their saying so, he relates not. And yet we know what a foundation of many
Assertions by following Writers, this Rumor or report is made to be. 2 In the
very next words the Author affirms and insists long upon it in the next
Chapter that Philo's book, (...), was written concerning the Christians
converted by Mark's preaching at Alexandria, when it is notoriously known that
it treats of the Essens, a Sect among the Jews, amongst whole observances
many things were vain, superstitious, and foolish; unworthy to be once
applauded as the practice of any Christian in those days: that same Philo, as
far as can be gathred living and dying in the Jewish Religion, having been
employed by them with an Apology to Rome in the days of Caligula. But 3.
Suppose that Mark were at Alexandria, and preached the Gospel there, which is
not improbable, and planted sundry Churches in that great and populous City of
Jews and Gentiles, and that as an Evangelist the care of those Churches was
upon him, in a peculiar manner, nay, and add farther that after his death, as
Hierome assures us, the Elders and Presbyters of those Churches, chose out one
among themselves to Praeside in their convocations and meetings; If I say all
this be supposed, what will ensue? why then it is manifest that there was fixed
at Alexandria a Patriarchal Chair, and a Metro-political Church, according to
the Appointment of Jesus Chirst by his Apostles, Si hoc non sit probationum
satis, nescio quid sit satis. If some few congregations live together in love,
and communion, and the fellowship of the Gospel in a City, he is stark blind
that sees not that to be an Archbishops See. The reason is as clear as his in
the Comedian, for the freedom of his Wife. Sy: utinam Phrygiam uxorem meam una
mecum videam liberam Them: Optimam mulierem quidem. Sy: Et quidem nepoti tuo,
hujus filio, hodie, primam mammam dedit haec. Them: hercle, vero, serio,
siquidem primam dedit hand dubium quin emitti Aequam siet. Mic: ob eam rem?
Them: ob eam: and there is an end of the contest. The Doctor indeed has sundry
other Sections added to these foregoing, which as they concern times more
remote from those who first received the Apostolical institutions, so I must
ingeniously profess that I cannot see any thing, whereon to fasten a suspicion
of a proof, so far as to call it into examination, and therefore I shall
absolve the Reader from the penalty of this Digression.

The truth is when I first named Ignatius for a witness in the cause I am
pleading for, I little thought of that excursion which I have occasionally been
drawn out unto. When first I cast an eye some few months since upon the
Dissertation of the Learned Doctor, in defense of Episcopacy. and saw it so
Cheker'd with Greek and Latin, so full of quotations divine and humane, I
began to think, that he dealt with his Adversaries, hastisque, clypeisque, and
saxis grandibus, that there would be no standing before his shower of
arguments: but after a little ferious perusal, I must take leave to say, that I
was quickly of another mind, with the reason of which change of thoughts, could
I once obtain the leisure of a few days or hours, I should quickly (God
willing) acquaint them who are concerned in Affairs of this nature. In the
mean time if the Reader will pardon me this digression, having given him an
account of my thoughts concerning the Epistles of Ignatius, I shall in a
procedure upon my first intention bring forth some Testimonies from him, and
valiant quantum valere possunt.

He seems (in the first place) to speak sufficiently clearly, to the death of
Christ for his Church, for Believers, in a peculiar manner, which is one
considerable bottom, and foundation of the truth we plead for. Epist: ad Trall
(...) and again Epistola ad Philad: by Christ (says he) (...) with many the
like expressions. His confidence also of the Saints perseverance for whom
Christ thus dyed, he does often profess; Speaking of the faith of the Gospel he
adds, (...).

And again more clearly and fully to the same purpose Epist: ad Smyrn: (...).
etc.

And this confirmation and establishment in believing, he ascribes not to their
manly considerations, but to the grace of Christ, exclusively to any of their
own strength, Epist: ad Smyrn. (...) (says he of him self) (...).

To the same purpose and with the same confident persuasion he speaks, Epist:
ad Ephesians. (...). etc.

And again in the same Epistle. (...). And in his last Epistle, he gives us
that noble Expression of his own assurance. (...) where we leave the holy
soul, until the same God gather us to him, and the rest of the spirits of just
men made perfect.

And this was the language, these were the Expressions of this holy man, which
what they discover of his judgment, to the case under consideration, is left to
the learned Reader to consider. This I am certain, our Adversaries have very
little cause to boast of the consent of the Primitive Christians with them in
the doctrine of Apostasy, there being in these most ancient writers after the
Apostles, about the things of our Religion, not the least shadow cast upon it,
for it is refreshment.

Add in the next place the most Ancient of the Latins, Tertullian, (that
great storehouse of all manner of learning and knowledge) says he,
Quemadmodum nobis arrhabonem spiritus reliquit, ita and a nobis arrhabonem
carnis accepit, and vexit in Coelum, pignus totius summae illuc redigendae.
Tertullian: de Resur. The certain salvation of the whole mystical body of
Christ, with whom he has that communion, as to give them his Spirit, as he
took their flesh (for he took upon him flesh and blood, because the Children
were partakers of the same,) is evidently asserted: which he could not do who
thought that any of those, on whom he bestowed his spirit, might perish
everlastingly.

And again de praescripti: ad Haeret.

In pugna pugilum and gladiatorum, plerumque, non quia fortis ost, vincit quis,
aut quia non potest vinci. Sed quoniem ille quivictus est; nullis viribus fuit:
adeo idemille victor been valenti postea comparatus, etiam superatus recedit:
non aliter haereses de quorundam infirmitatibus habent, quod valent, nihil
valentes* si in been valentem fidem incurrant. Solent quidem illi miriones
etiam de quibusdam personis ab Haeresi captis aedificari in Ruinam; quare ille
vel illa, fidelissimi, prudentissimi, and usitatissimi in Ecclesia, In ^^am
partem tranfierunt? quis hoc dicens non ipse sib^ respondet, neque prudentes,
neque fideles, neque usitatos aesimandos quos haeresis potuit demutare? He
plainly denies them to have been believers* (that is truly, thoroughly properly
so) who fall into pernicious haeresies to their destruction.

Cyprian is express to our purpose: says he, nemo existimet bonos de Ecclesia
posse disecdere. tritioum non rapit ventus, nec arborem solida radice fundatam
procella subvertit, inanes paleae tempestate metantur; inva^^^e arbores
tutbinis incursione evertuntur. Hos execratur and percutit Apostolus Johannes,
dicens, ex nobis exierunt, sed non fuerunt ex nobis, si enim fuissent ex nobis,
mansissent utique nobiscum. Cyp: de Unita: Eccles: The whole Doctrine we
contend for, is plainly, and clearly asserted, and bottomed on a text of
Scripture, which in a special manner (as we have cause) we do insist upon; all
that is lost by temptations in the Church, was but Chafe, the Wheat abides,
and the rooted Tree is not cast down. Those fall away, who indeed were never
true believers in heart and union, what ever their profession was. And yet, we
are within the compass of that span of time, which our adversaries, without
proof, without shame, claim to be theirs. One Principal foundation of our
Doctrine, is the bestowing of the holy Ghost upon Believers by Jesus Christ.
Where he is so bestowed, there say we he abides: for he is given them for that
end. viz: to abide with them for ever. Now concerning him Basil tells us, that
though in a sort, he may be said to be present with all, that are baptized yet
he is never mixed with any that are not worthy, that is, he dwells not with any
that obtain not salvation. Basil Lib: de Spir: Sanc: Cap: 16. (...). By that
seeming presence of the holy Ghost, with hypocrites that are baptized
professors, he evidently intends the common gifts and graces that he bestows
upon them, and this is all he grants to them who are not at last (for such he
discourses of^) found worthy.

Macarius Aegyptius. Homil: 5: about the same time with the other, or somewhat
before, is of the same mind. He tells us that those who are Christians (...):
and how men can be assured of Heaven, whilst they live here, by the earnest of
it which they have received, as well as if they were crowned and reigning in
Heaven. If those who have received that earnest may loose it again, I know
not. The words of Ambrose to this same purpose, Lib: 1. de Jacob: and Vita:
beat* are many: But because they do not only fully assert the truth* we contend
for, but also insist briefly on most of the Arguments, with which in this case
we plead, I shall transcribe them at large, and they are as follows.

Non gloriabor, quia justus sum, sed gloriabor quia redemptus sum, gloriabor
non quia vacuus peccati sum, sed quia mihi remissa sunt Peccata, non gloriabor
quia profui, nec quia profuit mihi quisquam, sed quia advocatus pro me apud
Patrem Christus est, sed quia pro me Christi sanguis effusus est. -- Haeredem
te fecit, Cohaeredem Christi, Spiritum tibi adoptionis infudit. Sed vereris
dubios vitae anfractus and adversarit insidias, cum habeas auxilium Dei, habeas
tantam ejus dignationem, ut filio proprio pro te non peperce^it? -- nihil enim
excepit, qui omnium concessit Authorem. Nihil est igitur quod negari posse
nobis ver^^^ur; nihil est in quo de munificantiae divinae diffidere
perseverantia debeamus* eujus fuit tan^ diutu^na and jugis abertal, ut primo
praedestinaret, deinde, vocanet, and quos vocavit has and justificaret, and
quos justificaret has and glorificaret. Poterit de^erere quos tantis beneficiis
neque ad pr^mia prosecutus est? Inter ^ot beneficia Dei, number metuend^ sunt
aliquae accusationis insidea? sed quis audeat accusare quos electos divine
ce^nit judicia? number Dous pater ipse qui Contulit, potest dona sua res^i^dere,
and quos adaptione suscapit, eos a paterni affectas gratia religare? sed metus
est ne judea severior sit, confidera qu^m judicem habeas; nempe Christo dedit
pater omne judicium: poterit te ergo ille demnare, quem redemit a morte, pro
quo s^ abtulit, cujus vitam suaemortis mercedem esse cognescit? nonne decit
quae utilitas in sanguine meo, si damno quem ipse salvavi? deinde consideras
judicem, non consideras advocatum?

The foundation of all our glorying in the Love of God, and assurance of
salvation, He lays in the free grace of God, in redemption and justification;
for the certainty of our continuance in that estate, he urges the decree of
Gods pr^destination, the unchangeableness of his love, the Complete Redemption
made by Christ, with his effectual Intercession, all which are at large
insisted upon in the ensuing treatise.

Add to him his contemporary Chrysostom. Ser^^* 3. in 2 Cor: 1. 21. 22. (...)
of these words of the Apostle he given the ensuing exposition. (...).

The design and aim of our Establishment by the Spirit is, he tells us, that
we be not shaken or moved from the says of Christ: So establishes (...) not
to depart and fall away from the faith. And that the argument which he
insistion, from what we have presently received to an assurance of abode in our
Condition, to the enjoyment of the full inheritanceis not contemtible in the
Cause in hand, as is further manifested in the treatise it self.

And these instances may suffice for the first period of time mentioned, before
the rising of the Pelagian heresy, of which, and those others of the same kind
that might be produced, though they may not seem so full, and expressive to the
point under Consideration, as these which follow after, yet concerning those
Authors and their testimonies, these two things may be asserted.

1 That though some Expressions may be gathred from some of the Writers within
the space of Time mentioned, that seem to allow a possibility of defection, and
Apostasy in Believers, occasioned all of them by the general use of that word,
and the taking in the several accounts, whereon men both in the Gospel, and in
common use are so called, yet there is no one of them that ever ascribed the
perseverance of them, who Actually and eventually persevere, to such grounds
and principles as Mr. Goodwin does, and which the Reader shall find at large by
him insisted on, in the ensuing treatise. The truth is, his maintaining of the
Saints perseverance is as bad, if not worse, then his maintaining their
Apostasy.

2 That I scarce know any Head in Religion, concerning which the Mind of the
Ancients who wrote before it received any opposition, may be made out more
clearly, then we have done in this, by the Instances produced, and insisted on.

The Pelagian Heresy began about the year 417. The first opposers thereof are
reckoned up by Prosper, Cap: 2. de Ingrat: The Bishop of Rome, the Palestine
Synod in the Case of Pelagius, Hierome, Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, the
Synod of Ephesus, Sicily, and two in Africa, he mentions in order, concluding
them with the second African gathered to that end and purpose; Anne alium in
finem posset procedere sanctum
Concilium, cui Dux Aurelius Ingeniumque
Augustinus erat? quem Christi gratia corni^
Vberiore rigans, nostro lumen dedit aevo,
Accensum vero de Lumine, nam cibus illi
Et vita and requies Deus est omnisque voluptas
Vnus amor Christi est, unus Christiest Honor illi:
Et dum nulla sibi quaerit bona, fit Deus illi
Omnia, and in Sancto regnat sapientia Templo.


And because I shall not burden the Reader, being now entered upon the Place and
Time, wherein very many witnesses call aloud to be heard about the Difference in
hand, of the first opposers of the Pelagian Heresy, I shall insist only on him,
who is indeed Instar omnium, and has ever been so accounted in the
controversies about the Grace of God: And I shall the rather lay this weight on
him, because it is evident that he spoke the sense of the whole Church, in those
days wherein he lived. This is Austin, of whom says the same Prosper --
Noverint illis non solum Romanam Ecclesiam Affricanamque, sed per omnes Mundi
parts universos promissionis filios, cum Doctrina Hujus Viri, sicut in tota
fide, ita in Gratiae confessione congruere: Epist: ad Rusti:

And when his writings began to be carped at by the Semi-Pelagians of France,
Caelestine Bishop of Rome in his Epist: ad Gallos, gives him this Testimony:
Augustinum Sanctae Recordationis Vir^m pro vita sua and moribus, in nostra
Communione semper habuimus, nec unquam hunc finistrae suspicionis rumor saltem
aspersit, quem tantae scientiae olim fuisse meminimus, ut inter magistros
optimos etiam a meis Praedecessoribus haberetur. His writings also were made
use of not only by Prosper Hilary, and Fulgenti^^, but generally of all that
engaged against the Pelagians. Zozimus ( says Prosper ad Collat: c: 41:) cum
esset Doctissimus, adversus Librostamen Pelagianorum beati Augustin^ responsa
poscebi^. And, Leo Epist: ad Council: Arausic: transcribes out of him verbatim
the things that he would have confirmed and established. And in his own days
not withstanding the differences between them, that Aged and learned Hierome,
tells him Epist: 94: Mihi decretum est te amare, te suspicere, ^^^ere, mirari,
tuaque dicta, quasi mea, defendere. Hence was that out^ry in the Palestine
Synod upon the sleighting of his Authority by Pelagius. Dixit Pelagius, Quis
est mihi Augustinus? Acclamabant omnes Blasphemantem in Episcopum, ^x cujus are
dominus Vniversae Africa Vnitatis indulserit sanitatem, non solum a conventu
illo, sed ab omni Ecclesia pellendum* Oros: Apologet: page* 621* 622: So also
Gelas: biblioth: Pat: T^m: 4 Col^m 553, page* 589.

Fulgen^ius also with then assembled with him at (...), when they were banished
Africa by ^hrasimundus, in that Synodical Epist: gives them this Counsel: pr^
omnibus st^dium gerite libros S: Augustini quos ad Prosperum and Hilarium
scripsit, memoratis fratribus legendos ingerere: Epist: Synod: Byzac: much more
might be added to manifest the Judgment of Austine to have been the Catholic
Judgment of the Church in those days. So that in his single Testimony as great
a number are included, as in the Testimony of any one man in the world whatever.

Now the Controversy that was between Austin, and the Pelagians, and
Semi-Pelagians about Perseverance, Hilary thus expresses in his Epist: to him:
Deinde moleste ferunt (speaking of the Semi-Pelagians) ita dividi gratiam, quae
vel tunc, primo Homini data est, vel nunc omnibus datur, ut ille acceperit
Perseverantiam, non qua fieret, ut perseveraret, sed sine qua per liberum
Arbitrium persever are non posset: nunc vero Sanctis in Regnum per Gratiam
praedestinatis, non tale adjutorium perseverantiae detur, sed tale, ut eis
perseverantia ipsa donetur, non solum ut sine ilio Dono perseverantes esse non
possint, verum etiam ut per hoc Donum non nisi perseverantes sint. Caeterum
quicquid libet donatum sit predestinatis, id posse and amittere, and retinere
propria voluntate contendunt. The very state of the controversy as now under
contest is most clearly expressed, in this Report of the Difference, between the
Semi-pelagians, and the Church of God in those days. And because the whole
sum of Mr. Goodwin's Book is briefly comprised, in the ninth and tenth
Chapter of Prosper de Ingrat: I shall transcribe that tenth chapter, to present
to the Reader the substance and pith of That Treatise, as also the state of the
Controversy in those days. -- Quam sana fides sit vestrapatescat,
Gratia qua Christi Populus sumus, hoc cohibetur
Limite vobiscum, and formam hanc adscribitis illi:
Vt cunctos vocet illa quidem, invitetque nec ullum
Praeteriens, studeat communem afferre salutem
Omnibus, and totum peccato absolvere Mundum;
Sed proprio quemque Arbitrio parere vocanti,
Judicioque suo; mota se extendere mente
Ad lucem oblatam, quae se non subtrahat ulli,
Sed cupidos recti juvet, illustretque volentes.
Hinc adjutoris Domini Bonitate magistra
Crescere virtutum studia, ut quod quisque petendum
Mandatis didicit, jugi sectetur amor.
Esse autem edoctis istam communiter oequam
Libertatem animis, ut cursum explere beatum
Persistendo queant, finem effectumque petitum
Dante Deo, ingeniis qui nunquam desit honestis.
Sed quia non idem est Cunctis Vigor, and variarum
Illecebris rerum trahitur dispersa voluntas,
Sponte aliquos vitiis succumbere, qui potuissent
A Lapsu revocare pedem, stabilesque manner.


As I said, we have the sum of Mr. Goodwin's Book in this declaration of the
Judgment of the Semi-Pelagians, so also in particular the state of the
Controversy about the perseverance of the Saints as then it was debated; and I
doubt not but the learned Reader will easily perceive it to be no other, then
that which is now agitated between me and Mr. Goodwin. The controversy indeed
in the matter between Austin and the Pelagians was reduced to 3 heads 1. As to
the Foundation of it, which Austin concluded to be the decree of
Predestination, which they denied: the Impulsive Cause of it, he proved to be
the Free grace of God, and the measure or quality of that Grace to be such, as
that whoever received it, did persevere, it being perseverance which was given,
both which they denied: about the kind of faith, which Temporary professors
might have, and fall from it, which were never elected, there was between them
no Contest at all. Of his Judgment then, there were these two main heads which
he labored to confirm.

That perseverance is a gift of God, and that no man either did, or could
persevere in Faith and obedience upon the strength of any grace received, (much
less of his own Ability, stirred up and promoted by such considerations, as Mr.
Goodwin makes the ground and bottom of the perseverance of all that so do) but
that the whole was from his Grace. Subservient to this, he maintained, that no
one Temptation whatsoever, could be overcome but by some Act of Grace, and that
therefore perseverance must needs be a work thereof, it being an abiding in
Faith and obedience, notwithstanding, and against Temptation. To this is that
of his on Joh: Hom. 53; quosdam nimia voluntatis suoe fiducia extulit in
superbiam, and quosdam nimia volunta it is sua diffidentia dejecit in
negligentiam: Illi dicunt quid rogamus Deum ne vincamur tentatione quod in
nostra est potestate? Isti dicunt, at quid conamur been vivere, quod in Dei est
Potestate? o Domine, o Pater qui es in Coelis, ne nos infer as in quamlibet
istarum Tentationum, sed libera nos a malo. Audiamus Dominum dicentem, rogavi
pro Te Petre, ne fides deficiat tuae; ne sic existimemus fidem nostram esse in
Libero Arbitrio ut Divino non egeat adjutorio. etc. That, with both of these
sorts of men, the way and work of the Grace of God, is at this day perverted,
and obscured, is so known to all, that it needs no Exemplification. Some
require no more to the Conquest of Temptations, but men's own rational
consideration of their Eternal state and condition, with the tendency of That,
whereto they are tempted: Others turning the Grace of God into wantonness, and
supinely casting away all heedful regard of walking with God, being enslaved to
their lusts and corruptions, under a pretense of God's working all in all. The
latter denying themselves to be men, the former to be men corrupted; And in
plain terms the Milevitane Council tells us, si quis finxerit ideo Gratiam
esse necessariam ad vitanda peccata, quia facit hominem cognoscere peccata, and
discernere inter Peccata, and non peccata, qua Discretione per gratiam habita,
per liberum Arbitrium potest vitare; is procul, etc. The light of Grace to
discern the state of things, the nature of sin, and to consider these
aright, the Pelagians allowed, which is all the Bottom of that perseverance of
Saints, which we have offered by Mr. Goodwin: but upon that supply of these
means, to abide and persevere in faith, to fly and avoid sin, is a thing of
our own performance.

This the Doctors of that Council Anno 420. condemned as a Pelagian fiction, As
Prosper also presents it at large, C: 25: against Cassianus the Semi-Pelagian,
and further cleares and confirms it: so Austin again: De Bono Persev: c: 3:
cur ista perseverantia petitur a Deo, si non datur a Deo? an and ista irrisoria
Petitio est, cum illud ab eo petitur, quod scitur non ipsum Dare, sed ipso non
dante, esse in hominis potestate? sicut irrisoria est etiam illa Gratiarum
Actio, si ex hoc gratiae aguntur Deo quod non donavit ipse, nec fecit: And the
same Argument he uses again, Cap: 6, 9: much resting on Cyprian's
Interpretation of the Lord's Prayer: and Cap: 26: he further presses it, as to
the root and foundation of this Gift of God. Si ad Liberum Arbitrium Hominis,
quod non secundum gratiam, sed contra eam defendis, pertinere dicis, ut
perseveret in Bono quisquis, vel non perseveret, non Deo dante sic perseverat,
sed humana voluntate faciente. One or two instances more in this kind, amongst
hundreds that offer themselves may suffice.

De Correptione and Gratia, Cap: 14. Apostolus Judas, cum dicit, ei autem qui
potens est, etc: nonne apertissime ostendit Donum Dei esse Perseverare in Bono
usque ad Finem? quid enim aliud sonat qui potest conservare nos sine
offensione, and constituere ante conspectum gloriae suoe, immaculatos in
Laetitia, nisi Perseverantiam Bonam? quis tam insulse desipiat, ut neget
Perseverantiam esse Denum Dei, cum dicit Sanctissimus Jeremias, timorem meum
dabo in cord eorum ut non recedant a me, etc. I shall add only that one place
more out of the same Book, (c: 59.) where both the matter, and manner of the
thing in hand, is fully delivered: in hoc loco miseriarum, ubi tentatio est
vita hominum super terram, virtus infirmitate perficitur; qaoe virtus? nisi qui
gloriatur, ut in domino glorietur, per hoc de ipsa perseverantia Boni noluit
Deus Sanctos suos in viribus suis, sed in ipso gloriari, qui eis non solum dat
Adjutorium quod Primo homini dedit sine quo non possit persever are si velit,
sed in iis etiam operatur and velle: and quoniam non perseverabunt nisi and
possint, and velint, perseverandi eis and possibilitas, and voluntas Divinae
Gratiae largitate donatur: tantum quippe Spiritu Sancto accenditur voluntas
eorum, ut ideo possint quia sic volunt, ideo sic velint, quia Deus operatur ut
velint. Nam si tanta infirmitate hujus vitae ipsis relinquetur voluntas sua, ut
in Adjutorio Dei, fine quo perseverare non possent, manerent si vellent, ne
Deus in eis operaretur ut velint, inter tot, and tantas tentationes,
infirmitate sua succumberet voluntas, and ideo persever are non possent, quia
deficientes infirmitate voluntatis non vellent, aut non ita vellent, ut
possent. Subventum est igitur infirmitati voluntatis humanae, ut divina gratia
indeclinabiliter, and insuper abilitaer ageretur, and ideo quamvis infirma non
tamen deficiat: It is not possible that any one should deliver his sense more
clearly, to the whole of our present Contest, than this holy and learned man
has done, in the words now repeated from him: A gift of God he asserts it to
be, (and not an Act or course of our own, whereto we are prompted by certain
Considerations, and assisted with such outward means as are also added to us)
to the real production of that effect by the efficiency of the Grace of God.
And for the manner of this work, it is faith he, by the effectual working, the
Actual will of perseverance (in the continuance of our obedience) in a
Dispensation of Grace, different from, and beyond what was given to him, who
had a Power of Persevering if he would; but received not the will thereof. Now
to Adam's Perseverance there was nothing wanting, but his wills confirmation in
obedience and his Actual doing so. Power he had within, and means without
abundantly sufficient, for that end in their kind. This then He asserts to be
given to the Saints, and to be the work of God in them; even their Actual
Perseverance. Without this he also manifests that such is the infirmity of
our wills, and such the Power of our Temptations (that what means so ever may
be supplied and left to their Power, or what man-like rational considerations
whatever man may engage his thoughts into) that it is impossible any should
persevere to the end: which Bradwardine more confirms, De Cause: Dei Lib: 2.
Cap. 8. Coroll: Omne quod est natural, and non est per se Tale, si manner
debeat immutatum, oportet quod innitatur continue ali^ ui fixo per se: quare
quilibet justus Deo.

And the holy man ( Austin I mean) concludes, that this work of God being
wrought in a man, his will is indeclinably and inseperably fixed so to
obedience, as not to fall off from God. This is the foundation that He lays of
the Doctrine of the Perseverance of Saints: That it is a Gift of God, and that
such a Gift, as he effectually, and Actually works in him on whom he does
bestow it.

A Foundation that will by no means regularly bear the hay and stubble,
wherewith men think to build up a Doctrine of perseverance: making it a fruit
that may, or may not be brought forth, from our own use of the means allowed
for that end and purpose. And indeed the Asserting of the Perseverance of the
Saints in that way, is as bad, if not a worse and more fearful opposition to,
and slighting of the Grace of God, as the denial of it, in the way they oppose:
By the latter they oppose the Grace of God, by the former, set up the Power and
strength of their own will. Thus far Austin is clearly engaged with us; that
perseverance is a Gift of God, that it is given by him to every one that does
persevere: that every one to whom it is given, is inseperably confirmed in
Grace, and shall infallibly persevere to the end.

In that earnest, and long Contest, which that learned Doctor insists upon, to
prove Perseverance to be the Gift of God (for which he has sufficient ground
from that of the Apostle, 1 Cor: 1. 7, 8: that ye come behind in no Gift,
waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus etc.) two things he especially aimed
at: first, an opposing of such a Perseverance, as should not be the fruit and
work of the Grace of God in us: but the work and Effect of our own endeavors,
upon a supply of such means, motives, persuasions, and considerations as we
are, or may be furnished withal. Secondly, that it is so given and bestowed, as
that on whomsoever it is bestowed, he certainly has it, that is, he does
certainly Persevere. As it was Heresy to that holy man, to deny Perseverance to
be the Gift of God, so it was ridiculous to him, to say that that Gift was
given to any, and yet that they received it not; that is, that they might not
Persevere. Nobis (says he) de Cor. and Great: C: 11.) qui Christo insiti sumus,
talis data est Gratia, ut non solum possimus si velimus sed etiam ut velimus in
Christo perseverare. And C: 12: non solum ut sine illo dono perseverantes esse
non possint; verum etiam ut per hoc Donum non nisi perseverantes sint.

And that which he adds afterward, is most considerable, concluding from that
of our Savior, you have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you
to bear fruit; eis (faith he) non solum justitiam, verum etiam in illa
perseverantiam dedisse monstravit. Christo enim sic eos ponente ut eant and
fructum afferant, and fructus eorum maneat, quis audeat dicere forsitan non
manebunt? Though they dare say so, who also dare to to pretend his Authority
for what they say! how falsely, how injustly, is evident to all serious
observers of his mind and spirit, in and about the things of the Grace of God.

2 As he mentioned Perseverance to be such a Gift of God, as indeclinably
wrought in them on whom it was bestowed, a will to Persevere, and on that
account Perseverance it self (an Assertion as obnoxious to the Calumny, and
Clamor of the Adversaries of the Doctrine under consideration, as any we teach
or affirm concerning it) so he further constantly taught this Gift and Grace
to be a fruit of Predestination, or Election, and to be bestowed on all, and
only elected believers: so De Predestinatione Sanc: C. 17. Haec dona Dei dantur
Electis, secundum Dei Propositum vocatis, in quibus est and incipere and
credere, and in fide ad hujus vitae exitum perseverare. And afterward C: 9^.
De bono Persev: ex duobus piis (of his meaning in that word afterward) cur
huic donetur Perseverantia, usque in finem, illi non donetur, inscrutabilia
sunt judicia Dei: illud tamen fidelibus debet esse certissimum, hunc esse ex
Praedestinatis, illum non esse: nam si fuissent ex nobis (ait unus
Pradestinatorum quie pectore Domini biberat hoc secretum) mansissent utique
nobiscum. Quae est ista Discretio? patent Libri Dei, non avertamus aspectum,
elamat Scriptura Divina, adhibeamus auditum, non erant ex eis, quia non erant
secundum propositum vocati:non erant in Christo Electi ante mundi
constitutionem, non erant in eo sortem consecuti, non erant Praedestinati
secundum Propositum ejus qui omnia operatur. And unto these Elect, Predestinate
Believers, he concluded still, that Perseverance was so given in and for
Christ, so proceeding from the immutable will of God wrought by such an
efficacy of Grace, that it was impossible that they should not persevere. He
compares it further with the Grace that Adam received, Lib. De: Correp: and
Great: Cap. 12: primo itaque homini, qui in eo bono quo factus fuerat rectus,
acceperat posse non Peccare, posse non mori, posse ipsum Bonum non deserere,
datum est Adjutorium Perseverantiae, non quo fieret ut perseveraret, sed sine
quo per liberum Arbitrium persever are non possit. Nunc vero Sanctis in regnum
Dei per gratiam Dei praedestinatis, non tantum tale adjutorium Perseverantiae
datur; sed tale, ut iis Perseverantia ipsa donetur, non solum ut sine isto done
Perseverantes esse non possint, verum etiam ut per hoc donum non nisi
perseverantes sint. And a little after; ipseitaque dat perseverantiam, qui
stabilire potens est eos qui stant, ut perseverantissime stent. And in the
eight Chapter of the same Book, expounding that of our Savior, Luke 22, I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, he manifests how upon that account,
it was impossible that the will of Peter should not actually be established to
the end in believing; His words are, -- an audebis dicere, etiam rogante
Christo ne deficeret fides Petri, defecturum fuisse, si Petrus eam deficere
voluisset, idque si eam usque in finem perseverare noluisset? quasi aliud
Petrus ullo modo vellet, quam pro illo Christus rogasset ut vellet: nam quis
ignorant tunc fuisse perituram fidem Petri, si ea quae fidelis erat voluntas
ipsa deficeret; and permansuram, si voluntas eadem permaneret? quando ergo
oravit ne fides ejus deficeret, quid aliud rogavit, nisi ut haberet in fide
liberrimam, fortissimam, invictissimam, Perseverantissimam voluntatem? And in
this persuasion he had not only the consent of all the sound, and Orthodox
Doctors in his time, as was before manifested; but he is followed also by the
School men of all ages, and not forsaken by some of the Jesuits themselves; as
we shall afterward see, when we have added that consideration of the Doctrine
of this learned man, which has given occasion to some, to pretend his consent
in opposition to that, which most evidently He not only delivered, but
confirmed. There are in Austine, and those that either joined with him, or
followed immediately after him, (notwithstanding the Doctrine formerly insisted
on, that Actual perseverance is a Gift of God, and that it flows from
Predestination as an Effect thereof, and is bestowed on all Elect Believers,
infallibly preserving them unto the end: (wherein they assert, and strongly
prove, the whole of what we maintain) sundry Expressions commonly urged by the
Adversaries of the truth in hand, granting many who were Saints, believing and
Regenerate, to fall away and perish for ever: I need not instance in any of
their sayings to this purpose: the Reader knows where to find them gathered to
his hand, in Vossius, Grotius, and Mr. Goodwin from them. The seeming
contradiction that is amongst themselves in the delivery of this doctrine, will
easily admit of a Reconciliation, may they be allowed the common courtesy of
being Interpreters of their own meaning. What weight in those days was laid
upon the Participation of the Sacramental figures of Grace, and what
expressions are commonly used concerning them who had obtained that Privilege
is known to all. Hence all baptized persons continuing in the Profession of the
Faith, and Communion of the Church, they called, counted, esteemed truly
regenerate, and justified, and spoke so of them: Such as these they constantly
affirm, might fall away into everlasting destruction: but yet what their
judgment was, concerning their present state indeed, even then when they so
termed them Regenerate, and Believers, in respect to the Sacraments of those
Graces, Austine in sundry places clearly delivers his thoughts, to the
undeceiving of all that are willing to be free: This he especially handles in
his book de Correp: and Great: Cap: 9: non erant (says he) filii, etiam quando
erant in professione and nomine filiorum ^ non quiae justitiam simulaverunt,
sed quia in ea non permanserunt: This Righteousness he esteemed not to be
merely feigned, and hypocritical, but rather such as might truly entitle them
to the state and Condition of the Children of God, in the sense before
expressed.

And again, isti cum pie vivunt dicuntur filii Dei, sed quoniam victuri sunt
impie, and in eadem impietate morituri, non eos dicit filios Dei prascientia
Dei. And further in the same chapter, sunt rursus quidam qui filii Dei propter
susceptam temporalem gratiam dicuntur a nobis, nec sunt tamen `Deo: and again,
non erant in numero filiorum, etiam quando erant in fide filiorum. And, sicut
non vere Discipuli Christi, ita nec vere filii Dei fuerunt, etiam quando esse
videbantur, and ita vocabantur. He concludes; Appellamus ergo nos and Electos
Christi Discipulos, and Dei filios, quos regeneratos ( that is, as to the
Sacramental sign of that Grace) pie vivere ceruimus; sed tunc vero sunt quod
appellantur, si manserint in eo propter quod sic appellantur.

Si autem persever antiam non habent, id est, in eo quod caperunt esse non
manent, non vere appellantur, quod appellantur and non sunt. As also de Doct:
Christiana, Lib. 3. C. 32: non est revera Corpus Christi quod non erit cum illo
in aeternum.

And these are the Persons which Austine, and those of the same judgment with
him, do grant that they may fall away, such as upon the account of their
Baptismal entrance into the Church, their Pious devout lives, their profession
of the faith of the Gospel, they called and accounted regenerate believers,
whom yet they tell you upon a through search into the nature and causes of
holiness, grace, and walking with God that they would be found, not to be
truly, and really in that state and condition, that they were esteemed to be
in; of which they thought this a sufficient Demonstration, even because they
did not persevere: which undeniably on the other hand (with the testimonies
foregoing, and the like inumerable that might be produced) evinces, that their
constant judgment was, that all who are truly, really, and in the sight of God
believers, ingrafted into Christ, and adopted into his family, should certainly
Persevere: and that all the passages usually cited out of this holy and learned
man, to persuade us that he ever cast an eye toward the Doctrine of the
Apostasy of the Saints, may particularly be referred to this head, and
manifested that they do not at all concern those, whom he esteemed Saints
indeed; which is clear from the consideration of what has been insisted on.
Thus far He, of whom what were the thoughts of the Church of God in the days
wherein he lived, has been declared: He who has been esteemed amongst the
Ecclesiastical Writers of old to have labored more, and to more purpose in the
Doctrine of the Grace of God, then all that went before him, or any that have
followed after him, whose renown in the Church has been chiefly upheld, and
maintained upon the account of the blessed pains, and labors wherein the
Presence of God made him to excel, for the depressing the pride of all flesh,
and the exaltation of the riches of God's love, and efficacy of his grace in
Jesus Christ, wherewith the whole Church in succeeding Ages has been
advantaged beyond what is easy to be expressed.

That Prosper, Hilary, Fulgentius, and the men of renown in the Congregation
of God at the end of that Age, did fall in with their judgments, to that which
Austine had delivered, I suppose will be easily confessed: Prosper ad Cap: 7.
Gal. quomodo eos habeat praeordinata in Christo Electio? cum dubium non sit
donum Dei esse Perseverantiam in bono usque ad finem; quod istos, ex io ipso
quod non perseverarunt, non habuisse manifestum est. Also the breaking of the
Power, and (...) of the attempt of Pelagius by sundry Doctors of the Church,
and Synods to that end assembled, (whereof Prosper gives us an account,
reckoning them up in their order; and Austine before him, Epist: 42. and 47,)
with special relation to what was done in Africa; (and in the beginning of his
verses De Ingratis) with what troubles were raised, and created anew to the
Champions of the Grace of God by the writings of Cassianus, Faustus,
Vincentius, the Masilienses, with some others in France, and the whole rabble of
Semi-Pelagians, with the fiction of Sigibert about a Predestinarian Heresy,
whereof there was never any thing in being, no not among the Adrumetine Monks,
where Vossius hoped to have placed it, the Council of Arles, the Corruptions,
and falsifications of Faustus in the business of Lucidus, the impositions on
Goteschalcus, with the light given to that business, from the Epistle of
Florus, have exerci^ed the commendable endeavors of so many already, that
there is not the least need further to insist upon them. What entertainment
that peculiar Doctrine which I am in the Consideration of, found in the
following ages, is that which I shall further demonstrate.

After these was Gregory: 1: who Lib. 1. Epist 99: speaks to the same purpose,
with them in these words; Redemptor noster, Dei hominumque mediator,
Conditionis Humanae non immemor, sic imis summa conjungit, ut ipse in unitate
permanens ita Temporalia, occulto Instinctu, pia consulens moderatione
disponat, quatenus de ejus manu antiquus Host is nullatenus rapiat, quos ante
Secula intra Sinum matris Ecclesiae adunandos esse praescivit; nam et si
quisquam eorum inter quos degit, Statibus motus ad Tempus ut palms titubet,
radix tamen rectae Fidei, quae ex occulto prodit, divino judicio virens manet,
quae accepto Tempore fructum de se ostentare valeat, qui latebat. This is the
sum of what we contend for: viz: that all those whom God has predestined
to be added to the Church, receiving a saving faith, though they may be shaken,
yet on that account, the Root abides firm, their Faith never utterly
perishes, but in due time brings forth accepted fruits again.

And most expressive to our purpose is that discourse of his which you have,
Lib. 34. Moral. Cap. 8: says He, Aurum, quod pravis Diaboli persuasionibus
quasi lutum sterni potuerit, Aurum ante Dei Oculos nunquam fuit, qui enim
Seduci quandoque non reversuri possunt, quasi habitam Sanctitatem ante ocules
hominum videntur amittere, sed eam ante oculos Dei nunquam habuerunt.

The Exclusion of those from being True Believers, who may be seduced and fall
away; does most eminently infer the Perseverance of all Them, who are so: Add
unto these, Oecumenius (though he be one of a latter date) and those shall
suffice for the period of time, relating to the Pelagian Controversy: says he
in Epist: ad Ephesians: cap. 1. 14. (...). All is confirmed and Ratified by the
earnest of the Spirit, that is given to them that believe.

Of those that lived after the days of the forementioned, (I mean all of them
but the last) that I may not cloy the Reader, I shall not mention any, until
the business of Divinity, and the profession of it, was taken up by the
Schoolmen and Canonists, who from a mixture of Divine and Homane principles,
framed the whole body of it anew, and gave it over into the possession of the
present Romish Church, molded for the most part to the worldly carnal
Interests of them on whom they had their Dependency, in their several
generations.

But yet as there was none of those, but one way or other, was eminently
conducing to the carrying on of the mystery of Iniquity, by depraving,
perverting, and corrupting one Truth or other of the Gospel, so all of them did
not in all Things equally corrupt their ways, but gave some Testimony more or
less to some Truths, as they received them from those that went before them; so
fell it out in the matter of the Grace of God, and the Corruption of the Nature
of man: though some of them labored to corrode, and corrupt the ancient
received Doctrine thereof, so some again contended with all their might in
their way, and by their Arguments to defend it; as is evident in the Instance
of Bradwardine, crying out to God, and Man to help in the Cause of God against
the Pelagians in his Days, in particular complaining of the great Master of
their Divinity. So that notwithstanding all their Corruptions, these ensuing
Principles pass currantly among the most eminent of Them, as to the Doctrine
under consideration, which continue in credit with many of their Sophistical
Successors to this Day.

1 That Perseverance is a grace of God, bestowed according to Predestination,
or Election, on men; that is, that God gives it to Believers, that are
Predestined, and Elected.

2 That on whomsoever the Grace of Perseverance is bestowed, they do Persevere
to the end; and it is impossible in some sense, that they should otherwise Do.

3 That none who are not predestinate, what grace soever they may be made
partakers of in this world, shall constantly continue to the end.

4 That no Believer can by his own strength or power (incited, or stirred up,
by what manlike, or rational considerations so ever) Persevere in the Faith;
the Grace of Perseverance being a gift of God: It is true; that their Judgments
being perverted by sundry other Corrupt Principles, about the Nature, and
Efficacy of Sacraments, with their Conveyance of Grace, ex opere operato, and
out of Ignorance of the Righteousness of God, and the Real work of
Regeneration, they generally maintain (though Bradwardine punctually expressed
himself to be of another mind) that many Persons, not Predestinate, may come
to believe, yet fall away and perish.

Now the Truth is, it is properly no part of the Controversy under
consideration, whether, or how far, and in what sense, men by Reason of the
Profession, and Participation of Ordinances with the work, and effect of common
Grace upon them, may be said to be True Believers; but the whole, upon the
matter, of what we plead for is comprised in the Assertions now ascribed to
them; which that it is done upon sufficient grounds, will be manifest by
calling in some few, of the most eminent of Them, to speak in their own words,
what their thoughts were in this matter.

To bring them in, I desire that one who (though none of Them) was eminent in
his undertakings for a mixture of Divinity, and Law, in those days wherein they
had their eminent rise and Original may be heard. And that is Gratian, who
after his manner has Collected many things to the Purpose in hand: p. 2. c.
33. Q 3. de pan. dis. 2: Charitas (says he) est juncta Deo inseperabiliter,
and unita, and in omnibus semper invicta. And; Electi quippe sic ad Bonum
tendunt, ut ad mala perpetranda non redeant; and, Potest discursus, and
mobilitas Spiritus sic intelligi. In Sanctorum quippe eor dibus juxta quasdam
virtutes semper permanet; juxta quasdam vero recessurus venit, venturus
recedit:in fide etenim, and Spe, and Charitate, and bonis aliis, sine quibus ad
Coelestem patriam non petest veuiri (sicut est H^militas, Castitas, justitia
atque Msericor dia) perfectorum corda non deseri^: in Prophetiae vere virtute,
doctrina facundia, Miraculorum (...), suis aliquanda adest, aliquandose suber
(...), Answering the objection, of the Spirits departure from them, on whom he
is bestowed, He distinguishes of the respects, upon the account whereof, he
may be said so to do; in respect of some Common gifts (says he) he may
withdraw himself from them on whom he is bestowed, but not in respect of
Habitual Sanctifying grace.

Among the School-man there is none of greater name, and eminency, for
Learning, Devotion, and Subtilty, than our (...), who was Proctor of this
University, in the year 1325; and obtained by general consent the Title of
Doctor profundus: Lib. 2: de Causa Dei Cap. 8. This Profound Learned Doctor
proposes this Thesis to be confirmed in the following Chapter: quod nullus
viater, quantacunque gratia ereata subnixus, solim liberi Arbitrii viribus, vel
etiam cum adjutorio Gratiae, possit perseverare finaliter, fine alio Dei
auxilio speciali. In the long disputation following he disputes out of the
Scriptures, and Ancient writers abundantly cited to his purpose, that there is
no possibility of the Perseverance of any Believer in the faith to the end,
upon such Helps, considerations, and Advantages as Mr. Goodwin proposes, as
the only means thereof. That Perseverance it self is a gift of God, without
which gift, and Grace, none can persevere; the and specialty of that Grace, he
expresses in the Corollary wherewith he closes the Chapter: which is, quod
nullus viator, solius liberi Arbitrii, vel Gratiae Viribus, aut amborum
conjunctim, sine alio Dei Auxilio speciali, potest persever are per aliquod
Tempus omnino. Further asserting the efficacy of special grace, in, and for
every good work whatever: His Arguments and Testimonies I shall not need to
recite; they are at hand to those who desire to consult them.

After the vindication of the former Thesis, Chap. 9. 10. Chap. 11: he
proposes further this proposition, to a right understanding of the Doctrine of
Perseverance. Quod perseverantia non est aliquod Donum Dei creatum, a
Charitate, and Gratia realiter differens: And the Corollary wherewith he shuts
up that disputation is, quod Nomen Perseverantiae nullam rem absolutam
essentialiter significat, sed accidentaliter, and relative; Charitatem
videlicet, sive justitiam cum respectu futurae Permansionis usque in Finem, and
quod non improbabiliter posset dici Perseverantiam esse ipsam Relationem hujus.

After this, knowing well what Conclusion would easily be inferred from these
principles, viz: That Perseverance is not really distinct from Faith and Love,
that it as such a Grace, and Gift of God that who ever it is bestowed upon shall
certainly persevere; namely, that every one who has received True Grace, Faith
and Love, shall certainly persevere: He objects that to himself, and plainly
grants it to be so indeed, cap. 12. And to make the matter more clear, chap.
13: he disputes; that, Auxilium sine quo nullus perseverat, and per quod
quilibet perseverat, est Spiritus Sanctus, Divina bonitas, and voluntas. Every
Cause of bringing sinful man to God, is called by them Auxilium: in these
three, Spiritus Sanctus, Divina Bonitas, and Voluntas, he comprizeth the chief
Causes of Perseverance, as I have also done in the ensuing Treatise. By [
Divina Voluntas] he intends God's eternal, and Immutable decree, as he
manifests, cap. 8.9: whither he sends his Reader. His, Divina Bonitas, is that
free Grace, whereby God accepts and justifies us as his. Spirtus Sanctus, is
Sanctification; So that he affirms the perseverance of the Saints to consist
in the stability of their Acceptance with God, and continuance of their
Sanctification from him, upon the account of his unchangeable purposes and
Decrees, which is the sum of what we contend for.

And this is part of the Doctrine, concerning the Grace of God, and his
soveraingty over the wills of men, which Bradwardine in his days cried out so
earnestly for the Defense of to God and man against the Pelagian encroachement,
which was made upon it in those days: Thus he turns himself in the
conclusion of his Book, to the Pope, and Church of Rome, with zealous
earnestnes for their Interposition, to the Determination of these
Controversyes: us os inique loquentium (says he) obstruatur, flexis genibus
cordis mei imploro Ecclesiam, pracipue Romanam, quae summa Authoritate vigere
dignoscitur, quatenus ipsa determinare dignetur, quid circa Praemissas
Catholice sit tenendum. Non enim sine periculo in talibus erratur. Simon
d^rmis? exurge (speaking to the Pope) exime gladium, amput a quaque sinistra
haeretica pravitati^, defend, and protege Catholicam veritatem. Porro etsi
Dominus ipse in Petri navicula dormiat, nimie^ate Tempestatis compulsus, ipsum
quoque fiducialiter excitabo, quatenus Spirisus oris sui Tempestate sedata
tranquillum faciat and serenum. Absit autem, ut qui in prora hujus Navicula
pervigil laborabat, jam in puppi super cervicali dormiat, vel dormitet. Lib 3.
Cap. 53.

With this earnestness above 300 years ago did this profoundly learned man
press the Popes to a determination of these Controversyes, against the
Pelagians, and their Successors in his Schools. The same suit has ever since
been continued by very many Learned men, (in every Age,) of the communion of
the Church of Rome, crying out for the Papal definitive Sentence against the
Pelagian errors crept into their Church; especially has this outcry with
supplication been renewed by the Dominican Friars, ever since the Jesuits have
so cunningly gilded over that Pelagian Poison, and set it out, as the best,
and most wholesome food for the Holy Mother, and her children. Yea with such
earnestnes has this been in the last Age pursued, by Agents in the Court of
Rome: that (a Congregation de Auxiliis being purposely appointed) it was
generally supposed one while, that they would have prevailed in their suit, and
have obtained a definitive Sentence on their side, against their Adversaries.
But through the just Vengeance of God, upon a pack of bloody persecuting
Idolaters, giving them up more and more to the Belief of Lies, contrary almost
to the expectation of all men, This very year 1653 Pope Innocent the tenth,
who now wears the Triple Crown conjured by the subtilty, and dreadful
interest of the Jesuits in all nations, that as yet wonder after him, by a
Solemn Bull, or Papal Consistorian Determination, in the Case of Jansenius
Bishop of Ypress, has turned the Scales upon his first Suppliants, and Cast
the Cause on the Pelagian Side. But of that whole business elsewhere.

I shall not perplex the Reader, with the Horrid names, of Trombet, Holcot,
Bricot, Sychet, Tartaret, Brulifer, nor with their more Horrid terms and
expressions. Let the one Angelical Doctor answer for the rest of his Companions.

That this man then (one of the great Masters of the Crew) abode by the
Principles of him before insisted on, may quickly be made evident by some few
instances clearing his judgment herein:

This in the first place he every where insists on; that no Habitual grace
received, no improvement that can be made of it, by the utmost ability,
diligence, and the most raised Considerations of the best of men, will cause
any one certainly to Persevere, without the peculiar preservation of God. Of
this he gives his Reason: Lib. 3. Contra Gent: Ca: 155. Illud quod Natura sua
est Variabile, ad hoc, quod figatur in uno, indiget Auxilio alicujus moventis
immobilis; sed liberum arbitrium etiam existentis in gratia Habituali adhuc
manet variabile, and flexibile a bono in Malum; ergo ad hoc, quod figatur in
bono and perseveret in illo, usque ad Finem, indiget Speciali Dei Auxilio. An
Argument of the same importance, with that mentioned out of Bradwardine: which
(howsoever at first appearance it may seem to lie at the Out-skirts of the
Controversy in hand* yet indeed) is such as being granted, has an influence
into the whole, as has been manifested.

And this the same Author further Confirms, (says he) p: p: Q: 109. A: 9.
Cum nullum agens secundum agat nisi in Virtute primi, sitque care spiritui
perpetuo rebellis; non potest Homo licet jam gratiam consecutus, per seipsum
operari Bonum, and vitare Peccatum, absque novo Auxili^ Dei, ipsum moventis,
dirigentis, and protegentis; quamvis alia Habitualis gratia ad hoc, ei
necessaria non sit. And the Reasons he gives of this conclusion in the body of
the Article are considerable. This says he, must be so; primo quidem, ratione
generali propter hoc, quod nulla Res creata potest in quemcunque Actum prodire,
nisi virtute motionis divinae. The Pelagian selfe-sufficiency, and exemption
from dependence, in Solidum, upon God both providentially, and Physically, as
to operation was not so freely received in the Schools as afterward.

Secundo (says he) ratione speciali, propter Conditionem status Humanae
Naturae, quae quidem licet per Gratiam sanetur, quantum ad mentem, remanet
tamen in eo Corruption, and Infectio quantum ad carnem, per quam servit legi
peccati; ut dicitur, To: 7: Remanet etiam quaedam Ignorantiae obscuritas in
intellectu, secundum quam (ut etiam dicitur Rom: 8.) quid eremus sicut oportet
nescimus: ideo necesse est nobis, ut a Deo dirigamur, and protegamur, qui omnia
novit, and omnia Potest. And will not this man think you, who in his gropings
after Light, when darkness covered the Face of the Earth, and thick darkness
was upon the Inhabitants thereof, with this his discovery (of the impotency of
the best of the Saints for Perseverance, upon the Account of any Grace
received, because of the perpetual powerful rebellion of indwelling Lust, and
Corruption, and that all that do persevere, are preserved by the power of God
unto salvation) rise in Judgment against Those who in our Days, wherein the Sun
of Righteousness is risen with healing under his wings, do ascribe a
sufficiency unto men in themselves upon the bottom of their Rational
Considerations, to abide with God, or Persevere to the end?

And this assertion of the Angelical Doctor is notably confirmed by Didacus
Alvarez in his Vindication of it from the exception of Medina, that we make use
of habits when we will, and if men will make use of their Habitual Grace, they
may persevere, without relation to any After Grace of God: says he:
Respondetur, Habitibus quidem Nos uticum volumus, sed ut velimus illis uti,
praerequiritur Motio Dei efficax, praemovens Liberum Arbitrium, ut utatur
Habitu ad operandum, and operetur bonum, praesertim quando Habitus sunt
supernaturales; quia cum pertineant ad superiorem Ordinem, habent specialem
Rationem, propter quam potentia mere naturalis non utitur eisdem Habitibus,
nisi speciali Dei Auxilio moveatur: Alvar: de Aux: Lib. 10. Disput. 100. Though
received Graces are reckoned by him as supernatural Habits, yet such as we act
not by, nor with, but from new supplies from God.

Having laid down this Principle, Thomas proceeds to manifest, that there is a
special Grace of Perseverance, bestowed by God on some, and that on whomsoever
it is bestowed, they certainly, and infallibly, persevere to the end: p: p:
Quaest: 109: A: 10 C: and contra Gent: Lib. 3* he proves this Assertion from P:
6. 1 Pet: 5: 10. Psalm: 16.

But to spare the Reader, I shall give you this man's judgment, together with
one of his Followers, who has had the happiness to clear his Masters mind,
above any that have undertaken the maintenance of his Doctrine, in that part
now controverted in the Church of Rome; and therein I shall manifest (what I
formerly proposed) what Beamings, and Irradiations of this Truth, do yet glide
through that gross darkness, which is spread upon the face of the Romish
Synagogue (referring what I have further to add on this head, to the account
which God assisting I shall ere long give of the present Jansenian
Controversies, in my Considerations on Mr. Biddles Catechismes, a task by
authority lately imposed on me.) This is Didacus Alvarez whose 10th Book de
Auxiliis treats peculiarly of this Subject of Perseverance. In the entrance of
his disputation he lays down the same Principles with the Former, concerning
the necessity of the Peculiar Grace of Perseverance to this end that any one
may persevere. Disput: 103.

Then Disp: 108 He further manifests, that this gift, or Grace of Perseverance,
does not depend on any Conditions in us, or any Cooperation of our wills. His
position he lays down in these words: Donum perseverantiae, in ratione Doni
perseverantiae, and efficacia illius, nullo modo dependet effective ex libera
Cooperatione nostri Arbitrii, sed a solo Deo, atque ab efficaci, and absoluto
Decreto Voluntatis ejus, qui pro sua misericordia tribuit illud Donum cui vult.
In the further proof of this proposition, he manifests by clear Testimonies
that the Contrary Doctrine hereunto, was that of the Pelagians, and
Semi-pelagians, which Austine opposed in sundry Treatises. And in all the
Arguments whereby he further confirms it, he still presses the absurdity of
making the Promise of God concerning Perseverance Conditional, and so
suspending it on any thing, in and by us to be performed. And indeed all the
Acts whereby we persevere, flowing according to him from the Grace of
perseverance, it cannot but be absurd to make the Efficient Cause in it is
Efficiency, and operation, to depend upon it is own effect: This also is with
him Ridiculous, that the Grace of perseverance should be given to any, and he
not persevere; or be promised, and yet not given: yet withal he grants in his
following Conclusions, that our wills secundarily, and in dependency, do
cooperate in our Perseverance.

The second Principle this learned School-man insists on, is, that this gift of
perseverance is peculiar to the Elect, or praedestinate: Disput: 104. 1. Con:
Donum perseverantiae est proprium Praedstinaterum, ut nulli alteri conveniat:
And what he intends by Praedestinati; he informs you according to the Judgment
of Austin, and Thomas: Nomine praedestinationis ad Gloriam, felum (...)
praedestinationem intelligunt (Augustinus and Thomas) qua Electi ordinantur
efficaciter, and transmittuntur ad vitam aeternam; cujus effectus sunt vocatio,
Justificatio and perseverantia in gratia usque ad Finem; not that (or such a)
Conditional predestination, as is pendent in the air, and expectant of men's
good final Deportment; but that which is the eternal, free fountain of all
that grace, whereof in time by Jesus Christ we are made Partakers.

And in the pursuit of this proposition, he further proves at large, that the
persverance given to the Saints in Christ, is not a supplement of Helps, and
advantages, whereby they may preserve it if they will; but such as causes them,
on whom it is bestowed certainly, and actually so to do: and that in it is
efficacy, and operation, it cannot depend on any free cooperation of our wills,
all the Good Acts tending to our perseverance, being fruits of that Grace which
is bestowed on us, according to the absolute unchangeable Decree of the will of
God.

This indeed is common with this Author and the Rest of his associates (the
Dominicans, and pres^^^ Jansenians) in these controversies, together with the
residue of the Romanists, that having their Judgments wrested by the abominable
figments, of implicit Faith, and the efficacy of the Sacraments of the new
Testament, conveying and really exhibiting the grace signified, or sealed by
them; that they are enforced to grant, that many may be, and are Regenerate,
and made True Believers, who are not predestinate, and that these cannot
persevere* nor shall eventually be saved. Certain it is, that there is not any
Truth, which that Generation of men do receive, and admit, but more or less it
suffers in their Hands, from that gross ignorance of the free Grace of God in
Jesus Crhist, the power whereof they are practically under: what the poor
Vassailes, and Slaves will do, upon the late Bull of their Holy Father casting
them in sundry maine Concernements of their Quarrel, with their Adversaries, is
uncertain; otherwise setting aside some such deviations, as the above
mentioned, (whereunto they are enforced, by their Ignorance of the Grace, and
Justification with is in Jesus Christ,) there is so much of Ancient Candid
Truth in opposition to the Pelagians, and Semi-Pelagians, preserved, and
asserted in the writings of the Dominican Friars, as will rise up (as I said
before) in Judgment against those of our Days, who enjoying greater Light, and
Advantages, do yet close in with those and are long since Cursed Enemies of the
grace of God.

To this Dominican, I shall only add the Testimony of two famous Jesuits,
upon whose understandings the light of this glorious Truth prevailed, for an
Acknowledgment of it: The first of these is Bellarmine, whose disputes to this
purpose, being full, and large, and the Author in allmens hands, I shall not
transcribe his assertions, and arguments; but only refer the Reader to his l.
2. de Great. and l. Ar. Cap. 12. Denique ut multa alia Testimonia, etc: The
other is Suarez, who delivers his thoughts succinctly upon the whole of this
Matter, Lib. 11. de perpetuitat: vel Amiss: Great: Cap. 2. Sect. 6. says he: de
praedestinatis verum est Infallibiliter, quod gratiam finaliter seu in
perpetuum non amittunt; unde postquam semel gratiam habuerant, ita reguntur and
proteguntur a Deo, ut vel non cadant, vel si ceciderint resurgant; and licet
saepius cadant and resurgant, tandem aliquando ita resurgunt ut amplius non
cadant: in which few words he has briefly comprised the sum of that, which
is by us contended for.

It was in my Thoughts in the last place to have added the concurrent witness
of all the reformed Churches, which that of the most eminent Divines, which
have written in the defense of their Concessions: but this Trouble, upon second
considerations, I shall spare the Reader and my self: for, as many other
reasons lie against the Prosecuting of this Design, so especially the
uselesness of spending-Time, and pains, for the demonstration of a thing of so
evident a truth, prevails with me to desist; Notwithstanding the Endeavors of
Mr. Goodwin to wrest the words of some of the most ancient Writers, who
labored in the first Reformation of the Churches; I presume no unprejudiced
Person in the least measure acquainted with the systeme of that Doctrine, which
with so much pains, diligence, piety, and Learning, they promoted in the
world, with the clearness of their Judgments, in going forth to the utmost
compass of their Principles which they received, and their constancy to
themselves, in asserting of the Truths they embraced, owned by their Friends
and Adversaries, until such time as Mr. Goodwin discovered their self
Contradictions, will scarce be moved once to question their Judgments by the
Excerpta of Mr. Goodwin Cap: 15: of his Treatise: so that of this discourse
this is the Issue.

There remains only that I give a brief account of some concernments of the
ensuing Treatise, and dismiss the Reader from any further Attendance in the
Porch, or entrance thereof.

The Title of the book speaks of the Aim and Method of it; the Confutation of
Mr. Goodwin was but secundarily in my eye; and the best way for that I judged
to consist, in a full Scriptural Confirmation of the Truth he opposed. That I
chiefly intended, and therein I hope the pious Reader, may through the Grace of
God, meet with satisfaction. In my undertaking to affirm the Truth of what I
assert, the Thing it self first, and then the manifestation of it, was in my
Consideration: for the thing it self, my arguing has been to discover the
Nature of it, it is principles, and causes, it is relation to the Good will of
the Father, the mediations of the Son and dispensation of the Holy Ghost to the
Saints thereupon; it is use and tendency, in, and unto that fellowship with the
Father and the Son, whereunto we are called and admitted.

As to the manner of it is Revelation, the proper seats of it in the Book of
God, the occasion of the Delivery thereof, in several seasons, the Significant
Expressions wherein it is set forth, and the receiving of it by them, to whom
it was revealed, have been diligently remarked.

In those parts of the Discourse, which tend to the vindication of the
Arguments from Scripture, whereby the Truth pleaded for is confirmed, of the
usefulness of the thing it self contended about etc. I have been I hope
Careful to keep my Discourse from degenerating into Jangling, and strife of
words (the usual Issue of Polemical writings) being not altogether Ignorant of
the devices of Satan, and the usual carnal Attendencies of such proceedings:
The weight of the Truth in hand, The Common interest of all the Saints, in
their walking with God therein, sense of my own duty, and the near approach of
the Account which I must make of the ministration to me Committed, have given
bounds and limits to my whole discourse, as to the manner of handling the Truth
therein asserted. Writing in the Common language of the Nation, about the
Common possession of the Saints, the meanest and weakest as well as the wisest
and the most learned, laboring in the works of Christ and his Gospel, I durst
not hide the understanding of what I aimed at, by mingling the plain doctrine
of the Scripture, with Metaphysical Notions, expressions of Arts, or any
pretended ornaments of wit, or fancy; because I Fear God For the more sublime
Consideration of Things, and such a way of their Delivery, as depending upon
the acknowledged reception of sundry Arts and sciences, which the Generality of
Christians neither are, nor need to be acquainted withal; Scholars may
communicate their Thoughts and Apprehensions unto, and among Themselves, and
that upon the stage of the world, in that language, whereunto they have
consented, for, and to that end and purpose: That I have carefully abstayned
from Personal reflections, scoffs, Undervaluations, applications of Stories,
and old sayings, to the provocation of the Spirit of them with whom I have to
do, I think not at all praise worthy; because that upon a review of some
passages in the treatise (now irrecoverable) I fear I have scarce been so
careful, as I am sure it was my duty to have been.

Errata in the Preface.
Read. p. 1. l.* 36 it* 3 a fine (...). p. 3 l. 24 ( viz: 104.) 29. an impeca.
p. 5. 21. (...). l. 22. (...), 23. (...). p. 6. l. 7. quae. 3. Canonical. 8 a
fine: (...). p. 7. l. 23 (...). 28. (...). 29. (...). p. 8. l. 1. 2. d. that he
wrote. l. 21. a fine: and then he adds. p. 9. l. 1 5. Genevatismum. 18. dele
no. 26. (...). p. 10. l. 2. helped. p. 11. l. 2. (...). 3. (...). 14. Vienna
and Lions. 17. A Syrian. p. 12. l. 6* breaks. 10. him in that course of
proceeding: 11. (...). 13. (...): 14. (...)* 6. (...). 21. (...). ^2. (...) 22.
(...). p. 12. 26: (...): 30. (...). 31 (...). 32. (...) l. ult. (...) p. 13. l.
2 (...). 3. (...). 38. (...). 39. (...). ^3. a fine: (...). 12. a fine (...).
11 a fine (...). 8 a fine (...). 7. a fine (...)* 6. a fine (...). p. 14. l. 9.
dele, l. 3. ext: 24. approbation, is added 7 a fine spiritu. p. 15. l. 26.
(...). 27. (...). p. 16. l. 6. d* ab l. 5. a fine (...). p. 15. l. 5. (...). l.
17. give us Ch^p. 20. l. 22. a fine: ancients seeming to favor them. p. 21. l.
7. a fine Episcopal. p. 22. l. 22. a fine Archiepiscopal. l. ult. He be sound.

CAP. I.
1. The various thoughts of men concerning the Doctrine proposed to
consideration. 2. The great concernment of it (how ever stated) on all hands
confessed. 3. Some special causes pressing to the present handling of it. 4.
The fearful Backsliding of many in these days. 5: The great offense given,
and taken thereby: with the provision made for its removeall. 6: The nature of
that offense and temptation thence arising considered. 7: Answer to some
Arguings of Mr G. c: 9.. 8, 9, 10, 11. from thence against the truth proposed.
The use of trialls and shakings: Grounds of believers assurance that they are
so. 8. The same farther argued and debated. 9: Of the Testimony of a man's own
conscience concerning his uprightness, and what is required thereunto. 10. 1
Ioh: 3. 7. considered: of the rule of selfe-judging, with principles of
settlement for true Believers, notwithstanding the Apostasies of eminent
Professors. (2) 11. Corrupt teachings rendering the handling of this Doctrine
necessary: its enemies of old and of late. 12: The particular undertaking of Mr
G. proposed to consideration. 13: An entrance into the stating of the Question.
14. 15. The terms of the Question explained: of Holiness in its several
acceptations. Created holiness, Original or Adventitious. Complete or
Inchoate. Typical by dedications, Real by purification. 16. Holiness
Evangelicall, either so indeed, or by estimation. 17. Real Holiness, partial
or universal. 18, 19. The partakers of the first or Temporary Believers, not
true Believers: maintained against Mr G. Ground of judging professors to be
true believers. 20. Mat. 7. 20. Considered, what is the rule of judging men
therein given. 21, 22. What knowledge of the Faith of others is to be obtained.
23: What is meant by Perseverance: How in Scripture it is expressed. 24. The
grounds of it pointed at. 25: What is intended by falling away: whether it be
possible the Spirit of Grace may be lost: or 26, 27, 28: The habit of it, and
how. 29, 30: The state of the Controversy as laid down by Mr G. 31: The vanity
thereof discovered. 32, 33, 34: His judgment about Believers falling away
examined: what principles and means of Perseverance he grants to them. 35: The
enemies of our Perseverance: Indwelling sin in particular considered: 36: No
possibility of preservation upon Mr G grounds, demonstrated. 37, 38, 39, 40,
41, 42: The means and ways of the Saints preservation in Faith, asserted by
Mr G: at large examined, weighed and found light: 43: The Doctrine of the
Saints Perseverance, and way of teaching it cleard from Isa: 4: 44, 45: That
Chapter opened. 47, 48, 49: The 43 verse particularly insisted on and
discussed. 50: The whole state and Method of the Controversy thence educed.

THe Truth which I have proposed to handle,. 1.
and whose defense I have undertaken in the ensuing discourse, Iud. 3.
is commonly called, the PERSEVERANCE OF SAINTS; 2 Cor. 13. 8.
A Doctrine, Isai. 4. 5, 6.
whereof nothing ordinary, Low, or Common is spoken by any, Ierem. 31. 31, 32,
33, 34, 35.
that have engaged into the consideration of it. To some it is the very Salt of
the Covenent of Grace, Ier. 32. 39, 40
the most distinguishing mercy communicated in the blood of Christ, Isa. 59. 21.
so interwoven into, Heb. 8. 10, 11.
and lying at the bottom of all that consolation, which God is abundantly
willing, that all the Heirs of the promise should receive; That it is utterly
impossible it should be safe guarded one moment, 1 Cor. 1. 9.
without a persuasion of this truth, Phil. 1. 6.
which seals up all the mercy and grace of the new Covenant, Romans 8. 32, 33,
34, 35.
with the unchangeableness and faithfulness of God. To others, it is no grace
of God, Pelag. Armin. Socin. Papist. Thomson de Intercis. Justif. Diatrib.
Bertius Apost. Sanct. Remon-Coll. Hag. Scripta Sinod.
no part of the purchase of Christ, no doctrine of the Gospel, no foundation
of consolation, but an invention of men, a delusion of Satan, an occasion of
dishonor to God, disconsolation and perplexity to believers, a powerful
temptation unto sin and wickedness in all that do receive it.

A Doctrine it is also, whose right apprehension is on all hands confessed, to
be of great importance, upon the account of that effectual influence, which it
has and will have,. 2.
into our walking with God, which say some, is, to Love, Genesis 17. 1.
Humility, Thankefulness, Fear, Fruitfulness: To Folly, Stubborness,
Rebellion, Psalm. 23. 6.
Dissolnteness, Negligence, say others. The great confidence expressed by men
concerning the evidence and certainty of their several persuasions, Phil. 2.
12, 13.
whether defending or opposing the Doctrine under consideration, Heb. 10. 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
the one part professing the truth thereof to be of equal stability with the
promises of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
and most plentifully delivered in the Scripture; 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. etc.
others (at least one who is thought to be pars magna of his Companions) that
if it be asserted in any place of the Scripture, it were enough to make wise
and impartial men to call the authority thereof into question; must needs
invite men to turn aside to see about what this earnest contest is: and quis
is est tam potens, who dares thus undertake to remove not only ancient
Landmarkes and boundaries of doctrines among the Saints, but mountains of
brass, and the hills about Jerusalem, which we hoped would stand fast for ever?
The concernement then of the Glory of God, and the Honor of the Lord Jesus
Christ, with the interest of the souls of the Saints, being so wrapped up, and
that confessedly on all hands, in the Doctrine proposed, I am not out of hope
that the plain discoursing of it from the word of truth, may be as ae word in
season, like apples of gold in Pictures of silver.

Moreover,. 3.
besides the general importance of that doctrine in all times and seasons, the
wretched practizes of many in the days wherein we live, and the industrious
attempts of others in their Teachings, for the subverting, and casting it down
from its excellency, and that place which it has long held in the Churches of
Christ, and hearts of all the Saints of God, have rendered the consideration of
it, at this time necessary.

For the First: these are days, wherein we have as sad and tremendious
examples of Apostasy,. 4.
backsliding, and falling from high and glorious pitches in profession, as any
Age can parallel: As many stars cast from heaven, As many trees plucked up by
the roots, Revel. 12. 4.
as many stately buildings by wind, rain, and storm, Jud. 12.
cast to the ground, as many Sons of perdition discovered, as many washed swine
returning to their mire, Math. 7. 26, 27.
as many Demases going after the present evil World, 2 These. 2. 8.
and men going out from the Church which were never truly and properly of it, 2
Pet. 1. 20, 21, 22.
as many Sons of the morning and Children of high illumination and gifts
setting in darkness, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
and that of all sorts; as ever, in so short a space of time, 1 John 2. 19.
since the name of Christ was known upon the Earth. What through the deviating
of some to the ways of the World, Heb. 6. 4, 5. 6.
and the Lusts of the flesh; what of others, to spiritual wickednesses and
abominations: it is seldom that we see a Professor to hold out in the Glory of
his Profession to the end. I shall not now discourse of the particular causes
hereof, with the temptations and advantages of Satan, that seem to be peculiar
to this season, but only thus take notice of the thing it self, as that which
presses for, and renders the consideration of the doctrine proposed not only
seasonable but necessary.

That this is a stumbling block in the way of them, that seek to walk with
God,. 5.
I suppose that none of them will deny. It was so of old and it will so
continue until the end. And therefore our Savior predicting and discoursing
of the like season, Matthew 24. Foretelling that Many should be deceived, ver.
11. That Iniquity should abound, and the love of many wax cold, v. 12. that is,
visibly and scandalously to the contempt and seeming disadvantage of the
Gospel, adds as a preservative consolation, to his own chosen select ones, who
might be shaken in their comforts and confidence to see so many that walked in
the House of God and took sweet counsel together with them to fall headlong to
destruction, that the Elect shall not be seduced; Let the attempts of Seducers
be what they will, and their Advantages never so many, or their successes never
so great, they shall be preserved; the House upon the Rock shall not be cast
down; Against the Church built on Christ the Gates of Hell shall not prevail.
And Paul mentioning the Apostasy of Hymenaeus and Philetus, who seem to have
been teachers of some eminency and Stars of some considerable magnitude in
the Firmament of the Church, with the eversion of the Faith of some who
attended unto their abominations, 2 Timothy 2, 17, 18. Least any disconsolation
should surprise believers in reference to their own condition, as though that
should be lubricous, uncertain, and such as might end in destruction and their
Faith in an overthrow: he immediately adds that effectual cordial, for the
reviving and supportment of their confidence and comfort, v. 19. Nevertheless
(notwithstanding all this Apostasy of eminent professors yet) The foundation of
God stands sure, the Lord knows who are his; Those who are built upon the
foundation of his unchangeable purpose and love, shall not be prevailed
against. John likewise does the same; for having told his little Children, that
there were many Antichrists abroad in the world, and they for the most part
Apostates, he adds in the first Epist: second Chap: verse the 19. They went out
from us because they were not of us, for if they had been of us they would no
doubt have continued with us; but they went out that they might be made
manifest that they were not all of us. He lets the^ know that by their being
Apostates, they had prooved themselves to have been but Hypocrites; and
therefore believers dwelling in safety was no way prejudiced by their
backsliding. The like occasion now calls for the like Application, and the same
disease for the same prevention or remedy; That no sound persons may be shaken,
because unhealthy ones are shattered, that those may not tremble who are built
on the Rock, because those are cast down who are built on the sand, is one
part of my aim and intendment in handling this doctrine. And therefore I shall
as little dabble in the waters of strife or insist upon it in way of
controversy as the importunity of the adversary and that truth which we are
obliged to contend for, will permit. One Scripture in its own plainness and
simplicity, will be of more use for the end I aim at, then twenty
Scholasticall Arguments pressed with never so much accuratenesse and subtility.

A Temptation then this is,. 6.
and has been of old to the Saints, disposed of by the manifold wisdom of
God, Romans 11. 20.
to stir them up to take heed least they fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12.
to put them upon trying and examining, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
whether Christ be in them or no, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
and also to make out to those Fountains of establishment in his eternal
Purpose and Gracious Promises, Revel. 2. 24, 25.
wherein their refreshments and reserves under such temptations do lie. Isa.
45. 22.
And yet though our doctrine inforces us to conclude Mal. 3. 6.
all such never to be sound believers in that peculiar notion and sense of that
expression which shall instantly be declared, 2 Pet. 3. 17.
who totally and finally apostatize and fall off from the ways of God, Heb. 3.
12.
yet is it excedingly remote from being any true ground of shaking the Faith of
those, Hab. 3. 17. 18.
who truly believe any farther then shaking is useful for the right and
thorough performance of that great Gospel duty of trial and self examination.

Mr Goodwin indeed contends, 7.
Chapter 9. Sect. 8, 9, 10, 11. Page 108, 109, 110:) that if we judge all such
as fall away to perdition never to have been true Believers (that is with such
a Faith as bespeaks them to enjoy union with Christ and acceptance with God,)
it will administer a thousand Fears and Jealousies concerning the soundness of
a man's own Faith whether that be sound or no; and so it will be indifferent as
to consolation, whether true believers may fall away or no, seeing it is
altogether uncertain whether a man has any of that true Faith which cannot
perish. But

First, Ans. 1.
God who has promised to make all things work together for good to them that
love him, Romans 8. 28.
in his infinite Love and Wisdom is pleased to exercise them with great
variety, Psalm. 30. 6, 7.
both within and without, in reference to themselves and others, Isa. 8. 17.
for the accomplishing toward them all the chapter 54. 7. 8, 9.
good pleasure of his goodness and carrying them on in that holy humble
depending 1 Pet. 3. 7.
frame, 1 Cor. 3. 13.
which is needful for the receiving from him those gracious supplies, 1 Pet.
4. 12.
2 Cor. 7. 5.
without which it is impossible they should be preserved. 2 These. 1. 11.
To this end are they often exposed to winnowings of feirce winds and shakings
by more dreadful blasts, Heb. 12. 25, 28, 29.
then any breathes in this consideration of the Apostatizing of professors
though of Eminency. Isa. 57. 15. and 66. 2.
Not that God is delighted with their fears and jelousies, Jam. 4. 6.
which yet he knows under such dispensations they must conflict with all, 1
Pet. 5. 5.
but with the trial and exercise of their Graces whereunto he calls them;
that is his Glory, Mat. 7. 24, 25.
where in his soul is delighted. It is no singular thing for the Saints of God
to be exercised with a thousand fears and jealousies and through them to grow
to great establishment; Amos. 9. 9.
If indeed they were such as were unconquerable, Luke 22. 31.
such as did not work together for their good, Ephe. 6. 11, 12, 13.
such as must needs be endless, Ephe. 4. 14.
all means of satisfaction and establishment being rescinded by the causes of
them, Isa. 49. 14, 15, 16. and 63. 9.
then were there weight in this exception: but neither the Scriptures, Acts 9.
5.
not the experience of the Saints of God do give the least hint to such an
assertion. Psalm. 103. 13.


Secondly, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
It is denied that the fall of the most glorious Hypocrites is indeed an
efficacious engine in the hands of the adversary, Rom 8. 38.
to ingenerate any other fears and Jealousies, or to expose them to any other
shakings, 1 Cor. 10. 13.
then what are common to them in other temptations of daily incursion, which
God does constantly make way for them to escape; It is true indeed, that if
true believers had no other foundation of their persuasion that they are so,
but what occurres visibly to the observation of men in the outward conversation
of the^ that yet afterward fall totally away, the Apostasy of such
(notwithstanding the general assurance they have, that those who are borne of
God cannot, shall not sin unto deaths, 1 John 3. 9.
seeing their own interest in that estate and condition may be clouded, (at
least for a season) and their consolation thereupon depending interrupted)
might occasion thoughts in them of very sad consideration: but whilst besides
all the beams and rays that ever issued from a falling star, all the leaves
and blossoms with abortive fruit, that ever grew on an unrooted tree, all the
goodly turrets and ornaments of the fairest house that ever was built on the
sand, 1 John 5. 7, 8.
there are moreover three that bear witness in Heaven, the Father, Son, and
Spirit; and three that bear witness on Earth, the Water, Blood, and Spirit; 1 John 2. 20, 21*
whilst there is a teaching, anointing, and assuring earnest, a firm sealing
to the day of redemption, a knowledge that we are passed from death to life: 2
Cor. 1. 21, 22.
the temptation arising from the Apostasy of Hypocrites is neither so potent
nor unconquerable, 2 Cor. 5. 5.
but that by the grace of him through whom we can do all things, Ephesians. 1. 14.
it may be very well dealt withal. Ephesians. 4. 30.
This I say, Romans 8. 16.
supposing the ordinary presence and operation of the spirit of grace, in the
hearts of believers, with such shines of Gods countenance upon them, as, they
usually enjoy. Let these be interrupted, or turned aside, and there is not the
least blast or breath, that proceeds from the mouth of the weakest enemy, Psalm
30. 6, 7.
they have to deal withal, but is sufficient to cast them down from the
excellency of their joy and consolation.

The evidence of this truth is such, 8.
that M. Goodwin is forced to say Vere fidelit uti pro tempore praesenti de
fidei and conscientiae suae integritate certus esse potest, ita and de salute
sui and de salutifera Dei erga ipsum benevolentia pro illo tempore certus esse
potest and debet.
Far be it from me to deny but that a man may very possibly attain unto a
very strong and potent assurance, and that upon grounds every way sufficiently
warrantable and good, that his faith is sound and saving: Cap: 9. Sect: 9. but
unto this concession: he puts in a double exception.

First, That there is not one true believer of an hundred, yea of many
thousands, who has any such assurance of his Faith as is built upon solid and
pregnant foundations.

I must (by his leave) enter my dissent hereunto, and as we have the liberty of
our respective apprehensions so neither the one, nor the other prove any thing
in the cause. Setting aside causes of desertion, great temptations, and
trials, I hope through the riches of the grace, and tenderness of the love of
their father, Act. Synod. p. 182. decl. sent. These. 7.
the condition is otherwise then is apprehended by M. Goodwin with the
generality of the Family of God. The reasons given by him of his thoughts to
the contrary, do not sway me from my hopes, or byas my former apprehensions in
the least; His reasons are,

First, Because though the testimony of a man's heart and conscience touching
his Secondly) be in the actual contemplation consideration, or remembrance of
what he knows in this kind. Now very few believers in the World come up to
this height and degree.

First, Ans. 1.
There is in this reason couched a supposition which if true, would be far
more effectual to shake the confidence and Resolution of believers, then the
most serious consideration of the Apostasies of all professors, that ever fell
from the glory of their profession from the beginning of the World; and that
is, that there is no other pregnant foundation of Assurance, but the testimony
of a man's own heart, and conscience, touching his uprightness toward God, and
therefore before any can attain that assurance upon abiding foundations they
must be excellently enlightened in the nature, properties, and condition of
that which their consciences testify unto; (as true faith and uprightness of
heart) and be clear in the disputes and Questions about them, being in the
actual contemplation of them when they give their Testimony. I no way doubt
but many thousands of believers, 1 Cor. 1. 26.
whose apprehensions of the nature, properties, and conditions of things, Jam.
2. 5.
as they are in themselves, are low, weak, and confused; yet having received
the Spirit of Adoption bearing witness with their spirits, Romans 8. 16.
that they are the Children of God, 1 John 5. 10.
and having the Testimony in themselves, have been taken up into as high a
degree of comforting and cheering assurance, and that upon the most infallible
foundation Imaginable, 1 John 5. 6.
( for the spirit witnesses because the spirit is truth) as ever, the most
seraphically illuminated person in the World, attained unto. Yea in the very
graces themselves of Faith and uprightness of heart, there is such a seal and
stamp impressing the image of God upon the soul, as without any reflex act, or
actual contemplation of those graces themselves, have an influence into the
establishment of the souls of men, in whom they are, unto a quiet comfortable
assured repose of themselves upon the love and faithfulness of God: neither is
the spiritual confidence of the Saints shaken, Math. 7. 25.
much less cast to the ground, by their conflicting with fears, Math. 16. 18.
scruples, and doubtful apprehensions; seeing in all these conflicts, they
have the pledge of the faithfulness of God, Psalm. 77. 10.
that they shall be more then conquerours. 1 Cor. 1. 9.
Though they are exercised by them, 1 These. 5. 23, 24.
they are not dejected with them: 1 Cor. 10. 13.
nor deprived of that comforting assurance and joy which they have in
believing. Romans 8. 37.
But yet suppose, that this be the condition practically of many Saints of God,
and that they never attain to the state of the primitive Christians, 1 Pet. 1.
8.
to whose joy and consolation in believing the Holy Ghost so plentifully
witnesses, nor do live up to that full rate of plenty, which their Father
has provided for them in his Family, and sworn that he is abundantly willing,
they should enjoy and make use of; Heb. 6. 17, 18.
what will hence follow as to the business in hand, I profess I know not.
Must that little evidence which they have of their acceptance with God, be
therefore necessarily built upon such bottomes (or rather topps) as are visible
to them in hypocrites, so that upon their Apostasy they must needs not only
try and examine themselves, but conclude to their disadvantage and
disconsolation, that they have no true faith? Credat Apella.

Secondly,. 9.
the comfortablenesse he tells us of the testimony of a man's conscience
concerning his uprightness with God, depends mainly and principally upon his
uniforme and regular walking with God; now this being by the neglects of the
Saints often interupted with many stains of unworthiness, the testimony it
self must needs be often suspended: now true believers finding themselves
outgon in ways of obedience by them, that impenitently Apostatize, if from
hence they must conclude them Hypocrites, they have no evidence left for the
soundness of their own Faith, which their consciences bear Testimony unto,
upon the fruitfullnesse of it, which is inferior by many degrees to that of
them who yet finally fall away. This is the substance of one long Section page
109, 110. But

that the only Evidence of a true Faith and acceptance with God, is the
testimony of a man's conscience concerning his regular and upright walking with
God; For, an obstruction in this being supposed, his comfort and consolation is
thought to vanish; but that the Scripture builds up our assurance on other
foundations is evident, and the Saints acknowledge it, as has been before
delivered; Nor

Goodwin affirm it so to do) on the constant regularity of his walking with
God. Job. 35. 10.
It will also witness what former experience it has had of God, Psalm. 77. 5,
6. 7.
calling to mind its song in the night, all the tokens and pledges of its
fathers love, all the gracious visits of the holy and blessed Spirit of grace,
Isa. 40. 28, 29, 30.
all the imbracements of Christ, all that intimacy and communion it has
formerly been admitted unto, Canti. 3. 1, 2. and 5. 4, 5.
the healing and recovery it has had of wounds, Psalm 42. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and from backslidings, with all the spiritual intercourse it ever had with
God, Hos. 2. 7. and 14. 2. 8.
to confirm and strengthen it self in the beginning of its confidence to the
end. And

its walking with God, and the fruits of Righteousness, it is very far and
remote from giving it only or chiefly, Heb. 3. 14.
or indeed at all, from those ways, works, and fruits which are exposed to
the eyes of men, Isa. 38. 3.
and which, in others, they who have that Testimony, may behold. Psalm. 139. 23,
24.
It resolves it self herein in the frame, principles, and life of the hidden
man of the heart, Revel. 3. 1.
which lies open and naked to the eyes of God, 1 Pet. 3. 4.
but is lodged in depths not to be fathomed by any of the Sons of Men: 2 Cor.
2. 12.
There is no comparison to be instituted between the obedience and fruits of
Righteousness in others, whereby a believer makes a judgment of them, and that
in himself from whence the testimony mentioned does flow: that of other men
being their visibly practical conversation, his being the hidden habitual
frame of his heart and spirit in his ways and actings; so that though through
the fallings of them, he should be occasioned to question his own faith, as to
trial and examination; yet nothing can thence arise sufficient to enforce him
to let go even that part of his comfort, which flows from the weakest
witness, and one of the lowest voices of all his store. He eyes others
without doors, but himself within.

Fourthly,. 10.
whereas 1 John 3. 7. Little Children let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness is righteous, is produced, and two things argued from thence,
First, that the caveat ( be not deceived) plainly intimates, that true
believers may very possibly be deceived in the estimate of a righteous man, and
secondly that this is spoken of a man judging himself, and that emphatically
and exclusively, he and he only is to be judged a righteous man. I say,

1. That though I grant the first, Ans.
that we may very easily be, and often are deceived in our estimate of
righteous persons, yet I do not conceive the inference to be enforced from
that expression, ( let no man deceive you) the Holy Ghost using it frequently,
or what is equivalent thereunto, not so much to caution men in a dubious thing,
wherein possibly they may be mistaken, as in a way of detestation, scorn, and
rejection of what is opposite to that which he is urging upon his Saints, which
he presses as a thing of the greatest evidence and cleernesse, as 1 Cor: 6. 9.
chap: 15. 32. Gal: 6. 7. neither is any thing more intended in this expression
of the Apostle, then in that of 1 Cor: 6. 9. be not deceived, no unrighteous
person shall inherit the Kingdom of heaven: so here, no person not giving
himself up to the pursuit of righteousness in the General drift and scope of
his life, (cases extraordinary and particular acts, being always in such rules
excepted) is, or is to be accounted a righteous man.

Secondly also it may be granted, (though the intendment of the place leads us
another way) that this is so far a Rule of self judging, that he, whose
frame and disposition suits it not, or is opposite unto it, cannot keep up the
power or vigor of any other comfortable evidence of his state and condition;
But that it should be so far extended, as to make the only solid and pregnant
foundation that any man has of assurance and consolation, to arise and flow
from the Testimony of his own conscience, concerning his own regular walking in
ways of Righteousness, (seeing persons that walk in darkness and have no light
are called to stay themselves on God, Isai: 50. 10. and when both heart and
flesh fails, yet God is the strength of the heart, Psalm: 73. 6.) is no way
clear in it self, and is not by M. Goodwin afforded the least contribution of
assistance for its confirmation. To return then from this digression: a
Temptation we acknowledge, and an offense to be given to the Saints by the
Apostasy of Professors: yet not such, but as the Lord has in Scripture made
gracious provision against their suffering by it, or under it, so it leaves
them not without sufficient testimony of their own acceptance with God, and
sincerity in walking with him. This then was the state of old, thus it is in
the days wherein we live.

As the practice and ways of some,. 11.
so the principles and teachings of others, have an eminent tendance unto
offense and scandal. Indeed ever since the Reformation, there have been some
endeavors against this truth to corrode it, and corrupt it: The first serious
attempt for the total intercision of the faith of true believers, though not a
final excision of the faith of elect belie^ers, was made by one in the other
University, who being a man of a debauched and vicious conversation, no small
part of the growing evils of the days wherein he lived, did yet cry out
against the doctrines of others as tending to loosnesse and profaneness, upon
whose breasts and teachings was written Holiness to the Lord all their daies'
Afterward Armin. Antiperk.
Arminius with his Quinquarticulan Followers, Rem. Coll.
taking up the matter, though they labored with all their might to answer
sundry of the Arguments whereby the truth of this doctrine is demonstrated,
Hag. Artic. 5.
yet for a season were very faint and dubious in their own assertions: not
daring to break in at once upon so great a Treasure of the Church of God: Nos
cum mentem nostram super hoc argumento categorice and dogmatice in alteram
par^em definivimus, nullo jure levitatis insimulari posse, propterea quod novem
ab hinc annis, eam non ita diserte and rotunde enunciaverimus, sed solummodo
disquirentium adhuc in morem professi simus. Declar. sent. Rem. circa 5. Artic.
and therefore in their Synodalia are forced to Apologize for their Haesitation
nine years before in their Conference at the Hague. But now of late since the
glorious light of Socinianisme has broken forth from the pit, men by their new
succors, are Socin. Praelect. Theol. cap. 6. art. 7. etc.
grown bold to defy this great truth of the Gospel and grace of the Covenant,
as an abomination for ever to be abhorred. Audax omnia perpeti Gens humana,
ruit per vetitum nefas.

In particular, 12.
the late studious endeavors of a Learned man in his Treatise Entitled
Redemption Redeemed, for to dispoyle the spouse of Christ of this most Glorious
pearl where with her beloved has adorned her, calls for a particular
Consideration. And this (discharging a regard unto any other motives) upon
(chiefly) this account, that he has with great pains and travel gathered
together what ever has been formerly given out, and dispersed by the most
considerable Adversaries of this Truth (especially not omitting any thing of
moment in the Synodall defense of the fifth Article, with an exact translation
of the dramaticall Prosopopoeias, with whatsoever looks toward his design in
hand from their fourth attempt about the manner of conversion) giving it a new
not only an elegant dress, and varnish of Rhetorical expressions, but
moreover reinforcing the declining cause of his Pelagian Friends with not to be
despised supplies of appearing Reason, Col. 2. 4.
and hidden Sophistry. So that though I shall handle this doctrine in my own
Method, (with the reason whereof, I shall instantly acquaint the Reader) and
not follow that Author (...), yet handling not only the main of the Doctrine it
self, but all the concernments and consequences of it in the several branches
of the Method intended, I hope not to leave any thing considerable in that
whole Treatise (as to the Truth in hand) Undiscussed, no Argument Unvindicated,
no Objection Unanswered, no Consequence Unweighed, with a special eye to the
Comparison instituted between the Doctrines in contest, as to their direct and
causall influence into the obedience and Consolation of the Saints.

That we may know then what we speak and whereof we do affirm, 13.
I shall briefly State the Doctrine under consideration, that the difference
about it may appear. Indeed it seems strange to me among other things, that
he of whom mention was lastly made, who has liberally dispended so great a
Treasure, of Pains, Reading, and Eloquence, for the subverting of the Truth,
whose explanation and defense we have undertaken; did not yet once attempt
fairly to fix the State of the difference about it, but in a very tumultuary
manner, fell in with prejudices swelling over all bounds and limits of ordinary
reasoning, Chap. 9.
Rhetorical amplifications upon a doctrine not attempted to be brought forth
and explayned, that it might be weighed in the Balance, as in it self it is.
Whereas there may be many Reasons, of such a proceeding, it may well be
questioned whether any of them be candid and commendable. Certainly the
advantages thence taken for the improveing of many Sophistical Reasons and
pretended Arguments are obvious to every one that shall but peruse his ensuing
discourse.

Although the Substance of this Doctrine has been by sundry delivered, 14.
yet least the terms, wherein it is usually done, may seem to be somewhat too
General, and some advantages of the Truth, which in it self it has, to have
been omitted, I shall breifely state the whole matter under those Terms,
wherein it is usually received.

The title of it is, 15.
the PERSEVERANCE OF SAINTS; A short discovery of whom we mean by Saints, the
Subject whereof we speak, and what by Perseverance, which is Affirmed of them,
will state the whole for the Judgment of the Reader. God only is essentially
holy, and on that account, Isa. 6. 3. losh. 24. 19.
the only holy One. In his Holiness as in his Being, and all his Glorious
Attributes, Revel. 15. 4.
there is an actual permanency or samenesse. Heb. 1. 10, 11, 12. Nothing in
him is subject to the least shadow of change: Exodus 3. 14.
not his Truth, not his Faithfulness, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Isa. 40. 38.
not his Holiness; all principles, causes, and reasons of alteration stand at
no less infinite distance from him, Chapter 41. 4.
then not being. Chapter 43. 10.
His Properties are the same with himself and are spoken of one another, Chapter
44. 6. Chapter 48. 12.
as well as of his nature. His Eternal Power is mentioned by the Apostle Romans
1. Reve. 1. 4, 17.
So is his Holiness Eternal, Immutable. Of this we may have use afterward;
Mal. 3. 6. Iam. 1. 18.
for the present I treat not of it. The Holiness of all Creatures is
Accidental and Created; 1 Samuel 15. 29.
to some it is innate or Original, as to the Angels, the first man, Genesis 1. 26.
our Savior Christ as to his humane nature; of whom we treat not. Math. 19. 17.
Adam had original holiness and lost it; so had many Angels, who kept not
their first habitation: It is hence argued by Mr Goodwin, Eccles. 7. 29.
that Spiritual gifts of God being bestowed, Heb. 7. 25. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27, 28.
may be taken away, nowithstanding the seeming contrary engagement of Romans 11.
29. From what proportion or Analogy this Argument does flow, Isa. 4. 3, 4. Romans
6. 4, 5. 6
is not intimated: The grace Adam was endowed with, was entrusted with
himself, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24, 25.
and his own keeping, in a covenant of Works: that of the Saints since the
fall, is purchased for them, laid up in their head, dispensed in a covenant of
grace; whose eminent distinction from the former, consists in the permanency
and abidingness of the fruits of it. But of this afterward. To others,
adventitious and added, as to all that have contracted any qualities contrary
to that Original Holiness, wherewith at first they were endued, as have done
all the sons of men, who have sinned and come short of the glory of God. Now
the Holiness of these is either complete, as it is with the spirits of just
men made perfect: or inchoate, and begun only, as with the residue of
Sanctified ones, in this life. The certain Perseverance of the former in their
present condition being not directly opposed by any, though the foundation of
it be attempted by some, we have no need as yet to engage in the defense of it.
These latter are said to be sanctified or holy two ways: upon the twofold
account of the use of the word in the Scripture.

1. For (first) some Persons, as well as Things, are said to be holy,
especially in the old Testament, and in the Epistle to the Hebrews, almost
constantly using the terms of Sanctifying and Sanctified in a legal or Temple
signification, in reference unto their being separated from the residue of men,
with relation to God and his worship; Exodus 28. 36, 38.
or being consecrated, and dedicated peculiarly to the performance of any part
of his will, Levit. 5. 15. Ezekiel. 22. 8.
or distinct enjoyment of any portion of his mercy: Heb. 2. 11.
thus the Arc was said to be holy, and the Altar holy, the Temple was holy and
all the utensils of it, chapter 10. 10. Ioh. 17. 19.
with the vestments of its officers. So the whole people of the Jews, were
said to be holy: the particular respects of Covenant, Worship, Separation, Law,
Mercy, and the like, upon which this denomination of Holiness and Saintship
was given unto them, and did depend, are known to all: yea persons Inherently
unclean, and personally notoriously wicked, in respect of their designement to
some outward work, which by them God will bring about are said to be
sanctified: distinguishing gifts, with designation to some distinct employment,
is a bottom for this Apellation; though their gifts may be recalled, and the
employment taken from them. Isai 13. 3. We confess Perseverance, not to be a
proper and inseparable adjunct of this subject, nor to belong unto such persons
as such: though they may have a right to it, it is upon another account: yet in
the pursuit of this business, it will appear that many of our adversaries
Arguments, smite these men only, and prove that Such as they, may be totally
rejected of God which none ever denied.

Again,. 16.
the Word is used in an Evangelicall sense, for inward purity and real
Holiness, whence some are said to be Holy, Luke 1. 15.
and that also two ways: for either they are so really, Romans 6. 19. 22.
and in the Truth of the thing it self, or in estimation only, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
and that either of themselves, or others. That many have accounted themselves
to be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. and 4. 24.
and been pure in their own eyes, who yet were never washed from their
iniquity, and have thereupon cried peace to themselves, I suppose needs no
proving. 1 These. 5. 13. and 4. 7.
It is the case of thousands in the world, at this day: they think themselves
Holy, Heb. 12. 14. (...)
they profess themselves Holy, and our Adversaries prove (none gainesaying)
that such as these may backslyde from what they have, and what they seem to
have, and so perish under the sin of Apostasy. Prove. 30. 12. Isa. 65. 5.
Again some are said to be Holy, upon the score of their being so in the
steeme of others, Isa. 7. 48, 49.
which was and is the condition of Many false Hypocrites in the Churches of
Christ both primitive and Modern. Isa. 9. 40, 41. 1 These. 5. 3.
Like them who are said to believe in Christ upon the account of the profession
they made so to do, Math. 25. 29. 2 Pet. 2. 21 Ioh. 6. 16.
yet he would not trust himself with them, because he knew what was in them.
Such were Judas, Simon Magus and sundry others of whom these things are spoken,
which they professed of themselves, and were bound to answer, and which others
esteemed to be in them. These some labor with all their strength, 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Act. Synod. Dec. sent. Art. 5. p: 266, 267. etc:
to make true believers, that so they may cast the stumbling block of their
Apostasy in the way of the Saints of God, closing with the Truth we have in
hand. But for such as these we are no Advocates: let them go to their own
place according to the Tenor of the Arguments leuyed against them from Heb. 6.
4. 2 Pet. 2. And other places.

Moreover of those,. 17.
who are said to believe, and to be holy really, and in the Truth of the thing
it self; there are two sorts. First such as having received sundry common
gifts and Graces of the Spirit, Heb. 6. 4. 1 Samuel 10. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 20. 1 King.
21. 27. 2 Cor. 7. 10.
as Illumination of the Mind, Change of affections, and thence Amendment of
life, with sorrom of the World, legal Repentance, temporary Faith and the
like, which are all True and Real in their kind, do thereby become Vessels in
the great house of God, Math. 17. 3, 4. Math. 13. 20. Mark 6. 20. 2 Kings 10.
16.
being changed as to their use, though not in their Nature, continueing Stone,
and Wood still, though hewed and turned to the serviceablenesse of Vessels, and
on that account are frequently termed Saints and believers. On such as these
their is a lower (and in some a subordinate) work of the Spirit effectually
producing ( in and on all the faculties of their Souls) somewhat that is true,
Hos. 6. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 20.
good, and useful in it self, answering in some likeness and sutablenesse of
operation unto the great work of Regeneration which fails not. Ioh. 6. 34.
Acts 26. 28. Math. 7. 26, 27.
There is in them Light, Love, Joy, Faith, Zeal, Obedience etc. All true in
their kind, which make many of them in whom they are, do worthily in their
Generation, Revel. 3. 1. Mark, 4. 16.
howbeit they attain not to the Faith of Gods Elect, neither does Christ live
in them, nor is the life which they lead, by the Faith of the Son of God: as
shall hereafter be fully declared. If ye now casheere these from the roll of
those Saints and Believers about whom we contend, seeing that they are no where
said to be United to^ Christ, Quickened and Justified, partakers of the first
Resurrection, Accepted of God, etc. You do almost put an issue to the whole
Controversy, and at once overturne the strongest Forts of the opposers of this
truth: some men are truly ready to think, that they never had experience of the
nature of true Faith, or Holiness, who can suppose it to consist in such like
common gifts, and Graces, as are ascribed to this sort of men. Yet, as was said
before, if these may not pass for Saints, if our Adversaries cannot prove
these to be true Believers in the strictest notion and sense of that term or
expression, actum est, the very subject about which they contend is taken away:
such as these alone are concerned in the Arguments from Heb: 6. 4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.
1. etc. yea all the Testimonies whch they produce for the supportment of their
cause from Antiquity, flow from hence, that their Witnesses thought good to
allow persons Baptized and professing the Gospel, the name of Believers, and
being Regenerate (that is, as to the participation of the outward Symbol
thereof) whom yet they expressly distinguished from them, whose Faith was the
Fruit of their Eternal Election, which they constantly maintained should never
fail.

Of such as these M.. 18.
Goodwin tells us Cap. 9. Sect. 7. page 107, 108. That if there be any persons
under Heaven, who may upon sufficient grounds, and justifiable by the word of
God, be judged true believers, many of the Apostates we speak of, were to be
judged such, all the visible lineaments of a true faith, wherein their faces,
Add hos de quibus hic agimus, non vulgares and plebeios, sed antesignanos and
eximios ac eminentes fuisse.
as far as the eye of man is able to pierce, they lived Godly, righteously
and soberly in this present World: does any true believer act zealously for his
God? So did they: is any true believer fruitful in good works? they were
such: yea there is found in those we now speak of, not only such things upon
the sight and knowledge whereof in men, we ought to judge them true believers,
* but even such things further, which we ought to reverence and honor, as
lovely and Majestic characters of God and holiness, Rem. Ac. Syn. p. 267.
therefore it is but too importune a pretense in men to deny them to have been
true believers.

If the proof of the first confident assertion concerning the grounds of
judging such as afterward have apostatized, Ans.
to be true believers, were called into question, I suppose it would prove one
instance, how much easier it is confidently to affirm any thing, then soundly
to confirm it. And perhaps it will be found to appear, that in the most, if
not all of those glorious apostates of whom he speaks, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36.
if they were thoroughly traced and strictly eyed, even in those things which
are exposed to the view of men, for any season or continuance, Job. 27. 9, 10.
2 Kings. 10. 29.
such warpings and flawes might be discovered, in positives, or negatives, as
are incompatible with truth of grace. But if this be granted, that they have
all the visible lineaments of a true faith in their faces, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Titus.
1. 16.
as far as the eye of man is able to judge, and therefore men were bound to
esteem them for true believers, does it therefore follow, that they were such
indeed? This at once instates all secret hypocrites in the ancient and present
Churches of Christ, into a condition of sanctification and justification, which
the Lord knows they were, and are remote from. Shall the esteem of men
translate them from death to life, and really alter the state wherein they are?
What ever honor then and esteem we may give to the characters of holiness
and faith instamped, or rather painted on them, as it is meet for us to judge
well of all, who professing the Lord Christ, walk in our view in any measure
suitable to that profession, and with Jonadab to honor Jehu, in his fits and
hasty passions of zeal, yet this (alas) is no evidence unto them, nor
discovery of the thing it self, that they are in a state of faith and
holiness. To say, that we may not be bound to judge any to be believers, and
Godly, unless they are so indeed and in the thing it self, is either to exalt
poor worms into the throne of God, and to make them searchers of the hearts
and tryers of the reins of others, who are so often in the dark to
themselves, and never in this life sufficiently acquainted with their own
inward chambers: or else at once to cut off and destroy all communion of
Saints, by rendering it impossible for us to attain satisfaction, who are so
indeed, so far as to walk with them upon that account, Romans 12. 9.
in Love without dissimulation. Doubtless the Disciples of Christ were bound
to receive them for Believers, of whom it is said, that they did believe,
because of their profession so to do, and that with some hazard and danger;
loh. 2. 23, 24.
though he who knew what was in man, would not trust himself with them, because
the root of the matter was not in them.

I suppose I shall not need to put my self to the labor to prove, or evince
this Ground of our charitable procedure,. 19.
in our thoughts of men professing the ways of God, though their hearts are
not upright with him; But, says Mr Goodwin, To say that whilst they stood, men
were indeed bound to judge them Believers: but by their declining, they
discover themselves not to have been the men, is but to beg the Question, and
that upon very ill terms to obtain it.

For my part, Ans.
I find not in this Answer to that Objection (But they had the lineaments of
true Believers and therefore we were bound to judge them so,) that, this did
not at all prove them to be so, any begging of the Question, but rather a fair
Answer given to their importune Request, 1 Samuel 16. 7.
that the appearance of the face, as far as the eyes of men can pierce, must
needs conclude them in the eyes of God to answer that Appearance in the inward
and hidden man of the heart.

But Mr Goodwin further pursues his design in hand,. 20.
from the words of our Savior Mat. 7. 20. By their fruit ye shall know them:
if faith he, this rule be Authentical, we do not only stand bound by the law
of Charity, but by the law of Righteousness or district Judgment it self, to
judge the persons, we speak of, true Believers; whilst they adorn the Gospel
with such fruits of Righteousness, as were mentioned; for our Savior does not
say; by their fruits ye shall have grounds to conceive or conjecture them such
or such, or to judge them in charity such or such, but ye shall know them; now
what a man knows, he is not bound to conjecture, or to judge in a way of
Charity to be that which he knows it to be, but positively to judge and
conclude of it accordingly. If then it be possible for men by any such fruits,
works, or expressions, to know true Believers, the persons we speak of, may
be known to have been such.

Though the words of our Savior principally lie on the other side of the way,
giving a Rule for a condemnatory Judgment of men, Ans.
whose evil Fruits declare the Root to be no better; wherein we cannot well be
deceived, the works of the flesh being manifest, and he that works
wickedness openly, and brings forth the effects of sin visibly, Gal. 2. 19.
in a course, as a Tree does its fruit, may safely be concluded, Romans 6. 16.
whatsoever pretense in words he makes, to be a false corrupt Hypocrite; yet by
the way of Analogy and proportion, it is a Rule also, whereby our Savior will
have us make a Judgment of those Professors and Teachers, with whom we have to
do, as to our Reception and Approbation of them. He bids his Disciples taste,
and try the Fruit that such persons bear, and acording to that, (not any
specious pretenses they make, or innocent Appearances which for a season they
show themselves in) let their Estimation of them be; Yea but, says Mr Goodwin,
we do not only stand bound by the Law of Charity, but by the Law of a
Righteous and strict Judgment it self to judge such persons Believers. This
distinction between the Law of Charity, and the Law of a Righteous Judgment, I
understand not. Though Charity be the principle exerted eminently in such
dijudications of men, yet doubtless it proceeds by the rules of Righteous
Judgment; When we speak of the Judgment of Charity, we intend not a loose
conjecture, much less a Judgment contradistinct from that which is Righteous;
but a Righteous and strict Judgment, according to the exactest rules
whatsoever, that we have to Judge by, free from evil surmises, and such like
vices of the mind, as are opposed to the grace of Love. By saying it is of
Charity, we are not absolved from the most exact procedure (according to the
Rules of judging given unto us) but only bound up from indulging to any Fnvy,
Malice, or such like works of the flesh, which are opposite to Charity, in the
subject wherein it is: Charity in this assertion denotes only a gracious
qualification in the subject, and not any condescension from the Rule: and
therefore I something wonder, that Mr Goodwin should make a Judgment of Charity
(as afterward) a mere conjecture, and allow beyond it a Righteous and strict
Judgment, which amounts to knowledge.

It is true our Savior tells us,. 21.
that by their fruits we shall know them; But what knowledge is it that he
intends? is it a certain knowledge by demonstration of it? or an infallible
assurance by revelation? I am confident M. Goodwin will not say it is either of
these, but only such a persuasion, as is the result of our thoughts concerning
them, upon the profession they make, and the works they do, upon which we may
(according to the mind of Christ, who bare with them whom he knew to be no
Believers, having taken on them the profession of the faith) know how to
demean our selves toward them: so far we may know them by their fruits and
judge of them; other knowledge our Savior intends not, nor I believe does M.
Goodwin pretend unto. Now notwithstanding all this, even on this account, and
by this rule, it is very possible, yea very easy, and practically proved true
in all places, and at all times, that we may judge, yea so far know, men to
be, or not to be seducers by their fruits, as to be able to order aright our
demeanor toward them, according to the will of Christ, and yet be mistaken,
(though not in the performance of our duty in walking regularly according to
the lines drawn out for our paths) in the persons concerning whom our
judgment is; the knowledge of them being neither by demonstration, nor from
revelation, such as cui non potest subesse falsum, we may be deceived.

The Saints then or believers,. 22.
of whom alone our discourse is, may be briefly delineated by these few
considerable concernements of their Saintship.

1. That whereas by nature they are children of wrath as well as others, and
dead in trespasses and sins, Romans 8. 28, 29.
that faith and holiness which they are in due time invested withal, whereby
they are made Believers and Saints, and distinguished from all others whatever,
is an effect and fruit of, and flows from God's eternal purpose concerning
their salvation or election: Act. 13. 4. Ephesians. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5.
their faith being as to the manner of its bestowing peculiarly of the
operation of God, and as to its distinction from every other gift, that upon
any account what ever is so called, Tit 1, 1.
in respect of its fountain termed, The faith of Gods elect.

2. For the manner of their obtaining of this precious faith, it is by Gods
giving to them that holy Spirit of his, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Romans 8. 11.
whereby he raised Jesus from the dead, to raise them from their death in
sin, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. and 2. 1, 5, 5, 8, 10.
to quicken them unto newness of life, endowing them with a new life, with a
Spiritual gracious supernatural habit, spreading it self upon their whole
souls, making them new creatures throughout (in respect of parts) investing
them with an abiding principle, Mat. 7. 17. and 12. 33.
being a natural genuine fountain of all those Spiritual acts, Galat. 2. 20.
1 Ioh. 5. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 1 These. 5. 25. Gal. 5122, 23. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Ephesians. 2.
10. 1 Pet. 1. 22. Philip. 12. v. 13.
works and duties, which he is pleased to work in them and by them, of his
own good pleasure.

3. That the holy and blessed Spirit, which effectually and powerfully works
this change in them, Ioh.4. 16, 26. and 15. 26. and 16. 7, 8, 9. Romans 8. 10, 11.
is bestowed upon them as a fruit of the purchase and intercession of Jesus
Christ, to dwell in them, and abide in them for ever: upon the account of which
inhabitation of the Spirit of Christ in them, they have union with him, 1 Cor.
6. 19. Romans 5. 5. 1 Ioh. 4. 4, 13.
i. e. one and the same spirit dwelling in him the Head, and them the Members.
2 Timothy 1. 14. 1 Cor. 6. 17. and 12. 12, 13. Ephesians. 4. 4.


4. By all which as to their actual state and condition, they are really
changed from 1 Ioh. 3. 14. Ephesians. 2. 2. Col. 2. 13. Romans 6. 11, 13. and 8. 2, 8,
9.
death to life, from Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 These. 5. 4. Col. 1. 13. 1 Pet.
2. 9.
darkness to light, from Ezekiel. 36. 25. Zach. 13. 1. Isa. 4. 3, 4. Ephesians. 5. 6. 1
Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 5. Heb. 10. 22.
universal habitual uncleanness to holiness, from Romans 6. 10. Ephesians. 2. 12,
13, 14, 15. Col. 1. 21. Heb. 12. 22.
a state of enmity, stubbornness, rebellion, etc. into a state of love,
obedience, delight, etc. and as to their relative condition, whereas they were
Ephesians. 2. 3. Galat. 3. 13. and 4. 4, 5, 6, 7. Romans 8. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Col. 2.
10. Romans 5. 1. and 8. 32, 33. 1 Ioh. 3. 1, 2. Ephesians. 3. 15.
children of wrath under the curse and condemning power of the law, they are
upon the score of him, who was made a curse for them, and is made
righteousness to them, accepted, justified, adopted and admitted into that
family of heaven and earth which is called after the name of God.

These alone are they, of whom we treat; of whose state and condition
Perseverance is an inseparable adjunct: wherein and in what particulars they
are differenced from, and advanced above the most glorious Professors whatever,
who are liable and obnoxious to an utter and everlasting separation from God,
shall be afterward at large insisted upon: And though M. Goodwin has thought
good to affirm, that that description which we have Heb: 6, of such (as is
supposed) may be Apostates, is one of the highest and most eminent, that is
made of believers in the whole Scripture; I shall not doubt but to make it
evident, that the Excellency of all the expressions there used, being extracted
and laid together, does yet come short of the meanest and lowest thing that is
spoken of those, concerning whom we treat; as shall be manifest, when through
Gods assistance we arrive unto that part of this contest.

That the other term (to wit) Perseverance may be more briefly explicated,.
23.
I shall take the shortest path. For Perseverance in general, he came near
the nature of it, who said it was in ratione been fundata stabilis ac perpetua
permansio. The words and terms, whereby it is expressed in Scripture, will
afterward fall in to be considered. The Holy Ghost restraines not himself to
any one expression, in spiritual things of so great importance, but using that
variety which may be suited to the instruction, supportment and consolation of
Believers, Romans 15. 4.
this grace (as is that of Faith it self in an eminent manner) is by him
variously expressed, 2 Samuel 7. 14, 15.
To walk in the name of the Lord: for ever, to walk with Christ as we have
received, to be confirmed or strengthened in the faith as we have been taught,
Psalm. 1. 3. 23. 6. 37. 24. 52. 10. 89. 31. 125. 1, 2. 3* 128. 5.
to keep the ways of Gods commandments to the end, to run steadfastly the
race set before us, to rule with God, to be faithful with the Saints, to be
faithful to the death, to be sound and steadfast in the precepts of God, to
abide or continue firm with Christ, in Christ, in the Lord, in the word of
Christ, in the doctrine of Christ, in the faith, in the love and favor of God,
in what we have learned and received from the beginning, Isa. 46. 4. 54. 10.
to endure, to persist in the Truth, to be rooted in Christ, Ierem. 31. 3. 32.
39, 40.
to retain or keep faith and a good conscience, to hold fast our confidence
and faith to the end, Zech. 10. 12.
to follow God fully, to keep the word of Christ's patience, Math. 7. 24, 25.
and 12. 20. and 16. 18, and 24. 24. Luke 8. 5. and 22. 23. Ioh. 6. 35, 39, 56,
57. and 8. 12. and 10. 27, 28, 29. and 14. 16, 17. and 17. 20, 18, 28. Romans 8.
1. 16. 29. 34. 36, 37. 1 Cor. 3. 8, 9, 10, 13. 15. 58.
to be built upon and in Christ, to keep our selves that the wicked one touch
us not, not to commit sin, to be kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, 1 Ioh. 5. 17. 3. 9.
to stand fast as mount Syon that can never be removed, to stand by faith, to
stand fast in the faith, to stand fast in the Lord, to have the good work
begun, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Romans 11. 20. 1 Cor. 16. 13.
perfected: to hold our profession, that none take our crown. These (I say)
and the like, are some of those expressions whereby the holy Ghost holds forth
that doctrine which we have in hand, Phil. 4. 1. Phil. 1. 6. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
which is usually called the Perseverance of Saints, regarding principally
their abiding with God, through Christ in faith and obedience, which yet is but
one part of this truth.

The reasons and causes investing this proposition, 4. 39.
that Saints, such as we have described, Gal. 2. 20. Phil. 1. 6.
shall so Persevere, with a necessity of consequence, and on which the truth of
it does depend, 1 These: 5. 24.
both negatively considered, and positively, with the limitation of
Perseverance, 2 Timothy 2. 12.
what it directly asserts, what not, with what failing, 1 Pet: 1. 2, 3, 4.
backsliding, and declensions on the one hand, and other, it is consistent, and
what is destructive of the nature and being of it, 1 John 2. 19, 27. etc.
the difference of it, as to being and apprehension, in respect the subject in
whom it is, with the way and manner whereby the causes of this Perseverance
have their operation on, 24.
and effect in them that persevere, not in the least prejudicing their liberty,
but establishing them in their voluntary obedience, will afterward be fully
cleared, And hereon depends much of the life and vigor of the Doctrine we have
in hand: it being oftener in the Scripture held forth in its fountains, and
springs and causes, then in the thing it self, as will upon examination
appear.

As to what is on the other side affirmed,. 25.
that Believers may fall totally, and finally away, something may be added to
clear up what is intended thereby, and to enquire how it may come to pass. We
do suppose (which the scripture abundantly testifies) that such believers
have Ezekiel: 36. 27. Isa: 59. 21. Luk: 11. 13. Psalm. 51. 11. Romans 8: 9: 11* 15. 1
Cor: 2. 12. Gal: 4. 6. 1 Timothy: 1. 14: Rom: 5. 5. Gal: 5. 22. Ioh: 14. 16, 17.
Ioh: 16. 13. 1 Cor: 3. 16. 1 Cor: 6. 19.
the holy Spirit dwelling in them, and by his implanting a Math: 12. 33. 2 Cor:
5. 17. 2 Pet: 1. 4: Gal: 5. 22, 23: Ephesians. 4. 23, 24.
new holy habit of Grace: the enquiry then is how believers may come utterly to
loose this holy spirit, and to be made naked of the habit of Grace, or new
nature bestowed on them. That and that only whereunto this effect is ascribed
is sin. Now there are two ways whereby sin may be supposed to produce such
effects in reference to the Souls of Believers. 1. Efficiently by a reaction
in the same subject, as frequent acts of Vice will debilitate and overthrow an
acquired habit whereunto it is opposite. 2. Meritoriously, by provoking the
Lord to take them away, in a way of punishment; for of all punishment sin is
the morally procuring cause. Let us a little consider which of those ways it
may probably be supposed that sin expelles the spirit, and habit of grace
from the souls of Believers.

1. For the spirit of grace which dwells in them, it cannot with the least
color of reason be supposed, that sin should have a natural efficient
reaction against the spirit which is a voluntary indweller in the hearts of
his, he is indeed grieved and provoked by it, Ephesians. 4. 30. Heb: 3. 10, 11.
Isa. 63: 10.
but that is in a moral way in respect of its demerit; but that it should have
a natural efficiency by the way of opposition against it, as Intemperance
against the Mediocrity which it opposes, is a madness to imagine.

The habit of Grace wherewith such believers are endued,. 26.
is infused: not acquired by a frequency of Acts in themselves: the root is
made good and then the fruit, and the work of God. It is a new Creation planted
in them by the exceeding greatness of his Power, as he wrought in Christ when
he raised him from the dead, which he also strengthens with all might, and all
power to the end. Is it now supposed, or can it rationally be so, that vicious
acts, acts of sin, should have in the soul a natural efficiency for the
expelling of an infused habit, Col. 2. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians. 1. 19. Col. 1.
11.
and that implanted upon the soul by the exceeding greatness of the power of
God? That it should be done by any one, or two acts is impossible: to suppose
that a man, in whom there is an habit set on by so mighty an impression as, the
Scripture mentions, to act constantly contrary thereunto, is to think what we
will, without troubling our selves to consider how it may be brought about.
Farther, whilst this Principle, life, and habit of Grace is thus consuming,
does their God and Father look on and suffer it to decay, and their spiritual
man to pine away day by day, Ephesians. 1. 23. Col. 2. 19.
giving them no new supplies, nor increasing them with the increase of Gods
has he no pity toward a dying child? Ephesians: 4. 16. 1 These: 3. 12.
or can he not help him? does he, of whom it is said that he is faithful, and
that he will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, Phil: 1. 6. 1
Cor. 10. 13.
but with the very temptation will make way for us to escape, let loose such
floodgates of Temptations upon them, as he knows his grace will not be able to
stand before, but will be consumed and expelled by it? what also shall we
suppose are the thoughts of Jesus Christ toward a withering member, Heb, 2.
17, 18. 3. 15. 7. 25.
a dying brother, a perishing child, a wandering sheep? where is his zeal and
his tender mercies, and the sounding of his bowels? are they restrained? Isa:
40. 11. and 63. 8.
Will he not lay hold of his strength, and stir up his Righteousness to save
a poor sinking creature? Ezekiel: 34. 4, 12.
Also He that is in us is greater then he that is in the world; and will he
suffer himself to be wrought out of his habitation, and not stir up his
strength to keep possession of the dwelling place which he had chosen? So that
neither in the nature of the thing it self, nor in respect of him, with whom
we have to do, does this seem possible.

But secondly,. 27.
Sin procures by the way of merit, the taking away of the Spirit, and
removeall of the Habit graciously bestowed; Believers deserve by sin, that
God should take his Spirit from them, and the Grace that he has bestowed on
them: They do so indeed, it cannot be denied: but will the Lord deal so with
them? Isa: 48. 9.
Will he judge his house with such fler and vengeance? Is that the way of a
Father with his Children? until he has taken away his Spirit and grace?
although they are Rebellious Children, yet they are his Children still: and is
this the way of a tender Father to cut the throats of his Children, when it is
in his power to mend them? The casting of a wicked man into Hell, is not a
punishment to be compared to this: the loss of Gods presence is the worst of
Hell. How infinitely, must they needs be more sensible of it who have once
enjoyed it, Isa: 49. 15, 16 Isa: 66. 13.
then those who were strangers to it from their womb? Certainly the Lord bears
another Testimony concerning his kindness to his Sons and Daughters, Ierem:
2. 14. Hos. 2. 14. etc.
then that we should entertain such dismal thoughts of him. He chastises his
Children indeed, but he does not kill them; he corrects them with rodds, but
his Kindness he takes not from them: notwithstanding of the attempt made by
the Remonstrants in their Synodalia, I may say that I have not as yet met with
any tolerable extrication of those difficulties: more to this purpose will
afterward be insisted on.

3. That which we intend, when we mention the Perseverance of Saints, is their
continuance to the end in the condition of Saintship, whereunto they are
called. Now in the state of Saintship, there are two things concurring, 1. That
Holiness which they receive from God, and 2. That Favor which they have with
God, being justified freely by his grace, through the blood of Christ: and
their continuance in this condition to the end of their lives, both to their
real Holiness, and gracious Acceptance, is the Perseverance whereof we must
treat. The one respecting the real estate, the other their relative, of which
more particularly afterward.

And this is a brief delineation of the Doctrine,. 28.
which, the Lord assisting, shall be explained, confirmed, and vindicated in
the ensuing discourse, which being first set forth as a mere Skeleton, its
Symetry and Complexion, Its Beauty and Comeliness, Its Strength and Vigor,
Excellency and Usefulness will in the description of the several parts and
branches of it, be more fully manifested.

Now because Mr Goodwin,. 29.
though he was not pleased to fix any orderly state of the Question under
debate; (a course he has also thought good to take in handling those other
Heads of the Doctrine of the Gospel, wherein he has chosen to walk (for the
maine with the Arminians) in Paths of difference from the Reformed Churches)
yet having scatterd up and down his Treatise, what his conceptions are of the
Doctrine he does oppose, as also what he asserts in the place and room
thereof, and Upon what Principles, I shall briefly call, what he has so
delivered, both on the one hand, and on the other, to an account: to make the
clearer way for the proof of the Truth, which indeed we own, and for the
discovery of that which is brought forth to contest for Acceptance with it,
upon the score of Truth and usefullnesse.

First then,. 30.
for the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, how it stands stated in Mr
Goodwins thoughts, and what he would have other men apprehend thereof, may from
sundry places in his Book, especially Cap. 9. be collected, and thus summarily
presented. It is ( says he Cap. 9. Sect. 3.) a promising unto men, and that
with height of assurance, under what loosnesse or vile practices so ever,
exemption and freedom from punishment: so Sect. 4. It is in vain to persuade
or press men unto the use of such means, in any kind which are in themselves
displeasing to them, seeing they are ascertained and secured before hand that
they shall not fail of the end however, whether they use such means or no: a
lushous, and Fulsome conceit (Sect. 5.) intoxicating the flesh, with a
persuasion, that it has Goods laid up for the days of Eternity; A notion
comfortable and betideing peace to the flesh (Sect. 15.) in administering unto
it certain hope, that it shall however escape the wrath and vengeance which is
to come, yea though it disporteth it self in all manner of loosnesse, and
licentiousness in the mean time. A presumption it is that men (Sect. 18.) may
or shall enjoy the love of God and Salvation it self, under practices of all
manner of sin and wickedness. Representing God (Sect. 20.) as a God, in
whose sight he is Good that does evil: promising his love, favor and
acceptance as well unto dogs returning to their vomit, or to swine wallowing
(after their washing) in the mire ( that is to Apostates which that believers
shall not be, is indeed the Doctrine he opposes) as unto Lambs and sheep. A
Doctrine whereby' it is possible for me certainly to know, that how loosly, how
profanely, how debauchedly soever I should behave my self, yet God will love
me, as he does the hold and most righteous man under Heaven.

With these and the like Expressions does Mr Goodwin adorn and Gilde over that
Doctrine, which he has chosen to oppose: with these Garlands and flowers does
he surround the Head of the Sacrifice, which he intends instantly to slay, that
so it may fall an undeplored Victim, if not seasonably rescued from the hands
of this sacred Officer. Neither through his whole Treatise, do I find it
delivered in any other sense, or held out under any other notion to his Reader:
The Course here he has taken in this case, and the paths he walks in toward
his Adversaries, seem to be no other, then that which was traced out by the
Bishops at Constance, when they caused Devils to be painted upon the Cap they
put on the Head of Huss, before they cast him into the fire; I do something
doubt (though I am not altogether Ignorant, how abominably the Tenants and
Opinions of those, who first opposed the Papacy, are represented and given over
to posterity, by them, whose interest it was to have them thought such, as they
gave them out to be) whether ever any man, that undertook to publish his
Conceptions to the world, about any opinion, or parcel of Truth, debated
amongst Professors of the Gospel of Christ, did ever so dismember, disfigure,
defile, wrest, and pervert that which he opposed, as Mr Goodwin has done the
Doctrine of Perseverance which he has undertaken to destroy; Me thinks a man
should not be much delighted in casting filth and dung upon his Adversary,
before he begin to graple with him; In one word, this being the account he
gives us of it, if he be able to name one Author, ancient or modern, any one
sober person of old, or of late, that ever spent a pen full of Ink, or once
opened his mouth in the defense of that Perseverance of Saints, or rather
profane walking of dogs and swine, which he has stated, not in the words, and
terms, but so much as to the matter, or purpose here intimated by him; and it
shall be accepted as a just defensative against the Crime, which we are
enforced to charge in this particular, and which otherwise will not easily be
warded. If this be the Doctrine, which with so great an endeavor, and a
Contribution of so much Pains and Rhetorique he seeks to oppose, I know not
any that will think it worth while, to interpose in this fierce contest
between him and his man of straw. Neither can it with the least color of Truth
be pretended, that these are Consequences, which he urges the Doctrine he
opposes withal, and not his Apprehensions of the Doctrine it self. For
neither does he in any place in his whole Treatise, hold it out in any other
shape, but is uniforme, and constant to himself, in expreffing his notion of
it; nor does he indeed almost use any Argument against it, but those that
suppose this to be the true state of the Co^troversy, which he has proposed.
But whether this indeed be the Doctrine of the Perseverance of Saints, which Mr
Goodwin so importunately cries out against, upon a brief consideration of some
of the particulars mentioned, will quickly appear.

First then,. 34.
does this Doctrine promise with height of Assurance, that under what
loosnesse, or vile practices soever men do live, they shall have Exemption
from punishment? wherein I pray? in that it promises the Saints of God, that
through his Grace they shall be preserved from such looseness and evil
practices, as would expose them to Eternal punishment? Psalm. 23. 6.
Does it teach men, that it is vain to use the means of mortification because,
Jerem. 31. 33. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
they shall certainly attain the end, whether they use the means or no? Or
may you not as well say, that the Doctrine you oppose is, that all men shall be
saved whether they believe or no, with those other comfortable and chearing
associate doctrines you mention? Or is this a Regular Emergency of that
Doctrine which teaches, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
that there is no attaining the End, but by the means, between which there is
such a Concatenation by Divine appointment, that they shall not be separated?
Does it speak peace to the flesh, in Assurance of Blessed Immortality, though
it disport it self in all folly in the mean time? Do the Teachers of it,
express any such thing? Does any such Abomination issue from their Arguings in
the defense thereof? Or does the Doctrine which teaches Believers (Saints who
have tasted of the love, and pardoning mercy of God, and are taught to value it
infinitely above all the world) that such is the Love, and goodwill of God
toward them, in the Covenant of mercy in the blood of Christ, that having
appointed Good works for them to walk in, Ephesians. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
for which of themselves they are insufficient, he will graciously continue to
them such supplies of his Spirit, and Grace, as that they shall never depart
from following after him, in ways of Gospel Obedience? Does this I say
encourage any of them to continue in sin that this Grace may abound? Or are
any Doctrines of the Gospel to be measured by the rules, and lines of the use,
or abuse that the flesh is apt to make of them? Or rather by their
suitableness to the Divine nature, whereof the Saints are made partakers, and
servicablenesse to their carrying on to perfection in that Attainment? Or is
this an Argument of validity against an Evangelicall Truth, that the carnal
unbelieving part is apt to turn it into wantonness? And whether Believers
walking after the Siprit, in which frame the Truths of God in the Gospel are
savory and sweet to them, Romans 8. 1, 14.
do experience such attendancies of the Doctrine under consideration, as are
here intimated; I am persuaded Mr Goodwin will one day find, that he has not
a little grieved the holy Spirit of God, by these reproaches cast upon the
work of his Grace. Further, Does this persuasion assure men that they shall
enjoy the Love and Favor of God under the practices of all manner of sin? Or
can this be wrested, by any racks or wheels from this Assertion, that none
indeed enjoy the love and favor of God, but only they, toward whom it is
effectual to turn them from the practices of all manner of sin and
wickedness; to translate them from Darkness into marvelous light, and from
the power of Satan into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; whom the Grace that
appears unto them, teaches to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts to live
soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present world: whom that Love
constraines not to live unto them selves, but unto him that dyed for them? Does
it promise the love and favor of God to dogs turning to their vomit, and
swine wallowing in their mire? when the very discriminating difference of it
from that Doctrine which advances it self into Competition with it, is, that
such returning dogs and wallowing Swine did indeed in their best estate and
Condition, never truly and properly partake of the Love and favor of God: but
notwithstanding their disgorging and washing of themselves, they were dogs and
swine still: But to what end should I longer insist on these things? I am fully
persuaded, Mr Goodwin himself cannot make room in his understanding to
apprehend that this is indeed the true notion of the Doctrine which he does
oppose; Something has been spoken of it already, and more the Lord asslisting,
will be discussed in the progress of our Discourse, abundantly sufficient to
manifest to the consciences of men, not possessed with prejudice against the
Truth, that it is quite of another nature, and consistency, of another
Complexion and usefullnesse, then what is here represented; I cannot but add,
that this way of handling Controversies in Religion, namely in proposing
Consequences and Inferences of our own framing, (wierdrawne with violence and
subtility from Principles far distant from them, disowned, disavowed, and
disclaimed by them, on whom they are imposed) as the Judgment of our
Adversaries, loading them with all manner of reproaches, is such, as (being of
all men in the world most walked in by the Arminians,) I desire not to be
Competitor with any in: haud defensoribus istis etc.

Let us now a little (in the next place) consider what Mr Goodwin gives in for
that Persuasion, 32.
which in Opposition to the other before by him displayed, he contendeth with
all his strength to advance; I do not doubt but all that are acquainted with
his way of expression, ( elato cothurno) will (as they may reasonably) expect
to have it brought forth (...), adorned with all the Gallantry and Ornaments,
that Words can contribute thereunto: for of them there is with him store to be
used on all occasions: (...).

The sum of the Doctrine he is so inamoured on,. 33.
he gives us Chap. 9. Sect. 21. Page 115. Longa est Fabula longae Ambagis) this
is Caput reir; Quidam sunt, qui jam aliquamdia luce veritatis collustrati
fuerunt, and in ejus cognitione pietatisque studio tantum profecerunt, ut
habitum tandem credendi sancteque vivendi comparaverint: Hos non tantum ad
finem usque vitae perseverare posse, sed facile posse, ac libenter and cum
voluptate perseverare velle credimus, adeo ut non nisi cum lucta and molestia
ac difficultate desicere possint. Act. synod. Decl. Sen. A. 5. p. 189, 190.
It is not any danger of falling away in them, that are Saints and Believers,
or probability of it, that he mainetaines but only possibility of it, such as
there is, that sober and careful men may voluntarily throw themselves down
from the topps of Houses or Steeples, though perhaps they never come there) or
run into the fire or water and be burned, or drowned having the use of their
reason and understanding to preserve them from such unusual and dismal
accidents; which seems to be an instance of as remote and infirm a
possibility, as can likely be imagened. Yea he tells you farther (Sect. 22.)
That the Saints have as good security of their Perseverance, as he could have
of his life, to whom God should grant a lease of it for so long upon condition
that he did not thrust a sword through his bowels, or cast himself headlong
down a Tower; so that his Doctrine indulgeth to the Saints as much assurance,
as that of Perseverance; but only it grants them not a liberty of sinning which
I presume his own Conscience told him that neither the other does.

But is this inded Mr Goodwins Doctrine?. 34.
Is this all that he intends his Arguments and proofs shall amount unto? Ad
populum phaleras: strange that when there is not so much as a probabillity or
danger of falling away, yet so many, and so Eminent Saints should so fall? How
seldom is it, that we hear of wise and sober men running into the fire,
throwing themselves headlong from Towers thrusting swords through their own
bowels? and nothing more frequent then the Apostasy of Saints, If these things
stood upon equal terms of unlikelyhood and improbability? Math. 13.
The stony field in the Parable seems to be every whit as large as the good
ground, whose fruit abides. That Ground in Mr Goodwins sense is true
Believers; so that a moiety at least must be granted to fall away, and never
come to perfection: Doubtless this is not easy to be received, that one half
of a Company of men in succession, should constantly from one Generation to
another, fall into ruin in such a way, as wherein there is no Danger of it, or
probability that it should so come to pass. Methinks, we should scarce dare to
walk the streets, least at every step we be stricken down by sober men,
voluntarily tumbling themselves from the topps of houses, and hardly keep our
selves from being wounded with the swords wherewith they run themselves
through. Was this inded the case with David, Solomon, Peter? and others who
totally Apostatized from the Faith? But if it be so, if they are thus secure,
whence is it, that it does arise? what are the Fountains, Springs and causes
of this general Security? Is it from the weakness of the Opposition, and
slightness of all Means of diversion from walking with God to the End, that
they meet withal? Or is it from the nature of that Faith, which they have, and
Grace wherewith they are endued? Or is it that God has gracionsly undertaken
to safeguard them, and to preserve them in their abiding with him, that they
shall not fall away? Or is it that Christ intercedeth for them, that their
Faith fail not, but be preserved, and their Souls with it, by the Power of
God unto the End? Or from what other Principle does this Security of theirs
arise? From what Fountain do the streams of their Consolation Flow? Where lie
the Heads of this Nilus?

That it is not upon the first account, I suppose cannot enter into the
Imagination of any person, who ever had the least experience of walking with
God, or does so much as assent to the letter of the Scripture. How are our
Enemies there discribed as to their Number, Nature, Power, Policy, Subtility,
Malice, Restlessenes, and Advantages? With what inimaginable and unexpressible
variety of Means, Temptations, Baits, Allurements, Inticements, Terrors,
Threats, do they fight against us? Such and so many are the enemies that
oppose the Saints of God in their abiding with him; so Great and Effectual the
Means, and weapons, wherewith they fight against the^; so unwearied and
watchful are they for the improovement of all Advantages and Opportunityes for
their ruin; that upon the supposall of the Rejection of those Principles, and
those means of of their Preservation, which we shall find Mr Goodwin to
attempt, they will be found to be so far from a state of no danger, and little
probability of Falling, or only under a remote Possibility of so doing, that it
will appear utterly imposible for them to hold out, and abide unto the end.
Had the choicest Saint of God, with all the Grace that he has received, but
one of the many Enemies, and that the weakest, of all them which oppose every
Saint of God, even the feeblest, to deal withal, separated from the Strength
of those Principles and Supportments, which Mr Goodwin seeks to cast down,
(let him lie under continual exhortations, to watchfulness, and close walking
with God) he may as easily move Mountains with his finger, or climb to Heaven
by a Ladder, as stand before the strength of that one enemy. Adam in Paradise
had no Lust within to entice him, no World under the Curse to seduce him, yet
at the first assault of Satan, who then had no part in him, he fell quite out
of Covenant with God. Psalm. 30. 6, 7.

I shall give one instance in one of the many enemies,. 35.
that fight against the welfare of our souls, and ( ex hoc uno) we may guess
at the residue of its companions. This is indwelling sin, whose power, and
policy, strength and prevalency, neerenesse and treachery, the Scripture
exceedingly setts out, and the Saints daily feel; I shall only point at some
particulars.

First concerning its Neerenesse to us, it is indeed in us: and that not as a
thing different from us, but it cleaves to all the faculties of our souls; it
is an Enemy borne with us, Psalm. 51. 5.
bred up^with us, carried about in our bosoms; by nature, Math. 5. 29, 30.
our familiar friend, our guide and councellor, dear to us as our right eye,
useful as our right hand, our wisdom, strength, etc. The Apostle 7. Romans
17:20. calls it the sin that dwells in us, Iam. 3. 15. 6.
it has in us, in the faculties of our souls, its abode and station. It does
not pass by, and away, but there it dwelles, so as that it never goes from
home, is never out of the way, when we have any thing to do; whence v, 21. he
calls it, the evil that is present with him. When we go about any thing that
is good or have opportunity for, or temptation unto any thing that is evil, it
is never absent; but is ready to pluck us back, or to put us on, according as
it serves its ends; it is such an Inmate, that we can never be quit of its
company, and so intimate unto us, that it puts forth it self, in every acting
of the ming, will, or any other faculty of the soul. Though men would feign
shake it off, yet when they would do good, this evil will be present with
them. Then,

2. Secondly, Its Universality and compass. Act. 26. 18. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Ephesians.
5. 8. Isa. 29. 18. 35. 5. 42. 7.
It is not straightned in a corner of the soul: it is spread over the whole,
all the faculties, affections. and passions of it. That which is Ioh. 5. 6.
Math. 6. 23. chapter 11. 79. Luke 11. 34, 35, 36.
borne of the flesh is flesh: it is all flesh, and nothing but flesh; it is
Darkness in the Understanding, keeping us at best that we know but in part,
and are still dull and slow of heart to believe; naturally we are all
Darkness, Romans 2. 19.
nothing but Darkness, and though the Lord, shine into our mind, to give us in
some measure the knowledge of his Glory in the face of Jesus Christ, Col. 1.
13. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
yet we are still very dark, and it is a hard work to bring in a little Light,
Luke 4. 8. Ephesians. 4. 18. Revel. 3. 17.
upon the soul; especially this is seen in particular practical things;
though in General, Math. 23. 16.
we have very clear light and eviction, yet when we come to particular Acts of
obedience. Math. 4. 16.
How often does our light grow dim and fails us, causing us to judge amiss
of that which is before us, Ioh. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
by the rising of that natural darkness, which is in us? It is perverseness,
stubbornness, obstinacy in the Will, Luke 4. 18. Ioh. 8. 34.
that carries it with violence, to disobedience and sin. It is sensuality
upon the Affections, Romans 6. 16.
bending them to the things of the World, alienating them from God; Romans 7. 18.
8. 7, 8.
It is slipperinesse in the memory, making us like leaking vessels, lerem. 6.
16.
that the things that we hear of the Gospel, do suddenly slip out, when as
other things abide firm in the Cells and Chambers thereof. Gen: 6. 5.
It is senselessness and error in the Conscience, lerem. 13. 23. Heb. 2. 1.
staving it off from the performance of that duty, which in the Name and
Authority of God, it is to accomplish: and in all these, is daily enticing, and
seducing the heart to Folly, conceiving and bringing forth sin. Iam. 1. 14,
15.


3. Thirdly, Its Power; the Apostle calls it a Law, a Law in his members, a Law
of sin, Romans 7. 21, 23. Such a Law as Fights, makes war, and leads captive,
selling us under sin: not suffering us to do the good we would, forceing us
to the evil we would not, drawing us off from that we delight in, bringing us
under bondage to that which we abhor; a powerful, unmercifull, cruel Tyrant
it is: Oh! wretched men that we are, verse. 24. There is no Saint of God, but in
the inward man does hate sin, every sin more then Hell it self, knowing
the world of evils, that attend the least sin; yet is there not one of them,
but this powerful Tyrant has compelled and forced to so many, as have made
them a burden to their own Souls.

4. Fourthly: Its Cunning, Craft, and Policy. It is called in Scripture the Old
Man, not from the weakness of its strength, but from the strength of its
Craft: Heb. 3. 13.
Take heed, says the Apostle, least any of you be hardened by the
deceitfulness of sin. There is abundance of deceitfulness in it; being
ready, fit, and prompt to beguile: lying in wayt for advantages, furnished for
all opportunities, and ready to close with every temptation; yea the ways of
it are so large and various, its Wiles and Methods for deceiving so
innumerable, its fruitfulness in conceiving and bringing forth of sin so
abundant, its advantages and opportunities so many, that it is like the way of
a Serpent upon a stone, there is no tracing or finding of it out.

A serious consideration of the opposition made unto our Perseverance, by this
one Enemy, which has so much ability, and is so restless in its warfare,
never quiet conquering nor conquered, which can be kept out of none of our
Counsels, excluded from none of our actings, is abundantly sufficient to
evince, that it is not want, or weakness of Enemies, which puts Believers
out of danger of falling away.

But all this perhaps will be granted: Enemies they have enough,. 36.
and those much more diligent and powerful every one of them, then all we have
spoken of that now described, amounts unto: but the means of Preservation,
which God affords the Saints, is that which puts them almost out of Gunshot,
and gives them that Golden security mentioned, which comes not (in
administering consolation) one step behind that which arises from the
Doctrine of absolute Perseverance; Let then this be a little considered, and
perhaps it will allay this whole contest. Is it then, that such is the Grace
that is bestowed upon them, in respect of the Principle whence it is bestowed,
( the eternal Love of God) and the way whereby it is for them procured (the
Bloodshedding and Intercession of Christ) with the nature of it, (being the
seed of God, which abides and withers not) and that such seems to be the
nature of infused Habits, that they are not removed, but by the power, and
immediate hand of him, by whom they are bestowed? Is it from hence, that their
Assurance and security does arise? Alas, all this is but a fiction: there is no
Faith that is the fruit of Election, Christ purchased it not for any, by his
Death: Infused Habits are not: the Grace that perishes, and that, that abides
are the same: these things are but pretenses. Is it then, that God has
purposed from Eternity, to continue Constant in his Love toward them, never to
Leave them nor Forsake them? Nay but of all things Imaginable, this is the
greatest Abomination, which if the Scriptures did any where Affirm, it were
sufficient to make a rational considering man, to Question their Authority.

What then, has the Lord Promised to give themsuch continued supplies of his
Spirit and Grace in Jesus Christ, as that they shall be supported against all
opposition, and preserved from all, or any such sins as will certainly make
a separation between God and their Souls? Nay there is not one such Promise
in all the Book of God; they are Conditional, for the enjoyment of the good
things, whereof Believers stand all their days upon their good behavior? Is
it then that the Lord Jesus, who is alwais heard of his Father, intercedes for
them, that their Faith fail not, and that they may be preserved by the power
of God unto Salvation, and that not only upon Condition of their Believing, but
chiefly, that they may be kept and preserved in Believing? Or is it that their
Enemies are so conquered for them, and on their behalf, in the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, that they shall never have dominion over them, that
their Security does arise? Neither the one, nor the other, nor any, nor all of
these, are the Grounds, and Foundations of their Establishment, but they are
wholly given up to the powerful hand of some Considerations, which M. Goodwin
expresses and sets out to the life, Cap. 9. Sect. 32, 33, 34. Page 174, 175.

Now because the Remonstrants have always told us,. 37.
that God has provided sufficiently for the Perseverance of the Saints, Coll
Hag. A. 5. Act. Synod. Decl. sent. A. 5. These. 2.
if they be not supinely wanting to themselves in the use of them, but have not
hitherto, either jointly, or severally (that I know of) taken the pains to
discover in particular, wherein that Sufficiency of Provision for their safety
does consist, or what the means are that God offords them to this end and
purpose; Mr Goodwin who is a learned Mystes of all their Councels, having
exactly and fully laid them forth, as a solid Foundation of his Assertion,
concerning only a remote Possibility of the Saints total Defection, let it not
seem Tedious or Impertinent, if I Transcribe, for the clearer Debate of it
before the Reader, that whole Discourse of his, and consider it in order as it
lies. If (says he) it be Demanded, what are the Means which God has given so
abundantly to the Saints, to make themselves so free, so strong in inclinations
to avoid things so apparently destructive to the Spiritual Peace, and
Salvation of their Souls, as naturally men are to forbear all such occasions,
which are apparently destructive to their natural lives, so that they need not
to be any more, any whit more afraid of loosing their Souls through their own
actings, then men are, or need to be of destroying their natural lives upon
the same terms. I Answer

1. First, he has given them Eyes wherewith, and Light whereby Clearaly, and
evidently to see and know, that it is not more rational, or manlike for men to
refrain all such acts, which they know they cannot perform, but to the
present and unavoidadle destruction of their natural lives, then it is to
forbear all sinful Acts whatsoever, and especially such, which are apparently
destructive to their Souls.

2. Secondly, God has not only given them the Eyes, and the Light we speak
of, wherewith, and whereby clearly to see, and understand the things
manifested, but has farther endued them with a faculty of Consideration,
wherewith to reflect upon, and review, and ponder, so often as they please, what
they See, Understand, and Know in this kind. Now what soever a man is capable,
First, of Seeing and Knowing: (Secondly) of Pondering and Considering, he is
capable of raising or working an inclination in himself toward it, answerable
in Strength, Vigor and Power, to any degree of Goodness, or Desireableness,
which he is able to apprehend therein: for what is an inclination toward any
thing, but a propension, and laying out of the heart and soul toward it? So
that if there be worth, and goodness sufficient in any object whatsoever to
bear it; and ( Secondly) if a man be in a capacity of discovering and
apprehending this good clearly; and ( Thirdly) be in a like capacity of
considering this vision, certainly he is in a capacity and at liberty to work
himself to what strength, or degree of desire and inclination toward it he
pleases, now it is certain to every man, that there is more good in abstaining
from things either Eminently dangerous, or Apparently destructive to his Soul,
then in forbearing things Apparently destructive to his natuturall being. (
Secondly,) as evident it is, that every man is capable of attaining or comeing
to the certain knowledge of, and clear apprehending this excess of good to
him in the former Good, then in the latter. Thirdly, neither is it a thing
less evident then either of the former, that every man is as capable of
ruminating or reapprehending the said excess of Good as much and as often, as he
pleases as he is simply of apprehending it at all; which supposed as
undeniably true, it follows with an high hand and above all contradiction,
that the Saints may (and have means and opportunityes fair and full for that
purpose) plant inclinations or dispositions in themselves to refrain all
manner of sins, apparently dangerous and destructive to the safety of their
Souls, fuller of energie, vigor, life, strength, power then the natural
inclination in them, which teaches them to refrain all occasions which they
know must needs be accompanied with the destruction of their natural beings.
Therefore if they be more or so much afraid of destroying their lives
volluntarily and knowingly, (as by the casting themselves into the fire, or the
water or the like) then they are of falling away through sin; the fault or
reason thereof is not at all in the Doctrine, which affirms or informs them,
that there is a possibility that they fall away, but in themselves, and their
own voluntary negligence: they have means and opportunityes (as we have
prooved) in abundance to render themselves every whit as secure, yea and more
secure touching the latter, as they are, or reasonably can be, concerning the
former.

When I first cast an eye on this Discourse of Mr Goodwin, 38. Ans.
I confess I was surprised to as high a degree of Admiration, and some other
Affections also, as by any thing I had observed in his whole Book: as having
not met (if without offense I may be allowed to speak my Apprehensions) with
any discourse whatsoever, of so transcendent a derogation from, and direct
tendency to the overthrow of the Grace of Christ, but only in what is remembered
by Austin, Hilary, Pulgentius, with some others, of the disputes of Pelagius,
Coelestius, Julianus, with their followers, and the Socinians of late, with
whom Mr Goodwin would not be thought to have Joined in their Opposition to the
Merit and Grace of Christ; As I said then before, if this should prove in the
issue to be the sum of the means afforded to preserve the Saints from
Apostasy and falling away into ruin, I shall be so far from opposing a
possibility of their defection, that I shall certainly conclude their
Perseverance to be impossible. Being fully persuaded that withal the
contribution of strength, which the considerations mentioned are able of
themselves to afford unto them, they are no more able to meet their Adversaries
who come against them with tweuty thousand subtilties and Temptations, then a
man with a straw and a feather, is to combat with, and overcome a royal Army;
The Scripture tells us, and we thought it had been so, that we are kept by the
power of God unto Salvation, and that to this end, he putts forth the exceeding
greatness of his power in them that Believe, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.
19. 20. Col. 1. 11.
according to the mighty Workings, which wrought in Christ when he raised him
from the Dead, whereby he strengthens them with all might according to his
Glorious Power, making them meet partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
Light; It seems, though there be a Glorious sound of words in these, and
innumerable the like Expressions of the engagement of the Power and
faithfulness of God, for the safegarding of his Saints, yet all this is but
an empty noise, and beating of the air: That which is indeed material to this
Purpose, consisting in certain Considerations, which rational men may have
concerning their present State, and future Condition: But let us a little
consider the Discourse it self.

1. First, it is all along Magnificently supposed, that there is the same Power
and Ability in a Rational Enlightened man to Deliberate and Conclude of things
in reference unto the Practical Condition of his Spiritual Estate, as there
is of his Natural, and that this Ability is constantly resident with him to
make use of upon all occasions, what ever our Savior say to the contrary viz.
That without him we can do nothing. Joh. 15. 5.

2. Secondly, (to make way for that,) that such a one is able to know, Ps. 119.
144. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
and to desire the things of his Peace in a Sprirituall and useful manner,
notwithstanding the vanity of those many seemingly fervent Prayers of the
Saints in the Scripture, that God would give them understanding in these
things, and his manifold Promises of that Grace.

3. Thirdly, that upon such deliberations men are put into a capacity and
liberty, or are enabled to work themselves to what strength or degree of
desire and inclination toward that Good considered, they please, and according
as the good is, that men apprehend, (as abiding with God is the greatest Good)
such will be the strengh and the vigor and power of their inclinations
thereto. Romans 7. ^8, 9, 10, 11, etc.
That they have a Law in their members, rebelling against the Law of their
minds, and leading them captive under the Law of sin, needs not to be taken
notice of. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
This sufficiency it seems is of themselves: He was a weak unskilful man,
who supposed that of our selves we could not think a good thought, seeing we
are such perfect Lords and Masters of all good thoughts and actings whatever.

4. Fourthly, the whole sum of this Discourse of the means afforded Believers
to enable them to Persevere, amounts to this, that being rational men, they
may, First consider that some kinds of sins will destroy them, and separate
them from God, and that by Obedience they shall come to the Greatest Good
Imaginable, where upon it is in their Power so strongly to incline their hearts
unto Obedience, that they shall be in no more danger of departing from God,
then a Wise and Rational man is of killing or wilfully destroying himself:
The first part whereof may be performed by them who are no Saints; the latter
not by any Saint whatsoever. And is not this noble Provision for the Security
and Assurance of the Saints, enough to make them cast away with speed all their
interest in the unchangeable purposes Gracious and Faithful Promises of God,
Intercession of Christ, Sealing of the Spirit, and all those Sandy and trivial
supports of their Faith, which hitherto they have rejoiced in. And what ever
experience they have, or Testimony from the Word they do recieve, of the
Darkness, and Weakness of their Minds, the stubbornness of their Wills,
with the strong inclinations that are in them to sin and falling away, what
ever be their Oppositions from above them, Ephesians. 6. 12. Heb. 12. 1. Romans 7. 17.
about them, within them, on the right Hand, and on the Left that they have to
wrestle withal; let them give up them selves to the hand of their own manlike
Considerations and weighing of things, which will secure them against all
danger or Probability of falling away; For if they be but capable (First) of
seeing and knowing, (Secondly) of pondering and considering, and that
rationally, (it matters not, whether these things are Fruits of the Spirit of
Grace or no, nay it is clear they must not be so) that such, and such evil is
to be avoided, and that there is so, and so Great a Good to be obtained by
continuing in obedience, they may raise and work inclinations in themselves
answerable in strength, vigor, and power, to any degree of goodness, which
they apprehend, in what they see and ponder.

The whole of the Ample sufficient Means,. 40.
afforded by God to the Saints to enable them to Persevere, branching it self
into these two heads, (First) The rational considering what they have to do,
(Secondly) Their vigorous Inclination of their Hearts, to act suitably and
answerable to their Considerations, I shall (in a word) consider them apart.

1. First the Considerations mentioned, of Evil to be avoided, and Good to be
attained, (I mean that which may put men upon Creating those strong
inclinations: For such considerations may be without any such Consequence as in
her that cried video meliora proboque deteriora sequor) are either Issues and
products of men's own natural faculties, and deduced out of the power of them,
so that, as men, they may put themselves upon them at any time; or they are
Fruits of the Spirit of his Grace, who works in us to will and to do of his
own good Pleasure. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4.
If they be the latter, I ask, seeing all Grace is of Promise, whether has
God promised to give and continue this Grace of selfe-consideration unto
Believers or not? If he has, whether absolutely, or conditionally? If
absolutely, then he has promised absolutely to continue some Grace in them,
which is all we desire. If Conditionally, then would I know what that Condition
is, on which God has promised that Believers shall so consider things
mentioned? And of the Condition which shall be expressed, it may farther be
enquired, whether it be any Grace of God, or only a mere Act of the Rational
Creature as such, without any immediate Inworking of the Will and Deed by God?
Whatsoever is answered, the Question will not go to Rest, until it be granted
that, either it is a Grace Absolutely promised of God, which is all we desire,
or a pure Act of the Creature contra-distinct thereunto, which Answers the
first inquiry: Let it then be granted, that the Considerations intimated are no
other, but such as a Rational man, who is enlightened to an assent to the
Truth of God, may so exert and exercise, as he pleases; then is here a
Foundation laid* of all the Ground of Perseverance that is allowed the Saints,
in their own endeavors, as men without the Assistance of any Grace of God;
Now these Considerations, be they what they will, must needs be beneath one
single good thought, (for as for that we have no sufficiency of our selves) yea
Vanity and nothing (for without Christ, we can do nothing) yea evil and
displeasing to God, 2 Cor. 3. 3. Ioh. 15. 5. Genesis 8. 21.
as are all the thoughts and imaginations of our Hearts, that are only such* I
had supposed that no man, in the least acquainted with what it is to serve God
under Temptations, and what the work of Saving Souls is, but had been
sufficiently convinced of utter the insufficiency of such Rational
Considerations, flowing only from Conviction, to be a solid Foundation of
abiding with God unto the end. If men's Houses of profession are built on such
Sands as these, we need not wonder to see them so frequently falling to the
ground.

2. Secondly,. 41.
suppose these Considerations to act their parts upon the stage raised for
them, to the Greatest Applause that can be expected or desired, yet that, which
comes next upon the Theater, will, I fear, foully miscarry, and spoil the
whole Plot of the Play: That is, men's vigorous inclination of their hearts to
the good things pondered on, to what height they please: For besides that

1. First, it is liable to the same Examinations, that passed upon it is
Associate before, or an inquiry from whence he comes, whether from Heaven or
Men? upon which I doubt not, but he may easily be discovered to be a Vagabond
upon the earth, to have no Pass from Heaven, and so be rendered liable to the
Law of God.

2. Secondly, it would be inquired, whether it has a Consistency with the
whole design of the Apostle Romans 7. and therefore,

3. Thirdly, it is utterly denied, that Men, the Best of Men, have in
themselves and of themselves, arising upon the account of any Considerations
whatsoever, a Power, Ability, or Strength, vigorously or at all acceptably to
God, to incline their Hearts to the performance of any thing that is
spiritually good, or in a Gospel tendency to walking with God; All the
Promises of God, all the Prayers of the Saints, all their Experience, the whole
design of God in laying up all our stores of Strength and Grace in Christ,
jointly cry out against it, for a counterfeit pretense. In a word, that men are
able to plant in themselves Inclinations and Dispositions to refrain all
manner of Sin destructive to the safety of their souls, fuller of Energie,
Vigor, Life, Strength, Power, then those that are in them, to avoid things
Apparently tending to the destruction of their natural lives, is an Assertion
as full of Energy, Strength, and Vigor, Life and Poison, for the destruction
and eversion of the Grace of God in Christ, as any can be invented.

To shut up this Discourse and to proceed:. 42.
If these are the solid Foundations of Peace and Consolation, which the Saints
have concerning their Perseverance, if these be the means sufficient,
abundantly sufficient afforded them, for their Preservation, that are laid in
the balance, as to the giving of an Evangelicall Genuine Assurance, with the
Decrees, and Purposes, the Covenant, Promises and Oath of God, the Blood and
Intercession of Christ, the Annoynting and Sealing of the spirit of Grace, I
suppose we need not care, how soon we enter the Lists with any, as to the
comparing of the Doctrines under contest, in reference to their Influence into
the Obedience and Consolation of the Saints, which with it is Issue, in the
close of this discourse shall God willing be put to the trial.

Now that I may lay a more clear Foundation for what does ensue,. 43.
I shall briefly deduce, not only the Doctrine it self, but also the Method,
wherein I shall handle it, from a portion of Scripture, in which the whole is
summarily comprised, and branched forth into suitable Heads, for the
Confirmation and vindication thereof. And this also is required to the main of
my design, being not so directly to Convince stout Gaine-sayers, in
vanquishing their Objections, as to Strengthen Weak Believers, in helping them
against Temptations, and therefore shall at the entrance hold out that,
whereinto their Faith must be ultimately resolved; the Authority of God in his
Word, being that Arc alone whereon it can rest the sole of its foot. Now this
is the Fourth chap. of Isaiah, of which take this short account: It is a
Chapter made up of Gracious Promises, given to the Church, in a Calamitous
season: the Season it self is described, verses 25, and 26. of the third
Chapter, and the first of this; all holding out, a distressed estate, a low
condition; it is indeed Gods Method, to make out gracious Promises to his
People, when their condition seems most deplored, to sweeten their souls with
a sense of his Love, in the multitude of the perplexing thoughts, which in
distracted times, are ready to tumultuate in them.

The Foundation of all the following promises lies in the second verse,. 44.
even the giving out of the Branch of the Lord, and the Fruit of the earth for
Beauty and Glory, to the remnant of Israel: Who it is, who is the Branch of the
Lord, the Scripture tells us in sundry places, Isaiah 11. 1. Ier. 23. 5. and
33. 15. Zach. 3. 8. The Lord Jesus Christ, the Promise of whom is the Churches
only Supportment in every trial or distress, it has to undergo; He is this
Branch and Fruit, and he is placed in the Head here, as the great Fountain
Mercy, from whence all others do flow: In those that follow, the Persons, to
whom those promises are made, and the Matter or Substance of them are
observable; the Persons have various Appellations, and descriptions in this
Chapter; They are called (First) the Escaping of Israel: v. 2. They that are
left in Sion, v. 3. Jerusalem it self, v. 4 The Dwelling places and Assemblies
of Mount Sion. v. 5. That the same individual Persons, are intended in all
these several Appellations, is not questionable; It is but in reference to the
several Acts of Gods dwelling with them, and outgoing of his Love and Goodwill
both eternal, and temporal toward them, that they come under this variety of
Names, and Descriptions. First, in respect of his Eternal Designation of them
to Life and Salvation, they are said to be written among the living, or unto
life in Jerusalem: Revel. 3. 12. 13. 8.
their names are in the Lambs book of life, from the foundation of the World,
Luke 10. 20.
and they are recorded in the purpose of God from all eternity. Secondly in
respect of their Deliverance, and actual Redemption from the bondage of death
and Satan, which for ever prevail upon the greatest number of the Sons of
Men, shadowed out by their deliverance from the Babilonish Captivity, Revel. 5.
9.
(pointed at in this place) they are said to be, a Remnant, Ephesians. 5. 25. 26.
an Escaping, such as are Left, and Remain in Jerusalem: From the perishing
Lump of Mankind, Zech. 3. 2.
God does by Christ, snatch a Remnant (whom he will preserve) like a Brand out
of the fire. John 17. 9.
Thirdly, in respect of their enjoyment of Gods Ordinances and Word, Romans 8. 38.
and his Presence with them, therein, they are called, Psalm. 48. 11, 12, 13,
14. 16. 1, 2, 3. etc.
the Daughter of Sion, and the Dwelling places thereof. There did God make
known his Mind and Will, Jerem. 50. 5.
and Walked with his People in those Beauties of Holiness; Zecl. 8. 2.
These are they to whom these promises are made: the Elect, John. 12. 17.
Redeemed and Called of God: or those who being Elected, and Redeemed, Psalm.
110. 3.
shall in their several Generations be Called, according to his Purpose, who
works all things, Isa 49. 14.
according to the Council of his own will.

For the Matter of these promises,. 45.
they may be reduced to these three Heads. First of Justification. verse. 2.
Secondly, of Sanctification v. 3, and 4. Thirdly, of Perseverance verse. 5, and
6. First, of Justification, Christ is Made to them, or Given unto them, for
Beauty and Glory: which how it is done, the Holy Ghost tells us Isaiah 61 10. I
will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God, for he
has clothed me with the Garment of salvation, he has covered me with the
Robes of Righteousness, says the Church: he puts upon poor deformed
Creatures, the Glorious Robe of his own Righteousness, to make us Comely in
his Presence, and the Presence of his Father. Zac. 13. 3, 4. Through Him, 1 Cor
1 20. 54. 17.
his being given unto us, made unto us of God Righteousness, Isa. 45. 24, 25.
becoming, the Lord our Righteousness, do we find free acceptance, as
Beautiful and Glorious in the eyes of God. Jer. 23. 6.
But this is not all: He does not only Adorn us without, Romans 5. 1. 8. 1.
but also Wash us within: the Apostle acquaints us, that, Col. 2. 10.
that was his design, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. and therefore you have (Secondly) the
promise of Sanctification added, verses 3, 4. v. 3. you have the thing it
self, they shall be called holy, Made so, called so by him, who calls things
that are not as though they were, and by that Call, gives them to be that which
he calls them; 2 Cor. 4. 6.
he said, let there be light, and there was light. And then the manner how it
becomes to be so. v. 4. first setting out the Efficient cause: Ezekiel. 11. 19.
the spirit of Judgment and Burning, Joh. 3. 5.
that is of Holiness, and Light: and (Secondly) the way of his producing this
great effect, Romans 8. 2.
washing away filth, and purging away blood: Spiritual filth and blood, Joh.
16. 9, 10, 11.
is the defilement of sin; the Scripture to set out it is abomination, Psalm.
38. 5. 7.
comparing it to the things of the greatest Abhorrency to our nature, Prove. 13.
5, 6.
even as that is to the nature of God. And this is the second promise, Isa. 1.
5, 6.
that in, and by, Isa. 64. 6.
the Branch of the Lord, is here made to them, who are written unto life in
Jerusalem. Ezekiel. 16. 4. 5. and 24. 6.
But now, least any should suppose that both these are for a season only, Hos:
8. 8.
that they are Dying privileges, Perishing mercies, Jewels that may be lost,
Zech. 13. 1.
so that, though the persons to whom those promises are made, Romans 3. 13. 2
Pet. 2. 22.
are once made Glorious and Comely, being in Christ freely accepted, yet they
may again become odious in the sight of God, and be utterly rejected, that
being once Washed, Purged, Cleansed, they should yet return to wallow in their
mire, and so become wholly defiled and abominable: In the Third place, He
gives a promise of Perseverance, in the two last verses, and that expressed
with Allusion to the Protection afforded unto the people of the Jews in the
Wilderness, by a Cloud and Pillar of fire: which as they were created, and
Instituted signs of the presence of God, so they gave assured protection,
preservation, and direction to the People in all their ways. The sum of the
whole intendment of the Holy Ghost in these two verses, seeming to be comprised
in the last words of the Fifth, and they being a suitable bottom unto the
ensuing discourse, comprising as they stand in Relation to the verses
foregoing, the whole of my aim, with the way, or method wherein it may
conveniently be delivered I shall a little insist upon them: Upon all the glory
shall be a defense.

The words are a Gospel Promise, Expressed in Law terms, or a New Testament
Mercy,. 47.
in Old Testament Clothes: the subject of it is, all the Glory, and the thing
Promised, is a defense over it, or upon it. By the Glory some take the People
themselves to be intended, who are the Glory of God, Isa. 46. 13. In whom he
will be Glorified, and who are said to be made Glorious, v. 2. But the Pillar
of fire, and the Cloud lead us an other way. As the Protection here Promised,
must Answer the Protection given by them of old; so the Glory here mentioned,
must answer that which was the Glory of that People, when they had their
Preservation and Direction from those Signs of the presence of God, in the
midst of them. It is very true the sign of Gods Presnce among them it self,
and the Protection received thereby, is sometimes called his glory, Ezekiel, 10.
10. But here it is plainly differenced from it, that being afterward called a
defense. That which most frequently was called the Glory in the Ancient
dispensation of God to his People, was the Arc: when this was taken by the
Philistims, the Wife of Phineas calls her son Johabod, and says the Glory is
departed from Israel 1 Samuel 4. 2. and 22. Which the holy Ghost mentions again
Psalm. 78. 61. And delivered his Strength into Captivity and his Glory into his
Enemies hand. The Tabernacle, or the Tent wherein it was placed is mentioned,
v. 60. He forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh the Tent which he had placed among
them. And the People to whom it was given, v. 62. He gave the People over also
to the Sword. That Arc being the Glory and Strength which went into Captivity,
when he forsook the Tabernacle, and gave his People to the Sword. That this
Arc, the Glory of Old was a Tipe of Jesus Christ (besides the end and aim of
its Institution, with its use and place of its abode) appears from the Mercy
seat or Plate of Gold that was laid upon it, which Jesus Christ is expressly
said to be Romans 3. 25, 26. compared with Heb. 10. 5. It is he who is the Glory
here mentioned, not considered absolutely and in his own Person, but as he is
made Beauty, and Glory unto his People: as he is made unto them Righteousness
and Holiness according to the tenor of the Promises insisted on before; Isa.
45. 25.
and this is indeed, all the Glory of the Elect of God, even the presence of
Christ with them, as their Justification, and Sanctification, their
Righteousness and Holiness.

The matter of the Promise made in reference to his Glory and them upon whom it
does abide,. 48.
Is, that they shall be a defense upon it: the word Translated here a defense
comes from a root, that is but once read in Scripture. Deuteronomy. 33. 12. Where it
is rendered to cover: The Lord shall cover him all the day long. So it properly
signifyes. From a Covering, to a Protection, or a defense, is an easy Metaphor,
a covering being given for that end and purpose. And this is the native
signification of the word Protego, Psalm. 17. 8. 36. 7. 57. 1. 63. 7. 121. 5.
to defend by covering, as Abimelek called Abraham the covering of Sarahs eyes,
or a protection to her Genesis 20. 16. The Allusion also of a Shade, which in
Scripture is so often taken for a defense, Isa. 30. 2. 49. 2.
arises from hence. This word it self is used twice more, and in both places
signifye a Bridechamber, Ezekiel. 31. 6. etc.
Psalm. 19. 6. Joell 2. 16. From the peace, covert, and protection of such a
place. The name of the Mercy seat is also of the same root with this. In this
place it is by common consent rendered, a defense or protection, being so used,
either by Allusion to that refreshment, that the Lord Christ the great
Bridegroom gives to his Bride in his Banqueting House, Cant. 2. 4.
or rather in pursuit of the former similitude of the Cloud, that was over the
Tabernacle, and the Arc, which represented the Glory of that People. Thus this
defense or covering is said to be upon, or above the Glory, as the Cloud was
over the Tabernacle, and as the Mercy seat lay upon the Arc. Add only thus
much to what has been spoken (which is also affirmed in the beginning of the
verse) viz. That this defense is created, or is an immediate product of the
mighty Power of God, not requiring unto it the least concurrence of Creature
Power, and the whole will manifest the intendment of the Lord everlastingly to
safegarde the Spiritual Gloryes of his Saints in Christ.

As there was before shown,. 49.
there are two parts of our Spiritual Glory: the one purely Extrinsecall, to
wit, the Love and Favor of God unto us, his free and Gracious Acceptance of
us in Christ; on this part of our Glory, there is this defense Created, it
shall abide for ever it shall never be removed. His own Glory and Excellencies
are engaged for the preservation of this excellency and glory of his People.
This Sun, though it may be for a while eclipsed, yet shall never set, nor
give place to an evening, that shall make long the shade thereof: whom God once
freely accepts in Christ, he will never turn away his Love from them, nor cast
them Utterly out of his Favor. The other is within us, and that is our
Sanctification: our Portion from God by the Spirit of Holiness, and the fruits
thereof, in our Faith, Love, and Obedience unto him; And on this part of our
Glory, there is this Defense, that this Spirit shall never Utterly be dislodged
from that Soul, wherein he makes his residence, nor resign his habitation to
the Spirit of the World, that his fruit shall never so decay, as that the
Fruits of Sodom, and the Grapes of Gomorra should grow in their room, nor
they, wherein they are Everlastingly, Utterly and wickedly grow barren, in
departing from the Living God; these two make up that Perseverance, whereof we
speak: Whom God accepts in Christ, he will continue to do so for ever: whom
he quickens to walk with him, they shall do it to the end. And these three
things, Acceptance with God, Holiness from God, and a Defense upon them both,
unto the end; all Free* and in Christ, are that threefold cord of the Covenant
of Grace, which cannot be broken.

In the handling then of the Doctrine proposed unto consideration, 50.
I shall (the Lord assisting) show, First, that the Love and Favor of God, as
to the free Acceptance of Believers with him in Christ, is constant, abiding,
and shall never be turned away; handling at largethe Principles, both of its
being and manifestation. Secondly, that the Spirit and grace of Sanctification,
which they freely receive from him, shall never utterly be extinguished in
them, but so remain, as that they shall abide with him for ever: the
Sophistical separation of which two parts of our Doctrine, is the greatest
advantage our Adversaries have against the whole. And demonstrate Thirdly, the
Real, and Causall influences, which this Truth has, into the Obedience and
Consolation of the Saints, considered both absolutely, and compared with the
Doctrine, which is set up in competition with it: In the pursuit of which
particulars, I shall endeavor to Enforce and press those places of Scripture,
wherein they are abundantly delivered, and vindicate them from all the
Exceptions put in to our inferences from them by M. Goodwin in his Redemption
Redeemed; as also Answer all the Arguments, which he has with much labor and
industry, collected and improved, in opposition to the Truth in hand: Take then
only these few Previous observations, and I shall insist fully upon the proof
and Demonstration of the first Position, concerning the Unchangeableness of
the Love of God toward his, to whom he gives Jesus Christ, for Beauty and
Glory, and freely accepts them in him.

First,. 51.
as to their Inherent Holiness, the Question is not concerning Acts, either as
to their vigor, Revel. 2. 5. 3. 2.
which may be abated, or as to their frequency, which may be interrupted, Isa.
57. 17.
but only as to the Spirit and Habit of it which shall never depart: Hos. 14. 4.
We do not say they cannot sin, fall into many sins, great sins, which
the Scripture plainly affirms of all the Saints, Isa. 59. 21.
that went before: and who of them living does not this day labor under the
Truth of it? Ioh. 14. 16.
But through the Presence of God with them, 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
upon such Grounds and Principles, as shall afterward be insisted on, 1 Ioh.
1. 8.
they cannot, shall not, sin away the Spirit and Habit of Grace, Iam. 3. 2.
(which without a miracle cannot be done away by any one Act, 1 King. 8. 38.
and God will not work Miracles for the destruction of his Children,) so as to
fall into that state, Isa. 64. 5, 6.
wherein they were, before they were Regenerate, and of the Children of God,
become Children of the Devil, tasting of the second Death, Rev. 20. 6.
after they have been made Partakers of the first Resurrection.

Secondly, the Question is not about the decay of any Grace, but the loss of
all; not about sickness and weaknesses, but about death it self; which alone
we say, they shall be preserved from. Neither do we say, that Believers are
endowed with any such rich and plentiful Stock of Grace, Psalm. 23. 6.
as that they may spend upon it without new supplies all their days, Isa. 35.
1, 2. etc.
but grant that they stand in continual need of the renewed communication of
that Grace, Ioh. 15. 3, 4, 5, 6. 7.
which has its abode and residence in their Souls, Romans 11. 18.
and of that actual Assistance, whereby any thing that is truly and
Spiritually good, Ioh. 1. 16.
is wrought in them. Thirdly, whereas there is a twofold Impossibility. Col. 2.
19.
(First) that which is absolutely and simply so in its own nature: Luke 17. 5.
And (Secondly) that which is so only upon some suposition, Phil. 2. 13.
we say the total falling away of the Saints is imppossible only in this
latter sense. The unchangeable Decree and Purpose of God, his faithful
Promises, and Oaths, the Mediation of the Lord Jesus being in the Assertion
supposed: And Fourthly, whereas we affirm, they shall assuredly continue unto
the end, the Certainty and Assurance intimated, is not mentis but entis, Isa.
49. 14, 15, 16.
not subjective, but objective, not always in the person persevering, but
always relating to the thing it self. Isa. 5. 17.
Fifthly, that the three things, formerly mentioned, Cantt 5. 2, 6.
Acceptance with God, Psalm. 73. 26.
Holiness from God, and the Defense upon them both unto the end, are that
threefold cord of the Covenant, which cannot be broken. This will appear, by
compareing those two eminent places together, which afterward must more fully
be insisted on; Jerem. 31. 34, 35. Cap. 32. 38, 39, 40. In general God
undertakes to be their God and that they shall be his People, Cap. 31. 31. Cap.
32. 38. And this he manifests in three things. First, that he will Accept them
freely, give them to find great Favor before him, in the forgiveness of
their sins, for which alone he has any quarrel with them. I will (says he)
forgive their iniquities and remember their sins no more, cap: 31. 34. As
it is again repeated, Heb. 8. 12. Secondly, that they shall have sanctification
and Holiness from him, I will put my Law in their inward parts and write it in
their Hearts, cap. 31. 33. I will put my fear in their Hearts, v: 40. with
Ezekiel. 66. 67. calls the putting his Spirit in them, who is the Author of that
Grace and Holiness which he does bestow: Thirdly that in both these, there
shall be a continuance for ever, cap: 32. 40. I will not turn away from them
to do them good, and I will put my fear in their Hearts and they shall not
depart from me; Or as v: 39: They shall fear me for ever; which distinguishes
this Covenant from the former, made with their Fathers, in that that was
broken, which this shall never be. Cap: 21: 32: This is the Crowning Mercy,
that renders both the other glorious: As to Acceptance he will not depart from
us: as to Sanctification we shall not depart from him.

CAP. II.
1. The Theses proposed for confirmation. 2. The fivefold foundation of the
Truth thereof. 3. Of the Unchangeablenesse of the Nature of God: and the
influence thereof into the confirmation of the Truth in hand. Mal. 3. 6.
considered, explained. 4. lames 1. 16, 17, 18. opened. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Romans
11. 29. Explained and vindicated. The conditions on which Grace is asserted to
be bestowed and continued, discussed. The vanity of them evinced in sundry
instances. Of Vocation, Justification, and Sanctification. 11. Isa. 40. 27, 28,
29, 30. opened and improved to the end aimed at. 12. Also Isa. 4. 43. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 13. The sum of the first Argument, 14. Mal. 3. 6. with the
whole Argument from the immutability of God at large vindicated. 15, 16.
Falsely proposed by Mr G. set right and reinforced. 17. Exceptions removed;
Sophistical comparisons exploded: distinct dispensations, according to
distinction of a People. 19. Alteration and Change properly and directly
assigned to God, by Mr G. 20. The Theme in Question begged by him. 21. Legal
approbation of duties, and conditional Acceptance of Persons confounded. As
also Gods command and purpose. 22. The Unchangeablenesse of Gods Decrees
granted to be intended in Mal. 3. 6. The Decree directly in that place
intended. 23. The Decree of sending Christ not immutable upon M. G. Principles:
The close of the vindication of this First Argument.

THE Certain Infallible continuance of the Love and Favor of God unto the
end,. 1.
toward his, those whom he has once freely accepted in Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding the interposition of any such supposalls, as may truly be made,
having foundation in the things themselves, being the first thing proposed,
comes now to be demonstrated.

Now the foundation of this the Scripture lays upon Five unchangeable things,.
2.
which eminently have an influence into the Truth thereof. (First) of the
Nature: (Secondly) Purposes: (Thirdly) the Covenant: (Fourthly) the Promises:
(Fifthly) the Oath of God. Every one whereof being engaged herein, the Lord
makes use of to manifest the Unchangeableness of his Love toward those, whom
he has once graciously accepted in Christ.

First he has laid the shoulders of the Unchangeableness of his own nature
to this work:. 3.
Malac. 3. 6. I am the Lord, and I change not: therefore ye Sons of Jacob,
Romans 9. 6. 11. 4, 5, 6.
are not consumed. These Sons of Jacob are the Sons of the Faith of Jacob,
the Israel of God, not all the seed of Jacob according to the flesh: the Holy
Ghost in this Prophesy makes an eminent distinction between these two. Cap. 3.
16. Cap. 4. 1, 2. The beginning of this Chapter contains a most evident and
clear prediction and Prophesye of the bringing in of the Kingdom of Christ,
Mat. 3. 12.
in the Gospel, wherein he was to purge his floor, and throw out the Chafe
to be burnt: This his appearance makes great work in the Visible Church of the
Jews, Isa. 49. 3, 4, 5, 6.
very many of those who looked and waited for that coming of his, Luke 2. 34.
are cut off, and cast out, as persons that have neither Lot nor Portion in the
Mercy wherewith it is attended. Romans 9. 30, 31.
Though they said within themselves, that they had Abraham to their Father, and
were the Children and Posterity of Jacob: Yea v. 5. To them who are only the
carnal seed and do also walk in the ways of the flesh, he threatens a sore
Revenge, and swift destruction, when others shall be invested with all the
eminent Mercies, which the Lord Christ brings along with him, least the true
Sons of Jacob should be terrifyed with the dread of the approaching Day, and
say, as David did, Isa. 54. 4, 5, 61
when the Lord made a breach upon Vzzah, who can stand before so holy a God?
Shall not we also in the issue be consumed? He discovers to them the
Foundation of their preservation to the end, even the Unchangeableness of his
own nature and being, whereunto his Love to them is conformed: Plainly
intimating, that unless himself and his everlasting Deity be subject and
liable to Alteration and Change (which once to imagine, were, what lies in us,
to cast him down from his Excellency,) it could not be, that they should be
cast of forever, and consumed. These are the Tribes of Jacob and the Preserved
of Israel, which Jesus Christ was sent to raise up, Isaiah 50. 6. The House of
Jacob, which he takes from the womb, and carries unto old Age, unto hoary
hairs, and forsakes not Isaiah 46. 3, 4.

This is confirmed,. 4.
James 1. 16, 17, 18. Do not err my beloved Brethren, every Good Gift and
every perfect gift comes down from the Father of Lights; with whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning: Of his own will begat he us with the
word of truth; He begets us of his own will by the word of truth: For
whatsoever men do pretend, we are borne again, not of blood nor of the will
of the flesh, nor the will of man, but the will of God, John 1. 13. Now herin
says the Apostle, we do receive from him good and perfect Gifts: Gifts
distinguished from the common endowments of others: Yea but they are failing
ones perhaps? Such as may slourish for a season, and be but Children of a
night, like Jonas Gourde. Though God has begotten us of his own will, and
bestowed good and perfect Gifts upon us, yet he may cast us off for ever. Do
not err my beloved Brethren, says the Apostle, these things come from the
Father of Lights: God himself is the Fountain of all Lights of Grace, which
we have received; and with him, there is no Variableness nor shadow of
Turning, not the least appearance of any change or Alteration. And if the
Apostle did not in this place Argue from the Immutability of the Divine Nature,
to the Unchangeablenesse of his Love, toward those, whom he has begotten, and
bestowed such Light and Grace upon, there were no just Reason of mentioning
that Attribute and Property there.

Hence Romans 11. 29. The gifts and calling of God are said to be without
Repentance: 5.
the gifts of his effectual calling ((...)) shall never be repented of: They
are from him, with whom there is no change.

The words are added by the Apostle, to give Assurance of the certain
Accomplishment of the Purpose of God toward the Remnant of the Jews,
according to the Election of Grace. What the principle mercies were, that were
in Gods intendment to them, and whereof by their effectual calling they shall
be made partakers, he tells us v. 26, 27. The Deliverer or Redeemer, which
comes out of Sion, shall, according to the Covenant of Grace, turn them from
ungodliness, the Lord taking away their sin. Sanctification and
Justification by Christ, the two maine Branches of the New Covenant: ( Ierem.
31. 42. Ierem. 32. Ezekiel: 36. Heb: 8. 13, 14. chap: 10. 17, 18.) do make up the
Mercy purposed for them. The certainty of the Collation of this Mercy upon
them, notwithstanding the interposition of any present obstruction (amongst
which their Enmity to the Gospel was most eminent, and lay ready to be
objected) the Apostle argues from the Unchangeablenesse of the Love of
Election, wherewith the Lord embraced them from Eternity; as touching the
Election they are beloved: and farther to manifest on that account, the
fulfilling, of what he is in the proof and Demonstration of, viz. that though
the major part of Israel according to the flesh, were rejected, yet the
Election should obtain, and all Israel be saved, he tells them, that that
calling of God, whereby he will make out to them those Eternally designed
mercies, shall not be repented of eminently in that Assertion, distinguishing
the grace whereof he speaks, from all such common gifts, and such outward
dispensations as might be subject to a removal from them on whom they are
bestowed: and if upon any supposition or consideration imaginable, the Mercies
mentioned may be taken away, the Assertion comes very short of the proof of
that, for which it is produced.

Against this plain expression of the Apostle,. 6.
that the gifts and calling of God, are without repentance: Mr Goodwin puts in
sundry Exceptions to weaken the Testimony it bears in this case, Cap: 8. Sect:
86. which because they have been already sufficiently evinced of Weakness,
Falsehood, and Impertinency, by his Learned Antagonist, I shall only take up
that which he mainly insists upon, and farther manifest its utter uselessenesse
for the end for which it is produced Thus then he pleads: The Gifts and Calling
of God, may be said to be without repentance, because let men continue the same
persons which they were, when the Donation or Collation of any gift was first
made by God unto them, he never changes or alters his Dispensations toward
them, unless it be for the better, or in order to their farther good, in which
case he cannot be said to repent of what he had given: but in case men shall
change, and alter from what they were when God first dealt graciously with
them, especially if they shall notoriously degenerate or cast away the
Principles, or divest themselves of that very qualification on which as it were
God grafted his benefit or gift; in this case though he recall his gift, he
cannot be said to repent of his giving it, because the terms on which he gave
it please him still, only the Persons to whom he gave it, and who pleased him
when he gave it them, have now rendered themselves unpleasing to him.

Two things are here Asserted: 1.. 7.
That if men continue the same, or in the same state and condition wherein they
were, when God bestowed his gifts and graces upon them, then God never changes
nor alters; his dispensations toward them abide the same. 2. That there are
certain Qualifications in men, upon which God grafts his grace, which whilst
they abide, his gifts and graces abide upon them also, and therefore are said
to be without repentance; but if they are lost, God recalls his gifts, and that
without any chang^ Let us a little consider both these Assertions: and First,
it being evident, that it is Spiritual grace, and Mercy, of which the Apostle
speaks, as was manifested, (for they are such as flow from the Covenant of the
Redeemer v. 26, 27.) Sanctification and Justification being particularly
mentioned, let us consider what is the condition of men when God Invests them
with these Mercies, that we may be able to instruct them how to abide in that
condition, and so make good the possession of the Grace and Mercy bestowed on
them: and to keep close to the Text, let our Instance be in the three eminent
mercies of the Gospel intimated in that place: 1. Vocation, 2. Sanctification,
3. Justification.

The Gift and Grace of Vocation, is confessedly here intended, being expressly
mentioned in the words (...), that Calling which is an effect of the Covenant
of Grace. v. 28. consider we then what is the state of Men, when God first
calls them, and gives them this gift and Favor, that if it seem so good, we
may exhort them to a continuance therein.

Now this Sat with the Qualifications of it, Isa. 65. 1.
is a State, 1. of Death, Ioh. 5. 25. The Dead hear the voice of the Son of
God. Romans 9. 25.
Christ speaks to them who are dead, Hos. 2. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 10.
and so they Live. 2. Of Darkness, Acts 25. 26. God calls them out of
Darkness into his marvelous light, Ephesians. 2. 12.
1 Pet. 29. a State of Ignorance and Alienation from God, Ephesians: 4. 18. The
grace of Vocation or effectual calling, finding men in a state of Enmity to
God, and Alienation from him, if they may be prevailed withal, to continue
such still, this gift shall never be recalled, nor repented of.

But perhaps the Gift and Grace of Sanctification finds men in a better
condition, in a state,. 8.
wherein if they abide, them that also shall abide with them for ever. The
Scripture abounds in the description of this state, that we shall not need to
haesitate about it: Ephesians: 2. 1, 2. you has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins: Quickening and renewing Grace is given to persons dead in
sins: and is so far from depending, as to its Unchangeablenesse, upon their
Continuance in the State, wherein it finds them, that it consists in a real
change, and translation of them from that State or Condition. The Apostle sets
out this at large, Titus 3. 3, 4, 5. we our selves were sometimes foolish etc.
the State of men, when God bestows their Gifts upon them, is positively
expressed in sundry particulars, v: 3. the Qualifications on which this Gift or
Grace is grafted (of which M: Goodwin speaks afterward) negatively v: 5. it is
not of any work that we have done, which is unquestionably exclusive of all
those stocks of Qualifications, which are intimated, whereon the Gifts and
Graces of God should be grafted. The gift it self here bestowed, is the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, saveing us through
mercy from the state and Condition before described. In brief that the
Condition wherein this Grace of God finds the Sons of Men, is a state of Mat.
8. 27. Romans 6. 13. Col. 2. 13.
Death, Ezekiel. 17. 6. Isa. 4. 4. Job. 14. 4. Joh. 3. 6.
Blood, Joh. 1. ^. Ephesians. 5. 8. Col. 1. 13. Luke 4. 18.
Darkness, Romans 8. l 6, 7, 8. Romans 5. 10. Col. 1. 21. Gal. 3. 13. Joh. 3. 35.
Bindnesse, Enmity, curse, and Wrath, Disobedience, Rebellion, Impotency, and
Universal Alienation from God, is beyond all contradiction (by Testimonies
plentifully given out here a little, and there a little, line upon line)
manifest in the Scripture. Shall we now say, that this Grace of God is bestowed
on men upon the account of these Qualifications, and continued without
revocation on condition that they abide in the same State, with the same
Qualifications? Let then men continue in sin, that grace may abound.

Is the case any other as to Justification? does not God justify the ungodly?
To. 4. 5. are we not in filthy Robes, when he comes to cloth us with Robes of
Righteousness? Zech: 3. 3. are we not reconciled to God, when alienated by
wicked works? Col: 1. 13. these are the Qualifications on which it seems God,
grafts his Gifts and Graces: and whose abode in the Persons, in whom they are,
is the condition, whereon the irrevocablenesse of those Gifts and Graces does
depend: Who would have thought, they had been of such reckoning and esteem
with the Lord?

And this, considering what is learnedly discoursed elsewhere may suffice, as
to the other Assertion; 1 Cor. 4. 7.
that God gives his Gifts and Graces to Qualifications, not to Persons. Those
Qualifications are either Gifts of God, or not: if not, who made those men, in
whom they are, differ from others? if they are, on what Qualifications, were
those Qualifications bestowed? That God freely bestows on Persons, of his own
good pleasure, not Grafting on Qualifications, his Gifts and Graces, we have
Testimonies abundantly sufficient to out-ballance M. Goodwins Assertions. Rom:
9. 18. He has Mercy, on whom he will have Mercy: he bestows his Mercy and the
fruits of it, not on this or that Qualification, but on whom or what Person he
will, and to them it is given, says our Savior, to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of God, but to others it is not given. I see no stock that his gift is
grafted on, but only the Persons of Gods good will, whom he graciously designs
to a Participation of it.

Truth is,. 9.
I know not any thing more directly contradictory to the whole Discovery of the
work of Gods Grace in the Gospel, then that which is couched in these
Assertions of M. Goodwin, neither is it any thing less, or more, then that
which of old was phrased, The Giving of Grace according to merit, ascribing the
primitive discriminating of persons as to Spiritual Grace, unto self
endeavors, casting to the ground the free distinguishing good pleasure of God,
and that Graciousnesse of every Gift of his, (I speak as to the first issue of
his love in quickening, renewing, pardoning Grace) which eminently consists in
this, that he is found of them that seek him not, and has Mercy on whom he
will, because so it seemed good to him.

Not to digress farther (in the discovery of the unsatisfactorinesse of this
pretense) from the pursuit of the Argument in hand; Because Gods gifts are not
repented of, therefore do men continue, not in the condition wherein they find
them, but wherein they place them: And all Qualifications in men whatever, that
are in the least acceptable to God, are so far from being stocks whereon God
grafts his Gifts and Graces, that they are Plants themselves, which he plants
in whomsoever he pleases.

Yea the Tree is made good before it bear any good fruit, and the Branch
implanted into the True Olive, before it receive the sap, or juice, of any one
good Qualification. The sum of Mr Goodwins Answer amounts to this; let men be
steadfast in a good condition, and Gods Gifts shall steadfastly abide with them,
if they change, they also shall be revoked: which is directly opposite to the
plain intendment of the place, viz. That the steadfastness of men, depends upon
the irrevocablenesse of Gods Grace, and not e contra: there is not, in his
sense, the least intimation in these words, of the permanency of any Gift or
Grace of God with any one, on whom it is bestowed, for a Day, an Hour, or a
Moment; but notwithstanding this Testimony of the Holy Ghost, they may be given
one hour, and taken away the next, they may flourish in a man in the morning,
and in the evening be cut down, dried up, and withered: this is not to Answer
the Arguings of men, but positively to deny what God affirms. To conclude, God
gives not his gifts to men (I mean those mentioned) because they please him,
Jerem. 31. 32.
but because it pleases him so to do: he does not take them away, because
they displease him, but gives them so to abide with them, that they shall never
displease him, to the height of such a provocation. Neither are the Gifts of
God otherwise to be repented of, then by taking them from the Persons, on whom
they are bestowed: But this heap being removed, we may proceed.

Farthermore then,. 10.
in sundry places does the Lord propose this for the Consolation of his, and to
assure them, that there shall never be an everlasting separation between him
and them; which shall be further cleared by particular instances; Things or
Truths proposed for Consolation, are of all others most clearly exalted above
exception: without which, they were no way suitable (considering the promptness
of our unbelieving hearts to rise up against the work of Gods Grace and Mercy)
to compass the end for which they are proposed.

Isaiah.. 11.
40. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak O Israel, my
way is hid from the Lord and my Judgment is passed over from my God? have thou
not known, have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the
Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, neither is weary? there is no
searching of his Understanding. He gives power to the faint, and to them that
have no might, he increases strength. Even the youths shall faint and be
weary, and the young men shall utterly fail, but they that wait upon the Lord,
shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as as Eagles, they
shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint. v. 27. Jacob and
Israel make a double complaint, both parts of it manifesting some fear, or
dread of Separation from God: for though in General it could not be so, yet in
particular, Believers under Temptation, may question their own condition, with
their right unto, and interest in all the things, whereby their state and Glory
is safegarded. My way (say they) is hid from the Lord: The Lord takes no more
notice, sets his heart no more upon my way, my walking, but lets me go and
pass on as a stranger to him: And farther, My judgment is passed over from my
God: Mine enemies prevail, perhaps Lusts, and Corruptions are strong, and God
does not appear in my behalf: Judgment is not executed on them, and what will
be the issue of this my sad estate? What the Lord proposes and holds out
unto them for their Establishment in this condition, and to assure them that
what they feared should not come upon them, he ushers in by an effectual
expostulation, v. 27. Have thou not heard? Have not thou been taught it by the
Saints that went before thee? Have thou not known? Have thou not found it true
by experience? What it is he would have them take notice of, and which he so
Pathetically insinuates into their understandings and affections, for their
establishment, is an Exurgency of that Description of himself, which he gives
v. 28. (1.) From his Eternity, he is the Everlasting God: (2.) From his Power,
he is the Creator of the ends of the Earth: (3.) From Unchangeableness, he
faints not, he waxes not weary, and therefore there is no reason, he should
relinquish or give over any design that he has undertaken; especially
considering that he lays all his purposes in that, whereby he describes
himself in the last place, even his Wisdom, there is no end of his
Understanding. He establishes (I say) their Faith upon this fourefold
description of himself, or Revelation of these four Attributes of his Nature,
as engaged for the effecting of that, which he incourageth the^ to expect. Who
is it o Jacob, with whom thou have to do, that thou should fear or
complain that thou art rejected? He is Eternal, Almighty, Unchangeable,
Infinitely Wise, and if he be engaged in any way of doing thee good, who can
turn him aside, that he should not accomplish all his pleasure toward thee?
He will work, who shall let him? It must be either want of Wisdom, and fore
sight to lay a design, or want of Power to execute it, that exposes any one
to variableness in any undertaking. Therefore that they may see how unlikely,
how impossible a thing it is, that their ways should be hid from the Lord, and
their judgment passed over from their God, he accquaints them, who and what he
is, who has undertaken to the contrary; but alas! They are poor faint
Creatures, they have no might, no strength to walk with God; Unstable as
water, they cannot excel: It is impossible they should hold out in the way
wherein they are engaged, unto the end. To obviate or remove such fears, and
misgiving thoughts, he lets them know, v. 29. That though they have, or may
have many decays (for they often faint they often fail, whereof we have
Examples and Complaints in the Scripture, made lively by our own experience)
yet from him they shall have supplies, to preserve them from that which they
fear: He is Eternal, Almighty, Unchangeable and infinitely Wise, he will give
out Power, and increase Strength, when they Faint and (in themselves) have no
might at all; The Lord does not propose himself under all these
considerations, to let them know what he is in himself, only, but also that he
will expert and act sutably to these Properties, in dealing with them, and
making out supplies unto them, notwithstanding all their misgiving thoughts,
which arise from the consideration of their own faintings and total want of
might; Though in themselves they are weak and faint, yet their springs are in
him, and their supplies from him, who is such as he has here described
himself to be. Hereupon also he anticipates an Objection, by way of
Concession, v. 30. Even the youth shall faint and be weary, and the young men
shall utterly fail. Men that seem to have a great stock of strength and
Ability, may yet fail and perish utterly: An objection which, as I formerly
observed, these days have given great force unto: We see many, who seem to
have the vigor of youth, and the strength of young men, in the ways of God,
that have fainted in their course, and utterly failed; they began to run
well, but lay down almost at the entrance; and be it so, says the Lord, it
shall so come to pass indeed: many that go out in their own strength, shall
so fall and come to nothing: But what is that to thee, O Jacob, my chosen, thou
that waitest upon the Lord? v. 31. The unchangeable God will so make out
strength to thee, that thou shall never utterly faint, nor give over, but abide
flying, running, walking, with speed, strength, and steadfastness, unto the
end. That expression, they that wayt upon the Lord, is a Description of the
Persons, to whom the Promise is made, and not a condition of the Promise it
self. It is not, if they wait upon the Lord, but, they that wait on the
Lord: if it were a Condition of this Promise, there were nothing promised; it
is only said, if they wait on the Lord, they shall wait on the Lord: But of
the vanity of such conditionalls I shall speak afterward.

A Scripture of the like importance you have Isaiah 44.. 12.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. verses, Yet now hear O Jacob my servant, and Israel,
whom I have chosen: thus says the Lord, that made thee, and framed thee from
the womb, which will help thee; fear not O Jacob my servant, Iessurun whom I
have chosen, for I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and stoods upon
the dry ground, and I will put my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon
their offspring, and they shall spring up as among the grass, as Willowes by
the water courses: One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall call
himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto
the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel, thus says the Lord, the
King of Israel, and his redeemer, the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am
the last, besides me there is no God, etc. I shall not need to insist long on
the opening of these words: the general design of them, is to give
Consolation and Assurance unto Israel, from the Eternity, Unchangeableness,
and Absoluteness of God: with some peculiar references, to the Second Person,
the Redeemer, who is described, ( Rev. 1. 8.) with the titles, for the
substance of them, whereby the Lord here holds out his own Excellency. I shall
only observe some few things from the words, for the Illustration of the Truth,
we have in hand, contained in them. The State and Condition wherein Jacob,
Israel, Iessurun, (several titles upon several accounts given to Believers)
are described to be, is two fold; First, of Fear and Disconsolation, as it is
intimated in the redoubled Prohibition of that frame in them: v. 2. fear not,
and v. 8. fear ye not, neither be afraid: some temptation of farther distance
or separation from God, (the only thing to be feared) was fallen upon them.
This they are frequently exercised withal; it is the greatest, and most
pressing temptation, whereunto they are liable and exposed; To conclude because
some Believers, in Hypothes^, may, under temptation, fear their own separation
from God, therefore Believers in Thesi, may be forsaken, yea that unless this
be true, the other could not befall them, may pass for the Arguing of men, who
are unacquainted with that variety of Temptations, spiritual motions, and
commotions, which Believers are exercised withal. This I say is the First part
of that State, wherein they are supposed to be: a Condition of the greatest
difficulty in the World, for the receiving of Satisfaction; Secondly, of
Barrenness, Unprofitableness, and withering, which seems and that justly, to
be the cause of their fear: v. 3. They are as the thirsty and dry ground,
parched in it self, fruitless to its owners, withering in their own Souls,
and bringing forth no fruit to God. A sad condition on both hands; within they
find decays, they find no active principles of bringing forth fruit unto God:
and without desertion, fears at least, that they are forsaken; upon this ye
have the foundation that the Lord lays for the refreshment of their spirits in
this condition, and reducing of them into an established Assurance of the
continuance of his love; and that is his free gracious Election, and choosing
of them; thou art Jacob whom I have chosen. (verse: 1. Iesurun whom I have
chosen: even from Eternity, when he appointed the ancient people, and the
things that are coming and shall come, v. 7. When he purposed mercy for the
Fathers of old, whom long since he had brought upon that account unto himself:
This is the foundation of doing them good, which stands sure, as the Apostle
makes use of it to the same purpose: 2 Timothy: 2. 19. This Foundation being laid
v. 3. he gives them a twofold promise, suited to the double state wherein they
were: (First) for the removal of their drought and barrenness: he will give
them waters, and floods, for the taking of it away: which in the following
words, he interprets of the Spirit, as likewise does the Apostle John 7. 39.
He is the great Soul Refresher, in him are all our springs. Says the Lord
then, fear not you Poor thirsty Souls, you shall have him as a Flood, in
great abundance until all his Fruits be brought forth in you. ( Secondly) For
the removal of the other evil, or Fears of desertion and casting off, Genesis
17. 7.
he minds them of his Covenant, or the blessing of their offspring, of them
and their seed, according to his promise, when he undertook to be their God;
and then ( Fourthly,) there is a two fold Issue of Gods thus dealing with them.
First, Of real Fruitfulness, v. 4. They shall be as grass under perpetual
showers, which cannot possibly wither and decay, or dry away, and as trees
planted by the rivers of water, Psalm. 1. 3, 4.
that bring forth fruit in their season, whose leaf does not wither. Secondly,
Of Zealous Profession, and owning of God, with the engagement of their hearts
and hands unto him, which you have in v. 5. Every one for himself shall give
up himself to the Lord, in the most solemn engagement, and professed
subjection that is possible; They shall say, and subscribe, and Surname
themselves, by names and terms of Faith and obedience, to follow the Lord in
the Faith of Jacob or Israel in the inheritance of the promises which were
made to him. But now what Assurance is there, that this happy beginning shall
be carried on to perfection, that this kindness of God to them, shall abide to
the End, and that there shall not be a separation between him and his chosen
Israel. In the Faith hereof the Lord confirms them, by that Revelation which
he makes of himself and his Properties, verses 6, 7, 8. First, In his
Sovereignty, he is the King. What shall obstruct him, has not he power to
dispose of all things? He is the Lord and King, he will work, and who shall let
him? But has he kindness and tenderness to carry him out hereunto? therefore
2ly, He is their Redeemer: and do but consider, what he does for the glory of
that Title, and what the Work of Redemption stood him in, and ye will not
fear, as to this, not be afraid; And all this he (Thirdly) Closes with his
Eternity, and Unchangeableness, he is the First and the Last, and besides him
there is none other: the First that chose them from Eternity, and the Last that
will preserve them to the End; and still the same, he alters not. I shall not
add more instances in this kind, that the Lord often establishes, his Saints
in the Assurance of the Unchangeablenesse of his Love toward them, from the
Immutability of his own nature, is very evident; Thence comparing himself and
his Love with a tender Mother, and her love, he affirms, that hers may be
altered, but his shall admit of no variableness nor shadow of turning, Isai:
49. v. 14. 15, 16.

To wind up this Discourse,. 13.
the sum of this first part, of our first Scripturall demonstration of the
Truth under Debate, amounts to this Argument; That which God affirms, shall be
certainly and infallibly fulfilled upon the account of the Immutability of his
own nature, and incourageth men to expect it, as certainly to be fulfilled, as
he is Unchangeable; that shall infallibly notwithstanding all oppositions and
difficulties, be wrought and perfected; now that such, and so surely bottomed,
is the Continuance of the Love of God unto his Saints, and so would he have
them to expect etc. has been proved by an induction of many particular
instances, wherein those engagements from the Immutability of God, are fully
expressed.

One of these Testimonies,. 14.
even that mentioned in the first place: Mal. 3. 6. from whence this Argument
does arise, is proposed to be considered, and answered by Mr Goodwin, Cap. 10.
Sect. 40, 41. Page 205, 206, 207. A brief removal of his Exceptions to our
inference from hence, will leave the whole to its native vigor, and the truth
therein contained to its own stedfastnes in the hand and power of that
Demonstration. Thus then he proposes that place of the Prophet, and our
Argument from thence, whereunto he shapes his Answer: For the words of Mal: I
am the Lord, I change not; from which it is wont to be argued, that when God
once Loves a person, he never cease to love him, because this must needs
argue a changeableness in him, in respect of his Affection: and consequently
the Saints cannot fall away sinally from his Grace, (so he.) --

It is an easy thing so to frame the Argument of an Adversary, Ans.
as to contribute more to the weakening of it, in its proposeing then in the
Answer afterward given there unto; and that it is no strange thing with Mr
Goodwin, to make use of this Advantage in his Disputations in this Book, is
discerned, and complained of by all not engaged in the same contest with
himself; that he has dealt noe otherwise with us in the place under
Consideration, the ensuing Observations will clearly manifest.

(First) all the strength,. 15.
that Mr Goodwin will allow to this Argument, arises from a naked
consideration of the Immutability of God, as it is an essential Property of his
nature: when our Arguing is from his engagement to us, by, and on the account
of that Property; that God will do such and such a thing, because he is
Omnipotent, though he shall not at all manifest any purpose of his will to lay
forth his Omnipotency, for the accomplishment of it, is an inference, all whose
strength is vain presumption But when God has engaged himself for the
Performance of any thing, thence to conclude to the certain accomplishment of
it, from his power, whereby he is able to do it, is a deduction, that Faith
will readily close withal. So the Apostle assures us of the reimplanting of
the Jews, upon this account; God (says he) is able to plant them in again,
having promised so to do. Romans 11. 23. There are two considerations, upon
which the Unchangeableness of God, has a more effectual influence into the
continuance of his Love to his Saints, then the mere objected thought of it,
will lead us to an acquaintance withal.

1. God Proposes his Immutability to the Faith of the Saints,. 16.
for their establishment and consolation, in this very case of the stability of
his Love unto them: we dare not draw conclusions in reference to our selves,
from any Property of God, but only upon the account of the Revelation, which he
has made thereof unto us, for that end and purpose: But this being done, we
have a sure anchor firm and steadfast, to fix us against all blasts of
Temptation or opposition whatsoever; When God proposes his Immutability or
Unchangeablenesse, to assure us of the continuance of his Love unto us, if we
might truly aprehend, yea and ought so to do, that his Unchangeablenesse may
be preserved, and himself vindicated from the least shadow of Turning, though
he should change his Mind, Thoughts, Love, Purposes concerning us every day,
what conclusion for consolation could possibly arise from such Proposalls of
Gods Immutability unto us? Yea would it not rather appear to be a way suited
to the delusion of poor Souls, that when they shall think they have a solid
Pillar, no less then an Essential Property of the nature of God to rest upon,
they shall find themselves leaning on a Cloud, or Shadow, or on a broken Reed,
that will run into their hands, instead of yiedling them the least
supportment. God deals not thus with his Saints: His discoveries of himself
in Christ, for the Establishment of the Hearts of his, are not such Flints, as
from whence the most skillful, and exercised Faith cannot expect one drop of
Consolation. Whatsoever of his Name he holds out to the Sons of men, it will
be a strong Tower, and place of Refuge and safety to them, that fly unto it.

Secondly, the Consideration of that Love in its continuance, wherein the Lord
settles and puts out of doubt the Souls of his, by the engagement of his
Unchangeableness, or the calling of them to the Consideration of that Property
in him, from whom that Love does flow, adds strength also to the way of arguing
we insist upon. Were the Love of God to his nothing but the declaration of his
Approbation of such and such things, annexed to the Law and Rule of Obedience,
it might stand firm like a Pillar in a River, though the water be not thereby
caused to stand still one moment, but only touch it, and so pass on; there
were some color of Exception to be laid against it: And this is indeed the
(...) of Mr Goodwin in this whole Controversy, that he acknowledges no other
Love of God to Believers, but what lies in the outward Approbation of what is
good, and men's doing it: upon which account, there is no more Love in God to
one, then another; to the choicest Saint, then to the most profligate Villain
in the world: nay it is not any Love at all, properly so called, being no
internal vital Act of Gods will, the seat of his Love; but an external
Declaration of the issue of our Obedience. The declaration of Gods Will, that
he approoves Faith and Obedience, is no more Love to Peter, then it is to
Judas. But let now the Love of God to Believers be considered, as it is in it
self, as a vital Act of his will, willing if (I may so speak) good things to
them; as the Immanent purpose of his Will, and also joined with an Acceptance
of them in the Effects of his Grace, Favor, and Love in Jesus Christ, and it
will be quickly evidenced, how an Alteration therein will entrench upon the
Immutability of God, both as to his Essence and Attributes and Decrees.

Having thus reinforced our Argument from this place of Scripture,. 17.
by restoring unto it those considerations, which being its maine strength, it
was maimed, and deprived of by Mr Goodwin in his proposal thereof, I shall
briefly consider the Answers, that by him are suggested thereunto.

Thus then he proceeds; By the Tenor of this Arguing it will as well follow
that in case God should at any time withdraw his Love, and his Favor from a
Nation, or body of a People, which he sometimes Favored, or Loved, he should
be changed: But that no such change of dispensation as this toward one, or the
same People or Nation, argues any change at all in God, at least any such
change, which he disclaimeth, as incompetent to him, is evident from those
instances without number recorded in Scripture, of such different dispensations
of his, toward sundry Nations, and more especially toward the Jews, to whom
sometimes he gives Peace, sometimes consumes them with Wars, sometimes he makes
them the Head, and sometimes again the Tail of the Nations round about them.

The Love and favor of God to a Nation or People, Ans.
here brought into the lists of Comparison with the peculiar Love of God to his
Saints, which he Secures them of, upon the account of his Immutability, is
either the outward Dispensation of Good things to them, called his Love,
because it expresses and holds out a fountain of Goodness, from whence it
flows, or it is an Eternal act of Gods will toward them, of the same nature
with the Love to his own formerly described. If it be taken in the first
sense, as apparently it is intended, and so made out from the instance of Gods
dealing with the Jews in outward Blessings, and Punishments, Mr Goodwin does
plainly ((...)) fall into a thing quite of another nature, instead of that,
which was first proposed. ( Amphora cum caepit Institui cur urceus exit?) There
is a wide difference between outward Providentiall Dispensations, and Eternal
Purposes and acts of Grace and Good will; To deal in the instance insisted on
by Mr Goodwin: there being frequent mention in the Scripture (as afterward
shall be fully declared) of a difference and distinction in, and of that
People, Romans 9. 4, 5.
( for they are not all Israel, that are of Israel) the whole lump and body of
them being the People of God, in respect of separation from the rest of the
world, and dedication to his Worship and external profession yet a Remnant
only, a hidden Remnant, being his People upon the account of Eternal
designation, and actual Acceptance into Love and Favor in Jesus Christ:
there must needs be also a twofold Dispensation of God, and his will, in
reference to that People: The First Common and General, toward the whole body
of them in outward Ordinances and Providentiall Exercises of Goodness or
Justice: In this there was Great variety, as to the Latter part, comprehending
only external Effects, or products of the Power of God; in which regard he can
pull down what he has set up, and set up what he has pulled down, without
the least shadow of turning: These various Dispensations working Uniformely
toward the accomplishment of his Unchangeable Purpose; And this is all that Mr
Goodwins Exceptions reach too: Even a change in the outward dispensation of
Providence, which none ever denied, being that which may, nay is done for the
bringing about and accomplishment (in a way suitable to the advancement of his
Glory) of his unchangeable Purpose. What proportion there is to be argued from*
between the general effects of various Dispensations, and that peculiar Love,
and Grace of the Covenant thereof, wherein God assures his Saints of their
Stability upon the account of his own Unchangeablenes I know not: Because he
may remove his Candlestick from a fruitless, Faithless People, and give them
up to desolation, may he therefore take his holy Spirit from them that Believe?
For whilst that continues the root of the matter is in them. So that (Secondly)
there is a peculiar Dispensation of Grace, exerted toward those peculiar ones,
whom he owneth and receives as above mentioned; wherein there are such
engagements of the Purpose, Decrees and Will of God, as that the stream of
them cannot be forced back, without as Great an Alteration and change in God,
as the thoughts of the heart of the meanest worm in the world, are liable
unto; And on this the Lord asserts the steadfastness of his Love to them, in
the midst of the changes of outward Dispensations toward the body of that
People, wherein also their External concernments were wrapped up, 1 Samuel 12. 22.
But this will afterward be more fully cleared. The Substance of this Exception
amounts only to thus much; there are changes wrought in the works which
outwardly are of God, as to general and common administrations; therefore also
are his Eternal purposes of Spiritual Grace liable to the like Alterations.
Whereas Mr Godwin says that this will not import any alteration in God, at
least any such alteration as is incompetent to him; I know not of any shadow of
alteration, that may be ascribed to him, without the greatest and most
substantial derogation from his Glory, that you can engage into.

And this farther clears,. 18.
what is farther excepted, to the end of the Sect. 40. in these words;
Therefore neither the Unchangeableness, nor Changeableness of God are to be
estimated, or measured, either by any variety, or uniformity of dispensation
toward one and the same Object; and consequently, for him to express himself,
as this day, toward a Person, Man or Woman, as if he intended to save them, or
that he really intended to save them, and should on the morrow, as the
alteration in the interim may be, or how ever may be supposed in these Persons,
express himself to the contrary, as that he verily intends to destroy them,
would not argue or imply the least Alteration in him.

It is true, Ans.
such Dispensations of God, as are morally declarative of what God approves, of
what he rejects, not engagements of any particular inte^dment, design, or
purpose of his Will, or such as are merely outward Acts of his Power, may in
great variety be subservient to the accomplishment of his Purpose, and may
undergo (the first, in respect of the Object; the latter, of the Works
themselves) many alterations, without prejudice to the Immutability of God. The
first in themselves, are everlastingly unchangeable; God always approves the
Obedience of his Creatures, according to that Light and knowledge, which he is
pleased to communicate unto them: and always condemns, disallowes their
Rebellions; yet the same Persons may do sometimes what he approves, and
sometimes what he condemns, without the least shadow of change in God. Whilst
they thus change, his Purposes concerning them, and what he will do to them,
and for them, are unchangeable, as is his Law concerning Good and Evil. For
the latter, take an instance in the case of Pharaoh; God purposes the
destruction of Pharaoh, and suites his Dispensations in great variety, and with
many changes, for the bringing about, and accomplishing of that his
unchangeable Purpose; he Plagues him, and Frees him, he Frees him, and Plagues
him again: all these things do not in the least prove any alteration in God,
being all various effects of his Power, suited to the accomplishment of an
unchangeable Purpose. So in respect of Persons, whom he intends to bring,
(through Christ,) infallibly to himself, how various are his Dispensations
both Temporal and Spiritual? He Afflicts them, and Relieves them, sends them
Light and Darkness, Strength and Weakness, Forsakes and Appears to them
again, without the least alteration in his thoughts, and purposes toward
them: all these things, by his infinite Wisdom, working together for their
good. But now, if by Dispensation, you understand and comprehend also, the
thoughts and Purposes of God toward any, for the bringing of them to such and
such an end, if these be altered, and the Lord does change them continually, I
know no reason, why a poor Worm of the Earth may not lay an equal claim (
absit Blasphemia) to Immutability and Unchangeablenesse, with him who Asserts
it, as his Essential Property, and Prerogative, whereby he distinguishes
himself from all Creatures whatsoever.

There is also an Ambiguity in that expression,. 19.
that God expresses himself this day toward a Man or Woman, that he really
intends to save them, and on the morrow expresses himself to the contrary: If
our Author intends only Gods Moral approbation of Duties and Performances, as
was said before, with the Conditional approbation of Persons, with respect to
them, there being therein no Declaration of any Intention, or Purpose of God
properly so called, the instance is not in the least looking toward the
business, we have in hand. But if withal, he intend the Purposes and
Intentions of the will of God, as those terms really intend, and verily intend
do import; I know not what to call or account Alteration and Change, if this
be not; surely if a man, like our selves, do really intend one thing one day,
and verily intend the clean contrary the next day, we may make bold to think
and say, he is Changeable; and what Apology will be found, on such a supposall,
for the Immutability of God, does not fall within the compass of my narrow
apprehension; neither is that Parentheticall Expression of a change, imagined
in the Persons, concerning whom Gods intentions are, any Plea for his
Changeableness upon this supposall: For he either foresaw that change in them,
or he did not; if he did not, where is his Prescience? Yea where is his Deity?
If he did; to what end did he really and verily intend and purpose to do so,
and so, for a man, when at the same instant, he knew the man would so behave
himself, as he should never accomplish any such intention toward him. We
should be wary, how we ascribe such Lubricous thoughts to Worms of the Earth,
like our selves; But if a man sin against the Lord, who shall plead for him?
If one should really and verily intend or purpose, to give a man bread to eat
to morrow, who he knows infallibly will be put to death to night, such a one
will not perhaps be counted Changeable, but he will sCarce escape being esteemed
a Changeling. Yet it seems it must be granted, that God verily intends, and
really, to do so, and so for men, if they be in such and such a condition,
which he verily and really knows they will not be in: But suppose all this
might be granted, what is it at all to the Argument in hand, concerning the
Lords engaging his Immutability to his Saints, to secure them from perishing
upon the account thereof? Either prove that God does change, which he says he
does not, or that the Saints may perish, though he change not, which he
affirms they cannot; or you speak not to the business in hand.

The 41.. 20.
Section contains a discourse, too long to be transcribed, unless it were
more to the purpose in hand, then it is. I shall therefore briefly give the
Reader a taste of some Paralogismes, that run from one end of it, to the
other, and then in particular roll away every stone, that seems to be of any
weight, for the detaining captive the Truth, in whose vindication we are
engaged. First, from the beginning to the ending of the whole Discourse, the
thing in question, is immodestly begged, and many inferences made upon a
supposall, that Believers may become Impenitent Apostates, which being the sole
thing under debate, ought not it self to be taken as granted, and so made a
proof of it self. It is by us Asserted, that those who are once freely
accepted of God in Christ, shall not be so forsaken, as to become impenitent
Apostates: and that upon the account of the Immutability of God, which he has
engaged to give Assurance thereof. To evince the falsity of this, it is much
pressed, that if they become impenitent Apostates, God, without the least
shadow of mutability, may cast them off, and condemn them; which is a kind of
reasoning, that will scarce conclude to the Understanding of an intelligent
Reader: and yet this sandy Foundation is thought sufficient, to bear up many
Rhetorical expressions, concerning the Changeableness of God, in respect of
sundry of his Attributes, if he should not destroy such Impenitent Apostates,
as it is splendidly supposed, Believers may be; ( o Fama ingens, ingentior armis
Vir Trojane) This way of Disputing will scarce succeed you, in this great
undertaking.

The second Scene of this discourse,. 21.
is a gross confounding of Gods Legal or Moral Approbation of duties, and
Conditional of Persons, in reference to them, (which is not Love properly so
called, but a mere Declaration of Gods approving the thing, which he Commands
and Requires) with the will of Gods Purpose and Intention, and actual
Acceptance of the Persons of Believers in Jesus Christ, suited thereunto;
Hence are all the comparisons used between God and a Judge, in his Love, and
the express denial, that Gods Love is fixed on any Materially, that is on the
Persons of any (for that is theintendment of it) but only Formally, in
reference to their Qualifications. Hence also is that Instance, again and
insisted on in this and the former Section, of the Love of God to the fallen
Angels, whilst they stood in their obedience. Their Obedience no doubt (if
any they actually yielded) fell under the Approbation of God; but that it was
the purpose and intention of God, to continue and preserve them in that
Obedience, cannot be asserted without ascribing to him more palpable
mutability, then can fall upon a wise and knowing man.

Thirdly the Discourse of this Section has a contribution of strength, such as
it is, from a squaring of the Love of God, unto the sweet nature and Loving
disposition of men, which is perhaps no less gross Anthropomorphisme, then
they were guilty of, who assigned him a Body and Countenance like to ours; And
upon these three stilts, whereof the first is called Petitio Principii, the
second Ignoratio Elenchi, and the third Fallacia non causae pro caus^, is this
Discourse advanced.

I shall not need to transcribe,. 22.
and follow the Progress of this Argumentation: the Observation of the
Fallacies before mentioned, will help the meanest capacity to unravell the
Sophistry of the whole; The close only of it may seem to deserve more
particular consideration: so then it prooceedeth. The Unchangeableness assumed
by God himself, unto himself, in the work in hand, I am the Lord I change
not, is, I conceive, that which is found in him in respect of his Decrees; the
reason is, because it is assigned by him as the reason why they were not
utterly destroyed: I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye Sons of Jacob
are not consumed; In the beginning of the Chapter, he did declare unto them his
purpose and Decree of sending his only begotten Son, whom he there calls the
Messenger of the Covenant unto them. He predicteth, v. 3, 4. The happy fruit or
consequence of that his sending, in reference to their Nation and Posterity. To
the Unchangeableness of this his Decree he assigns the Patience, which he had
for a long time exercised toward them under their great and continued
provocations; whereby he implies, that if he could have been turned out of the
way of his Decree concerning the sending of his Son unto them in their
Posterity, they would have done it by the greatness of their sins; but in so
much as this his Decree, or himself in this his Decree, was Unchangeable, and
it must have been changed, in case they had been all destroyed (For the Decree
was for the sending to their Nation, and Posterity) hence, says he, it comes
to pass, that though your sins otherwise abundantly have deserved it, yet I
have spared you from a total ruin, therefore in these two last Scripture
Arguments, there is every whit as much, or rather more against, then for the
common Doctrine of Perseverance.

That the Unchangeableness of God, Ans.
which is mentioned in this Text, has Relation to the Decrees of God, is
granted; whatever then God Purposes or Decrees, is put upon a certainty of
Accomplishment, upon the account of his Unchangeablenesse: There may be some
use hereafter made of this concession, where (I suppose) the Evasions that will
be used about the Objects of those Decrees, and their Conditionality, will
scarce wave the force of our Arguing from it. For the present, though I
willingly embrace the Assertion, yet I cannot assent to the Analysis of that
place of Scripture, which is introduced as the Reason of it. The design of the
Lord in that place, has been before considered: That the Consolation here
intended, is only this, that whereas God purposed to send the Lord Christ to
the Nation of the Jews, which he would certainly fulfill and accomplish, and
therefore did not, nor could not utterly destroy them, will scarcely be evinced
to the Judgment of any one, who shall consider the business in hand with so
much liberty of Spirit, as to cast an eye upon the Scripture it self: That
after the rehearsal of the great Promise of sending his Son into the flesh
to that People, he distinguishes them into his Chosen ones, and those
rejected; his Remnant, and the refuse of the Nation, being the maine Body
thereof; threatening destruction to the latter, but engaging himself into a way
of Mercy and Love toward the former, has been declared. To assure the last of
his Continuance in these thoughts, and purposes of his Good will toward them,
he minds the^ of his Unchangeablenes in all such Purposes, and particularly,
incourages them to rest upon it, in respect of his Love toward themselves.
That God intended to administer Consolation to his Saints in the Expression
insisted on, is not, cannot be denied; now what Consolation could redound to
them in particular from hence, that the whole Nation should not utterly be
rooted out, because God purposed to send his Son to their Posterity;
notwithstanding this, any individual Person that shall fly to the Horns of
this Altar for refuge, that shall lay hold on this Promise for succor, may
perish everlastingly. There is scarce any place of Scripture where there is a
more evident Distinction asserted between the Jews who were so outwardly only,
and in the flesh, and those who were inwardly also and in the Circumcision of
the heart, then in this and the following Chapter: Their several Portions are
also clearly proportioned out to them in sundry particulars. Even this Promise
of sending the Messiah respected not the whole Nation, and doubtless was only
subservient to the Consolation of them, whose Blessedness consisted in being
distinguished from others; but let the Context be viewed, and the determination
left to the Spirit of Truth in in the heart of him that reads.

Neither does it appear to me,. 23.
how the Decree of God concerning the sending of his Son into the world, can
be asserted as absolutely Immutable, upon that Principle formerly laid down,
and insisted on by our Author. He sends him into the World to Dye, neither is
any concernement of his Mediation so often affirmed to fall under the will and
Purpose of God as his Death, Socin. Prael. Theol. cap. 10.
But concerning this Mr G. disputes out of Socinus for a possibility of a
contrary Event, and that the whole Council of God might have been fulfilled by
the Good will and intention of Christ,. 8.
though actually he had not Dyed. If then the purpose of God concerning Christ,
as to that great, and and eminent part of his intendment therein, might have
been frustrat, and was liable to alteration, what Reason can be rendered,
wherefore that might not upon some Considerations (which Mr Goodwin is able, if
need were, to invent) have been the Issue of the whole Decree? And what then
becomes of the Collateral Consolation, which from the Immutability of that
Decree is here asserted. Now this being the only Witness, and Testimony in the
first part of our Scripturall Demonstration of the Truth in hand, whereunto any
Exception is put in, and the Exceptions against it being in such a frame and
composure, as manifest the whole to be a Combination of Beggars and Juglers,
whose pleas are inconsistent with themselves, as it does now appear upon the
Examination of them apart; it is evident, that, as Mr Goodwin has little
ground or encouragement for that Conclusion he makes of this Section, so that
the light breaking forth from a Constellation of this, and other Texts
mentioned is sufficient to lead us into an Acknowledgment, and Imbracement of
the Truth contended for.

CAP. III.
1. The Immutability of the Purposes of God proposed for a second Demonstration
of the Truth in hand. 2. Somewhat of the nature and properties of the Purposes
of God: The object of them. 3. Purposes how Acts of Gods Understanding and
Will. The only foundation of the futurition of all things. 4. The Purposes of
God Absolute. Continuance of Divine Love toward Believers purposed. 5.
Purposes of God farther considered, and their nature explained 6. Their
Independency and absoluteness evinced. 7, 8. Prooved from Isa: 46. 9, 10, 11.
Psalm. 33. 9, 10, 11. Heb. 6. 17, 18. etc. those places explained. 9, 10. The
same Truth by sundry Reasons and Arguments farther confirmed. 11. Purposes in
God, of the continuance of his Love and Favor to Believers, manifested by an
Induction of Instances out of Scripture: the first from Romans 8. 28. proposed.
And 12, 13, 14. Farther cleared and improved: M. G. dealing with our Argument
from hence, and our Exposition of this place, considered. His exposition of
that place proposed and discussed. The design of the Apostle consented on: the
fountain of the Accomplishment of the good things mentioned, omitted by Mr G.
In what sense God intends to make all things work together for good to them
that Love him. 15. Of Gods foreknowledge. Of the sense and use of the word
(...), also of Scisco, and (...) in Classical Authors. (...) in Scripture
every where taken for Foreknowledge or Pre-determination, no where for
Pre-approbation, of pre-approving, or Pre-approbation here insisted on by Mr G.
its inconsistency with the sense of the Apostles discourse manifested. 16. The
progress of Mr G. exposition of this place considered. Whether men Love God
antecedently to his Predestination and their effectual calling: to preordaine,
and to preordinate different. 17. No assurance granted of the consolation
professed to be intended: The great uncertainty of the dependence of the Acts
of Gods Grace mentioned* on one another: the efficacy of every one of them
resolved finally into the wills of men. 18. Whether calling according to Gods
purpose, supposes a saving answer given to that call: The affirmative proved,
and exceptions given thereto removed. 19. What Obstructions persons called may
lay in their own way to justification. The iniquity of imposing Conditions and
supposalls on the Purpose of God, not in the least intimated by himself. 20.
The whole acknowledged design of the Apostle everted, by the interposition of
Cases and Conditions by M.G. 21. M. G. first attempt to prove the Decrees of
God to be conditional considered: 1 Samuel 2. 3. to that end produced. 22. I
Sam. 2. 30. farth^r considered, and its unsutablenesse to illustrate Romans 8.
32, 33 prooved: interpretation of Scripture by comparing of places agreeing
neither in design, word, nor matter, rejected. The places iusisted on proved
not to be parallel, by sundry particular instances. Some observations from the
words rejected. 23. What act of God intended in those words to Eli, I said
indeed: no purpose or decree of God in them declared. Any such purpose as to
the house of Eli by sundry Arguments disproved. 24. No purpose of God in the
words insisted on farther manifested. They are expressive of the Promise or Law
concerning the Priesthood Numb. 25. 11, 12, 13. 25. More especially relating
unto Exodus 28. 43. and Chapter 29. 9. The import of that Promise, Law, or Statute,
cleared: the example of Jonas Preaching, and Gods commands to Abraham and
Pharaoh. 26. The universal disproportion between the Texts compared by Mr G.
both as to matter and expression farther manifested. 27. Instances or cases of
Saul and Paul to prove conditional Purposes in God considered. 28.
Conditional purposes argued from conditional threatenings: the weakness of
that Argument: the nature of Divine threatenings: what Will of God, or what of
the Will of God is declared by them: no proportion between Eternal purpose,
sand Temporal threatenings: the issue of the vindication of our Argument from
the foregoing exceptions. 29. M.G's endeavor to main^aine his Exposition of
the place under consideration: the Text perverted. 30. Several evasions of M.
G. from the force of this Argument considered 31. His Arguments to prove no
certain or infallible connection between Calling, Justifification, and
Glorification, weighed and answered. His first from the scope of the Chapter,
and the use of Exhorrations; the Question begged. 32. His Second from examples
of Persons called, and not justified: The Question argued, begged; no proof
insisted on, but the interposition of his own Hypothesis. How we are called
irresistibly and in what sense. Whether ^arrs of Wickedness and Unbelief may
be laid in the way of Gods effectual call. 33. Mr G. demurre to another
consideration of the Text, removed. 34, 35. The Argument in hand freed from
other objections and concluded 36. Jer. 31. 3. Explained and improved for the
confirmation of the Truth under Demonstration. 37. 2 Timothy 2. 19. opened, and
the Truth from thence confirmed. 38. The foregoing Exposition and Argument
vindicated and confirmed. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. The same matter at large pursued
44. loh 6. 38, 39, 40. explained, and the Argument in hand from thence
confirmed. 45. M. G. Exceptions to our arguing from this place removed. 16. The
same matter farther pursued. 47, 48. The Exposition and Argument insisted on
fully vindicated and established. 49. Math. 24. 24. opened and improved. 50.
The severalls of that Text more particularly handled. 51. Farther Observations
for the clearing the mind of the Holy Ghost in this place, 52. The same farther
insisted on and vindicated. 53. M. G. Exceptions at large discussed and
removed. 55. Ephesians 1. 3, 4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14. opened. 56. The close of the
second Argument from the Immutability of the Purposes of God.

HAving cleared the Truth in hand,. 1.
from the Immutability of the Nature of God, which himself holds out, as
engaged for us to rest upon, as to the Unchangeable Continuance of his Love
unto us; Proceed we now to consider the Steadfastness, and Immutability of his
Purposes, which he frequently asserts, as another Ground of Assurance to the
Saints, of his Safegarding their Glory of free Acceptance, to the end.

I shall not enter upon the consideration of the Nature,. 2.
and Absoluteness of the Purposes of God, as to an express handling of them,
but only a little unfold that Property, and Concernement of them, whereon the
strength of the inference we aim at, does in some measure depend. Many
needless, and curious Questions have been, by the Serpentine wits of men,
moved and agitated concerning them: wherein perhaps our Author has not been
outgon by many, as will be judged by those, who have weighed his Discourses
concerning them, with his distinctions of Desires, Intentions, Purposes and
Decrees in God; But this is not the business we have in hand; for what
concerns that, that which ensues, may suffice; God himself being an
Infinite Pure Act, those Acts of his Will and Wisdom, which are Eternal and
Immanent, are not distinguished from his Nature and Being, but only in respect
of the reference and habitude, which they bear unto some thing to be produced
outwardly from him. The Objects of them all are such things, as might not be.
Gods Purposes are not concerning any thing, that is in it self absolutely
necessary. He does not purpose that he will be Wise, Holy, Infinitely Good,
Just: all these things, that are of absolute necessity, come not within the
compass of his Purposes. Of things that might not be, are his Decrees and
intentions; they are, of all the Products of his Power, all that outwardly he
has done, does, or will do to Eternity. All these things to the falling of a
hair, or the withering of a Grass, Mat. 6. 28, 29, 30.
has he determined from of old; now this divine Fore-appoyntment of all
things, Luk 12. 6, 7.
the Scripture assigns some times to the Knowledge and Understanding, Jon. 4.
6. 7, 8.
sometimes to the Will of God, known unto him are all his Works from the
beginning of the World, Acts 15. 18. It is that Knowledge, which has an
influence into that most Infinitely wise disposal of them, which is there
intimated: and the determination of things to be done is referred to the
Counsel of God. Acts 4. 28. which denotes an Act of his Wisdom and
Understanding, and yet withal, it is the Counsel of his Will, Ephesians. 1. 11.

I know that all things originally owe their Futurition to a free act of the
Will of God:. 3.
He does what ever he will and pleases. Their Relation thereunto, Isa. 14. 24.
19. 12. 23. 9.
translates them out of that state of Possibility, and (being Objects of Gods
absolute Omnipotency, and infinite simple Intelligence, or Undestanding,
whereby he Intuitively beholds all things, Jerem. 51. 29.
that might be produced by the exerting of his infinite Almighty Power) into a
state of Futurition, Rom 8. 28. 9. 11, 19.
making them Objects of Gods Foreknowledge, Ps. 139. 11, 12.
or Science of Vision as it is called. But yet the Scripture expresses (as
before) that Act of God, Isa. 40. 28.
whereby he determines the Beings, Issues, Heb. 4. 13.
and Orders of things, to manifest the concurrence of his infinite Wisdom* and
Understanding in all his Purposes. Further, as to the way of expressing these
things to our manner of apprehension, there are held out Intentions, and
Purposes of God, distinctly suited to all Beings, Operations, and Events, yet
in God himself they are not multiplied. As all things are present to him in
one most simple, and single Act of his Understanding, so with one individual
Act of his Will he determines concening all, but yet in reference to the
things, that are disposed of, we may call them the Purposes of God: And these
are the Eternal Springs of Gods Actual Providence which being ( Ratio ordinis
ad fine^) the disposing of all things to their Ends in an appointed manner and
order in exact correspondence unto them; these Purposes themselves must be the
Infinitely Wise, Eternal, Immanent Acts of his Will, appointing and
determining all Things, Beings, and Opperations, kinds of Beings, manners of
Opperations free necessary, contingent as to their Existence, and Event, into
an Immediate tendency unto the exaltation of his Glory: Or as the Apostle
calls them the Counsel of his Will, according whereunto he effectually
works all things. Ephesians 1. 11.

Our consideration of these Purposes of God being only in reference to the
Business which we have in hand,. 4.
I shall do these two things.

1. First manifest, that they are all of them Absolute and Immutable: wherein I
shall be brief, not going out to the Compass of the Controversy thereabout,
as I intimated before. My intendment lies another way.

2. Secondly show, that God has Purposed the continuance of his Love to his
Saints, to bring them infallibly to himself, and that this Purpose of God in
particular, is Unchangeable; which is the second part of the Foundation of our
Abiding with God in the Grace of Acceptance.

By the Purposes of God,. 5.
I mean (as I said before) the Eternal Acts of his Will concerning all things
that outwardly are of him, which are the Rule (if I may so speak) of all his
following Operations. All external temporary Products of his Power universally
answering those internal Acts of his Will. The Judgment of those who make
these Decrees or Purposes of God, (for I shall constantly use these words
promiscuously, as being purely of the same import as relating unto God) to be
in themselves Essential to him, and his very Nature or Understanding and Will
may be safely closed withal. They are in God as was said, but one: There is
not a real multiplication of any thing but Subsistence in the Deity. To us
these lie under a double Consideration. First Simply as they are in God, and so
it is impossible they should be differenced from his Infinite Wisdom and Will,
whereby he determines of any thing. Secondly in respect of the Habitude and
Relation which they bear to the things Determined, which the Wisdom and Will
of God might not have had. In the first sense, as was said, they can be nothing
but the very nature of God: The (...) velle of God his Internal willing of any
thing that is either Created or Increated; for those Terms distribute the
whole nature of beings. Created they are not, for they are Eternal; (that no
new immanent Act can possibly be ascribed to God, has full well of late been
demonstrated.) Farther If they are Created, then God willed that they should be
Created; for he Created only what he will: If so, was he willing they should be
Created or no? If he were, then a progress will be given infinitely, for the
Question will arise up to Eternity. If Increated then doubtless they are God
himself for he only is so. It Is impossible that a Creature should be
increated. Again, Gods very willing of things is the cause of all things, and
therefore must needs be Omnipotent, and God himself: that Voluntas Dei is
Causa rerum, is taken for granted and may be prooved from Psa. 115. 3. Which
the Apostle ascribes Omnipotency unto Romans 9. 19. Who has resisted his Will?
Doubtless it is the Property of God alone to be the Cause of all things and to
be Almighty in his so being; but hereof at present no more. On this supposall,
the Immutability of the Decrees of God, would plainly be coincident with the
Immutability of his Nature before handled.

It is then of the Decrees and Purposes of God, with respect to the matter
about which they are, whereof I speak, in which regard also they are Absolute
and Immutable, not that they work any essential Change in the Things
themselves, concerning which they are, making that to be Immutable from thence,
which in its own Nature is Mutable, but only that themselves as Acts of the
Infinite Wisdom and Will of God, are not liable to, nor suspended on any
Condition whatever foreign to themselves, nor subject to change or Alteration
(whence flows an infallible certainty of actual Accomplishment in reference
to the things Decreed or Purposed, be their own nature what it will, or their
next causes in themselves never so undetermined to their Production) whereof I
treat. That the determining Purposes or Decrees of Gods will concerning any
thing, or things, by him to be done, or effected, do not depend as to their
Accomplishment, on any conditions, that may be supposed in, or about the things
themselves, whereof they are, and therefore are Unchangeable and shall
certainly be brought forth unto the appointed Issue, Mat. 11. 25. 1 Cor. 26,
27, 28.
is that, which we are to prove. Knowing for whose sakes, and for what End this
labor was undertaken, I shall choose to lay the whole proof of this Assertion
upon plain Texts of Scripture, Iam. 2. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 10.
rather then mix my Discourse with any such Philosophical Reasonings, as are
of little use to the most of them, whose benefit is hereby intended.

Isa. 46: 9, 10, 11. The Holy Ghost speaks expressly to our purpose;. 7.
Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none like me,
declaring the End from the beginning, and from ancient times, the things that
are not yet done, saying my Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure, calling a ravenous Bird from the East, the man that executes my
counsel from a far Country: Yea I have spoken it, I will also bring it to
pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it. v. 19. The Lord asserts his own
Deity and Eternal Being, in opposition to all false Gods and Idols, whom he
threatens to destroy. v. 1. Of this he gives them a threefold Demonstration.

First, from his Patience or Foreknowledge, there is none like me, declaring
the end from the beginning and from ancient times, the things that are not yet
done; In this am I infinitely discriminated from all the pretended Deityes of
the Nations: All things from the Beginning to the End are naked before me, and
I have declared them by my Prophets, even things that are future and contingent
in themselves; so are the things that I now speak of, the destruction of
Babylon by the Medes and Persians, a thing to be carried on through innumerable
contingencies, and yet as I have seen it, so have I told it, and my counsel
concerning it shall certainly be executed.

Secondly, by his Power in using what Instruments he pleases for the executing
of his Purposes and bringing about his own designs; calling a ravenous Bird
from the East: One that at first, when he went against Babylon, thought of of
nothing less, then Executing the Counsel of God, but was wholly bent upon
satisfying his own Rapine and Ambition, not knowing then in the least by whom
he was Anointed and Sanctified for the Accomplishment of his Will. All the
thoughts of this heart, all his Consultations and Actions, all his Progresses
and Diversions, his Success in his great and dreadful undertaking to break
in pieces that Hammer of the whole Earth, with all the free deliberations and
contingencies, wherewith his long War was attended, which were as many,
strong, Ierem. 50. 51.
and various, as the nature of things is capable to receive, were not only in
every individual Act, Isa. 44. 25, 26, 27, 28.
with its minutest circumstances, by him foreseen, and much also fore told,
but also managed in the hand of his Power in a regular subservience to that
call, Phil. 45. 1, 2, 3, 4.
which he so gave that Raveinous Bird, for the Accomplishment of his Purpose
and Pleasure.

Thirdly, by the Immutability of his Purposes which can never be frustrated,
nor altered; My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure, I have
Purposed it, and I will also do it. The Standing, or Fixednesse and
Unchangeablenesse of his Counsel he manifests by the accomplishment of the
things, which therein he had determined: Neither is there any Salve for his
Immutability in his Counsel, should it otherwise fall out. And if we may take
his own Testimony of himself, what he Purposes, that he does: And in the
Actual fulfilling, and the bringing about of things themselves Purposed, and
as Purposed, without any possibility of diversion from the real and intended,
is their Stability, and Unchangeablenesse in them manifested. An Imaginary
Immutability in God's Purposes, which may consist and be preserved under their
utter Frustration, as to the fulfilling of the things themselves, under which
they are, the Scripture knows not, neither can Reason conceive. Now this
Unchangeableness of his Purposes, the Lord brings as one Demonstration of his
Deity, and those who make them liable to Alteration upon any Account, or
supposition whatsoever, do depresse him what in them lies, into the number of
such Dungehill Gods, as he threatens to famish, and destroy.

Psa. 33. 9, 10, 11. He spoke and it was done,. 8.
he commanded and it stood fast. The Lord brings the Counsel of the Heathen
to naught, he makes the devices of the People of none effect. The Council of
the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his Heart to all Generations. The
Production and Establishment of all things, in that order wherein they are, are
by the Psalmist ascribed to the Will, and power of God: By his Word, and
Command, they not only are, but Stand fast; Heb. 1. 3.
being fixed in that Order by him appointed: both the Making, Fixing, and
Sustaining of all things, Revel. 4. 11.
is by the Word of his Power. As the first relates to their Being, Act. 17. 28.
which they have from Creation, so the other to the order in subsistence and
Operation, Act. 2. 23. 4. 28.
which relates to his Actual Providence. Herein they Stand fast. Genesis 50. 20.
Themselves with their several and respective relations, dependencies, Eccles.
3. 11.
influences, circumstances, suited to that Nature, and Being, which was
bestowed on them by his Word in their Creation, are settled in an exact
correspondency to his Purposes (of which afterward) not to be shaken or
removed. Men have their Devices and Counsels, also, they are free Agents, and
work by Counsel, and Advice; and therefore God has not set all things so
fast, as to overturne and overbeare them, in their Imaginations, and
undertakings. Says the Psalmist, they Imagine and Devise indeed, but their
Counsel is of naught, and their Devices are of none effect, but the Counsel
of the Lord etc. The Counsel, and Purposes of the Lord, are set in opposition
to the Counsel, and Purposes of men, as to Alteration, Change, and Frustration
in respect of the Actual Accomplishment of the things about which they are.
Their Counsels are so, and so: But the Counsel of the Lord shall stand; he
that shall cast v. 11. into the 10. and say The Counsel of the Lord that comes
to naught, and the thoughts of his heart are of none effect, let him make what
pretenses he will, or flowrishes that he can, or display what supposalls and
conditions he pleases, he will scarcely be able to keep the field against
him, who will contend with him about his Prerogative and Glory. And this
Antithesis between the Counsels of men, and the Purposes of God upon the
Account of Unchangeableness, is again confirmed Prove. 19. 21. There are many
devices in a man's heart, nevertheless the Counsel of the Lord that shall
stand, Isa. 8. 9, 10.
Herein is the difference between the Devices of men, and the Council of God;
men have many Devices to try what they can do: If one way take not, Job. 8. 9.
they will attempt an other ( hac non successit, alia aggrediemur via) and are
always disappointed, Job. 11. 12.
but only in that, wherein they fall in with the Will of God. Eccles. 8. 7. 9.
12.
The Shallowness of their Understanding, the Shortness of their Foresight,
the Weakness of their Power, the Changeableness of their Minds, the
Uncertainty of all the means they use, puts them upon many Devices, and often
to no purpose. But for him, who is Infinite in Wisdom and Power, to whom all
things are present, and to whom nothing can fall out Unexpected, yea what he
has not himself Determined; unto whom all Emergencyes are but the Issue of
his own good Pleasure, who proportions out what efficacy he pleases unto the
means he uses, his Counsels, his Purposes, his Decrees shall stand, being
(as Job tells us) as Montaines of Brass. By this he differenceth himself
from all others, Isa. 44. 7. 25. 26.
Idols and men, as also by his certain foreknowledge of what shall come to
pass, and be accomplished upon those Purposes of his. Hence the Apostle Heb.
6. 17, 18. acquaints us, that his Promise and his Oath, those two Immutable
things, do but declare ((...)) the Unchangeableness of his Counsel, which
God is abundantly willing to manifest, though men are abundantly unwilling to
receive it. Job determines this business in the 23. Chapter v. 13, 14. He is of
one mind, and who can turn him? What his soul desires, even that he does;
for he performs the thing, that is appointed for me. Desires are the least
and faintest kind of Purposes, in Mr Goodwin's Distinctions. Yet the certain
accomplishment of them, as they are ascribed unto God, is here asserted by the
Holy Ghost.

Were the confirmation of the matter of our present Discourse,. 9.
my design in hand; I could farther confirm it, by enlarging these ensuing
Reasons.

1. First, from the Immutability of God; the least questioning whereof falls
foul on all the Perfections of the Divine Nature, which requires a
correspondent affection of all the Internal, and Eternal Acts of his Mind and
Will.

2. Secondly, from his Sovereignty, in making and executing all his Purposes;
which will not admit of any such mixture of Consults or Cooperations of others,
as should render his thoughts liable to Alteration. Romans 11. 34, 35, 36. The
Lord in his Purposes is considered as the great Former of all things, who
having his clay in the hand of his Almighty power, ordaines every parcel to
what kind of vessel, and to what use he pleases; hence the Apostle concludes
the consideration of them, and the distinguishing Grace flowing from them, with
that admiration, (...), Oh the depth! etc.

3. Thirdly, from their Eternity, which exempts them from all shadow of change,
and lifts them up above all those spears, that either from within, and their
own nature, or from without, by the impression of others, are exposed to
turning; that which is Eternal, is also Immutable. Acts 15. 18. 1 Cor. 2. 11.

4. Fourthly, from the Absoluteness, and Independency of his Will, whereof
they are the Acts and Emanations, Romans 9. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. whatever has
any influence upon that, as to Move it, Cause it, Change it, must be Before it,
Above it, Better then it, as every cause is, then its effect, as such. This
Will of his, as was said, is the fountain of all beings, to which free and
independent Act all Creatures owe their being and subsistence, their operations
and manner thereof, their whole difference from those Worlds of beings, which
his Power can produce, but yet shall lie bound up to Eternity, in their
nothingnesse and possibility, upon the account of his good Pleasure. Into this
does our Savior resolve the disposal of himself, Math. 26. 42. and of all
others, Math: 11. 25, 26, 27. certainly men in their wrangling Disputes and
Contests about it, have scarce seriously considered, with whom they have to
do: shall the thing formed say to him, that formed it, why have thou made nice
thus?

5. Fifthly,. 10.
from the Engagement of his Omnipotency, for the accomplishment of all his
Purposes and Designs, as is emphatically expressed, Isa: 14. 24, 25, 26, 27.
Surely the Lord of Hosts has Sworn, saying, surely as I have thought, so
shall it come to pass, and as I have purposed, it shall stand, that I will
break the Assyrian in my land: This is the purpose of God, that is purposed
upon the whole Earth, and this is the hand, that is stretched out upon all the
Nations; for the Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disanull it? And
his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? The Lord does not only
Assert the certain Accomplishment of all his Purposes, but also to prevent, and
obviate the Unbelief of them, who were concerned in their fulfilling, he
manifests upon what account it is, that they shall certainly be brought to
pass; and that is by the stretching out of his hand, or exalting of his mighty
Power, for the doing of it: so that if there be a failing therein, it must be
through the shortness of that Hand of his so stretched out, in that it could
not reach the end aimed at. A Worm will put forth its Strength for the
fullfilling of that, whereunto is is inclined: and the Sons of men will draw
out all their Power for the compassing of their designs: if there be Wisdom
in the laying of them, and foresight of Emergencyes, they alter not, nor turn
aside to the right hand, or to the left, in the pursuit of them: And shall the
Infinitely Wise, Holy, and Righteous thoughts, and Designs of God, not have
his Power engaged for their accomplishment? His Infinite Wisdom, and
Understanding are at the foundation of them: they are the Counsels of his
Will. Ephesians. 7. 11. who has known his mind (in them?) says the Apostle, and
who has been his Counselor? though no creature can see the paths, wherein he
walks, nor apprehend the reason of the ways, he is delighted in; yet this he
lets us know for the satisfying of our hearts, and teaching of our inquiries,
that his own Infinite Wisdom is in them all: I cannot but fear sometimes,
that men have darkened counsel without knowledge in curious contests about the
Decrees, and Purposes of God, as though they were to be measured by our rule
and line, and as though by searching we could find out the Almighty to
Perfection. But he is Wise in heart; he that contendeth with him let him
Instruct him. Add, that this Wisdom in his Counsel is attended with
infallible Prescience of all, that will fall in by the way, or in the course of
the accomplishment of his Purposes; and you will quickly see, that there can be
no possible intervenience upon the account whereof the Lord should not engage
his Almighty Power for their accomplishment; He is of one mind, and who can
turn him? he will work, and who shall let him?

6. Sixthly, by demonstrating the Vnreasonablnesse, Folly, and Impossibility, of
suspending the Acts, and Purposes of the Will of God, upon any actings of the
Creatures whatsoever: seeing it cannot be done without subjecting Eternity to
time, the first Cause to the second, the Creator to the Creature, the Lord to
the Servant; disturbing the whole order of Beings and Operations in the world.

7. Seventhly, by the removeall of all Possible, or Imaginary Causes of
Alteration and change: which will all be resolved into impotency in one kind,
or other. Every Alteration being confessedly an imperfection, it cannot follow
but from want and weakness, Upon the Issue of which Discourse, if it might be
perused, these Corollaries would ensue;

1. First, Conditional Promises, and Threatenings, are not declarative of Gods
Purposes concerning Persons, but of his Moral Approbation or Rejection of
Things.

2. Secondly, There is a wide difference between the Change of what is
Conditionally pronounced, as to the things themselves, and the change of what
is Determinately willed: the certainty of whose event is proportioned to the
Immutable Acts of the Will of God it self.

3. Thirdly, That no Purpose of God is Conditional, though the things
themselves, concerning which his Purposes are, are often times conditionalls
one of another.

4. Fourthly, That conditional Purposes concerning Perseverance, are either
Impossible, implying contradictions, or Ludicrous, even to an unfitnes for a
Stage. But of these and such like, as they occasionally fall in, in the ensuing
Discourse.

This foundation being laid,. 11.
I come to what was Secondly proposed, namely, to manifest by an Induction of
particular Instances, the engagement of these Absolute and Immutable Purposes
of God, as to the Preservation of the Saints in his Favor to the End: and
whatsoever is by Mr Goodwin excepted, as to the former Doctrine of the Decrees
and Purposes of God, in that part of his Treatise, which falls under our
consideration, shall in the vindication of the respective places of Scripture
to be insisted on, be discussed.

The First particular Instance, that I shall propose, is, that Eminent place of
the Apostle, Romans 8. 28. where you have the Truth in hand meted out unto us,
full measure, shaken together, and running over. It does not hang by the side
of his discourse, nor is left to be gathered, and concluded from other
Principles, and Assertions couched therein; but is the maine of the
Apostolical drift, and Design; it being proposed by him, to make good, upon
unquestionable Grounds, the Assurance he gives Believers, That all things work
together for Good to them that love God, to them that are Called according to
his Purpose: the reason whereof he farther adds in the following words* For
whom he did foreknow, he also did Predestinate to be conformable to the Image
of his Son, that he might be the first borne among many Brethren: moreover
whom he did Predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he also
justified, and whom he justified, them he also Glorified. What the Good aimed
at, is, for which all things shall work together, and wherein it does consist,
he manifests in the Conclusion of the Argument produced to prove his first
Assertion v. 35. 36, 37, 38, 39. Who shall separate us from the Love of God in
Christ* shall tribulation etc. The Good of Believers, of them that love God,
consists in the enjoyment of Christ, and his Love: says then the Apostle, God
will so certainly order all things, that they shall be preserved in that
enjoyment of it, whereunto in this life they are already admitted, and borne
out through all oppositions, to that perfect fruition thereof, which they aim
at; and this is so unquestionable, that the very things, which seem to lie in
the way of such an Attainment and event, shall work together, through the
Wisdom, and Love of God to that end. To make good this Consolation, the
Apostle lays down two Grounds or Principles, from whence the Truth of it does
undeniably follow: the one, taken from the Description of the Persons,
concerning whom he makes it; and the other, from the Acts of Gods Grace, and
their respective concatenation in reference to those Persons.

The Persons,. 12.
he tells you, are those, who are called according to the Purpose of God: That
their calling here mentioned, is the Effectual call of God, which is answered,
by Faith and Obedience, because it consists in the bestowing of them on the
Persons so called, taking away the Heart of stone and giving a Heart of flesh,
is not only manifest from that place, which afterward receives in the Golden
Chain of Divine Graces between Predestination and Justification, whereby the
one has infallible influencies into the other; but also from that precious
description which is given of the same Persons, viz. that they Love God, which
certainly is an Issue and fruit of Effectual Calling, as shall afterward be
further Argued. For to that Issue are things driven in this Controversy, that
proofs thereof are become needful.

The Purpose according to which these persons are called, is none other then
that, which the Apostle, cap. 9. 11. terms the Purpose of God according to
Election, cap. 11. 5. The Election of Grace, as also the Foreknowledge and
Foundation of God, as will in the Progress of our Discourse be made farther
appear, although I know not, that this is as yet questioned; The Immutability
of this Purpose of God, cap. 9. 11, 12. The Apostle demonstrates from its
Independency in any thing in them, or respect of them, concerning whom it is,
it being Eternal, and expressly safegarded against apprehensions, that might
arise, of any causall or occasional influence from any thing in them given
thereunto, they lying under this Condition alone unto God, as Persons that had
done neither good nor evil. And this also the Apostle further pursues from the
Soveraignity, Absoluteness, and Unchangeableness of the Will of God: But
these things are of another Consideration.

Now this Unchangeable Purpose and Election being the fountain, from whence
the effectual Calling of Believers does flow, the preservation of them to the
End designed the Glory whereunto they are Chosen, by those Acts of Grace and
Love, whereby they are prepared thereunto, has coincidence of Infallibillity,
as to the end aimed at, with the Purpose it self; nor is it liable to the
least exception, but what may be raised from the Mutability and Changeableness
of God in his Purposes, and Decrees. Hence in the following verse upon the
account of the Stability, and Immutability of this Purpose of God, the utmost,
and most remote End in reference to the good thereby designed unto Believers,
though having its present subsistence only in that Purpose of God, and
Infalible Concatenation of means thereunto conducing, is mentioned as a thing
actually acomplished, v. 30.

Herein also lies the Apostles second Eviction of Consolation,. 14.
formerly laid down, even in the indissoluble Concatenation of those Acts of
Grace, Love, and Favor, whereby the Persons of Gods Purpose, or the remnant,
according to the Election of Grace, shall be infallibly carried on in their
present enjoyment, and unto the full fruition of the Love of Christ. If we may
take him upon his word (and he speaks in the name and Authority of God) those
whom he does Foreknow, or fixes his thoughts peculiarly upon, from Eternity,
(for the term these, is evidently discriminated: and the Act must needs be
Eternal, which in order of Nature is previous unto Predestination, or the
appointment to the end by means designed,) those I say he does Predestinate,
and appoint in the Immutable Purpose of his Will, to be conformed unto the
Image of his Son, as in afflictions, so in Grace and Glory;

To fancy a suspension of these Acts of Grace, (some whereof are Eternal) upon
conditionalls, and they not intimated in the least in the Text, nor consistent
with the Nature of the things themselves, or the End intended, casting the
Accomplishment and bringing about of the designs of God Proposed, as his, for
our Consolation, upon the certain lubricity of the Wills of men, and thereupon
to propose an intercision of them, as to their Concattenation, and Dependence,
that they should not have a certain Influence on the one hand, descending; nor
an Unchangeable dependence, on the other Ascending; may easily be made appear,
to be so plain an opposition to the aim and design of the Apostle, as it is
possibly capable of; But because these things are really insisted on by Mr
Goodwin. I shall choose rather to remove them, as with much Rhetoric, and not
without some Sophistry they are by him pressed, then further anticipate them,
by arguments of the Text it self, of their invalidity and nullity.

The discussion of our Argument from this place of Scripture, he enters upon
Chap. 10. Sect. 42. page 207. and pursues it, being much in angled with what
himself is pleased to draw forth as the strength of it, unto Sect. 52. page
219.

Now though Mr Goodwin has not at all mentioned any Analysis of the place
insisted on, for the making out of the Truth we believe to be intended in it,
nor ever once showed his Reader the face of our Argument from hence, but only
drawn something of it forth, in such divided parcells, as he apprehended
himself able to blurre and obscure; yet to make it evident, that he has not
prevailed to foil that part of the strength of Truth (his Adversary) which he
voluntarily chose to grapple withal, I shall consider that whole discourse,
and manifest the nullity of his Exceptions unto this Testimony given in by the
Apostle to the Truth we have in hand.

To obtain his end,. 16.
Mr Goodwin undertaketh these two things,

1. First, to give in an Exposition of the place of Scripture insisted on,
whence no such conclusion as that, which he opposes (says he) can be drawn.

2. Secondly, to give in Exceptions to our Interpretation of it, and the
Inferences thereupon by us deduced. The first in these words.

For the scope of the Apostle, in the sequel of this passage, is clearly
this, as the particle for in the beginning of verse. 29. plainly shows, to
prove and make good that Assertion of his v. 28. that all things work together
for Good, to those that love God: to prove this, he shows by what Method, and
degrees of Dispensations God will bring it so to pass. Whom he fore-knowes (
says he) that is, pre-approves, (the word Knowledge frequently in Scripture
importing Approbation) as he must needs do those that love him, these he
Predestinates to be conformed to the Image of his Son: and therefore as all
things, even his deepest sufferings, wrought together for Good unto him; so
must they needs do unto those, who are Predestined, or Preordinated by God
to a Conformity with him; To give you yet, says our Apostle, a farther and
more particular account, how God in the secret of his Counsels, has laid
things in order to the bringing of them unto an actual conformity with the
Image of his Son, to wit, in Glory, whom he Predestined thereunto, (who are
such as love him, and thereupon are approved by him) you are to understand,
that whom he has so Predestined, he has also Called, (that is) has
Purposed or Decreed to Call to the knowledge of his Son, or of his Gospel, (
that is) to afford a more plain and effectual discovery of him unto them,
then unto others, whom he has not so Predestined: By the way, this Call does
not necessarily suppose a Saving Answer given unto it by the Called, no whit
more, then the Calling mentioned Mat. 20. 16. Mat: 22. 14. It only supposes a
real purpose on Gods part, to make it very sufficient to procure such an
Answer to it, from those that are Called: The Apostle advances toward his
proposed end, and adds: Those whom he Calls, them he also Justified ( that
is) according to our last expesition of the word Called, he has Purposed or
Decreed to Justify: to wit, in case the Called obstruct him not in his way, or
by their unbelief render not themselves incapable of Justification: The clause
following is likewise to be understood with the like proviso as this; Whom he
has Justified, them he also Glorified, that is, has Purposed or Decreed to
save, in case they retain the Grace of Justification, confirmed upon them to
the end.

First:. 17.
Let it be granted, that the design of the Apostle is to make good that
Assertion, Ans.
All things shall work together for Good, to them that love God, and the
Consolation for Believers, which thence he holds forth unto them; yet he does
not only show by what Method, Degrees, or Stepps, God will bring it to pass,
but also, as the Fountain of all that ensues, lays down the unalterable
Purpose of God concerning that End, which is attended in, and accomplished by
all those Stepps or Degrees of his effectual Grace after mentioned; This Mr
Goodwin passes over, as not to be wrested into any tolerable conformity with
that sense (if there be any sense in the whole of what he insists upon for the
sense of this place) which he intends to rack and press the words unto. To
save stumbling at the Threshold, (which is malum omen) he leaps at once over
the consideration of this Purpose and Design of God, as aiming at a certain
end, without the least touch upon it. Farther that God will bring it to pass,
that all things shall work together for Good to them that love him, is not
intended by Mr Goodwin, as though it should infallibly be so indeed, but only
that God will so way-lay them, with some Advantages, that it may be so, as well
as otherwise. What Consolation Believers may receive from this whole Discourse
of the Apostle, intended properly to administer it unto them, as it lies under
the Gloss ensuing, shall be discovered in our following Consideration of it:
Thus then he makes it out.

Whom he fore-Knowes,. 15.
that is Preapprooves (the word Knowledge in Scripture frequently importing
Approbation) as he mmst needs do those that Love him, them he Predestinates.

1. (First) that to Know is sometimes taken in Scripture for to Approove, Ans.
may be granted: But that the word here used must therefore signify to
Preapproove, is an assertion, which I dare not pretend to so much foreknowledge
as to think that any one besides himself will approove. Mr Goodwin (I doubt
not) knows full well that Prepositions in Greek Compositions do often
restrain simple verbs formerly at liberty for other uses, to one precise
signification. The word (...) in its constant sense in other Authors is
praescio or predecerno; (...) it self for to determine or decree: so is scisco
among the Latins, the ancient word, Plaut. in Curcul.
to know. So he in Plautus, Rogitationes plurimas propter vos populus scivit,
Cic. pro Flacco. (...) 2. de Legi^.
quas vos rogatas rumpitis. And no thing more frequent in Cicero Quae scisceret
plebs, aut quae populus juberet etc. and again Quod multa perniciose, multa
pestifere sciscuntur in populis: and, Pro Plan^io.
Plancus primus legem scivit de Publicanis: Plutarchus in Alcibiad.
In like manner is (...) frequently used (...) they determined not to do that
thing: Lucian in Prometh.
(...), says he in Lucian. He has determined unrighteous things against me.
Hence (...) is often taken for a Decree, or an established purpose as Budaeus
manifests out of Plutarch: In Scripture, the word is sundry times used, and
still in the senses before mentioned: sometimes for a simple foreknowledge; so
Paul uses it, of the Jews, who knew him before his Conversion: Act. 26. 5.
(...), it relates not to what they fore-knew, but what they knew before, or in
former days. And as the simple verb (as was showed) is often taken, for
Decerno, statuo, to decree, order, or determine, so with this composition it
seems most to be restrained to that sense. 1 Pet. 1. 20. It is said of Christ
that he was (...), he was foreknowne, or fore ordained before the foundation of
the world; which is opposed to that which follows (...)* manifested in the
last times for you, and relates to the Decree or fore purpose of God,
concerning the giving of his Son. Hence (...) is joined with (...), Gods
Determinate Counsel, as a word of the same importance. Acts 2. 23. (...) etc.
If there be any difference, the first designing the Wisdom, the latter the
Will of God in this business: In the 11. Romans 2. it has again the same
signification, God has not cast of (...) or the Remnant which among the
obstinate and unbelieving Jews, were under his everlasting purpose of Grace:
In which place causelessly, and without any attempt of proof the Remonstrants
w^est the word to signify Preapprobation: Des. Sent. Art. 1. The whole contest
and design of the Apostle, the terms of Remnant and Election, whereby the
same thing is afterward expressed, undeniably forcing the proper per
acceptance of the word. Not only the original sense, and Composition of the
word, but also the constant use of it in the Scripture, leads us away from the
Interpretation here pinned upon it.

Further, what is the meaning of Preapprooving? Gods Approoving of any Person,
as to their Persons, is his free and Gracious Acceptance of them in Christ.
His Preapprooving of them in Answer hereunto, must be his Eternal Gracious
Acceptance of them in Christ; But is this Mr Goodwin's intendment? Does God
accept any in Christ antecedently to their Predestination, Calling, and
Justification (for they are all consequentiall to this act of Preapprobation)?
This then is that which is affirmed: God approoves and accepts of men in
Christ; thereupon he Predestinates, Calls, and Justifies them. But what need
all these, if they be Antecedently accepted? I should have expected, that this
Foreknowledge should have been resolved rather into a middle, or Conditionate
Prescience, then into this Preapprobation, but that our Great Masters were
pleased (in the place newly cited) though without any attempt of proof, to
carry it another way. That God should approve of, love, accept persons
antecedently to their Predestination, Vocation, and Justification, is
doubtless not suitable to Mr Goowin's Principles. But that they should love
God also, before they fall under these Acts of his Grace, is not only openly
contradictious to the Truth, but also to it self. The phrase here of Loving
God is confessedly a description of Believers: Now to suppose men Believers,
that is to answer the Call of God, antecedently to his Call, will scarce be
salved from a flat contradiction, with any reserved Considerations, that may be
invented.

This Solid Foundation being laid,. 16.
he proceeds; Those who thus love him, and he approves of them, he
Predestinates to be conformed to the Image of his Son. It is true, the
Apostle speaks of them, and to them that Love the Lord; but does not (in the
least) suppose them, as such, to be the Objects of the Acts of his Sovereign
Grace after mentioned. If God Call none, but those that Love him Antecedently
to his Call, that Grace of his must eternally rest in his own bosom, without
the least exercise of it, toward any of the Sons of Men. It is those persons
indeed, who in the process of the Work of Gods Grace toward them, are brought
to love him, that are thus Predestined and Called: but they are so dealt
withal, not upon the Account or Consideration of their Love of God (which is
not only in order consequentiall to some of them, but the proper Effect and
product of them) but upon the Account of the Unchangeable Purpose of God,
appoynting them to Salvation; which I doubt not but Mr Goodwin studiously and
purposely omitted to insist upon, knowing its absolute inconsistency with the
Conclusion, (and yet not able to wave it, had it been once brought under
consideration) which from the Words he aims to extract. As then, to make men's
Loving of God to be antecedent to the Grace of Vocation, is an express
contradiction in it self; so to make it, or the Consideration of it, to be
previous unto Predestination, is an insinuation of a gross Pelagian figment,
giving rise and spring to Gods Eternal Predestination, not in his own
Sovereign Will, but the selfe-differencing Wills of men: Latet anguis also in
the adding grass of that exegeticall term, ( Preordinated) Predestined,
that is Preordinated; Though the word being considered in the Language, whereof
it is, seems not to give occasion to any suspicion, yet the change of it from
Preordained into Preordinated, is not to be supposed to be for nothing, in him
who is expert at these Weapons. To ordain, is either ordinare ut aliquid fiat,
or ordinem in factis statuere; or according to some, subjectum disponere ad
finem: to Preordaine, is of necessity, precisely tied up to the first sense: to
Preordinate, I fear, in Mr Goodwins sense, is but to Predispose men by some
good inclinations in themselves: and men Preordinated, are but men so
predisposed; which is the usual Gloss, that men of this persuasion put upon
Acts 13. 48.

Thus far then we have carried on the sense affixed to these words,. 17.
if it may so be called, which is evidently contradictious in it self, and in
no one particular suited to the mind of the Holy Ghost.

He proceeds, To give you yet, says our Apostle, a farther and more particular
Account, how God in the secret of his Counsel, has belaid things in order etc.

This expression ( God has belaid things in order to the Salvation of them
that love him,) is the whole of the Assurance here given by the Apostle, to the
Assertion formerly laid down for the Consolation of Believers: and this,
according to the Analogy and Proportion of our Authors Faith, amounts only
thus far: you that Love God, if you continue so to do, you will fall under
his Predestination; and if you abide under that, he will call you, so as that
you may farther obey him, or you may not: if you do obey him, and believe upon
his Call (having loved him before) he will Justify you; not with that
Justification which is final, of which you may come short; but with initiall
Justification, which if you continue in, and walk up unto, Solvite curas when
you are dead in your graves: This is called Gods belaying of things in his
secret Counsel, whereby the total Accomplishment of the first engagement is
cut off from the Root of Gods Purposes, and Branches of his effectual Grace in
the pursuit thereof, and grafted upon the wild Olive of the Will of man, that
never did, nor never will bear any wholesome fruit of it self to Eternity.
What is afterward added, of the Qualification of those whom God Predestinates,
being an intrusion of another false Hypothesis, for the Confirmation of an
Assertion of the same alloy, is not of my present consideration; But he adds:
ye are to understand, that whom he has Predestined, he has also Called,
has purposed or Decreed to Call, to the Knowledge of his Son, or his
Gospel, as before etc.

Ans. How he has Predestined them, is not expressed; but being so
Predestined, God purposes to Call them; that is them, and only them; for it
is an uniforme proceeding of God toward all, whom he attempts to bring to
himself, which is here described; That is, when men Love him, and are approved
of him, and are there-upon Preordinated to Conformity with Christ, then he
Decrees to call them, or, as the Calling here mentioned is described, (that ye
may not mistake, as though any internal effectual work of Grace were hereby
intended, but only an outward moral persuasion, by a Revelation of the Object
they should embrace) he gives a more plain and effectual Discovery of Christ
to them, then to any others. Doubtless it is evident to every one, that
(besides the great Confusion, whereunto the proceedings of God in bringing
sinners to himself, or belaying, their coming with some kind entertainments,
are cast into,) the whole work of Salvation is resolved into the Wills of Men,
and instead of an Effectual, Operative, Unchangeable Purpose of God, nothing
is left on his part, but a moral Approbation of what is well done, and a
proposing of other desirable things unto men, upon the Account of former worthy
carriages. And this is no small part of the intendment of our Author in this
undertaking.

That God decrees to call them, Deuteronomy. 7. 7.
and only them, who love him, Ezekiel. 16. 6.
and upon that account are approved of him, Math 11. 26.
when all Faith and Love are the Fruits of that Calling of his, is such a
figment, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. 3.
as I shall not need to cast away words in the Confutation of it.

Yet,. 18.
least any should have too high thoughts of this Grace of Vocation, he tells
them by the way, that it does not necessarily suppose a saving Answer given to
it by the called no whit more then the Calling mentioned Mat. 20. 21. Mat. 22.
14.

1. (First) by Mr Goodwin's Confession here is as yet no great Advance made
toward the proof of the Assertion laid down in the Entrance, and for the
Confirmation whereof this Series, and Concatenation of Divine Graces is
insisted on. Though men Love God, are Predestined, and accepted, yet when it
comes to Calling, they may stop there and perish everlastingly: for many are
called, but few are chosen; They are indeed be-layd by a Calling, but they may
miss the place of its Residence, or refuse to accept of its entertainment, and
pass on to ruin. But

2. (Secondly) They are so called, as upon the account thereof to be Justified
For whom he Calls, he Justifies. Yea in case they obey: But this is the
Interpretation of the new Apostle, not the old; neither has the Text any such
supposition, nor will the Context bear it, nor can the design of the Apostle
consist with it, nor any more consolation be squeezed from this place upon the
account of it, then of milk from a flint in the Rock of stone. Neither

3. (Thirdly) does the calling here mentioned, hold any Analogy with that of
the many that are called, but not chosen, pointed at in the second place
instanced in; being indeed the Effectual, calling of the few who are chosen.
For as our Savior in those places of Matthew, mentioned two sorts of Persons,
some that have a general Call but are not Chosen: and others, that being
Chosen, are therefore distinguished from the former, as to their Vocation; so
Paul here tells ye, that the Calling he insists on, is the peculiar Call of God
according to his Purpose (the same Purpose intimated by our Savior) which
being suited of God to the carrying on and accomplishing of that Purpose of
his, must be effectual, unless he through Mutability, and Impotency come
short of accomplishing the design of his Will and Wisdom.

Neither is this Salved by what follows that it is the Intention of God, to
make this call sufficient for the end purposed: Yea this part of the Wallet is
most filled with folly and falsehood. For as general Purposes of giving means
for an End, with an intention to bring that end about, that may or may not
attain it, are most remote from God, and being supposed, are destructive to
all his holy and blessed Atributes, and Perfections, as has been shown: So the
thing it self, of sufficient Grace of Vocation, which is not Effectual, is a
gross figment, not whilst this world continues, by M. Goodwin to be made Good:
The most of his Arguments being importunate sugestions of his own false
Hypotheses and Conceptions. But he goes on,

The Apostle advances toward his proposed end,. 19.
and adds, those whom he called, them he also Justified, or decreed to
Justify, in case the called obstruct him not in his way, or by their unbelief
render not themselves incapable of Justification.

Ans. That exception ( in case they obstruct him not) is a Clew, to lead us
into all the corners of of this Labyrinth, and a key to the whole design in
hand. Such a supposall it is, as not only enervates the whole Discourse of the
Apostle, and frustrats his design, but also opens a door for the Questioning
of the Accomplishment of any Purpose, or Promise of God what ever; and in one
word, rejects the whole Efficacy of the Grace of the Gospel, as a thing of
naught. What strength is there in the Discourse and arguing of the Apostle from
the Purpose, and ensuing Series of Gods Grace, to prove that all things Should
work together for good to them that Love God, if the whole issue and Event of
things mentioned to that end, depend not on the efficacy or effectual
Influences of those Acts of God, one upon an other, and all upon the end; they
being all and every one of them, Jointly, and severally suspended upon the
wills of the Persons themselves, concerning whom they are, (which yet here is
concealed and intimated in the least?) How does it prove at all, that they
shall never be separated from the Love of Christ, that they shall be made
conformable to him in Glory, notwithstanding all opposition, upon the account
of the dispensation of Gods Eternal and Actual Love toward them, when the
whole of their usefulness to the End proposed, is resolved ultimately into
themselves and their endeavors; and not into any purpose or Act of God? Such
as is the foundation, such is the strength of the whole building. Inferences
can have no more strength, then the Principle from whence they are deduced; If
a man should tell another, that if he will go a Journey of a hundred miles, at
each twenty miles end, he shall meet with such and such refreshments: all the
consolation he can receive upon the account of refreshment provided for him, is
proportioned only to the thoughts he has of his own strength for the
performance of that Journey.

Farther, If in such Expressions of the Purposed Works of God, we may put
Cases, and trust in what supposalls we think good, where there is not the least
Jot, Title, or Syllable of them in the Text, nor any room for them, without
destroying, not only the design and meaning of the place, but the very sense
of it; why may not we do so in other undertakings of God, the certainty of
whose Event, depends upon his Purpose and Promise only? For instance, The
Resurrection of the Dead; may we not say God will raise up the dead in Christ,
in case there be any necessity that their bodies should be glorified? What is
it also that remains of praise to the Glorious grace of God? This is all he
effects by it: in case men obstruct him not in his way, it does good. God calls
men to Faith and Obedience: in case they obstruct not his way, it shall do
them good; But how do they obstruct his way? By Unbelief, and Disobedience:
take them away, and Gods calling shall be effectual to them: that is, in case
they Believe and Obey, Gods Calling shall be effectual to cause them to
Believe and Obey.

The Cases then foisted into the Apostles discourse,. 20.
in the close of this Interpretation of the place (if I may so call it) namely,
that God will justify the Called, in case they obstruct not his way; and will
glorify them whom he has justified, in case they continue and abide in the
state of Justification, are First, thrust in without Ground, Warrant, or Color
of Advantage, or occasion given by any thing in the Text, or Context: and,
Secondly, are destructive to the whole design of the Holy Ghost in the place
whereinto they are intruded: injurious to the Truth of the Assertion intended
to be made good, that all things shall work together for Good, proposed upon
the account of the unchangeable purpose of God, and infallible Connection of the
Acts of his Love and Grace in the Pursuit thereof: and resolve the promised
work and designed event, wholly into the uncertain lubricous wills of men,
making the Assurance given, not only to be liable to just Exceptions, but
evidently to fail, and be falsified in respect of thousands: and, Thirdly,
render the whole dispensation of the Grace of God to Lackey after the Wills of
Men, and wholly to depend upon them, Giving in thereby (as was said)
Innumerable Presumptions, that the word, for whose Confirmation all these Acts
of Gods Grace are mentioned and insisted on, shall never be made good nor
established.

Take then in few words the sense and scope of this place, as it is held out in
the Exposition given of it by M. Goodwin, and we will then proceed to consider
his Confirmations of the said Exposition; Oh you that Love God, many
Afflictions, Temptations, and Oppositions ye shall meet withal, but be of good
comfort, all shall work together for your Good, for God has appointed you to
be like his Son, and you may triumph in every Condition on this account; for
if ye before any Act of his special Grace toward you, Love him, he Approves
you, and then he Predestinates you: (what that is I know not) then it is in
your power to continue to love him, or to do otherwise: if ye abide not, then
ye perish; if ye abide, he will call you: and when he does so, either ye may
obey him, or ye may not; if you do not, all things shall work together for
your hurt, and ye will be like the Devil: if you do, then he will justify
you, and then if you abide with him, as perhaps ye may, perhaps ye may not, he
will finally Justify you; and then all shall be well. This being the substance
of the Interpretation of this place here given, let us now consider how it is
confirmed.

That,. 21.
which in his own terms he undertaketh to Demonstrate, and to vindicate from
all Objections in his ensuing Discourse, he thus expresses, page 209. Sect:
43. These Decrees or purposed Acts of God here specified, are to be understood
in their successive dependencies, with such a condition or proviso
respectively, as those mentioned; and not absolutely, peremptorily, or without
Condition.

Ans. The imposing of Conditions and Provisoes, upon the Decrees and Purposes
of God, of which himself gives not the least intimation, and the suspending
them, as to their Execution, on those conditions so invented and imposed, at
the first view reflects so evidently on the Will, Wisdom, Power, Pre-science,
and Unchangeablenesse of God, who has said, his Purposes shall stand, and he
will do all his Pleasure, especially when the Interruption of them does
frustrate the whole design and aim of God in the mentioning of those Decrees
and Purposes of his; that there will be need of Demonstrations written with the
Beams of the Sun, to enforce men, tender, and regardfull of the Honor and
Glory of God, to close with any in such an undertaking; let us then consider
what is produced to this end, and try if it will hold weight in the balance of
the Sanctuary. This, says he, appears, First,

1. By the like Phrase or manner of expression, frequent in the Scripture
elsewhere. I mean, when such Purposes or Decrees of God, the respective
Execution whereof, are suspended upon such and such conditions, are
notwithstanding simply and positively, without any mention of Condition,
expressed and asserted. Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says; I said indeed
that thy House, and the House of thy Father shall walk before me, ( meaning
in the Office and Dignity of the Priesthood) for ever. But now says the Lord,
be it far from me; I said indeed, that is, I verily Purposed or Decreed, or I
Promised; it comes much to one; When God made the Promise and so declared his
Promise accordingly, that Eli and his Fathers house should walk before him for
ever, he expressed no condition, as required to the Execution or performance of
it, yet here it plainly appears, that there was a condition understood; In the
same kind of Dialect Samuel speaks to Saul; Thou have done foolishly, thou have
not kept the Commandment of the Lord thy God; for now the Lord had established
thy Kingdom upon Israel for ever; but now thy Kingdom shall not continue: the
Lord had established, that is, he verily purposed, or decreed to establish it
for ever, to wit, in case his posterity had walked obediently with him.

Here we have the strength (as will be manifest in the progress of our
Discourse) of what Mr Goodwin has,. 22.
to make good his former strange Assertion; Whether it will amount to a
necessary proof or no, may appear upon these ensuing Considerations.

1. First: The Reason intimated, being taken neither from the Text under
debate, nor the Context, nor any other place, where any concernement of the
Doctrine therein contained, is touched, or pointed at, there being also no
Coincidence of phrase or expression in the one place and the other here
compared: I cannot but admire by what Rules of Interpretation M. Goodwin does
proceed, to make one of these places exegeticall of the other. Though this way
of Arguing has been mainly, and almost solely insisted on of late, by the
Socinians, viz. Such a word is in another place used to another purpose, or in
another sense, therefore this cannot be the necessary sense of it in this: yet
it is not only confuted over and over, as irrational, and unconcluding, but
generally exploded, as an Invention suited only to shake all Certainty whatever
in matters of Faith, and Revelation. Mr Goodwin in his instance goes not so
far, (or rather he goes farther, because his instance goes not so far)
there being no likelinesse, much less samenesse of Expression in those Texts,
which he produces to weaken the obvious, and literally exposed sense of the
other insisted on therewith. To wave the force of the inference from the words
of the Holy Ghost, (seeing nothing in the least intimated in the place will
give in any assistance thereunto.) First,

1. This Thesis is introduced. The Purposes, and Decrees of God (confessedly
engaged in the place in hand) are, as to their respective Executions, suspended
on conditions in men. An Assertion destructive to the Power-Goodnesse, Grace,
Righteousness, Faithfulness, Wisdom, Unchangeablenesse, Providence, and
Sovereignty of God, as might be demonstrated, did it now lie in our way. To
prove that this must needs be so, and that that Rule must take place, in the
mention that is made of the Purpose and Decrees of God, ( Romans 8. 1.) 1 Samuel 2.
30. is produced, being a Denunciation of Gods judgments upon the House of Eli,
for their unworthy walking in the honor of the Priesthood, whereunto they were
by him advanced and called, and which they were entrusted withal, expressly
upon condition of their obedience; Let us then a little consider the
Correspondency, that is between the places compared for their mutual
illustration.

1. (First,) in the one, there is express mention of the Purpose of God, and
that his Eternal Purpose: in the other, only a Promise expressly Conditional
in the giving, of it, amounting to no more then a Law, without the least
intimation of any Purpose or Decree.

2. (Secondly,) The one incompasseth the whole design of the Grace of the
Gospel; the other mention not any special Grace at all.

3. (Thirdly,) the one is wholly expressive of the Acts of God, and his design
therein; the other declarative of the Duty of man, with the issue there upon
depending. This then is the strength of this Argument. God approoving the
Obedience of a man tells him, that upon the Continuance of that Obedience in
him, and his, he will continue them an Office in his service; (a temporal
mercy, which might be enjoyed without the least saving Grace) and which upon
his Disobedience, he threatens to take from him: (both Promise and threatening
being declarative of his approbation of obedience, and his annexing the
Preisthood thereunto, in that family) therefore God intending the consolation
of Elect Believers, affirming that all things shall work together for their
good, upon this Account, that he has Eternally Purposed to preserve them in
his Love, and to bring them to him self by such Effectual Acts of his Grace,
as whose Immutable dependence one upon the other, and all upon his own Purpose
cannot be interrupted, and therefore such, as shall infallibly produce and
work in them all the obedience, which for the end proposed he requires. His
Purposes I say thus mentioned, must be of the same Import with the declaration
of his Will in the other place spoken of; If such a Confounding of the Decrees
and Denuntiations, Absolute Purposes, and Conditional Promises, Spiritual
things with Temporal, and the General Administration of the Covenant of Grace
in Christ, with Special Providentiall Dispensations may be allowed, there is
no man needs to despair of prooving any thing he has a mind to assert.

3. (Thirdly) there are two things, that Mr Goodwin insists upon to make good
his arguing from this place.

First, that these words ( I said indeed) hold out the real Purpose and Decree
of God.

Secondly, that in the Promise mentioned, there was no Condition expressed, or
required to the Execution, or Performance of it.

By the First he intends, that God did really Purpose and Decree from Eternity,
that Eli and his House should hold the Preisthood for ever: By the Second, that
no condition was expressed, neither in terms, or necessarily employed in the
thing it self, which is of the same import.

If neither of these now should prove true, what little advance has M. Goodwin
made for the weakening of the plain intendment of the words in the place under
consideration, or for the confirmation of his own gloss and interposed
conditionals, either by this, or the following instances, that are of the same
kind will plainly appear. Now that these words ( I said indeed) are not
declarative of an Eternal Decree and Purpose of God, concerning the futurition
and event of what is asserted to be the object of that Decree, the Continuance
of the Priesthood in the house of Eli, may be evidenced, as from the general
nature of the things themselves, so from the particular explanation of the Act
of God, whereunto this expression ( I said indeed) does relate.

1. First,. 23.
from the General nature of the thing it self, may this be manifested. To
what has been formerly spoken, I shall add only some few Considerations,
being not willing to insist long, on that which is but collateral to my
present design.

1. First then, when God Decreed and Purposed this, (if so be he purposed it,
as it is said he did) he either foresaw what would be the issue of it, or he
did not? If he did not? where is his infinite Wisdom and Understanding? If we
may not be allowed to say his foreknowledge? How are all his works known to
him from the foundation of the World? How does he declare the End from the
Beginning, Acts 15. 18. Isa.
and the things that are yet to come? Distinguishing himself from all false
gods on this account? If he did foresee the Event, that it would not be so;
Why did he Decree and Purpose it should be so? Does this become the infinite
Wisdom of God to Purpose and Decree from all Eternity, that that shall come to
pass, which he knows will never come to pass? Can any such Resolution fall
upon the Sons of men, to whom God is pleased to continue the use of that
little spark of Reason, wherewith they are endued? If you say, God purposed it
should continue, in case their disobedience hindered it not; I ask again, did
God foresee the Disobedience that would so hinder it, or did he not? If he did
not, the same difficulties will arise which formerly I mentioned. If he did,
then God decreed and purposed that the Priesthood should continue in the House
of Eli, if they kept themselves from that disobedience, which he saw and knew
full well they would run into. ( Cui sint?)

2. Secondly, if God did thus Purpose and Decree, he was able to bring it
about, and accomplish his design by ways agreeable to his Goodness, Wisdom,
and Righteousness, or he was not. If he was not, where is his Omnipotency, who
is not able to fulfill his Righteous Designs and Purposes, in way,
corresponding to that state of Agents and things, which he has allotted them?
How can it be said of him, he will work, and none shall let him? That God
ingageth his Power, for the Accomplishment of his Purposes was showed before;
If he were able to accomplish it, why did he not do it, but suffer himself to
be frustrated of his end? Is it suitable to the Sovereign Will and Wisdom of
God, eternally to purpose and Decree that, which by means agreeable to his
Holiness and Goodness, he is able to bring to pass, and yet not to do it,
but to fail and come short of his Holy and Gracious intendment.

3. Thirdly, the Obedience of the House of Eli, on which the Accomplishment of
the pretended Decree is suspended, was such, as either they were able of
themselves to perform, or they were not? To say they were, is to exclude the
necessary Assistance of the Grace of God, which Mr Goodwin has not in terms
declared himself to do, not are we as yet arrived at that height, though a
considerable progress has been made. If they were not able to do it, without
the Assistance of the Spirit, and Concurrence of the Grace of God: did the Lord
purpose to give them that Assistance, working in them both to will, and to do
of his own good pleasure? or did he not? If he did so purpose, why did the not
do it? If he did not purpose to do it, to what end did he Decree, that that
should come to pass, which he knew could not come to pass, without his doing
that, which he was resolved never to do? It is all one, as if a man knew that
another were shut up in a prison, from whence it was impossible that any body,
but himself, should deliver him; and should Resolve, and Purpose to give the
poor prisoner an hundred pound, so that he would come out of prison to him,
and resolve withal never to bring him out.

4. Fourthly, God from Eternity foresaw, that the Priesthood should not be
continued to the House of Eli: therefore he did not from Eternity Purpose and
Decree, that it should. To know that a thing shall not be, and to determine
that it shall be, is a (...), rather beseeming an half frantik Creature, then
the infinitely Wise Creator. Again, upon what account did God Foresee, that it
should not be so? Can the futurition of Contingent Events be resolved in the
Issue into any thing but Gods Sovereign Determination? God therefore did not
Determine and Purpose, that it should be so; because he Determined, and
Purposed, that it should not be so. Whatsoever he does in time, that he
purposed, to do from Eternity; Now in time he remooved the Priesthood from the
House of Eli, therefore he Eternally Purposed, and Determined so to do; which
surely leaves no place for a contrary Purpose, and Decree, (not so much as
Conditional) that it should so continue for ever. The truth is, the mystery of
this Abomination lies in those things, which lie not in my way now to handle. A
disjunctive Decree, a middle Science, Creature Dependency are Father, Mother,
and Nurse of the Assertion we oppose, whose monstrous Deformity, and desperate
Rebellion against the Propertyes of God, I may (the Lord assisting) hereafter
more fully Demonstrate.

But you will say;. 24.
does not the Lord planely hold out a Purpose, and Decree in these words, I
said in deed? Did he say it? Will you assign Hypocrisy to him, and doubling
with the sons of men?

I say then secondly; that the expression here used holds out no intention nor
Purpose of God, (as to the Futurition and Event of the thing it self) that the
Priesthood should continue in the House of Eli, but only his Purpose and
Intention that Obedience and the Priesthood should go together. There is a
Connection of things, not an Intendment or Purpose of Events, in the words
intimated. The latter cannot be ascribed to God, without the charge of as
formal Mutability as the poorest Creature is liable to. Mr Goodwin indeed
tells ye, Sect. 43. page 209. That the Purpose of God it self considered, as
an act, or conception of the mind of God, depends not on any Condition what
soever, and all Gods Purposes, and Decrees without exception, are in such
respect absolute, and independent: How weak and unable this is to free the
Lord from a charge of Changeableness upon his supposalls, needs little pains
to demonstrate. The Conceptions of the minds of the Sons of men and their
Purposes, as such, are as absolutely free and inconditionall, as the nature of
a Creature will admit: only the Execution of our Purposes and resolves is
suspended upon the Intervention of other things, which render them all
Conditional; And this it seems is the state with God himself; although in
the Scripture he most frequently distinguishes himself from the Sons of
men, on this acompt, that they purpose at the greatest rate of uncertainty
imaginable, as to the accomplishment of their thoughts, and therefore are
frequently disappointed; but his Purposes and his Counsels stand for ever. so
Psa. 33. 10, 11. The expression then here (I said) relates plainly to the in
vestiture of Aaron and his seed in the Priesthood. There was a twofold
engagement made to the House of Aaron about that office: one in General to him
and his Sons: the other in Particular, to Phinehas and his Posterity. The
latter to Phinehas is far more expressive and significant, then the other;
you have it Numb. 25. 11, 12, 13. Phinehas the Son of Fleazar, the Son of
Aaron the Priest, has turned my Wrath away from the Children of Israel, while
he was Zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed not the Children of
Israel in my Jealousy: wherefore say I, Behold, I give unto him my Covenant of
peace, and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the Covenant of an
everlasting Priesthood, because he was Zealous for God, and made an Atonement
for the Children of Israel. Here is a Promise indeed, and no Condition in
terms expressed: But yet being made and granted upon the Condition of
Obedience, which is clearly expressed once and again, that the Continuance of
it was also suspended on that Condition, (as to the Glory and beauty of that
office, the thing principally intended) cannot be doubted; yea it is
sufficiently expressed in the Occasion of the Promise, and fountain thereof.
But this was not that promise, wherein Eli's was particularly concerned. Indeed
his Posterity was rejected in order to the accomplishment of this Promise, the
seed of Phinehas returning to their dignity from whence they fell, by the
interposition of the House of Ithamar.

That which this Expression here peculiarly relates unto,. 25.
is the Declaration of the mind of God, concerning the Priesthood of Aaron and
his posterity, which you have Exodus 28. 43. Exodus 29. 91. where the
confirming them in their Office is called a perpetual Statute, or a Law for
ever; The signification of the term for ever, in the Hebrew especially,
relating to Legal Institutions, is known. Their Eternity is long since
expired; that then which God here Emphatically expresses, as an Act of Grace
and Favor to the House of Aaron, which Eli and his had interest in, was that
Statute or Law of the Priesthood: and his purpose and intention (not concerning
the Event of things, not that it should continue in any one branch of that
Family, but) of his connexing it with their Obedience and Faithfulness in that
Office. It is very frequent with God to express his Approbation of our duty,
under terms holding out the Event, that would be the Issue of the duty, though
it never come to pass: and his disapprobation or rejection of the Sons of
Men, under terms that hold out the end of that disobedience, though it be
prevented, or removed. In this latter case, he commands Jonas to cry, yet forty
days and Niniveh shall perish; not that he purposed the destruction of Niniveh
at that time, but only effectually to hold out the end of their sin, that it
might be a means to turn them from it, and to prevent that end, which it
would otherwise procure. His purpose was to prevent, at least prorogue the
ruin of Niniveh, and therefore made use of threatening them with ruin, that
they might not be ruined. To say that God purposed not the execution of his
purpose, but in such and such cases, is a plain Contradiction. The purpose is
of Execution, and to say, he purposed not the Execution of his Purposes, is to
say plainly, he purposed and purposed not, or he purposed not what he purposed.
The examples of Pharaoh and Abraham, in the precepts given to them, are proefes
of the former: but I must not insist upon particulars.

This then is all that here is intended.. 26.
God making a Law, a Statute about the continuance of the Priesthood in the
Family of Aaron, affirms, that then he said his House should walk before him
for ever, that is, with Approbation and Acceptance: for as to the right of the
Priesthood, that still continued in the House of Aaron, whilst it continued,
notwithstanding the ejection of Fli and his. Now whether there were any
conditions in the promise made, which is Mr Goodwins second improvement of this
instance, may appear from the Consideration of what has been spoken
concerning it. It is called a Law, and St^^u^e, the Act: on that Account, what
ever it were, that God here points unto, is but a Moral legislative Act, and
not a Physical determining Act of the Will of God; and being a Law of
Privilege in its own nature, it involves a condition, which the Acts of Gods
Will vital and eternal, wherewith this Law is compared, do openly disavow.

Let us now see the parallel between the two places insisted on, for the
Explanation of the former of them, which as it will appear by the sequel, is
the only Buckler, wherewith Mr Goodwin defends his Hypothesis, from the
irresistible force of the Argument, wherewith he has to do. First, the one
speaks of things Spiritual, the other of Temporal. Secondly, The one of what
what God will do, and the other of what he approves to be done, being done.
Thirdly, The one holds out Gods Decree and Purpose concerning Events, the other
his Law and Statute concerning duties. Fourthly, The one not capable of
interposing Conditionalls, without perverting the whole design of God revealed
in that place; the other directly including conditions. Fifthly, The one
speaking of things themselves; the other only of the manner of a thing. Sixthly,
In the one, God holds out what he will do for the Good of his, upon the
account of the Efficacy of his Grace; In the other, what men are to do, if
they will be approved of him. And how one of these places can be imagined to be
suited for the illustration and interpretation of the other, which agree
neither in name, nor thing, word, nor deed, purpose, nor design, must be left
to the judgments of those, who desire to ponder these things, and to weigh
them in the balance of the Sanctuary.

The other instances in the Case of Saul and Paul,. 27.
being more heterogeneous to the business in hand, then that of Eli which went
before, require not any particular help for the removal of them out of the
way. Though they are Dead, as to the end for which they are produced, I presume
no true Israelite in the pursuit of that Sheba in the Church, the Apostasy of
Saints, will be retarded in his way, by their being cast before them. In
brief, neither the Connection of obedience, and suited Rewards, as in the case
of Saul; nor the necessity of means subservient to the Accomplishment of
purposes themselves also falling under that purpose of him, who intends the
end, and the fulfilling of it, as in the Case of Paul, are of the least force
to persuade us, that the Eternal Immanent Acts of Gods will, which he pursues
by the Effectual irresistible Acts of his Grace, so to compass the end, which
he has from everlasting determinately resolved to bring about, are suspended
upon imaginary Conditions, created in the brains of men, and (notwithstanding
their Evident inconsistency with the scope of the Scripture, and design of God
therein) intruded into such Texts of Scripture, as on all hands, (which will be
evident in the sequel of this Discourse) are fortified against them.

Besides, in the Case of Paul, though the infallibility of the Prediction did
not in the least prejudice the Liberty of the Agents, who were to be employed
for its accomplishment, but left room for the Exhortation of Paul, and the
endeavors of the Soldiers, yet it cutts off all possibility of a contrary
event and all supposall of a disjunctive purpose in God, upon the account
whereof he cannot predict the issue, or event of any thing whatsoever. But of
this more largely afterward.

But this is farther Argued by Mr Goodwin, from the purposes of God in his
threatenings,. 28.
in these words. Most frequently the purpose and Decree of God, concerning the
punishment of wicked and ungodly men, is expressed by the Holy Ghost,
absolutely and certainly, without the least mention of any condition, of
relaxation or reversion: yet from other passages of Scripture it is fully
evident, that this Decree of his is conditional, in such a sense, which
imports a non-execution of the punishment therein declared, upon the repentance
of the Persons, against whom the Decree is. In like manner though the purpose
and Decree of God, for the justification of those who are called, (and so for
the Glorifying of those that shall be Justified) be (in the Scripture in hand)
delivered in an absolute and unconditioned form of words; yet is it no way
necessary to supose, (the most familiar frequent, and accustomed expression in
Scripture in such cases, exempting us from any such necessity) that therefore
these Decrees must needs bring forth against all possible interveniences
whatever; so that (for example) he that is called by the Word and Spirit, must
needs be Justified, whether he truly Believe or no; and he that is Justified
must needs be Glorified, whether he Persevere or no.

Ans. 1. That the Threatenings of God are moral Acts, not declarative, as to
Particular Persons, of Gods Eternal Purposes, but subservient to other ends
together with the Law it self, whereof they are a Portion; (as the avoiding of
that for which men are threatened) is known. They are Appendixes of the Law,
and in their Relation thereunto, declare the Connection, that is between Sin
and Pnnishment, such Sins and such Punishments.

2. That the Eternal Purposes of God concerning the works of his Grace, are
to be measured by rule and Analogy of his Temporal Threatenings, is an
Assertion striking at the very Root of the Covenant of Grace, and efficacy of
the Mediation of the Lord Jesus, yea at the very being of Divine Perfections of
the nature of God himself. This there is indeed in all Threatenings declared of
the absolute Purpose, and Unchangeable Decree of God, that all impenitent
sinners shall be punished, according to what in his Wisdom, and Righteousness
he has apportioned out unto such deservings, and threatens accordingly. In
this regard there is no Condition, that does, or can (in the least) import a
non-execution of the Punishment Decreed; Neither do any of the Texts cited in
the Margent of our Author, prove any such thing. They all indeed positively
affirm, Faithless, Impenitent Unbelievers shall be Destroyed, which no
supposall whatsoever, that takes not away the Subject of the Question, (and so
alters the whole thing in Debate) can in the least infringe. Such assertions (I
say) are parts of the Law of God revealing his will in General, to Punish
impenitent Unbelievers, concerning which his Purpose is absolute, Unalterable,
and Steadfast.

The conclusion then, which Mr Goodwin makes, is apparently racked from the
words, by stretching them upon the unproportioned bed of other Phrases, and
Expressions wholly Hetcrogeneous to the design in this place intended, Added
here are supposed Conditions in general, not once explayned to keep them from
being exposed to that shame that is due unto them, when their (intrusion
without all order or warrant from Heaven) shall be manifested; only wrapped up
in the Clouds of possible Interveniences, when the Acts of Gods Grace, whereby
his Purposes, and Decrees are accomplished, do consist in the effectual
removeall of the Interveniences pretended, that so the end aimed at in the
Uuchangeable Counsel of God, may (suitably to the determination of his
Soveragin, Omnipotent, Infinite, Wise Will) be accomplished. Neither does it in
the least appear, that any such Calling by the Word and Spirit, as may leave
the Persons so called in their unbelief, (they being so called in the pursuit
of this Purpose of God, to give them Faith, and make them conformable to
Christ) may be allowed place, or Room in the Haven of this Text: The like may
be said of Justification, wherein men do not Persevere. Yea these two
supposalls are only not an open beging of the thing in Contest, but a flat
defying of the Apostle as to the validity of his Demonstration, That all things
shall work together etc.

Notwithstanding then any thing that has been objected to the contrary, the
Foundation of God mentioned in this place of Scripture stands ^irme, and his
Eternal Purpose of safegarding the Saints in the Love of Christ, until he
bring them to the enjoyment of himself in Glory, stands clear from the least
shadow of Change, or suspension upon any certain Conditionalls, which are
confidently (but not so much as speciously) obtruded upon it.

The next thing undertaken by Mr Goodwin,. 29.
is to vindicate the forementioned Glosses from such oppositions, as arise
against them from the Context, and words themselves, with the design of the
Holy Ghost therein: These things does He find his Exposition obnoxious unto.
The exposition which He pretends to give no strength unto, but what is
foreign on all Considerations whatsoever of words and things, to the place it
self: This, it seems, is to prophesy according to the Analogy of Faith. Romans
12: 6.


First then Sect. 44. To the Objection, that those who are Called are also
Justified, and shall be Glorified, according to the Tenor of the series of the
Acts of the Grace of God here laid down, he Answers, That where either the
one, or the other of these Assertions, be so or no, it must be Judged of by
other Scriptures; Certain it is by what has bin argued concerning the frequent
usage of the Scripture in point of Expression, that it cannot be concluded or
determined by the Scripture in hand. The Sum of this Answer amounts to thus
much: Although the sense opposed be clear in the Letter, and Expression of
this place of Scripture, in the Grammatical sense, and use of the words;
though it flows from the whole Context, and Answers (alone) the design, and
scope of the place, which gives not the least Countenance to the interposing of
any such Conditionalls, as are framed, to force it to speak contrary to what
((...)) it holds forth: yet the mind of God in the words, is not from these
things to be concluded on; but other significations and senses, not of any word
here used, not from the laying down of the same Doctrine in other places with
the Analogy of the Faith thereof, not from the proposing of any design
suitable to this here expressed, but places of Scripture agreeing with this,
neither in Name, nor Thing, Expression, nor Design, Word, nor Matter, must be
found out in the sense and meaning of this place, and be from them concluded,
and our interpretation of this place accordingly regulated. Nobis non licet
etc. neither has M. Goodwin then produced any place of Scripture, nor can he
parallel to this so much as in expressio^, though treating of any other subject
or matter, that will endure to have any fuch sense tied to it, as that which he
violently imposes on this place of the Apostle. And of the Sense, and Mind of
God in this place, may not safely be received and closed withal, from the
proper and ordinary fignification of the word (which is always attended unto
without the least dispute, unless the subject matter of any place, with the
Context enforces to the sense left usual and natural) with the clear design
and scope of the Context in all the parts of it, universally correspondent unto
it self; I know not how, or when, or by what Rules we may have the least
certainty, that we have attaind the knowledge of the mind of God in any one
place of Scripture whatever.

What he nextly objects to himself,. 30.
namely that, though there be no Condition expressed, in the instances by him
produced, yet there are in parallel places, by which they are to be expounded,
(but such conditions as these, are not expressed in any place, that answers to
that which we have in hand) it being by himself, (as I conceive) invented to
turn us aside from the Consideration of the irresistible efficacy of the
Argument from this place, (which use he makes of it in his first answer given
to it) I own not: and that because I am fully assured, that in any promise
whatsoever, that is indeed Conditional, there is no need to enquire out other
Scriptures of the like import, to evince it so to be; all and every one of them
that are such, either in express terms, or in the matter whereof they are, or
in the Legal manner wherein they are given and enacted, do plainly and
undeniably hold out the Conditions enquired after. His threefold Answer to this
Objection, needs not to detain us: Passing on (I hope) to what is more
material and weighty; He tells us First ( Sect. 44.) that if this be so, then
it must be tried out by other Scriptures, and not by this: which Evasion I can
allow our Author to insist on, as tending to shift his hands of this place,
which I am persuaded in the Consideration of it, grew heavy on them. But I
cannot allow it to be a plea in this Contest, as not owning the Objection which
it pretends to answer. The two following Answers, being not an actual doing of
any thing, but only fair and large promises of what Mr Goodwin will do, about
answering other Scriptures, and evincing the Conditionalls intimated from such
others, as he shall produce; (some, doubtless will think these promises no
payment, especially such as having weighed Money formerly tendered for real
payment, have found it too light) I shall let them lie in Expectation of their
accomplishment. Rusticus expectat etc.

In the mean time, (till Answers come to hand) Mr Goodwin proffers to prove
by two Arguments,. 31.
(one clear Answer had been more fair) that these Acts of God, Calling,
Justification, and so the rest, have no such Connection between them, but that
the one of of them may be taken, and be put in execution, and yet not the
other, in respect of the same persons.

His first Reason is this: If the Apostle should frame this Series or Chain of
Divine Acts, with an intent to show or teach the uninterruptiblenesse of it, in
what case, or cases soever, he should fight against his General, and maine
scope or design in that part of the chapter, which lies from v. 17. Which
clearly is this, to encourage them to constancy, and Perseverance in suffering
afflictions. For to suggest any such thing, as that being Called and Justified,
nothing could hinder them from being Glorified, were to furnish them with a
ground, on which to neglect his exhortation; for who will be persuaded to
suffer Tribulation for the otaining of that, which they have sufficient
Assurance given, that they shall obtain, whether they suffer such things or
no: therefore certainly the Apostle did not intend here to teach the certainty
of Perseverance in those that are Justified.

Ans. Ans.
That this Argument is of such a Composition as not to operate much in the case
in hand, will easily appear; For

1. First, those expressions [ in what Case or Cases soever] are foysted into
the sense, and sentence of them, whom he opposes; who affirm the Acts of Gods
Grace here mentioned to be effectually, and vertually Preventive of those
cases, and of which might possibly give any Interruption to the Series of them.

2. Secondly, Whatsoever is here pretended of the maine scope of the Chapter,
the scope of the place, we have under consideration, was granted before, to be
the making Good of that Assertion premised in the Head thereof, that all things
should work together for good to Believers, and that so to make it Good, that
upon this Demonstration of it, they might triumph with Joy and Exultation:
which it cannot be denied, but that this uninterruptible series of Divine Acts,
(not framed by the Apostle, but) revealed by the Holy Ghost, is fitted and
suited to do.

3. Thirdly, suppose that be the Scope of the foregoing verses; What is there
in the Theses insisted on, and the sense embraced by us, opposite thereunto.
Why to suggest any such thing to them as, that being Called, and Justified,
nothing could possibly interpose to hinder them from being Glorified, (that is
that God by his grace will preserve them from departing wilfully from him, and
will in Jesus Christ establish his Love to them for ever) was to furnish them
with a motive to neglect his exhortations: yea but this kind of Arguing we call
here Petitio principii, and it is accounted with us nothing valid; The thing in
Question, is produced as the medium to Argue by. We affirm there is no
stronger motive possible to encourage them to Perseverance, then this proposed.
It is otherwise says Mr Goodwin; and its being otherwise in his Opinion, is
the medium whereby he disproves not only that, but another Truth, which he also
opposes. But he adds this Reason, for who would be persuaded to suffer etc.
that is, it is impossible for any one industriously and carefully to use the
means for the Attainment of any End, if he has Assurance of the End by these
means to be obtained. What need Hezekiah make use of food, or other means of
sustaining his life, when he was assured that he should live fifteen years? The
Perseverance of the Saints is not in the Scripture, nor by any of those, whom
Mr Goodwin has chosen to oppose, held out on any such ridiculous terms, as
whither they use means, or use them not; carry themselves well, or wickedly
miscarry themselves: but is asserted upon the account of Gods effectual Grace,
preserving them in the use of the means, and from all such miscarrages, as
should make a total separation between God and their souls. So that this
first Reason is but a plain begging of those things, which (to use is own
language) he would not dig for.

But perhaps,. 32.
although this first Argument of Mr Goodwin be nothing but an importune
suggestion of some Hypothesis of his own, with an arguing from inferences, not
only Questionable but Unquestionably false; yet if his second Demonstration
will evince the matter under Debate, he may be content to suffer loss in the
Hay and Stubble of the first, so that the Gold of the following Argument do
abide. Now thus he proceeds in these words. And lastly this demonstrates the
same thing yet farther. If God should Justify all without exception whom he
Calls, and that against all bars of wickedness and unbelief, possible to
be laid in his way by those, who are Called; Then might ungodly and unbelieving
Persons inherit the kingdom of God: the Reason of the connection is evident: it
being a known Truth, that the Persons Justified are in a condition or present
capacity of inheriting the kingdom of God.

Ans: But Carbones pro Thesauro, if it be possible this (being of the same
nature with that which went before) is more weak and infirm, as Illogicall
and Sophistical as it; the whole strength of it lies in a supposall, that
those who are so Called, as here is intimated in the text called according to
the Purpose of God, called to answer the design of God to make them like to
Jesus Christ, so called as to be hereupon Justified, may yet lay such bars of
Wickedness, and Unbelief in their own way, when they are so Called, as not
to be Justified; when that Calling of theirs consists in the effectual
removeall of all those bars of Wickedness and Unbelief, which might hinder
their free and Gracious Acceptance with God. That is, that they may be called
Effectually, and not Effectually; A supposall hereof, is the strength of that
Consideration, which yielded Mr Goodwin this Demonstration. His eminent way of
Arguing here in, will also be farther manifest, if you shall consider that the
very thing, which he pretends to prove, is that which he here uses for the
medium to prove it, not varied in the least. Si Pergama dextra etc. But Mr
Goodwin foresaw, (as it was easy for him to do) what would be excepted to
this last Argument, to wit, that the Calling here mentioned effectually removes
those bars of Wickedness and Unbelief, a supposall whereof is all the
strength and vigor it has: And in that supposall there is a plain assuming
of the thing in Question, and a bare contradiction to that, which from the
place we prove, and confirm. Wherefore he answers sundry things.

1. First that Judas, Demas, Simon Magus, were all called, and yet laid bars of
Wickedness and Unbelief, whereby their Justification was obstructed; and to
the reply, that they were not so Called, as those mentioned in the Text, not
Called according to Gods Purpose, with that Calling which flows from their
Predestination to be conformed unto Christ, with that Calling which is held out
as an effectual mean to accomplish the End of God, in causing all things to
work together for their good: and therefore that the strength of this Answer
lies in the interposition of his own Hypothesis once more, and his renewed
requests for a grant of the thing in question, he proceeds to take away this
Exception by sundry cross Assertions, and Interrogations. Sect. 45. 1. It has
not been prooved (says he) by any man, nor I believe never will be (Sr we live
not by your Faith,) that the Calling here spoken of imports any such Act or
Work of God, whereby the called are irresistibly necessitated savingly to
believe. If it import no such thing as this, what hinders but that the persons
mentioned, might have been Called by that very kind of Calling here spoken of?

It is known what Mr Goodwin ayms at in that Expression [ iresistibly
necessitated savingly to believe] we will not contend about words: neither of
the two first terms mentioned, Ans.
are either willingly used of us, or can be properly used by any, in reference
to the work of Conversion or Calling. What we own in them, relates as to the
first term (irresistibly) to the Grace of God Calling, or Converting: and in
the latter (necessitatingly) to the Event of the Call it self. If by
irresistibly, you intend the manner of operation of that effectual Grace of
God, (not which conquers in a reaction, which properly may be termed so: but)
which really, and therefore certainly (for unumquodque, quod est, dum est,
necessario est) produces its effect, not by forcing the Will, but (being as
intimate to it as it self) making it willing etc. we own it. And if by
necessitating they understand only the event of things, that is, it is of
necessity, as to to the Event that they shall savingly Believe, who are
Effectually Called without the least straitning, or necessitating their Wills
in their Conversion, (which are still acted sutably to their native Liberty) we
close with that term also, and affirm that the Calling here mentioned imports
such an Act of Gods Grace, as whereby they who are Called, are effectually and
infallibly brought savingly to believe, and so consequentially, that the
persons whose Wickedness and Unbelief abides upon them, were never Called
with this Calling here contended about; They who are not Predestined a part
ante, nor Glorified a part post, are not Partakers of this Calling. I must
add, that (as yet) I have not met with any proof of Mr Goodwin's
Interpretation, nor any Exception against ours, that is not resolved into the
same principle of Craving the thing in question, producing the thing to be
prooved, as its own Demonstration. And asserting the things prooved against
him, not to be so, because they are not so. From the design and scope of the
place, the intendment of the Holy Ghost in it, the meaning of the words, the
Relation and Respect wherein the Acts of God mentioned, stand one to an other,
the disappointment of Gods Purpose and Decree in case of any interruption of
them, or non-producing of the effects, which lead the subjects, of whom they
are spoken, from one to an other, we prove the infallible efficacy of every Act
of Gods Grace here mentioned, as to their tendency unto the end aimed at: and
these he that is called to believe, may infallibly do so. But says Mr Goodwin
this is otherwise Well let that pass. He adds secondly, Suppose it be granted,
that the Calling here spoken of is that kind of Calling which is always
accompanied with a saving Answer of Faith; yet neither does this prove, but
that even such called ones may obstruct and prevent by Wickedness and
Unbelief their final Justification and consequently their Glorification; If
so; then that Chain of Divine Acts or Decrees here framed by the Apostle, is
not indissolveable in any such sense, which imports an Infallibility, and
universal exertion or execution of the latter, whenever the former has
taken place: In this Answer Mr Goodwin denies our conclusion, to wit, that the
Chain of Divine Acts of Grace in this place is indissolveable which that it
is, we make out and prove from the words of the Text, the Context and scope of
the place: and adds his reason; Because they who are Justified, may lay bars
in their way from being finally so, or being Glorified; That is, it is not so,
because it is not so. For the Efficacy of the Grace asserted, is for the
removeall of the bars intimated, or wherein may its efficacy be supposed to
consist, especially in its Relation to the end designed. And so this place is
Answered: Says the Holy Ghost, those whom God Justifies, he Glorifies;
perhaps not, says Mr Goodwin; some things may fall in, or fall out to hinder
this. Eligite cui credatis.

Were I not resolved to abstain from the Consideration of the Judgments of
men, when they are Autoritatively interposed in the things of God, I could
easily manifest the fruitlesnesse of the following endeavor to prove the
effectual Calling of Judas, by the Testimony of Chrysostom and Peter Martyr:
for neither has the first in the place alleged any such thing; (least of all
is it included in M. G's Marginall Annotation, excluding Compulsion, Necessity,
and Violence from Vocation) and the latter in the Section pointed to, and that
following, lays down principles sufficiently destructive to the whole
design, whose management M. Goodwin has undertaken. Neither shall I contest
about the imposing on us in this dispute, the notion of final justification,
distinct from Glorification, both name, and thing being Foreign to the
Scripture, and secretly including, (yea delivering to the advantage of its
Author) the whole Doctrine under consideration stated to his hand. If there be
a Gospell-justification in Sinners or Believers in the blood of Christ, not
final, or that may be cut off, he has prevailed.

But Mr Goodwin proceeds to object against himself,. 33.
Sect: 46. But some it may be will farther object against the interpretation
given, and plead that the Contexture between these two linkes of this Chain,
Predestination to a conformity with Christ, and Calling, is simply and
absolutely indissolveable, so that whoever is so Predestined, never fails of
being called. 2. That it is altogether unlikely that in one and the same series
of Divine actions, there should not be the same fixednesse or certainty of
coherence, between all the parts. The first of these being the bare Thesis
which he opposed, I know not how it came to be made an Objection. I shall only
add to the latter Objection; which includes something of Argument, that the
Efficacy of any one Act of Gods Grace here mentioned, as to the end proposed,
depending wholly on the uninterruptible concatenation of them all, and their
effectual prevalency and certainty, (as to their respective Operation) of
every one of them, being equal to the Accomplishment of the Purpose of God in
and by them all; and willingly own it, especially finding how little is said
(and yet how much labor taken) to dress up a pretended Answer unto it; Of
this there are two parts, whereof the first is this I Answer, says he.

1. First, By a demurre upon the former of these pleas, which was that the
connection between the Predestination of God mentioned, and his Calling, is
uninterruptible. Somewhat doubtful to me it is, whether a person, who by
means of the Love of God, which is in him at present, falls under his Decree
of Predestination, may not possibly, before the time appointed by God for his
Calling, be changed in that his Affection, and consequently pass from under
that Decree of Predestination, and fall under another Decree of God opposite
thereunto, and so never come to be called.

Ans. I confess this demurre outrunnes my understanding, Equis albis neither
can I by any means, overtake it, to pin any tolerable sense upon it; though
I would allow it to be suited only to M. Goodwins principles, and calculated
for the Meridian of Arminianisme: for, who (I pray) are they, in any sense, (in
M. Goodwins) that do so love God, as to fall under, as he speaks, that
pendulous Decree of Predestination, and to whom this promise here is made? Are
they not Believers? Are any others Predestined in our Authors judgment, but
those who are actually so? is not the Decree of Predestination, Gods Decree or
Purpose of saving Believers by Jesus Christ? Or can any love God to
Acceptance, without Believing? If then they are Believers, can they alter that
condition before they are Called? We supposed that Faith had been by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10. 17.
and that it is of necessity (in order of nature) that Calling should precede
Believing. What are men called to? Is it not to Believe? Here is then a new
sort of men discovered, that believe, and fall from Faith, Love God and forsake
him, all antecedently to their Vocation and Calling. I am confident that M.
Goodwin may be persuaded to withdraw this demurrer, or if not, that he will be
overruled in it, before the judgment seat of all unprejudiced men. It will
scarcely as yet pass currantly, that men are borne Believers, and after such
and such a time of their continuance in that estate of belief, and being
Predestined thereupon, God then Calls them. Neither do I understand the
meaning of that phrase, [ never come to be called] used by Him, who maintains
all to be called, but this is but a demurrer. the Answer follows.

For the great regard I bear unto the Authors Abilities,. 34.
I shall not say that his ensuing Discourse does not deserve to be transcribed,
and punctually insisted on: but this I may say (I hope) without offense, that
it is so long and tedious, so remote from what it pretends unto, to wit, an
Answer to the forementioned Argument, that I dare not venture upon the patience
of any Reader, so far, as to enter into a particular consideration of it.

The sum of it is, that there is no unlikelihood in this, that, though one
part of the Chain of Divine Graces before mentioned, cannot be dissolved nor
broken, yet another may, (notwithstanding that a dissolution of any one of
them, renders the design of God in them all, wholly frustrate and fruitless)
This he proves, by proposing a new series of Divine Acts, in actual dependence
one upon another, some whereof may be uninterruptible, but the other not so. He
that shall but slightly view the Concatenation of Divine Acts, here proposed by
Mr Goodwin, for the illustration of that dependence of them, and their
Efficacy, which we insist upon, will quickly find it liable to some such small
Exceptions, as renders it altogether useless, as to the end proposed. As first,

1. That the case here proposed, and pretended to be parallel to that under
our Consideration, is a fictitious thing, a fained Concatenation of fained
Decrees of God, being neither in any one place delivered in the Scripture, nor
to be collected from any, or all the Texts in the Bible: which course of
proceeding, if it may be Argumentative in sacred Truths, it will be an easy
and facile task to overthrow the most Eminent and clearly delivered Heads of
Doctrine in the whole Book of God.

2. That it is a case surmised by him, suitable to his own Hypotheses, neither
true in its self, nor any way Analogous to that wherewith it is yoked, being
indeed a new way and tone of begging the thing in question. For instance; It
supposes (without the least Attempt of proof) (1.) Conditional Decrees, or a
disjunctive intendment of Events in God; it shall come to pass, or otherwise.
(2.) A middle science conditional, as the foundation of those disjunctive
Decrees; with (3.) A futurition of things, Antecedent to any determining Act of
the Will of God; and (4.) A possibility of frustrating (as to Event) the
Designs and purposes of God; and (5.) That all medium's of the Accoplishment
of any thing, are conditions of Gods intentions, as to the end he aims at; and
(6.) That God appoints a series of mediums for the compassing of an End, and
designs them thereunto, without any determinate Resolution to bring about that
End; and (7.) That the Acts of Gods Grace in their Concatenation mentioned in
this place of Romans 8. are severally Conditional, because he has invented or
feigned some Decrees of God which he says are so; All which, with the
inferences from them, Mr Goodwin knows will not advance his Reasonings at all,
as to our Understandings, being fully persuaded, that they are all Abominations
of no less base alloy, then the Error it self, in whose defense and
Patronage they are produced.

To our Argument then before mentioned,. 35.
prooving an equal indissolveablenesse in all the linkes of the Chain of
Divine Graces, drawn forth and insisted on, from the equal dependence of the
design and Purpose of God on the mutual dependence of each of them on the
other, for the fullfillng of that Purpose of his, and obtaining the End, which
he professes himself to intend: this is the sum of Mr Goodwins Answer, If I
can invent a series of Decrees, and a Concatenation of Divine Acts, though
indeed there be no such thing, neither can I give any color to it without
laying down, and taking for granted many false and absurd supposalls; and
though it be not of the same nature with that here proposed by the Apostle, nor
any where held out in the Scripture for any such End and Purpose as this is;
neither can I assign any absolute determinate end in this Series of mine,
whose Accomplshment God ingages himself to bring about; (as the Case stands in
the place of Scripture under Consideration) then it is meet and equitable, that
laying aside all inforcements from the Text, Context, Nature of God, the thing
treated on, all compelling us to close with another sense and Interpretation,
that we regulate the mind of the Holy Ghost herein, to the Rule, proportion,
and Analogy of the case as formerly proposed. This being the sum of that,
which Mr Goodwin calls his Answer, made naked I presume to its shame, valeat
quantum valere potest.

I shall only add that (1.) when Mr Goodwin shall make good that order and
Series of Decrees, here by him mentioned, from the Scripture, or with solid
Reason from the nature of the things themselves, suitably to the Properties of
him, whose they are; And (2.) Prove that any eternal Decree of God either as
to its primitive enacting, or temporal Execution, is suspended on any thing,
not only really contingent in it self and its own nature, in respect of the
immediate fountain from whence it flows, and nature of its immediate cause;
but also as to its Event, in respect of any Act of the will of God, that it may
otherwise be, and so the accomplishment of that Decree left thereupon
uncertain, and God himself dubiously conjecturing at the Event, (for instance
whether Christ should Dye or no, or any one be saved by him.) and (3.) Clearly
evince this notion of the Decrees and Purposes of God, that he intends to
Create Man, and then to give him such advantages, which if he will, it shall be
so with him: if otherwise, it shall be so: To send Christ, if men do so, or
so: or not to send him, if they do otherwise; and so of the residue of the
Decrees mentioned by him; and (4.) That all events of things whatsoever,
Spiritual and Temporal, have a Conditional futurition antecedent to any act
of the Will of God. When I say he shall have proved these and some like things
to these, we shall further consider what is offered by him; yea we will
confess that Hostis habet muros etc.

Of the many other Testimonies to the purpose in hand,. 36.
bearing witness to the same Truth, some few may yet be singled out; and in
the next place that of Jeremiah 31. 3. presents it self unto trial and
Examination. Yea I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with
loving kindness have I drawn thee; It is the whole Elec^ Church: of the seed
of Jacob, of whom he speaks: the foundation of whose blessedness, is laid in
the Eternal Love of God; Who the persons are thus beloved, and of whom we are
to interpret these expressions of Gods good will, the Apostle manifests Rom:
11. as shall afterward be more fully discoursed, and cleared. He tells you, it
is the Election, whom God intends, of whom he says that they obtained the
Righteousness that is by faith, according to the purport of Gods good will
toward them, though the rest were hardened; God (who adds daily to his Church
such as shall be saved, Acts 13. 48.) drawing them thereunto, upon the account
of their being so Elected. He calls them also the Remnant according to the
Election of Grace, and the People whom God did foreknow v: 1, 2. or from
Eternity designed to the participation of the Grace there spoken of, as the use
of the word has been evinced to be; These are the ( Thee) here designed; the
portion of Israel after the flesh, which the Lord in his Free Grace has
eternally appointed to be his peculiar inheritance, which in their several
Generations he draws to himself with Loving Kindness. And this everlasting
Love is not only the fountain, whence actual Loving Kindness in drawing to
God, or bestowing Faith does flow, ( as they Believe, who are ordained to
eternal life) but also the sole Cause and Reason, upon the account whereof, in
contra-distinction to the Consideration of any thing in themselves, God will
exercise Loving Kindness toward them for ever. That which is everlasting or
eternal, is also unchangeable; Gods everlasting Love is no more liable to
mutability then himself; And it is an always equal Ground and Motive for
Kindness. On what account should God alter in his actual Kindness, or favor
toward any, if that, on the account whereof he exercises it, will not admit of
the least Alteration? He that shall give a Condition, on which this everlasting
Love of God should be suspended, and according to the influence whereof, upon
it, it should go forth in Kindness, or be interrupted; may be allowed to
boast of his discovery.

That of the Apostl^e 2 Timothy 2. 19.. 37.
is important to the business in hand. Nevertheless the foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his. Some
persons of eminency and note in the Church, yea Stars (it seems) of a
considerable magnitude in the visible Firmament thereof, having fallen away
from the Truth and faith of the Gospel, and drawn many after them into ways
of destruction, a great Offense and Scandal among Believers thereon (as in
such cases it will fall out) insued; and withal a Temptation of a not to be
despised prevalency, and sad consequence, (which we formerly granted to attend
such eminent Apostasy) seems to have laid hold on many weak Saints: they
feared, least they also might be overthrown, and after all their laboring,
and suffering in the Work of Faith, and Patience of the Saints, come short of
the mark of the high calling set before them, considering their own weakness
and instability, with that powerful opposition, whereunto (in those days
especially) they were exposed; Upon the contemplation of such Apostasies or
defections, they were opportune and obnoxious sufficiently to this Temptation.
Yea their thoughts upon the Case under consideration, might lead them to fear
a more general defection: for seeing it is this with some, why may not this be
the Condition of all Believers? and so the whole Church may cease, and come to
nothing, notwithstanding all the Promises of building it on a Rock, and of the
presence of Christ with it to the end of the World; Nay may not his whole
Kingdom on earth on this account, possibly fall to utter ruin, and himself
be left a Head without members, a King without Subjects? This by Mr Goodwins
own confession, is the Objection, which the Apostle answers, and removes in,
and by the words under Consideration. Cap. 14. page 359. 360. Seeing these fall
away, are not we likewise in danger of falling away, and so of loosing all
that we have done and suffered in our Christian profession. To this Objection
or Scruple, the Apostle Answers in the Words in hand; So he; Thus far then
are we agreed. About the sense of the words themselves, and their Accommodation
to the removal of the Objection or Scruple mentioned, is our difference. I
know not how M. Goodwin comes to call it an Objection or Scruple, (which is the
expression of thoughts or words, arising against that which is, in the truth of
it) seeing it is their very State and Condition indeed, and that, which they
fear, is that which they are really exposed unto, and which they ought to
believe that they are exposed to. In his Apprehension, they who make the
Objection, or whose Scruple it was, were as liable unto in his judgment, and
in the same danger of falling away, or greater, (their Temptations being
increased, and heightened by the Apostasy of others) then them that fell the
day and hour before; neither could that falling away of any be said to raise a
Scruple in them that they might do so to, if this were one part of their Creed,
that all and every man in the world might so do.

The Answer given by the Apostle,. 38.
is no doubt suited to the Objection and fitted to the removeall of the Scruple
mentioned, which was alone to be accomplished by an effectual removing away
the solicitious fears and cares about the preservation of them, in whose
behalf this is produced. This therefore the Apostle does by an exception to
the inference, which they made, or through temptation might make upon the
former considerations. (...) are exceptive particles, and an Induction into the
exemption of some from the condition of being in danger of falling, wherein
they were concluded in the Objection proposed. The intendment I say of the
Apostle in that exceptive plea he puts in, nevertheless is evidently to exempt
some from the state of falling away, which might be argued against them from
the defection of others. Neither does he speak to the thing in hand, nor are
the particulars mentioned exceptive to the former Intimation, if his speech
look any other way. Moreover he gives yet further the account of this
Exception he makes, including a radical discrimination of professors, or men
esteemed to be Believers, expressing also the Principle and ground of that
difference. The differing Principle he mentions is, the Foundation of God
that stands sure, or the firm Foundation of God, that is established, or
stands firm: This is not worth contending about. An Expression parallel to
that of the same Apostle Romans 9. 11. That the Purpose of God according to
Election might stand; Both this and that hold out some Eternal Act of God,
differencing between persons, as to their Everlasting condition. As if the
Apostle had said, you see indeed that Hymenaeus and Philetus are fallen away,
and that others, with whom you sometimes walked in the Communion and outward
fellowship of the Gospel, and took sweet Counsel together in the House of
God with them, are gone after them; yet be you (true Believers) of good
Comfort: God has laid a Foundation (which must be some Eternal Act of his,
concerning them of whom he is about to speak: or the solemn Assertion of the
Apostle, then which you shall not easily meet with one more weighty, is neither
to the Case, nor matter in hand) which is firm and abiding, (being the good
pleasure of his Will, accompanied with an Act of his Wisdom and Understanding)
appointing some (as is the case of all True Believers) to be his, who shall be
exempted on that account, from the Apostasy and desertion, that you fear.
This, says the Apostle, is the fountain and spring of the difference, which
is among them that profess the Gospel. Concerning some of them, is the
Purpose of God for their preservation: They are ordained to Eternal Life. And
herein (as was said) lies the Concernement of all that are True Believers, who
are all his, chosen of him, given to his Son, and Called according to his
Purpose; with others it is not so, they are not built on that bottom, they have
no such foundation of their Profession; and it is not therefore marvelous, if
they fall.

The words then contain an Exception of True Believers from the danger of
total Apostasy,. 39.
upon the account of the stable, fixed, Eternal Purpose of God concerning
their Salvation, answerable to that of Romans 8. 28, 29, 30. the place last
considered. The Foundation here mentioned, is the good Pleasure of the Will of
God, which he had Purposed in him himselse, or determined to exert toward
them, for the praise of the Glory of his Grace. Ephesians. 1. 9. According to which
Purpose we are Predestined. v. 11. And he calls this Purpose the Foundation
of God, as being a groundworke, and bottom of the thing, whereof the Apostle
is treating; namely the Preservation and Perseverance of True Believers, those
who are indeed planted into Christ, notwithstanding the Apostasy of the most
Glorious Professors, who being not within the compass of that Purpose, nor
built on that Foundation, never attain that peculiar Grace, which by Jesus
Christ is to them administered, who have that Privilege. And this further
appears by the Confirmation of the certainty of this Foundation of God, which
he has laid, manifested in the next words: It has this seal, the Lord knows
who are his. Whether ye will take this for a Demonstration of the former
Assertion, either a posteriori, from the peculiar Love, Favor, Tenderness,
and care, which the Lord bears to them which are his, who are built on the
Foundation mentioned, whereby, in the pursuit of his Eternal Purpose, he will
certainly preserve them from perishing, knowing, owning, and taking care of
them in every Condition: or for the Prescience of God, accomplishing his
Eternal Purpose, designing them of whom he speaks, as his, (for his they
were, and he gave them unto Christ) is to me indifferent. Evident it is that
this Confirmation of the Purpose mentioned, is added to assure us of the
stability and accomplishment of it; in that none, who are built thereon, or
concerned therein, shall fall away. And herein does the Apostle fully Answer
and remove the forementioned Objection: Let men (says he) appear never so
eminent in profession, If once they prove Apostates, they manifest themselves
to have been but Hypocrites; that is, such as never had any of the Faith of
Gods Elect, which is their peculiar, who are Ordained to Eternal Life.

This then, beyond all colorable Exception, is the intendment of the Apostle
in the words under consideration; Though many Professors fall away, yet you,
that are true Believers, be not shaken in your confidence, for God has laid
the foundation of your preservation in his Eternal Purpose, whereby you are
designed to Life and Salvation, and by the fruits whereof, you are
discriminated from the best of them, that fall away: only continue in the use
of means, let every one of ^ec depart from iniquity, and keep up to that
universal Holiness, whereunto also ye are appointed and chosen. And this is
the whole of what we desire Demonstration of: neither will less in any
measure, answer the Objection, or remove the Scruple, at first proposed.

But it seems,. 40.
we are all this while besides the intendment of the Apostle, whose Resolution
of the Objection mentioned, is quite of another nature, then what we have
hitherto insisted on; which Mr Goodwin thus represents: page 359. Cap. 14.
Sect. 14.

To this Objection or Scruple, the Apostle (in the words now in hand)
Answers, to this effect; that notwithstanding the falling away of men, who
ever, or how many soever they be, yet the Glorious Gospel, and Truth of God
therein, stands and always has stood, firm and steadfast. Which Gospel has
the matter and substance of this saying in it, as a seal for the establishment
of those, who are upright in the sight of God, viz.

The Lord knows, that is, takes special notice of, approoveth, and
delights in those that are his, that is, who truly Believe in him, love and
serve him: yea and farther has this Item, tending to the same end; Let every
one that calls upon the name of Christ, that is, makes profession of his
name, depart from iniquity: so that in this Answer to the Scruple mentioned,
the Apostle intimates by way of satisfaction, that the reason, why men fall
away from the Faith, is partly because they do not consider, what worthy
respects God bears to those, who cleave to him in Faith, and Love: partly
also because they degenerate into loose and sinful courses, contrary to the
Law imposed by the Gospel, and consequently, that there is no such danger of
their falling away, who shall duly consider the one, and observe the other,
inserting the stability of the Truth of God, in the Gospel, by the way of
Antidote against the fears of those, that might possibly suspect it, because
of the defections of others from it: he does but tread in his own foot steps,
else where in this very Chapter, if we Believe not, yet he abides faithful,
and cannot deny himself.

Ans. If that necessity were not voluntarily chosen, which inforceth men to
wrest and pervert the Word of God, not only to Mistaken, but strange, uncouth,
and inconsistent senses, their so doing might perhaps seem not to be
altogether without color and pretext: but when they willingly embrace those
paths, which will undoubtedly lead them into the Briers, and contrary to
abundance of Light, and Evidence of Truth embrace those persuasions, which
necessitate them to such courses, I know not what Cloak they have left for
their deviations. An Example of this we have before us in the words recited: A
sense is violently pinned upon the Apostles words, not only alien, foreign to
the scope of the place, and Genuine signification of the words themselves, but
wholly unsuited for any serviceablenesse to the end, for which the Author of
this Gloss himself, confesses these Expressions of the Apostle, to be
produced, and used.

The sum of Mr Goodwins Exposition of this place, is this. The Foundation of
God, is the Gospel or the Doctrine of it: its standing, or standing sure, the
certain truth of the Gospel: the Seal mentioned, is the substance or matter
of that saying, God knows who are his, contained in the Gospel; and the
Answer to the Objection or scruple, lies in this, that the reason why men fall
from the Gospel, (which neither is, nor was the scruple, nor was it so
proposed by Mr Goodwin) is, because they consider not the Love that God bears
to Believers, that is, that he approoves them, whilst they are such; which is
indeed one maine part of the Gospel. So that men fall from the Gospel,
because they fall from the Gospel, and this must satisfy the scruple
proposed. It is an easy thing for men of Ability and Eloquence, to gild over
the most absurd and inconsistent Interpretation of Scripture, with some
appearance of significancy: though I must needs say, I know not lightly, when,
nor by whom, pretending to any sobriety, it has been more unhappily, or
unsuccesfully attempted, them by Mr Goodwin in this place, as upon due
consideration will be made further appear. For,

1. First, to grant that the Foundation of God may be said so far to be the
Gospel because his Eternal Purpose, so expressed, is therein revealed which
is the interpretation Mr Goodwin proposes; I ask

1. Whether the Apostle applies himself to remove the Scruple ingenerated in
the minds of Believers, about their own falling away, upon Consideration of
the Apostasy of others, and to answer the Objection arising thereupon? This Mr
Goodwin grants in the Head, though in the Branches of his Discourse, he casts
in inquiries quite of another nature; as, that a Reason is inquired after, why
men fall from the Gospel, and a suspicion is supposed to arise of the Truth of
the Gospel, because some fell from it: Things that have not the least
intimation in the words, or Context of the place, nor of any such evidence for
their interest in the business in hand, that Mr Goodwin durst take them for
ingredients in the case under consideration, when he himself proposed it; so
that he was enforced to foyst in this counterfeit Case, to give some color to
the Interpretation of the words, introduced. But yet this must not be openly
owned, but intermixed with other Discourses, to lead aside the Understanding of
the Reader from bearing in mind the true State of the Case by the Apostle
proposed, and by himself ackowledged: So that this Discourse desinit in piscem
etc.

2. The Case being supposed as above,. 41.
I ask, whither the Apostle intended a Removeall of the Scruple, and Answer to
the Objection, as far at least, as the one was capable of being removed, and
the other of being answered? This (I suppose) will not be Scrupled, or Objected
against, being indeed fully granted in Stating the Occasion of the words. For
we must at least allow the Holy Ghost to speak pertinently to what he does
propose; then,

3. I further inquire, whither any thing what ever be in the least suited to
the Removeall of the Scruple and Objection proposed, but only the giving of the
Scruplers and Objectors, the best Assurance, that upon solid Grounds and
Foundations could be given, or they were in truth capeable of, that what they
feared should not come upon them* and that, notwithstanding the deviation of
others, themselves should be preserved; and then

4. Seeing that the sum of the sense of the words given by Mr Goodwin amounts
to these two Assertions; 1. That the Doctrine of the Gospel is True and
Permanent; 2. That God approoves for the present all, who for the present
believe, supposing that there is nothing in the Gospel, teaching the
Perseverance of the Saints: I ask yet, whither there be any thing in this
Answer of the Apostle, (so interpreted) able to give the least satisfaction
imaginable to the Consciences, and Hearts of men making the Objection
mentioned? For is it not evident notwithstanding any thing here expressed, that
they, and every Believer in the world may Apostatise, and fall away into Hell?
Say the poor Believers, Such, and such fall away from the Faith: Their eminent
usefulness in their Profession, beyond perhaps what we are able to demonstrate
of our selves, makes us fear, that this abominable defection may go on; and
swallow us up, and grow upon the Church to a further desolation. The answer is:
however the Gospel is true, and God bears gracious respects to the^ that cleave
to him in love, whilst they do so. Quaestio est de alliis, responsio de cepis.
Methinks the Apostle might have put them upon these Considerations, which Mr
Goodwin proposes, as of excellent use and prevalency against falling away, that
they put men out of danger of it, ( Cap. 9.) rather then have given them an
answer not (in the least) tending to their satisfaction, nor any way suited to
their fears, or inquiries; no not as backed with that explanation, that they
fall away because they degenerate into loose, and sinful courses; that is,
because they fall away. A degeneracy into loose and sinful courses amounts
surely to no less.

5. Again; I would know, whether this Foundation of God be an Act of his Will
commanding, or purposing? declarative of our duty, or his intention? If the
first, then what Occasion is administered to make mention of it in this place?
Whether it were called in Question, or no? and whether the Assertion of it
conduces to the solution of the Objection proposed? Or is it in any parallel
terms expressed in any other place? Besides, seeing this Foundation of God is
in nature antecedent to the Sealing mentioned, of Gods knowing them that are
his, and the Object of the Act of Gods Will, be it what it will, being the
Persons, concerning whom that Sealing is; whether it can be any thing, but some
distinguishing Purpose of God concerning those persons, in reference to the
things spoken of? Evident then it is, from the words themselves, the Occasion
of them, the design, and scope of the Apostle in the place, that the
Foundation of God here mentioned, is his discriminating Purpose concerning some
men's certain preservation unto Salvation, which is manifestly confirmed by that
Seal of his, that he knows them, in a peculiar distinguishing manner; A
manner of speech and Expression suited directly to what the same Apostle uses
in the same case every where, as Romans 8. 28, 29, 30. Cap. 9. and 11. 11. Ephesians.
1. 4, 5, 6.

But, (says Mr Goodwin,) this is no more, then what the Apostle elsewhere
speaks, Rom: 3. 3. What if some did not believe, shall their unbelief make
the Faith of God of none effect? that is, shall the Unbelief of men be
interpreted as any tolerable Argument, or ground, to prove that God is
unfaithful? or that he has no other Faith in him, then that which sometimes
miscarrieth, and produces not that, for which it stands engaged? Implying that
such an interpretation as this, is unreasonable in the highest.

But truly by the way, if it be so, I know not who in the lowest can quit Mr
Goodwin from unreasonablenesse in the highest: for does he not contend in this
whole Discourse, that the Faith of God in his Promises, for the producing of
that, for which it stands engaged (as when he says to Believers, he will never
leave them, nor for sake them) does so depend on the Faith of men, as to the
Event intended, that it is very frequently by their unbelief, rendered of none
Effect? Is not this the spirit, that animates the whole Religion of the
Apostasy of Saints? Is it not the great Contest between us, whether any
unbelief of men may interpose to render the Faith of God of none effect, as to
the producing of the thing he promises? Tibi, quia intristi, exedondum est.

But (2.) Let it be granted, that these two places of the Apostle are of a
parallel signification, what will it advantage the Interpretation imposed on
us? What is the Faith of God here intended? And what the unbelief mentioned?
And whereunto tends the Apostles vehement interrogation? The great contest in
this Epistle concerning the Jews, (of whom he peculiarly speaks, v. 1, 2.) was
about the Promise of God made to them, and his Faithfulness therein. Evident
it was, that many of them did not Believe the Gospel; as evident, that the
Promise of God was made peculiarly to them, to Abraham and his Seed: hence no
small peplexity arose, about the Reconciliation of these things; many perplexed
thoughts ensuing on this seeming Contradiction. If the Gospel be indeed the
way of God, what is become of his faithfulness in his promises to Abraham and
his Seed, they rejecting it? If the Promises be true and stable, what shall we
say to the Doctrine of the Gospel, which they generally disbelieve and reject?
In this place the Apostle only rejects the inference, that the faithfulness of
God must fall, and be of none effect, because the Jews believed not; whereof
he gives a full account afterward, when he expressly, takes up the objection,
and handles it at large, Cap. 9, 10, 11. The sum of the Answer he there
gives, as a Defensative of the faithfulness of God, with a non obstante to
the Infidelity of some of the Jews, amounts to no more, nor less, then what
is here argued and by us asserted, viz. that notwithstanding this (their
incredulity and Rejection of the Gospel) the Foundation of God stands sure;
God knows who are his: that the Promise, his Faithfulness wherein, (came
under Debate,) was not made to all the Jews, but to them that were Chosen
according to his Purpose, as he expressly disputes it at large beyond all
possibility of Contradiction Cap. 11. As shall afterward be further argued,
and has in part been already discovered. I verily believe never did any man
produce a Testimony more to the disadvantage of his own cause both in
general, and in particular, then this is to the Cause Mr Goodwin has in hand.

Neither does he advance one step further in the confirmation of the sense
imposed on the Apostles words,. 42.
by comparing them with the words of the same Apostle v. 13. of the same
Chapter, If we Believe not, yet he continues Faithful, he cannot deny himself:
wherein again, contrary to the whole drift of Mr Goodwins Discourse, the
Faithfulness of God, in the Accomplishment of his Promises, is asserted to be
wholly independent upon any Qualification whatever, in them, to whom those
Promises are made. Though we are under Sufferings, Temptations, and Trials,
very apt to be cast down from our Hope of the great Things that God has
prepared for us, and Promised to us, yet his Purpose shall stand however, and
our uubeliefe shall not in the least cause him to withdraw, or not to go
through with his engagement to the utmost: The faithfulness of his own
nature requires it at his hand: He cannot deny himself.

What remains Sect. 14.. 43.
Wherein he labors further to give strength unto, or rather more largely to
Explicate what he formerly asserted, is built upon a critical Consideration of
the word (...), which (without any one example produced from any approoved
Author,) we must believe to signify a bond, or instrument of security given
between men by the way of Contract. And what then, suppose it do? Why then
contrary to the whole scope of the place, and constant signification of the
word in the Scripture, it must be interpreted according to the Analogy of that
sense. Why so? Does it remove any difficulty on the other hand? Does it more
suite the Objection for its removeall, whereunto it is given, that we should
warpe from the first, Genuine, Native usual signification of the word, to that
which is Exotic and Metaphorical? Yea but we are enforced to embrace this
sense, because that here is a seal set to this Foundation, and men use not to
set Seals to the foundation of a House. And is it required that Allusions
should hold in all prticulars and Circumstances, even in such as wherein their
teaching property does not consist? The terms of Foundation, and Sealing are
both figurative: neither will either of them absolutely be squared to those
things in Nature, wherein they have their Foundation. The Purpose of God is
here called his Foundation, because of its Stability, Abidingnesse, Strength,
and Use in bearing up the whole Fabric of the Salvation of Believers, not in
respect of its lying in, or under the Ground, or being made of wood, or stone.
And in this sense why may it not be said to be Sealed. Spiritual Sealing holds
out two things: Confirmation, and Conforming by impression: and in them consist
the chief political use of the Word, and thing, not in being a Labell annexed
to a writing. And why may not a Purpose be confirmed, or be manifested to be
firm, as well as a Contract, or Instrument in Law? Having also its conforming
virtue and Efficacy (which is the natural effect of Sealing) to implant the
Image in the Seal, on the things impressed with it, in rendering them,
concerning whom the Purpose of God is, answerable to the Image of his Son (in
whom the Purpose is made) and that pattern which he has Chosen them to, and
appointed them for. What follows to the end of this Section, is but a new
expression of what Mr Goodwin pretends to be the sense of this place. The
Foundation of God is the Gospel, or the Promise of God to save Believers: the
Seal is his taking notice of them to save them, and to condemn them that
Believe not: and therefore questionless Believers need not fear that they
shall fall away, though there be not the least intimation made of any thing,
that should give them the least comfortable or chearing security of
preservation in Believing: only it is said, he that believes shall be saved,
(which yet is not an absolute Promise of Salvation to Believers) and he that
believes not shall be damned: which one disjunctive Proposition declarative of
the connection that is between the Means and the End, Mr Goodwin labors to make
comprehensive of all the Purposes of God concerning Believers, it being such as
wherein no one person in the world, is more concerned then another. If the
Foundation here mentioned be only God's Purpose, (or rather declaration) of his
Will for the Saving of Believers, and the Damning of Unbelievers, what
Consolation could be from hence administered in particular unto persons laboring
under the Scruple mentioned formerly, has not as yet been declared. Let us
then proceed to further proof of the Truth in hand, and the vindication of
some other places of Scripture whereby it is confirmed.

That which I shall next fix upon,. 44.
is that eminent place of Ioh. 6. 37, 38, 39, 40. All that the Father gives
me, shall come to me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out:
for I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him
that sent me; and this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up again
at the last day, and this is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I
will raise him up at the last day. Our Savior acquaints us with the design,
wherewith he came from heaven; it was not to do his own will, that is, to
accomplish, or bring about, any private purposes of his own, distinct or
different from them of his Father, as he was Blaspheamously charged by the
Jews to do: but he came to do the will of God, the Will of him that sent
him. The Will of God, which Christ came to fulfill, is sometimes taken for the
Commandment, which he received from the Father, for the Accomplishment of his
Will. So Heb. 10. 9. I come to do thy Will O God: that is, to fulfill thy
Command; as it is expressed, Psa. 40. 8. Thy Law is written in my heart; Thy
Law! all that thou requirest at my hand, as Mediator, I am ready to perform On
this account is Christ said to take on him the form of a Servant. Phil. 2. 7.
that is, to become so indeed in the assumption of his Humane nature, that he
might do the Will of him that sent him. For which Reason also his Father
expressly calls him his Servant Isa. 42. 1. Behold my Servant whom I uphold,
mine Elect in whom my soul delights, I have put my spirit upon him, he shall
bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles; He is the Servant of the Father, in the
Accomplishment of that work, for which the spirit was put upon him; and v. 19.
Who is blind but my servant, or deaf as my messenger that I sent, who is blind
as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lords servant. God gives him in command
to fulfill his will, which accordingly he performs to the utmost. Again, the
Will of God is taken for his Purpose, his design, decree, and good pleasure,
for the fulfilling and Accomplishment whereof, the Lord Christ came into the
world: and this appears to be the sense and importance of the Word in this
place, from the distinction which is put between the will of the Father, and
any such private Will of Christ, as the Jews thought he went about to
establish; it was some design of his own, in opposition whereunto, he tells
them, that he came to do the Will, that is to fulfill the Council, Purpose,
and Design of the Father. However, should it Principally be taken for the
Command of God, yet there is, and must needs be, an universal coincidence and
oneness in the object of Gods Purposing, and Commanding Will in all commands
given unto Christ: because all of them shall certainly and infallibly, by him
be fulfilled, and so the thing certainly accomplished, which is commanded.
What now is this Will, Purpose, Aim, Design, and Command of the Father whose
Execution and Accomplishment is committed to the Lord Christ, and which he
faithfully undertakes to perform, (as he was faithful in all things to him
that appointed him) for the clearing of this let these two things be observed.
1. Who the Persons are concerning whom this Will of God is: and those he
describes by a double Character. 1. From their Election the Fathers giving them
to him; all which he has given me, that is, all his Elect, as our Savior
expounds this very expression John 17. 16. Thine they were and thou gave them
to me: Thine they were in Eternal designation, thou having Chosen them from
the Foundation of the World, and thou gave them to me, for actual
Redemption, to deliver them from every thing that keeps them at distance from
thee. 2. From their Faith or Believing, which he calls, seeing the Son and
Believing on him v. 40. The persons then here designed, are Elect Belivers,
Persons Chosen, and Called of God. What next then is the Will of God,
concerning them? This also is set out both in General and in some pariicuars;
(1.) In General, that none of them be lost: that by no means whatsoever, by
no Temptation of Satan, Deceits of sin, Fury of oppressiours, Weakness or
decay of Faith, they perish and fall away from him. This is the Will, the
design and Purpose of God; this he gives to Jesus Christ in command for to
accomplish. (2.) In particular, 1. That they might have Eternal Life, v. 40.
That they be preserved to the Enjoyment of that Glory whereunto they are
designed, 2. That they may be raised up at the last Day, and so never be lost,
neither as to their being, nor wellbeing of these two, v. 40. Everlasting Life,
is placed before the Resurrection or raising of Believers at the last Day,
plainly intimating, that the Spiritual Life whereof in this world they are
partakers, is also as to its certain uninteruptible continuance, an
Everlasting Life, that shall never be intercepted or cut off; That then which
from this Portion of Scripture I Argue is this. God having Purposed to give
Eternal Life to his Elect Believers, and that none of them should ever be
lost, and having committed the Accomplishing and perfomance of this his
Goodwill and Pleasure unto the Lord Jesus, who was Faithful unto him in all
things, and endued with Power, ( all Power from above) for that end, they shall
certainly be Preserved to the end designed. The favor and Love of God, in
Christ, shall never be turned away from them, for his Counsel shall stand and
he will do all his Pleasure.

Some thing is by M. Goodwin offered to take off the strength of this
testimony, but yet so little,. 45.
that had I not resolved to hear him out to the utmost, what he can say in,
and unto the case in hand, it would scarce be thought needful, to divert to
the consideration of it; This place of Scripture he binds up in one bundle,
with nine or ten others, to the composure of one Argument which (almost uno
Halitu) he blows away Cap. 11. Sect. 36, 37. etc. Page 251, 252 etc. To the
consideration of the Argument it self there by him proposed, I am not yet
arrived; the influence of this Text into it, is from what is said of Christ's
Preserving Believers: my present Consideration is cheiflly of the will and
Intention of the Fathers giving them to him to be preserved: so that I shall
observe only one or two things to his General Answer, and then proceed to the
vindication of this Particular place we have in hand.

1. First he tells you, That the Conclusion of the former Argument, that true
Believers shall never miscarry or fall away, opposes not his sense in this
Controversy; whether it oppose his sense or no, must be judged, this I know,
that he has to his utmost opposed it all this while, showing himself therein
very uncurteous and unkind, but why so, on what account is it, that this
conclusion which has so much opposed, is now conceited not to oppose him?
Those who thus fall away (says he) are noe true Believers but wicked
Apostates, at the time of their falling away. That the conclusion mentioned
opposes his sense to me is evident; but that it is sense wherewith in this
place he opposes the Conclusion, is not so clear. The Question is who fall
away; not Believers but Apostates faith Mr G. We say so too, in the natural
first sense of those words who eventualiter are Apostates, were never
antecedenter (to their Apostasy) True Believers. But this is not your sense
doubtless; That those who fall away, in their falling away (which is the sense
of that clause, at the time of falling away) were Apostats, that is, were
fallen away, before they fell away, is neither our sense nor yours, for it is
none at all. Bertius, has one Argument against the Perseverance of the Saints,
from the impossibility of finding a subject to be affected with the notion of
Apostasy, if true Believers be exempted from it: for Hypocrites, says he,
cannot fall away; nor can Believers says Mr Goodwin, but they are Apostates
when they fall away; that is, it is a dead man that dies; or after he is dead,
he dies: after he is an Apostate he falls away. Perhaps it would be worth our
serious inquiry, to consider how Believers can indeed possibly come to loose
the Spirit of Grace which dwells in them, with their habit of Faith and
Holiness. For our parts we contend that they have an infussed Habit of Grace,
and that wrought with a mighty Impression upon their Minds and Hearts, (Faith
being of the opperation of God, wrought by the exceeding greatness of his Power
as he wrought in Christ when he Raised him from the dead) Whether such an Habit
can be removed, but by that hand that bestowed it, and whether it may be made
appear, that God will on any occasion so take it away, or has expressed
himself that he will so deal with any of his Children, is I say, worthy our
inquiry: But

2. Secondly, he denies the Major Proposition, and says, that, those who are
kept and preserved by Christ, may possibly miscarry; Boldly ventured! what Want
is there then, or defect in the keeper of Israel, that his flock should so
miscarry under his hand? Is it of Faithfulness? The Scripture tells us, he is
a faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God Heb. 2. 17. Faithful to
him that appointed him, Heb. 3. 2. And that he did the whole will of God. Is it
of Tenderness, to take care of his poor wandering ones? He is otherwise
represented unto us, Heb. 2. 18. For in that he himself has suffered, being
tempted, he is able to succor them, that are tempted, and (chapter 4. 15, 16.) We
have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like unto us, yet without sin.
Isa. 40. 11, 12. It is said of him, he shall feed his flock like a sheapheard,
he gathers the Lambs with his Arms, and carries them in his bosom, and shall
gently lead them that are with young. And he quarrels with those sheapheards,
who manifest not a care and tenderness like his, toward his flock. Ezec: 34.
4 The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye
brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which
was lost, all which he takes upon himself to perform. v. 15, 16. Or is it
want of Power? All Power is given to him in Heaven and Earth. Mat. 28. 8. All
things are delivered to him of his Father. Mat. 11. 27. He is able to save to
the utmost them, that come to God by him. Heb. 7. 25. If he wants neither Care,
nor Tenderness, Wisdom, nor Watchfullnesse, Love, nor Ability, Will, nor
Faithfulness, how comes it to pass that they miscarry, and fall away into
ruin, whom he has undertaken to keep? David durst fight with a Lion, and a
Bear in the defense of his Lambs; and Jacob endured Heat and Cold, upon the
account of Faithfulness: And shall we think that the Shepherd of Israel,
from whose being so, the Psalmist concludes he shall want nothing, (Psa 23. 1.)
who did not only fight for his Flock, but laid down his Life for them, will
be less careful of his Fathers Sheep, his own Sheep, which are required
also at his hand, for his Father knows them, and calls them all by name?

Yea but (says Mr Goodwin) it may be thus,. 46.
in case themselves shall not comport with Christ in his Act of Preserving
them, with their care and diligence in preserving themselves. that is, Christ
will surely keep them, in case they keep themselves. Alas! poor Sheep of
God! If this were the case of the Flocks of the Sons of men, how quickly
would they be utterly destroyed? Does the veriest Hierling in the World deal
thus with his Sheep? keep them, in case they keep them selves? Nay to what
end is his keeping, if they keep themselves^ Christ compares himself to the
Good Shepherd, which seeks out, and fetches a wandering Sheep from the
Wilderness, laying him on his shoulders, and bringing it home to his Fold. How
did that poor Sheep keep it self when it ran among the Ravenous Wolves in
the Wilderness? Yet by the Good Shepherd it was preserved; This is the
Spirit, and comforting Genius of this Doctrine. Christ keeps us, provided we
keep our selves. We hoped it had been he who Saved Israel: that he gave us his
holy Spirit to abide with ns for ever, to Seal us up to the day of Redemption:
that knowing himself, and telling us, that without him we can do nothing, he
would not suspend his doing, upon our doing so great a thing, as preserving our
selves? For let us see now, what it is, that is required in us, if we shall be
preserved by Christ: it is to comport with him in his Act of Persevering us,
and to be diligent to keep our selves.

What is this, comporting with him in his Act of preserving us? Our comporting
with Christ in any thing, is by our Believing in him, and on him: that is our
radical Comportment, whence all other closings of Heart in obedience do flow;
so then, Christ will preserve us in Believing, provided we continue to Believe.
But what need of his help to do so, if antecedently thereunto so we do? Is
not this not only (...), but also (...), not only Unscripturall, but also
Unreasonable, yea absurd and Ludicrous: This is the flinty Fountain of all that
Abundance of Consolation, which Mr Goodwins doctrine does afford. Doubtless
they must be Wise and Learned men (like himself) who can extract any such
thing therefrom; Let him go with it to a poor weak tempted fainting
Believer, and try what a Comforter he will be thought, a Physician of what
value he will be esteemed. Let him tell him, thou art indeed weak in Faith,
ready to decay and perish, which thou may do, every day, there being neither
Purpose nor Promise of God to the contrary; great Oppositions, and great
Temptations have thou to wrestle withal, but yet Christ is loving, tender,
faithful, and in case thou continuest Believing, he will take care thou shall
believe: That Christ will increase thy Faith, and keep it alive by continual
influences, as from a Head into its Members, preserving thee not only against
outward Enemies, but the treacheries and deceits, and unbelief of thine own
heart, of any such thing I can give thee no account. Such Consolation a poor
man may have at home at any time.

Further;. 47.
what is that Act of Christ in Preserving them that is to be comported withal?
Ioh. 1. 16.
Wherein does it consist? 1 Cor. 12. 13.
Is it not in his daily continual Communication to them of new supplies of
that Spiritual life, whose springs are in him? Ephesians. 1. 23. 2. 21, 22. 4. 15,
16.
The making out from his own fullness unto them? His performing the office of
an Head to its Members, Gal. 2. 20.
and filling those other Relations wherein he stands, working in them both to
will and to do of his own good pleasure? What is it then to comport with this
Act, Col. 1. 17, 18, 19.
or these Acts of Chist? Can any thing reasonable be invented, 2. 19.
wherein such comportment may be thought to consist, but either it will be
found coincident with that, whereof it is a Condition, or appear to be such as
will crush the whole undertaking of Christ for the Preservation of Believers
into vanity and nothing? Again, has Christ undertaken to Preserve us against
all our Enemies, Heb. 7. 15.
or some only? If some only, give us an Account both of them, that he does
undertake against, that we may know for what to go to him, whereof to
complain; and of them, that he does not so undertake to safeguard us against
them, that we may know, Ioh. 15. 5.
wherein to trust to our selves? And let us see the places of Scripture, Isai.
30. 1.
wherein any Enemies are excepted out of this undertaking of Christ for the
safety of his? Paul goes far in an enumeration of particulars Romans 8. If he
has undertaken against them all, then let us know, whither it be an Enemy that
keeps us from this Comportment with Christ, or a Friend? If it be an Enemy, (as
surely every thing in us, that moves us to depart from the living God is) has
Christ undertaken against it or no? If not, how has he undertaken against them
all? If he has, how is it that it prevails? Yea but be undertakes this in
case we comport with him; that is, he undertakes to overcome such an Enemy, in
case there be no such Enemy. In case we be not turned aside from comporting
with him, he will destroy that Enemy that turns us aside from comporting with
him. Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla. Or on the otherside, if our Enemies
prevail not against us, he has faithfully undertaken that they shall not
prevail against us.

Yea but (says Mr Goodwin) No Scripture prooves that those, whom Christ
preserves, must by any compulsory, necessitating Power, use their diligence in
preserving them selves. And who I pray ever said they did? Compulsory Actings
of Grace are your own figment; so are all such necessitating Acts, which
procceed any further, then only as to the infallibillity of the Event aimed at.
God does not compel the Wills of men, Ioh. 8. 33.
when he works in them to will. Christ does not compel men to Care and
Diligence, Romans 6. 18.
when he works in them Holy Care and Diligence; Luke 17. 5.
when the Disciples prayed, Lord increase our Faith, they did not pray that
they might be compelled to Believe. Col. 1. 11, 12.
Gods working in them, that Believe, according to the exceeding greatness of
his Power, strengthening them with all might, according to his Glorious Power
unto all patience and long-suffering, with Joyfullnesse, very far from any
Compulsion or necessitation, inconsistent with the most absolute freedom,
Ephesians. 2. 8.
that a Creature is capable of. He that works Faith in Believers, can continue
it and increase it in them, without Compulsion. And this is the sum of Mr
Goodwins Answer to an Argument that notwithstanding all which he has spoken,
has yet strength enough left, to cast his whole building down to the ground.
What he further speaks to the particular place, which gave occasion to this
Discourse, may breifely be considered.

1. He speaks something to v. 37. which I insisted not on.. 48.
As to the purpose in hand, he tells you that Christ will in no wise cast out
(...), him that is coming; but yet he that is coming on his way, may turn back
and never come fully up to him.

Ans. But if this be not Huckstering of the Word of God, 2 Cor. 2. 17.
I know not what is. The words before in the same verse are, All that the
Father gives me, shall come to me. Says Mr Goodwin, they may come but half
way, and so turn back again, not coming fully home to him. Says Christ, they
shall come to me. Says Mr Goodwin, they may perhaps come but half way. Nunc
satis est dixisse, ego mira poemata pango. But why so? Why, (...) is coming, a
coming it seems in fieri, but not in facto esse; that is, it denotes a tract
of time, whilst the man is traveling his journey. As though believing, were a
successive motion, as to the Act of laying hold on Christ. But is he that is on
his way, that Christ receives, a Believer or not? Has he Faith or not? If he
has no Faith, the Faith whereof we speak, how can he be said to be coming,
seeing the wrath of God abides on him? If he has Faith, Ioh. 3. 36.
how is it, that he is not come to Christ? Has any one true Faith at a
distance from him? God gives another Testimony Ioh. 1. 11, 12. But (says he)
there is nothing in the words, that they are under no possibility of falling
away, who come to Christ. But 1. there is in those that follow, that (as to the
event,) they are under an impossibility of so doing, in respect of the Will and
Purpose of God; (which suffices me) as shall be made to appear. 2. That
Emphaticall expression (...), I will in no wise cast them out, expresses so
much Care and Tenderness in Christ toward them, that we are very apt to hope,
and believe, that he will not loose them any more; but that he will not only
not cast them out, but also according to his Fathers appointment, that he will
keep them, and preserve them in safety, until he bring them to glory, as is
fully asserted v. 39, 40. as has been declared. Again Mr Goodwin tells you,
it is not spoken of loosing Believers by defection of Faith, but by Death: And
to assure Believers of this, Christ tells them, It is his Fathers Will, that he
should raise them up at the last day. Besides if any be lost by defection from
Faith, this cannot be imputed to Christ, who did his Fathers pleasure to the
utmost for their preservation: but to themselves.

Ans. For the perverting of v. 37. the beginning of it was left out; and for
the accomplishing of the like designs upon v. 39. 40 (which farther clears the
mind and intendment of Christ in the words,) is omitted: He tells you, Math: 4.
6.
that it is the Will of the Father, that every one that comes to him, that is,
that Believes on him, have Everlasting life: What is Everlasting life in the
Gospel, is well known from Ioh: 17. 3. and unto this bestowing on them
everlasting Life, his raising of them at the last Day (as was mentioned) is a
necessary consequent: namely, that they may be brought to the full and complete
fruition of that life, which here in some measure they are made partakers of.
Even in the words of v: 39. that passage ( I should loose nothing) extends it
self to the whole Compass of our Saviors Duty, in reference to his Fathers
Will, for the safe-garding of Believers: and is it only death, and the state of
dissolution of Body and Soul, that it is the Will of God that he should
deliver them from? and the power of that, that it should not have dominion over
them in the morning? The Apostle tells us that he came to do the will of God,
whereby we are sanctified: Heb: 10. 9, 10. it was the Will of God, that he
should sanctify us: and he tells his Father, that he had kept all his own in
the World, Joh: 17. which doubtless was not his raising them from the dead. If
he be the Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, if the Promises of God be yea and
amen in him, if he be our Head, Husband, and Elder Brother, our Advocate and
Intercessour, our Sheapheard and Savior, his keeping us from being lost
extends it self no less effectually to our preservation from utter ruin in
this life, then to our raising at the last day; yea and that exceptive particle
((...)) includes this preservation, as well as leads us to the addition of the
other Favor and Privilege of being raised to Glory at the last day. In a
word, this whole discourse is added to make good that Gracious Promise of our
Savior v: 35. He that comes to me, shall never hunger: and he that Believes
on me, shall never thirst; which how it can be done by a naked engagement for
the Resurrection of them that come to him, and abide with him, if many do, and
most of all them that come to him, may depart from him, and fall into
everlasting ruin, needs Mr Goodwins farther labor and pains to unfold. What
is lastly added concerning Christ's doing the utmost of his Fathers Pleasure
for their Custody, but the fault is their own, who fall away, is the same
inconsistent ridiculous Assertion with that erewhile considered: with this
addition, that whereas it is his Fathers Pleasure, that they be saved; Christ
does his pleasure to the utmost, and yet saved they are not. And so much (if
not too much) for the vindication of this Testimony witnessing to the Truth
that we have in hand.

Mat: 24. 24. comes in the next place to be Considered,. 49.
(an unquestionable Evidence to the Truth) and that voluntarily of its own
accord, speaking so plain to the matter in hand, that it were a sin against
clear light to refuse to attend unto it; so far is it from being compelled
to bear the Cross of this service, as Mr Goodwin phrases the matter Cap: 10.
Sect: 9. Page: 181, 182, 183. They shall seduce, if it were possible, the very
Elect: hence (says he) it is inferred, that the deceiving or seducing of them
that Believe is a thing impossible, which is the drawing of darkness out of
light. Strange! to me it seems so far from a forced inference, or a strained
drawing of a Conclusion, that it is but the conversion of the terms of the
same Identicall supposition. He that says, they shall deceive the very Elect,
if it were possible, so mighty shall be their prevalency in seducing, seems to
me (and would, I doubt not, do so to others, did not their prejudices and
engagements force them to stop their ears, and shut their eyes) to say, that
it is Impossible the Elect should be seduced.

But let the Place (as it deserves) be more distinctly considered; It is among
them,. 50.
which I refer to the head of the Purposes of God; and a Purpose of God there
is (though not expressed, yet) included in the words: The Impossibility of the
seduction of some persons from the Faith, is here Asserted: Whence does this
Impossibility arise? Not from any thing in themselves, not from their own
careful Consideration of all the Concernments of their Condition, the only
preservative in such a season, if some (who pretend themselves skillful and
experienced, yea almost the only Physicians of Souls,) may be believed. They
can never stand upon such sands, against that opposition they shall be sure to
meet withal. Our Savior therefore intimates, whence the Impossibility
expressed does flow, in a description of the Persons, of whom it is affirmed,
in reference to the Purpose of God concerning them. They are the Elect; Those
whom God has chosen before the foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1. 4. Romans 9. 12.
11. 7.
that they should be holy and unblameable before him in love. His Purpose
according to Election must stand firm, and therefore the Election it self
shall obtain. This then is that, which is here affirmed; God having chosen
some, or Elected them to Life, according to the purpose which he purposed in
himself, and faith being bestowed on them, Ephesians. 1. 9. Phil. 1. 29.
they believing on the account of their being ordained to eternal life, Act.
13. 48.
it is impossible they should be seduced, so as to be thrown down from that
state and Condition of Acceptance with God, (for the substance of it) wherein
they stand.

Some few Observations will further clear the mind of the Holy Ghost,. 51.
and obviate the exceptions that are put in against our receiving the words in
their plain, proper, obvious signification; Observe then.

1. Upon the intimation of the Great Power and Prevalency of Seducers, our
Savior adds this as a matter of great Consolation to True and Sound
Believers, that notwithstanding all this, all their attempts however advantaged
by force or subtility, yet they shall be preserved: This the whole Context
inforceth us to receive, and our Adversaries to confess, that at least a great
difficulty of their seduction is intimated. And it arises with no less
Evidence, that this difficulty is distinguishing, in respect of the Persons
exposed to seduction; that some are Elect, who should be seduced, if it were
possible: others not, that may and shall be prevailed against.

2. The Bottom of the Consolation in the freedom of the Persons here spoken
of, from falling under the prevailing Power of Seducers, consists in this, that
they are the Elect of God; such as in a personal Consideration are Chosen of
God from all Eternity, to be kept and preserved by his Power to Salvation,
notwithstanding any Interveniences or Oppositions, which he will suffer to lie
in their way. But (says Mr Goodwin) These men, at least before their Calling,
are as liable to be deceived or seduced as other men: this is their own
Confession, and Paul says, that they were sometimes deceived. Titus 3. 3.

Ans. An Exception doubtless unworthy him that makes it, who, had he not
resolved to say all, that ever had been said by any, to the business in hand,
would scarcely (I presume) have made use thereof; The seduction of persons is
not opposed to their Election, but their Believing. Mention is made of their
Election, to distinguish them from those other Professors, which should be
seduced: and to discover the Foundation of their stability under their trials,
but it is of them as Believers (in which consideration the Attempts of seducers
are advanced against them) that he speaks. It is not the seducing of the
Elect, as Elect; but of Believers, who are Elect, and because they are Elected,
that is denied.

3. That it is a seduction unto a total and final departure from Christ and
Faith in him, whose impossibility, in respect of the Election, is here
asserted. But (says Mr Goodwin Cap. 10. Sect. 16. page 181.) This is to
presume not to Argue, or Believe: for there is not the least Ground in the
word, whereon to build such an Interpretation. But the Truth is, without any
presumption or much labor for proof, the falsity of this Exception will
quickly appear to any one that shall but view the Context. It is evidently
such a seduction, as they are exposed unto, and fall under, who endure not unto
the end, that they may be Saved, v. 13. And they, who are excepted upon the
account mentioned, are opposed to them, who being seduced, and their Love being
made cold, and their Iniquityes abounding, perish everlastingly. v. 11, 12.

4. It is then a denial of their being cast out by the power of seducers, from
their state, and condition of Believing, and Acceptance with God, wherein they
stand, that our Savior here asserts and gives out to their consolation: they
shall not be seduced, that is, drawn of from that state, wherein they are, to
a state of Unregeneracy, Infidelity, and Enmity to God, so that (as Mr Goodwin
observes in the next place) we deny them from hence, not only to be subject to
a final, but also to a total seduction.

5. We grant, that notwithstanding the security given, which respects the state
and Condition of the persons spoken of, yet they may be, and often were
seduced, and drawn aside into ways that are not right, into errors and false
Doctrines, through the cunning sleights of men, who lay in wait to deceive, but
never into such, (as to any abode in them,) which are inconsistent with the
union with their Head, and his Life in them.

The Errors and ways whereunto they are, or may be seduced,. 52.
are either such, as, though dangerous, yea in their Consequences pernicious,
yet have not such an Aspect upon the Faith of Believers, as to deny a
possibility of union, and holding the Head upon other accounts: I doubt not but
that men for a season may not know, may disbelieve, and deny some fundamental
Articles of Christian Religion, and yet not be absolutely concluded not to hold
the Head by any sinew, or ligament; to have no influence of life by any other
means. Was it not so with the Apostles, when they questioned the Resurrection
of Christ, and with the Corinthians, who denied the Resurrection of the Saints?
an abode, I confess, in either of which Errors would, when the Consequences
of them are manifested, prove pernicious to the Souls of men. But that they
have in themselves such an absolute Repugnancy unto, and inconsistency with the
Life of Christ, however considered, as that their entertainment for a season,
should be immediately exclusive thereof, I suppose Mr Goodwin himself will not
say. In this sense then, we grant that true, Saving, Justifying Faith may
consist with the denial of some fundamental Articles of Christian Religion,
for a season: but that any True Believer can persist in such an Heresy, we
deny; he having the Promise of the Spirit to lead him into all necessary Truth.

2. There are such ways and things, as in their own nature have an
inconsistency with the Life of Christ, as the Abnegation of Christ himself:
but this also we affirm to be twofold, or to receive a twofold Consideration:
1. It may be resolved, upon Consideration, with the deliberate Consent of the
whole Soul: which we utterly deny, that Believers can, or shall be left unto
for a moment: or that ever any True believer was so. 2. Such as may be squeezed
out of the mouths of men, by the surprisall of some great, dreadful, and
horrible Temptation, without any habitual or Cordial Assent to any such
Abomination* or Disaffection to Christ, or resolute Rebellion against him. Thus
Peter fell into the Abnegation of Christ, whose Faith yet under it did not
perish, if our Savior was heard in his Prayer for him, having an e^e to that
very Temptation of his, wherein he was to be tried, and his fall under it. In
the first sense are those words of our Savior ( Mat. 10. 32.) to be
understood, and not in the latter. Christ was so far from denying Peter before
his Father under his Abnegation of him, that he never manifested more Care and
Tenderness toward any Believer, then toward him in that Condition. And this
wholly removes Mr Goodwins 10th. Section out of our way, without troubling of
our selves to hold up that distinction of a final denial of Christ, and that
not final; seeing in all probability he set it up himself, that he might have
the honor to cast it down.

What follows in Mr Goodwin from the beginning of Sect:. 53.
11. Cap: 10. to the end of Sect: 17. is little more then a Translation of the
Remonstrants Sophistry, in vexing this Text in their Synodalia, which he knows
full well where to find discussed, and removed. For the sake of our English
Readers, I shall not avoid the consideration of it. I affirm then: 1. That the
phrase (...) here denotes the Impossibility of the Event denied. The manner of
Speech, Circumstances of the place, with the aim of our Savior in speaking,
exacting this sense of the words. The words are (...). It is the constant
import of the word (...) to design the Event of the thing, which by what
attends it, is asserted, or denied so Gal: 2. 13. Mat: 8. 28. 15. 31. 1 Thessalonians:
1. 8. Neither is it ever used for (...). In the place by some instanced for it
Rom: 7. 6. it points clearly at the Event: (...) is sometimes put for it, but
not on the contrary; and the words (...), though not so used always, (though
sometimes they are, as Gal: 4. 15.) do signify at least a moral impossibility,
when they refer to the endeavors of men; but relating to the prediction of
an event by God himself, they are equivalent to an absolute Negation of it;
That of Acts 20. 16. is urged to the contrary. Paul hoped (...), to be at
Jerusalem at the Pentecost. If it be possible, here cannot imply an
impossibility as to the event, says Mr G. But are these places parallel? Are
all places, where the same phrase is used, always to be expounded in the same
sense? The terms here, [ if it be possible] respect not the futurition of the
thing, but the uncertainty to Paul of its possibility or impossibility; the
uncertainty (I say) of Paul in his conjecture, whether he should get to
Jerusalem by such a time, or no; of which he was ignorant. Did our Savior here
conjecture about a thing, whereof he was ignorant whether it would come to
pass, or no? We say not then, that in this place, where (...) is expressive of
the uncertainty of him, that attempts any thing, of its Event, that it affirms
an impossibility of it, and so to insinuate that Paul made all have to do
that, which he knew was impossible for him to do: but that the words are used
in these two places in distinct senses, according to the enclosure that is made
of them by others: But (says Mr Goodwin) to say, that Paul might be Ignorant,
whether his being at Jerusalem by Pentecost, might be possible or no, and that
he only resolved to make trial of the truth herein to the utmost, is to
asperse this great Apostle with a ridiculous imputation of Ignorance. And why
so I pray you? It is true; he was a great Apostle indeed. But it was no part of
his Apostolical furnishment, to know in what space of time he might make a
Sea-voyage. Had Mr Goodwin ever been at Sea, he would not have thought it
ridiculous Ignorance, for a man to be uncertain, in what space of time he might
sail from Miletus to Ptolemais. Paul had a short time to finish this voyage
in. He was at Philippi at the days of Unleavened Bread, and afterward, v. 6.
thence he was five days sailing to Troas v: 6. and there he abode seven days
more: it may well be supposed, that it cost him not less th^n seven days more
to come to Miletus v: 13, 14, 15. how long he tarried there is uncertain:
Evident however it is, that there was a very small space of time left to get to
Jerusalem by Pentecost. Paul was one that had met, not only with Calmes, and
contrary Winds, 2 Cor. 11. 25.
but Shipwreck also: so that he might well doubt, whether it were possible for
him to make his voyage in that space of time, he had designed to do it in; and
this surely without the least disparagement to his Apostolical knowledge, and
wisdom. In brief, when this phrase relates to the Cares and desires of men,
and unto any thing of their Ignorance of the Issue, it may design the
uncertainty of the event, as in this place and that of Romans 12. 18. But when it
points at the event it self, it peremptorily designs its accomplishment or
not, according to the tendency of the Expression, which affirms or denies.
Notwithstanding then all Evasions, the simple, direct, and proper sense of our
Saviors words, who is setting forth and aggravating the prevalency of seducers
in evil times by him then foretold, is, that it shall be such, and so great,
as that if it were not impossible upon the account of their Election, they
should prevail against the very Elect themselves. But

6. Suppose it be granted, that the words refer to the endeavors of the
seducers in this place, yet they must needs deny their prevalency, as to the
end aimed at: It is asserted, either to be possible,. 54.
that the Elect should be so seduced, or not. If not, we have what we aim at;
If it be possible, and so here asserted, the total of this Expression of our
Savior will be resolved into a Conclusion, certainly most remote from his
intendment. If it be possible that the Elect may be seduced, then shall they be
seduced: but it is possible (say our Adversaries,) therefore they shall be
seduced. Neither does that which Mr Goodwin urges Sect. 12. out of the
Synodalia before mentioned page 314, 315. at all prove, that the words denote
only a difficulty of the thing aimed at, with Relation to the earnest
endeavors of seducers: (...) does indeed intimate their endeavors, but
withal their fruitlesnesse, as to the event. (...) is not referred (as in the
Example of Paul) to the thoughts of their minds, but to the success foretold
by Christ. That Emphaticall and Diacriticall Expression in the description of
them, against whom their Attempts are, ( even the very Elect) argues their
exemption. And if by Elect are meant simply and only Believers as such, how
comes this Emphaticall Expression and description of them to be used, when they
alone, and no other can be seduced; for those who seem to Believe only, cannot
be said to fall from the Faith, say our Adversaries; It is true, the Professors
of Christianity adhered of old, under many trialls (for the greater part) with
eminent Constancy, to their Profession: yet is not any thing eminently herein
held out in that saying, which Mr Goodwin calls Proverbial in Galen: he
speaking of the followers of Moses the same as of the followers of Christ. What
else follows in Mr Goodwin from the same Authors, is nothing but the pressing
of (I think) one of the most absurd Arguments, that ever Learned Men made use
of, in any Controversy; and yet such as it is, we shall meet with it, over and
over, (as we have done often already) before we arrive at the end of this
discourse; and therefore to avoid tediousness I shall not here insist upon it.
With its mention it shall be passed by. It is concerning the uselesnesse of
means, and Exhortations unto the use of them, if the End to be attained by
them be irrevocably determined, although those Exhortations are part of the
means appointed for the Accomplishment of the end so designed. I shall not (as
I said) in this place insist upon it: One thing only I shall observe in Sect.
17. he grants, that God is able to determine the Wills of the Elect to the use
of means, proper and sufficient to prevent their being deceived; by this
determining the Wills of the Elect to the use of proper means, the Efficacy of
Grace in and with Believers, to a certain preservation of them to the end, is
intended. It is the thing he opposes, as we are informed in the next words (
he has no where declared himself willing or resolved to do it). That by this
one Assertion Mr Goodwin has absolved our Doctrine from all the absurd
Consequences and Guilt of I know not what Abominations, which in various
Criminations he has charged upon it, is evident upon the first view and
Consideration. All that we affirm God to do, Mr Goodwin grants that he can
do. Now if God should do all he is able, there would no Absurdity or evil,
that is truly so, follow. What he can do, that he can Decree to do: and this
is the sum of our Doctrine, which he has chosen to oppose. God (we say)
has Everlastingly Purposed to give, and does actually give his Holy Spirit to
Believers, to put forth such an exceeding greatness of. Power, as whereby in
the use of means, they shall certainly be preserved to Salvation; This God
can do, says our Author. This Concession being made by the Remonstrants in
their Synodalia, Mr Goodwin (I presume) thought it but duty to be as free, as
his Predecessors, and therefore consented unto it also, although it be an axe
laid at the root of almost all the Arguments he sets up against the Truth, as
shall hereafter be farther manifested.

I draw now to a close of those places,. 55.
which (among many other omitted) tender themselves unto the proof of the
stable, unchangeable Purpose of God, concerning the safe-garding and
preservation of Believers in his Love, and unto Salvation. I shall mention one
or two more, and close this second Scripturall Demonstration of the Truth in
hand. The first is that eminent place of Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5. Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ, according as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the World, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in Love; having Predestined us unto the adoption of Children by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will: verse 3.
the Apostle summarily blesses God for all the spiritual mercies, which in
Jesus Christ he blesses his Saints withal; of all which v. 4. he discovers
the fountain and spring, which is his free choosing of them before the
foundation of the World; That an Eternal Act of the Will of God is hereby
designed, is beyond dispute: and it is that foundation of God, on which the
whole of the building mentioned and pourtraid in the following verse is laid.
All the Grace and Favor of God toward his Saints, in their Justification,
Adoption, and Glory, all the fruits of the Spirit, which they enjoy in Faith
and Sanctification, flow from this one fountain: and these the Apostle
describes at large in the verses following. The aim of God in this eternal
and unchangeable Act of his Will (he tells us) is, that we should be
unblameable before him in Love. Certainly cursed Apostats, backsliders in
Heart, in whom his soul takes no pleasure, are very far from being
unblameable before God in Love. Those that are within the compass of this
Purpose of God, must be preserved unto that State and Condition, which God
aims to bring them unto, by all the fruit and issues of that Purpose of his,
which was pointed at before. A Scripture of the like importance unto that
before named, is 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14. God has from the beginning chosen you to
Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth,
whereunto he calls you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the Glory of the Lord
Jesus; The same fountain of all spiritual and eternal mercy, with that
mentioned in the other place, is here also expressed, and that is Gods choosing
of us by an everlasting Act, or Designing us to the end intended, by a Free,
Eternal, Unchangeable Purpose of his Will.

Secondly, The end aimed at by the Lord in that Purpose, is here more clearly
set down, in a twofold Expression. 1. Of Salvation v: 13. He has chosen us to
Salvation: that is the thing which he aimed to accomplish for them, and the End
he intended to bring them to, in his choosing of them, and 2ly v: 14. The Glory
of the Lord Jesus: or the obtaining a portion in that Glory, which Christ
purchased and procured for them, with their being with him, to behold his
Glory. And 3ly You have the means, whereby God will certainly bring about, and
accomplish this his design and Purpose, whereof there are three most eminent
Acts expressed. 1. Vocation, or their calling by the Gospel v: 14. 2.
Sanctification v: 13. ( through the Sanctification of the Spirit.) And 3.
Justification, which they receive by belief of the Truth. Thus much then is
wrapped up in this Text; God having in his Unchangeable Purpose fore-appointed
his to Salvation and Glory, certainly to be obtained through the effectual
working of the Spirit, and free justification in the Blood of Christ, it cannot
be, but that they shall be preserved unto the enjoyment of what they are so
designed unto.

To sum up what has been spoken from these Purposes of God, 56.
to the Establishment of the Truth we have in hand. Those, whom God has
purposed by effectual means to preserve to the enjoyment of Eternal Life and
Glory in his Favor and Acceptance, can never so fall from his Love, or be so
cast out of his Grace, as to come short of the end designed, or ever be totally
rejected of God. The Truth of this proposition depends upon what has been
said, and may farther be insisted on, concerning the unchangeablenesse, and
Absoluteness of the Eternal Purposes of God, the Glory whereof men shall
never be able Sacrilegiously to rob him of. Thence the Assumption is,
concerning all true Believers, and truly sanctified persons, are these Purposes
of God, that they shall be so preserved to such ends etc. as has been
abundantly proved by an induction of particular instances, and therefore it is
impossible they should ever be so cast out of the Favor of God, as not to be
infallibly preserved to the End. Which is our Second Demonstration of the Truth
in hand.

CAP. IV.
1. An entrance into the Consideration of the Covenant of Grace, and our
Argument from thence, for the Unchangeablenesse of the Love of God unto
Believers. 2. The intendment of the ensuing discourse. 3. Genesis 17. 3. opened
and explained: with the confirmation of the Argument in hand from thence. 4.
That Argument vindicated and cleared of Objections. 5. Confirmed by some
observations. 6. Ierem. 32. v. 38, 39, 40. compared with Cap. 31. v. 32, 33.
The Truth under consideration from thence clearly confirmed. 7. The certainty,
immutability, and infallible accomplishment of all the Promises of the New
Covenant, demonstrated. 1. From the removal of all causes of Alteration. 2.
From the Mediator, and his undertaking therein. 3. From the Faithfulness of
God. 8. One instance from the former considerations. 9. The endeavor of M. G.
to Answer our Argument from this place. 10. His observation on, and from the
Text, considered: 1. This promise not made to the Jews only: 2. Nor to all the
Nation of the Jews, proved from Romans 11: 3. not intending principally their
deliverance from Babylon. 11. His inferences from his former observations
weighed: 1. The Promise made to the body of the People of the Jews Typically
only: 2. An Exposition borrowed of Socinus Rejected: 3. The Promise not
appropriated to the time of the Captivity: and the disadvantage ensuing to M.
G. cause upon such an Exposition. 12. The place insisted on compared with Ezekiel.
11. 17, 18, 19, 20. That place cleared: a 4th Objection Answered: this Promise
always fulfilled: the Spiritual part of it accomplished during the Captivity:
Gods intention not frustrated. How far the civil prosperity of the Jews was
concerned in this Promise. Promises of Spiritual and Temporal things
compared. The Covenant of Grace how far conditional. 13, 14. M. G's sense of
this place expressed: borrowed from Faustus Socinus: the inconsistency of it
with the mind of the Holy Ghost, demonstrated: also with what himself has
elsewhere delivered: no way suited to the Answer of our Argument from the
place. 15. The same Interpretation farther disproved* an immediate divine
efficacy held our in the words: Conversion and pardon of sins promised:
differenced from the Grace and Promises of the Old Covenant: Contribution of
means put by M. G. in the place of effectual operation of the thing it self,
farther disproved. 16. How, when, and to whom this promise was fulfilled,
farther declared: An Objection arising upon that consideration answered. 17.
Conjectures ascribed to God by Mr G. The foundation real of all Divine
Prediction: the Promise utterly enervated, and rendered of none effect by Mr G.
Exposition: its consistency with the Prophesies of the Rejection of the Jews.
18. The close of the Argument from the Covenant of God.

HAving shown the Unchangeable Stability of the Love and Favor of God toward
his Saints,. 1.
from the Immutability of his own Nature and Purposes, manifested by an
Induction of sundry paricular Instances from eminent places of Scripture,
wherein both the one and the other are held out as the foundation of what we
affirm: I proceed to further clear and demonstrate the same important Truth
from the first way of Declaration, whereby God has assured them that it shall
be to them according to the Tenor of the Purposes insisted on; and that is his
Covenant of Grace. The Principium essendi of this Truth (if I may so say) is in
the Decrees and Purposes of God: the Principium Cognoscendi in his Covenant,
Promise, and Oath, which also add much to the real Stability of it, the Truth
and Faithfulness of God in them, being thereby peculiarly engaged therein.

It is not in my Purpose to handle the Nature of the Covenant of Grace,. 2.
but only breifely to look into it, so far as it has Influence into the
Truth in hand: The Covenant of Grace then, as it enwraps the Unchangeable Love
and Favor of God, toward those, who are taken into the bond thereof, is that
which lies under our present Consideration* The other great branch of it,
(upon the account of the same Faithfulness of God) communicating permanency
of Perseverance in it self, unto the Saints, securing their Continuance with
God, shall (the Lord assisting) more peculiarly be explained, when we arrive to
the head of our Discourse: unless enough to that purpose may fall in
occasionally in the progress of this business.

For our present purpose,. 3.
the producing and vindicating of one or two Texts of Scripture, being
unavoidably expressive toward the end aimed at, shall suffice.

The first of those is Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my Covenant between me and
thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an Everlasting
Covenant, to be a God unto thee and thy seed after thee. This is that, which
God engages himself unto in this Covenant of Grace, that he will for
everlasting be a God to him, and his Faithful Seed. Though the external
Administration of the Covenant was given to Abraham, and his Carnal Seed, yet
the effectual dispensation of the Grace of the Covenant is peculiar to them
only, who are the Children of the Promise, the Remnant of Abraham according to
Election, with all, that in all Nations were to be Blessed in him, and in his
Seed Christ Jesus. Gal. 4. 22, 23, 30.
Ishmael though Circumcised was to be put out, and not to be here with Isaak;
nor to abide in the House for ever, as the Son of the Promise was: Now the
Apostle tells you, look what Blessings Faithful Abraham received by virtue of
this Promise, the same do all Believers receive. Gal. 3. 9. We which are of
the Faith, are Blessed with Faithful Abraham: which he prooves (in the words
foregoing) from Genesis 12. 3. because all Nations were to be Blessed in him. What
Blessing then was it, that was here made over to Abraham? All the Blessings,
that from God are conveyed in and by his Seed Jesus Christ, (in whom both he
and we are Blessed) are enwrapped therein. What they are the Apostle tells you
Ephesians. 1. 3. They are all Spiritual Blessings: If Perseverance, if the
Continuance of the Love and Favor of God toward us, be a Spiritual Blessing,
both Abraham and all his Seed, all Faithful ones throughout the world, are
Blessed with it in Jesus Christ: and if Gods continuing to be a God, to them
for ever, will enforce this Blessing, (being but the same thing in another
expression) it is here likewise asserted.

It is importunately excepted, 4.
that though God undertake to be our God in an Everlasting Covenant, and upon
that account to Bless us with the whole Blessing, that is convayed by the
Promised Seed; yet if we abide not with him, if we forsake him, he will also
cease to be our God, and cease to Bless us with the Blessing, which on others
in Jesus Christ he will bestow.

Ans. If there be a necessity to smite this Evasion so often as we shall meet
with it, it must be cut into an hundred pieces. For the present I shall only
observe two evils it is attended withal. First, it takes no notice that God,
who has undertaken to be a God unto us, has with the like Truth, Power, and
Faithfulness undertaken, that we shall abide to be his People. So is his Love
in his Covenant expressed by its Efficacy to this end and Purpose. Deuteronomy. 50. 6.
And the Lord thy God will also Circumcise thy Heart and the Heart of thy Seed,
to Love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart and with all thy Soul, that thou
may live. Secondly, it denies the continuance of the Love of God to us, to
the End, to be any part of the Blessings, wherewith we are blessed in Jesus
Christ: For if it be, it could no more be suspended on any Condition in us,
then the Glorification of Believers that abide so to the end.

This then is enwrapped in this Promise of the Covenant unto the Elect, with
whom it is Established; God will be a God to them for ever, and that to Bless
them with all the Blessings, which he communicates in and by the Lord Jesus
Christ the promised seed. The contiuuance of his Favor to the End, is to us
(unquestionably) a Spiritual Blessing; if any one be otherwise minded, I shall
not press to share with him in his Apprehension: And if so, it is in Christ,
and shall certainly be enjoyed by them, to whom God is a God in Covenant. He
that can suppose, that he shall prevail with the Saints of God to believe it
will make for their Consolation to apprehend, that there is no engagement in
his Covenant assuring them of the continuance of the Favor of God unto them,
to the End of their Pilgrimage, has no reason to doubt or question the Issue
of any thing, he shall undertake to persuade men unto. Doubtless he will find
it very difficult with them, who in time of Spiritual Straights and pressures,
have closed with this engagement of God in the Covenant, and have had
experience of its bearing them through all perplexityes, and entanglements,
when the Waves of temptation were ready to go over their Souls. Certainly
David was in another persuasion, when upon a view of all the difficulties he
had passed through, and his house was to meet withal, he concludes 2 Samuel 23.
5. This is all my desire and all my Salvation, that God has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure. The Covenant from whence
he had his sure Mercyes, not Changeable, not Alterable, not liable to failings,
as the temporal Prosperity of his House was, was that he rejoiced in.

I shall close this with two Observations.

First,. 5.
it may doubtless, and on serious Consideration will seem strange to any one,
acquainted in the least measure with God and his Faithfulness, that in a
Covenant established in the Blood of Christ he should freely promise to his,
that he would be a God unto them, that is, that he would abide with them in the
Power, Goodness, Righteousness, and Faithfulness of a God, that he would be
an Allsufficient God to them for ever, when he might with an Almighty facility
prevent it, and so answer and fulfill his Engagement to to the utmost, he
should yet suffer them to become such Villains and Devils in Wickedness, that
it should be utterly impossible for him in the Blood of his Son, and the
riches of his Grace, to Continue a God unto them: this I say seems strange to
me, and not to be received without casting the greatest reproach imaginable, on
the Goodness, Faithfulness, and Righteousness of God.

Secondly, if this Promise be not absolute, Immutable, Unchangeable,
Independent on any thing in us, it is Impossible that any one should plead it
with the Lord but only upon the account of the sense that he has of his own
accomplishment of the Condition, Psalm. 73. 26. Isa. 8. 17. Isa. 50. 10.
on which the Promise does depend; I can almost suppose that the whole
Generation of Believers will rise up against this Assertion to remove it out of
their way of walking with God. This I know, that most of them, who any time
have walked in darkness and have had no Light, will reprove it to the Faces of
them that mainetaine it, and profess that God has witnessed the contrary
truth to their hearts. Are we in the Covenant of Grace left to our own Hearts,
Ways, and Walkings? Is it not differenced from that which is abolished? Is it
not the great distinguishing Character of it, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
that all the Promises of it are stable, and shall certainly be accomplished
in Jesus Christ? Heb. 7. 22. and 8. 7, 8, 9.


One place I shall add more, wherein our intendment is positively expressed, 6.
beyond all possibility of any colorable evasion, especially considering the
Explication, Enlargement, and Application, which in other places it has
received. The place intended is Jeremy 32. v. 38, 39, 40. They shall be my
People, and I will be their God; and I will give them one heart, and one way,
that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and their Children after
them, and I will make an everlasting Convenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me; in conjunction with those words of the same
importance. Chapter 31. v: 31, 32, 33. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that
I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah,
not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers; but this shall be
my Covenant, that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says
the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People, and they shall
teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know
the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest
of them, says the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquities, and remember
their sins no more.

1. The Thesis under demonstration is directly, and positively affirmed, in
most significant, and emphaticall words, by God himself: seeing then the
Testimony of his holy Prophets, and Apostles, concerning him are so excepted
against, and so lightly set by, let us try if men will reverence himself, and
cease contending with him, when he appears in judgment. Says he then to
Believers, those whom he takes into covenant with him, This is my Covenant
with you (in the performance whereof his Allsufficiency, Truth, and
Faithfulness with all other his glorious Attributes are eminently engaged) I
will be your God (what that expression intends is known, and the Lord here
explaines, by instancing in some eminent Spiritual mercy thence flowing, as
Sanctification, and Acceptance with him by the forgiveness of sins) and that
for ever in an everlasting Covenant, that He will not turn away from them to
do them good. This plainly God says of himself, and this is all we say of
him in the business, and which (having so good an Author) we must say, whether
men will hear, or whether they will forbear: Whether it be right in the sight
of God to hearken unto men, more then unto God, let all judge. Truly they have
a sad task in my Apprehension, who are forced to sweat and labor to alleviate
and take off the Testimony of God.

2. Secondly, That the way the Lord proposes to secure his Love to his, is
upon terms of Advantage of Glory and Honor to himself, to take away all
scruple which on that hand might arise, is fully also expressed: Sin is the
only differencing thing between God and man; and hereunto it has a double
influence: First, Moral in its guilt, deserving that God should cast off a
sinner, and prevailing with him upon the account of justice so to do;
Secondly, Efficient, by causing men through its power and deceitfulness, to
depart from God, Heb. 3, 1: Prove. 1. 31. 14. 14.
until, as back-sliders in heart, they are filled with their own ways. Take
away these two, provide for Security on this hand, and there is no possible
case imaginable, of separation between God and man once brought together in
Peace and Unity. For both these does God here undertake; for the first (says
he) I will forgive their Iniquities, and remember their sins no more. Cap.
31. 34. The guilt of sin shall be done away in Christ, and that on terms of
the greatest Honor and Glory to the Justice of God, that can be apprehended;
God has set forth Christ to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of sins that are past. Romans 3.
25. And for the latter, that that may be thoroughly prevented, says God the
care shall ly on me, I will put my Law in their Hearts and write it in their
inward parts. Cap. 31. 33. I will put my fear in their inward parts, that they
shall not depart from me. Cap. 32. 40. So that the Continuance of his Love is
secured against all possible interveniences whatever, by an assured prevention
of all such that have an inconsistency therewithal.

The Apostle Paul setting out the Covenant,: 7.
which God ratifieth in the Blood of Christ, which shall never be broken, takes
the description of it from this place of the Prophet. Heb. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12.
and therein fixes particularly on the Unchangeableness of it, in opposition
to the Covenant, which went before, which was liable to mutation: when if these
differed only in the Approbation of several Qualifications, they come to the
same end. For if this Covenant depends on Conditions by our selves and in our
own strength, with the advantage of its proposal to us, attended with
exhortations and therefore by us to be fulfilled, how was it distinguished from
that made with the People, when they came out of Egypt? But in this very thing
the difference of it lies, as the Apostle asserts. v. 6, 7, 8. The
Immutability of this Covenant, and the certain product of all the Mercy
promised in it, might (were that our present task) be easily demonstrated; as
First.

1. From the Removal of all causes of Alteration. When two enter into Covenant
and Agreement, no one can undertake, that that Covenant shall be firm, and
stable, if it equally depends upon both: yea both it may be are changeable, and
so actually changed, before the accomplishing of the thing engaged about
therein: However though the one should be faithful, yet the other may fail,
and so the Covenant be broken: Thus was it with God and Adam; it could not be
undertaken, that that Covenant should be kept inviolable, because though God
continues faithful, yet Adam might prove, (as indeed he did) faithless: and
so the Covenant was disanulled, as to any power of knitting together God and
Man. The Covenant between Husband and Wife; the one party cannot undertake
that the whole Covenant shall be observed, because the other may prove
treacherous. In this Covenant the case is otherwise. God himself has
undertaken the whole, both for his continuing with us, and our continuing with
him. Now he is one, God is one, and there is not another, that they should
fail and disanull this agreement. Though there be sundry persons in covenant,
yet there is but one undertaker on all hands, and that is God himself. It does
not depend upon the will of another, but of him only, who is faithful, who
cannot lie, who cannot deceive, who will make all his engagements good to the
utmost. He is an Allsufficient one, he will work, and who shall let him? The
Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disanull it? Yea he is an
unchangeable one, what he undertakes, shall come to pass. Blessed be his name,
that he has not laid the foundation of a Covenant in the Blood of his dear
Son, laid out the riches of his Wisdom, Grace, and power about it; and then
left it to us, and our frail will to carry it on, that it should be in our
power to make void the great work of his mercy. Whence then (I say) should any
change be, the whole depending on one, and he immutable.

2. Seeing that God and man, having been at so great a distance, as they were
by sin, must needs meet in some Mediator, some middle person in whom, and by
whose blood, (as covenants usually were confirmed by blood) this Covenant must
be ratified; consider who this is, and what he has done for the establishing
of it. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ
Jesus. 1 Timothy 2.5. He is the surety of this Testament. Heb. 7. 22. The Mediator
of this better Covenant, established upon better Promises Heb: 8. 6. neither is
this surety or Mediator subject to change. He is the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever. Heb. 13. 8. But though he be so in himself, yet is the work so,
that is committed to him? says the Apostle, all the Promises of God are yea
and amen in Jesus Christ, to the glory of God by us, 2 Cor: 1. 20. God has in
him, and by him, ascertained all the Promises of the Covenant, that not one of
them should be broken, disanulled, frustrate, or come short of an
Accomplishment. God has so confirmed them in him, that he has at his death
made a Legacy of them, and bequeathed them in a Testamentary dispensation to
the Covenanters. Heb: 9. 15, 16, 17. and what he has farther done for the
Assuring of his Saints abiding with God, shall afterward be declared.

3. Thirdly, the Faithfulness of God is oftentimes peculiarly mentioned in
reference to this very thing, the God that keeps Covenant is his Name, That
which he has to keep, is, all that in Covenant he undertaketh: now in this
Covenant he undertaketh: First, That he will never forsake us: Secondly, That
we shall never forsake him: his Faithfulness is engaged to both these; and if
either part should fail, what would the Lord do to his great name, The God
that keeps Covenant?

Notwithstanding the undertaking of God on both sides in this Covenant,. 8.
notwithstanding his Faithfulness in the performance of what he undertaketh,
notwithstanding the Ratification of it in the blood of Jesus, and all that he
has done for the confirmation of it, notwithstanding its differing from the
Covenant, that was disanulled on this Account, that that was broken, which this
shall never be, (that being broken, not as to the truth of the Proposition
wherein it is contained, Do this and Live, but as to the succes of it in
bringing any to God) notwithstanding the Seal of the Oath that God set unto
it; they (I say) who notwithstanding all these things, will hang the
unchangeablenesse of this Covenant of God upon the slipperinesse, and
uncertainty, and lubricity of the Will of Man, let them walk in the light of
the sparks, which themselves have kindled, we walk in the light of the Lord
our God.

When first I perused Mr Goodwin's Exceptions to this Testimony ( Cap. 10.
Sect. 52, 53, 54, 55, 56. Page 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 224.) finding them
opposed not so much,. 9.
nor so directly to our inference from this place, as to the design,
intendment, and arguing of the Apostle Romans 9, 10, 11th chapters, and the
reinforcing of the Objections by him, answered, casting again the Stone of
offense in the way, by him removed, I thought to have passed it without any
Reply, being not convinced, that it was possible for the Author himself to be
satisfied either with his own exposition of this place, or his exceptions unto
ours; but arriving at length to the close of this discourse, I found him quasi
re preclare gesta, to triumph in his victory, expressing much confidence, that
the World of Saints, who have hitherto bottomed much of their Faith and
consolation, on the Covenant of God in these words expressed, will veil their
faith and understanding to his uncontrouleable Dictates, and not once make
mention of the name of God in this place any more. Truly for my part, I must
take the boldness to say, that before the coming forth of his Learned
Treatise, I had read, and (according to my weak ability) weighed and
considered what ever either Arminians, or Socinians (from the Founder of which
Sect, their and his Interpretation of this place is borrowed) had entered
against the interpretation insisted on, that I could by any means attain the
sight of, and was not in the least shaken by any^ of their Reasonings, from
rejoicing in the Grace of God, as to the Unchangeableness of his Love to
Believers, and the certainety of their Perseverance with him to the end,
therein expressed: And I must add, that I am not one jot enamored on their
Objections and Reasonings, for all the new dress, which with some cost our
Author has been pleased to furnish them with, fashionably to set out
themselves withal. Were it not for the confidence you express in the close of
your Discourse, of your noble Exploits and Atcheivements in the consideration
of this Text (which magnificent thoughts of your undertakings and success, I
could not imagine from the reading of your Arguments or Exceptions, though on
other accounts I might) I should not have thought it worth while to examine it
particularly, which now, to safeguard the Consolation of the weakest Believers,
and to encourage them to hold fast their confidence so well established against
the assaults of all Adversaries, Satan or Arminians, I shall breifely do.

Then (says Mr Goodwin,) Evident it is from the whole Tenor of the Chapter,.
10.
that the words contain especial Promises made particularly to the Jews.

Ans. If by particularly, you mean exclusively, to them, and not to others,
this is evidently false; for the Apostle tells you Heb. 8. 6. to the end of the
Chapter, that the Covenant here mentioned is that, whereof Christ is Mediator,
and the Promises of it those better Promises, which they are made partakers
off, who have an interest in his Mediation.

2. ( He says) As evident it is, upon the same account, that the Promise here
mentioned was not made only to the Saints or sound Believers amongst the Jews,
who were but few; But to the whole body or generality of them.

Ans. True, it is as evident as what before you affirmed, and that in the same
kind, that is, it is evidently false; or else the Promise it self is so; for
it was never fulfilled toward them all. Bnt I refer you to a Learned Author,
who has long since assoyled this difficulty, and taught us to distinguish
between a Jew (...), and a Jew (...), of Israel according to the flesh, Romans 2.
28, 29.
and according to the Promise: He has also taught us, Romans 9. 6, 7.
that they are not all Israel that are of Israel. Rom: 9. 6. And upon that
account it is, that the word of this Promise does not fail, though all of
Israel do not enjoy the fruit of it. Not that it is Conditional, but that it
was not at all made unto them, as to the Spiritual part of it, to whom it was
not wholly fulfilled. And cap. 11. He tells you that it was the Election to
whom these Promises were made, and they obtained the fruit of them: neither
does that Appendix of Promises poynted to, look any other way. When you have
made good your Observation by a Reply to that Learned Author, we shall think of
a Rejoinder. It is therefore added,

3. It is yet upon the same account as evident, as either of the former, that
this Promise was made unto this Nation of the Jews, when and whilst they were
(or at least considered as now being) in the Iron-furnace of the Babylonian
captivity. v. 33.

Ans. That this solemn Renovation of this promise of the Covenant, was (not
made to them when in Babylon, but) given out to them before hand, to sustain
their hearts and spirits withal, in their Bondage and Thraldom, is granted;
and what then I pray? Is it any new thing to have spiritual Promises solemnly
given out, and renewed upon the occasion of temporal distresses? A Promise of
Christ is given out to the House of David, when in fear of being destroyed,
Isaiah 7. 13. So it was given to Adam Gen: 3.16. So to Abraham, Genesis 17. So to
the Church; Isaiah 4. 2, 3, 4. But farther it is said,

4. From the words immediately preceding the passages offered to debate, it
clearly appears, that the Promise in these passages relates unto, and concerns
their reduction, and return from, and out of that Captivity, into their own
Land.

Ans. Will Mr Goodwin say, that it does only concern that? Dares any man so
boldly contradict the Apostle setting out from this very place the tenor of
the Covenant of Grace, ratified in the blood of Christ, Heb. 8.? Nay will any
say, that so much of the Promise here, as God calls his Covenant, cap. 31. v.
32, 33. chap: 32. v. 38, 39, 40. does at all concern their Reduction into
their own Land, any farther then as it was a Type or Resemblance of our
deliverance by Christ? These evident Assertions are as express and flat
contradictions to the evident intendment of the Holy Ghost, as any man is able
to invent. But,

M. Goodwin has many deductions out of the former (sure and evident)
premises,. 11.
to prove that this is not a promise of Absolute and Final Perseverance (it is
a strange Perseverance, that is not final) in Grace to the end of their lives:
for says he,

1. The Promise is made to the Body of the People, and not to the Saints and
Believers among them, and respects as well the Unfaithful, as the Believers,
in that Nation.

Ans. It was made to the Body of the People only Typically considered, and so
it was accomplished to the Body of the People; Spiritually and Properly to the
Elect among the People, who, as the Apostle tells us, obtained accordingly.
There being also in the Promise wrapped up, the Grace of effectual Conversion;
It may in some sense be said to be made to the unfaithful: that is, to such as
were so antecedently to the Grace thereof: but not to any that abide so, for
the Promise is, not that they shall not, but that they shall Believe, and
continue in so doing to the end. But says he,

2. This Promise was appropriated and fitted to the state of the Jews, in a
sad captivity: but the Promise of Perseverance was (if our Adversaries might be
Believed) a standing Promise among them, not appropriated to their condition.

Ans. 1. Non venit ex pharetris ista sagitta tuis. It is Socinus's, in
reference to Ezechiel 36. In Prael: Theol: cap. 12. Sect: 6. And so is the
whole Interpretation of the place afterward insisted on, derived to Mr Goodwin
through the hands of the Remonstrants at the Hague Conference. 2. If this
exception against the Testimony given in these words for the confirmation of
the Thesis in hand may be allowed, what will become of Mr Goodwins Argument
from Ezechiel 18. for the Apostasy of the Saints? It is most certain, the
words from thence, by him and others insisted on, with the whole discourse, of
whose contexture they are a part, are appropriated to a peculiar state of the
Jews, and are brought forth as a meet vindication of the Righteousness of
God in his dealing with them in that condition. This then may be laid up in
store to refresh Mr Goodwin with something of his own providing, when we are
gone so far onward in our journey: But 3. It is most evident to all the
World, that Mr Goodwin is not such a stranger in the Scriptures, as not to have
observed long since, that Spiritual Promises are frequently given to the
People of God, to support their Souls under Temporal distresses: and that not
always new Promises for the matter of them, (for indeed the substance of all
Promises is comprised in the first promise of Christ) but either such, as
enlarge and clear up Grace formerly given or promised; or such, as have need
of a solemn Renewall, for the establishing of the Faith of the Saints,
assaulted in some particular manner, in reference to them: which was the state
of the Saints among the Jews at this time. How often was the same promise
renewed to Abraham? And upon what several occasions? And yet that Promise, for
the matter of it, was the same that had bin given from the beginning of the
World; That Gods solemn Renewall of the Covenant at any time, is called his
making of, or entering into Covenant, needs no labor to prove. But (says he)

3. This Promise is the same with that of Ezekiel. 11. 17, 18, 19, 20. which
Promise notwithstanding,. 12.
it is said v. 21. But as for them whose heart walks after the heart of their
detestable things, and their abominations, I will recompense their ways upon
their heads; so that, notwithstanding this seeming Promise (as is pretended) of
Perseverance in Grace, they may walk after their abominable things, for this
threatening intends the same Persons or Nations (as Calvin himself confesses)
the Israelites.

1 Grant that this is the same Promise with the other, Ans.
how will it appear that this is not a Promise of such an enterposure of the
Spirit and Grace of God, as shall infallibly produce the effect of
Perseverance? Why? Because some are threatened for following the Heart of their
abominable things. Yea but how shall it appear that they are the same Persons
with them, to whom the Promise is made? The Context is plainly against it:
says he, I will give them a Heart to walk in my Statutes and Ordinances, to
do them: but for them that walk after their own Hearts, them I will destroy,
in as clear a distinction of the Object of the Promise, and threatening as is
possible. Says Mr Goodwin, this Threatening concerns the same Persons or
Nation: the same Nation, but not the same Persons in that Nation: but Calvin
says that it concerns the Israelites: But Paul has told us, that they are
not all Israel who are of Israel, not all Children of the Promise, who are
Children of the flesh. And

2. If it do any way concern the Persons to whom that Promise is given, it is
an expression suited to the dispensation of God, whereby he carries Believers
on in the enjoyment of the good things he gives them in and by his Promises,
without the least prediction of any event, being only declarative of what the
Lord abhors, and the connection that is between the Antecedent and the
Consequent of the axiom, wherein it is contained: and is far from the nature
of those Promises, which hold out the Purpose or Intention of God, with the
engaging of a real efficacy for their accomplishment. He adds.

4. If this be a Promise of absolute Perseverance, no time nor season can be
imagined, wherein it was fulfilled.

Ans. At all times and seasons to them, to whom it was made, according to their
concernement in it. But says he,

1. It has been proved that it was made to the community of the Jewish Nation,
toward whom it was not fulfilled.

Ans. 1. It has been said indeed, again and again, but scarce once attempted
to be proved: nor the Reasoning of the Apostle against some pretended proofs
and Answers to them, at all removed.

2. It was fulfilled to the Body of that Naiion, as far as it concerned the
Body of that Nation, in their Typical return from their captivity. But then,

2. If this be the sense, it was fulfilled in the captivity as well as
afterward, for you say the Saints always Persevere.

Ans. 1. The Typical part of it was not then accomplished.

2. It is granted, that as to the Spiritual part of the Covenant of Grace, it
was at all times fulfilled to them, which is now evidently promised to
establish them in the Assurance thereof. Wherefore it is,

5. Argued (Sect. 53.) That these words, I will give them one Heart, that they
shall not depart from me, may be as well rendered that they may not depart from
me, and so it is said in the verse foregoing, that they may fear me for ever.

Ans. 1. Suppose the words may be thus rendered, what inconvenience will ensue?
Either way they evidently and beyond exception design out the End aimed at by
God; and when God intends an End or Event, so as to exert a real efficiency
for the compassing of it, to say that it shall not be infallibly brought about,
is an Assertion, that many have not as yet had the boldness to venture on. But
says he:

2. The words so read do not necessarily import the actual event or taking
place, of the effect intended of God in the Promise, and his performance
thereof, but only his intention it self in both these, and the sufficiency of
the means allowed for the producing such an effect: but it is of the same
nature with that, that our Savior says John 5. 34. these things I say unto
you, that ye might be saved: And that of God to Adam Gen: 3. 10, 11. All which
things were in like manner insisted on by the Remonstrants at the Hague
Colloquie.

Ans. It is not amiss that our contests about the sense of this place of
Scripture, are at length come to the state and issue here expressed. It is
granted, the thing promised, and that according to the intendment of God, is
Perseverance: but that there is any necessity that this Promise of God should
be fulfilled, or his intention accomplished, that is denied. Were it not, that
I should prevent my self, in what will be more seasonable to be handled, when
we come to the consideration of the Promises of God, I should very willingly
engage here into the proof of this Assertion: When God purposes or intends
an event, and promises to do it, to that end putting forth and exercising an
efficient real power, it shall certainly be accomplished and brought to pass;
neither can this be denied without casting the greatest reproach of Mutability,
Impotency, and breach of Word upon the most Holy, that is possible for any man
to do: Neither do the Remonstrants, nor Mr Goodwin acquit themselves from a
participation in so high a crime, by their instance of Genesis 3. 10, 11. where a
Command of God is only related to express his duty to whom it was given, not
in the least asserting any intention of God about the event, or Promise, as to
the means of its Accomplishment. Nor does that of John 8. 28 give them any
more assistance in their sad undertaking to alleviate the truth of God. A
means of Salvation in its own nature and kind sufficient is exhibited, which
asserts not an infallible necessity of event, as that does which in this place
is ascribed to God. But it is added.

6. ( Sect. 54.) The continuance of external and Civil prosperity to the
Jewish Nation may much more colourably be argued from hence, then the certainty
of their Perseverance in Grace: for these things are most expressly promised,
verses 39, 40. and yet we find that upon their nonperformance of the condition,
they are become the most contemptible and miserable Nation under Heaven:
certainly then the Spiritual Promises here must also depend on conditions,
which if not fulfilled, they also may come short of performance.

Ans: 1. Rom: 11. 25, 26, 27. 2. These Temporal Promises were fulfilled unto
them, so far as they were made to them, that is, as they were Typical, and
what is behind of them, shall be made good in due time. 3. All these Promises
are, and were in their chiefest and most eminent concernments (even the
spiritual things set forth by allusions to the good land, wherein they lived)
completely and absolutely fulfilled to them all, and every one, to whom they
were properly and directly made, as the Apostle abundantly proves Rom:
9.10,11. 4. Whereas there are two special spiritual Promises here expressed,
one of Conversion, the other of Perseverance, I desire to know on what
condition their accomplishment is suspended? On what condition will God write
his Law in their hearts? On condition they hear him, and obey him, suffer his
mercies and kindnesses to work kindly on them: that is, on condition his Law be
in their hearts, he will write it there thanks yet for that: On what condition
does God promise, that they shall abide with him for ever? Why, on condition
they depart not from him: very good! To what end does God promise that, which
he will not effect, but only on condition that there is no need for him so to
do? But says he.

7. If the Spiritual Promises be absolute, so must the Temporal be also: For
their accomplishing depends solely on the things mentioned and promised in the
Spiritual.

Ans. 1. Temporal things in the Promises are often expressed only to be a
resemblance, and to set off some eminent Spiritual Grace intended, as shall
afterward appear. In that sense the Promises mentioning such things, are
actually and fully accomplished in the collation of the Spiritual things by
them typed and resembled. 2. Temporal Promises as such, belong not primarily
to the Covenant of Grace, as they are of Temporal things for the substance of
them but to the Covenant with that whole Nation, about their inheritance in the
Land of Canaan, which was expressly conditional, and which held out no more
of Gods Intendment to that Nation, but only that there should be an inviolable
connection between their Obedience and Prosperityes. 3. The things in this
Promise are expressly differenced from the things of that Covenant, on this
account, that that Covenant being broken on the part of the Nation, they
enjoyed not that which was laid out as a fruit of their Obedience; but this
shall never be violated or broken, God undertaking for the accomplishing of it,
with another manner of engaging, and suitable power exerted, then in that of
old. Heb: 8. 7, 8, 9, 10. Cap. 10. 16, 17. But says he,

8. The expression of a Covenant plainly shows it to be conditional; for a
Covenant is not, but upon the mutual stipulation of parties: when one fails,
then is the other true.

Ans. 1. The word Berith is sometimes used for a single Promise without a
condition. Gen: 6.18. cap. 9.9. Whence the Apostle handling this very Promise
changes the terms, and calls it a Testament. In a Testamentary
dispensation, there is not in the nature of it any mutual stipulation
required, but only a mere single favor and grant or concession. 2. It may be
granted, that here is a stipulation of duty from us, God promising to work that
in us, which he requires of us: and thereby is this Covenant distinguished from
that which was disanulled. In the good things indeed of this Covenant, one may
be the condition of another, but both are freely bestowed of God: And these are
Mr Goodwins exceptions against this Testimony, which comes in, in the cause of
God, and his Saints, that we have in hand. His next attempt is to give you the
sense of the words on this consideration, to manifest from thence, that this
Promise of God may come short of Accomplishment.

This then at length is the account that is given in of the sense of the
Promise in hand,. 13.
and all others of the like nature.

I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, and
will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not, or may not depart
from me, ( i.e.) I will deal so above measure graciously and bountifully with
them, as well in matters relating to their Spiritual condition, as in things
concerning their outward condition, that, if they be not prodigiously
refractory, stubborn, and unthankful. I will overcome their evils with my
Goodness, and will cause them to own me for their God, and will reduce them,
as one man, to a loving and loyal ^rame and temper of heart, that they shall
willingly with a free and full purpose of heart fear and serve me for ever.
Sect: 55.

Ans: The first Author of this Gloss upon a parallel Text was Hunc Ezechielis
locum satis commode explicat Erasmus in sua Diatribe, dicens in eo contineri
usitatam figuram loquendi, qua cura in altero aliquid efficiendi significatur,
illius opera minime exclusa: ac si quis (inquit) Praeceptor discipulo
solaecizanti diceret, exeram tibi linguam istam barbaricam, and inseram
Romanam. Haec sunt fere ipsius Erasmi verba. Quibus addex loco ipso satis appa
rere, nulla^ necessitate^ Deum significare voluisse sed neque ullam vim
interiorem, cum non alia ratione ea, quae ibi pollicetur se effecturum,
ostendat Deus, quam beneficiorum multitudine, quibus affecturus erat populum,
ejusque cor and animum emolliturus. etc. Soc. Prael. Cap. 12. 8. 6. p. 45.
Socinus: Prael: Theol: cap: 6. whose words are. This place of Ezekiel is well
explained by Erasmus in his Diatribe, saying, that there is an usual figure of
speaking contained in it, whereby a care in any, of working something by
another, is signified, his endeavor being not excluded; as if a Master should
say to his Scholar speaking improperly, I will take away that barbarous tongue
from thee, and give thee the Roman: these are almost the words of Erasmus: to
which add, that it appears from the place it self, that God would not
signify any necessity, or any internal efficacy, when he declares that he
will effect what he promises, no other way, then by the multitude of his
benefits, wherewith he would affect the people, and mollify their hearts and
minds, and thereby as it were, beget and create in them a willingness and
alacrity in obeying of him. The Remonstrants received this sense, in the
conference at the Hague, managing it in these words: it is manifest that these
words do signify some great efficacy and motion, which should come to pass by
the many and excellent benefits of God, for whose sake they ought to convert
themselves, etc. which worthy Interpretation being at length fallen upon Mr
Goodwins hand, is trimmed forth as you have heard. Secondly, not to insist on
those Assumptions, which are supposed in this interpretation, as that this
Promise was made peculiarly to the Jews, and to the whole Nation of them,
properly and directly, etc. The G^osse it self will be found by no means to
have the least consistency with either the words, or intendment of the Holy
Ghost in the place, nor to be suited to Answer our Argument from thence, nor
yet to hold any good intelligence or correspondency with what has already been
delivered concerning it. For,

1. To begin with the latter: he affirms this cannot be a Promise of
absolute Perseverance, because if it be so, the Jews enjoyed it in that
Captivity, as well as afterward; when that is here promised, which they were
not to receive until in, and upon their return from Babylon. Sect: 52. Page:
220, 221. But if that, which is here mentioned, be all that is promised to
them, namely, dealing so graciously and bountifully with them in his
Dispensations, according as was intimated, there is not any thing in the least
held out to them in this place, but what God had already (himself being judge)
in as eminent and high a manner wrought in reference to them and for them, as
could be conceived. And indeed it was such, as he never after this, arose to
that height of outward mercy and bounty, in things spiritual and temporal, so
as before. Isai. 5.1,2,4. Neither after the Captivity unto this day, did they
see again the triumphant glory of David, the magnificent peace of Solomon, the
beauty of the Temple, the perfection of Ordinances etc. as before.

2. Whereas he affirmed formerly, that this Promise is conditional, and that
the things therein promised, do depend on conditions by them to be fulfilled,
to whom the Promise is made. Sect: 54. page 221. in the Gloss here given us of
the words, there is no intimation of any such conditions, as whereon the
promised actings of God should be suspended, but only an uncertainty of Event
in reference to these actings Asserted. That (according to this interpretation)
which alone God promises to do is, that he would deal above measure
graciously, and bountifully with them, as well in matters relating to their
spiritual conditions, as in things concerning their outward condition, this is
all he promises, and this he will absolutely do, be the Event what it will.
It is not said, (nor can it with any pretense of reason) that this also is
conditional, nay whatever the Event and issue be, that God will thus deal
with them, is the sense of the words in hand, according to the estimate here
taken of them. It is true, it is in the Exposition under consideration left
doubtful and ambiguous, whether such, or such an Event shall follow the
promised actings of God or no; but what God promises concerning his dealing
with them, that without supposall of any condition what ever, shall be
accomplished. According as a sense serves the turn, so it is to be embraced,
when men are once engaged against the Truth.

3. Neither does this Interpretation so much as take notice of, much less does
it with any strength, or evidence, wave our Argument for the Saints
Perseverance from this place. We affirm 1. That the Promise God made unto, or
the Covenant he makes here with his people, is distinguished from, or opposed
unto the Covenant that was broken, upon this account, that that was broken by
the default of them, with whom it was made; but God would take care and provide
that this should not fail, but be Everlasting. Jer: 31. 32, 33. Chapter 32. 40.
Heb. 8. 8, 9. 2. That the intendment of God in this Promise, and the
administration of this Covenant, with means and power mentioned therein, is
the abiding of his Saints with him, or rather (primarily, and principally) his
abiding with them, notwithstanding all such interveniences, as he will not
powerfully prevent from ever interposing to the disturbance of that Communion
he takes them into. I will, says he, make an everlasting Covenant with them,
that I will not turn away from them from doing them good. Now these things,
and such like, are not once taken notice of, in the exposition boasted to be
full and clear.

3ly Neither indeed has it any affinity unto,. 15.
or acquaintance in name or thing, with the words or intendment of God, with
the Grace of the Promise, or the Promise it self. For,

1. God (says he) will give them one heart and one way, or he will put his Law
in their inward parts, and write it in their Hearts: which is plainly the work
of his Grace in them, and not the effect and fruit of his dealing with them. In
the Gloss in hand, the work of God is limited to such dealings with them, as
may overcome them to such a frame. The having of a new heart is either the
immediate work of God; or it is their yielding unto their duty to him, upon his
dealing bountifully and graciously with them. If the First; it is what the
Scripture affirms, and all that we desire: If the Latter; how comes it to be
expressed in terms holding out an immediate Divine Efficiency? That the taking
away of a heart of Stone, the giving of a new heart, and Spirit, the writing of
the Law in their hearts, and (which is all one) the quickening of the Dead, the
opening of blind eyes, the begetting of us a new, as they relate unto God do
signify no more but his administration of means, whereby men may be wrought
upon, and persuaded to bring their hearts and spirits into such a condition, as
is described in those expressions, to quicken themselves, to open their blind
eyes etc. Mr Goodwin shall scarce be able to evince.

2. Conversion, and Pardon of Sin being both in this promise of the Covenant
(I take in also that place of the same importance cap. 31.) and relating alike
to the Grace of God, if Conversion, or the giving of a new heart, be done only
by administering outward means, and persuasions unto men to make the new
heatrs; the forgiveness of Sins must also be supposed to be tendered unto them
upon the condition, that their sins be forgiven; as Conversion is, on
condition they be converted, or do convert themselves.

3. This Promise being by the Prophet and Apostle insisted on, as containing
the Grace, whereby eminently and peculiarly the New Covenant is distinguished
from that which was abolished; If the Grace mentioned therein, be only the
laying a powerful and strong obligation on men to duty, and obedience upon the
account of the gracious, and bountiful dealing of God with them, both as to
their Temporal and Spiritual condition, I desire to know wherein the
difference of it from the old Covenant, as to the collation of Grace, does
consist? And whether ever God made a Covenant with man, wherein he did not put
sufficient obligations of this kind upon him, unto obedience? And if so, what
are the better promises of the New Covenant? And what eminent and singular
things, as to the bestowing of Grace, are in it? Which things here are
emphatically expressed to the uttermost.

4. The scope of this Exposition (which looks but to one part of the Promise
about bestowing of Grace, overlooking the maine End and intendment of it, as
has been showed) being to darken the words of the Holy Ghost, so far, as to
make them represent a contribution of means, instead of an effectual working
the end and the event, on which the means supplied have an influence of
persuasion, to prevail with men to do the things they are afforded them for:
I desire to know, (First) What new thing is here promised to them, which
exceeded that mentioned chapter 25. v: 4, 5. Wherein the Lord testifies, that he
had granted them formerly a large supply of outward means (and especially of
the word) for the end here spoken of. (Secondly) To what end, and on what
account, is this administration of means for a work expressed by terms of a
real efficiency in reference to the work it self, which proceeding from the
intendment of God, for the event aimed at, must needs produce it? And (Thirdly)
Why these words should not be of the same importance with the associate
expression, which of necessity must be interpreted of an actual and absolute
efficiency? v. 41, 42. And (Fourthly) Whether the Administration of outward
sufficient means for the producing of an Event, can be a ground of an
infallible prediction of that Event? As God here absolutely says, they shall
all know him from the Greatest to the least. Ch: 31. 34. which how it is
brought about, the Holy Ghost acquaints us Is. 4. 13. They shall be all taught
of the Lord, and Ioh: 6. 44, 45, 46. It is written of the Prophets. And they
shall be all taught of God: Every man therefore that has heard, and has
learned of the Father, comes unto me. But Mr Goodwin has sundry Reasons to
confirm his Gloss, which must also be considered; and he says.

1. That it is the familiar Dialect of Scripture to ascribe the doing of things
or effects themselves, to him that ministers occasions, or proper and likely
means for the doing of them: so God is said to give them one heart, and one
way, to put his fear into their hearts, when he administers motives, means,
occasions, and opportunities to them, which are proper to work them to such a
frame, and disposition of heart, out of which men are wont to love, and obey
him, whether they be ever actually brought thereunto, or no: and this Promise
was fulfilled to the People after their return out of Captivity, in the
mercies they enjoyed, and the Preaching of the Prophets.

Ans. 1. We are not now to be informed, that this is Mr Goodwin's Doctrine
concerning conversion: that God does only administer means, motives, and
oportunities for it, but that man thereupon converts himself. And 2ly That
when God has done all he will, or can: that the Event may not follow, nor the
work be wrought. But 3ly, That this sense by any means or opportunities can be
fastened on the Promise under consideration, we are not as yet so well
instructed. When God once intends an End, and expresses himself so to do,
promising to work really and efficiently for the accomplishing of it, yea that
he will actually do it, by that efficiency preventing all interpositions
whatever, that may tend to frustrate his design, that that End of his shall
not be accomplished, or that that working of his is only an Administration of
means, whereby men may do the things intended, if they will, or may do
otherwise, (he affirming that he will do them himself) is a Doctrine beyond
my reach and capacity. 4ly His saying, that in this sense the Promise was
fulfilled to the People after the Captivity, is a saying against his own light.
He has told us not long since, that it could not be a Promise of those things
which were enjoyed before it was ever given, as in our sense they did the Grace
of Perseverance. etc Surely the means he mentions (until at least the coming
of Christ in the Flesh) were advanced to a far higher pitch and eminency on
all hands, before the Captivity, then after: and at the coming of Christ, it
was eminently fulfilled in our acceptance of it, unto all, to whom it was
made. But he adds.

2. That if it be not so to be understood,. 16.
and so said to be fulfilled as above, it is impossible for any one to assign
how, and when this Promise was fulfilled. For first it was made to the whole
People, and the fulfilling of it to a few, will not confirm the Truth of it.
Secondly, The Elect had no need of it (knowing themselves to be so) that they
should never fall away: so that this is but to make void the glorious Promise
of God. And thirdly, to say that it was made to the Elect, is but to beg the
thing in question.

Ans. 1. As far as the Body of the People was concerned in it, it was, and
shall be in the latter days absolutely accomplished toward them. It was, is,
and shall be fulfilled to all to whom it was made, if so be that God be
faithful, and cannot deny himself. 2. It was, it is, and shall be
accomplished properly and directly to all the Elect of that Nation, to whom it
was so made, as it has been cleared already from Romans 9. 10, 11. Where the
Apostle expressly and data opera answers the very Objection, that Mr Goodwin
makes about the accomplishing of these Promises, concerning the hardening and
rejection of the greatest part of that people, affirming it to consist in this,
that the Election obtained, when the rest were hardened. Wherein he did not
beg the question, though he dug not for it; but answered by clear
distinctions, as you may see Romans 9. 6 Chapter 11. 1, 2, 3. 3. Neither do all the
Elect after their calling know themselves to be so, nor have they any other way
to come acquainted with their Election, but by their faith in the Promises; nor
is it spoken like one acquainted with the course and frame of Gods dealing with
his Saints, or with their Spirits in walking with God, who supposes the
solemn and clear Renovation of Promises concerning the same things, with
Explanations and enlargements of the Grace of them to confirm and establish
the communion between the one and the other, to be needless. And who make the
promises of God void, and of no effect? we who profess the Lord to be
faithful in every one of them, and that not one Title of them shall fall to
the ground, or come short of accomplishing? or Mr Goodwin, who reports the
Grace mentioned in them, for the most part to come short of producing the
effect, for which it is bestowed, and the engagements of God in them, to depend
so upon the labricity of the wills of men, that mostly they are not made good
in the end aimed at, the Lord will judge. But it is farther Argued.

3. That the Scripture many times asserts the futurity, or coming to pass of
things, not yet in being,. 17.
not only when the coming of them to pass is certainly known, but when it is
probable upon the account of the means used for the bringing them to pass;
for God says in the Parable, they will reverence my Son, Mark. 12. (and yet
the event was contrary. So upon the executing an offender, he says, the People
shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously, which yet might not have
its effect on all. So God says, I will give them one heart, not out of any
certainty of knowledge or determination in himself, that any such heart or way
should actually be given them, which would infallibly produce the effect
mentioned, but that he would grant such means, as were proper to create such a
heart in them.

Ans. The nearer the bottom, the more sower Lees. First, Does God foretell the
coming to pass of things future, upon a probable conjecture, which is here
assigned to him? Is that the Intendment of the expression in the Parable, they
will reverence my Son? Or was he mistaken in the Event, the thing falling out
contrary to his expectation? Or is there any thing in this, or the place
mentioned Deuteronomy: 17. 12, 13. but only an expression of the duty of men, upon the
account of the means offered? Is there any the least intimation of any Intent
and purpose of God, as to the Events insisted on? Any Promise of his effectual
working for the accomplishing of them? Any Prediction upon the account of his
Purpose and Design, which are the foundation of all his Predictions? Or is
there any the least correspondency in name, or thing between the places now
instanced in, and called in for relief, with that under consideration? This
then is the sinew of Mr Goodwins arguing in this place: sometimes when there is
means offered men for the performance of a duty, the accomplishment of it is
spoken of, as of what ought to have succeeded; and it is the fault of men to
whom that duty is prescribed, and these means indulged, if it come not to
pass: therefore when God proposes, and promises to work and bring about
such, and such a thing, and engages himself to a real efficiency in it, yet
it may come to pass, or it may not, it may be accomplished, or God may fail
in his intendment.

2. The sense here given to the promise of God, I will give them one heart etc.
has been formerly taken into consideration, and it has been made to appear,
that notwithstanding all the glorious Expressions of Gods Administration of
means to work men into the frame intimated, yet upon the matter, the
intendment of the Exposition given amounts to this, though God says, he will
give us a new heart, yet indeed he does not so give it to any one in the World,
nor ever intended to do so; but this new Heart, men must create, make, and
work out themselves, upon the means afforded them, which being very eminent,
are said to create such hearts in them, though they do it not, but only
persuade men thereunto: A Comment this is, not much unlike the first that ever
was made upon the words of God Gen: 4. 5. Whether God, or man, create the new
Heart, is the matter here in Question.

For what he lastly affirms, That if this be a Promise of Absolute
Perseverance, it is inconsistent with all the Prophesies of the Rejection of
the Jews, which are accordingly fulfilled. I must refer him to St Paul, who
has long ago undertaken to answer this Objection, from whom if he receive not
satisfaction, what am I, that I should hope to afford the least unto him?

And these are the Reasonings, upon the account whereof Mr Goodwin discharges
this Text of Scripture, by virtue of his Autocratoricall power in deciding
Controversies of this nature, from bearing Testimony in this cause any more.
Whether he will be attended unto herein, time will show. Many Attempts to the
same purpose have formerly been made, and yet it endures the trial.

I have thus turned aside to the consideration of the Exceptions given in to
the ordinary interpretation of this place,. 18.
least any should think that they were waved upon the account of their strength
and efficacy to overthrow it. The Argument I intended from the words, for the
stability of Gods Love and Favor to Believers, upon the account of his
Covenant-engagement, is not once touched in any of them. These words then yield
a Third Demonstration of the Stedstastnesse and Unchangeablenesse of
Acceptance of Believers in Christ, upon the account of the Absolute Stability
of that Covenant of Grace, whereof Gods engagement to be their God, and never
forsake them, is an eminent portion.

CAP. V.
1. Entrance into the Argument from the Promises of God, with their stability,
and his Faithfulness in them. 2. The usual Exceptions to this Argument. 3. A
general description of Gospell-Promises. 4. Why, and on what account called
Gospell-Promises: The description given, general; not suited to any single
Promise. 5. They are free: and that they are so, proved, all flowing from the
first great Promise of giving a Redeemer. 6. How they are discoveries of Gods
goodwill: How made to Sinners: consequentiall Promises made also to Believers.
7. Given in, and through Christ: in a Covenant of Grace. Their certainty upon
the Account of the engagement of the Truth and Faithfulness of God in them: of
the maine matter of these promises, Christ and the Spirit. 8. Of particular
Promises, all flowing from the same Love and Grace. 9. Observations of the
Promises of God, subservient to the End intended: (1.) They are all true and
faithful: the ground of the Assertion: (2.) Their accomplishment always
certain, not always evident: (3.) All conditional Promises made good: and
how. 10. (4.) The Promise of Perseverance of two sorts: (5.) All Promises of
our abiding with God in Faith and Obedience, absolute: The vanity of imposing
conditions on them, discovered: (6.) Promises of Gods abiding with us, not to
be separated from Promises of our abiding with him: (7.) That they do not
properly depend on any condition in Believers, demonstrated: instances of this
Assertion given: (8) (Making them conditional renders them void, as to the
Ends, for which they are given:) given to persons, not Qualifications: 11. The
Argument from the Promises of God, stated. 12. Mr G's Exceptions against the
First Proposition cleared, and his Objections Answered: The Promises of God
always fulfilled: Of the Promise made to Paul Acts 27. 24. etc. Good men make
good their Promises to the utmost of their abilities. The Promise made to Paul
absolute, and of infallible accomplishment. Of the promise of our Savior to
his Disciples Mat. 19. 28. Who intended in that Promise: not Judas: the
accomplishment of the Promise: The Testimony of Peter Martyr Considered: The
conclusion of the forementioned Objection. 13. The engagement of the
Faithfulness of God for the accomplishment of his Promise: 1 Cor. 1. 9. 1
These. 5. 23, 24. 2 These. 3. 3. 14. The nature of the Faithfulness of God
expressed in the foregoing places, inquired into: perverted by M. G. His notion
of the Faithfulness of God, weighed and rejected: what intended in the
Scriptures by the Faithfulness of God: The close of the confirmation of the
proposition of the Argument proposed from the Promises of God. 15. The
assumption thereof vindicated: The sense put upon it by M. G. The Question
begged.

THe consideration of the Promises of God,. 1.
which are all branches of the forementioned Root, all streaming from the
fountain of the Covenant of Grace, is, according to the method proposed, in the
next place incumbent on us. The Argument for the Truth under contest, which
from hence is afforded, and used, is by Mr Goodwin termed the firstborn of
our strength, cap. 11. Sect. 1. page 225. and indeed we are content, that it
may be so accounted, desiring nothing more ancient, nothing more strong,
effectual, and powerful to stay our souls upon, then the Promises of that
God, Heb. 6. 18. Titus 1. 2.
who cannot lie. I shall for the present insist only on those, which peculiarly
assert, and in the name and Authority of God, confirm that part of the Truth,
we are peculiarly in Demonstration of; namely the Unchangeable stability of the
Love and Favor of God to Believers, in regard whereof he turns not from
them, nor forsakes them, upon the Account of any such Interveniences what
ever, as he will suffer to be interposed in their communion with him; leaving
those, wherein he gives Assurance upon Assurance, that he will give out unto
them such continual supplies of his Spirit and Grace, that they shall never
depart from him, to their due and proper place.

I am not unacquainted with the usual Exception,. 2.
that lies against the Demonstration of the Truth in hand, from the Promises
of God; to wit, that they are conditional, depending on some things in the
Persons themselves to whom they are made, upon whose change, or Alteration,
they also may be frustrated, and not receive their accomplishment. Whether this
plea may be admitted against the particular Promises, that we shall insist
upon, will be put upon the trial, when we come to the particular handling of
them. For the present being resolved (by Gods Assistance) to pursue the
Demonstration proposed from them, it may not be amiss, yea rather it may be
very useful, to insist a little upon the Promises themselves, their Nature and
Excellency, that we may be the more stirred up to enquire after every Truth,
and sweetness of the Love, Grace, and kindness (they being the peculiar way
chosen of God, for the manifestation of his good will to sinners) that is in
them; and I shall do it briefly, that I may proceed with the business of my
present Intendment.

Gospel Promises then are,. 3.
1. The free, and gracious dispensations, and 2. Discoveries of Gods good will
and Love to 3. Sinners, 4. through Christ, 5 In a Covenant of Grace, 6. Wherein
upon his Truth and Faithfulness, he engages himself to be their God, to give
his Son unto them, and for them, and his Holy Spirit to abide with them, with
all things that are either required in them, or are necessary for them, to make
them accepted before him, and to bring them to an enjoyment of him.

I call them Gospel Promises:: 4.
not as though they were only contained in the Books of the New Testament, or
given only by Christ after his coming in the flesh; Genesis 3. 14, 15 Gal. 3. 17.
for they were given from the beginning of the World, or first entrance of
sin: Titus 1. 2.
and the Lord made plentiful provision of them and by them for his People,
under the Old Testament: but only to distinguish them from the Promises of the
Law, which hold out a word of Truth and Faithfulness engaged for a reward of
Life, to them that yield obedience thereunto (there being an indissolveable
connection between entering into life, and keeping the Commandments) and so to
manifest, Gal. 3. 12. Luke 2. 10.
that they all belong to the Gospel properly so called, Ephesians 2. 15.
or the tidings of that peace for sinners, which was wrought out, Isa. 52. 7.
and manifested by Jesus Christ.

2. Farther, I do not give this for the description of any one single,
individual Promise, as it lies in any place of Scripture, as though it
expressly contained all the things mentioned therein (though vertually it does
so) but rather to show what is the design, aim, and good will of God in them
all, which he discovers and manifests in them by several parcells, according
as they may be suited to the Advancement of his Glory, in reference to the
persons, to whom they are made. Upon the matter, all the Promises of the
Gospel are but one, and every one of them comprehend, and tender the same
Love, the same Christ, the same Spirit, which are in them all. None can have an
interest in any one, but he has an interest in the good of them all, that
being only represented variously for the advantage of them that believe. My
design is, Gal. 16. 17.
to describe the general intention of God in all Gospel Promises, whereby
they being equally Spirited, Ephesians. 2. 12. Heb. 6. 17.
become as one; and concerning these I say.

1. That they are free and Gracious as to the rise,. 5.
and fountain of them. They are given unto us, Tit. 1. 2.
merely through the good will and pleasure of God. That which is of Promise, 2
Pet. 1. 3, 4.
is every where opposed to that, which is of doubt, or that which is any way
deserved or procured by us. Gal. 3. 18. If the inheritance be of the Law,
(which includes all that in us is desirable, acceptable and deserving) it is
no more of Promise, that is, free, and of mere Grace. He that can find out any
Reason, or cause without God himself, why he should promise any good things
whatever to Sinners, (as all are, and are shut up under sin, till the Promise
came, Mat. 20. 15.
Gal. 3. 22.) may be allowed to Glory in the invention which he has found out.
A well conditioned Nature, necessitating him to a velleity of doing good, and
yielding relief to them that are in misery (though justly receiving the due
reward of their deeds, which even among the Sons of men, is a virtue dwelling
upon the confines of vice) for their recovery, is by some imposed on him. But
that this is not the fountain and rise of his Promises, needs no other
evidence, but the light of this Consideration. That, which is natural, is
necessary, and universal: Promises are distinguishing as to them in misery: at
least they are given to men, and not to fallen Angels: But may not God do
what he will with his own?

Farther, Jesus Christ is himself in the Promise: he is the great original
matter, and subject of the Promises; and the giving of him was doubtless of
free Grace and Mercy so John 3. 16. God so Loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, and Rom: 5. 8. God commends his Love toward us, in that
whilst we were Sinners, Christ died for us: and in the first of Ioh: 4. 10.
Herein is Love, Mat. 11. 26.
not that we Loved God, but that he Loved us, and sent his Son to be a
Propitiation for us. All is laid upon the account of Love, and free Grace. I
confess there are following Promises, given out for the orderly carrying on of
the persons, to whom the maine original fundamental Promises are made, unto
the end designed for them, that seem to have Qualifications and Conditions in
them; but yet even those are all to be resolved into the Primitive grant of
Mercy. That which promises Life upon believing, being of use to stir men up
unto, and carry them on, in Faith and Obedience, must yet as to the pure nature
of the Promise be resolved into that, which freely is promised viz. Christ
himself, and with him both Faith, and Life, Believing, and Salvation. As in
your Automata, there is one original spring or wheel, that giveeth motion to
sundry lesser and subordinate movers, that are carried on with great variety,
sometimes with a seeming contrariety one to another, but all regularly
answering, and being subservient to the impression of the first mover. The
first great Promise of Christ, Genesis 3. 15. 16
and all good things in him, is that which Spirits and principles all other
Promises whatsoever; Genesis 49. 10. Isa. 9. 6.
and howsoever they may seem to move upon conditional terms, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
yet they are all to be resolved into that absolute, and free Original Spring.
Hence that great Grant of Gospel Mercy, is called the Gift by him. Rom: 5. 16,
17. yea all the Promises of the Law, as to their Original Emanation from God,
and the constitution of the reward in them engaged to be bestowed for the
services required, are free and Gracious. There is not any natural
indispensable connection between Obedience and Reward, Diatr. de Just. Div.
as there is between Sin and Punishment: as I have elsewhere at large
Disputed, and Proved.

2. I call them Discoveries and Manifestations of Gods Good Will and Love,. 6.
which is the prime, and sole cause of all the good things, which are wrapped
up, and contained in them. Of this Good Will of God, the Promises, which he
has given, are the sole discoveries: We do not in this Discourse take
Promises, merely for what God has said he Will do in terms, expressly, but
for every Assertion of his Good will and Kindness to us in Christ, all which
was first held out under a word of Promise. Gen: 3. 15. And this the Apostle
inferres in Tit. 1. 2, 3. In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie,
promised before the^ World began, but has in due time manifested his Word
through Preaching; or discovered, or made known that good will of his, by the
Promises in Preaching of the Gospel. And to this extent of significancy is
that Promise in the Scripture, both name and thing, in very many places
stretched out: Every thing whatever, that is manifestative of Grace and good
will to Sinners, is of the Promise, though it be not cast into a Promissory
form of expression. Yea whereas strictly a Promise respects that, which is,
either only future, and not of present existence, or the continuance of that
which is; yet even expressions of things formerly done, and of a present
performance, (some Individuals to the end of the World being to be made a new
partakers of the Grace, good will, and Mercy in them,) do belong to the
Promise also, in that Acceptance of it, which the Holy Ghost in many places
leads unto, and which we now insist upon. Mica. 7. 17, 18, 19.


3. I say they are made unto sinners, and that as sinners, under no other
Qualification whatever: it being by the Mercy of the Promise alone, that any
men are relieved out of that condition of being sinners, and morally nothing
else. Were not the Promises originally made to sinners, Ephesians. 2. 12.
there would never any one be found in any other state or Condition. Romans 3. 19.
I know there are Promises made to Believers, Gal. 3. 22.
even such as are unchangeable, and shall bear them into the bosom of God*
but I say these are all consequentiall, and upon supposition of the first and
great Promise, whereby Christ himself, and Faith, for his sake is bestowed on
them. This runs through them all, as the very tenor of them, Ioh. 3. 16. Romans
8. 32.
and method of God in them do manifest, as we shall see afterward. So the
Apostle. Gal. 3. 22: The Scripture has concluded all under sin, 1 Cor: 1. 30.
that the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that Believe.
Phil. 1. 29.
All are shut up under sin, Ephesians. 1. 3.
until the Promise of Salvation by Jesus Christ, and Faith in him, comes in
for their deliverance. The Promise is given to them as shut up under sin,
which they receive by mixing it with Faith. And Rom: 3. 23. 24. All have sinned
and come short of the Glory of God, being justified freely by his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Christ. Their condition is a condition of
sin, and falling short of the glory of God, when the Promise for
Justification is given unto them, and finds them. Thence the Lord tells us
Isai: 54. 8, 9. that this Promise of mercy is like that, which he made about
the waters of Noah, Gen: 5. 21, 22
where is mentioned no condition at all of it, but only the sins of men. And
in that state unquestionably was Adam, when the first Promise was given unto
him. To say then, that Gospel Promises are made to men in such conditions, and
are to be made good only upon the account of men's abiding in the condition,
wherein they are when the Promise is made to them; is to say, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 8.
that for men to leave the state of sin, is the way to frustrate all the
Promises of God. All deliverance from a state of sin is by Grace: all Grace
is of Promise: under that condition then of sin does the Promise find men,
and from thence relieve them.

4. I say,. 7.
these Discoveries of Gods good Will are made through Christ, as the only
medium of their Accomplishment, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
and only procuring cause of the good things that flowing from the good will of
God are enwrapped and tendered in them. And they are said to be in Christ: as 1.
The great Messenger of the Covenant, as in him who comes from the Father;
because God has confirmed and ratified them all in him: not in themselves, but
unto us. He has in him, and by him given Faith and Assurance of them all unto
us, declaring and confirming his good Will and Love to us by him: He reveals
the Father (as a Father) from his own Bosom: Ioh: 1. 18. declaring his name,
or Grace unto his. Ioh: 17 3. 2 Cor. 1. 20. In whom all the Promises of God are
yea, and in him amen, to the Glory of God by us, Ioh: 17. 3.
In him, and by his Mediation, they have all their Confirmation, Establishment,
and unchangeablenesse unto us. And 2. Because he has undertaken to be Surety
of that Covenant, whereof they are the Promises. Heb: 7. 24. He is the Surety
of the Covenant, that is, one who has undertaken, both on the part of God and
ours, what ever is needful for confirmation thereof. 3. Because that himself
is the great Subject of all these Promises, and in him (it being of his own
Purchase and procuring, he having obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb: 9.)
John 1. 16.
there is treasured up all the fullness of those Mercies, Col. 1. 18, 19.
which in them God has graciously engaged himself to bestow; cap. 2, 10. etc.
they being all annexed to him, as the portion he brings with him to the Soul.
Romans 8. 32.
Then I say,

5. That they are discoveries of Gods good will, in a Covenant of Grace: they
are indeed the Branches, Streams, and manifesting conveyances of the Grace of
that Covenant, and of the Good Will of God, putting it self forth therein.
Hence the Apostle mentions the Covenant of Promise. Ephesians: 2. 12. either for
the Promises of the Covenant, or its manifestation, as I said before Indeed as
to the Subject Matter and eminently, the Promise is but one, as the Covenant is
no more; but both come under a plural Expression, because they have been
variously delivered, and renewed upon several occasions So the Covenant of
Grace, is said to be established upon these Promises: Heb: 8. 6. that is, the
Grace and Mercy of the Covenant, and the usefulness of it to the Ends of a
Covenant, to keep God and man together in Peace and Agreement, is laid upon
these Promises, to be by them confirmed and established unto us: God having by
them revealed his Good Will unto us, with an attendency of stipulation of duty.
Their use, for the begetting and continuing Communion between God and us, with
the concomitancy of precepts, places them in the capacity of a Covenant.

And then,

6. I mentioned the foundation of the Certainty and Unchangeableness of these
Promises, with our Assurance of their Accomplishment. The Engagements, and
Undertakings of God; upon his Truth and Faithfulness, is the stock, and
unmovable foundation of this respect of them. Therefore speaking of them, the
Holy Ghost often backs them with that Property of God: He cannot lie, so Heb:
6. 17. 18. God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of Promise, the
immutability of his Council, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two immutable
things, wherein it was not possible for God to lie etc. So Tit: 1. 2. God,
which cannot lie, has promised us eternal life. There is no one makes a
solemn Promise, but as it ought to proceed from him in sincerity and Truth, so
he engages his Truth and Faithfulness, in all the credit of them, for the
Accomplishment thereof, what lies in him. And on this account, does David so
often appeal unto, Psalm. 31. 1. 5. 14.
and call upon the Righteousness of God, as to the fulfilling of his Promises,
Isa: 45. 19. 2 Pet: 1. 1.
and the word, which he caused him to put his trust in. It is because of his
engagement of his Truth and Faithfulness, whence it becomes a righteous thing
with him, to perform what he has spoken. How far this Respect of the
Promises extends, and wherein it is capable of a dispensation, is the sum of
our present Controversy: but of this afterward. Then,

7. A brief description of the Matter of these Promises, and what God freely
engages himself unto in them, was insisted on. Of this, of the Promises in
this regard, there is one maine Fountain or Spring, whereof there are two
everlasting Streams, whence Thousands of refreshing Rivolets do flow. The
original Fountain and spring of all good unto us, both in respect of its
being and manifestation, is, that He will be our God. Gen: 17. 1, 2. I am
Almighty God: walk before me, and be thou perfect, and I will make my
Covenant. So every where, as the bottom of his dealing with us in Covenant
Ierem: 31. 33. I will be their God, Hos: 2. 23.
and they shall be my People, Isai: 54. 5. And in very many other places. Now
that he may thus be our God, two things are required.

1. That all Breaches, and Differences between him and us be removed, perfect
Peace and Agreement made, and we rendered acceptable, and well pleasing in his
sight. These are the terms, whereon they stand to whom he is a God in
Covenant: For the Accomplishment of this, is the first maine stream, that
flows from the former Fountain, namely the great Promise of giving Christ to
us, and for us, who is Peace: Ephesians. 2. 14. And who of God is made unto us
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor: 1. 30. Who
loves us, and washes us in his own blood, and makes us Kings, and Priests to
God and his Father. Revel: 1. 6. Giving himself for his Church, that he might
purify, and cleanse it, with the washing of water, by the word, that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, Ephesians. 5, 26, 27
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be Holy and
without blemish. Tit. 2. 14.
Doing and accomplishing all things, Genesis 3. 15.
that are required for the forementioned Ends; And this is the first maine
Stream, Job. 19. 25.
that flows from that Fountain. Christ as a Redeemer, Ephesians. 2. 14.
a Savior, Heb. 2. 17.
a Mighty one, a Priest, a Sacrifice, an Oblation, a Ransom, our Peace,
Righteousness, Ephesians. 5. 2. 1 Timothy 2. 6.
and the Author of our Salvation, is the Subject matter thereof.

2. That we may be kept and preserved meet for communion with him, as our God,
and for the enjoyment of him, as our Reward. For this End, flows forth the
other great Stream from the former Fountain, namely, the Promise of the Holy
Spirit, which he gives us, to make us meet for the inheritance with the Saints
in Light, Col. 1. 11.
to put forth and exercise toward us, all the Acts of his Love, which are
needful for us, and to work in us the Obedience, which he requires, and
accepts of us in Jesus Christ, so preserving us for himself. This Promise of
the Spirit in the Covenant, Isa. 59. 21.
with his work and peculiar dispensations, Ezekiel. 11. 21.
is plentifully witnessed in very many places of the Old Testament, and New;
Chapter 36. 26, 27
some whereof must afterward be insisted on: Hence he is sometimes called the
Promise of the Covenant, John 14. 15, 16. etc.
Acts 2. 59. The Promise is to you; which Promise is that which Christ
receives from his Father v: 33. even the Promise of the Holy Ghost. I shall
only add, that though this be a great Stream, flowing from the first
Fountain, yet it comes not immediately thence, but issues out from the Stream
before mentioned, the Promise of the Lord Jesus Christ; for he is given by him
unto us, John 14. 16. Gal. 4. 6.
as procured for us, and given only unto his.

Now from these two grand Streams,: 8.
do a thousand Rivulets flow forth for our refreshment. All the mercy that
Christ has purchased, all the Graces that the Spirit does bring forth, (which
in the former description I call, all things, that are either required in them,
or needful to them, to make them accepted before God, and to bring them to an
enjoyment of him) all Promises of Mercy, and Forgiveness, all Promises of
Faith and Holiness, of Obedience and Perseverance, of Joy and Consolation, of
Correction, Affliction, and Deliverance; they all flow from these: that is,
from the matter of those Promises, does the matter of these arise, and hence
are the ensuing Corollaries.

1. Who ever has an interest in any one Promise, has an interest in them all,
and in the Fountaine-Love, from whence they flow. He to whom any drop of
their sweetness flows, may follow it up unto the Spring: Were we wise, each
taste of Mercy would lead us to the Ocean of Love. Have we any hold on a
Promise, we may get upon it, and it will bring us to the Maine, Christ
himself, and the Spirit, and so into the bosom of the Father. It is our folly
to abide upon a little, which is given us merely to make us press for more.

2. That the most Conditional Promises, are to be resolved into absolute, and
inconditionall Love. God, who has promised life upon Believing, has promised
Believing, on no Condition (on our parts) at all, because to sinners.

This in general being given in,. 9.
concerning the nature of the Promises, I shall proceed to some such
Considerations, as are of particular usefulness unto that improvement, which
(the Lord assisting) I intend to make of them, for the confirmation of the
Truth under debate. And they are these,

1. All the Promises of God are true, and faithful, and shall most certainly,
all of them be accomplished. His nature, his veracity, his Unchangeablenesse,
his Omniscience, and Omnipotency, do all contribute strength to this assertion.
Neither can these Properties possibly continue entire, and the honor of them
be preserved unto the Lord, if the least failing in the Accomplishment of his
Promises be ascribed unto him. Every such failing must of necessity relate to
some such Principle, as stands in direct Opposition to one or more of the
perfections before mentioned. It must be a failing in Truth, Unchangeablenesse,
Prescience, or Power, that must frustrate the Promise of any one. We indeed
often alter our Resolutions, and the Promise that is gone out of our mouths,
and that (perhaps) righteously, upon some such change of things, as we could
not foresee, nor ought to have supposed, when we entered into our engagements.
No such thing can be ascribed unto him, who knows all things, with their
Circumstances, that can possibly come to pass, and has determined, what shall
so do, and therefore will not engage in any Promise that he knows, something,
which he foresaw would follow after, would cause him to alter. It were a
ludicrous thing in any son of man, to make a solemn Promise of any thing to
another, if he particularly knew, that in an hour some such thing would
happen, as should enforce him to change, and alter that promise, which he had
so solemnly entered into. And shall we ascribe such an action to him, before
whom all things are open, and naked? Shall he be thought solemnly to engage
himself to do, or accomplish any thing, which yet not only he will not do, but
also at that instant has those things in his eye, and under his Consideration,
for which he will not so do, as he Promises, and determined before that he
would not so do. If this be not unworthy the infinite Goodness, Wisdom, and
Faithfulness of God, I know not what can, or may be ascribed unto him, that
is. Yea the Truth, and veracity of God in his Promises cannot be denied him,
without denying him his Deity, or asserted, without the certain Accomplishment
of what he has Promised.

2. There are sundry things relating to the Accomplishment of Promises, as to
Times, Seasons, Persons, Ways, etc. wherein we have been in the dark, and
yet the Promises concerning them be fully accomplished. The rejection of the
Jews supplies us with an instance pregnant with this objection; The Apostle
tells us, that with many this Objection did arise on that Account: If the Jews
be rejected, then the Promises of God to them do fail. Romans 6. 9. He lays
down, and answers this Objection, discovering that fallacy therein by a
distinction. They are not (says he) all Israel that are of Israel. v. 7, 8. As
if he had said, there is a twofold Israel, an Israel after the flesh only, and
an Israel after the flesh and Spirit also. Unto these latter were the Promises
made; and therefore they who look on the former only, think it fails,
whereas indeed it holds its full accomplishment. So he disputes again Cap.
11. 7. I say then we may be in the dark, as to many Circumstances of the
fulfilling of Promises, when yet they have received a most exact accomplishment.

3. All the Conditional Promises of God are exactly true, and shall be most
faithfully made good by accomplishment, as to that wherein their being as
Promises does consist, as far as they are declarative of Gods Purpose and
intendment. This is that, which (as I said before,) some object; Many of the
Promises of God are Conditional, and their truth must needs depend upon the
Accomplishment of the Condition mentioned in them: if that be not fulfilled,
then they also must fail, and be of none effect. I say then that even the
Conditional Promises of God, are Absolutely made good. The truth of any
Promise consists in this, that that whereof it speaks, answers the Affirmation
it self. For instance; He that believes shall be saved. This Promise does not
Primarily affirm that any one shall be saved, and notwithstanding it, no one
might so be: but only this it affirms, that there is an infallible connection
between Faith and Salvation: and therein is the Promise most true, whither any
one believe or no. Breifely, Conditional Promises are either simply
declarative of the Will of God, in fixing an exact correspondency between a
Condition mentioned and required in them, and the thing promised by them, in
which case they have an Unchangeable and infallible verity in themselves, as
there is in all the Promises of the Moral Law to this day; for he that keeps
the Commandments shall live or they are also the discoveries of the Goodwill
of God, his intendments and Purposes, that, whereof they make mention, being
not the Condition, whereon his Purposes are suspended, but the way and means,
whereby the thing promised is to be accomplished: and in the latter Acceptance
alone are they (in the business in hand) our concernment.

4.. 10.
That the Promises concerning Perseverance (as has been often intimated) are
of two sorts. The first, of the Continuance of the Favor of God to us; which
respects our Justification. The other, of the continuance of our Obedience unto
God; which respects our Sanctification. Let us consider both of them, and begin
with the latter.

1. Of them, I say then, they are all Absolute, not one of them Conditional
(so as to be suspended, as to their accomplishment, on any Conditions) nor can
be; The Truth of God in them, has not its efficiency and Accomplishment, by
establishing the relation that is between one thing and another, or the
connection, that is between duty and reward, as it is in Conditional Promises
that are purely and merely so: but inforceth the exact fulfilling of the thing
promised, and that with respect unto, and for the preservation of the Glory of
that Excellency of God, He cannot lie. Let it be considered, what that
Condition, or those Conditions be, or may be, on which Promises of this nature
should be suspended, and the Truth of the former Assertions will evidently
appear: That God has Promised unto Believers, that they shall for ever abide
with him, in the Obedience of the Covenant unto the End, shall afterward be
proved by a cloud of Witnesses. What now is the Condition, whereon this Promise
does depend? It is (says Mr Goodwin) That they perform their duty, that they
suffer not themselves to be seduced, nor willingly cast of the yoke of Christ;
But what does this amount unto? Is it not thus much, if they abide with God,
(for if they perform their Duty, and not suffer themselves to be seduced, nor
willingly depart from God, they abide with him) God has promised, that they
shall abide with him. Upon Condition they abide with him, he has promised they
shall; egregia^ vero laudem. Can any thing more ridiculous be invented? If men
abide with God, what need they any Promise, that they shall so do? The whole
virtue of the Promise depends on that condition and that condition, contains
all that is promised: neither is it possible that any thing can be invented to
be supplied as the condition or conditions of these Promises, but it will
quickly appear upon consideration, that, how ever it may be differently
phrased, yet indeed it is coincident with the matter of the Promise it self.
That condition, or those conditions must consist in some Act, Acts, Way or
Course of acceptable Obedience in them, to whom the Promises are made: This the
nature of the thing it self requires. Now every such Act, way, or course is
the matter of the Promise, even universal Obedience. Now if one man should
promise another, that he should at such a time and place be supplied with an
hundred pounds to pay his Debts, on condition that he came and brought the
Moneys himself, ought he to be esteemed to have a mind to relieve the poor
man, or to mock him? To affirm, that, when God promises to write his Law in
our Hearts, to put his Fear in our inward parts, to Create in us a New Heart,
to circumcise our Hearts that we may fear him always, to give us his Spirit
to abide with us for ever, to preserve us by his Power, so that we shall never
leave him nor forsake him, shall live to him, and sin shall not have dominion
over us etc. he does it upon condition, that we write his Law in our hearts,
Circumcise them, continue to fear Him, abide with Him, not forsake him, etc.
is to make him to mock and deride at their misery, whose relief he so
seriously pretends. What ever Promises then of this kind (Promises of working
Obedience in us, for our abiding with him) shall be produced, they will be
found to be Absolute, and independent on any condition whatever, and their
Truth no ways to be maintained, but in and by their Accomplishment.

2. For those of the first sort,. 10.
which I shall now handle, farther to clear the foundation of their ensuing
Application, I shall propose only some few things unto consideration. As,

1. That they are not to be taken, or looked upon, as to their use for Argument
in the present Controversy, separated and divided from those other Promises
formerly insisted on, which assure Believers, that they shall always abide
with God, as to their Obedience: all hope that any have to prevail against
them, is by dividing of them. It is a very vain supposall and foundation of
sand, which our Adversaries build their inferences upon, which they make
against the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, viz. the Impossibility that
God should continue his Love and Favor to them, whilst they wallow in all
manner of Abominations, and desperate Rebellions against him: An Hypothesis
crudely imposed on our Doctrine, and repeated over and over, as a matter of the
greatest detestation, and abomination, that can fall within the thoughts of
men. And such supposalls and conclusions are made thereupon, as border at least
upon the cursed cost of Blasphemy, but cui fini, I pray? To what end is all
this noise? as though any had ever Asserted, that God promised to continue his
Love and gracious Acceptance always to his Saints, and yet took no care, nor
had promised, that they should be continued Saints: but would suffer them to
turn very Devils. It is as easy for men to confute Hypotheses created in
their own imaginations, as to cast down men of straw of their own framing, and
setting up. We say indeed, that God has faithfully promised, that he will
never leave nor forsake Believers; but withal, that he has no less
faithfully engaged himself, that they shall never wickedly depart from him,
but that they shall continue Saints and Believers. Yea (if I may so say)
Promising always to accept them freely, it is incumbent on his Holy Majesty,
upon the account of his Truth, Faithfulness, and Righteousness, to preserve
them such, as without the least dishonor to his Grace, and Holiness, yea to
the greatest advantage of his Glory, he may always accept them, delight in
them, and rejoice over them: and so he tells us he does, Ierem. 31.7: Yea I
have loved thee with an everlasting Love, therefore with loving kindness have
I drawn thee: he draws us with his kindness, to follow him, obey him, live
unto him, abide with him, because he Loves us with an Everlasting Love.

2. That these promises of God do not properly, and as to their original
rise, depend on any conditions in Believers, or by them to be fulfilled, but
are the Fountains, and Springs of all conditions whatever, that are required to
be in them, or expected from them; though the Grace and Obedience of Believers
are often mentioned in them, as the means, whereby they are carried on
according to the appointment of God, unto the enjoyment (or continued in it) of
what is promised. This one Consideration, that there is in very many of these
Promises, an express non obstante, or a not-withstanding the want of any such
condition, as might seem to be at the bottom, and to be the occasion of any
such Promise, or Engagement of the Grace of God, is sufficient to give light
and evidence to this Assertion. If the Lord says expressly, that he will do
so with men, though it be not so with them, his doing of that thing cannot
depend on any such thing in them, as he says, notwithstanding the want of it,
he will do it. Take one instance, Isai. 54. v. 9, 10. In a little wrath have I
hid my face from thee, for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord they Redeemer: for this is as the waters of Noah
unto me; whereas I have sworn, that the waters of Noah shall no more cover
the Earth, so have I sworn that I will not be worth with thee, nor rebuke
thee: for the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee. He will have mercy on them
with everlasting kindness v. 8. Yea, but how if they walk not worthy of it?
Why yet this kindness shall not fail, says the Lord: for it is as the waters
of Noah: God swears that the waters of Noah should no more cover the Earth,
and you see the stability of what he has spoken. The World is now reserved for
Fire, but drowned it shall be no more: my kindness to thee (says God) is
such. it shall nor more depart from thee, then those waters shall return
again upon the Earth. Neither is this all, wherein he compares his kindness
to the waters of Noah, but in this also, in that in the Promise of drowning the
World no more, there was an express non obstante for the sins of men. Genesis 8
21. The Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for
man's sake, for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Though
men grow full of wickedness and violence, as before the Flood they were, yet
says the Lord, the World shall be drowned no more. And in this does the
Promise of kindness hold proportion with that of the waters of Noah: there is
an express relief in it, against the sins and failings of them, to whom it
is made, viz. such as he will permit them to fall into, whilst he certainly
preserves them from all such, as are inconsistent with his Love and Favor,
according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace: and therefore it depends not
on any thing in them, being made with a proviso for any such defect, as in them
may be imagined.

3. To affirm that these Promises of God's abiding with us to the end do
depend on any condition, that may be uncertain in its event, by us to be
fulfilled, as to their Accomplishment, does wholly enervate and make them void
in respect of the maine end, for which they were given us of God. That one
chief end of them is to give the Saints consolation in every condition, in all
the straights, trials, and temptations, which they are to undergo, or may be
called to, is evident. When Joshua was entering upon the great work of subduing
the Canaanites, and setting the Tabernacle, and people of God in their
appointed Inheritance, wherein he was to pass through innumerable
difficulties, trials, and pressures, God gives him that word of Promise, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Joshua 1.5. so are many of them made to
the Saints in their weakness, darkness, and desertions, as will appear by
the consideration of the particular instances following. Isa. 4. 3, 4.
Now what one drop of consolation can a poor drooping tempted soul squeeze
out of such Promises, that depend wholly and solely upon any thing within
themselves: he will be with me and be my God, it is true: but always
provided, that I continue to be his: That also is a sweet and gracious Promise;
but that I shall do so, he has not promised; It seems I have a cursed Liberty
left me, of departing wickedly from him; so that upon the matter,
notwithstanding these Promises of his, I am left to my self; If I will abide
with him, well and good, he will abide with me, and so it shall be well with
me: That he should so abide with me, as to cause me to abide with him, it
seems there is no such thing; Soul look to thy self; all they hopes and help
is in thy self: but alas! for the present I have no sense of this Love of God,
and I know not that I have any true, real, unfeigned Obedience to him.
Corruption is strong, Temptations are many, what shall I say? Shall I exercise
Faith on those Promises of God, wherein he has said, and given Assurance, that
he will be a God to me for ever? According as my thoughts are of my own abiding
with him, so may I think of them, and no otherwise; so that I am again rolled
upon mine own hands, and left to mine own endeavors, to extricate my self
from these sad intanglements. What now becomes of the Consolation, which in
these Promises is intended? Are they not on this account rather flints, and
pieces of Iron, then Breasts of comfort and joy.

Lastly, if it be so as is supposed, it is evident, that God makes no Promises
unto Persons, but only unto Conditions and Qualifications, that is, His
Promises are not engagements of his love and Goodwill to Believers, but
discoveries of his Apporbation of Believing: suppose any Promise of God, to be
our God, our allsufficient God for ever, non eminently to include an engagement
for the effectual exertion of the alsufficiency to preserve and continue us,
in such a state and spiritual condition, as wherein he may with the Glory and
Honor of his Grace (and will not fail to) abide and continue our God, and you
cut all the nerves and sinews of it, as to the Administration of any
Consolation unto them to whom it is given. The Promises must be made good: that
is Certain: and if they are accomplished, or not accomplished unto men,
merely upon the account of such, and such Qualifications in them, which if
they are not found, then they shall be fulfilled; if not, then they are
suspended: they are made to the Conditions, and not at all to the Persons. And
though some perhaps will easily grant this, yet upon this account it cannot be
said, that God ever made any one Promise unto his Church, as consisting of such
persons, namely Abraham and his Seed; which is directly contrary to that of the
Apostle. Romans 9. 8. Where he calls the Elect, the Children of the Promises,
or those to whom the Promises were made. It appears then, that neither are
these Promises of God Conditional. As they proceed from free Grace, so there
is no other account, on which they are given out, continued and accomplished
toward the Children of God. Though the things of the Promise are often placed
in dependence one of another, as Means and Ends, yet the Promises themselves
are absolute.

These few things being premised,: 11.
I shall now name and insist upon some particular Promises, wherein the Lord
has graciously engaged himself that he will abide to be a God in Covenant unto
his People, and their Guide unto death: from which I shall labor to make good
this Argument, for the Perseverance of the Saints.

That which that God, who cannot lie, nor deceive, with whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning, who is Faithful in all his Promises, and
all whose words are Truth and Faithfulness, Titus 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18. Jam. 1.
18. 1 Cor. 1. 9.
has solemnly promised and engaged himself unto, to this end, that they,
unto whom he so promises and engages himself, may from those Promises
receive strong Consolation; That he will certainly perform and Accomplish.
That he will be a God and a Guide unto death unto his Saints, that he will
never leave them nor forsake them, that he will never cast them off, nor leave
them out of his favor, but will preserve them such as is meet for his Holy
Majesty to embrace, Love, and delight in, and that with an express
notwithstanding for every such thing, as might seem to provoke him to forsake
them; He has Promised, and for the end mentioned. Therefore that he will so
abide with them, that his Love shall be continued to them to the End, that he
will Preserve them unto himself etc. according to his Truth and
Faithfulness, shall be accomplished and fulfilled. The inference has its
strength from the Nature, Truth and Faithfulness of God: and whilst they
abide in any credit with the somes of men, it may seem strange, that it should
be denied or questioned. The major proposition of the forementioned Argument is
examined by Mr Goodwin Cap. 11. Sect. 1. Page 225. says he.

1. What God has promised in his Word,. 12.
is certain in such a sense, and upon such Terms, as God would be understood
in his Promises; but what he promised in one sense, is not certain of
performance in the other.

Ans. 1. Doubtless Gods meaning and intention in his Promises is the Rule of
their accomplishment. This sometimes we may not be able to fathom: and
thereupon be exposed to Temptations not a few, concerning their fulfilling, so
was it with them with whom Paul had to do, in reference to the Promises made to
the Seed of Abraham. The Question then is not whither that which is promised in
one sense, shall be performed in another: but whither God's Promises have, and
shall certainly have, all of them, according to his intendment, any
performance at all. And the aim of Mr Goodwin in the Example, that he
afterward produces, is not to manifest that that which God promises, shall
certainly be performed only in that sense, wherein he made his Promise^ but
that they may be performed, or not performed at all. It is not in whose sense
they shall have their performance, but whither they shall have any performance,
or no. If the thing promised be not accomplished, the Promise is not at all in
any sense performed; unless Mr Goodwin will distinguish, and say, there are
two ways of any things performance, one whereby it is performed; another,
whereby it is not. But he proceeds to manifest this Assertion by an indction
of instances.

God (says he) promised to Paul the lives of them that were in the Ship: Acts
27.
his intent and meaning was not, that they should all be preserved, against
what ever they in the Ship might do to hinder that Promise, but with this
proviso or Condition, that they in the Ship should harken unto him, and follow
his advice: which is evident from those words of Paul, Except these abide in
the Ship, ye cannot be saved: And had they gone away, God had not made any
breach of Promise, though they had been all drowned.

Ans. First when men seriously promise any thing, which is wholly, and
absolutely in their power to Accomplish and bring about, causing thereby good
men to rest upon their words, and to declare unto others their repose upon
their honesty and worth; if they do not make good what they have spoken, we
account them unworthy promise breakers, and they do it at the peril of all the
repute of honesty, honor, and Faith they have in the world. With God it seems
it is otherwise; He makes a solemn Gracious Promise to Paul that the lives of
all them in the Ship with him, should be saved: Paul on who^ it was as much
incumbent as on any man in the world not to engage the name of God (that God
whom he worshipped and Preached) in any thing, whose truth might in the least be
liable to exception, being in the way of declaring a new Doctrine to the world,
Act. 14. 15. and 17. 24. 1 Timothy: 4. 10.
which would have been everlastingly prejudiced by any misprision of the
Faithfulness of that God, in whose name and Authority he preached it. The
sum of that Doctrine also being the exaltation of that God, in opposition to
all the pretended Deities of the world: He (I say) boasts himself upon the
Promises that he had received, verse. 22, 23.
that there should be no loss of any man's life among them, v. 22. v. 25. he
gives the reason of his confident Assertion, when all hope was taken away, v.
20. I believe God (says he) that it shall be even as it was told me; His Faith
in God was in reference to the event, that it should come to pass, as it was
told him. Faith in God, Divine Faith can have nothing for its Object, that may
fail it. He does not say, that he believes that God will be Faithful to his
Promise in General, but also tells them wherein his Faithfulness does
consist, even in the performance and accomplishment of that which he had
promised. This he informs the Centurion, and the rest in the ship with him:
and if in the issue it had otherwise fallen out, there had not been any color
of Justifying the Faith of that God he served, or his own truth in being
witness to him. Had any perished, those that remained would have argued him of
lying. Yea but says he not himself, except these abide in the ship ye cannot
be saved? He did so indeed, and thereby declared the necessity of using suitable
means, when Providence affordes them to us, for the Accomplishment of
appointed determined ends. God, who Promises any thing, and affords means
for the attaining of it, will direct them to whom those Promises are made, to
the use of those means, as he does the Centurion by Paul; It being incumbent
in this case on his Holy Majesty, upon the account of his engaged Faithfulness
to save them, he will yet have them subservient to his Promise in their
endeavors for their own safety. Means may be assigned for an End, as to
their ordinary subserviency thereunto, without any suspending of the Event on
them, as a condition of an uncertain issue and Accomplishment. And therefore
that this solemn Promise made unto Paul, whose Event and Accomplishment, up on
the account of his believing God, he absolutely believed, and whose performance
he foretold with out the least intimation of any Condition whatever, (only he
bids them not throw away the means of their Preservation) should depend, as to
its fulfilling, on such a Condition, as in respect of the event might not have
been, (God who made the Promise not making any infallible provision for the
Condition) and so have been actually frustrate, is an Assertion, not only not
grounded on these words of Paul, setting out the suitable means of the
providence of God for the accomplishment of an appointed end, but also
derogatory in the highest to the Glory of the Truth and Faithfulness of God
himself. But

3. That Promise, (says he) of our Savior to his Disciples. Mat. 19. 28. That
they who followed him in the Regeneration, should sit upon twelve thrones
Judging the twelve tribes of Israel, Judas being yet one of them, was not
fulfilled, and in case the rest had declined, they also with him might have
come short of the Promise made unto them.

Ans. Christ knew what was in man, and had no need of any to tell him, he knew
from the beginning who it was that should betray him, and plainly pronounced
him to be a Devil; He knew he was so, that he Believed not; that he would
continue so, Ioh. 6. 64, 70, 7. 1.
he would betray him, that his end would be desperate; be pronounced a curse
upon him, as being cursed by David: Ps. 109. so many Generations before his
coming into the world; and is it probable now that he promised this man a
Throne for his following him in the Regeneration? which is most certain (take
it in what sense you will) he did never follow him in, but only as he gave him
his bodily attandance, in his going up and down. He was never admitted to be
witness of his Resurrection, the time being not yet come, wherein a discovery
was to be made of the hypocrisy of Judas, that he might have space to carry on
the work which he had to do, and the number of those, who in a peculiar manner
were to bear witness to the completing of the whole work of Regeneration in
the Resurrection of Christ, Acts 1. 21.
being twelve, he who was afterward admitted into that number being one that
now followed him, our blessed Savior tells them indefinitely to their
consolation, what will be the Glorious Issue of their following him, and
bearing witness to him, in this work. That which is promissory in the words,
is made to them, who forsook all and followed him in the work mentioned,
which assuredly he, who was always a theife, a Devil, a covetous person, that
followed not in the maine of the work it self, was none of; that Promise
being afterward fulfilled to another then present with Christ. It is granted,
if the rest of the twelve had fallen away, you may suppose of them what you
please: that they might fall away, is to beg that, which you cannot prove,
nor will ever be granted you, though you should resolve to starve your self,
if you get it not: But this is

4. Confirmed out of Peter Martyr, whose Doctrine it is, that the Promises of
God are wont to be made with a respect unto the present estate and condition of
things, with men: that is, they shall be performed unto men abiding under the
Qualifications, unto which they are made; as for example. What Promises soever
God makes to Believers, with respect had to their Faith, or as they are
Believers, are not to be looked on as performeable, or obliging the maker of
them unto them, in case they shall relapse into their former unbelief.

Ans. It is too well known, how, and to what end, our Author cites Peter
Martyr, and men of the same judgment with him, in this Controversy, and to how
little Advantage to his Cause with discerning men, he has done it. In the same
place, from whence these words are taken, the Author distinguishes of the
Promises of God, and tells you, that some of them are conditional, which are
(says he) of a Legal nature, which only show the connection between the
Condition, or Qualification they require, and the thing they promise thereunto:
and such are those whereof he speaks: but others he tells you, are Absolute
and Evangelicall, not depending on any Condition in us at all; and so he tells
us, out of Chrysostom, that this of our Savior Mat. 19. 28. is of the former
sort; and the Accomplishment of such like Promises as these; He informs us to
consist not in the actual fulfilling of what is conditionally affirmed, but in
the certain truth of the axiom, wherein the condition, and the Event as such,
are knit together.

2. To the Example urged, I shall only ask what Mr Goodwin's judgment is of
the Promises, that God has made to Believers, that they shall never relapse
into their former state of unbelief, and on what condition they are made?
Whether his Promise of his Love unto, and Acceptance of Believers, wherein he
will abide for ever, do not infer their Preservation in the Condition,
wherein they are ( i e. Believers), will in the next place fall under our
Consideration. Your Conclusion is, in the sense explained you admit the
Proposition; whatsoever God promises is certain, that is, it shall certainly
be fulfilled, or it shall not.

There is moreover no small contribution of strength, as to our establishment
in the Faith of it,. 13.
given to our Proposition, by the signal engagement of the Faithfulness of
God, for the Accomplishment of the Promises, which he makes unto us; as it is
manifest in those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, by whom
you are called to the fellowship of his Son: in the foregoing verse he
tells them that God will confirm them to the end, that they may be
blameless in the day of the Lord Christ; of which confident Assertion, he
gives them this account, Gof is faithful to make good his Promises made unto
them, he changes not. When a Promise is once passed, that which first presents
it self to the consideration of them to whom it is made, and whose
concernement it is, that it be fulfilled, is, the Faithfulness of him that
has made the Promise. This property of Gods nature does the Apostle therefore
mind the Saints of, to lead them to a full Assurance of their preservation. His
Promise being passed, fear not his faithfulness for its Accomplishment. Might
there in this case a supposall be allowed of any such interveniences, as might
intercept them in the way of enjoying what God truly promised, and cause them
to come short thereof, what assurance could arise to them from the
consideration of the Faithfulness of God, who made those Promises unto them?
The Faithfulness of God then is engaged for the Accomplishment of the thing
promised, which also shall be done, in case that fail not. So also the 1 These:
5. 23, 24. The very God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God, your
spirits, and souls, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ: faithful is he that calls you, who will also do it. He
assures them of their preservation in, and unto the enjoyment of the things
which he prayed for, and that upon the account of his Faithfulness who had
promised them: and, says he, he will do it: viz. because he is Faithful. Let
the oppositions to it be never so many, the difficulties never so great, the
interveniences what they will; He is faithful, and he will do it: as it is
affirmed 2 These: 3. 3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall establish you, and
keep you from evil: as also in the 1 Cor: 10. 13. God is faithful, who will
not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it. The
same Faithfulness of God is held out as that upon the account whereof no
temptation shall befall Believers, so as to separate them from him. The Promise
here peculiarly confirmed by it, and established on it, is such as no condition
can tollerably be fixed unto. I will not suffer Believers to be overcome with
Temptations, in case they be not overcome with Temptations, is a Promise not to
be ascribed to the Infinite Wisdom of God, with which we have to do, and yet
no other can with the least color be proposed. All sin, all falling from God
is upon temptation. Though Satan and the World should have no hand in drawing
man aside from God, yet what they do from their own Lusts, they do from
Temptation. Iam. 1. 14, 15. If God in his Faithfulness will not suffer any
Temptation to prevail against Believers, unless they neglect their duty and
fall from him, and they can no otherwise neglect their duty, nor depart from
him, but upon the prevalency of Temptation, their abiding with him, their
final unconquerablenesse has a certainty answerable to the faithfulness of
God.

This part of our strength Mr Goodwin attempts to deprive us of. Cap. 11. Sect:
18. p. 236. in these words. Whereas the Apostle mentions the Faithfulness of
God, as that Divine principle in him, or Attribute, out of which he is moved to
establish, and confirm Believers unto the end, and so to keep them from
evil; by Faithfulness he does not necessarily mean that Property or
Attribute of his, that renders him true, and just, or Constant in the
performance of his Promises, as if the Apostle in these, or any like places,
supposed such a promise, one or more made by him, by which he stands obliged to
establish and confirm his Saints unto the end by a strong and irresistible
hand.

Ans. The sum of this Answer is, that the Apostle by saying God is Faithful,
does not understand Gods Faithfulness. What other virtue is intended in God by
his Faithfulness, but that whereby his Truth and his Constancy in Words and
Promises is signified, I know not. Let the places from the beginning of the
Scriptures to the end, wherein there is mention made of the Faith, or
Faithfulness of God, of his being Faithful, with the Application thereof, the
Scope, and intendment of the place, be perused, and see if they will give the
least allowance to turn aside from eying the Property and Perfection of God
before mentioned, as that which they peculiarly intend. Deuteronomy: 7. 9. Ps: 36. 5.
Ps: 89. 1, 2, 5. Ps: 143. 1. Isai: 49 7. Hos: 2. 20. Romans 3. 3. 2 Timothy: 2. 13.
Heb: 10. 23. 1 John 1. 9. are some of them. Why we should wring out another
sense of the expression in this place, I know not.

2. The Faithfulness of God is not mentioned as that Divine principle, out of
which he is moved to establish and confirm Believers to the end, but only to
confirm them in the faith of his Unchangeablenesse and Constancy, in the
accomplishing the work of his free Grace, which he had begun in them, and
promised to confirm to the end. The work flows from the Principle of his free
Grace in Jesus Christ, whence alone, he gives them great, free, and precious
Promises. His stability and Constancy in those Promises, as to their
performance, is intended by his Faithfulness and Truth in them. What are the
Promises of God improperly so called, and not exhibited in words, which you
intimate, I know not.

3. The Apostle does not only suppose, but in the name, and Authority of God,
gives actually in the places under consideration, Promises of the certain and
infallible preservation of Believers to the end, asserting the immutability of
Gods engagement in them from his Faithfulness. In brief: not to darken
counsel and understanding with a multitude of words; by the Promises of God,
we intend in a peculiar manner, those expressed in the Texts under consideration.
viz. That God will establish Believers to the end, keep them from evil, and
all Temptations, that would overthrow them: and by the Faithfulness of God,
from whence Believers have their Assurance of the accomplishment of these
promises, that which the Scripture holds out, and all the World of Believers
have hither to taken to be, the Faithfulness of God, as was before described.
But it seems the word is here used otherwise. For (says he.)

It is such a kind of Faithfulness, or disposition in him, as that meant by
Peter, when he styles him a faithful Creator: Now God is, and may properly be
termed a faithful Creator, because he constantly per^ormes unto his Creature,
whatsoever the Relation of a Creator promises in an equitable and rational
way unto it, which is a great care and tenderness for the preservation and
well-being of it: in like manner he may, yea it is most likely that he is,
called faithful in his calling of men, as he is a spiritual Father or
Creator, a giver of a new being unto men, because he never fails to perform
unto those new creatures of his, whatsoever such a being as this regularly
interpreted, promises unto him, who receives it from him who is the donor of
it: (that is) convement and sufficient means for the preservation, and
well-being of it. So that the Faithfulness of God in the Scriptures in hand,
supposes no such Promise made by God, as our opposers imagine. viz. Whereby he
should in terms, or words stand engaged to establish, confirm, or keep
Believers from evil, his new creatures, his regenerated ones, after any such a
manner, but that they, if they be careless or negligent for themselves, may be
shaken and decline, and commit evil notwithstanding.

Ans. That by Gods Faithfulness mentioned in that place of Peter, such a
disposition as you afterward describe, is intended, you had better say, then
undertake to prove. It is evident the scope of the Apostle is to exhort the
Saints of God in all their trialls and afflictions, to commit themselves and
their ways, with patience and quietness unto God, upon the account of his
power to preserve them, as he is the Creator of all, and his constancy in
receiving of them, being present with them, abiding with them, as he is
Faithful in his word and Promises. Yea and the interpretation, our Author
would have fixed on the expression here used, is not only remote from the
intendment of the place, turning that into a general good disposition toward
all his creatures, which is intimated for the peculiar support of Believers,
and that in their distress, but also is in it self, a false, fond, and loose
Assertion. There is no Law, nor Relation of Creation, that lays hold on God so
far, as to oblige him to the Communication of one drop of his Goodness to
any of the creatures, beyond what is given them by their Creation, or to
continue that unto them for one moment; All the dispensation of himself unto
his creatures flowing from his sovereign good pleasure, doing what he will
with his own.

2. He does very faintly, when he has made the farthest step in confident
asserting that he dares venture upon, ( it may be, and it is most likely)
suppose that the Faithfulness of God in these places under consideration, may
be taken in such a sense as that before described. But,

1. This is no sense at all of the Faithfulness of God, neither is the word
ever used in Scripture to signify any such thing in God, or man, nor can with
any tolerable sense be applied to any such thing; neither would there be any
Analogy between that which in God we call Faithfulness, and that virtue in
man, which is so termed: nor is the Faithfulness of God here mentioned upon
any such account, as will endure this description, being insisted on only to
assure the Saints of the steadfastness, and unalterablenesse of God in the
performance of his Promises made to them: neither is the obligation of God, to
continue his Love and Favor, with Grace, and means of it to Believers,
founded upon such a disposition as is imagined; but in the free purpose of his
will, which he purposed in Jesus Christ before the world was: so that there is
not the least appearance of truth, or soundness of Reason, or any thing that
is desirable, in this attempt to corrupt the Word of God.

2. Then, the Faithfulness of God in the Scriptures in hand bespeaks his
truth and stability in the performance of his Promises, made of establishing
Believers to the end, keeping them from evil, not suffering any temptation to
befall them, but making withal a way to escape: in all which God assures them
he will prevent all such carelessness, and negligence in them, as is
inconsistent with their Establishment, which he will certainly accomplish. And
thus is our Major Proposition with its supplies of light, and strength, freed
from such exceptions, as M. Goodwin supposes it liable unto.

For the Assumption,. 15.
I shall not much trouble my self with that ridiculous sense (called a sober
and Orthodox explication) which Mr Goodwin is pleased to put upon it, to allow
it to pass current. In this sense (says he) it is most true, that God has
promised that all Believers shall Persevere, i.e. that all true Believers
formally considered, i.e. as such, and abiding such, shall persevere: viz. in
his Grace and Favor; But this he presumes is not our sense. Ch: 11. Sect: 2.
page 226. And well he may presume it: for what ever his greatest skill may
enable him unto, we can make no sense of it, but this: God has promised
Believers shall Persevere, in case they Persevere: which is to us upon the
matter no sense at all. To Persevere in Gods Grace and Favor, is to continue
in Faith and Obedience, which if men do, God has solemnly promised, and
sworn that they shall so do. Certainly there is an Orthodox sense in Gods
Promises, that is not nonsense Be it granted then, that this is not our sense,
not so much because not ours, as because not sense, what is our meaning in this
Proposition? It is (says Mr Goodwin) that God will so preserve Believers, that
none of them shall make shipwreck of their Faith, upon what quicksands of lust
and sensuality soever they shall strike, against what rock of obduration and
impenitency soever they dash. But I beseech you, who told you that this was our
sense of this Proposition^ being indeed no more sense then that which you give
in for your own: By striking on the quicksands of Lust, and dashing upon
Rocks of sensuality, impenitency, and obduration, you have in other places
sufficiently explained your self to intend their falling under the power of
Sin. And is this asserted by us to be the tenor of Gods Promises to
Believers? Or is it not? or do you not know that it is not so? did ever any say
that God preserves men in believing under obduration and impenitency? that is,
under unbelief? for no man can be obdurately impenitent but unbelievers: do
not you know that we maintain that the Grace faithfully engaged to be bestowed
on them, is given them to this end, to preserve them from the power of sin,
from obduration and impenitency, and shall certainly be effectual for that
purpose? Prima est haec ultio, quod se Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur.

CAP. VI.
1. The former Argument confirmed by an induction of particular instances: Ioh:
1. 5. opened. The concernment of all Believers in that Promise, proved by the
Apostle. Heb: 13. 5. The general interest of all Believers in all the Promises
of God cleared. Objections answered. How Old Testament Promises may be
improved. 2. The Promise insisted on relates principally to Spiritualls. The
strength of it to the end intended. 3. 1 Samuel 12. 22. To whom the Promise there
is given. 4. The twofold use of this Promise: Threats to wicked men of use to
the Saints: Promises to the Saints, of use to wicked men. Isa. 4. 2, 3, 4.
Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. opened. A condition of backsliding
supposed in Believers: yet they not rejected: Gods abididing with his Saints,
upon the account of his (1.) Faithfulness, (2.) Loving-kindnesse. (3.)
Covenant: (4.) Promise, (5.) Oath. 5. The intendment of the words insisted on,
from 1 Samuel: 12. 22. Isa. 27. 2, 3, 4. Zeph. 3, 17. illustrated. The intendment
of those words, I will not forsake thee. The reason of the Promise, and means
promised therein: no cause in them, to whom the Promise is made. Ezekiel. 36. 31.
Isa. 43. 22, 23, 24, 25. opened, also Isa. 57. 17. 6. The cause in God himself
only. The Name of God what it imports: his Allsufficiency engaged therein, and
his Goodness. 7. The Rise and fountain of all Gods Goodness to his people,
in his own good pleasure: The sum of our Argument from this place of
Scripture. 8. Psl. 23. 4, 5. opened: the Psalmists use of assurance of
Perseverante. 9. Inferences from the last use: 2 Timothy: 4. 18. opened: all
Believers in the same condition, as to Perseverance, with David and Paul. 10.
The Second inference from the place insisted on. Assurance a motive to
obedience, and is the end that God intends to promote thereby. 11. Psalm: 125.
12. explained. Psalm: 37. 28. Deuteronomy: 33. 3. 12. Inferences from that place of the
Psalmist: perpetual preservation in the condition of Saints promised to
Believers. 13. Mr G. Objections and Exceptions to our Exposition and Argument
from this place, removed. 14. Promises made originally to persons, not
Qualifications: not the same Reason of Promises to the Church, and of
threatenings to sinners. 15. Other objections removed. 16. Isa. 54. 7, 8, 9. 17.
The mind of the Lord in the Promises mentioned in that place opened. 19. The
exposition given on that place and Arguments from thence vindicated. 20.
Direction for the right improvement of Promises. 20. Hos. 2. 19, 20. opened.
21. Of the general design of that Chapter: the first part of the total
Rejection of the Church and Political state of the Jews. 23. The second, of
Promises to the remnant according to the election of Grace. Of this four
particulars: (1.) Of Conversion: v. 14, 15. (2.) Of obedience and forsaking all
false, worship. (3.) Of Peace and quietness v. 18. (4.) Discovering the
fountain of all the mercies. 24. Some objections removed: to whom this Promise
is made. 25. The Promise farther opened: the persons to whom it is made. 26. v.
14. of that Chapter opened. The wilderness condition whereunto men are allured
by the Gospel, what it imports: (1.) Separation: (2.) Intanglement. 27. Gods
dealing with a soul in its wilderness condition. 28. Promises given to
persons in that condition. 29. The sum of the foregoing Promises: The persons
to whom they are made farther described. 30. The nature of the maine Promise it
self considered. Of the maine Covenant between God and his Saints. 31. The
Properties of God engaged for the Accomplishment of this Promise. 32, 33, 24.
Mr G. Exposition of this place considered, and confuted. 35. Ioh. 10. 27, 28,
29. opened. 30. Vindicated.

HAving cleared the Truth of the one,. 1.
and Meaning of the other Proposition mentioned in the Argument last proposed,
I proceed to confirm the Latter, by an induction of particular Promises. The
first, that I shall fix upon, is that of Ioshuah 1. 5. I will be with thee, I
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. This Promise (it is true) in this
original Copy of it is a grant to one single person, entering upon a peculiar
employment: but the Holy Ghost has eminently taught the Saints of God to
plead, and improve it in all Generations for their own Advantage, and that not
only upon the account of the general rule, 2 Cor. 1. 10.
of the establishment of all Promises in Jesus Christ, to the glory of God by
us; but also by the application which himself makes of it unto them, and all
their occasions, wherein they stand in need of the Faithfulness of God
therein. Heb: 13. 5. Let your conversation be without Covetousness, and be
content with such things as you have; for he has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee. The Apostle lays down an Exhortation in the
beginning of the verse, against the inordinate desire of the things of this
World, that are labored after upon the account of this present life: To give
power and efficacy to his Exhortation, he manifests all such desires to be
altogether needless, upon consideration of his Allsufficiency, who has
promised never to forsake them, which he manifests by an instance in this
Promise given to Ioshuah, giving us withal a Rule for the Application of all
the Promises of the Old Testament, which were made to the Church and People of
God. Some labor much to rob Believers of the consolation intended them in the
Evangelicall Promises of the Old Testament, though made in general to the
Church, upon this account, that they were made to the Jews: and being to them
peculiar, their concernment now lies not in them. If this plea might be
admitted, I know not any one Promise that would more evidently fall under the
power of it, then this we have now in consideration. It was made to a peculiar
person, and that upon a peculiar occasion, made to a General, or Captain of
Armies, with respect to the great Wars he had to undertake, upon the special
command of God. May not a poor hungry Believer, say, what is this to me? I am
not a General of an Army, have no Wars to make upon Gods command, the virtue
doubtless of this Promise expired with the conquest of Canaan, and died with
him, to whom it was made. To manifest the samenesse of Love, that is in all the
Promises, with their Establishment in one Mediator, and the general
concernment of Believers in every one of them, how ever, and on what occasion
soever given to any, this Promise to Joshua is here applied to the condition of
the weakest, meanest, and poorest of the Saints of God; to all, and every one
of them, be their state and condition what it will. And doubtless Believers
are not a little wanting to themselves, and their own consolation, that they
do no more particularly close with those words of Truth, Grace, and
Faithfulness, which upon sundry occasions and at diverse times have been given
out unto the Saints of old, even Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and the residue
of them, who walked with God in their Generations: These things in an especial
manner, are recorded for our consolation, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scripture might have hope. Rom: 15. 4. Now the Holy Ghost knowing the
weakness of our Faith, and how apt we are to be beaten from closing with the
Promises, and from mixing them with faith, upon the least discouragement that
may arise, (as indeed this is none of the least, that the Promise is not made
to us, it was made to others, and they may reap the sweetness of it, God may
be faithful in it, though we never enjoy the mercy intended in it; I say) in
the next words he leads Believers by the hand, to make the same conclusion with
boldness and confidence from this, and the like Promises, as David did of old,
upon the many Gracious assurances, that he had received of the presence of God
with him. v. 6. So that (says he upon the account of that Promise) we may say
boldly (without staggering at it by unbelief) that the Lord is our helper;
This is a conclusion of Faith: Because God said to Ioshuah a Believer, I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee, (though upon a particular occasion, and in
reference to a particular employment) every Believer may say with boldness, He
is my helper.

It is true,: 2.
the Application of the Promises here looks immediately unto temporalls: but
yet being drawn out from the testimony of the continuance of the presence of
God with his Saints, does much more powerfully conclude to spiritualls. Yea the
Promise it self is of Spiritual Favor, and what concerns Temporalls, is
only from thence extracted. Let us then weigh a little the importance of this
Promise, which the Apostle has rescued from suffering under any private
Interpretation, and set at liberty to the use of all Believers. To every one of
them then, God says directly and plainly, that he will never leave them nor
forsake them. If there should any Question arise, wehther he should be taken at
his word or no, Gen 3. 1.
it must be the Devil that must be entertained as an advocate against him.
Unbelief indeed has many pleas, and will have in the breasts of Saints
against closing with the Faithfulness of God in this Promise, and the Issue of
confidence in him, which from a due closing with it, would certainly flow. But
shall our unbelief make the truth of God of none effectreversed?? He has told
us that he will never leave us nor forsake us; The old Serpent, and some
arguing from him herein, are ready to say: yea, has God indeed said so? The
truth of it shall not indeed be surely so, it may be otherwise, for God does
know, that many cases may fall out, that you may be utterly rejected by him,
and cast out of his presence: you may have such oppositions rise against you in
your walking with him, as shall certainly overcome you and set you at Enmity
with him; or you may fully depart from him: and many such like pleadings will
Satan furnish the unbelief of Believers withal. If they are not sufficiently
taught by experience, what it is to give credit to Satan, endeavoring to
impair, and call in Question (upon any pretense what ever) the Faithfulness of
God and his Truth, when will they learn it? Surely they have little need to
join with their Adversaries for the weakening of their supportments, or the
impairing of their Consolations; Whereas there is an endeavor to make men
believe, that the denying any absolute unchangeable Promise of God unto
Believers makes much for their Comfort and Refreshment, it shall afterward be
considered in common, in reference also to those other Demonstrations of the
Saints Perseverance, that shall, God willing, be produced.

It will be excepted, that God will not forsake them, whilst they are
Believers; but if they forsake him, and fall from him, he is at liberty to
renounce them also. But that Gods not forsaking of any, is no more but a mere
non-rejection of them, shall afterward be disprooved. Whom he does not forsake
as a God in Covenant, to them does he continue his Presence, and toward them
exercises his Power and Allsufficiency for their Good. And if he can by his
Spirit and the Power of his Grace keep them whom he does not forsake, in a
state and Condition of not-forsaking him, he does forsake them, before they
forsake him, yea before he is said to forsake them. Gods not forsaking
Believers, is effectually preventive of that state and condition in them, on
the account whereof it is asserted that he may forsake them.

1 Samuel 12. 22. The truth we have under consideration is confirmed by the
Prophet in the name and Authority of God himself,. 3.
and the words wherein it is done, have the force of a Promise, being
declarative of the good will of God unto his people in Christ: For the Lord
will not forsake his People for his great Name sake, because it pleased the
Lord to make them his People.

The expression is the same with that, which the Lord gives his People of his
good will in the Covenant of Grace, Gen: 17. 1. Ierem. 31. 38, 39.
of which I have spoken before. Many may be their Calamityes, and Afflictions,
many their Trials and Temptations, many their Desertions, and Darknesses, but
God will not forsake them, he will not utterly cast them off for ever. That his
People are his People in Covenant, his secret ones, his Spiritual Church, the
remnant according to the Election Grace, has been before declared in the
handling of like places of Scripture. It is to vindicate this and the like
Promises from all surmises of failing and coming short of Accomplishment, that
the Apostle says, God has not cast away his People which he did foreknow.
Romans 11. 2. that is, He has made good this Promise to them: even to them among
the Jews, whom he did so foreknow; as also to Predestinate them to be
Conformed to the Image of his Son, Romans 9. 29. So out of all Israel Saving
all Israel, even the whole Israel of God. That a discriminating Purpose of God
is intended in that expression, has been already declared, and shall (the Lord
assisting) be farther manifested.

The Promise, as here mentioned, has a double use.

1. It is held out as an Inducement to Obedience,. 4.
to that whole People, in reference whereunto he tells them, that if they did
wickedly, they should be destroyed, both they and their king, v. 25. In the
dreadful threatenings that God denounces against wicked and impenitent ones,
he has an end to accomplish in reference to his Saints, unto his own: even to
make them know his terror, and to be acquainted with the Abomination of sin.
And in his Promises intended directly to them, he has designs to accomplish
upon the most wicked, and ungodly: even to discover his Approbation of that
which is Good, that they may be left inexcusable

2. It was a Testimony of his good will unto his secret ones; his Remnant, his
Residue, his brand out of the fire, unto his People called according to his
Eternal purpose, in the midst of his people by external profession, and of
his presence with them, under the accomplishment of the threatening mentioned
upon the generality of that Nation. He did not forsake them, when the people in
general, and their King were destroyed. What ever outward dispensation he
brings upon the whole, the Love and Grace of the Promise shall cerainly be
reserved for them, as, Isa. 4. v: 2, 3, 4. the remnant, the escaping of Israel,
those that were written unto life, shall obtain, when the rest are destroyed,
or hardened. So Ps: 89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37: If his children forsake
my Law, and walk not in my judgments, if they break my statutes, and keep
not my Commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with a rod, and
their iniquity with stripes; nevertheles my Loving-kindnesse will I not utterly
take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail: my Covenant will I not
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips: once have I sworn by
my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David; His seed shall endure for ever,
and his Throne as the Sun before me, it shall be established for ever, as
the Moon, and as the faithful witness in Heaven. Selah.

A supposall is made of such ways and walkings in the spiritual seed and
offspring of the Lord Christ, (which in the Psalm is typed out by David) that
the Lord will be as it were compelled to deal sharply with them, for their
iniquities and transgressions: yet his kindness, that shall abide with Christ,
in reference to the preservation of his seed; his Faithfulness, that shall not
fail, his Covenant, and his Oath shall be made good to the uttermost.

It is supposed, which is the worst that can be supposed, that in some degree,
at least for some season, they may forsake the Law, not keep the Commandments,
and profane the Statutes of God, which continues the burden of poor
Believers to this day: yet the worst that the Lord threatens them on this
account, when they might have expected, that he would have utterly cast off
such unthankful, unfruitful backsliders, poor creatures, is but this, I will
visit them with a rod, and with stripes; they shall have what ever comes within
the compass of correction or affliction: Rod and Stripes shall be on them, and
that whether outward correction, or inward desertion. but will the Lord proceed
no farther^ Will he not for ever cast them off, and ease himself of such a
provoking Generation? No, says the Lord: there lie five things in the way,
upon whose account I cannot so deal with them. All regard the same persons, as
is evident from the Antithesis that is in the discourse.

1. There is my Loving-kindnesse (says God) which is eternal, and
unchangeable: for I love them with an everlasting Love Ier. 31. 3. this I
cannot utterly take away, though it may be hid and eclipsed, as to the
appearance and influences of it, yet utterly it shall not be taken away as to
the reality of it. Though I chasten and correct them, yet my loving kindness
shall be continued to them. And then, (says he)

2. There is my Faithfulness, which I have engaged to them, which, whatever
they do* (that is, that I will suffer them to do, or that they may do upon
supposition of the Grace of the Covenant, Isa. 43. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
wherewith they are supplied) though they behave themselves very foolishly, and
frowardly, yet that I must take care of, that must not fail. 2 Timothy 2. 13. He
abides faithful, he cannot deny himself: And this Faithfulness (says God)
I have engaged in three things.

1. First, In my Covenant, that I have made with them to be their God, and
wherein I have promised that they shall be my People: wherein also I have made
plentiful provision of Mercy, and Grace for all their failings: and this must
not be broken, my Faithfulness is in it, and it must abide. My Covenant of
Peace that I make with them, is an everlasting Covenant: it is an everlasting
Covenant ordered in all things and sure. 2. Sam: 22.5. Ezekiel: 37. 26. it is a
Covenant of Peace an everlasting Covenant.

2. Secondly, In the thing that is come out of my lips, or the Grace and Love
I have spoken of in the Promise, herein also will I be Faithful, and that
shall not be altered: all my Promises are yea and amen in Jesus Christ. 2 Cor:
1. 20. And,

3. Lastly, All this I have confirmed by an Oath, I have sworn it by my
Holiness, Heb. 6. 18.
and I will not lie: so that in all these immutable things, wherein it is
impossible for God to deceive, he has treasured up strong consolation for them
that do believe. Though then the seed of Christ, which he is to see, upon the
account of his suffering for them ( Isa: 53. 10.) do sin and transgress,
yet God has put all these Gracious obligations upon himself, to reduce them
by Correction and Affliction, but never to proceed to final sentence of utter
Rejection.

To this purpose I say are the words in the place of Samuel now mentioned.. 5.


1. First, the matter of the Promise, or what he promises the People, is, he
will not forsake them. Gods not forsaking them, is not a bare not casting them
off, but an active continuance with them in love and mercy. He exercises not a
pure negative Act of his Will toward any thing, or person. Whom he hates not,
he loves: so Heb. 13. 5. these words, I will not forsake thee, hold out a
continual supply of all those wants, whereunto in our selves we are exposed,
and what from his presence we do receive. I will not forsake them, is, I will
continue my presence with them, a God in Covenant. so he expresleth his
presence with them. Isa. 27. 3. I the Lord do keep it, I do water it every
moment, least any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. He abides with his
vineyard, so as to keep it, and to preserve it from being destroyed. But may it
not at one time or other be surprised into desolation? No, says he, I will
keep it night and day: but what if this vineyard prove barren, what will he
then do? Nay but he will so deal with it, that it shall never be so barren,
as to cause him to cast it up. He is not with it for naught, his presence is
attended with Grace, and Kindness. I water it, (says he) and that not now and
then, but, every moment. He powers out fresh supplies of his Spirit upon it, to
make it fruitful. Thence it becomes a vineyard of red wine, v. 2. the best
wine, the most delicious, the most precious, to cheer the heart of God
himself, as Zep: 3. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he
will Save thee, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his Love,
he will joy over thee with singing. He causes them thereby that come of Jacob
to take root, he makes Israel blossom and bud, to fill the face of the World
with fruit. This is that which God promises his people; he will not forsake
them, he will always give them his presence, in the kindness and supplies of
a God in Covenant, to protect them from others, to make them fruitful to
himself: This is his not forsaking them: He will preserve them from others,
who shall take them out of his hand? he will make them fruitful to himself;
he will work, and who shall let him?

2. The Reason why the Lord will not forsake his People, why he will continue
doing them good, is expressed in these words for his own name sake, and in
this Assertion two things are considerable.

1. A tacit exclusion of any thing in themselves, for which, or upon
Consideration whereof God will constantly abide with them. It is not for their
sakes, for any thing in them, or what they have done, may, or can do, it is not
upon the account of any Condition, or qualification whatever, that may, or may
not be found on them, but merely for his name sake; which in the like case he
expresses fully Ezekiel. 36. 32. Not for your sakes do I this; says the Lord,
be it known unto you, be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, oh House
of Israel! The truth is, they may prove such, as on all accounts whatever shall
deserve to be rejected, that nothing in appearance, or in their own sense, as
well as others, though the root of the matter be in them, may be found upon
them, when God takes delight in them. Like those you have described at large.
Isai. 43. 22, 23, 24, 25. But thou have not called upon me Oh Jacob, but thou
have been weary of me Oh Israel, thou have not brought me the small Cattle of
thy burnt offerings, neither have thou honored me with thy Sacrifices, I have
not caused thee to serve with an Offering, nor wearied thee with Incense, thou
have brought me no sweet cane with money, neither have thou filled me with the
fat of thy Sacrifices, but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou
have wearied me with thine iniquities: I even I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins any more.
Weary of God they are, neglecting his worship, making his Patience and
Forbearance to serve with their iniquities. It seems to be impossible almost
for any Creature to apprehend, that God will not give them up to everlasting
confusion. Yea perhaps they may be forward in their follies, and contend with
God when he goes to heal them. Isai. 57. 17. For the iniquity of his
covetousness, was I wroth and smote him, I hid me and was wroth and he went on
forwardly in the way of his heart. Iniquity is upon them, a vile iniquity, the
iniquity of Covetousness. God is wroth with them, and smites, and hides him,
and they go on frowardly: and yet for all this he forsakes not for ever, he
abides to be their God, and that because his so doing is not bottomed on any
consideration of what they are, have been, or will be, but he does it for his
Names sake, and with regard unto that, which thereupon he will do for them.
And upon this account, this Promise of Gods abiding and continuing with his,
let Grace be never so weak, corruption never so strong, temptations never so
violent, may be pleaded, and the Lord rejoices to be put in remembrance of it
by the weakest, frailest, sinfullest Saint, or Believer in the World.

2. The Cause or reason is positively expressed,: 6.
why God will not forsake them, it is, for his Great Name sake. His Great name
is all that he consults withal, about his continuance with his people: this he
calls himself Isa. 43. 25. I blot out thy sins for my own sake: that is for
no other cause in world that may by found in thee, or upon thee. The Name of
God is all that whereby to us he is known; all his Attributes, his whole will,
all his Glory. When God is said to do any thing for his name, it is either the
Cause and End of what he does, or the Principle from whence, with the motive
wherefore he does it, that is by him intended. In the first sense, to do a
thing for his Name sake, is to do it for the manifestation of his Glory, that
he may be known to be a God, in the Excellency of those Perfections, whereby he
reveals himself to his, with (most frequently) a special regard to his
Faithfulness and Grace: it is in those properties to make himself known, and
to be exalted in the hearts of his. So all his dispensations in Jesus Christ
are for the praise of his glorious Grace. Ephesians. 1. 6. That he may be exalted,
lifted up, made known, believed, and received as a God pardoning iniquity, in
the Son of his Love. And in this sense may the Lord be said to abide with his
people for his Name sake; for the exalting of his Glory; that he may be known
to be a God faithful in Covenant, and unchangeable in his Love, who will not
cast off for ever, those whom he has once received into favor. It will not
enter into the hearts of Believers sometimes, why the Lord should so deal with
them as he does, and not cast them off; their souls may go to rest as to this
thing: he himself is glorious herein; he is exalted and does it on that
account 2ly. If by his name you understand the principle from whence he
works, and his motive thereunto, as it comprehends the whole long-suffering,
gracious, tender, unchangeable nature of God, according as he has revealed
himself in Jesus Christ, in whom his name is, Ex. 23. 21. and which he has
committed to him to be manifested. Ioh: 17. 6. so evidently two things in God
are engaged, when he promises to work for his Names sake, or according to his
great Name.

1. His Power or sufficiency: Upon the engagement of the Name of God on his
peoples behalf, Moses carefully pleads this latter, or part thereof. Number: 14.
17, 18, 19. God has given his Name unto his people: and this is wrapped up in
that mercy, that he will lay out his Power to pardon, heal, and do them good
in his preserving of them, and abiding with them: Let thy Power be great,
according as thou have spoken, the Lord is long suffering: and as when he
works for his name, the way whereby he will do it, is according to the
greatness of his Power; so the fountain and rise, from whence he will do it,
is,

2. His Goodness, Ioh. 17. 3, 26
Kindness, Love, Patience, Mercy, Grace, Faithfulness in Jesus Christ. Psalm.
22. 22.
And thus under the title of his Name, does he call poor afflicted, Psalm. 63.
4.
dark, hopeless, helpelesse Creatures, (upon any other account in the World)
persons ready to be swallowed up in disconsolation and sorrow, Psalm. 69. 30.
to rest upon him. Isa: 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, and
obeys the voice of his Servant, that walks in darkness and has no light,
let him trust in the name of the Lord and stay upon his God. When all other
holds are gone, when flesh fails, and heart fails, then does God call poor
souls to rest upon this Name of his. So the Psalmist Psalm: 73. 26. My flesh,
and my heart fails, (all strength, natural and spiritual, fails and is
gone) but God is the strength of my heart (says he) and my portion for ever.
Now this is the sole motive also of Gods continuance with his: He will do it,
because he himself is good, gracious, merciful, loving, tender: and he will
lay out these Properties to the utmost in their behalf, that it may be well
with them, lifting up, exalting, and making himself Gracious in so doing. This
the Lord emphatically expresses five times in one verse, Isa. 46. 4. ^ven to
your old age I am he, even to hoary hairs, will I carry you, I have made, and
I will bear, I will carry and will deliver you: this then I say is the reason,
and only ground: This the principal aim and End, upon the account whereof the
Lord will not forsake his People.

3. The Rise of all this Goodness,. 7.
Kindness, Faithfulness of God to his People, as to the exercise of it, is
also expressed: and that is, his own good pleasure, because it has pleased the
Lord to make you his People. This is the spring, and fountain of all the
goodness mentioned. God is essentially in himself of a good, gracious, and
loving nature, but he acts all these properties, as to works that outwardly are
of him, according to the Counsel of his Will, Ephesians: 1. 11. according to the
Purpose which he purposes in himself, and his Purposes all of them have no
other rise, or cause, but his own good pleasure. Why did the Lord make us his
People, toward whom he might act according to the Gracious Properties of his
nature, yea and lay them forth and exercise them to the utmost on our behalf?
Was it because we were better then others? did his Will? walked with him? Did
he declare we should be his People upon condition we did so and so? Not on any
of these, or the like grounds of proceeding does he do this, but merely
because it pleases him to make us his People. Mat: 11. 26. and shall we think
that he who took us to be his People, notwithstanding our universal alienation
from him, on the account of his own good pleasure, which caused him to make us
his People, (that is obedient, believing, separated from the World) will, upon
any account, being himself Unchangeable, not perserve us in, but reject us
from that Condition? Thus is God's Mercy in not forsaking his People, resolved
into its original principle, viz. his own good-pleasure in choosing of them,
carried on by the Goodness and Unchangeablenesse of his own Nature to the
appointed Issue. This then is the sum of this Argument. What work or Design
the Lord enters upon merely from his own good pleasure, or solely in answer
to the Purpose, which he purposes in himself, and engages to continue in
Mercy for his Name sake, thereby taking upon him to remove, or prevent what
ever might hinder the accomplishment of that Purpose, Work, or Design of his,
that he will abide in unchangeable to the end. But this is the state of the
Lords undertaking to abide with his People, as has been manifested at large.

Let us add in the next place that of the Psalmist,. 8.
Ps. 23. 4, 6. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear none evil, for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff does comfort me:
Surely Goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I will
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. The Psalmist expresses an exceeding
confidence in the midst of most inexpressible troubles and pressures. He
supposes himself walking through the valley of the shadow of death, as death is
the worst of evils and comprehensive of them all, so the shadow of death is
the most dismal and dark Representation of those evils to the Soul, and the
valley of that shadow the most dreadful bottom and depth of that
Representation. This then the Prophet supposed, that he may be brought into a
condition, wherein he may be overwhelmed with sad apprehensions of the comeing
of a confluence of all manner of evils upon him, and that not for a short
season, but he may be necessitated to walk in them, which denotes a state of
some continuance, a conflicting with most dismal evils and in their own
nature tending to death, is in the supposall. What then would he do if he
should be brought into this estate? Says he, even in that condition, in such
distress, wherein I am to my own, and the eyes of others, hopeless,
helpelesse, gone and lost, I will fear none evil. A noble resolution, if
there be a sufficient bottom and foundation for it, that it may not be
accounted rashness and groundless confidence, but true Spiritual courage,
and holy Resolution. Says he, it is because the Lord is with me: But alas!
what if the Lord should now forsake thee in this Condition, and give thee up to
the power of thine enemies, and suffer thee by the strength of thy Temptations,
wherewith thou art beset, to fall utterly from him? Surely then thou would
be swallowed up for ever; the waters would go over thy Soul, and thou must for
ever lie down in the shades of death. Yea but (says he,) I have an assurance
of the contrary, Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.

But this is (say some) a very desperate persuasion. If thou art sure that
Goodness, and Mercy shall follow thee all the days of thy life, then live as
thou please, as loosly as flesh can desire, as wickedly as Satan can prompt
thee to: Certainly this perwasion is fit only to ingenerate in thee an high
contempt of humble and close walking with God. What other conclution can' st
thou possibly make of that presumption, but only that, I may then do what I
please, what I will; let the flesh take its swing in all abominations, it
matters not, Goodness and Mercy shall ^ollow me. Alas! says the Psalmist,
these thoughts never come in my heart: I find this persuasion through the
Grace of him, in whom it is, effectual to ingenerate contrary Resolutions.
This is that which I am upon the account thereof, determined on, I will dwell
in the house of God for ever: seeing Goodness and Mercy shall follow me, I
will dwell in his house; and seeing they shall follow me all the days of my
life, I will dwell in his House for ever.

There are then these two things in this last verse,. 9.
pregnant to the purpose in hand.

1. The Psalmist's assurance of the presence of God with him for ever, and that
in kindness and pardoning Mercy, upon the account of his Promise unto him;
Goodness or benignity (says he) shall follow me, into every Condition, to
assist me, and extricate my Soul, even out of the valley of the shadow of
death. A conclusion like that of Paul. 2 Timothy 4. 18. The Lord shall deliver me
from every evil wor^, and will preserve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom. Having
( v. 17.) given testimony of the Presence of God with him in his great trial,
when he was brought before that devouring monster Nero, giving him deliverance,
he manifests in the 18. v. that the Presence of God with him was not only
effectual for one or an other deliverance, but that it will keep him from
every evil work, not only from the rashness, cruelty, and oppression of
others, but also from any such way or works of his own, which should lay a
bar against his enjoyments of, and complete preservation unto that Heavenly
Kingdom, whereunto he was appointed.

What reason now can be imagined, why other Saints of God, who have the same
Promise with David and Paul established unto them in the hand of the same
Mediator, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
being equally taken into the same Covenant of Mercy and Peace with them, may
not make the same conclusion of Mercy with them; viz. That the Mercy, and
Goodness of God will follow them all the days of their lives that they shall be
delivered from every evil work, and preserved to God's Heavenly kingdom. To
fly here to immediate Revelation as though God had particularly, and
immediately assured some persous of their Perseverance, which begat in them a
confidence, wherein others may not share with them, besides that it is
destructive of all the vigor and strength of sundry, if not all the Arguments,
produced against the Saints Perseverance, it is not in this place of any
weight, or at all relative to the business in hand. For evident it is, that
one of them even David, is thus confident upon the common account of Gods
Relation unto all his Saints, as he is their Shepherd: one that takes care of
them, and will see, not only whilst they abide with him, that they shall have
Pasture and refreshment, but also will find them out in their wanderings and
will not suffer any of them to be utterly lost. And he is a Shepherd equally
in care and love to every one of his Saints, as he was to David. He gives them
all the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3.
even the Mercy contained and wrapped up in the Promise that was given to them,
and what by virtue thereof, he did enjoy, with what he received from God in
that Covenant Relation wherein he stood. And for Paul, it is most evident that
he grounded his Confidence and Consolation, merely upon the general Promise of
the Presence of God with his, that he will never leave them nor forsake them,
but be their God, and guide even unto death. Neither is there the least
intimation of any other bottom of his Consolation herein. Now these being
things wherein every Believer, even the weakest in the world, has an equal
share and interest with Paul, David, or any of the Saints in their generations,
what should lie in their way, but that they also may grow up to this assurance,
being called thereunto. I say they may grow up unto it: I do not say that
every believer can with equal assurance of mind thus make their boasts in the
Lord, and the continuance of his kindness to them. The Lord knows we are
oftentimes weak, and dark, and at no small loss even as to the main of our
interest in the Promises of God: But there being an equal certainty in the
things themselves, of which we speak, it being as certain that the Goodness
and Mercy of God shall follow them all their days, as it did David, and as
certain that God will deliver them from every evil work, and preserve them
to his Heavenly kingdom as he did Panl, they also may grow up unto, and ought
to press after the like Assurance and Consolation With them, whom Goodness
and Mercy shall follow all their days, and who shall be of God preserved from
every evil work, they can never fall totally and finally out of the Favor of
God: That this is the state and Condition of Believers is manifested from the
Instances given of David, and Paul, testifying their full persuasion and
assurance concerning that Condition, on Grounds common to them with all
Believers.

2. The conclusion and inference thar the Psalmist makes,. 10.
from the Assurance which he had of the Continuance of the Goodness, and
Kindness of God unto him, follows in the words insisted on, All the days
of his life, he would dwell in his House. He would for ever give up himself
unto his Worship and service, seeing this is the case of my Soul that God will
never forsake me, let me answer this Loye of God in my constant obedience. Now
this conclusion follows from the former principle upon a twofold account.

1. As it is a motive unto it. The Continuance of the Goodness, and Kindness
of God unto a Soul is a constreining motive unto that Soul to continue with
him in Love, Service and Obedience: It works powerfully upon a heart any way
enobled with the ingenuity of Grace, to make a suitable return, as far as
possible it can, to such eminent Mercy and Goodness. I profess, I know not
what those men think the Saints of God to be, who suppose them apt to make
conclusions of wantonness and rebellion, upon the account of the Steadfastness
of the Love and Kindness of God to them. I shall not judge any, as to their
state and Condition: yet I cannot but think, that such men's prejudices, and
fullness of their own persuasions do exceedingly interpose in their Spirits,
from receiving that impression of this Grace of God, which in its own nature
it is apt to give; or it would be impossible they should once imagine, that of
it self it is apt to draw the Spirits of men into a neglect and contempt of
God.

2. As the end of God intended in giving that assurance, to the effecting
whereof it is exceedingly operative and effectual; so you have it Luke 1. 74,
75. This is the intendment of God in confirming his Oath and Promise unto us,
that he may grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear, in righteousness and holiness all the
days of our lives. Now though these forementioned, with many other Texts of
Scripture, are plain, evident, and full to the business we have in hand; yet
the Adversaries of this truth having theirhands so full with them that are
commonly urged, that they cannot attend unto them, I shall not need to spend
time in their vindication from exceptions, which none, that I know, have as yet
brought in against them (though, upon their principles, they might possibly be
invented) but shall leave them to be mixed with faith, according as God by his
Spirit shall set them home upon the souls of them, who do consider them.

The whole 125. Ps. might in the next place be brought in,. 11.
to give Testimony to the truth in hand. I shall only take a Proof from the
first verses of it. They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, which
cannot be removed; as the mountains round about Jerusalem, so is the Lord
round about his people from henceforth even for ever. whereunto answers that
of Ps: 37. 28. The Lord loves judgment, and forsakes not his Saints, they are
preserved for ever. as also Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Yea he loves his people, all his
Saints are in thy hand. In the verses named, I shall a little fix upon two
things conducing to our purpose, which are evidently contained in them.

1. A Promise of Gods everlasting presence with his Saints, Believers, them
that trust in him; and their steadfastness thereupon, they shall be as mount
Sion that can never be removed, and that, because the Lord is round about them,
and that for ever.

2. An allusive comparison of both these, both their stability, and Gods
presence with them, given for the encouragement of weak Believers, with
special regard to the days wherein the Promise was first made, which actually
also belongs to them, on whom the ends of the World are fallen. The Psalmist
bids them (as it were) lift up their eyes, and look upon mount Sion, and the
hills that were round about Jerusalem, and tells them that God will as
certainly, and assuredly continue with them, and give them establishment, as
those hills and mountains which they beheld round about, abide in their
places: so that it shall be as impossible for all the powers of Hell to remove
them out of the Favor of God, as for a man to pluck up mount Sion by the
roots, or to overturne the foundations of the Mountains, that stand round
about Jerusalem. It is true, the Holy Ghost has special regard to the
oppositions and Temptations that they were to undergo from men, but bears also
an equal regard to all other means of separating them from their God; It
would be a matter of small consolation unto them, that men should not prevail
over them for ever, if in the mean time there be other more close and
powerful Adversaries, who may cast them down with a perpetual destruction.
Some few considerations of the intendment of the place, will serve for the
enforcing of our Argument from this portion of Scripture.

1. That which is here promised the Saints,. 12.
is a perpetual preservation of them in that condition wherein they are, both
on the part of God, he is round about them, even henceforth and for ever, and
on their parts, they shall not be removed; that is, from the state and conditon
of acceptance with him, wherein they are supposed to be, but abide for ever
and continue therein immovable unto the end. It is (I say) a plain Promise of
their continuance in that condition, wherein they are, with their safety from
thence, and not a Promise of some other good thing, provided that they continue
in that condition. Their being compared to Mountains, and their Stability,
which consists in their being and Continuing so, will admit no other sense. As
Mount Sion abides in its condition, so shall they: and as the Mountains about
Jerusalem continue, so does the Lord his presence unto them.

2. That expression which is used v. 2. is weighty and full to this purpose,
The Lord is round about his People henceforth and for ever. What can be spoken
more fully, more pathetically? Can any expression of men so set forth the truth
which we have in hand? The Lord is round about them, not to save them from this
or that incursion, but from all: not from one or two evils, but from every
one, whereby they are, or may be assaulted. He is with them and round about
them, on every side, that no evil shall come nigh them. It is a most full
expression of universal preservation, or of Gods keeping his Saints in his
Love and Favor, upon all accounts whatsoever. And that not only for a season,
but it is, henceforth from his giving this Promise unto their Souls in
particular, and their receiving of it in all Generations, according to their
appointed times, even for ever.

Some few exceptions,. 13.
with a great surplusage of words and phrases, to make them seem some other
things, then what have been formerly insisted on again and again, are
advanced by Mr Goodwin, to overturne this Sion, and to cast down the
mountains that are about Jerusalem. Chapter 11. Sect. 9. page: 230, 231, 232. The
sum of our Argument from hence, as of the intendment of this place, is this:
Those whom the Lord will certainly preserve for ever in the state and conditon
of trusting in him, they shall never be forsaken of him, nor separated from
him. The latter clause of this Proposition is that which we contend for, the
whole of that whose proof is incumbent on us: of this, the former part is a
sufficient basis and foundation: being comprehensive of all that is, or can be
required to the unquestionable establishment thereof: from the Letter of the
Text we assume; But God will certainly preserve for ever all his Saints that
put their Trust in him, in their so doing, that they shall not be altered, or
cast down from that state and conditon: Change but the figurative expressions
in the Text, and the Allusions used for the accommodation of their Faith in
particular, to whom this Promise was first given, into other terms of a direct
and proper significancy, and the Text and the Assumption of our Argument will
appear to be the same; whence the conclusion intended will undeniably follow:
unto this clear deduction of the Truth contended for, from this place of
Scripture, the Discourse ensuing in the place mentioned, is opposed.

1. The Promise only assures them that trust in the Lord, that they shall be
preserved, but not at all that they that trust in him, shall be necessitated to
do so still, or that so they shall do. So Paul says, it was in my heart to
live and dye with the Corinthians: but doubtless with this proviso, that they
always continued such as they then were, or as he apprehended them to be, when
he so wrote to them.

Ans. I must be forced to smite this evasion once and again, before we arrive
at the close of this contest, it being so frequently made use of by our
Adversary, who without it, knows himself not able to stand against the
evidence of any one Promise usually insisted on. This is the substance of all
that, which with exceeding delightful variety of expressions, is an hundred
times made use of. The Promise is conditional, and made to those that trust in
the Lord, and is to be made good only upon the account of their continuing so
to do: but that they shall so do, that they shall continue to trust in the
Lord, that is wholly left to themselves, and not in the least undertaken in the
Promise; and this is called a discharging or dismissing of places of Scripture,
from the service whereunto (contrary to their proper sense and meaning) they
are pressed, a delivering them from the bearing the cross of this warfare,
with such like Imperial terms and expressions. To speak in the singleness
of our spirits, we cannot see any one of the discharged Soldiers, returning
from the Camp, wherein they have long served for the safety and consolation of
them that do believe. Particularly this Scripture detests the gloss with
violence imposed on it, and tells you, that the end for which the God of truth
sent it into this service, wherein it abides, is to assure them that trust in
the Lord, that they shall be preserved in that condition to the end. That in
the condition of trusting and depending on God, they shall be as Sion, and the
Favor of God unto them as immovable mountains, he will for ever be with them
and about them: And that all this shall certainly come to pass, Christ does
not say, that they shall be as established mountains, if they continue to
trust in the Lord, but they shall be so in their trusting, abiding for ever
therein, through the safegarding presence of God. For their being necessitated
to continue trusting in the Lord, there is not any thing in Text, or in our
Argument from thence, or in the doctrine we maintain, that requires or will
admit of any such proceeding of God, as by that expression is properly
signified. Indeed there is a contradiction in terms, if they are used to the
same pupose: to Trust in the Lord, is the voluntary free act of the creature:
to be necessitated unto this Act, and in the performance of it, so that it
should be done necessarily as to the manner of its doing, is wholly destructive
to the nature and being of it. That God can effectually, and infallibly as to
the event, cause his Saints to continue trusting in him, without the least
abridgement of their liberty, yea that he does so eminently by heightning and
advancing their spiritual liberty, shall be afterward declared: if by
necessitated to continue trusting, not the manner of Gods operation with, and
in them, for the compassing of the end poposed, and the efficacy of his Grace,
whereby he does it (commonly decryed under those terms) be intended; but only
the certainty of the issue, rejecting the impropriety of the expression, the
thing it self we affirm to be here promised of God. But is urged,

2. That this Promise is not made unto the Persons of any,: 14.
but merely unto their Qualifications: like that, he that believes shall be
saved, it is made to the Grace of Trusting, Obedience, and walking with God,
for threatenings are made to the evil Qualifications of men.

Ans. This it seems then we are come unto, and what farther progress may be
made the Lord knows. The Gracious Promises of God, made to his Church, his
People; in the blood of Jesus, on which they have rolled themselves with safety
and security in their several generations, are nothing but bare declarations
of the will of God; what he allows, and what he rejects: with the firm
concatenation that is between Faith and salvation, Obedience and reward. And
this it seems is the only use of them: which if it be so, I dare boldly say,
that all the Saints of God from the foundations of the World, have most
horribly abused his Promises, and forced them to other ends, then ever God
intended them for. Doubtless all those blessed souls, who are fallen a sleep
in the Faith of Jesus Christ, having drawn refreshment from these breasts of
Consolation, could they be summoned to give in their experience of what they
have found in this kind, they would with one mouth profess that they found
far more in them, then mere conditional declarations of the will of God:
Yea that they received them in Faith, as the engagement of his heart and good
will toward them, and that he never failed in the accomplishment and
performance of all the good mentioned in them: neither will that emphaticall
expression in the close of the second verse, (which being somewhat too rough
for our Author to handle, he left it quite out) bear any such sense. That the
Promises of the Covenant are made originally to Persons, and not to
Qualifications, has been in part already proved, and shall be farther evinced,
(God assisting) as occasion shall be offered in the ensuing discourse: The
Promises are to Abraham and his seed: and some of them (as has been declared)
are the springs of all Qualifications whatever, that are acceptable unto God:
what be the Qualifications of Promises of opening blind eyes, taking away stony
hearts, etc. has not as yet been declared. But it is farther argued.

3. That this and the like Promises are to be interpreted according to the rule
which God has given for the interpretation and understanding of his
threatenings unto Nations about temporal things, and his Promises that are of
the same import; which we have Jer. 18. 7, 8. Plainly affirming that all their
accomplishment depends on some conditions in the Persons, or Nations, against
whom they are denounced.

Ans. God forbid! shall those Promises which are branches of the everlasting
Covenant of Grace, Heb. 7. 23.
called better Promises then those of the old Covenant upon the account of
their infallible accomplishment, 2 Cor: 1. 20.
ratified in the blood of Christ, made yea and amen in him the witness of the
Faithfulness of God to his Church, 2 Pet. 1. 3.
and grand Supporter of our Faith, exceeding great and precious; shall they be
thought to be of no other sense and interpretation, to make no other Revelation
of the Father unto us, but in that kind, which is common to threatenings of
Judgments (expressly conditional) for the deterring men from their impious and
destructive courses? I say, God forbid. To put it then to an issue. God here
promises that they who here trust in him shall never be remooved. What (I
pray) is the Condition, on which this Promise does depend? It is say they who
oppose us in this, if they continue trusting in him: that is, if they be not
removed; for to trust in him, is, not to be removed; if then they be not
removed, they shall not be removed; and is this the mind of the Holy Ghost?
Notwithstanding all the Rhetoric in the world, this Promise will stand for
the consolation of them that believe, as the Mountains about Jerusalem that
shall never be removed.

In some it is said to be a Promise of abiding in Happiness,. 15.
not in Faith: but it plainly appears to be a Promise of abiding in trusting
the Lord; which comprehends both our Faith and Happiness

Ob. It is not promised, that they who once trust in the Lord, shall abide
happy, though they cease to trust in him.

Ans. It is a Promise that they shall not cease to trust in him:

Ob. It is not that they shall be necessitated to abide trusting in him.

Ans. No, but it is that they shall be so far assisted and effectually wrought
upon, as certainly to do it.

Ob. It is no more then the Apostle says to the Corinthians 2 Cor. 2. 3. which
frame toward them he would not continue, should they be changed and turned
into Idolaters and Blasphemers.

Ans. First, the Promises of God, and the affections of men are but ill
compared. 2. Paul loved the Corinthians, whilst they were such as he mentioned;
God promises his Grace to Believers, that they may continue such as he loves.

Ob. All the Promises are made to Qualifications, not to Persons.

Ans. Prove that, and 1. Take the case in hand; and 2. Cast down the Church to
the ground, it having no one Promise on that account made unto it, as
consisting of Abraham's Seed: and so this witness also is freed from all
exceptions put in against it, and appears with confidence to give in its
Testimony to the Unchangeableness of God unto Believers.

I shall in the next place adjoine another portion of Scripture of the same
import with those foregoing,. 16.
wherein the truth in hand is no less clearly, and somewhat more pathetically,
and convincingly expressed the^ in that last mentioned. It is Isa. 54. 7, 8, 9,
10. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great Mercies will I
gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have Mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.
For this is as the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that the Waters
of Noah shall no more cover the Earth, so have I sworn that I will not be
wrath with thee, nor rebuke thee: for the Mountains shall depart and the hills
be removed, but my Loving-kindnesse shall not depart from thee, neither shall
the Covenant of my Peace be removed, says the Lord that has Mercy on thee.
The place I have mentioned before, but only as to one special inference from
one passage in the words, I shall now use the whole for the confirmation of the
general Truth we plead for; the words are full, plain, suited to the
business in hand. No expressions of our finding out, can so fully reach the
Truth we assert, much less so pathetically work upon the Affections of
Believers, or so effectually prevail on their understandings to receive the
Truth contained in them, as these words of God himself, given us for those
ends, are suited to do. Go to men, whose minds in any measure are free from
prejudice, not forestalled with a contrary persuasion, and furnished with
evasions for the defense of their opinions, and ask whether God does not in
these words directly and positively promise to those, to whom he speaks, that
he will always continue his kindness to them, to the end: and that for the
days of eternity his Love shall be fixed on them: and I no way doubt but they
will readily answer, It is so indeed, it cannot be denied. But seeing we have
to deal, as with our own unbelieving hearts, so with men who have turned every
stone to prejudge this Testimony of God, the words must a little more narrowly
be considered, and the mind of the Holy Ghost inquired into.

V. 5. mention is made of the desertion of the Church,: 17.
by the eclipsing of the beams of Gods countenance, and the inflicting of some
great affliction for a season: in opposition unto which momentary desertions,
in that, and in the beginning of the 8. v. he gives in Consolation from the
Assurance of the great Mercies, and Everlasting Kindness, wherein he abides
to do them good; with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, I will
pardon, pity, and heal thee, with that mercy which flows from Love, which
never had beginning, that never shall have ending, that cannot be cut off,
Everlasting Kindness. Bear with patience your present desertion, your present
trialls, whatever they are that befall you, they are but for a season, but for
a moment, and these also consistent with that Mercy and Kindness, which is
everlasting, and turns not away; If this Mercy and Kindness depends on any
thing in us, and is resolved lastly thereunto, which may alter and change every
moment, as our walking with God in its self considered, not relating to the
Unchangeablenesse of his Purpose, and the efficacy of his promised Grace, is
apt to do; what opposition can there be betwixt that desertion wherewith they
are exercised, and the kindness wherewith they are embraced, as to their
continuance? As that is said to be for a little while, for a moment, so this
also may be of no longer abode: It may possibly be as Jonah's Gourd, that grew
up in the morning, and before night was withered; what then shall become of the
foundation of that consolation, wherewith God here refreshes the souls of his
people, consisting in the continuance of his kindness, in an Antithesis to the
moment arinesse of their desertion.

Least that any should call this into Question,. 18.
(as our unbelieving hearts are very apt, and skillful in putting in pleas
against the truth of the Promises of God, and their accomplishment toward us)
v. 9. the Lord farther confirms the Assurance formerly given, and removes
those objections, to which through the Sophistry of Satan, and the Sottishness
of our own hearts, it may seem to be liable. This is (says he) as the waters
of Noah: Gods dealing with the^ in that mercy, which flows from his
everlasting kindness, is like his dealing with the World in the matter of the
waters of Noah, or the flood wherewith it was drowned and destroyed, when he,
with his, were saved in the Arc. He calls upon his Children to consider his
dealings with the World in respect of the flood, I have sworn, (says he)
(that is, I have entered into a covenant to that end, which was wont to be
confirmed with an Oath, and God being absolutely faithful in his covenant, is
said to swear thereunto, though there be no express mention of any such
oath,) that the World should no more be so drowned as then it was: now (says
God) see my Faithfulness herein, it has never been drowned since, nor ever
shall be; with equal Faithfulness have I engaged (even in Covenant) that that
kindness, which I mentioned to thee, shall always be continued, so that I
will not be wroth to rebuke thee, (that is) so as utterly to cast thee off, as
the World was when it was drowned. But some may say, before the flood the Earth
was filled with violence, and sin: and should it be so again, would it not
bring another flood upon it? Has he said he will not drown it,
notwithstanding any interposall of sin, wickedness, or rebellion whatever?
Yea, says he, such is my Covenant; I took notice in my first engagement
therein, that the Imagination of man's heart would be evil from his youth. Gen:
8. 21. and yet I entered into that solemn Covenant; so that this exemption of
the World from an universal deluge is not an Appendix to the obedience of the
World, which has been upon some accounts more wicked since, then before; (as
in the crucifying of Christ the Lord of Glory, and in rejecting of him being
preached unto them) but it solely leans upon my Faithfulness in keeping
Covenant, and my Truth in the accomplishment of the Oath, that I have solemnly
entered into: So is my kindness to you; I have made express provision for your
sins and failings therein; such I will preserve you from, as are inconsistent
with my kindness to you, and such will I pardon, as you are overtaken withal.
When you see an universal deluge covering the face of the Earth, (that is, God
unfaithful to his Oath and Covenant) then, and not till then, suppose that his
kindness can be turned from Believers.

Something is excepted against this Testimony,. 19.
Ch: 11. Sect: 4 Page: 227. but of so little importance, that it is scarce worth
while to turn aside to the consideration of it. The sum is, that this place
speaks only of Gods Faithfulness in his Covenant; but that this should be
the Tenor of the Covenant, that they who once truly believed, should by God
infallibly, and by a strong hand, against all interposalls of sin,
wickedness, or rebellion, be preserved in such a Faith, is not by any word,
syllable, or Iota intimated.

Ans. This is that which is repeated usque ad nauseam; and were it not for
variety of expressions, wherewith some men do abound, to adorn it, it would
appear extreme beggarly and over-worne; but a sorry shift (as they say) is
better then none, or doubtless in this place it had not been made use of. For,

1. This Testimony is not called forth to speak immediately, to the
continuance of Believers in their Faith, but to the continuance and
unchangeablenesse of the Love of God to them; and consequentially only to their
preservation in Faith upon that account.

2. It is not only assumed at a cheap, and very low rate or price, but clearly
gratis supposed, that Believers may make such interposalls of Sin,
Wickedness, and Rebellion in their walking with God, as should be inconsistent
with the continuance of his Favor and Kindness to them, according to the
tenor of the Covenant of Grace. His Kindness and Favor being to us things
extrinsecall, our sins are not opposed unto them really and directly, as
though they might effectually infringe an Act of the Will of God, but only
meritoriously; now when God says, that he will continue his kindness to us
for ever, notwithstanding the demerit of Sin, as is plainly intimated in that
Allusion to the Waters of Noah, for any one to say that they may fall into such
Sins and Rebellions, as that He cannot but turn his Kindness from them, is
a bold attempt for the violation of his Goodness and Faithfulness, and a
plain begging of the thing in Question. Certainly it is not a pious labor to
thrust with violence such supposalls into the Promises of God, as will stop
those breasts from giving out any consolation, when no place or room for them
does at all appear: there being not one word, syllable, Iota, or tittle of any
such supposalls in them.

3. The Exposition and Gloss, that is given of these words, namely, that upon
conditon of their Faithfulness and Obedience, which, notwithstanding any thing
in this or any other Promise, they may turn away from, he will engage himself
to be a God to them, is such, as no Saint of God, without the help of Satan
and his own unbelief, could affixe to the place, neither will that at all
assist: which

4. Is affirmed, namely, that in all Covenants (and his Promise holds out a
Covenant) there must be a condition on both sides; For we willingly grant that
in this Covenant of Grace, God does promise something to us, and requires
something of us; and that these two have mutual dependence one upon another.
But we also affirm that in the very Covenant it self, God has graciously
promised to work effectually in us those things, which he requires of us; and
that therein it mainly differs from the Covenant of Works, which he has
abolished. But such a Covenant, as wherein God should Promise to be a God unto
us, upon a condition by us, and in our own strength to be fulfilled, and on the
same account continued in unto the end, we acknowledge not, nor can whilst our
hearts have any sense of the Love of the Father, the Blood of the Son, of the
Grace of the Holy Spirit, the fountains thereof. Notwithstanding then any
thing that has been drawn forth in opposition to it, Faith may triumph from
the Love of God in Christ, held out in this Promise to the full assurance of an
everlasting Acceptance with him; for God also willing yet more abundantly to
give in consolation in this place, to the heirs of the Promis, assures the
stability of his Love and kindness to them by another allusion. v. 10. The
Mountains (says he) shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed,
says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. He bids them consider the
mountains and hills, and suppose that they may be removed, and depart;
suppose that the most unlikely things in the World shall come to pass, whose
accomplishment none can judge possible, while the World endures, yet my
kindness to thee is such, as shall not fall within those supposalls, which
concern things of such an impossibility. I am exceeding conscious, that all
Paraphrasing, or Exposition of the words that may be used for their
Accommodation to the Truth we plead for, does but darken and Eclipse the Light
and Glory, which in and by themselves, to a believing soul, they cast upon it.
Now least any should think, that there is the least tendency in such Promises
as these (as held out to Believers) to turn them aside from close walking with
God, before I enter upon the consideration of any other (this seeming of all
others most exposed to Exceptions of that nature) I shall give some few
Observations, that may a little direct Believers, to whom I write, and for
whose sake this task is undertaken, into the right improvement of them.

The genuine influence which this,. 20.
and the like Promises have upon the souls of the Saints, is, mightily to
stir them up unto, and to assist them in answering, what lies in them, that
inexpressible Love and Kindness, which their God and Father in Jesus Christ,
holds out unto their hearts in them: This the Apostle infers from them. 2
Cor: 7. 1. Having these Promises (that is those especially mentioned in the
words preceding the conclusion, and the inference the Apostle here makes, Chapter
6. v. 16, 18. I will dwell in them, and will be a Father unto them, and they
shall be my children) therefore (says he) let us cleanse our selves from all
pollution of slesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord.
Universal purity, holiness, and close walking with God, is that which these
Promises do press unto, and naturally promote in the hearts of Believers: and
in 2 Pet. 4. 5, 6. that Apostle pursues the same at large; God has called us
to Glory and Virtue, has given us exceeding great and precious Promises, that
by these you might be partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the
corruption, that is in the World through lust: Besides this giving all
diligence etc The exceeding great and precious Promises, which are given unto
us, in our calling, are bestowed for this end, that by them we may be made
partakers of the Divine Nature; they have no tendency to communicate to us the
Nature of the Devil, and to stir us up to Rebellion, Uncleanness, and
hatred of the God of all that Love that is in them; But lie indeed, at the
bottom, the Root, and foundation of the practice and exercise of all those
Graces, which he enumerates, and from the receiving of those Promises, exhorts
us to, in the following verse. Some (...) ^^^fesse do, or may turn the Grace
of God into lasciviousness; that is (...) ^^trine of grace, and of pardon of
sin in the blood of Jesus Christ; and so the mercy mentioned in such Promises
as these, (merely as in them it is mentioned) Grace and Mercy communicated,
cannot be turned into Wantonness; but what are they that do so? Ungodly men,
men of old ordained to condemnation; Jude 4. Paul rejects any such thoughts
from the hearts of Believers, Romans 6. 1. Shall we continue in sin, that Grace
may abound? God forbid! Nay suppose that that natural corruption, that flesh
and blood that is in Believers, be apt to make such a conclusion as this;
Because God will certainly abide with us for ever, therefore let us walk
carelessly, and do him all the despite we can, these Promises being not made
for the use and exalting of the flesh, but being given to be mixed with Faith,
which is carefully to watch against all abusing or corrupting of that Love and
Mercy, which is held out unto it, flesh and blood can have no advantage given
unto it thereby, as shall afterward be more fully and clearly demonstrated. The
Question is then, what conclusion Faith does, will, and ought to make of these
Promises of God, and not what abuse the flesh will make of them. Let then the
meanest and weakest Faith in all the World, that is true and saving, speak for
it self, whether there be any thing in the nature of it, that is apt to make
such conclusions as these: My God and Father in Jesus Christ, has graciously
promised in his infinite Love and Goodness to me, through him in whom he is
well pleased, that he will be my God, and guide for ever, that he will never
forsake me, nor take his Kindness from me to eternity: And he has done
this, although that he saw and knew, that I would deal foolishly, and
treacherously, that I would stand in need of all his Goodness, Patience, and
Mercy to spare me, and heal me, promising also to keep me from such a wicked
departure from him, as should for ever alienate my soul from him; therefore
come on, let me continue in sin, let me doc him all the dishonor and
despite that I can: this is all the sense that I have of his infinite Love,
this is all the impression that it leaves upon me, that I need not love him
again, but study to be as vile and as abominable in his sight, as can possibly
be imagined: certainly there is not any smoking flax, or any oruised reed,
there is not a soul in the World, whom God in Christ has once shined upon or
dropped the least dram of Grace into his heart, but will look on such a
conclusion as this, as a blast of the bottomless pit, a detestable dart of
Satan, which it is as proper for Faith to quench, as any other Abomination
whatever. Let then Faith in reference unto these Promises, have its perfect
work, not abiding in a naked contemplation of them, but mixing them with its
self, and there will be undoubtedly found the improvement before mentioned,
for the carrying on of Godliness, and Gospel obedience in the hearts of
Believers; But this I shall have occasion to speak to more afterward.

Hosea 2. 19, 20.. 20.
is pertinent also to the same purpose, I will betroth thee unto me for ever,
I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving
kindness, and in mercies: I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness,
and thou shall know the Lord. The words themselves as they lie in the Text, do
directly confirm our Assertion. The Relation, whereunto God here expresses
that he will, and does take his People, is one of the most near and eminent,
which he affords to them; a conjugall Relation, he is and will be their
Husband, which is as high an expression of the Covenant betwixt God and his
Saints, as any is, or can be used. Of all Covenants that are between sundry
persons, that, which is between Man and Wife, is the strongest, and most
inviolable; So is this Covenant expressed, Isai: 54. 5. Thy maker is thine
Husband (the Lord of Hosts is his Name); and this Relation he affirms shall
continue for ever, upon the Account of those Properties of his, which are
engaged, in this his Gracious undertaking to take them to himself therein. He
does it in Righteousness and in Judgment, in Loving-kindnesse and in Mercies,
and in Faithfulness; so that if there be not something in the Context, or
words adjoining, that shall with an high hand turn us aside from the first,
immediate, open, and full sense of these words, the case is undoubtedly
concluded in them. This then we shall consider, and therefore must look a
little back into the general design of the whole Chapter; for the evasion of
Qualifications will not here serve: God betrotheth Persons, not Qualifications.

There are two parts of the Ch:1.. 21.
That from the beginning to v. 4. contains a most fearful, and dreadful
commination, and threatening of the Judgments of the Lord, against the whole
Church, and Commonwealth of the Jews, for their Apostasy, Idolatry, and
Rebellion against him; It is not an affliction, or a trial, or some lesser
desolation, that God here threatens them withal, but utter destruction and
rejection, as to all Church and Political State; He will leave them neither
substance, nor ornament, State, nor Worship; describing the condition which
came upon them, at their Rejection of the Lord Jesus Christ; left they must be,
as in the day that God first looked on them poor, naked, in their blood,
unpittied, formed neither into Church State, nor Commonwealth: so will I make
them says the Lord; And this dispensation of God the Prophet expresses with
great dread, and terror, to the end of the 13. verse.

2. The second part of the Chapter is taken up and spent,. 23.
from the 14. verse to the end, in heavenly and gracious Promises, of the
conversion of the true Israelites, the seed according to the Promise of God, of
the Renovation of the Covenant with them, and blessing them with all spiritual
blessings in Jesus Christ, unto the end. And hereof, there are these four
parts.

1. An heavenly Promise of their Conversion, by the Gospel, which he
demonstrateth and sets out, by comparing the Spiritual deliverance therein,
to the deliverance, which they had by an high hand from Egypt: v. 14. and 15.

2. The delivery of them so converted, from Idolatry, False-worship, and all
those ways whereby God was provoked to cast off their Forefathers; attended
by their obedience, in close walking with God for ever.

3. The quietness and peace, which they shall enjoy being called, and purged
from their sins before mentioned; which the Lord expresses by his making a
Covenant, with the whole Creation, in their behalf. v. 18.

4. A discovery of the fountain of the mercies before mentioned, with those
also, which afterward are insisted on, (to wit) the Everlasting Covenant of
Grace, through which, God will with all Faithfulness, and Mercy take them to
himself: v. 19, 20. to the end.

Before we farther open these particulars,. 24.
some Objections must be removed, that are laid to prevent the inference
intended from these words. Ch: 11. Sect: 8. page 229. It is first objected.

1. The Promise of the Betrothing here specified, is made unto the entire body
and Nation of the Jews, as well unbelievers, as Believers, as appears by the
carriage of the Chapter throughout.

Ans. The carriage of the Chapter throughout, is a weak proof of this
Assertion; and (no doubt) fixed on, for want of particular instances, to give
any light unto it: neither does the carriage of the Chapter throughout,
intimate any such thing in the least, but expressly manifests the contrary.
It is universal desolation and utter Rejection, that is assigned as the
portion of unbelievers as such, all along this Chapter. This Promise is made to
them, whom God allureth into the Wilderness, and there speaks comfortably to
them: which what it does import, shall be afterward considered. Yea and which
is more, the words of v. 23. which run on in the same tenor with the Promises
particularly insisted on, and beyond all exception are spoken to, and of the
same persons, are applied by the Apostle Paul, not to the whole Nation of the
Jews, Idolaters and Unbelievers, but to them that were brought in unto the Lord
Christ, and obtained the Righteousness of Faith, when the rest were hardened.
Romans 9. 26. From v. 24. to the 30. the Apostle by sundry instances from the
Scripture of the Old Testament, manifests, that it was a Remnant of Israel
according to the election of Grace, to whom the Promise was made; To us whom
God has called, not to the Jews only, but also to the Gentiles. For so (says
he) it is in Hosea, (instancing in the passage we insist on) I will call them
my people, which were not my people, and her beloved which was not beloved, and
it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, You are
not my people, there shall they be called the Children of the Living God. Which
he farther confirms firmeth by a Testimony out of Isaiah 10. 22, 23.
manifesting, that it is but a Remnant, that are intended. Wherefore it is
objected:

2. That the Promise is conditional and the performance of it, and of the
Mrceies mentioned in it, suspended upon the repentance of that people,
especially of their Idolatry, to the true, and pure worship of God, as
appears v. 14, 16, 17. which plainly shows, that it was made as well, nay
rather to those that were wicked, and Idolatrous amongst this People then unto
others, as being held forth unto them, chiefly for this end, to woo them away
from their Idols unto God.

Ans. I hope the people of God will more steadfastly abide by their interest in
the sweetness, usefulness, and consolation of this Promise, then to throw it
away, upon such slight, and Atheologicall flourishes. For,

1. Is there any title, Iota, or word in the whole Text to intimate that this
Promise is conditional, and depends on the peoples forsaking their Idolatry,
The 14, 16, 17. verses are urged for proof thereof; God indeed in those verses
does graciously promise that from the Riches of the same Grace whence he freely
says, that he will Betroth them to himself, that he will convert them, and
turn them away from their Idolatry, and all their sins; but that that should
be required of them, as a condition whereon God will enter into Covenant with
them, there is nothing in the whole Context, from v. 14. and downwards, that
intimates it in the least, or will endure to be wrested to any such sense; it
holding out several distinct Acts, of the same free Grace, of his unto his
People.

2. That this is a Promise of entering into Covenant with them; cannot be
denied. Now that God should require their Repentance, as an antecedaneous,
previous qualification to his receiving them into Covenant, and yet in the
Covenant, undertake to give them that Repentance, as he does, in promising them
to take away their hearts of stone, and give them new hearts of flesh, is a
direct Contradiction, sit only for a part of that Divinity, which is in the
whole* an express contradiction to the Word, and mind of God.

3. Neither can it be supposed as a conditional Promise, held out to them as a
motive to work them from their Idolatry, when antecedentaly thereunto, God has
expressly promised to do that for them (v. 16, 17.) with as high an hand and
efficacy of Grace, as can well be expressed; wherefore these being exceptions
expressly against the scope of the whole: It is objected.

3. That it cannot be proved that this promise properly, or directly intends
the collation of Spiritual or heavenly good things unto them, so as of
Temporal: yea the situation of it betwixt Temporal Promises, immediately both
behind and before it, persuades the contrary: Read the Context from v. 8. to
the end of the Chapter.

Ans. The other forts being demolished, this last is very faintly defended.
That it cannot be proved, that it does so properly or directly; but if it does
intend spiritualls properly and directly, though not so properly or directly,
the case is clear: And that it does properly intend Spiritualls, and but
secondarily and indirectly Temporalls, as to sundry limitations, is most
evident For,

1. The very Conjugall Expression of the Love of God here used, manifests it
beyond all contradiction, to be a Promise of the Covenant: I will Betroth thee
unto me, I will take thee unto me in a Wedlock covenant. What! in Temporal
mercies? Is that the tenor of the Covenant of God? God forbid!

2. The Foundations of these Mercies, and the principles from whence they flow,
are Loving-kindnesses, and Mercy, and Fathfulnesse in God, which are fixed upon
them, and engaged unto them, whom he thus takes into Covenant; and surely they
are Spiritual Mercies.

3. The Mercies mentioned are such, as never had a literal accomplishment to
the Jews in Temporalls, nor can have; and when things promised exceed all
accomplishment as to the outward and temporal part, it is the spiritual, that
is principally and mainely intended; And such are these, v. 18. I will break
the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and make you to lie
down in safety: How I pray was this fulfilled toward them, whilst they lived
under the power of the Persian, Grecian, and Roman Empires, to their utter
desolation? and v. 23. he tells them that he will sow them unto himself in
the Earth, and have mercy on them: which, as I said before, Paul himself
interprets, and applies to the special Mercies of Faith, and Justification
in the blood of Christ; So that both the verses going before, and those that
follow after, to the consideration whereof we are sent, contain directly, and
properly spiritual Mercies, though expressed in words, and terms of things of
a temporal importance. Thus notwithstanding any Exception to the contrary, the
Context is clear, as it was at first proposed; Let us then in the next place,
consider the intendment of God in this Promise, with that influence of
Demonstration, which it has upon the Truth we are in the consideration of, and
then free the words from that corrupting Gloss, which is endeavored to be put
upon them.

In the first I shall consider.. 25.
1. The Persons to whom this Promise is made. 2. The Nature of the Promise it
self. 3. The great undertaking and engagement of the Properties of God, for
the accomplishment of his Promise.


1. The Persons here intimated are such as are under the power, and enjoyment
of the Grace and kindness mentioned in v. 14, 16, 17, 18. Now because a right
understanding, of the Grace of those Promises, adds much, to the Apprehension
of the Kindness of these particulars insisted on, the opening of those words
may be thought necessary.

1. V. 14. they are those, whom God allureth into the Wilderness,. 26.
and speaks comfortably unto them: He allureth, and persuades them; there is
an allusion in the words, to the great original Promise of the conversion of
the Gentiles, and the way whereby it shall be done. Gen: 9. 27. God persuades
Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Shem. Their alluring is by the powerful and
sweet persuasion of the Gospel, which here is so termed, to begin the Allegory
of Betrothing and Marriage, which is afterward pursued. It is God's beginning
to Woo the Soul by his Ambassadors: God persuades them into the Wilderness:
persuades them, but yet with mighty power, as he carried them of old out of
Egypt, for thereunto he evidently alludeth, as in the next verse is more fully
expressed. Now the Wilderness condition, whereunto they are allured, or
persuaded by the Gospel, comprizeth two things.

1. Separation. 2. Intanglement.
1. Separation; as the Israelites in the Wilderness were separated from the
residue of the World, and the pleasures thereof, the people dwelling alone,
being not reckoned with the Nations, having nothing to do with them. So God
separateth them to the love of the Gospel, from their carnal contentments,
and all the satisfactions which before they received in their Lusts, until
they say to them, Get you hence, what have we to do with you any more? They
are separated from the practice of them, and made willing to bid them
everlastingly farewell. They see their Egyptian Lusts ^ye slain, or dead, or
at least dying by the cross of Christ, and desire to see them no more.

2. Intanglement; as the Israelites were in the Wilderness, they knew not what
to do, nor which way to take one step, but only as God went before them: as he
took them by the hand, and taught them to go; God brings them into a lost
condition: they know not what to do, nor which way to take, nor what course to
pitch upon: and yet in this Wilderness state, God does commonly stir up such
gracious dispositions of soul in them, as himself is exceedingly delighted
withal: hence he does peculiarly call this time, a Time of Love, which he
remembers with much delight. All the time of the Saints walking with him, he
takes not greater delight in a soul, when it comes to its highest peace and
fullest assurance, then when it is seeking after him in its Wilderness
Intanglement. So he expresses it Ierem: 2. 2. Thus says the Lord, I remember
thee, the kindness of thy youth, the Love of thine Espousals, when thou
wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a land that was not sown. And what he
here affirms, holds proportion therewithal. The Time of their being in the
Wilderness, was the Time of their Espousals; and so it is here, the Time of
the Lords Betrothing the Soul to himself: the Wooing words whereby he does
it, being intimated in the next verse. For,

1. He speaks comfortably to them;. 27.
speaks to their hearts: good words that may satisfy their spirits, and give
them Rest, and deliverance out of that condition. What it is that God speaks,
when he speaks comfortably to the very hearts of poor souls, he tells
you, Isai: 40. 1. Comfort you, comfort you my People, says your God, speak
you comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned; It is the pardon of iniquity that
enwrappeth all the Consolation, that a poor Wilderness soul separated and
entangled is capable of, or does desire. And this is the first description of
the Persons, to whom this Promise is given. They are such as God has humbled
and pardoned; such as he has converted, and justified; whom hehath allured
into the Wilderness, and there spoken comfortably to them.

2. Verse 15,. 28.
the Lord promises to this called and justified People, plenty of Spiritual
Gospel Mercies, which he shaddoweth out with typical Expressions of Temporal
enjoyments, and that with Allusion to their deliverance of old, from Egypt, in
three particulars.

1. In general; He will give them Vineyards from thence (that is, from the
Wilderness) as he did to them in Canaan, when he brought them out of the
Wilderness. This God often minds them of, that he gave them Vineyards which
they planted not. Deuteronomy. 6. 11. And here sets out the plenty of Gospel
Grace, which they never labored for, which he had provided for them, under
that notion. He gives them of the Wine of the Gospel, his holy Spirit.

2. In particular: He compares his dealings with them, to his dealings in the
valley of Achor; a most pleasant and fruitful valley, that was near Jericho,
being the first the Israelites entered into, when they came out of the
Wilderness; which is mentioned as a fruitful place. Isa. 65. 10. And
therefore this is said to be to them a door of hope, or an entrance into that,
which they hoped for; it being the first fat, fruitful, and fertile place that
the Israelites came into, in the Land of Canaan, and so an entrance into the
good land which they hoped for, answering their Expectation to the uttermost.
In the Promise of the abundance of Spiritual Mercies and Grace, which God has
prepared for his, here calls into their minds, the consideration of the
refreshment, which the Israelites after so long an abode in the wast and
howling Wilderness, had, and took in the fruitful plenteous valley of Achor.
Such is the spiritual provision, that God has made for the entertainment of
poor souls, whom he has allured into the Wilderness, and there spoken
comfortably to them; being called and pardoned, he leads them to sweet and
pleasant pastures, treasures of Grace and Mercies, which he has laid up for
them in Jesus Christ. He gives them of the first fruits of Heaven, which is a
door of hope unto the full possession. Romans 8. 23.

3. To the Songs, and Rejoycings, which the Church had, when they sung one to
another, upon the destruction of the Egyptians, at their delivery out of the
bondage of Egypt. As then they sung for joy, Exodus 15, upon the sense of that
great and wonderful deliverance, which God had wrought for them, so shall
their hearts be affected with Gospel Mercies, pardoning, healing, purging, and
comforting Grace, which in Jesus Christ he will give in unto them. These then
are the three things, which are promised to them that come out of the
Wilderness. 1. Gospel refreshment, in pouring out of the Spirit upon them. 2.
The first fruits of Heaven, a door of Hope. 3. Spiritual joy, in the
destruction and conquest of sin.

This then is the sum,. 29.
of this second part of that description, which we have of those persons, to
whom the Promise under consideration is given; They are such as being Called,
and Pardoned, are admitted to that portion in the wonderful marvelous
provision of Gospel Mercies, and Grace, which in Jesus Christ he has provided
for them, with that joy and Consolation which thereon does ensue. In the
following verses you have a fuller description of these Persons, upon a twofold
account.

1. By their delivery from Idolarty and falfe-worship, v: 16, 17. which is
particularly and peculiarly insisted on, because that eminently was the sin,
for which, those mentioned in the beginning of the Chapter, were utterly
rejected: God will preserve these, as from the sin of Idolatry, so from any
other, that should procure their utter Rejection and desolation, as that of
Idolatry had formerly done, in respect of the only carnal Jews.

2. By their protection against their enemies, v: 18. and these are the Persons
to whom this Promise is made; converted, justified, sanctified, and purified
Persons.

2ly We may take a little view of the Nature of the Promise it self,. 30.
I will (says the Lord) betroth thee unto me for ever; There is in this
Promise a twofold opposition to that Rejection, that God had before denounced
unto the carnal and rebellious Jews. 1. In the Nature of the thing it self,
unto the divorce, that God gave them v. 2. She is not my Wife, neither am I
her Husband: but to these (says God) I will betroth them unto my self, they
shall become a Wife to me, and I will be a Husband unto them: and this also
manifests that they are not the same persons, to whom that threatening was
given, that are principally intended in this Promise; For if God did only take
them again, whom he had once put away, there would have been no need of any
betrothing of them anew; New Sponsalia are not required for such an Action.

2. In the continuance of the Rejection of the first, and the establishment of
the Reception of the latter, at least in respect of his abiding with these, and
those; with those for a season: but unto these (he says) I will Betroth them
unto me FOR EVER. Gods betrothing of Believers is his actual taking them into
a Marriage covenant with himself, to deal with them in the tenderness,
faithfulness, and protection of a Husband. So is he often pleased to call
himself in reference to his Church; I shall not go forth to the consideration
of this Relation, that God is pleased to take the souls of Saints into with
himself. The eminent and precious usefulness and consolation, that flows
from it, is ready to draw me out thereunto, but I must attend that which I
principally aim at; namely, to evince, that God has undertaken, the He and
Believers, will, and shall abide in this Relation to the end; that he will for
ever be a Husband to them, and that in opposition to his dealing with the
carnal Church of the Jews, to whom he was betrothed as to Ordinances, but
rejected them, and said he was not their Husband, as to peculiar grace. To whom
God continues to be a Husband, to them he continues the loving-kindnesse,
goodwill and protection of a Husband, the most intense, useful, fruitful,
that can be imagined: This then will he do to Believers, and that for Ever.
Now because sundry Objections may be levied against the Accomplishment of this
Engagement of God, upon the account of our instability, and backsliding, the
Lord adds the manner of his entering into this engagement with us, obviating
and preventing, or removing all such Objections whatever, which is the third
thing proposed to consideration, namely, the Engagement of the Properties of
God, for the accomplishment of this Promise.

Five Properties does the Lord here mention,. 31.
to assure us of his constancy in this undertaking of his Grace, and the
steadfastness of the Covenant he has taken his People into: and they are
Righteousness, Judgment, Loving-kindnesse, and Mercies, and Faithfulness;
whose efficacy also in reference unto their abiding with him, whom he does
betroth to himself, he mentions in the close of v: 20. thou (says he) shall
know the Lord. I shall not insist on the particular importance of the several
Expressions, whereby the Lord has set forth himself, and his goodness here
unto us: It is plain, that they are all mentioned to the same end and purpose,
namely to give Assurance unto us of the Unchangeablenesse of this work of his
Grace, and to prevent the objections, which the fears of our unbelieving
hearts, from the consideration of our weakness, ways, and walkings,
temptations, trialls and troubles, would raise upon it. The Lord, when he
betroths us to himself, sees and knows what we are, what we will be, and how
we will provoke the eyes of his Glory. He sees, that if we should be left unto
our selves, we would utterly cast off all knowledge of him, and obedience unto
him; Wherefore (says he) I will betroth thee unto me in Righteousness and
Judgment, allowing full measure for all thy weaknesses, that they shall not
dissolve that union I intend. As if a Prince should go to take to him in
Marriage a poor deformed Beggar, who being amazed with his kindness, and
fearing much least he should be mistaken, and account her otherwise then indeed
she is, which, when it is discovered, will be her ruin, she plainly tells
him, she is poor, deformed, and has nothing in the World, that may answer his
expectation, and therefore she cannot but fear, that when he knows her
thoroughly indeed, he will utterly cast her off: But he thereupon replieth,
Fear no such thing, what I do, I do in Righteousness, and Judgment,
knowingly of thee, and thy Condition, and so as that, I will abide by it.
Perhaps (as some think) by this betrothing us in Righteousness, the Lord may
intimate his bestowing upon us Righteousness, yea his becoming in Jesus Christ
our Righteousness, to supply that utter want, Isa. 45. 24.
which is in us of that which is acceptable unto him. Now because we are not
only unmeet, to be at first accepted into any such terms of alliance with the
Lord, but also shall certainly in the carrying of it on, behave our selves
foolishly and frowardly, unanswerable to his loving-kindnesse, so that he may
justly cast us off for ever, he tells us farther, that he betroths us to
himself in Lovingkindnesse and Mercies, knowing that in entering into this
alliance with us, he makes work for his tenderest bowels of Compassion, his
pity, and pardoning mercy. In his continuance in this Relation, whatever his
Kindness, Patience, and Pardoning mercy can be extended unto, that he will
accomplish and bring about. But will not the Lord, when he pardons once, and
again, at length be waried by our innumerable provocations, so as to cast us
off for ever? No (says he) this will I do in Faithfulness. He doubleth the
expression of his Grace, and adds a Property of his nature, that will carry
him out to abide by his first Love to the utmost; I will (says he) even
betroth thee unto my self in Faithfulness. His firmness, constancy, and
truth, in all his ways and promises will he use in this work of his Grace,
Deuteronomy: 32. 4. But perhaps notwithstanding all this, the heart is not yet quiet:
yet it fears it self, and its own treachery, least it should utterly fall
off from this gracious Husband; wherefore in the close of all, God undertaketh
for them also, that no scruple may remain, why our souls should not be
satisfied, with the sincere milk that flows from this breast of Consolation;
Thou shall (says he) know the Lord; This indeed is required, that under the
Accomplishment of this gracious Promise, you know the Lord, (that is) believe,
and trust, and obey the Lord: and (says he) thou shall do it. I will by my
Grace keep alive in thy heart (as a fruit of that Love, wherewith I have
betrothed thee to my self) that Knowledge, Faith, and Obedience, which I
require of thee

This then is some part of that, which in this Promise, the Lord holds out
unto us, and assures us of: notwithstanding his Rejection of the carnal
Jews, yet for his elect, both the Jews and Gentiles, he will so take them
into a Marriage Covenant with himself, that he will continue for ever a
Husband unto them: undertaking also, that they shall continue in Faith, and
Obedience, knowing him all their days: and of all this, he effectually
assures them, upon the account of his Righteousness, Judgment,
Loving-kindnesse, Mercy, and Faithfulness.

I cannot but add, that, if there were no other place of Scripture in the
whole Book of God, to confirm the Truth we have in hand, but only this: I
should not doubt (the Lord assisting) to close with it upon the signal
Testimony given unto it thereby, notwithstanding all the specious Oppositions
that are made thereunto.

For the Close,. 32.
I shall a little consider that lean and hungry Exposition of these words,
which is given in the place before metioned Chapter 11. Sect: 8. page 229. I will
betroth them unto me in Righteousness, and in Judgment, and in
Loving-kindnesse, and Mercy: so the words are expressed in a different
Character, as the very words of the Promise in the Text. 1. ( Thee) that is,
the Church, is changed into ( Them) that is, the Jews, and their Children or
carnal seed, as a little before was expressed: and then that emphaticall
expression ( for ever) is quite thrust out of the Text, as a stubborn word,
not to be dealt withal upon any fair terms. Let us see then, how that which
remains is treated and turned off. ( I will betroth thee) that is, I will
engage and attempt to insure both them, and their affections to me, by all
variety of ways, and means, that are proper and likely to bring such a thing
to pass: But who knows not that this is wooing, and not betrothing? we need
not go far to find out men learned in the Law, to inform us, that to try,
and attempt to get and assure the affections of any one, is not a Betrothment.
This then is the first part of this Exposition: ( I will betroth) that is, I
will woo and essay, attempt and endeavor to get their affections: which
besides the forementioned absurdity, is attended with another sore oversight,
(to wit) that God promises to do this very thing in the last words of v. 20.
which is affirmed, that he does but attempt to do.

To proceed: (he says) I will do this, 1. By showing my self Just and
Righteous unto them, in keeping my Promise concerning their deliverance out of
captivity, at the end of 70 years. So then, in this new Paraphrase, I will
Betroth thee, (that is, the Election of Jews and Gentiles) to my self for
ever in Righteousness, is, I will essay to get their affections, by showing my
self Righteous in the Promise of bringing the Jews out of captivity. That
this Promise is not made to the body of the Jews, returning out of Captivity,
was before demonstrated; The Righteousness here mentioned, is that, which God
will, and does exercise in this very Act of Betrothing, and not any other act
of it, which he will make use of to that purpose. God engages to betroth them
to himself in Righteousness, using and exercising his Righteousness in that
very Act of his Love, and Grace to them: and this is now given, in an alluring
them to love him by appearing Righteous, in bringing them out of Captivity.

The like interpretation is given of the other expressions following,. 33.
( Judgment:) It is (says he) by punishing and judging their enemies, and
destroying them that led them into captivity, and held them in bondage and
subjection, and (Loving-kindnesse) is his giving them corn, wine, oil, peace
and plenty, and (Mercy) in pardoning of daily sins, and insirmities, and
(Faithfulness) is, he knows not what. This is made the sum of all; God by
doing them good, with outward mercies, and pardoing some sins and infirmities,
will morally try to get their affections to himself. Virgula Pictoris. 1. It
is not an Expression of Gods attempting to get their Love, but of the
establishing and confirming of his own. 2. That God should morally try and
essay to do, and effect, or bring about any thing, which yet he does not, will
not, or cannot compass and effect, is not to be ascribed to him, without
casting the greatest reproach of Impotency, Ignorance, Changeableness, upon
him imaginable. 3. God promising to Betroth us to himself, fixing his love on
us, that we shall know him, so fixing our hearts on him; to say, that this
holds out only the use of some outward means unto us, enervateth the whole
Covenant of his Grace, wrapped up in these Expressions; so that all things
considered, it is not a little strange to me, that any sober learned man,
should ever be tempted so to wrest, and corrupt, by wrested and forced Gsosses,
the plain words of Scripture: wherein whatever is pretended, he cannot have
the least countenance of any Expositor of note, that went before him: Although
we are not to be pressed with the name of Tarnovius a Lutheran, a professed
Adversary in this cause; yet let his Exposition of that place under
consideration be consulted with, and it will plainly appear, that it abides
not in any compliance with that, which is here by our Author imposed on us.

The Promises we have under consideration,. 34.
looking immediately and directly only to one part of that Doctrine, whose
defense we have undertaken, (to wit) the Constancy and Unchangeablenesse of the
Grace of Justification, or God's abiding with his Saints, as to his free
acceptance of them and love unto them unto the end, I shall not insist on many
more particulars.

The 10.. 35.
John 27, 28, 29. closes this Discourse My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand; my Father, which gave me them, is
greater then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand.

In the verse foregoing, our Savior renders a reason why the Pharisees
notwithstanding all his Preaching to them, and the Miracles he wrought among
them, yet believed not, when sundry others, to whom the same dispensation of
outward means was afforded, did hear his voice and did yield obedience
thereunto; and this he tells us was, because they were not of his sheep:
such as were given him of his Father, and for whom as the good Shepherd he
laid down his life, v. 14, 15. upon the close of this discourse, he
describes the present Condition of his Sheep, and their Preservation in that
Condition from the power of himself, and his Father engagedthere unto. He
lays their abiding him as his Sheep, upon the Omnipotence of God, which upon
account of the constancy of his Love toward them, he will exercise and exert
as need shall be, in their behalf. There are many emphaticall expressions both
of their continuance in the Obedience of Faith, and of his undertaking for
their Preservation therein. The latter I at present only intend. (Says he) 1.
I know them. 2. I give them Eternal Life. 3. They shall never perish. 4. No
man shall pluck them out of my hand. 5. My Father is Omnipotent: and has a
Sovereignty over all, and he takes care of them, and none shall take them out
of his hand. It is not easy to cast these words into any other form of arguing,
then that wherein they lie, without loosing much of that convincing Evidence
that is in them: this you may take for the sum of their influence into the
Truth in hand. Those whom Christ so owneth, as to take upon him to give them
Eternal Life, and by his Power, and the Power of his Father, to preserve them
thereunto, which power shall not, nor possibly can be prevailed against, so
that the end aimed at to be accomplished therein, should not be brought about,
those shall certainly be kept for ever in the Favor and Love of God, they
shall never be turned from him. Such is the case of all Believers: for they are
all the Sheep of Christ, they all hear his voice and follow him.

Some few things to wrest this Gracious assurance given Believers, of the
everlasting good will of God and Christ unto them,. 36.
by Mr Goodwin Cap. 10. Sect. 37. Page. 203. are attempted.

1. He grants, that there is an engagement of the mighty power of God for the
safegarding of the Saints, as such, or remaining such, against all adverse
power what ever: But no where for the compelling or necessitating of them to
persevere, and continue such, is there any thing in the Scripture.

Ans. The sum is, if they will continue Saints, God will take care that
notwithstanding all opposition, they shall be Saints still. Very well! if they
will be so, they shall be so: But that they shall continue to be so, that is
not promised. The terms of Compelling, or Necessitating, are cast in, merely
to throe dirt upon the Truth, least the beauty shining forth too brightly,
there might have bin danger, that the very Exceptor himself could not have
born it. We say not that God by his Power compels men to persevere, (that
is) makes them do it, whether they will or no. Perseverance being an habitual
Grace in their wills, it is a gross contradiction once to imagine that men
should be compelled thereunto. But this we say, that by the Almighty Power of
his Spirit, and Grace, he confirms his Saints, in a voluntary abiding, with
him all their days. Having made them a willing People in the day of the Power
of Christ toward them, he preserves them unto the end. Neither are they wrapped
up by the power of God into such a necessity of Perseverance, as should
obstruct the liberty of their Obedience; The necessity that regards them in
that Condition, respecting only the issue and end of things, and not their
manner of support in their abiding with God. And it is not easy to conjecture
why our Author, should so studiously avoid the grant of a Promise of final
Perseverance, in these words, who in his next observation upon them, affirms,
that they respect the state of the Saints in Heaven, and not at all those that
are on Earth; I mean that part of those words, which expresses their
preservation and safegarding by the Power of God. So that this is fancied
perhaps, even to be the condition of the Saints in Heaven, that God will there
preserve them whilst they continue Saints, but that they shall so do, there is
not any Assurance given, or to be had. It is marvelous if this be so, that in
so large and vast a space of time, we yet never heard of any of those holy
ones, that were cast out of his Inheritance, or that forfeited his enjoyment.
But let us hear what is farther asserted. He adds by way of Answer,

1. The security, for which our Savior engages the Greatness of his Fathers
power unto his sheep, is promised unto them, not in order to the effecting or
procuring their final Perseverance, but rather by way of reward to it.

Ans. But what Tittle is there (I pray you) in the whole Context to intimate
any such thing? What insinuation of any such Condition? They hear my voice,
and they follow me, (that is) they believe in me, and bring forth the fruits of
their Believing in suitable obedience, as these words of hearing and following
do imply. (Says our Savior,) these shall not perish; the Power of my Father
shall preserve them; (that is) says our Author, in case they persevere to the
end, then God will preserve them: clearly our Savior undertaketh, that
Believers shall not perish, and that his Power and his Fathers are engaged for
that end, which is all we assert, or have need to do.

2. That this Promise of safety, made to his Sheep by Christ, does not relate
to their state or condition in this present world, but that of the world to
come. My Sheep hear my voice and follow me, in which words of hearing and
following him, he intimates or includes their Perseverance, as appears by
the words immediately following. And I give them Eternal Life.

Ans. This I confess is to the purpose if it be true: but being so contrary to
what has been (I had almost said Universally) received, concerning the mind of
Christ in this place, we had need of evident concluding Reasons, to enforce the
truth of this gloss or interpretation. For the present I shall give you some
few inducements or persuasions, why it seems altogether unsuitable to the
mind of our Blessed Savior, that this engagement of his Fathers Power, and his
own, should be shut out from taking any place in the Kingdom of Grace.

1. Observe that there is a great opposition to be made against the Saints, in
that condition, wherein they are promised to be preserved. This is supposed in
the words themselves. There is none shall take them out of my hands: my Father
is great, and none shall be able to take them out of his hands. As if he should
have said, It is true, many Enemies they have, great opposition will there be,
and arise against them on all hands, but preserved they shall be in the midst
of them all; But now what Enemies, what opposition will there be, and arise
against the Saints in Heaven? The Holy Ghost tells us, the last ^nemy is
Death, and that at the Resurrection, that shall be utterly swallowed up into
Victory, that it shall never lift up the head; There they rest from their
labors who dye in the Lord. Yea, it is exceeding ridiculous to suppose, that
the Saints need Assurance of the engagement of the Omnipotency of God, for
their safeguarding in heaven, against all opposition, when they are assured of
nothing more, then that there they shall not be liable to the least opposition,
or obstruction, in their enjoyment of God, unto all eternity.

2. Our Savior here describes the present condition of his sheep, in a way of
opposition to them that are not his sheep: His hear his voice, the others do
not, and his shall be preserved, when the others perish: The Pharisees believed
not, and, as he told them, they died in their sins; his sheep heard him, and
were preserved in their obedience. It is then evidently the deportment of
Christ toward, and his care of his sheep in this World, in a
contra-distinction to them, who are not his sheep, among whom they live, that
is here set forth.

3. The very Context of the words inforceth this sense: They follow me, and I
give them eternal life, I do it, that is the work I have in hand. Take
eternal Life in the most comprehensive sense, for that which is to be enjoyed
in heaven, (though doubtless it comprizeth also the Life of Grace, which here
we enjoy. Ioh: 17. 3:) What is that which our Savior undertaketh to give (...)
they may be sure, that they shall be preserved to the enjoy (...) tells them
they shall not perish, Is that not pe rishing, (...) of Heaven, when they come
thither? Not to be deprived of (...) after they have entered into the fullness
of it? Or rather that (...), or come short of it, and so perish? And this is
that which (...) Father, and Son, is engaged to accomplish; namely, that
(...) not by coming short of that ^ternall Life, which is the business (...)
give unto them. If any one Reason of weight or importance, that has the least
pregnancy with Truth, be offered to the contrary* we shall (...) and ^ake off
the power of the former Reasons, which we have (...) on, though without
offering the greatest violence imaginable to Truth it self, it cannot be done.
It is said, that by these words, They hear my voice, (...) Christ does
intimate, or include their Perseverance: to say a thing (...) or included, is
of small power against so many express Reasons, as we have induced to the
contrary; but will this be granted, that where ever the Saints are said to
hear the voice of Christ, Perseverance is included? We shall quickly have a
fresh supply of Scripture proofs, for the demonstration of the Truth in hand:
but what attempt is made for the proof hereof? It is so, because the words
immediately following are, I give to them eternal Life, which presuppose their
final Perseverance; and this must be so, because it is so said; I will give to
them Eternal Life, is either an intimation of what he does for the present, by
giving them a spiritual Life in himself, or a Promise he will do so, with
respect to eternal Life consummated in heaven; which Promise is every where
made upon Believing: and it is a Promise of Perseverance, not given upon
Perseverance. Neither is there any thing added in the words following, to
confirm this uncouth wresting of the mind of our Savior, but only the
Assertion is repeated, that God will defend them in Heaven against all
opposition. Here, where their oppositions are innumerable, they may shift for
themselves, but when they come to Heaven, where they shall be sure to meet with
no opposition at all; there the Lord has engaged his Almighty power for their
safety, against all that shall arise up against them; and this is (as is said)
the natural, and clear disposition of the Context in this place, but, Nobis
non licet etc.

There are sundry other texts of Scripture, which most clearly and evidently
confirm the truth we have in hand, which are all well worth our consideration,
for our consolation and establishment: as also something of our labor and
diligence to quit them from those glosses and interpretations, (which turn
them aside from their proper intendment) that are by some put upon them.
Amongst which 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9. 1. Philip. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24. Joh. 5. 24. ought
to have place. But because I will not insist long on any particulars, of our
Argument from the Promises of God, here shallbe an end.

CAP. VII.
1. The Consideration of the Oath of God deferred. 2. The method first proposed
somewhat waved. The influence of the mediation of Christ into God's free and
unchangeable acceptance of Believers propo^ed. Reasons of that proposal. 3, 4.
Of the Oblation of Christ. Its influence into the Saints Perseverance. All
causes of separation between God and Believers, taken away thereby. Moral and
efficient causes thereby removed. 5. The guilt of sin, how taken away by the
death of Christ* Of the Nature of Redemption. Conscience of sin, how
abolished by the sacrifice of Christ Heb: 10. 3, 4, 14. 6. Dan. 9. 24. opened.
Rom: 2 34. 7. Deliverance from all sin, how by the death of Christ. The Law
innovated in respect of the Elect. 8. The vindictive justice of God satisfied
by the death of Christ: How that is done. Wherein satisfaction does consist.
Absolute not conditional. 9. The Law how fulfilled in the Death of Christ. 10.
The Truth of God thereby accomplished: His distributive justice engaged. 11.
Observations for the clearing of the former assertions. Whether any one, for
whom Christ died, may dye in sin. The necessity of Faith and Obedience. The
Reasons thereof. The end of Faith and Holiness. 12. The first Argument for the
proof of the former Assertions, concerning the fruit, and efficacy of the
death of Christ: Heb. 9. 14. The second. The third. The compact between the
Father and Son about the work of mediation. 14. The Fourth. Good things
bestowed on them for whom Christ died, antecedently to any thing spiritually
good in them. The Spirit so bestowed, and Faith it self. The close of those
Arguments. 14. Inferences from the foregoing discourse. The Efficacy of the
death of Christ, and the necessity of Faith and Obedience reconciled. Sundry
considerations unto that end proposed. All Spiritual mercies, fruits of the
death of Christ. (2.) All the fruits of Christ's death laid up in the hand of
Gods Righteousness. (3.) The state of them, for whom Christ died not actually
changed by his death. (4) On what account Believing is necessary. 15. Christ
secures the stability of the Saints abiding with God. What is contrary
thereunto, how by him removed. The World overcome by Christ, as managed by
Satan in an enmity to the Saints. 16. The complete victory of Christ over the
Devil. The ways, whereby he compleats his conquest. The Rule of Satan in
respect of si^ners two fold. (1.) Over them: (2.) in them. 17. The Title of
Satan to a rule over men, judged and destroyed by Christ. The exercise of all
power taken from him. 18. The works of Satan destroyed by Christ, in, and for
his Elect. 19. The Holy Spirit procured by the death of Christ. 20. The giving
of the spirit, the great Promise of the New Covenant. 21. This farther proved
and confirmed. 22. The perpetual Residence of the Holy Spirit with Believers,
proved by the threefold testimony of Father, Son, and Spirit. Isa: 59. 21.
The Testimony of the Father, proposed and vindicated. 23. Our Argument from
hence farther cleared. This Promise Absolute not Conditional. No condition
rationally to ^e affixed to it: The import of those words ^as for me.^ To whom
this Promise is made. 24. That farther cleared: not to all Israel according to
the flesh. 25. Mr G's Objections answered. 26. The Testimony of the Son given
to the perpetual abiding of the Spirit with Believers. Ioh: 14. 16. opened.
The Promise in those words equally belonging to all Believers. 27. Mr G's
Objections answered. No Promise of the Spirit abiding with Believers on his
principle allowed. The Promise given to the Apostles personally, yet given also
to the whole Church. Promises made to the Church, made to the individualls,
whereof it is constituted. 28. The giving of this Promise to all Believers
farther argued from the scope of the place: And vindicated from Mr G's
exceptions. 29. The third Testimony of the Holy Spirit himself proposed to
consideration: His Testimony in sealing particularly considered. 2 Cor: 1. 22.
Ephesians: 1. 13. 4. 30. Of the nature and use of Sealing amongst men. The end,
aim, and use, of the sealing of the Holy Ghost. 30. Mr G's Objections and
Exceptions to our Argument from that sealing of the Spirit, considered and
removed: 31. The ^ame farther carried on etc:

THere remains nothing for the confirmation of the first branch,. 1.
or part of the Truth proposed, but only the consideration of the Oath of God;
which because it ought certainly to be an end of all strife, I shall reserve
the handling of it to the close of the whole; if God be pleased to carry us out
thereunto, that we may give The Oath of God its due Honor, of being the last
word in this Contest.

The order of our method first proposed would here call me to handle our
Steadfastness with God, and the Glory created upon our Grace of Sanctification:
But because some men may admire, and ask, whence it is, that the Lord will
abide so Steadfast in his Love toward Believers, as has been manifested upon
several accounts, that he will, besides what has been said before of his
own Goodness and Unchangeablenesse etc. I shall now add that outward
consideration, which lies in the Mediation of Christ, upon the account whereof,
he acts his own Goodness, and Kindness to us, with the greatest advantage of
Glory ad Honor to himself, that can be thought upon. Only I shall desire the
Reader to observe, that the Lord Jesus is an undertaker in this business of
perfecting our Salvation, and safegarding our Spiritual Glory, not in one
regard and respect only; There is one part of his Engagement therein, which,
under the Oath of God, is the close of the whole; and that is, his becoming a
surety to us of his Fathers Faithfulness toward us; and a suerty for us, of
our Faithfulness to him; so that upon the whole matter, the business on each
side, as to security, will be found knit up in him, and there we shall do well
to leave it, though the handling of that suertiship of his be not of our
present consideration; Men will scarce dispute him out of his Faithfulness;
Henceforth he dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, he sitts at
the right hand of God, expecting to have his enemies made his footstool: This
then I will do if God permit. And for the steadfastness of his Saints, in
their abiding with God, I shall (I fear) no otherwise insist peculiarly upon
it, but as occasion shall be ministered by dealing with our Advesary, as we
pass on.

That which I shall now do,: 3.
is, to consider the influence of the Preisthood of Christ in those two Grand
Acts thereof, his Oblation and Intercession, into the Perseverance of Saints,
according to that of the Apostle Heb. 5. 27. Wherefore he is able also to save
to the uttermost them that come unto God by him, seeing he lives ever to make
intercession for them. And I will do it the more carefully, because though it
be one of the greatest strengths of our Cause, yet I shall walk in a path,
wherein none shall meet me, for the most part of the way, to make any
opposition.

My entrance into the consideration of the procurement of our Glory by Christ,.
4.
shall be with that, whereby he came into his own, viz. his Oblation, which
has a twofold influence into the Perseverance of the Saints, Luke 24. 24.
or into the Safeguarding of their Salvation to the utmost.

1. By removing and taking out of the way all causes of separation between
God, Isa. 59. 2.
and those that come unto God by him: that is, all Believers. Now these are of
two sorts:

1. That which is moral, and procuring such separation or distance, which is
the Guilt of Sin.

2. That which is Efficient, and working as the power of Satan and of sin.
The first of these, being that alone, for which it may be supposed that God
will turn from Believers; and the latter, that alone, whereby they may
possibly be turned from him. Now that both these are so taken out of the way by
the Oblation of Christ, that they shall never actually and eventually work, or
cause any total, or final separation between God and Believers, shall be
demonstrated.

1. He has so taken away the Guilt of Sin from Believers,. 5.
from them that come to God by him, Ephesians. 1. 10. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16.
that it shall not prevail with the Lord to turn from them: He has obtained
for us Eternal Redemption Heb. 9. 12. Eternal and Complete; Coll. 1. 20, 21,
22.
nor so far and so far, but Eternal Redemption has he obtained; Redemtion
that shall be completed, notwithstanding any interveniences imaginable what
ever: 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
This Redemption, which he has obtained for us, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
and which by him we obtain, the Apostle tells us what it is, and wherein it
does consist Ephesians. 1. 2. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even
the forgiveness of sins. He has obtained for us everlasting forgiveness of
Sins; as to the complete efficiency of the procuring cause thereof,
absolutely perfect and complete in its own kind, not depending on any
Condition in any other whatsoever, for the producing the utmost effect intended
in it; There shall be no after reckoning or account for sin, between God and
them, for whom he so obtaines Redemption. And the Apostle in the 10th Chapter
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, disputes at large this difference, between the
Typical Sacrifices, and the Sacrifice of the blood of Christ; He tells you,
those were offered year by year, and could never make the comers to God by
them perfect: (or acquit them from sin) for then they could have had no more
Conscience of sin being once purged; but now (says he) there was a
remembrance again of sin renewed every year, v. 3, 4. If sin had been
taken away, there would have been no more Conscience of it: that is, no such
Conscience, as upon the Account whereof, they came for help unto, or healing
by those Sacrifices: no more Conscience condemning for sin; Conscience judges
according to the Obligation unto punishment; which it apprehends upon it.
Conscience of sin; that is, a tenderness to sin, and a condemnation of
sin, still continues after the taking of the guilt of it away; but Conscience
disquieting, judging, condemning the Person for sin, Romans 5. 1.
that vanishes together with the guilt of it; And this is done, when the
Sacrifice for sin is perfect and complete, and really attaines the end for
which it was instituted; And if any Sacrifice for sin what ever, do not
completely take away that sin for which the Oblation is made, and the
Atonement thereby, so that no after charge might come upon the sinner, it is
of necessity, that, that Sacrifice be renewed again, and again. The reason
the Apostle gives of the repetition of the Legal Sacrifices, is, that they
made not the comers to them perfect: that is, as to the taking away of their
sins and giving them entire and complete peace thereupon; All this the
Apostle informs us, was don in the Sacrifice of Christ, v. 14. with one
offering he has for ever perfected (or made perfect that work for them as to
this business of Conscience for sin) them that are Sanctified; His one
Offering perfectly put an end to this business; even the difference between
God and us, upon the account of sin; which if he had not done, it would have
been necessary, that he should have been often offered, his Sacrifice having
not obtained the complete end thereof; That the efficacy of this Sacrifice of
his, cannot depend on any thing foreign unto it, shall be declared
afterward. Also that the necessity of our Faith and Obedience, in their proper
place, is not in the least hereby impaired, shall be manifested. That they may
have a proper place, efficacy, and usefullnesse, and not be conditions whereon
the effects of the death of Christ are suspended, as to their Communication
unto us, is by some denied: how weakly, how falsely, will then also appear.
Now this Christ does for all that are Sanctified, or dedicated, or consecrated
unto God, (which is almost the perpetual sense of that word in this Epistle)
in, and by that Offering of his. And this the Apostle farther conmfires from
the Consideration of the New Covenant with us, ratifyed in, and whose Effects
were procured by, the Bloud-shedding and Offering of Christ, v. 17. their
sins and their iniquities I will remember no more. Says God, upon the
account of the Offering of Christ, there is an end of that business, and that
Controversy, which I have had with those Sanctified ones: and therefore let
them (as to this) as to the making satisfaction for sin, trouble themselves
no more, to think of thousands of Rams, or the like; Mic. 6. 6, 7.
for there is no more Offering for sin required; And on this foundation. I
may say, there does not remain any such Guilt to be reckoned unto Believers
as, that with regard thereunto, God should forsake them utterly and give them
over unto everlasting ruin; And this is the sum of the Apostles discourse in
that Chapter, as it looks upon the matter under present consideration. That
Sacrifice, which so takes away the Sins of them, for whom it is offered, as
that thereupon they should be perfect, or perfectly accquitted of them, and
have no more conscience (which is a judgment of a man's self, answering to the
judgment of God concerning him) of sin, so to judge him and condemn him for
it, as not to have remedy of that Judgment or condemnation provided in that
Sacrifice, that (I say) does so take away the Guilt of sin, as that it shall
never separate between God and them, for whom and whose sin it was offered*
but such was the Sacrifice of Christ: Ergo; The Reason of the Consequence is
clear from the very form of the proposition; and nothing is assumed, but what
is the express Testimony of the Apostle, in that and other places?

So Daniel 9. 24.. 6.
The design in the Death of Christ, is to finish the Transgression, to make an
end of Sin, and to make reconciliation for iniquities, and to bring in
everlasting Righteousness; Christ makes an end of sin: not that there should
be no more sin in the world; for there is yet sinning to the purpose, in some
respect, Heb. 6. 4, 5. 10. 28.
much more then before his death; and there will be so to eternity, if those
under the ultimate sentence may be thought to sin; but he makes an end of it,
as to the Controversy and difference about it, between God, Romans 5. 10.
and them for whom he died; and that by making Reconciliation; On the part of
God, attoning him toward us, which Atonement we are persuaded to accept: Isa.
27. 3, 4. 45. 24, 25.
and by bringing in for us, a Righteousness, which is everlasting, and will
abide the trial, which God will certainly accept: Now when God is satisfied
for sin, and we are furnished with a Righteousness exactly complete, and
answering to the utmost of his demand, whence can any more contest arise about
the guilt of sin, or the obligation of the sinner unto punishment, that from
the Justice and Law of God does attend it? This also the Apostle urges Romans 8.
34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died. He argues from the
death of Christ to the ablation, Heb. ^ 10. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18
or removal of Condemnation for sin; because by his death he has made an
end of sin, as was showed, and brought in everlasting Righteousness. To
suspend the issue of all these transactions between God, and the Mediator, upon
conditions by us to be accomplished, not bestowed on us, purchased for us, and
as to their event uncertain, is disadvantagiously to beg the thing in
question.

Now because it appears, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
that, notwithstanding the death of Christ, many for whom he died, Ephesians. 2. 11,
12
are kept a long season under the guilt of sin, and are all of them borne in
a condition of wrath, ( Ephesians. 2. 3.) I shall crave leave a little to insist on
this instance, and to show, that notwithstanding the Truth thereof, yet the
guilt of sin is so taken away, from all those for whom Christ died, by his
death, that it shall never be a cause of everlasting separation between God and
them. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20.
In the Obedience and Death of Christ, whereby as a completely sufficient and
efficacious means, he made way for the Accomplishment of his eternal
purposes, in such paths of infinite wisdom, as brought in all the good he
aimed by it, in that order, which the very frame and nature of things by him
appointed, required the exaltation of his Glory, God is satisfied, well
pleased, and resolved that he will not take his course at Law against those, in
the behalf of whom he died. Though an Arrest was gone forth against all
mankind, yet the Lord suspended by his Sovereignty the utmost Execution of it,
that room and space might be given, according to the Eternal thoughts of his
heart, for the deliverance of some. A reprieve is granted mankind out of
Reasons, and for Purposes of his own: After the sentence of Death was
denounced against them, God being pleased to magnify his Grace, according to
his Eternal Council, and purpose in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 6, 11.
innovates the Law, as to the Obligation of it unto punishment, on the behalf
of some, 2 Timothy 1. 9.
by an interposition of the Son of his love in such way, as to undergo what
was due unto those, Heb. 7. 22. 10. 9.
on whose behalf the interposition was made: 2 Cor. 5. 21.
and by this undertaking of Christ, in the very first notion of it, as it was
satisfactory, thus much is done and accomplished.

First,. 8.
the vindictive Justice of God is satisfied; that is, whereas such is the
natural Right, Genesis 18. 25.
Sovereignty, and Dominion of God over his Creatures, Josh. 24. 19.
and such his Essential Perfections of Holiness, Psalm. 5. 4, 5, 6.
Purity, and Righteousness, that if his Creatures cast off his yoke, Hab. 1.
13.
and their dependence on him (which they do by every sin, To. 1. 18, 32.
what in them lies) it is then of indispensable necessity, that he render unto
that sin, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6.
or sinner, guilty thereof, a meet Recompense of Reward: Jesus Christ has so
answered his Righteousness, Vid. Diat. de Just. Div.
that without the impairing of his Right, or Sovereignty, without the least
derogation from his Perfections, he may receive his sinning Creatures again to
favor; It being the Judgment of God, that they, who commit sin, are worthy
of Death Romans 1. 32. and a Righteous thing with him, to render Tribulation to
sinners: 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. ( For shall not the Judge of all the world do right?
Genesis 18.) He has set forth his Son to Declare his Righteousness for the
forgiveness of sins Romans 3. 24, 25. Now for whom Christ dyed, he dyed for
all their sins, 1 John 1. 7. The Blood of Christ cleanses us from all
sinn^e; The Application of it being commensurate to his intendment in his
Oblation, not extending it self to the actual effecting of any thing
whatever, which was not meritoriously procured thereby. He loved his Church,
and gave himself for it, that he might Sanctify, and Cleanse it with the
washing of water, that he might present it to himself a Glorious Church, not
having spotte or wrincle, or any such thing, but that it should be Holy and
without blame Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. He makes complete Atonement to the
Justice of God on their behalf, so that the very vindictive Justice of God
has nothing to lay to their charge. That which in God maintains the Quarrel
against sinners Is attoned, and is no more their Enemy than Mercy it self: And
this not upon condition of Believing to be antecedently accomplished before
this be done. The Satisfaction of Justice vindictive depends not at all on any
thing in us; it requires only that there be vindicta noxae, and a vindication
of the Sovereignty of God, over the sinning Creature, by the inflictioon of
that punishmient, which in his Infininite Wisdom and Righteousness, he has
proportioned unto sin; on a supposition of sin in such Creatures, as being
made meet and fit to yield voluntary Obedience unto God, and so standing in a
moral subjection to him, being their cutting off, what lies in them, their
dependence on God; (which that it should be contlnued, is as necessary as that
God be God, or the Lord of all) Those Creatutes are upon the account of the
Sovereignty and Righteousness of God, whereof we speak, indipensably
obnoxious unto punishment, which is of necessity required unto Gods retaining
his Dominion over them. By the Death of Christ, this Condition is so far
repaired, that the dependence and subjection unto God, of those, for whom he
Dyed, is made up, so far as to a deliverance of them, from a necessity of
being obnoxious unto punishment, and that compleately, without any Abeyance
upon conditions in themselves, which can have no influence thereunto. So that
though the process of the Law, sent forth, John 3. 36.
be not instantly recalled, but man is suffered to lie under that arrest for a
season, Ephesians. 2. 3.
yet God lets fall his suit on this account, 2. Cor. 5. 18.
and will never pass his first sentence, Psalm. 21. 3, 4.
from which we are reprieved, unto full and final execution: pronouncing
himself, Math. 17. 5.
well pleased with his Son, resting satifyed with his mediatory performances,
and seeking no farther.

2. The Law of God is fulfilled. Unless this be answered in all concernements
of it, the Lord would be thought to change his Will, to reverse his Word, and
to blurre the Copy of his own Holiness. There is in the whole Law, and every
parcel of it an eternal indispensable Righteousness and Truth: arising
either from the nature of things themselves, concerning which it is, or the
Relation of one thing unto another. That to fear God, to Love him, to Obey
him, to do no wrong, are everlastingly indispensablely good and necessary, is
from the nature of the things themselves: only with this supposition, that God
would make Creatures capable of yiedling him such Obedience. That that which is
good, shall be so rewarded, that which is evil so punished, is also an
everlasting truth upon supposition of such actual performances. Whereas then
of this Law there are two parts, the one Absolute or Preceptive, in the Rule
and commands thereof, The other Conditional, and rewarding in its Promise, or
condemning in its curse, Christ by his death put himself, in their behalf,
for whom he Dyed, (to speak to that particular) under the curse of it. Romans 8.
3.
Gal. 3. 13. He Redeemed us from the curse of the Law, Kom. 10. 3, 4.
being made a curse for us; Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6.
neither is this at all suspended on our Believing; The Law does not threaten a
Curse, Philipp. 3. 9.
only if we do not Believe, but if we do not all things written therein; Deuteronomy.
27. 26.
whether we believe or not, the Law takes no notice, as to the Curse that it
denounces; If there has been any sin, that must be executed. Genesis 27. 28.
And the Law is for the Curse, as Isaac for the the great Spiritual Blessing;
He had but one; it has but one great Curse, and that being underrgone by
Christ, it has not an other for them, in whose stead Christ underwent it; 2
Cor. 5. 21.
God having made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, we become the
Righteousness of God in him; All separation from God is by the Curse of the
Law; All that is required in it, by it, is, that it be undergone: this is done
by Christ for all Believers: that thereby is taken away, which alone can
separate them from God, or put any distance between them: But of this, and
their subjection to the Curse before their Believing, more afterward.

3. The Truth,. 10.
or veracity of God was particularly engaged to see sin punished, upon the
account of the Promulgatio^ of the first expres Sanction of the Law; In the day
thou eatest, Genesis 2. 17.
thou shall dye; For the satisfying the engagement of God's Truth, there seemed
to be a tender made in the Sacrifices instituted of old: but it was rejected,
as insufficient to make good that Word of God, so eminently given out; There
was neither any such Relation, Union, or Conjunction between the sinner and the
innocent Creature Sacrificed, or any such real worth in the Sacrifice it
self, as that the Death of the substituted beast, might by any means be so
interpreted, as to amount to the accomplishment of the Truth of God: Death
being once denounced, as the reward of sin. Heb. 10. 5, 6. Sacrifices and
Offerings for sin thou would not, in burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices for
sin thou had no pleasure; but says our Savior Lo I come to do thy will, O
God, v. 7. Will that do it? Yea, it will assuredly, for in the volume of his
Book it is written, that he should so do; All that God willed to be done for
the accomplishment of his Truth, was fulfilled by Christ, when he came to give
up himself a sweet smelling Sacrifice, Ephesians. 5. 2. God then may be true, His
Truth being salved to the utmost, though never any one of them, for whom Christ
Dyed, do dye: But this to the Salvation of Believers, is only as removens
prohibens.

4. The distributive Justice of God is, Isa. 53. 10, 11.
upon this Oblation of Christ engaged upon the Covenant and compact made with
Christ as Mediator, to that purpose, to bestow on them, for whom he Offered and
Dyed, all the good things which he promised him for them, in and upon the
account of his undertaking in their behalf: The distributive Justice of God,
is that perfection of his Nature, Genesis 18. 24.
whereby he renders to every one, according to what, either his vindictive
Justice on the one side, Psalm. 5. 31, 35. 65. 5. 71. 2. 96. 13. 98. 2. 103. 17.
141. 1. 11
or his Uprightness, and Faithfulness, on the other, do require. In
rewarding, it respects his own Faithfulness in all his engagements
immediately, in punishing, the demerit of the Creature: there being no such
natural connection and necessary coherence, from the nature of the things
themselves, between Obedience and Reward, as there is between Sin and
Punishment.

Now the Lord having given many eminent and Glorious Promises to his Son
Jesus Christ, Psalm. 2. 7, 8. 110. 3. 7. 45. 13, 14
(some whereof we shall mention afterward) concerning his Seed, Isa. 49. 5, 6,
8. 52. 13, 14. 53. 11. 59. 20.
and Offspring, or those that he committed to his charge, to be Redeemed from
their sins, it is incumbent on him, in regard of his Righteousness, to make
out all those things in due time unto them. And therefore that he might magnify
that Righteousness and Truth of his, Joh. 12. 51, 52.
he has cast the whole procedure of his Grace, into such a way, and all the
Acts of it, into such a dependence upon one another, as that the one of them,
should have infallible influence into the other, and the effects of every one
of them be rendered indubitably certain.

Thus upon the Account of the Death of Christ, antecedently to all
considerations of Faith, Isa 53. 6,
or Belief, in them for whom he Dyed, thus much is done, Gal. 4. 4, 5.
for the extinguishing the quarrel about sin: Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8.
The vindictive Justice, Law, and Truth of God are disingaged from pursuing the
Sentence of Death and Everlasting Separation from God, Romans 8. 33, 34.
against them as sinners; Neither have they at all any thing to lay to their
charge, for which they should be cast out of the presence of God: Isa. 53. 11,
12.
Yea the Lord is moreover, in his own Faithfulness and Righteousness, Romans
4. 25.
with respect to the Covenant of the Mediator, engaged to do that which is
needful, Phil. 1. 29.
to the bringing of them to himself; After some previous Observations, Ephesians. 1.
3.
I shall confirm what has been spoken, by sundry Arguments. I say then,

First, that it is a most vain supposall, which some make: What if any one of
them, for whom Christ Dyed, should dye in an Unregenerate Condition? Would not
the Justice and condemning Power of the Law of God, notwithstanding the Death
of Christ, lay hold upon them? It is I say a supposall of that, which in sensu
composito, is impossible and so in that sence^ however upon other respects it
may) not to be argued from; Joh. 3. 16, 17. 7. 33.
Christ Dyed, that those for whom he Dyed might Live; that they might be
quickened and borne again. And so they shall, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
in their due season, every one undoubtedly be, and not any of them dye in
their sins.

Secondly, that our Affirmation, is not in the least liable to that Exception
which usually men insist upon, in opposition unto it: viz. That if Christ has
so satsfyed Justice, and fulfilled the Law, in reference to all them, for whom
he dyed, that the sentence of Condemnation should not be issued out against
them, but they must infallibly be Saved; then there is no necessity, either
that they do at all Believe, or if they do, that they live in Holiness, and
the avoidance of Sin; Isa. 53. 5, 6, 11, 12.
all that being accomplished, which by these mediums is sought for. Dan. 9. 24.
I say our position in it self is no way liable to this Exception: For

First, Romans 8. 32, 33
though the Justice, Law, Gal. 3. 13.
and Truth of God be satisfied and fulfilled, as to their sins, Heb. 2. 14,
15.
that he has not, as on that account, any thing to lay to their charge, Rom 1.
16, 17, 3. 23, 24, 25. 4. 16. 9. 31, 32.
yet this hinders not at all, but that God may assign and ascribe such a way
for their coming to him, as may be suited to the exalting of his Glory, the
Honor of Jesus Christ, who has brought all this about, and the preparing of
the soul of the sinner for the full enjoyment of himself; Joh. 5. 23.
and this he has done by the Law of Faith, which gives him the Glory of his
Grace, Romans 3. 27.
and all his other Attibutes, exalts Jesus Christ, whom it is his will we
should Honor, as we Honor himself, Ephesians. 1. 6.
and emptyes the poor sinful Creature of it self, Philip. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11.
that it may be made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

Secondly This consideration of the Death of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
of his freeing us from condemnation for any, Tit. 2. 14.
or all of our sins, is not to be taken apart, or separated from the other,
Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6.
of his procuring the Holy Spirit, and Grace for us, that we should not commit
sin, Joh. 17. 7.
being borne of God, with all the dispensations of Precepts and Promises, Mat.
28. 18, 19, 20.
Exhortations and Threatenings whereby he morally carries on the work of his
Grace, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13, 14.
in the hearts of his Saints; setting us free from the guilt of sin, Romans 6.
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. etc.
he so far also sets us free from the Power of sin, that we should be dead
to it, live no longer in it, that it should not reign in us, nor prevail to
turn us utterly from God.

Thirdly, they seem not much to be acquainted with the nature of Faith,
Holiness, and Communion with God, who suppose the end of them, is only for the
escapeing of the Wrath that is to come; Ephesians. 4. 22.
they are the things, 2 Cor. 5. 15.
whereby we are daily renewed, Romans 12. 1, 2.
and changed into the Image of the Glory of God, and so not only made useful,
2 Cor. 3. 18.
and serviceable to him here, but also prepared for the fulness of his
Likeness, wherewith we shall be satisfied hereafter. Wherefore observe

Fourthly, that though this complete Atonement be made in the Death of Christ,
Mat. 20. 5, 6.
yet it remains free in the bosom of God, when he will begin our Actual
Deliverance, from under that arrest of Death, that was gone out against us, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11.
and how far in this Life he will carry it toward perfection; It is I say in
his bosom, Joh. 3. 8.
when he will bestow his Spirit on us, for Regeneration and Faith; when he will
actually absolve us from under the arrest of the Law, by the Application of his
Mercies in Christ unto us, by the Promise of the Gospel; and how far he will
carry on the work of our deliverance from sin, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
in this Life. Only that is done, upon the account whereof, it is impossible
that the quarrel against sin, should be carried on to the utmost Execution
of the sentence denounced toward those sinners, for whom Christ dyed; which I
prove by these following Arguments.

First,. 12.
it is plainly affirmed, that Christ by his Death obtained everlasting
redemption. Heb: 9. 12. he obtained everlasting Redemption, before his
ascending into the most holy place, Heb. 1. 3.
called elsewhere the purging of our sins. Now this Redemption (as was said)
the Apostle informs us to consist in the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1. 7.
in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins;
or the Intercision of that Obligation unto punishment, which attends sin, in
reference to the sinner, and his subjection to the Law of God, and the
righteousness thereof. As the oblation of Christ respects God and his
justice, to whom it is given as a price and Ransom, and whereof it is an
Atonement, so it is, and is called (or we are said to receive thereby)
Redemption: As it respects them, who receive the benefit of that Redemption,
Romans 1. 5.
it is the forgiveness of sins. Forgiveness of sins, as it is completed,
and terminated in the Consciences of Believers, requires the interposition of
Faith, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
for the receiving of Christ in the Promise, who of God is made unto us
Righteousness; but in respect of the procurement of it, and the removing all
causes, Romans 4. 4.
upon the account whereof, sin should be imputed unto us, that is perfected
in the oblation of Christ; hence he is said to bear our sins in his own body
on the Cross; 1 Pet: 2. 24. and being once on him, either he was discharged of
them, or he must for ever lie under the burden of them: They were on him on
the Tree, what is then become of them? If he were freed of them, and Justified
from them (as he was, Isa. 50. 8, 9.) how should they ever be laid to our
charge? And yet this freedom from condemnation for sin, for all the Elect,
which God himself so clearly asserts Romans 8. 32. 33. etc. does not in the
least set them free from the necessity of Obedience, nor acquit them from
contracting the guilt of sin, upon the least irregularity or disobedience.

Secondly, we are said to do, together with Christ, those things, which he
does for us in his own person: Romans 6. 5, 8.
and that upon the account of that benefit, which by those his personal
performances, 2 Cor. 5. 15, 16.
does redound unto us, and which being done, Col. 3. 1.
the Quarrel about sin, as to make an utter separation between God and our
souls, Romans 6. 7.
is certainly removed; Thus we are said to die with him, to be raised again with
him, and with him we enter into the holy place; this whole business about sin
being passed through: for he that is dead, is justified from sin. Now all this
being done by us, and for us, in, and by our head, can we hencesorth die any
more? shall death any more have dominion over us? This the Apostle argues, 2
Cor. 5. 15. we judge (says he) that if one dyed for all, then were all they
(that is, all those for whom he dyed) dead, or dyed likewise; they were dead
in, and with him, their sponsor, as to the curse due for sin, that henceforth
they might live to him that dyed for them.

Thirdly, the Compact or agreement, that was between the Father and the Son
as Mediator, about the business of our Redemption in his blood, manifests this
Truth. Psalm. 40. 8.
The Father required at his hands, that he should do his will, Isa. 53. 10, 11.
fulfill his pleasure and counsel, make his soul an offering for sin, and
do that which the Sacrifices of Bulls and Goats shadowed out, Heb. 10. 5, 9, 7.
but could never effect: upon the performance whereof, he was to see his Seed,
and to bring many Sons to Glory. Heb. 2, 10.
(A covenanting and agreement into an uncertain Issue and event (as that must
be of God and the Mediator, if the Salvation of the persons, concerning which,
and whom it was, be not infallibly certain) ought not at any cheap rate, or
pretense to be assigned to infinite Wisdom.) In the Accomplishment of this
undertaking, whereunto Christ was designed, the Father dealt with him in strict
and rigid Justfce: Romans 8. 32.
There was neither composition about the debt, 2 pet. 2. 4.
nor commutation about the punishment, that he had taken upon himself: 2 Cor.
5. 21.
Now does not exact Justice require, that the Ransom being given in, Gal. 3.
13.
the Prisoners be delivered? That the debt being paid, Heb. 2. 9.
the bond be cancelled, as to any power of imprisoning the Original debtor?
That punishment being undergone, and the Law fulfilled, the offender go free?
Especially all this being covenanted for, in the first undertaking; doubtless
wrath shall not arise a second time. The right knowledge, use, and improvement
of this Grace, being given, bounded, and directed by the Gospel, it is
safegarded from abuse, by that which God calls his own Wisdom.

Fourthly,. 13.
it appears from what God bestows upon his Elect, upon the Account of the
undertaking of Christ for them (in the pursuit of the Eternal purpose of his
Will) antecedently to any thing whatsoever in them, that should engage him to
do them the least good; when God comes as a friend to hold out unto, and bestow
good things upon men, (I mean) good in that kind of Mercy, which is peculiarly
suited to the bringing of them to the enjoyment of himself, it is evident that
he has put an end to all enmity and quarrel between him and them: Isa. 59.
20. 21
Now antecedently unto any thing in men, God for Christ's sake bestows, Romans 8.
11.
with the greatest act of friendship imaginable, Gal. 5. 22.
no less than the holy Spirit on them. 1 Cor. 7. 4.
By him they are quickened; 2 Cor 3. 5.
and their Faith is but a fruit of that Spirit bestowed on them; John 15. 3, 5.
If they have not any sufficiency in themselves, as much as to think a good
thought, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2.
nor can do any thing, that is acceptable to God, being by nature dead in
trespasses and sins, which at present (the Scripture affirming it) I take for
granted; then assuredly God does give his Holy Spirit to the Saints, whereby he
works in them both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 1. 13.
antecedently to any good thing in them, Col. 1. 12.
that is well pleasing unto him. Every thing that men do, must either be
brought forth by the strength and Ability of their own natural facultyes,
assisted and provoked by motives and persuasions from without, or it must be of
the operation of the Spirit of God: there is not another principle to be fixed
on. The first (at present I take for granted) is not the fountain, of any
Spiritual acting whatsoever: John Gal*
Neither can any Gracious act be educed radically from the corrupt natural
faculty, Genesis 8. 21.
however assisted, or advantaged; It must be the Spirit then, Job. 14. 4.
that is the sole principal cause and Author, of all the movings of our souls
toward God, Mat. 12. 33.
that are acceptable to him in Christ: Now the cause is certainly before the
effect; and the Spirit in order of Nature, is bestowed upon us, antecedently to
all the Grace which he works in us: whether the Spirit be bestowed on men, on
the account of Christ's undertaking for them, none can question, but they must
withal deny him to be the Mediator of the new Covenant: The Spirit of Grace is
the principal Promise thereof Isa. 59. 20, 21. We are blessed with all
Spiritual Blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. Surely the holy Spirit himself so
often Promised to us of God, is a Spiritual Blessing: God's bestowing Faith on
us, is antecedent to our Believing: and this also is given upon the account of
Christ. Phil. 1. 29. It is given to us, on the behalf of Christ, to Believe on
him. If then God for Christ's sake, antecedently to any thing that is good, that
is not enmity to him, that is not iniquity in men, do bestow on them, all that
ever is good in them, as to the root and principle of it, surely his quarrel
against their sins is put to an Issue. Thence Christ being said to make
Reconciliation for the sins of the people Heb. 2. 17. God as one pacifyed and
attoned thereupon, is said to be in him, reconciling the world unto himself 2
Cor. Ephesians. 2. 13, 24
5. 19. And in the dispensation of the Gospel, he is still set forth, as one
carrying on that peace, whose foundation is laid in the blood of his Son, by
the Atonement of his Justice; and we are said to accept, or receive the
Atonement Romans 5. 10. We receive it by Faith, it being accepted by him: Thus
his death and Oblation is said to be a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor.
Ephesians. 5. 2. that wherein God is abundantly delighted, and wherewith his soul is
fully satisfied; so that as when he smelt a sweet savor from the Sacrifice of
Noah, Genesis 8. 21.
he swear he would curse the Earth no more: smelling this sweet savor of the
Oblation of Christ, on the account of them, for whom it was Offered, John 17.
19.
he will not execute the Curse on them, whereof they were guilty. Romans 5. 10.
I might also insist on those Testimonies for the further proof of the former
Assertion, Romans 6. 6.
where an immediate efficacy for the taking away of sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
is ascribed to the death of Christ: Ephesians. 5. 25. 26
But what has, been spoken may at present suffice. Titus 2. 14.


The Premises considered, * 14.
some Light may be brought forth, to discover the various mistakes of men, Heb.
9. 14.
about the effects of the Death of Christ, Heb. 10. 14.
as to the taking away of sin, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
if that were now the matter before us. Some having truly fixed their thoughts
on the efficacy of the death of Christ, 1 John 1. 7.
for Abolition of sin, Revel. 1. 5, 6,
do give their, Lusts and darkness leave to make wretched inferences
thereupo^: as that therefore because we are so completely justified, and
accepted before, and without our believing, or the consideration of any thing
what ever in us; that therefore sin is nothing, nor at all to be accounted
of. And though they say, we must not sin, that Grace may abound, yet too many
by woeful experience have discovered, what such corrupt Conclusions have tended
unto. Others again, fixing themselves on the necessity of Obedience, and the
concurrence of actual Faith, to the completing of justification in the soul
of the sinner, with a no less dangerous reflection upon the Truth, do suspend
the efficacy of the death of Christ upon our believing, which gives life, and
vigor, and virtue unto it, (as they say) and is the sole originally
discriminating cause, of all the benefits we receive thereby; without the
antecedent accomplishment of that condition in us, or our Actual believing, it
is not (say they) nor will be useful: yea that the intention of God is, to
bestow upon us the fruits and effects of the death of Christ, upon condition we
do Believe, which that we shall, is no part of his purchase, and which we can
of our selves perform, say some of them, others not. Doubtless these things
are not (being rightly stated) in the least inconsistent; Christ may have his
due, and we bound to the performance of our duty; which might be cleared by an
enlargement of the ensuing Considerations.

1. First, That all good things, that are spiritual whatsoever, that are
wrought either for men, or in them, are fruits of the death of Christ. They
have nothing of themselves, but nakedness, blood, and sin, guilt and
impenitency, so that it is of indispensable necessity, that God should show
them favor, antecedently to any Act of their Believing on him. Faith is given
for Christ's sake, as was observed.

2. Secondly, That all the Effects and Fruits of the death of Christ,
antecedent to our Believing, are deposited in the hand of the Righteousness,
and Faithfulness of God, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6.
to whom, as a ransom, Heb. 2. 17.
it was paid, as an Atonement, it was offered, before whom, as a price and
purchase, it was laid down. It is all left in the hands of Gods Faithfulness,
2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.
Righteousness, Mercy, and Grace, to be made out effectually to them, 1 Cor.
6. 19, 20.
for whom he died, in the appointed time or season. So that,

3. Thirdly, The state or condition of those, for whom Christ died, is not
actually and really changed by his death, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
in its self; but they lie under the curse, whilst they are in the state of
nature, unregenerate, and all effects of sin whatever: John 3. 36.
That which is procured for them, is left in the hand of the Father; They are
not in the least entrusted with it, until the Appointed time do come.

4 Fourthly, That Faith and Belief are necessary, not to add any thing to
complete the procurement of forgiveness of sins, any or all; but only to the
Actual receiving of it, when upon the account of the death of Christ, it
pleases God, in the Promise of the Gospel, to hold it out, and impart it unto
the soul, thereby completing Covenant-justification. And thus the whole
business of Salvation, may be resolved into the mediation of Christ, and yet
men carried on, under an orderly dispensation of Law and Gospel, into the
enjoyment of it. Acts 13. 38, 39.
Of the whole, these degrees are considerable.

1 Gods eternal purpose of saving some, Romans 5. 10.
in, and by the mediation of Christ, Joh. 3. 16
that mediation of Christ being interposed between the purpose of God, Romans 5.
7, 8.
and the accomplishment of the thing purposed, 1 John 4. 10.
as the fruit and effect of the one, Heb. 2. 17. 9. 14.
the meritorious procuring cause of the other. This Act of the Will of God,
Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. 6, 7, 8, 9. etc.
the Scripture knows by no other name then that of Election, or
Predestination, or the Purpose of God according to Election, or the Purpose of
his Will in Jesus Christ, Romans 9. 11.
which though it comprize his Will of not punishing them in their own persons,
Joh. 3. 36.
that are within the verge of this his Purpose, Ephesians. 2. 3.
yet it is not properly an Act of forgiveness of sins, Romans 5. 6, 8.
nor are they pardoned by it, Gal. 3. 23.
nor is the Law actually innovated, 2 Cor. 5 21.
or its obligation on them unto punishment dissolved, Romans 3. 23, 24, 25.
nor themselves justified in any sense thereby.

2. That interposition of the Lord Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 30.
whereof we have been treating, being a medium indispensably necessary as to
satisfaction, Math. 17. 5.
and freely designed by the will and Wisdom of God, for such a procurement of
the good things designed in his Eternal Counsel, as might advance the Glory
of his Grace, and make known his Righteousness also: And this being fixed on
by God, as the only thing by him required, that all the Mercies, all the Grace
of his eternal Purpose, might be dispensed in the order by him designed unto
them; Romans 5. 9, 10.
upon the performance of it, God rests, as well pleased, and they for whom he
has mediated by his Blood, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 21.
or for whom he is considered so to have done, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
are reconciled unto God, as to that part of Reconciliation, which respects the
Love of God, as to the dispencing the fruits of it, unto them, even whilst
they are enemies, upon the accounts before mentioned.

3. Things being thus stated between God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
and them, Rom 8. 11.
for whom Christ dyed, on the account of his death God actually absolves them
from under that sentence and Curse of the Law, by sending the Spirit of his
Son into their hearts, to quicken them and to implant Faith in them. And in
what Act of God to place his actual absolution of sinners, ungodly persons,
whom Christ dyed for, but in this actual collation of the Spirit, and habit of
Grace on them, I am not as yet satisfied: neither does this in any measure
confound our Justification, and Sanctification: For nothing hinders, but that
the same Act as it is of free Grace, in opposition to works, or any thing in
us, may justify us, or exert the fruit of his Love, which was before purchased
by Christ, in our Gracious Acceptance, notwithstanding all that was against
us: and also by principling us with Grace for Obedience, Sanctify us throughout.

4. This being done* they, with whom God thus Graciously deals, receive the
Atonement, and being Justified by Faith, have peace with God.

But this is not the matter, or subject of our present Contest. This then is
the first influence, which the Bloodshedding in the death and Oblation of
Christ, has into the Saints continuance of the Love and Favor of God; It
takes away the guilt of sin, that it shall not be such a provocation to the
eyes of his Glory, (his Law being fulfilled, and Justice satisfied) as to cause
him utterly to turn away his Love from them, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
And they becoming the Righteousness of God in him, to all intents and
purposes, what should separate them from the Love of God? Ephesians. 2. 14, 15
He has made peace in the Blood of the Cross of his Son, Romans 8. 32, 33.
and will not engage in enmity against his Elect any more to Eternity: But in
his own way and own time (as he has the Sovereignty of all in his hands) he
will bring them infallibly to the enjoyment of himself. And thus much by this
discourse about the effects of the Death of Christ, have we clearly obtained;
what Christ aims to accomplish by his Death, and what was the design and
intention of the Father, that he should accomplish, that cannot fail of its
issue and appointed event, by any interposure whatever. That the effectual
removal of every thing, that might intercept, hinder, or turn aside the Love
and Favor of God from them, for whom he dyed, is the designed effect of the
death of Christ, has been demonstrated. This then, in the order, wherein it
has seemed good, to the infinite Wisdom of God to proceed in dispencing his
Grace unto sinners, shall certainly be fulfilled, and all Believers saved to
the utmost.

I come,. 15.
in the second place, to demonstrate, that as our. Savior secures the
stability of the Love of the Saints to God, and their abiding with him, by
taking away and removing, what ever might hinder them therein, or prevail upon
them utterly and wickedly to depart from him; That which meritoriously might
cause God to turn from us, he utterly destroies and abolishes, and that, which
efficiently might cause us to turn from God, that also he destroys and and
removes. Now all, that is of this kind, that works effectually and powerfully
for the alienating of the hearts of Believers from God, or keeping men in a
state of alienation from him, may be referred unto two principles. Genesis 3. 17.
1. Satan himself. 2. His Works; The world, as under the Curse, is an
instrument in his hand, who is called the God thereof, to allure, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
vex, and mischief us withal; neither has it the least power or efficacy in
it self, Math. 4. 9.
but only as it is managed in the hand of Satan to turn men from God. And yet
the Lord Christ has not let that go free, neither without its deaths wound,
John 16. 32.
but bids his followers be of good comfort, for he had overcome the World; Gal.
1. 4.
that is, 1 John 5. 4, 5.
for them, and in their stead; so that it should never be used nor heightened in
its enmity to a conquest over them; I mean a total and final Conquest, such
as might frustrate any intention of God in his undertaking for them: It is not
our loss of a little blood, but our loss of Life, that makes the enemy a
Conqueror. But now for Satan.

1. First he overcomes,. 16.
destroys, and breaks him in pieces, with his power: Heb: 2. 14. by death he
destroyed him, that had the power of death, that is, the Devil. The first
thing that was promised of him, was, That he should break the head of the
Serpent: Genesis 3. 15. He does it also in, and for the seed of the Woman, all the
Elect of God, opposed to the seed of the Serpent, or Generation of Vipers. In
pursuit hereof, he spoils Principalities and Powers, and makes a show of them
openly, triumphing over them in his Cross, Col. 2. 15. In the blood of his
Cross he conquered, and brake the power of the Devil, binding that strong man
Armed, and spoiling his goods, making a show of him, and them, as great
Conquerors were wont to do with their Captives and their spoils.

Now there are two ways, whereby the blood of Christ thus brake the power of
Satan, that he shall not lead those always captive at his pleasure, nor rule
in them, as Children of disobedience, in the behalf of whom his power was so
broken.

1. First, He subdues him by taking away all that Right and Title, which he had
by sin, to rule over them: I speak of the Elect of God. By the entrance of
sin, the Devil entered upon a two fold rule in reference to sinners; First, A
Rule over them with the terror and dread of death and Hell; they are in
bondage by reason of death, Heb. 2. 14.
all their days, Heb: 2. 15. And the Devil has the power of that death upon
the World, whereunto they are in bondage. The death, that is in the Curse, is
put into his hand to manage it, to the dread and terror of sinners; and by it
he has always kept many, and to this day does keep innumerable souls in
unexpressable bondage: putting them upon Barbarous Inhumanities, to make
Atonement for their sins: and forcing some to inflict revenge and
destruction upon themselves, thinking to prevent, but really hastening that
which they fear. As of old, this power of his lay at the bottom of all the
Abominations, Diat. de Just. Divin.
wherewith men provoked God, when they thought to Atone him, as by burning
their Children in the fire, and the like. Mic. 6. 7, 8. So at present is it the
principle of all that superstitious Will Worship, Levit. 18. 21.
and Religious drudgery, which is spread over the Antichristian World: Deuteronomy.
18. 10. 2
yea the inventions of men, Kings 21. 6. 23. 10.
ignorant of the Righteousness of God, and convinced of their own
insufficiency to perform, work out, 2 Chr. 33. 6.
and establish a Righteousness of their own, Jer. 32. 35.
that shall perfectly answer the exact holy demands of the Law, as far as to
them is discovered, to deliver themselves from under this dread of Death,
wherewith he, that has the power of it, terrifies them all their days, are
indeed the foundation, and spring, the sum and substance of all Religions in
the World, and the darling of all Religious Persons, in, and with whom, Christ
is not all and in all. And herein, have the Papists gone one notable step beyond
all their predecessors in superstition and devotion: for whereas they
universally contented themselves, with sacrifices, purifications, purgations,
lustrations, satisfactions, recompenses to be in this life performed, these
latter, more refined, sublimated mercuriall wits, observing that nothing, they
could here invent, would settle and charm the spirits of men haunted with the
dread of death we speak of, but that instantly they came again with the same
disquietnesse as formerly, and renewed mention of sin, upon the insufficiency
of the Atonement fixed on for its expiation, they found out that noble
expedient of the future Purgatory, which might maintain the souls of men in
some hopes in this life, and secure themselves from the cries and complaints of
men, against the insufficiency of their Remedy, which they do prescribe.

2. As he rules over men by death, and hell that follows after, so also he
rules in men by sin, he rules in the children of disobedience. Ephesians. 2. 2.
And to this end, to secure men to himself, he being that strong man armed, who
has the first possession, Math. 12. 39.
and labors to keep what he has got, Mark. 3. 27.
in peace, he sets up strong holds, Luke 11. 21.
Imaginations, and highthings, against God. 2. Cor. 4. 5. Now this twofold
power of Satan, over men and in men, do both arise from sin: whereby men are
first, cast out of Gods Love and care, becoming obnoxious to death. And
secondly are alienated from God, in willing subjection to his Enemy: And both
these parts and branches of his dominion, are, in reference unto the Elect,
cast down and destroyed and taken away. For

First,. 17.
Christ by his Death Casheires the Title and Claim, that Satan laid to the
exercise of any such power in reference unto the Elect. When men cast down any
from Rule, they may interrupt, and put by their exercise of any power, but they
cannot take away their Title, unless it be of their own giving; Christ by his
Death, takes away the very bottom, foundation, and occasion of the whole power
of Satan. Genesis 3. 3.
All the power of Satan in the first sense, Deuteronomy. 27. 29.
consists in death, Romans 5. 12.
and those things that either conduce to it; or do attend it. Heb. 2. 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Now death entered by sin, and there withal the power of Satan. The Lord
Jesus taking away sin, and putting an end thereunto, as was manifested, the
whole Title of Satan falls and comes to nothing. And this was really done in
the Cross: Col. 2. 15.
its manifestation by the Gospel ensuing thereupon according to the
appointment of God. Tit. 1. 3.


Secondly he takes away the exercise of his power,. 18.
and that to the utmost. For

1. He binds him with bonds, He binds the strong man Armed Math. 12. 19. And
he breaks his head. Genesis 3: 15. Then leads him captive. Psalm. 68. 18. Triumphs
over him. Col. 1. 16. Treads him down under the feet of his. Romans 16. 20. as
the Kings of Canaan were trod down under the feet of the Children of Israel;
John 10. 24.
then destroys him Heb. 2. 14. What exercise of power is left, to a conquered
bound, wounded, captived, triumphed over, trodden down, destroyed Caytife?
Think ye this wretch shall ever wholly prevail against any one of them, for
whose sake, all this was done to him? Neither can this with any color of
reason be said to be done for them, or with respect unto them, toward whom the
power of Satan remains entire all their days, whom he leads captive and
rules over at his pleasure, until death take full dominion over them.

2. As he destroys Satan, so he does his works; For this cause was he
manifested, even to destroy the works of the Devil. 1 John 3. 8. He does not
only bind the strong man armed, Luke 12. 21.
but also he spoils his Goods. Whatsoever is in men, that follows from that
corrupted principle of nature, is reckoned to the work of Satan, being the
issue of his seduction. Whatsoever his temptations draw men out unto, the Lord
Christ came to destroy it all, to make an end of it: and he will not fail of
his end, but certainly carry on his undertaking, until he has utterly
destroyed all those works of Satan, in the hearts of all that are his. He
redeemes us from our vain Conversation. 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. from the power of
our lusts and corruptions, leading us out to a vain Conversation. The Apostle
tells us ( Romans 6. 6.) that by his death the old man is crucified, and the body
of sin destroyed. The craft of sin, the old man, and the strength of sin,
the body of it, or the ruling of Original sin, the old man, and the full
fruit of actual sin, in the body of it, is by the death of Christ, crucified
and destroyed; and in that whole Chapter, from our participation in the death
of Christ, he argues to such an abolition of the Law, and Rule of sin, to
such a breaking of the power and strength of it, that it is impossible, that it
should any more rule in us, or have dominion over us. Of the way, whereby
virtue flows out from the death of Christ, for the killing of sin, I am not
now to speak.

And this is the first way, whereby the death of Christ has an influence into
the safegarding of Believers, in their continuance of the Love and Favor of
God. He so takes away the guilt of sin, that it shall never be able utterly
to turn the Love of God from them, and so takes away the rule of Satan, and
power of sin, destroying the one, and killing the other, that they shall
never be able to turn them wholly from God.

Farther,. 19.
to secure their continuance with God, he procures the Holy Spirit for them,
as was showed before. But because much weight lies upon this part of our
foundation, I shall a little farther clear it up. That the Spirit of Grace and
Adoption, with all those Spiritual Mercyes, and operations, wherewith he is
attended and accompanied, is a Promise of the new Covenant, doubtless is by
its own evidence put out of question. There is scarce any Promise thereof,
wherein he is not either clearly expressed, or evidently included. Yea and
often times, the whole Covenant is stated in that one Promise of the Spirit,
the actual collation and bestowing of all the Mercy thereof, being his proper
work, and peculiar dispensation, for the carrying on the great design of the
Salvation of sinners. So Isa. 59. 20. As for me (says God) this is my Covenant
with them; my Spirit that is upon thee, and my word which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart from thee. This is my Covenant (says God) or what in
my Covenant I do faithfully engage to bestow upon you. But of this Text and its
vindication more afterward. Many other places not only pregnant of proof to
the same purpose, but expressly in terms affirming it, might be insisted on.

Now that this Spirit,. 20.
promised in the Covenant of Grace as to the bestowing of him on the elect of
God, or those for whom Christ dyed, is of his purchasing and procurement in his
Death, is apparent,

1. Because he is the Mediator of the Covenant, by whose hands, and for whose
sake, all the Mercyes of it are made out to them, who are admitted into the
bond thereof. Genesis 17. 1.
Though men are not completely stated in the Covenant before their own
Believing, Ierem. 31. 32. 32. 38, 39, 40
which brings in what of their part is stipulated, yet the Covenant and Grace
of it lays hold of them before, even to bestow Faith on them, Ezekiel. 11. 19.
36. 25, 26.
or they would never Believe: for Faith is not of our selves, it is the Gift
of God. God certainly bestows no such Gifts, but from a Covenant. Spiritual
Graces are not administered soly in a providentiall dispensation. Heb. 8. 9, 10,
11.
Faith for the receiving the pardon of sin, is no gift, nor product of the
Covenant of works. Now, as in general the Mercies of the Covenant are
procured by the Mediator of it, so this, whereof we speak, in an especial
manner Heb. 9. 15. For this cause he is the mediator of the New Testament, that
by means of death, they which are called might receive the Promise of Eternal
Inheritance. By his death, they for whom he dyed, and who thereupon are called,
Deuteronomy: 27, 29.
being delivered from their sins, which were against the Covenant of works,
Gal. 3, 12.
receive the Promise, Romans 3. 21.
or pledge of an Eternal Inheritance. What this great Promise here intended
is, and wherein it does consist, the Holy Ghost declares, Acts 2. 23. The
Promise, which Jesus Christ received of the Father upon his exaltation, was
that of the Holy Ghost, having purchased and procured the bestowing of him by
his Death: upon his Exaltation, the dispensation thereof, is committed to him,
as being part of the Compacte and Covenant, which was between his Father and
himself, The grand bottom of his satisfaction and merit. This is the great
Original radical Promise of that Eternal Inheritance. By the Promised Spirit
are we begotten a new, into a hope thereof, Romans 8. 11.
made meet for it, Col. 1. 12.
and sealed up unto it; Ephesians. 4. 30.
Yea do but look upon the Spirit as promised, and ye may conclude him
purchased: for all the Promises of God are yea and a men in Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 1. 20. They all have their Confirmation, Establishment and Accomplishment
in, by, and for Jesus Christ. And if it be granted that any designed appointed
Mercy whatever that in Christ, the Lord blesses us withal, be procured for us
by him, in the way of merit, (being given freely to us, through him, but
reckoned to him of debt) it will easily be manifested, that the same is the
condition of every Mercy whatever promised unto us, and given us, upon his
Mediatory interposition.

2. It appears from that peculiar promise,: 21.
that Christ makes of sending his Holy Spirit unto his own; He tells them
indeed, once, and again, that the Father will send him: Ioh. 14. 16, 26.
As he comes from that original and Fountain Love, from which also himself
was sent. But withal, he assures us, that he himself will send him. Ioh. 15.
26. When the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the Spirit of truth. It is true! that he is promised here only as a Comforter,
for the performance of that part of his Office. But look upon what account he
is sent for any one Act, Ioh. 16. 7.
or Work of Grace, on that he is sent for all. I will send him, then says
Christ: and that as a fruit of his death, as the procurement of his Mediation;
for that alone he promises to bestow on his. And in particular he tells us,
that he receives the spirit from the Father for us upon his Intercession,
wherein, as has been elsewhere demonstrated, he asks no more nor less, Salus
Electorum sanguis Jesus.
then what by his death is obtained. John 14. 16, 17. I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever,
even the spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive; he tells us v. 13.
that whatsoever we ask, he will do it: But withal, in these verses, how he
will do it: even by interceding with the Father for it, as a fruit of his
Bloodshedding, and the Promise made to him, upon his undertaking to Glorify his
Fathers name, in the great work of Redemption. And therefore he informs us,
Ioh. 17. 4. 6.
that when the Comforter, whom he procures for us, shall come, he shall
Glorify him, and shall receive of his, and show it unto us, (Ioh. 16. 14.)
farther manifest his Glory, in his bringing nothing with him, but what is his,
or of his procurement; so also instructing us clearly and plentifully, to ask
in his name, that is, for his sake, which to do plainly and openly, is the
great privilege of the New Testament; (for so he tells his Disciples Ioh. 16.
24. hitherto have you asked nothing in my name, who yet were Believers, and had
made many addresses unto God in and through him; but darkely, as they did under
the Old Testament, when they begged mercy for his sake Dan. 9. 17. But to plead
with the Father, clearly upon the account of the Mediation and Purchase of
Christ) That (I say) is the privilege of the New Testament. Now in this way he
would have us ask the Holy Spirit at the hand of God. Luke 11. 9, 13. Ask
him, that is, as to a clearer, fuller Administration of him unto us: for he is
antecedently bestowed, as to the working of Faith, and Regeneration, even unto
this Application, for without him we cannot once ask in the name of Christ;
for none can call Jesus Lord, or do any thing in his nane,. 22.
but by the spirit of God: This I say then; He, in whom we are blessed with all
spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1. 4.
has procured the Holy Spirit for us, and through his Intercession he is
bestowed on us. Now where the Spirit of God is, 2 Cor. 3. 17.
there is liberty from sin, peace and acceptance with God. But it may be
objected, although this Spirit be thus bestowed on Believers, yet may they not
cast him off, Romans 8. 14.
so that his abode with them may be but for a season, and their Glory not be
safegarded in the Issue, but their condemnation increased by their receiving of
him? This being the only thing, wherein this proof of Believers abiding with
God, seems liable to exception, I shall give a triple Testimony of the
certainty of the continuance of the Holy Spirit with them, on whom he is
bestowed, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses this Truth may be
established: and they are no mean ones neither, but the three that bear
witness in Heaven, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

The first you have Isa.. 23.
59. 21. But as for me, this is my Covenant with them says the Lord, my Spirit
which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy Seeds Seed, says the Lord hence forth and for ever. That which the Lord
declares here to the Church, he calls his Covenant. Now whereas in a Covenant
there are two things, 1. What is stipulated, on the part of him that makes the
Covenant. 2. What of them is required, with whom it is made, (which in
themselves, are distinct, though in the Covenant of Grace, God has promised,
that he will work in us, what he requires of us) that here mentioned is
clearly an Evidence of somewhat of the first kind, of that Goodness, that
God in the Covenant, does promise to bestow; Though perhaps words of the future
tense may sometimes have an Imperative Construction, where the import of the
residue of the words inforces such a sense, yet because it may be so, in some
place, therefore it is so in this place, and that therefore these words are not
a Promise, that the Spirit shall not depart, but an injunction to take care,
that it do not depart (as Mr Goodwin will have it) is a weak inference. And
the close of the words will by no means be wrested to speak significantly to
any such purpose, Says the Lord, henceforth even for ever; which plainly make
the words Promissory, and an engagement of God himself to them, to whom they
are spoken: So that the interpretation of these words, this is my Covenant with
them, by Mr Goodwin Cap. 11. Sect 4. Page 227. That Covenant of perpetual
Grace and Mercy, which I made with them requires this of them, in order to the
performance of it on my part, that they quench not my Spirit, which I have put
into them, does plainly invert the intendment of God in them, and substitute,
what is tacitly required as our duty, into the room of what is expressly
promised as his Grace. Observe then

Secondly, that, as no Promise of God given to Believers, is either apt of it
self to ingenerate, or by them to be received under such an absurd notion, of
being made good, what soever their deportment be, it being the nature of all
the Promises of God to frame and mould them, to whom they are given into all
Holiness and purity (2 Cor. 7. 1.) and this in especial is a Promise of the
principal Author and cause all Holiness to be continued to them, and is
impossible to beapprehended under any such foolish supposall, so also that this
Promise is absolute, and not Conditional, can neither be colourably gainesaid,
nor the contrary probably confirmed; so that the strength of Mr Goodwins two
next Exceptions. 1. That this cannot be a Promise of Perseverance unto true
Believers, whatsoever their deportment shall be. And 2. That it must be
Conditional (which cannot, as he says, be reasonably gainesaid.) The first of
them not looking toward our persuasion in this thing: And the latter being not
in the least put upon the proof, is but very weakness; For what Condition (I
pray) of this Promise can be imagined? God promises his Spirit of Holiness,
that sanctifyeth us, and works all holiness in us; and therewith the holy
Word of the Gospel, which is also Sanctifying* John 17. 7. that they shall
abide with us for ever: It is the continuance of the presence of God with us
for our Holiness, that is here promised. On what condition shall this be
supposed to depend? Is it in case we continue Holy? Who sees not the vanity of
interserting any condition? I will be with you by my Spirit, and Word for ever,
to keep you Holy, provided you continue Holy.

3. Thirdly, It is a hard task to seek to squeeze a condition out of those
gracious words in the beginning of the verse, As for me: which Iunius renders
( de me autem); words wherein God graciously reveals himself, as the sole
Author of this great blessing promised, it being a work of his own, which he
accomplisheth upon the account of his free Grace. And therefore God signally
placed that expression in the entrance of the Promise, that we may know, whom
to look unto for the fulfilling thereof; And it is yet a farther corruption, to
say, that as for me, is as much, as, for my part, I will deal bountifully with
them, provided that they do so and so, what I require from them, which is Mr
Goodwins Interpretation of the words; for of this supposition there is not one
word in the Text, as incumbent on them, to whom this Promise is made, in
contradistinction to what God here promises; yea he promises them, at least
in the root and principal, whatsoever is required of them: Let it be, that as
for me, is, as for my part I will do, what here is promised: and there is an
end of this debate.

4. The Persons, to whom this Promise is made, are called thee, and thy Seed,
that is all those, and only those, with whom God is a God in Covenant. God here
minds them of the first making of this Covenant with Abraham, and his Seed Genesis
17. 7. Now who are this Seed of Abraham? Not all his carnal Posterity, not the
whole Nation of the Jews; which is the last subterfuge invented by our Author,
to evade the force of our Argument from this place. Our Savior not only
denies, but also proves by many Arguments, that the Pharisees and their
followers, who doubtless were of the Nation of the Jews, and the carnal seed
of Abraham, were not the Children of Abraham in this sense, nor his Seed, but
rather the Devils, Ioh: 8. 39, 40, 41. And the Apostle disputes and argues the
same case, Romans 4. 9, 10, 11. and proves undeniably, that it is Believers only,
whether Circumcised or Uncircumcised, whether Jews or Gentiles, that are this
Seed of Abraham, and Heirs of the Promise. So plainly, Gal. 3. 7. Know ye
therefore that they, which are of the Faith are Blessed with Faithful Abraham,
and then concludes again as the Issue of his debate, v. 9. So then they which
he of Faith, are Blessed with Faithful Abraham: And this is the sum of what
Mr Goodwin objects unto this Testimony in our case, to the perpetual abiding
of the Spirit with the Saints.

The force then of this Promise,. 24.
and the influence it has into the establishment of the Truth we have in hand,
will not be evaded and turned aside, by affirming that it is made to the whole
people of Israel: for besides, that the Spirit of the Lord could not be said to
be in the ungodly rejected part of them, nor his Word in their mouth, there is
not the least in Text or Context, to intimate such an extent of this Promise,
as to the object of it, and it is very weakly attempted to be proved from Paul's
accommodation, and interpretation of the verse foregoing, and the Redeemer
shall come to Sion, etc. in Rom: 11. 26. for it is most evident, and
indisputable, to any one who shall but once cast an eye upon that place, that
the Apostle accommodates, and applies these words to none, but only those who
shall be saved, being turned away from ungodliness to Christ, which are only
the seed before described. And those he calls all Israel; either in the
spiritual sense of the word, as taken for the chosen Israel of God, or else
indefinitely for that Nation, upon the account of those plentiful fruits,
which the Gospel shall find amongst them, when they shall fear the Lord and
his Goodness in the latter days. Hos. 3. 5.


5. This then is a Promise equally made unto all Believers; it is to all that
are in Covenant; neither is there any thing that is of peculiar importance to
any sort of Believers of any time, or age, or dispensation, therein comprised.
It equally respects all, to whom the Lord extends his Covenant of Grace.
Certainly the giving of the Spirit of Grace is not enwrapped in any Promise,
that may be of private Interpretation: the concernment of all the Saints of God
lying therein. It cannot but be judged a needless labor to give particular
instances, in a thing so generally known in the word; Though the Expressions
differ, the matter of this Promise is the same with that given to Abraham, the
Holy Spirit being the great blessing of the Covenant, Genesis 17. 1.
and bestowed on all, and every one, and only on them, whom God has graciously
taken into Covenant from the foundation of the World.

Mr Goodwin then labors in the fire,: 25.
in what he farther objects, Sect. 6. That this Promise exhibiteth, and holds
forth some new Grace, or Favor, which God had not vouchsafed formerly either
unto the persons, to whom the said Promise is now made, or to any other: but
for the Grace or favor of final Perseverance, it is nothing ( at least in the
opinion of our Adversaries) but what is common to all true Believers, and what
God has conferred upon one and other, on this Generation, from the beginning
of the World.

Ans. The Emphasis here put upon it, does not denote it to be a new Promise,
but a great one, not that it was never given before, but that it is now
solemnly renewed, for the Consolation and Establishment of the Church. If
wherever we find a solemn Promise made and confirmed and ratified to the
Church, we must thence conclude, that no Saints were before made partakers of
the Mercy of that Promise, we must also in particular conclude, that no one
ever had their sins pardoned, before the giving of that solemn Promise.
Jerem. 31. 32.

6. We say, that the Grace of Perseverance is such as Believers may expect, not
upon the account of any thing in themselves, nor of the dignity of the state,
whereunto by Grace they are exalted; but merely on this bottom and
foundation, that it is freely promised of God; who has also discovered the
rise, and Fountain of his Gracious Promise to lie in his Eternal Love toward
them, so that they can lay no other claim unto it, then to any oath Grace
whatsoever. When we have the Assurance given by any Promise of God, to say that
what is promised of him, may be expected of course, is an expression that fell
from Mr Goodwin, when in the heat of disputation, his thoughts were turned
aside from the Consideration of what it is, to mix the Promises of God with
Faith.

7. Whereas this is given in for the sense of the words, that God will advance
the Dispensation of his Grace and Goodness, toward, or among his People, to
such an Excellency and height, that, if they prove not extremely unworthy,
they shall have of the Spirit, and Word of God abundantly amongst them, and
consequently abundance of Peace and Happiness for ever: It is most apparent
that not any thing of the mind of God in the words, is reached in this gloss.
For

1. That Condition, if they prove not extremely unworthy, is extremely
unworthily inserted; the Promise being an engagement of God to keep and
preserve them, to whom it is made by his Spirit, from being so; the Spirit is
given and continued to them for that very purpose.

2. It is supposed to be given to all the Nation of the Jews, when it is
expressly made to the Church, and Seed in Covenant.

3. It carries the Mercy promised no higher then outward dispensations, when
the words expressly mention, the Spirit already received. Evident it is, that
the whole Grace, Love, Kindness, and Mercy of this eminent Promise, and
consequently the whole Covenant of Grace, is enervated by this corrupting
Gloss; Do men think indeed, that all the mercy of the Covenant of Grace
consists in such tenders, and offers, as here are intimated? that it all lies
in outward endearements, and such dealings with men, as may seem to be suited
to win upon them: and that, as to the real exhibition of it, it is wholly
suspended upon the unstable, uncertain, frail wills of men? The Scripture
seems to hold out something farther of more efficacy. Ezekiel. 11. 19.
The design of these exceptions, Jere, 31. 32. 32. 40.
is indeed to exclude all the effectual Grace of God, promised in Jesus
Christ, upon the account, that the things which he promises to work in us
thereby, are the duties which he requires of us.

In sum; these are the exceptions which are given into this Testimony of God,
concerning the abiding of the spirit with them, on whom he is bestowed, and for
whom he is procured, to whom he is sent by Jesus Christ. And this is the
Interpretation of the words* [ As for mee] for my part, or as much as in me
lies [this is my Covenant] I will deal bountifully and graciously [with them]
the whole Nation of the Jews, [my spirit that is in thee] that they ought to
take care that they entertain, and retain the Holy Spirit, and not walk so
extremely unworthily, that he should depart from them: the residue of the words
wherein the maine Emphasis of them does lie, is left untouched. The import then
of this Promise, is the same with that of the Promises insisted on before, with
especial reference to the Holy Spirit, procured for us, and given unto us by
Christ. The stability, and establishing Grace of the Covenant, is here called
the Covenant; as sundry other particular mercies of it are also. Of the
Covenant of Grace in Christ, the blessed Spirit to dwell in us, and rest upon
us, is the maine and principal Promise: This for our consolation is renewed,
again and again, in the Old and New Testoment. As a Spirit of sanctification,
he is given to men to make them believe; and as a spirit of Adoplion, upon
their Believing. In either sense, God, even the Father, who takes us into
Covenant in Jesus Christ, affirms here, that he shall never depart from us:
which is our first Testimony in the case in hand. With whom the Spirit abides,
and whilst he abides with them, they cannot utterly forsake God, nor be
forsaken of him; for they who have the spirit of God, are the Children of God,
sons, and Heirs. But God has promised that his Spirit shall abide with
Believers for ever: as has been clearly evinced from the Text under
consideration, with a removal of all exceptions put in thereto.

The second witness we have of the constant abode and residence of this spirit
bestowed on them,. 26.
which Believe, for ever, is that of the Son, who assures his Disciples of
it. Joh. 14. 16. I will (says he) pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. As our Savior gives a
Rule of Interpretation, expressly of his Prayers for Believers, that he did in
them intend not only the men of that present Generation, but all that should
believe to the end of the World, Ioh. 17. 20. ( I pray not for these alone, but
for them also, who shall believe on me through their word,) so is it a Rule
equally infallible for the interpretation of the gracious Promises, which he
made to his Disciples, that are not peculiarly appropriated to their season and
work, (in which yet, as to the general Love, Faithfulness, and Kindness,
manifested and revealed in them, the concernements of the Saints in all
succeeding ages does lie) they are proper to all Believers, as such. For whom
he did equally intercede, to them he makes Promises alike. They belong no less
to us, on whom, in an especial manner, the ends of the World are fallen, then
to those, who first followed him in the Regeneration. Let us then attend to the
Testimony in this place, (and as he shall be pleased to increase our Faith, mix
it therewithal) that the Spirit he procures for us, and sends to us, shall
abide with us for ever: and whilst the Spirit of the Lord is with us, we are
his. Doubtless it is no easy task to raise up any pretended plea against the
evidence given in by this Witness, the Amen, the great and faithful witness
in Heaven: He tells us, that he will send the Spirit to abide with us for ever;
and therein speaks to the whole of the case in hand, and Question under debate.
All we say, is, that the Spirit of God shall abide with Believers for ever;
Christ says so too: and in the issue what ever becomes of us, he will appear
to be one, against whom there is no rising up.

Against this Testimony it is objected by Mr Goodwin.. 27.
Cap. 11. Sect. 14. Page 234. This Promise ( says he) concerning the abiding
of this other Comforter for ever, must be conceived to be made, either to the
Apostles, personally considered, or else to the whole body of the Church, of
which they were principal members: If the first of these be admitted, then it
will not follow, that, because the Apostles had the perpetual residence of the
spirit with them, and in them, therefore every particular Believer has the
like: no more then it will follow, that, because the Apostles were infallible
in their judgments, through the teachings of the spirit in them; therefore
every Believer is infallible upon the same account also; If the latter be
admitted, neither will it follow, that every Believer, or every member of the
Church, must needs have the residence of the spirit with them for ever: There
are principal privileges appropriated to Corporations, which every particular
member of them cannot claim: the Church may have the residence of the spirit
of God with her for ever, and yet every present member thereof loose his
interest and part in him; yea the abiding of the spirit in the Apostles
themselves, was not absolutely promised. Ioh. 15. 10.

1. The design of this discourse is to prove, Ans.
that this Promise is not made to Believers in general, or those, who through
the word, are brought to believe in Christ in all Generations to the end of the
World: and consequently that they have no Promise of the Spirits abiding with
them: for that is the thing opposed; and this is part of the Doctrine, that
tends to their Consolation and improvement in Holiness. What thanks they will
give to the Authors of such an eminent discovery, when it shall be determined
that they have deserved well of them, and the Truths of God, I know not:
especially when it shall be considered that not only this, but all other
Promises uttered by Christ to his Apostles (as we had thought) not for their
own behoof alone, but also for the use of the Church in all ages, are tied up
in their tendency and use to the men of that Generation, and to the employment,
to which they, to whom he spoke, were designed; But let us see whether these
things are so or no. I say,

2. There is not any necessary cause of that disjunctive proposition, The
Promise of the perpetual residence of the Spirit is made, either to the
Apostles personally, or to the whole body of the Church: By the Rule formerly
given for the Interpretation of these Promises of Christ, it appears, that what
in this kind was made to the one, was also given to the other; and how Mr
Goodwin will enforce any necessary conclusion from this distinction framed by
himself, for his own purpose, I know not; The Promise was made both to these
and those, the Apostles, and all other Believers, because to the Apostles, as
Believers.

3. The making of the Promise to the Apostles personally, does not argue that
it was made to them, as Apostles, but only that it was made to their Persons,
or to them, though under another qualification, viz. of Believing. It Is given
to them personally as Believers, and so to all Believers whatever; This also
sets at liberty, and plainly cashiers the comparison instituted between the
Apostles Infallibility as Apostles, and their sanctifying grace as Believers,
by the Spirit of Grace given for that end; The Apostles Infallibility, we
confess, was from the Spirit; for they (as other Holy men of old) wrote as
they were moved by the Spirit of God: 2 Pet. 1. 21.
but that this was a distinct gift bestowed on them as Apostles, and not the
teaching of the Spirit of Grace, which is given to all Believers 1 Ioh. 2. 22.
we need not contend to prove.

Besides, to what end does he contend, that it was made to the Apostles in the
sense urged, and by us insisted on, seeing he denies it in the close of this
Section; and chooses rather to venture upon an opposition unto that common
received persuasion, that the Apostles of Christ, (the son of perdition only
excepted) had an absolute promise of Perseverance, then to acknowledge that,
which would prove so prejudicial and ruinous to his cause, as he knows the
confession of such a Promise made to them would inevitably be: He contends not
(I say) about the sense of the Promise, but would feign divert it from other
Believers, (at the entrance of the Section) by limiting it to the Apostles; but
considering afterward better of the matter, and remembering that the concession
of an absolute Promise of Perseverance to any one Saint whatever, would
evidently root up, and cast to the ground the goodliest engine, that he has
set up against the Truth he opposes, he suits it (in the close of the Section)
to an evasion, holding better Correspondency with its associates in this
undertaking.

4. I wonder what Chimericall Church he has found out, to which Promises are
made, and Privileges granted, otherwise then upon the account of the Persons,
whereof'tis constituted; suppose (I pray) that Promises of the Residence of the
Spirit for ever with it, be made to the Church, which is made up of so many
members, and that all these members every one, should loose their interest in
it, what subject of that Promise would remain? What Universal is this, that
has a real existence of it self, and by it self, in abstraction from its
particulars, in which alone it has its being? Or what whole is that, which is
preserved in the destruction and dissolution of all its essentially constituent
parts? The Promises then, that are made to the Church, are of two sorts. 1. Of
such Grace and Mercies, as, whether inherent or relative, have their residence
in, and respect unto particular persons as such; of this sort are all the
Promises of the Grace of Sanctification, as also of Justification etc. which
are all things of men's personal spiritual interest; The Promises made to the
Church of this nature, are made unto it, merely as consisting of so many, and
those Elected, Redeemed persons, whose right and interest, as those individual
persons they are. 2. Of all such good things, as are the exurgency of the
collected state of the Saints, in reference to their spiritual invisible
Communion, or visible gathering into a Church, constituted according to the
mind of Christ, and his Appointment in the Gospel; and these also are all of
them founded in the former, and depend wholly upon them, and are resolved into
them. All Promises then whatever made to the Church, the Body of Christ, do
not respect it primarily, as a Corporation, which is the second notion of it,
but as consisting of those particular Believers; much less as a Chimericall
universal, having a subsistence in and by it self, abstracted from its
particulars. This evasion then, not withstanding this Promise of our Savior,
does still continue to press its Testimony concerning the perpetual residence
of this Holy Spirit with Believers.

The scope of the place inforces that exception of these words,. 28.
which we insist upon. Our Blessed Savior observing the trouble and
disconsolation of his followers, upon the apprehension of his departure from
them, stirs them up to a better hope and confidence by many Gracious
Promises, and engagements, of what would and should be the Issue of his being
taken away. v. 1. He bids them to free their hearts from trouble, and in the
next words, tells them, that the way whereby it was to be done, was by acting
Faith on the Promises of his Father, and those which in his Fathers name, he
had made, and was to make unto them. Of these he mentions many in the following
verses, whereof the Fountain, Head, and Spring, is that of giving them the
Comforter, not to abide with them for a season, as he had done, with his bodily
presence, but to continue with them as a Comforter, (and consequently, to the
discharging of his whole dispensation toward Believers) for ever. He speaks
to them as Believers, as disconsolate dejected Believrs, quickening, their Faith
by Exhortations, and gives them this Promise, as a solid Foundation of peace
and composedness of Sprit, which he exhorted them unto. And if our Savior
intends any thing, but what the words import viz. that he will give his Holy
Spirit, as a Comforter, to abide with them for ever, the Promise has not the
least sutablenesse to relieve them in their distress, nor to accomplish the
end for which it was given them. But against this it is excepted Cap. 11. Sect.
13. Page 233

1. Evident it is, that our Savior does not in this place oppose the abiding
or remaining of the Holy Ghost, to his own departure from the hearts or souls
of men, into which he is framed or come; but to his departure out of the world,
by death, which was now at hand.

Ans. 1. This is a weighty observation: yet withal it is evident, that he
opposes the abiding of the Spirit with them as a Comforter, to his own bodily
presence with them for that end. His was for a season, the other to endure for
ever. And I desire to know, how our Savior Christ comes, or enters into the
souls or hearts of men, but by his Spirit: and how these things come here to
be distinguished. But

2. He says By the abiding of the Comforter with them for ever, he does not
mean his perpetual abode in their hearts, or the hearts of any particular
man, but his constant abiding in the world, in, and with the Gospel, and the
Children thereof, in respect of which, he says of himself elsewhere, I am with
you always even to the end of the world: as if he should have said, This the
purpose of my Father, in sending me into the world, requiers, that I should
make no long stay in it, I am now upon my return, but when I come to my
Father, I will intercede for you, and he will send you another Comforter, upon
better terms, for staying and continuing with you, then those on which I came:
for he shall be sent, not to be taken out of the world by death, but to make
his residence with, and among you my friends and faithful ones for ever; Now
from such an abiding of the Holy Ghost with them, as this, cannot be inferd his
perpetual abiding with any one person or Believer, determinately, much less
with every one.

Ans. 1.. 29.
It was evident before, that this Promise was made to the Disciples of Christ,
as Believers, to quicken and strengthen their failing, drooping Faith, in and
under that great Trial, of loosing the presence of their Master, which they
were to undergo; and being made unto them as Believers, though upon a
particular occasion, is made to all Believers: for a quatenus ad omne valet
argumentum.

2. It is no less evident, that according to the interpretation, here, without
the least attempt of proof, importunately suggested, the Promise is no way
suited to give the least Encouragement or Consolation unto the Disciples, in
reference to the Condition, upon the account whereof it is now so solemnly
given the^; It is alone as if our Savior should have said, you are sadly
troubled indeed, yea your hearts are filled with trouble and fear, because I
have told you that I must leave you, be not so dejected; I have kept you whilst
I have been with you in the world, and now I go away, and will send the Holy
Spirit into the world, that, whatsoever becomes of you, or any of you, whether
ye have any Consolation or no, he shall abide in the world (perhaps) with some
or other, (that is, if any do believe, which it may be some will, it may be
not) until the end, and consummation of it.

3. Is this Promise of sending the Holy Spirit given to the Apostles, or is it
not? If you say not, assign who it is given or made unto: Christ spoke it to
them, and doubtless they thought he intended them, and it was wholly suited to
their Condition. If it were made unto them, is it not in the letter of the
Promise affirmed that the Spirit shall abide with them for ever, to whom it was
given? If there be any subject of this Promise in receiving the Spirit, he must
of necessity keep his residence and abode with it for ever. The whole design
of this Section, is to put the persons, to whom this Promise is made, into the
dark, that we may not see them; yea to deny that it is made to any persons at
all, as the recipient subject of the Grace thereof. He tells ye, that he
abides in the world: how I pray? Doubtless not as the unclean Spirit, that
goes up and down in dry places, seeking rest and finding none. Christ
promises his Spirit to his Church, not to the world, to dwell in the hearts of
his, not to wander up and down. Nay he abides with the Apostles, and their
Spiritual posterity, that is Believers, in our Saviors interpretation John
17. 20. Are they then, and their posterity, (that is, Believers) the persons,
to whom this Promise is made, and who are concerned in it, with whom as he is
promised, he is to abide? This you can scarcely find out an Answer to, in the
whole Discourse. He tells you indeed, the Holy Ghost was not to dye, with such
other rare notions: but for any persons particularly intended in this Promise,
we are still in the Dark.

4. He tells us, That from such an abiding of the Holy Ghost with them, as
this, cannot be inferred his perpetual abiding with any one person,
determinately. But

1. What kind of abiding it is, that he intends, is not easily apprehended.

2. If on the account of this Promise, he is given to any person, on the same
account he is to abide with the same person for ever.

3. That, which he seems to intend, is the presence of the Spirit in the
Administration of the Word, to make it effectual, unto them to whom it is
delivered; when the Promise is to give him as a Comforter, to them, on whom he
is bestowed. But he adds Sect. 14.

4. And lastly, This particle (...) does not always import the certainty of
the thing spoken of, by way of event, (no, not when the speech is of God
himself) but often times the intention only of the Agent: so that the words
(that he may abide with you for ever) do not imply an absolute necessity of
his abiding with them for ever, but only; that it should be the intent of him
that should send him, and that he would send him in such a way, that if they
were true to their own interest, they might retain him, and have his abode with
them for ever. Turn the words any way, with any tolerable congruity, either to
the scope of the place, manner of Scripture expression, principles of Reason,
and the Doctrine of Perseverance will be found to have nothing in them.

Ans. 1. This is the (...), that when all Medicines will not heal, must serve
to skin the wound given our Adversaries cause, by the Sword of the Word. The
Promise is made unto Believers indeed, but on such and such conditions, as on
the account whereof, it may never be accomplished toward them. 2. This no way
suits Mr Goodwins interpretation of the place formerly mentioned and insisted
on: If it be, as was said, only a Promise of sending his Spirit into the World,
for the end by him insinuated, doubtless the word (...), must denote the Event
of the thing, and not only an Intention, that might fail of Accomplishment.
For let all, or any individualls, behave themselves how they will, it is
certain, as to the Accomplishment and event, that the Spirit of God shall be
continued in the World, in the sense pleaded for. But it is not what is
congruous to his own thoughts, but what may oppose ours, (that is, the plain
and obvious sense of the words) that he is concerned to make use of. It being
not the sense of the place, but an escaping our Argument from it, that lies in
his design, he cares not how many contrary and inconsistent Interpretations he
gives of it: haec non successit, alia aggrediemur via. The word (...) denotes,
(as is confessed) the intention of Christ in sending the Spirit: that is, that
he intends to send him to Believers, so as that he should abide with them for
ever: Now besides the impossibility in general, that the intention of God, or
of the Lord Christ, as God and man, should be frustrate, whence in particular
should it come to pass he should fail in this his intention? I will send ye
the holy spirit to abide with you for ever, that is, I intend to send you the
Holy Spirit, that he may abide with you for ever; what now should hinder this?
Why it is given them, upon condition that they be true to their own interest,
and take care to retain him; what is that I pray? Why that they continue in
Faith, Obedience, Repentance, and close walking with God; but to what end is it
that he is promised unto them? Is it not to teach them, to work in them Faith,
Obedience, Repentance, and close walking with God, to Sanctify them
throughout, and preserve them blameless to the end, making them meet for the
inheritance with the Saints in Light? In case they Obey, Believe etc. the Holy
Ghost is promised unto them, to abide with them to cause them to Obey, Believe,
Repent etc.

4. The Intention of Christ for the sending of the Spirit, and his abiding for
ever, with them to whom he is sent, is but one and the same. And if any
frustration of his intention do fall out, it may most probably interpose, as to
his sending of the Spirit, not as to the Spirits continuance with them to whom
he is sent; which is asserted absolutely upon the account of his sending him.
He sends him (...): his abode is the end of his sending: which, if he be sent,
shall be obtained. Upon the whole doubtless it will be found, that the
Doctrine of Perseverance finds so much for its establishment in this place of
Scripture, and Promise of our Savior, that by no Art or cunning it will be
prevailed withal, to let go its interest therein. And though many attempts be
made to turn and wrest this Testimony of our Savior several ways, and those
contrary too, and inconsistent with one another, yet it abides to look
straight forwards to the proof and confirmation of the Truth, that lies not
only in the womb and sense of it, but in the very mouth and literal
expression of it also. I suppose it is evident to all, that Mr Goodwin knows
not what to say to it, nor what sense to fix upon. At first it is made to the
Apostles, not all Believers; then when this will not serve the turn, there
being a Concession in that Interpretation, destructive to his whole cause, then
it is made as a Privilege to the Church, not to any individual Persons; but
yet for fear that this privilege must be vested in some individualls, it is
denied that it is made to any, but only is a Promise of the Spirits abode in
the world with the Word: but perhaps some thoughts coming upon him, that this
will no way suit the scope of the place, nor be suited to the inte^dme^t of
Christ, it is lastly added, that let it be made to whom it will, it is
conditional, though there be not the least intimation of any condition in the
Text, or Context, and that by him assigned, be coincident with the thing it
self promised. But hereof so far: And so our second Testimony, the Testimony
of the Son abides still by the Truth, for the confirmation whereof it is
produced: and in the mouth of these two witnesses, the abiding of the Spirit
with Believers to the end, is established.

Add here unto (thirdly) the Testimony of the third that bears witness in
Heaven,. 29.
and who also comes near, and bears witness to this Truth in the hearts of
Believers, even of the Spirit it self, and so I shall leave it sealed under
the Testimony of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. As the other two, gave in
their Testimony in a word of Promise, so the Spirit does in a real work of
Performance; wherein as he bears a distinct Testimony of his own, the Saints
having a peculiar Communion and fellowship with him therein, so he is as the
common seal of Father and Son, set unto that Truth, which by their Testimony
they have confirmed. There are indeed sundry things, whereby he confirms and
establishes the Saints in the Assurance of his abode with them for ever: I
shall at present mention that one eminent work of his, which, being given unto
them, he does accomplish to this very end and purpose; and that is his Sealing
of them to the day of Redemption. A work it is, often in the Scripture
mentioned, and still upon the account of assuring the Salvation of Believers. 2
Cor. 1. 22. by whom also ye are sealed. Having mentioned the Certainty,
Unchangeablenesse, and efficacy of all the Promises of God in Christ, and the
end to be accomplished and brought about by them, namely the Glory of God in
Believers, v. 20. ( all the Promises of God are yea and Amen, in him to the
Glory of God by us) the Apostle acquaints the Saints with one Foundation of the
security of their interest in those Promises, whereby the end mentioned, the
Glory of God by them, should be accomplished. This he ascribes to the efficacy
of the Spirit bestowed on them, in sundry works of his Grace, which he
reckons, v. 21, 22. Among them this is one, that he seals them; As to the
nature of this sealing, and what that Act of the Spirit of Grace is, that is so
called, I shall not now insist upon it. The end and use of Sealing is more
aimed at in this expression, then the nature of it; what it imports, then
wherein it consists. Being a term forensicall, and translated from the use and
practice of men in their Civil Transactions, the use, and end of it may easily
from the original rise thereof be demonstrated. Sealing amongst men has a two
fold use. First to give secrecy and security (in things that are under present
consideration) to the things sealed. And this is the First use of Sealing, by a
seal set upon the thing sealed. Of this kind of sealing chiefly have we that
long Discourse of Salmasius, in the vindication of his Jus Atticum against the
Animadversions of Heraldus. And 2ly to give an assurance, or faith, for what is
by them that seal, to be done. In the first sense, are things sealed up in
Baggs, and in Treasuries, that they may be kept safe, none daring to break
open their seals. In the Latter, are all promissory engagements confirmed,
established, and made unalterable, wherein men either in conditional compacts,
or Testamentary dispositions do oblige themselves. These are the Sigilla
appensa, that are yet in use in all Deeds, Enfeofements, and the like
Instruments in Law. And with men, if this be done, their engagements are
accounted inviolable. And because all men have not that Truth, Faithfulness,
and Honesty, as to make good even their sealed engagements, the whole Race of
mankind, has consented unto the establishment of Laws, and Governors,
amongst others, to this end, that all men may be compelled to stand to their
sealed Promises; hence, whatsoever the nature of it be, and in what particular
soever it does consist, the end and use of this work in this special
Acceptance, is taken evidently in the latter sense, from its use amongst men.
Expressed it is upon the mention of the Promises. 2 Cor: 1. 20. To secure
Believers of their certain and infallible accomplishment unto them, the
Apostle tells them of this sealing of the Spirit, whereby the Promises are
irrevocably confirmed unto them, to whom they are made, as is the case among
the Sons of men; sutably Ephesians. 1. 13. he says, they are sealed by the Holy
spirit of Promise; Heb. 9. 14.
that is, that is promised unto us, and who confirms to us all the Promises of
God. That the other end of security also, safety and preservation, is designed
therein, secondarily, appears from the appointed season, whereunto this sealing
shall be effectual: it is, to the day of Redemption, Ephesians: 4. 30. until the
Saints are brought to the enjoyment of the full, whole, and complete purchase
made for them by Christ, when he obtained for them eternal Redemption. And
this is a real Testimony which the Holy Spirit gives to his own abiding with
the Saints for ever; The work he accomplisheth in them, and upon them, is on
set purpose designed to assure them hereof, and to confirm them in the Faith
of it.

Unto an Argument from this sealing of the spirit thus proposed;: 30.
Those who are sealed, shall certainly be saved; Mr Goodwin excepts sundry
things Chapter 11. Sect. 42. Page 255, 256, 257. which because they are applied to
blurre that interpretation of the words of the Holy Ghost, which I have
insisted on, I shall briefly remove out of the way, that they may be no
farther offensive to the meanest sealed one.

He answers then first by distinguishing the Major Proposition thus; They who
are sealed, shall certainly be saved, with such a sealing, which is
unchangeable by any intervenience whatsoever, as of sin and Apostasy, so that
they cannot loose their Faith; but if the sealing be only such, the continuance
whereof, depends on the Faith of the sealed, and consequently may be reversed,
or with-drawne, it no way proves, that all they, who are partakers of it, must
of necessity retain their Faith: therefore ( says he) 2ly We Answer farther,
that the sealing with the spirit spoken of, is the Latter kind of sealing, not
the former, ( i.e.) which depends upon the Faith of those that are sealed; as
in the beginning or first impression of it, so in the duration or continuance
of it; and consequently there is none other certainty of its continuance, but
only the continuance of the said Faith, which being uncertain, the sealing
depending on it must needs be uncertain also: That the sealing mentioned,
depends upon the Faith of the sealed, is evident, because it is said, in whom
also after ye believed, ye were Sealed with the spirit of Promise.

Ans. I dare say, there is no honest man that would take it well at the hand of
Mr Goodwin, or any else, that should attempt by distinctions, or any other way,
to alleviate, or take off the credit of his Truth, and Honesty, in the
performance of all those things, whereunto, and for the confirmation whereof,
he has set his Seal. What acceptance an like attempt in reference to the
spirit of God, is like to find with him, he may do well to consider: In the
mean time he prevails not with us to discredit this work of his Grace in the
least. For,

1. First, This supposall of such interveniencies of sin, and wickedness in
the Saints, as are inconsistent with the life of Faith, and the favor of God,
as also of Apostasy, are but a poor mean insinuation, for the begging of the
thing in Question, which will never be granted of any such terms. An
interveniency of Apostasy, that is defection from the Faith, is not handsomely
supposed, whilst men continue in the Faith.

2. That which is given for the confirmation of their Faith, and on set purpose
to add continuance to it, as this is, cannot depend on the condition of the
continuance of their Faith. The Holy Ghost seals them to the day of
Redemption, confirming and establishing thereby an infallible continuance, of
their Faith, but it seems upon condition of their continuance in the Faith.
Cui fini? Of what hitherto is said this is the sum. If they who are sealed
Apostatize into sin and wickedness, they shall not be saved, notwithstanding
that they have been sealed: and this must pass for an answer to our Argument
proving that they cannot so apostatise, because they are Sealed, on purpose to
preserve and secure them from that Condition: Men need not go far to seek
for Answers to any Argument, if such as these, (pure beggings of the thing in
Question and argued) will suffice.

3. Neither does the beginning or first impression of the sealing depend upon
their Faith, any otherwise, but as Believers are the subject of it, which is
not to have any kind of dependence upon it, either as to its nature or use.
Neither does that place of the Apostle Fph. 1. 13. ( After ye Believed ye were
sealed,) prove any such thing, unless this general axiom be first
established, that all things which in order of nature, are before, and after,
have the Connection of Cause, and effect, or at least of Condition, and Event
between them; It proves indeed that their Believing is in order of nature,
antecedent to their sealing, respecting the use of it here mentioned; but this
proves not at all, that Faith is the condition of sealing: the bestowing of
Faith, and the grant of this seal to establish it, being both acts depending
merely, solely, and distinctly, on the free Grace of God in Christ; Though
Faith in order of nature, go before Hope, yet is no Hope bestowed on men on
the condition of Believing. The truth is, both Faith and Sealing, and all other
spiritual Mercyes, as to the Goodwill of God bestowing them, are at once
granted us in Jesus Christ: but as to our reception of them, and the actual
instating of our souls in the enjoyment of them, or rather as to the exerting
of themselves in us, they have that order which either the nature of the things
themselves requires, or the sovereign Will of God, has allotted to them;
neither does sealing bespeake any Grace in us, but a peculiar improvement of
the Grace bestowed on us. So that

4. We refuse the Answer suggested by Mr Goodwin, That Sealing depends (that is
in his sense) upon Believing as to the first grant of it, but not as to the
continuance thereof: and reject his supposall of one that has truly Blieved,
making shipwreck of his Faith, as to importune a cry, or begging of that which
it is evident cannot be proved. I shall add only that Mr Goodwin granting here
the continvance of Faith to be a thing, uncertain, which is a word to express
a very weak probability of a thing, is much fallen off from his former
confident expression of the only remote possibility of Believers falling away.
That their falling away should be scarsly possible, and yet their continuance
in the Faith very uncertain, is somewhat uncouth. But this is the foundation
of that great Consolation which Mr Goodwins Doctrine is so pregnant and teeming
withal, that it even groans to be delivered. Their continuance in Believing is
uncertain, therefore they must needs rejoice and be filled with Consolation.
But he Answers farther:

1. I Answer farther, by way of exception, that the Sealing we speak of, is
neither granted by God, unto Believers themselves, upon any such terms, that
upon no occasion, or occasions whatsoever,. 31.
as of the greatest and most horrid sins committed, and long continued in by
them, or the like, it should never be interrupted, or defaced: for this is
contrary to many plain Texts of Scripture, and particularly uuto all those,
where either Apostates from God, or evil doers, and workers of iniquity are
threatened with the loss of Gods Favor, and of the inheritance of Life, such
as Heb. 10. etc.

Ans. 1. It is the intent and purpose of God, that the Sealing of Believers
shall abide with them for ever: whence comes it to pass, that his Purposes do
not stand, and that he does not fulfill his pleasure? It is not that he
changes, but that men are changed: that is, the beginning of the change is not
in him; Occasion of it is administered unto him by men. When his Sealing is
removed from Believers, does God still purpose that it shall continue with
them, or no? If he does, then he puposeth that shall be, which is not, which it
is his will shall not be, and he continues in his vain Purpose to Eternity. Or
if he ceases to purpose, how is it that he is not changed? Such things speak a
change in the sons of men, and we thought had been incompatible with the
Perfection of the Divine Nature: even that he should Will and Purpose one thing
at one time, and another, yea the clean contrary, at another: Yea but the
Reason of it is, because the men concerning whom his Purposes are, do change;
This salves not the Immutability of God; Though he does not change from any new
consideration in himself, and from himself, yet he does from obstructions in
his way, and to his thoughts in the Creatures: yea instead of salving his
Unchangeableness, this is destructive to his Omnipotency.

2. This whole Answer is a supposall, that God may alter his Purposes of
confirming men in Grace, if they be not confirmed in Grace; or that, though
Gods Purpose be to seal them to the day of Redemption, yet they may not
continue, nor be preserved thereunto: and then Gods Purpose of their
continuance cease also. This is

3. More evident in his second Answer, by way of exception, which is made up of
these two parts. First a begging of the maine, and upon the matter, only thing
in question, by supposing that Believers may fall into the most horrible
sins, and continue in them to the end: so proving with great Evidence and
perspicuity, that Believers may fall away, because they may fall away. And 2. A
suggestion of his own Judgment to the contrary: And his supposall, that it is
confirmed by some Texts of Scripture, which (God assisting) shall be delivered
from this Imputation hereafter: And these two do make up so clear an Answer to
the Argument in hand, that a man knows not well what to reply: let us take it
for granted, that Believers may fall away, and how shall we prevent Mr Goodwin
from proving it? But he adds farther

Believers are said to be sealed by the Holy Spirit of God, against, or until,
or for ((...)) the day of Redemption, because that Holiness, which is wrought
in them by the Spirit of God, qualifies them, puts them into a present and
actual Capacity of partaking in that Joy and Glory, which the Great day of the
full Redemption of the Saints, (that is, of those, who lived, and dyed, and
shall be found such) shall bring with it; and it is called the Earnest of their
Inheritance.

Ans. How (...) comes to be against, or for, or to denote the matter spoken of,
and what all this is to the purpose in hand, he shows not. The aim of him the
words are spoken of, and the uninterrupted continuance of the work mentioned,
to the end expressed, seems rather to be intended in the whole Coherence of
the words. Neither is the use of Sealing, to prepare any thing, for such a
time, but to secure and preserve it thereunto. He that has a Conveyance Sealed
unto him, is not only capacitated for the present, to receive the estate
conveyed, but is principally assured of a Right and Title, for a continued
enjoyment of it, not to be reversed. It is not the nature of this work of the
Holy Ghost, wherein it is coincident which other acts of his Grace; but the
particular use of it, as it is a Sealing, and Gods intendment by it, to
confirm us to the day of Redemption, that comes under our Consideration. If it
were a season to inquire, wherein it consists. I suppose we should scarce close
with Mr Goodwin's description of it, viz. That it is a quallifying of men, and
putting them in an actual capacity to partake of Joy etc. He is the first, I
know of, that gave this description of it, and probably the last that will do
so. Of the Earnest of the Spirit in its propper place.

What he adds in the last place, namely,. 32.
if the Apostles intent had been to inform the Ephesians, that the gift of the
Holy Spirit, which they had received from God, was the earnest of their
inheritance, upon such terms, that no unworthiness, or wickedness
whatsoever, on their parts, could ever hinder the actual collation of this
inheritance upon them, he had plainly prevaricated with that most serious
Admonition, wherein he addresses himself to them afterward, For this ye know,
that no Whore-monger, etc. has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ; This
I say, is of the same alloy with what went before. For,

1. Here is the same begging of the Question as before, and that upon a twofold
account. 1. In supposing, that Believers may fall into such sins, and
unworthiness, as are inconsistent with the state of Acceptance with God,
which is the very thing he has to prove. 2. In supposing, that, if Believers
are sealed up infallibly to Redemption, the Exhortations to the avoidance of
sins, in themselves, and to all that continue in them, destructive to
Salvation, are in vain: which is a figment, in a case somewhat alike (as to
the reason of it) rejected by men, that knew nothing of the nature of Gods
Promises, nor his commands, nor the Accommodation of them both, to the
fulfilling in Believers, all the good pleasure of his Goodness.

2. The Assurance, the Apostle gives of freedom from the wrath of God, is
inseparably associated with that Assurance that he gives, that we shall not be
left in, or given up to such ways, as wherein that wrath, according to the
tenure of the Covenant of Grace, is not to be avoided. From this latter
Testimony, this Argument also does flow; Those, who are sealed of God to the
day of Redemption, shall certainly be preserved thereunto: their preservation
being the end and aim of God in his sealing of them. Mr Goodwins Answer to
this Proposition is, that they shall be so preserved, in case they fall not
into abominable sins and practices, and so Apostatize from the Faith; that is
in case they be preserved, they shall be preserved; but wherein their
preservation should consist, if not in their effectual deliverance from such
ways and courses, is not declared. That all Believers are so sealed, and to
that end, as above, is the plain Testimony of the Scripture, and therefore our
Conclusion is undeniably evinced.

Thus have we, through the Lords assistance, freed the triple Testimony of
Father, Son, and Spirit, given to the Truth under Consideration, from all
Objections, and exceptions put in thereunto: so that we hope the mouth of
iniquity may be stopped, and that the cause of the Truth in hand is secured for
ever. It is a fearful thing to contend with God. Let God be true and all men
liars.

CAP. VIII.
1. Entrance into the Digression concerning the Indwelling of the Spirit. The
manner of the ahode of the Spirit with them, on whom he is bestowed. Grounds of
the Demonstratious of the Truth. 2. The Indwelling of the Spirit proved from
the Promises of it. 3. Express affirmations of the same Truth. Psalm. 51. 11.
Romans 8. 9. opened. v. 11, 15. 1 Cor. 2. 12. Gal. 4. 6. opened. 1 Timothy 3. 14. 4.
The Spirit in his Indwelling, distinguished from all his Graces. Evasions
removed. Romans 5. 5. Explained. The Holy Ghost himself, not the Grace of the
Holy Ghost there intended. Rom 8. 11. opened: Gal: 5. 22. 5. A Personality
ascribed to the Spirit in his Indwellings. (1) In personal Appellations. 1
Ioh. 4. 5. Ioh. 14. 19, 17. (2.) Personal Operations. Romans 8. 11, 15.
explained. (3.) Personal circumstances. The Spirit dwells in the Saints, as in
a Temple. 1 Cor. 3. 16. Chapter 6. 9. 6. The Indwelling of the Spirit farther
Demonstrated, from the signal Effects ascribed in the Scripture to his so
doing: as (1) Union with Christ. 7. Union with Christ wherein it consists. 8.
Union with Christ by the Indwelling of the same Spirit in him, and us. 9. This
proved from, (1.) Scripturall Declarations of it: 2 Pet. 1. 4. How we are made
partakers of the Divine Nature. 10. Union expressed by caring the flesh, and
drinking the blood of Christ. Ioh. 6. 56. opened. 11. The Prayer of our Savior
for the Union of his Disciples. I^h. 17. 21. The Union of the Persons in the
Trinity with themselves. 12. (2) Scripturall illustrations for the
manifestation of Union. 13. The Union of Head and Members, what it is, and
wherein it does consist. 14. Of the Union between Husband and Wife, and our
Union with Christ represented thereby. 15. Of a Tree and its branches. 16. Life
and quickening given by the Indwelling Spirit, in Quickening, Life, and suitable
operations. 17. (2.) Direction and guidance given by the Indwelling Spirit.
Guidance or direction twosold. 18. The several ways, whereby the Spirit gives
guidance and Direction unto them, in whom he dwells. The first way by giving a
new understanding, or a new spiritual light upon the understanding. 19. What
light men may attain without the particular guidance of the Spirit. 20. Saving
Embracements of particular Truths, from the Spirit: 1 Ioh: 2. 20, 21. 21. The
way, whereby the Spirit leads Believers into Truth. 22. Consequences of the
want of this guidance of the Spirit. 23. The 3d thing received from the
Indwelling Spirit: Supportment. 24. The way, whereby the Spirit gives
supportment. 25. (1.) By bringing to mind the things spoken by Christ for their
Consolation: Ioh. 14. 16, 26. 26. (2.) By renewing his Graces in them, as to
strength. The benefits issuing, and flowing from thence. 27. Bestraint given by
the Indwelling Spirit, and how. 28. The continuance of the Spirit with
Believers, for the Renewall of Grace, proved: Ioh. 4. 14. 29. That Promise of
our Savior, at large opened. 30. The Water there promised is the Spirit. The
state of them, on whom he is bestowed. Spiritual thirst twofold: Ioh. 65. 13.
1 Pet. 2. 2. 31. The Reasons why men cannot thirst again, who have once drank
of the Spirit, explained. 32. Mr G's Exceptions considered, and removed. 33.
The same work farther carried on: as also: 3^, 35, 36. The Indwelling of the
Spirit in Believers, farther demonstrated by the Inferences made from thence.
37. The first. Our Persons Temples of the Holy Ghost. To be disposed of, in all
ways of Holiness. 38. Wildome to try Spirits. 39. The ways, means, and
helps, whereby the Saints discern between the voice of Christ, and the voice
of Satan.

HAving showed,. 1.
that the Holy Spirit is purchased for us, by the Oblation of Christ, and
bestowed on us, through his Intercession, to abide with us for Ever, a Truth
confirmed by the unquestionable Testimonies of the Father, Son, and Spirit; I
shall in the next place, (I hope to the advantage and satisfaction of the
Christian Reader) a little turn aside to consider how, and in what manner he
abides with them, on whom he is bestowed: together with some Eminent Acts, and
Effects of his Grace, which he puts forth, and exerteth in them, with whom
he abides, all tending to their preservation in the Love and Favor of God. A
Doctrine it is of no small use, and importance in our walking with God, as we
shall find in our pursuit of it. And therefore though not appearing so directly
Argumentative, and immediately subservient to the promotion of the Dispute in
hand, yet tending to the establishment, guidance, and consolation of them who
do receive it, and to the cherishing, increasing, and strengthening of the
Faith thereof, I cannot but conceive it much conducing to the carrying on of
the maine Intendment of this whole undertaking. I say then, upon the purchase
made of all Good things for the Elect by Christ, the Holy and Blessed Spirit of
God is given to them, to dwell in them personally, for the Accomplishment of
all the ends and purposes of his Oeconomie toward them, to make them meet for,
and to bring them unto the inheritance of the Saints in Light. Personally (I
say) in our Persons, (not by Assumption of our Natures, giving us mystical
union with Christ, not Personal Union with himself, that is not one
Personality with him, which is impious and blasphemous to imagine) by a
Gracious inhabitation, distinct from his Essential filling all things, and his
energeticall operation of all things as he will, as shall afterward be
declared. Now this being a Doctrine of pure Revelation, our Demonstrations of
it must be merely Scriptuall, and such (as will instantly appear) we have
provided in great plenty. In the carrying on then of this undertaking, I shall
do these two things.

1. Produce some of those many Texts of Scripture, which are pregnant of this
Truth.

2. Show what great things do issue from thence, and are affirmed in reference
thereunto, being inferences of a supposall thereof, all conducing to the
preservation of Believers, in the Love and Favor of God, unto the end. For the
first, I shall refer them to 4. heads; unto 1. Promises, that he should so
dwell in us. 2. Positive Affirmations that he does so. 3. Those Texts that hold
out his being distinguished from all his Graces, and Gifts, in his so doing.
4. Those that ascribe a Personality to him, in his indwelling, in us. Of each
sort one, or two places may suffice.


1. The indwelling of the Spirit is the great and solemn Promise of the
Covenant of Grace; The manner of it we shall afterward evince. Ezekiel. 36. 27. I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my ways; In the verse
foregoing he tells them, He will give them a new heart, and a new Spirit, which,
because it may be interpreted of a renewed frame of Spirit, (though it rather
seems to be the renewing Spirit, that is intended as also Cap. 11. 19.) he
expressly points out, and differences the Spirit he will give them, from all
works of Grace whatsoever, in that Appellation of him, my Spirit, my Holy
Spirit; Him will I put with in you, I will give him, or place him, in interiori
vestro, in your inmost part, in your heart; or in visceribus vestris, in your
bowels, (as the Soul is frequently signified by expressions of sensual
things) within you. In his giving us a new heart, and new Spirit, by putting in
us his Spirit, certainly more is intended then a mere working of Gracious
qualities in our Hearts, by his Spirit, which he may do, and yet be no more in
us, then in the greatest Blasphemers in the world. And this in the carrying of
it on to its acco^plishment, God calls his Covenant Isa. 59. 21. This is my
Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee, shall not
depart from thee: upon thee, in thee, that dwells in thee, as was promised. And
this Promise is evidently renewed by the Lord Christ to his Disciples, clearly
also interpreting what that Spirit is, which is mentioned in the Promise of the
Covenant, Luke 11. 13. Your Heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask him, of him; that is, that pray to him for the Holy Spirit. Our
Savior instructs his Disciples to ask the Holy Spirit of God, upon the
account of his being so promised, as Acts 2. 23. All our supplications are to
be regulated by the Promise. And surely he, who (as shall afterward appear)
did so plentifully, Romans 8. 27.
and richly Promise the bestowing of this Spirit on all those, that believe on
him, did not instruct them to ask for any inferion Mercy, and Grace, under
that name. That Spirit which the Lord Christ instructs us to ask of the
Father, is the Spirit, which he has promised to bestow so on us, as that he
shall dwell in us. That the Spirit, which Christ instructs us to ask for, and
which himself promises to send unto us, is the Holy Ghost himself, the Holy
Spirit of Promise, by whom we are Sealed to the day of Redemption, I suppose
will require no labor to prove: what is needful to this end, shall be
afterward insisted on.

2. Positive affirmations that he does so dwell in,: 2.
and remain with the Saints, are the second ground of the Truth we assert; I
shall name one, or two Testimonies of that kind. Psalm. 51. 11. says David,
take not thy Holy Spirit from me. It is the Spirit, and his presence, as unto
Sanctification, not in respect of Prophesy, or any other gift whatever, that he
is treating of with God. All the Graces of the Spirit, being almost dead and
buried in him, he cries aloud that He, whose they are, and who alone is able to
revive and quicken them, may not be taken from him. With him, in him he was, or
he could not be taken from him. And though the Gifts or Graces of the Spirit
only may be intended, where mention is made of giving or bestowing of him
sometimes, yet when the Saints beg of God, that he would continue his Spirit
with them, though they have grieved him and provoked him, that no more is
intended, but some Gift or Grace, is not so clear. I know men possessed with
prejudice against this Truth, will think easily to evade these Testimonies, by
the Distinction of the Person, and Graces of the Spirit. Wherefore for the
manner how he is with them, with whom he is, the Apostle informs us, Rom: 8.
9. ye are in the spirit (that is, spiritual men, opposed to being in the
flesh, that is, carnal, unregenerate, unreconciled, and enemies to God) if so
be the spirit of Christ dwell in you: and if any man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is none of his: Not only the thing it self is asserted, but the
weight of our Regeneration, and Acceptance with God through Jesus Christ, is
laid upon it. If the Spirit dwell in us, we are spiritual, and belong to
Christ; otherwise not, we are none of his. This the Apostle farther confirms.
v. 11. if the spirit of him, that raised up Jesus, dwell in you: I know not how
the Person of the Holy Ghost can be more clearly decyphered, then here he is,
The spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead; Why that is mentioned, shall
afterward be considered. And this Spirit, as he bears Testimony of himself,
dwells in Believers, which is all we say, and, without farther curious enquiry,
desire to rest therein. Doubtless it were better for men, to captivate their
understandings to the obedience of Faith, then to invent Distinctions and
Evasions, to escape the power of so many plain Texts of Scripture, and those
literally, and properly, not Figuratively and Metaphorically, expressing the
Truth contained in then: which, though it may be done sometimes, yet is not in
a constant uniforme tenure of expression any where, the manner of the Holy
Ghost. The Apostle also affirms farther v. 15. that Believers receive the
spirit of Adoption to cry Abba Father; which being a work within them, cannot
be wrought and effected by Adoption it self, which is an extrinsicall
Relation. Neither can Adoption, and the Spirit of Adoption be conceived to be
the same. He also farther affirms it 1 Cor: 2. 12. we have received the
spirit, which is of God, that we might know the things, that are freely given
us of God. We have so received him, as that he abides with us, to teach us, to
acquaint our hearts, with Gods dealing with us: bearing witness with our
spirits to the condition wherein we are, in reference to our Favor from God,
and Acceptance with him; and the same he most distinctly asserts Gal. 4. 6.
God has sent forth the spirit of his Son, into our hearts, crying Abba
Father. The distinct Economy of the Father, Son, and Spirit, in the work of
Adoption, is clearly discovered. He is sent, sent of God, that is, the Father.
That name is Personally to be appropriated, when it is distinguished (as here)
from Son, and Spirit; That is the Fathers work, that work of his Love, he
sends him. He has sent him, as the spirit of his Son, procured by him for
us, promised by him to us, proceeding from him, as to his personal
subsistence, and sent by him, as to his office of Adoption and Consolation.
Then whether the Father has sent the spirit of his Son, where he is to abide
and make his residence is expressed; it is into our Hearts says the Apostle:
there he dwells and abides. And lastly, what there he does is also manifested:
he setts them on work in whom he is, gives them privileges for it, Ability to
it, Encouragement in it, causing them to cry Abba Father; Once, and again, to
Timothy, does the same Apostle assert the same truth, 1 Epist. 3. 14. the good
thing committed unto thee, keep by the Holy Spirit, which dwells in us. The
Lord knowing how much of our Life and Consolation depends on this Truth,
redoubles his Testimony of it, that we might receive it: even we, who are
dull and slow of heart to believe the things that are written.

3. Whereas some may say,. 3.
it cannot be denied, but that the Spirit dwells in Believers, but yet this is
not personally, but only by his Grace, though I might reply, that this indeed,
and upon the matter, is not to distinguish, but to deny, what is positively
affirmed. To say the Spirit dwells in us, but not the Person of the Spirit, is
not to distinguish, de modo, but to deny the thing it self; To say, the Graces
indeed of the Spirit are in us, (not dwell in us, for an Accident is not
properly said to dwell in its subject) but the Spirit it self does not dwell
in us, is expressly to cast down what the word sets up. If such distinctions
ought to be of force, to evade so many positive and plain Texts of Scripture,
as have been produced; it may well be questioned, whether any Truth be capable
of proof from Scripture or no. Yet I say farther, to obviate such Objections,
and to prevent all quarrellings for the future, the Scripture it self, as to
this business of the Spirits indwelling, plainly distinguishes between the
Spirit it self, and his Graces: He is (I say) distinguished from them, and
that in respect to his indwelling. Romans 5. 5. The Love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, that is given to us: The Holy Ghost is given to
us, to dwell in us, as has been abundantly declared, and shall yet farther be
demonstrated. Here He is mentioned together with the Love of God, and his
shedding thereof abroad in our Hearts; that is, with his Graces: and is as
clearly distinguished and differenced from them, as Cause and effect. Take the
Love of God, in either sense, that is controverted about this place, for our
Love to God, or a sense of his Love to us, and it is an eminent Grace of the
Holy, Spirit. If then by the Holy Ghost given unto us ye understand only the
Grace of the Holy Ghost, He being said to be given, because that is given, then
this must be the sense of the place, The Grace of the Holy Ghost is shed abroad
in our Hearts, by the Grace of the Holy Ghost, that is given to us. Farther, if
by the Holy Ghost, be meant only his Grace, I require what Grace it is, hereby
the expression intended? Is it the same with that expressed, the Love of God?
This were to confound the efficient cause with its effect. Is it any other
Grace, that does produce the great work mentioned? Let us know what that Grace
is, that has this power and energie in its hand, of shedding abroad the Love
of God in our Hearts. So Romans 8. 11. He shall quicken your mortal bodies by
the Spirit, that dwells in you. This quickening of our mortal bodies is
generally confessed to be (and the scope of the place inforceth that sense) our
Spiritual quickening in our mortal bodies: mention being made of our bodies,
in Analogy to the body of Christ: by his death, we have life, and quickening.
Donbtlesse then it is a Grace of the Spirit that is intended. Yea the habitual
principle of all Graces. And this is wrought in us by the Spirit that dwells
in us. There is not any Grace of the Spirit whereby he may dwell in men,
antecedent to his Quickening of them. Spiritual Graces, have not their
residence in dead souls. So that this must be the Spirit himself dwelling in
us, that is here intended, and that personally: or the sense of the words must
be, The Grace of quickening our mortal bodies, is wrought in us, by the Grace
of Quickening our mortal bodies that dwells in us: which is plainly to confound
the Cause and Effect; Besides it is the same Spirit that raised up Jesus from
the dead, that is intended, which doubtless was not any inherent Grace, but
the Spirit of God himself, working by the exceeding greatness of his Power.
Thus much is hence cleared. Antecedent in order of nature to our Quickening,
there is a Spirit given to us, to dwell in us. Every efficient Cause has at
least the precedence of its effect. No Grace of the Spirit is bestowed on us
before our Quickening, which is, the preparation, and fitting of the subject for
the receiving of them; the planting of the Root that contains them vertually,
and brings them forth actually in their order. Gal. 5. 22. All Graces
whatsoever come under the name of the fruit of the Spirit: that is, which the
Spirit in us brings forth, as the Root does the fruit, which in its sodoing,
is distinct therefrom. Many oher instances might be given, but these may
suffice.

4. There is a Personallity ascribed to the Holy Ghost, in his dwelling in us
and that in such a way,. 4.
as cannot be ascribed to any Created Grace, which is but a Quality in a
subject, and this the Scripture does three ways: 1. In personal Appellations.
2. In personal Operations. 3. Personal Circumstances.


1. First there are ascribed to the indwelling Spirit, in his indwelling,
Personal Appellations; He that is in you, is greater then he that is in the
world ((...):) He that is in you, is a personal Denomination, which cannot be
used of any Grace, or gracious habit whatsoever: so John 14 16, 17. He shall
abide with you, he dwells with you, shall be in you, (...) John 16. 13. But
when the Spirit of Truth is come, (...). His Person is as signally designed and
expressed, as in any place of Scripture to what intent or purpose soever
mentioned. Neither is it possible to apprehend, that the Scripture would so
often, so expressly affirm the same thing in plain proper words, if they were
not to be taken, in the sense which they hold out. The maine Emphasis of the
Expression lies upon the Terms that are of a personal designation, and to
evade the force of them by the fore mentioned distinction which they seem
signally to obviate and prevent: is to say what we please, so we may oppose
what pleases us not.

2. Personal Operations, such acts and actings, as are proper to a person
only, are ascribed to the Spirit in his indwelling. That place mentioned before
Romans 8. 11. is clear hereunto, But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead, dwell in you, he who raised Christ from the dead shall quicken
your mortal bodies by his Spirit which dwelteh in you, or, by his indwelling
Spirit, (...). To quicken our mortal bodies is a Personal acting, and such as
cannot be wrought but by an Almighty Agent. And this is ascribed to the Spirit
as inhabiting, whch is in order of nature antecedent to his quickening of us, as
was manifested. And the same is asserted, v. 15. The Spirit bears witness
with our spirits, that we are the Sons of God: That Spirit, that dwells in
us, bears witness in us, a distinct Witness by himself, distinguished from
the Testimony of our own spirit here mentioned, is either an Act of our
natural Spirits, or Gracious fruit of the Spirit of God in our hearts; If the
first, what makes it in the things of God? Is any Testimony of our natural
spirits of any value, to assure us that we are the Children of God? If the
latter, then is there here an immediate operation of the Spirit dwelling in our
hearts, in witnesse-bearing, distinct from all the fruits of Grace whatever.
And on this account it is that, whereas 1 Epistle of John 5. 7, 8. the Father,
Son, and Spirit, are said to bear witness in Heaven, the Spirit is moreover
peculiarly said to bear witness in the Earth, together with the Blood, and
Water.

3. There are such Circumstances ascribed to him in his indwelling, as are
proper only to that which is a Person; I will instance only in one, his
dwelling in the Saints as in a Temple, 1 Cor. 3. 16. Ye are the Temple of God,
and his Spirit dwells in you; that is, as in a Temple; so plainly chap. 6.
19. Your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which you have
of God, giving us both the distinction of the Person of the Spirit, from the
other Persons, he is given us of God, and his residence with us, being so
given, he is in us, as also the manner of his in-being, as in a Temple; Nothing
can make a place a Temple, but the Relation it has unto a Deity. Graces that
are but Qualifications of, and Qualities in a Subject, cannot be said to dwell
in a Temple; This the Spirit does: and therefore as a voluntary Agent in an
habitation, not as a necessary or natural principle in a subject: and though
every act of his be Omnipotent intensively, being the act of an Omnipotent
Agent, yet he works not in the acts extensively, to the utmost of his
Omnipotency: he exerteth and puts forth his Power, and brings forth his Grace
in the hearts of them, with whom he dwells as he pleases: to one he
comunicates more Grace, to another less: yea he gives more strength to one and
the same person, at one time, and in one condition, 1 Cor. 12.
then another, dividing to every one as he will: and if this peculiar manner of
his personal presence with his Saints, distinct from his Ubiquity or
Omnipresence, may not be believed, because not well by reason conceived, we
shall lay a Foundation for the questioning principles of Faith, which as yet we
are not fallen out withal.

And this is our first manifestation of the Truth concerning the Indwelling of
the Spirit in the Saints from the Scripture. The second will be from the
signal Issues, and benefits, which are asserted to arise from this indwelling
of the Spirit in them, of which I shall give sundry instances.

1. The first signal Issue and Effect which is ascribed to this Indwelling of
the Spirit,. 6.
is Union; not a Personal Union with himself, which is impossible: He does
not assume our natures, and so prevent our Personality, which would make us one
Person with him, but dwells in our Persons, keeping his own, and leaving us
our Personality infinitely distinct; But it is a spiritual Union; the great
Union mentioned so often in the Gospel, that is the sole fountain of our
Blessedness; our Union with the Lord Christ, which we have thereby.

Many thoughts of heart there have been about this Union;. 7.
what it is, wherein it does consist, the causes, manner, and Effects of it;
The Scripture expresses it, to be very Eminent, near, durable, setting it out,
for the most part, by similitudes, and Metaphorical Illustrations, to lead
poor weak Creatures into some useful, needful acquaintance with that
Mystery, whose depths in this life, they shall never fathom: That many in the
days wherein we live, have miscarried in their conceptions of it, is evident;
some to make out their Imaginary Union, have destroyed the person of Christ,
and fancying a way of uniting man to God by him, have left him to be neither
God nor Man. Others have destroyed the Person of Believers, affirming that in
their Union with Christ, they loose their own Personality, that is, cease to be
Men: or at least these or these Individual men.

I intend not now to handle it at large, but only (and that I hope without
offense) to give in my thoughts concerning it, as far as it receives light
from, and relates unto, what has been before delivered, concerning the
Indwelling of the Spirit, and that without the least contending about other
ways of Expression.

I say then,. 3.
this is that which gives us Union with Christ, and that wherein it consists;
even that the one, and selfsame Spirit, dwells in him and us; The first
saving Elapse from God, upon the Hearts of the Elect, is the Holy Spirit. Their
quickening is every where ascribed to the Spirit, that is given unto them; There
is not a quickening, a life-giving Power, in a quality, a created thing. In the
state of Nature, besides gracious dispensations and habits in the Soul
inclining it to that which is good, and making it a suitable subject for
spiritual Operations, John 5. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2.
we want also a vital Principle, which should actuate the disposed subject
unto answerable Operations; this a quality cannot give. He that carries on the
work of quickening, does also begin it. Rom: 8. 11. All Graces whatever, Gal.
5. 22.
(as was said) are the fruits of the Spirit; and therefore, in order of Nature,
are wrought in men, consequentially to his being bestowed on them: Now in the
first bestowing of the Spirit, we have Union with Christ, the carrying on
whereof, consists in the farther manifestation, and operations of the
Indwelling Spirit, which is called Communion: To make this evident, that our
Union with Christ consists in this, the same Spirit dwelling in him and us, and
that this is our Union; let us take a view of it First, from Scripturall
Declarations of it; and then Secondly, from Scripture Illustrations of it, both
briefly, being not my direct business in hand.

1. First Peter tells us,. 9.
that it is a participation of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. We are by the
Promises made partakers of the Divine Nature; that is, it is promised to be
given unto us, which when we receive, we are made partakers of, by the
Promises. That this participation of the Divine Nature (let it be interpreted
how it will) is the same, upon the matter, with our Union with Christ, is not
questioned: that (...) should be only a gracious habit, quality, or disposition
of Soul in us, I cannot easily receive; that is somewhere called (...), 2 Cor.
5. 17.
the New Crea ure, but no where (...) the Divine Nature. The pretended high and
spiritual, but indeed gross and carnal conceits of some, from hence,
destructive to the Nature of God and Man, I shall not turn aside to consider;
What that is of the Divine Nature, or wherein it does consist, that we are made
partakers of by the Promises, I showed before: That the Person of the Holy and
Blessed Spirit is promised to us, whence he is called the Holy Spirit of
Promise: Ephesians. 1. 13. has been I say by sundry evidences manifested: Upon the
Accomplishment of that Promise, he coming to dwell in us, we are said in him,
by the Promises, to be made partakers of the Divine Nature. We are (...), we
have our Communion with it: Our participation then of the Divine Nature, being
our Union with Christ, consists in dwelling of the same Spirit in him and in
us, we receiving him by the Promise for that end.

2. Christ tells us,: 10.
that this Union arises from the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his
blood, Ioh: 6. 56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in
me, and I in him; The mutual Indwelling of Christ and his Saints, is their
Union: this, says Christ, is from their Eating my flesh, and Drinking my
blood; But how may this be done? Many were offended, when this saying was
spoken: near and close trialls of sincerity, drive hypocrites into Apostasy;
from his Christ takes away this scruple v 63. it is (says he) the spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: It is by the Indwelling of the
quickening Spirit, whereby we have a real participation of Christ, whereby he
dwells in us, and we in him; So,

3. He prays for his Disciples Ioh. 17. 21. that they may be one,. 11.
as the Father in him, and he in the Father, that they may be one in the Father
and Son, and v. 22. let them be one, even as we are one; And that ye may not
think that it is only union with, and among themselves, that he presses for,
(though indeed that which gives them Union with Christ, gives them Union one
with another also, and that which constitutes them of the Body, unites them to
the Head, and there is one Body, because, there is one Spirit Ephesians. 4. 4. which
even Lombard himself had some notion of, in his Assertion, that Charity, which
is in us, is the person of the Holy Ghost, from that place of the Apostle God
is Love;) I say, he farther manifests, that it is Union with himself, which he
intends v. 23. I in them (says he) and thou in me. This Union then with him,
our Savior declares by, or at least illustrates by resemblance, unto his union
with the Father. Whether this be understood of the Union of the Divine Persons,
of Father and Son, in the Blessed Trinity (the Union I mean, that they have
with themselves, in their distinct Personality; and not their Unity of Essence)
or the Union, which was between Father, and Son as Incarnate, it comes all to
one, as to the Declaration of that Union we have with him: The Spirit is
Vinculum Trinitatis, the Bond of the Trinity, as is commonly, and not ineptly
spoken; proceeding from both the other Persons, being the Love and Power of
them both, he gives that Union to the Trinity of Persons, whose substratum and
Ground, is the inestimable unity of Essence, wherein they are one. Or if you
take it for the Union of the Father with the Son Incarnate, it is evident and
beyond inquiry or dispute, that, as the Personal Union of the Divine Word, and
the Humane Nature, was by the Assumption of that Nature into one Personal
Substance with it self; so the Person of the Father has no other union with
the Humane Nature of Christ, immediately, and not by the Union of his own Nature
thereunto, in the Person of his Son, but what consists in that Indwelling of
his Spirit, in all fullness, in the Man Christ Jesus. Now says our Savior,
this Union I desire they may have with me, by the dwelling of the same Spirit
in me and them, whereby I am in them, and they in me, as I am one with thee O
Father.

2. The Scripture sets forth this Union by many Illustrations,. 12.
given unto it from the things of the nearest Union, that are subject to our
apprehension, giving the very terms of the things so united, unto Christ and
his, in their Union, I shall name some few of them.

1. That of Head and Members making up one Body,. 13.
is often insisted on: Christ is the Head of his Saints, and they being many
are Members of that one Body, and of one another, as the Apostle at large 1
Cor: 12. 12. even as the Body is one, and has many members, and all the
members of that one body, being many, are one body, so is Christ; The body is
one, and the Saints are one Body, yea one Christ, that is mystical. They then
are the Body: what part is Christ? He is the Head 1 Cor. 11. 3. the Head of
every man (that is, every Believer) is Christ; He is the Head of the Church,
and the Savior of the Body; Ephesians. 5. 23. he is the Head of the Body the
Church, Col: 1. 19. This relation of Head and Members (I say) between Christ
and his, holds out the Union that is between them, which consists in their
being so. As the Head and the Members make one Body, so Christ and his Members
make one mystical Christ; Whence then is it that the Head and Members have
this their Union, whereby they become one Body; Wherein does it consist? Is it
that from the Head, the Members do receive their influences of life, sense, and
guidance, as the Saints do from Christ? Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. They grow up unto him
in all things, who is the Head, from whom the whole body fitly framed together,
and compact, by the which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, grows up to an holy increase. So also
Col: 2. 19. holding the Head, from whom the whole body, by bands and joints
knit together, increases with the increase of God; But evidently this is their
Communion, whereunto Union is supposed. Our Union with Christ cannot consist in
the Communcation of any thing to us, as Members from him the Head: but it must
be in that which constitutes him and us, in the Relation of Head and Members;
He is our Head, antecedently in order of nature, to any communication of Grace
from him as a Head; and yet not antecedently to our Union with him; Herein then
consists the Union of Head and Members, that though they are many, and have
many Offices, Places, and dependencies, there is but one living, quickening
soul, in Head and Members. If a man could be imagined so big, and tall, as
that his feet should stand upon the Earth, and his head reach the starry
Heavens, yet having but one soul, he is still but one man. As then one living
soul makes the natural Head and Members to be one, one body; so one quickening
Spirit, dwelling in Christ and his members, gives them their Union, and makes
them one Christ, one body. This is clear from the 1 Cor. 12. 12. As the first
man Adam was made a living Soul, so the last man Adam, is made a quickening
Spirit.

Secondly,. 14.
Of Husband and Wife: The Union, that is between them, sets out the Union
betwixt Christ and his Saints; There is not any one more frequent Illustration
of it in the Scripture, the Holy Ghost pursuing the allusion in all the most
considerable Concernements of it, and holding it out, as the most solemn
Representation of the Union, that is between Christ and his Church. Ephesians. 5.
31, 32. For this cause shall a man forsake his Father and Mother, and cleave to
his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh: This is a great mystery, but I
speak concerning Christ and the Church. The transition is eminent from the
Conjugall Relation, that is between man and wife, unto Christ and his Church.
What the Apostle had spoken of the one, he would have understood of the other.
Wherein consists then the Union between man, and wife, which is chosen by God
himself to represent the Union between Christ and his Church? The Holy Ghost
informs us, Genesis 2. 24. They shall be no more twain, but one flesh; This is
their union, they shall be no more twain, but (in all mutual care, respect,
tenderness, and love,) one flesh. The Rise of this you have v. 23. Because of
the bone and flesh of Adam, was Eve, his helper, made; Hence are they said to
be one flesh. Wherein then, in answer to this, is the Union between Christ, and
his Church? The same Apostle tells us 1 Cor. 6. 16, 17. He (says he) that is
joined to an harlot is one flesh, and he that is joined to the Lord, is one
spirit: as they are one flesh, so these are one spirit; and as they are one
flesh, because the one was made out of the other; so these are one Spirit,
because the Spirit, which is in Christ, by dwelling in them makes them his
Members; which is their Union.

3. Of a Tree,. 15.
an Olive, a Vine, and its Boughs and Branches; I am the Vine, (says Christ)
ye are the Branches, John 15. 5. Abide in me, and I in you; As Tree and
Branches, they have an abiding Union, one with another; Wherein this consists,
the Apostle sets out under the example of an Olive and his Boughs, Romans 11. 16,
17. It is in this, that the Branches, and Boughs being ingrafted into the Tree,
they partake of the very same juice and fatness with the Root and Tree, being
nou^^shed thereby. There is the same fructifying fatning virtue in the one, as
the other: only with this difference, in the Root and Tree it is originally, in
the Boughs by way of Communication. And this also is chosen to set out the
Union of Christ, and his. Both he, and they, are partakers of the same
fruit-bearing Spirit; He that dwells in them, dwells in him also: only it is in
him, as to them, originally, in them by Communication from him. Take a Cyon a
graft, a plant, fix it to the Tree with all the art you can, and bind it on as
close as possible, yet it is not united to the Tree, until the Sap that is in
the Tree, be communicated to it, which communication states the Union; Let a
man be bound to Christ by all the bonds of profession imaginable, yet unless
the Sap, that is in him, the Holy and Blessed Spirit, be also communicated to
him, thereis no Union between them. And this is the first thing, that does
issue and depend upon the indwelling of the Spirit in Believers, even Union
with Christ: which is a Demonstration of it a posteriori.

2. The Spirit as indwelling, gives us Life and Quickening: God Quickens our
mortal bodies, (or us in them) by his Spirit, that dwells in us, (Romans 8. 11.)
by which Spirit Christ also was raised from the dead: and therefore the Apostle
mentioning, in another place, the beginning and carrying on of Faith in us, he
says, it is wrought according to the exceeding greatness of the power of God,
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 8. Now
in this Quickening there are two things.

1. The Actus primus, or the Life it self bestowed.

2. The Operations of that Life in them, on whom it is bestowed.

For the first, I shall not positively determine, what it is, nor wherein it
does consist. This is clear that by nature we are dead in trespasses and
sins. That in our Quickening, we have a new Spiritual life communicated to
us, and that from Christ, in whom it is treasured up for that purpose. But what
this Life is it does not fully appear, whilst we are here below. All actual
Graces confessedly flow from it, and are distinct from it, as the Operations of
it. I say, in this sense they flow from it confessedly, as suitable actings are
from habits: though to the actual exercise of any Grace within, new help and
assistance is necessary, in that continual dependence are we upon the
fountain. Whether it consists in that, which is called habitual Grace, or the
gracious suitableness and disposition of the soul unto Spiritual Operations,
may be doubted. The Apostle tells us, Christ is our Life. Gol. 3 4. When
Christ, who is our Life, shall appear. and Col. 2. 22. Christ Lives in me;
Christ lives in Believers by his Spirit, as has been declared; Christ
dwells in you, and his Spirit dwells in you, are expressions of the same
import and signification. But

2. God by his Spirit works in us both to will and to do, of his own good
pleasure. All vital actions are from him; it may be said of Graces, and
Gracious Operations, as well as Gifts, all these works in us that one and
self same Spirit, dividing to every one as he will. (But this is not now to be
insisted on.)

3. The Spirit as indwelling, gives guidance and direction to them, in whom he
is, as to the way wherein they ought to walk. Rom: 8, 14. As many as are lead
by the Spirit of God: The Spirit leads them in whom it is, and v: 1. They are
said to walk after the Spirit: Now there is a twofold Leading, Guidance or
direction.

1. Moral and Extrinsecall, the leading of a Rule.

2. Internal and Efficient, the leading of a Principle.

Of these, the one lays forth the way, the other directs, and carries along in
it. The first is the Word, giving us the Direction of a way, of a Rule; the
latter is the Spirit, effectually guiding and leading us in all the paths
thereof. Without this, the other direction will be of no saving use. It may be
line upon line, precept upon precept, yet men go backward, and are ensnared
David notwithstanding the Rule of the Word, yea the Spirit of Prophecy, for the
inditing of more of the mind of God for the use of the Church, when moved
thereunto, yet in one Psalm cries out four times, Oh! give me understanding to
keep thy Commandments, concluding that hence would be his life, that therein
it lay, Oh give me (says he) understanding and I shall live, Psalm. 119. 144.
so Paul bidding Timothy consider the Word of the Scripture, that he might know
whence it is, that this will be of use unto him, he adds, I pray the Lord give
thee understanding in all things 2 Timothy: 2. 7. How this Understanding is given,
the same Apostles informs us. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. The God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, give unto us the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation
in the knowledge of him, the eyes of our understandings being thereby
enlightened. It is the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, the Holy Spirit of God,
from whom is all Spiritual Wisdom and all Revelation of the will of God, 1
Cor. 2. 11.
who being given unto us, by the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our God in
him, inlightens our understandings, that we may know etc. And on this account
is the Son of God said to come and give us an Understanding to know him that
is true: that is, himself by his Spirit, 2 John 5. 20.

Now there be two ways,. 18.
whereby the Spirit gives us Guidance, to walk according to the Rule of the
Word.

1. By giving us the knowledge of the will of God, in all Wisdom and
Spiritual Understanding. Col. 1. 9. carrying us on unto all Riches of the full
assurance of Understanding, to the acknowledgment of God, and of the Father,
and of Christ, Cap. 2. 2. This is that Spiritual, Habitual, Saving
Illumination, which he gives to the Souls of them, to whom he is given: He,
who commanded light to shine out of darkness, by him, shining into their
minds, to give them the knowledge of his Glory in the face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4. 6. This is else where termed translating from darkness to light:
opening blind eyes, Col. 1. 13.
giving light to them that are in darkness, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
freeing us from the Condition of natural men, who discern not the things
that are of God. Ephesians. 5. 8.
This the Apostle makes his design to clear up and manifest 1 Cor. 1. He
tells you, Luke 4. 18.
the things of the Gospel are the Wisdom of God in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
even the hidden Wisdom, which God ordained before the world, unto our glory,
v. 7. And then proves that an acquaintance herewith, is not to be attained by
any natural means or abilityes whatsoever: v: 9. Eye has not seen, ear
has not heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for those that Love him: And thence unto the end of the Chapter,
variously manifests, how this is given to Believers, and wrought in them by the
Spirit alone; from whom it is, that they know the mind of Christ; But (says
he) God has revealed them unto us, by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all
things, even the deep things of God: for who knows the things of a man, but
the spirit of a man? and who knows the things of God but the Spirit of God?
and we have received the Spirit, not of this world, but the Spirit which is of
God, that we may know the things which are freely given us of God.

The word is as the way whereby we go: yea an external Light, Ps. 119. 119.
as a light to our feet, and as a Lantern to our paths; yea as the Sun in
the firmament, sending forth its beams of light abundantly. But what will this
profit, if a man have no Eyes in his head? There must not only be light in the
object, and in the medium, but in the subject, in our Hearts and Minds: And
this is of the operation of the Spirit of Light and Truth given to us, as the
Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 3. 18. we all with open face beholding the Glory of
God as in a glass, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, as by
the Spirit of the Lord:

This is the first way, whereby the Holy Spirit dwelling in us, gives Guidance
and direction: fundamentally, habitually, he enlightens our minds, gives us
eyes, understandings, shines into us, translates us from darkness into
marvelous Light, whereby alone we are able to see our way, to know our paths,
and to discern the things of God: without this, men are blind, and see nothing
a far off 2 Pet: 2. 9.

There are three things,. 19.
which men either have, or may be made partakers of without this, this
communication of Light, by the Indwelling Spirit.

1. They have the Subject of knowledge, a natural faculty of understanding;
their minds remain, though depraved, destroyed, perverted; yea so far that
their eye, Math. 6. 23.
and the light that is in them is darkness; yet the faculty remain still.

2. They may have the Object, or Truth revealed in the word; This is common to
all, that are made partakers of the good Word of God; that is, to whom it is
Preached and delivered, as it is to many, whom it does not profit, being not
mixed with Faith. Heb: 4. 2.

3. The way and means of Communicating the truth so revealed to their minds or
understandings, which is the Litterall, Grammatical, Logical delivery of the
things contained in the Scriptures, as held out to their Minds and
Apprehensions, in their meditation on them: and this means of convayance of
the sense of the Scripture, is plain, obvious, and clear, in all necessary
Truths.

A Concurrence of these three will afford, and yield them, that have it, upon
their diligence and enquiry, a Disciplinary knowledge of the Litterall sense of
Scripture, as they have of other things: By this means, the Light shines
(...), sends out some beams of light into their dark minds, but the darkness
comprehends it not, John 1. 5.
receives not the Light in a spiritual manner: there is notwithstanding all
this, still wanting the work of the Spirit before mentioned, creating and
implanting in and upon their understandings and minds, that Light and power of
discerning spiritual things, which before we insisted on. This the Scripture
sometimes calls, the opening of the understanding. Luk: 24. 45. sometimes the
giving an understanding it self, 2 Timothy: 2. 7. 1 John. 5. 20 sometimes, light
in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. Notwithstanding all the Advantages formerly spoken
of, without this men are still natural men, and darkness, not comprehending,
not receiving the things of God: that is, not spiritually, for so the Apostle
adds, because they Spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Receiving Spiritual
things, by mere natural mediums, they become foolishness unto them: This is
the first thing, that the Spirit dwelling in us, does, toward Guidance and
Direction: he gives a new Light, and Understanding, whereby in general we are
enabled to discern, comprehend, and receive Spiritual things.

2. In particular, he Guides and leads men to the embracing particular Truths
and to the walking in, and up,. 20.
unto them, Christ promised to give him to us for this end; namely to lead us
into all Truth. John 16. 13. He will guide us into all Truth; There is more
required to the receiving, entertaining, embracing, a particular Truth, and
rejecting of what is contrary unto it, then an habitual Illumination: This
also is the work of the Spirit that dwells in us; he works this also in our
minds and hearts: therefore the Apostle secures his little Children that they
shall be lead into Truth, and preserved from seduction, on this account, 1 John
2. 20. You have au Unction from the holy one (or, ye have received the Spirit
from the Lord Jesus) and you shall know all things: why so? because it is his
work to Guide and Lead you into all the things, whereof I am a speaking; And
more fully v: 27. You have received an Unction from him, that abides in you,
and you have no need that any teach you, but as the Unction teaches you of all
things, and is true, and is no lie, and as he has taught you, abide in him: It
is received as promised, it does abide as the Spirit is said to do, and it
teaches, which is the proper work of the Spirit in an eminent manner.

Now this Guidance of Believers by the Spirit,. 21.
as to the particular Truths, and actings, consists in his putting forth of a
twofold Act of Light, and Power.

First, Of Light, and that also is twofold.

1. Of Beauty, as to the things to be received or done; he represents them to
the soul, as Excellent, Comely, Desirable and Glorious, leading us on in the
receiving of truth, from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 2. 18. He puts upon every Truth
a new Glory, making and rendering it desirable to the soul, without which it
cannot be closed withal, as not discovering, either suitableness or
proportion unto the minds and hearts of men. And

2. By some actual elevation of the mind and understanding to go forth unto,
and receive into it self, the Truth, as represented to it: by both of them,
sending forth Light and Truth Psalm. 43. 3. blowing of the Clouds, and raising
up the day Star, that rises in our hearts.

Secondly, 2 Pet. 2. 19.
Of Power, Isa. 35. 6. The breaking forth of Streams, makes not only the blind
to see, but the lame to leap; Strength comes, as well as Light, by the pouring
out of the Spirit on us: Strength for the receiving and practice of all his
Gracious discoveries to us: He leads us, not only in General, implanting a
saving Light in the mind, whereby it is disposed and enabled to discern
Spiritual things, in a Spiritual manner, but also as to Particular Truths,
rendering them Glorious, and Desirable, opening the mind and Understanding by
new beams of Light, he leads the soul irresistably into the receiving of the
truths revealed: which is the second thing we have by him

I shall only observe for a close of this,. 22.
one or two Consequences of the weight of this twofold Operation of the
indwelling of Christ.

1. From the want of the first, or his creating a new light in the minds of
men, it is that so many Labor in the fire, for an acquaintance with the things
of God, It is (I say) a consequence of it, as darkness is of absence of the
Sun. Many we see after sundry years spent in considerable labors and
diligence, reading of many books, with a contribution of assistance from other
useful Arts and Sciences, Romans 1. 21, 22
in the issue of all their endeavors, do wax vain in their imaginations,
having their foolish hearts darkened, professing themselves wise, they become
fools, being so far from any Sap, and savor, that they have not the
leaves of ability in things Divine. Others indeed make some progress in a
disciplinary knowledge of Doctrines of the Scriptures, and can accurately
reason and distinguish about them, according to the forms, wherein they have
been exercised, and that to a great height of conviction in their own spirits,
and permanency in the profession they have taken up. But yet all this while
they abide without any effectual power of the Truth, Romans 6. 17.
conforming and framing their spirits unto the likeness and mould thereof.
They do but see men walking like trees: some shines of the light break in
upon them which rather amaze, then guides them, they comprehend it not. They
see Spiritual things in a Natural Light, and presently forget what manner of
things they were: and in the species, wherein they are retained, 1 Cor. 2. 12,
13, 14.
they are foolishness.

2. From the want of the latter, it is, that we our selves are so slow in
receiving some parts of Truth, and do find it so difficult to convince others
of some other parts of it, which to us are written with the beams of the
Sun. Unless the Truth it self be rendered a Glory to the understanding, and
the mind be actually enlightened, as to the Truth represented, it is not to be
received in a spiritual manner. Those who know at all, what the Truth is, as
the Truth is in Jesus, will not take it up upon any other more common account;
Sometimes in dealing with Godly Persons, to convince them of a Truth, we are
ready to admire their Stupidity, or perverseness, that they will not receive
that, which shines in with so broad a Light upon our spirits. The truth is,
until the Holy Spirit sends forth the Light and Power mentioned, it is
impossible, that their minds and hearts should rest, and acquiesce in any Truth
whatever. But

4. From this Indwelling of the Spirit,. 23.
we have supportment: our Hearts are very ready to sink and fail under our
trials: indeed a little thing will cause us so to do: flesh, Psalm. 73. 26.
and heart, and all that is within us are soon ready to fail. Whence is it,
that we do not sink into the deeps? that we have so many and so sweet, and
gracious Recoveries, when we are ready to be swallowed up? The Spirit, that
dwells in us, gives us supportment. Thus it was with David, Psalm. 51. 22. He
was ready to be overwhelmed under a sense of the Guilt of that great sin,
which God then sorely charged upon his Conscience, and cries out like a man
ready to sink under water, Oh uphold me with thy free Spirit, if that do not
support me, I shall perish: So Romans 8. 26. The Spirit helps bears up that
Infirmity, which is ready to make us go double. How often should we be
overborne with our burdens, did not the Spirit put under his Power, to bear
them, and to support us? Thus Paul assures himself, that he shall be carried
through all his trials, by the help supplied to him by the Spirit. Phil. 1.
19.

There are two special ways,. 25.
whereby the Spirit communicates supportment unto the Saints when they are
ready to sink, and that upon two accounts. First of Consolation; and then of
Strength.

1. The first he does by bringing to mind the things, that Jesus Christ has
left in store for their supportment. Our Savior Christ informing his
Disciples, how they should be upheld in their tribulations, tells them, that
the Comforter, which should dwell with them, and was in them, (Ioh: 14. 16,
17.) should bring to remembrance, what he had told them. v. 26. Christ had said
many things, things gracious and heavenly, to his Disciples: He had given them
many rich and precious Promises, to uphold their hearts in their greatest
perplexities; But knowing full well how ready they were to forget, and to let
slip the things that were spoken, Heb. 2. 1.
and how coldly his Promises would come in to their assistance, when retained
only in their natural faculties, and made use of by their own strength; to
obviate these evils, tells them, that this work he commits to the charge of
another, who will do it to the purpose: When ye are ready to drive away the
Comforter (says he) who is in you, he shall bring to Remembrance, and apply to
your souls, the things that I have spoken, the Promises that I have made,
which will then be unto you, as Life from the dead. And this he does every day;
How often, when the Spirits of the Saints are ready to faint within them, when
straites and perplexities are round about them, that they know not what to do,
nor whether to apply themselves for help or supportment, does the Spirit, that
dwells in them, bring to mind some seasonable, suitable Promise of Christ,
that bears them up quite above their difficulties and distractions, opening
such a new spring of Life and Consolation to their souls, as that they, who
but now stooped, yea were almost bowed to the ground, do stand upright, and
feel no weight or burden at all. Often times they go for Water to the well,
and are not able to draw; or if it be powered out upon them, it comes like rain
on a stick, that is fully dry. They seek to Promises for refreshment, and find
no more savor in them, then in the white of an Egg: but when the same
Promises are brought to remembrance by the Spirit the Comforter, who is with
them, and in them, how full of Life and Power are they?

2. As this he does to support Believers,. 26.
in respect of Consolation, so, as to the Communion of real strength, he
stirs up those Graces in them, that are strengthening and supporting. The
Graces of the Spirit are indeed, all of them supporting and upholding: If the
Saints fall and sink at any time, in any duty, under any trial, it is because
their Graces are decayed, and do draw back, as to the exercise of them: If thou
faint in the day of Adversity, it is not because thy Adversaries are great or
strong, but because thy strength is small, Prove: 24. 10. All our Fainting is
from the weakness of our strength: Faith, Waiting, Patience, are small: when
David's Faith and Patience began to sink and draw back, Psalm. 116. 11.
he cries All men are liars, I shall one day perish by the hand of mine
Enemies; When Faith is but little, and Grace but weak, we shall be forced, if
the Wind do but begin to blow, to cry out, save Lord, or we sink and perish:
let a Temptation, a Lust, a Corruption, lay any Grace a s^eepe, and the
strongest Saint will quickly become like Sampson with his hair cut, and the
Philistims about him; he may think to do great matters, but at the first
trial, he is made a scorn to his enemies; Peter thought it was the greatness
of the Winds and waves that terrified him, but our Savior tells him, it was
the weakness of his Faith that betrayed him. Mat. 14. 31. 32.
For relief in this condition, the Spirit, that dwells in the Saints, stirs
up, enlivens, and actuates all his Graces in them, that may support, and
strengthen them in their duties, and under their Tribulations. Rom: 5. Paul
runs up the influence of Grace into the Saints supportment, unto this Fountain.
v. 3. We glory in Tribulation; this is as high a pitch, as can be attained: to
be patient under Tribulation, is no small victory; to Glory in it, a most
eminent Triumph, a conformity to Christ, who in his Cross triumphed over all
his opposers; we are not only patient under tribulations, and have strength to
bear them, but, says the Apostle, we glory and rejoice in them, as things
very welcome to us; How comes this about? Says he, Tribulation works
patience; (that is, it sets it a work; for Tribulation in it self, will never
work, or beget patience in us) and Patience Experience, and Experience Hope,
and Hope makes not ashamed. It is from hence, that these Graces, Patience,
Hope, Experience, being set on work, do bear up, and support our souls, and
raise them to such an height under their pressures, that we have great cause of
rejoicing in them all: Yea but whence is this? Do these Graces readily come
forth, and exert themselves, with an efficacy suitable to this triumphing
frame? The ground and spring of all is discovered v. 5. it is because the Love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, that is given to us.
From this fountain do all these fresh streams flow: the Spirit that is given
us, that sheds abroad the Love of God in our Hearts, and thereby sets all our
Graces on work. He oils the wheels of the souls obedience, when we neither
know what to do, nor how to perform what we know.

5. This indwelling Spirit,: 27.
gives Restraint: Restraining Grace does mainly consist in moral persuasions,
from the Causes, Circumstances, and Ends of things; When a man is dissuaded
from sin, upon Considerations taken from any such head or place, as is apt to
prevail with him, that persuasion so applied and intended of God for that end,
is unto him restraining Grace: By this means does the Lord keep within bounds
the most of the Sons of men, notwithstanding all their violent and impetuous
lusts; Hell, shame, bitternessee, disappointment on the one hand; Credit,
Repute, quietness of Conscience, and the like, on the other, bind the^ to their
good Behavior. God through these things, drops an awe upon their Spirits,
binding them up from running out unto that compass of excess and riot in
sinning, which otherwise their lusts would carry them out unto. This is not his
way of dealing with the Saints, Jer. 31. 34.
he writes his Law in their hearts, and puts his fear in their inward parts,
that they may not depart from him, making them a willing people, through his
own Power. Psalm. 110. 3.
By his effectually remaining Grace, he carries them out, kindly, chearefully,
willingly, to do his whole will, working in them to will and to do, of his own
good pleasure: yet notwithstanding all this, often times, through the strength
of Temptation, the subtilty of Satan, and his readiness to improve all
Advantages to the utmost, the treachery and deceitfulness of indwelling sin,
and corruption, they are carried beyond the bounds and lines of that principle,
or Law of Life and Love, whereby they are lead. What now does the Lord do? They
are ready to run quite out of the pasture of Christ; does he let them go,
and give them up to themselves? Nay, but he sets an hedge about them, that they
shall not find their way. He leads them as the wild Ass in her month, that
they may be found: he puts a Restraint upon their Spirits, by setting home some
sad considerations of the evil of their hearts and ways, whether they are
going, what they are doing, and what shall be Issue of their walking so loosly.
Even in this life, what shame, what scandal, what dishonor to themselves,
their profession, the Gospel, their Brethren, it would prove, and so hampers
them, quiets their, Spirits, and gently brings them again under obedience unto
that principle of Love, that is in them, and the Spirit of Grace (whose yoke
they were casting off,) whereby they are lead. Many times then, even the Saints
of God are kept from sins, especially outward, actual sins, upon such
outward motives, reasonings, and considerations, as other men are: Peter was
broken loose, and running down hill apace, denying and forswearing his Master;
Christ puts a restraint upon his Spirit by a look toward him: this minds him
of his folly, unkindnesse, his former rash confidence, and engagement to dye
with his Master, and sets him on such Considerations, as stirred up the
principle of Grace in him, to take its place and rule again: and in obedience
thereunto, he not only desists from any farther denial, but Faith, Repentance,
Love, all exerting themselves, he goes out, and wept bitterly: It is so
frequently with the Saints of God, though in lesser evils: by neglect and
omission of duty, or inclination to evil, and closing with temptations, they
break out of the pure and perfect Rule and Guidance of the Spirit, whereby
they ought to be lead: instantly some Considerations or other are pressed on
upon their Spirits, taken perhaps from outward things, which recovers them to
that obedientiall frame, from whence, through violence of Corruption, and
Temptation, they had broken. Like an Hawke sitting on a man's hand, eating her
meat in quietness, is suddenly, by the original wildness of her nature,
carried out to an attempt of flying away with speed, but is checked by the
string at her heels, upon which she returns to her meat again. We have an
innate wildness in us, provoking and stirring us up to run from God. Were we
not recovered by some clog fastened on us for our Restraint, we should often
run into the most desperate paths. And this Restraint (I say) is from the
indwelling Spirit; He stirrs up one thing or other, to smite the Hearts and
Conscience, when it is under the Power of any Temptation to sin and folly. So
it was with David, in the Attempt he made upon Saul, when he cut of the lap
of his Garment; Temptation, and opportunity had almost turned him loose from
under the power of Faith, waiting, and dependence on God, wherein lay the
general frame of his Spirit: he is recovered to it by a blow upon the heart,
from some dismal Consideration of the Issue, and scandal of that which he was
about.

6. We have hereby also the Renewall,. 28.
daily Renewall of sanctifying Grace; Inherent Grace is a thing in its own
nature, apt to decay and dye; it is compared to things ready to dye. Rev. 3. 2.
strengthen the things that remain, (says Christ to the Church of Sardis) that
are ready to dye. It is a thing, that may wither and decline from its vigor,
and the soul may thereby be betrayed into manifold weaknesses and
backslidings. It is not merely from the nature of the Trees in the Garden of
God, that their fruit fails not, nor their leaves wither, Psalm. 1. 4.
but from their Planting by the Rivers of water; Hence are the sicknesses,
weaknesses, and decays of the Spirit, mentioned in the Scripture. Should he,
who had the richest stock of any living, be left to spend of it, without new
supplies, he would quickly be a Bankrupt; This also is prevented by the
Indwelling Spirit. He is the fatness of the Olive, that is communicated to the
branches, continually to keep them fruitful and flourishing: He is that golden
Oil, which passes through the Branches, and empties it self in the
fruitfulness of the Church. He continually fills our Lamps with new Oil, and
puts new vigor into our spirits. Psalm. 92. 10. thou liftest up my horn, as the
horn of an Unicorn, I am anointed with fresh oil, or renewed supplies of the
Spirit. And this Psalm. 103. 5. is called a renewing of Youth like the Eagles; a
Recovery of former strength and vigor, new power and ability for new duties and
performances; And how comes that about? says the Psalmist, it is by Gods
satisfying my mouth with good things: he satisfied his mouth with good things;
or answered his prayers: What these good things are, which the Saints pray for,
and wherewith their mouths are satisfied, our Savior tells us; your Father
(says he) knows how to give good things to them that ask them of him; which
expressing in another place, he says, your Father will give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask him of him; He is given us, and he renewes our strength as the
Eagles, making our souls which were ready to languish, prompt, ready,
cheerful, strong in the ways of God; To this purpose is that Prayer of the
Spouse. Cant. 4. 6. Awake O North wind, and come thou South, and blow upon my
Garden, that the savor of my spices may flow out; let my beloved come into his
Garden, that he may eat of the fruit of his precious things; She is sensible
of the withering of her Spices, the decays of her Graces, and her disability
thereupon, to give any suitable entertainment unto Jesus Christ; Hence is her
earnestness for new breathings, and operations of the Spirit of Grace, to
renew, and revive, and set on work again her Graces in her, which, without
it, could not be done; All Graces are the fruits of the Spirit. Gal. 5. 25, 26.
The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Kindness,
Goodness, Faith, Gentleness, Temperance; if the Root do not communicate
fresh juice and sap continually, the fruit will quickly wither; were there
not a continual communication of new life, and freshness unto our Graces,
from the Indwelling Spirit, we should soon be poor withered Branches: this
our Savior tells us, Ioh. 15. 4, 5. abide in me and I in you: as the branches
cannot bring forth fruit of themselves, unless they remain in the Vine, no
more can ye, unless ye abide in me; I am the Vine, ye are the Branches: he
who abides in me, and I in him, he brings forth much fruit, for separate
from me ye can do nothing. Our Abiding in Christ, and his in us, is (as was
declared) by the Indwelling of the same Spirit in him and us. Hence, says
Christ, have you all your fruit-bearing virtue, and unless that be continued
to us, we shall wither and consume to nothing; David in his spiritually
declined condition, entangled under the power and guilt of sin, cries out for
the continuance of the Spirit, and the restoring him, as to those ends and
purpose^ in reference whereunto, he was departed from him. Ps: 51. 21, 22. This
the Apostle prays earnestly, that the Ephesians may receive Chapter 3. 16, 17. I
bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he will give unto
you, according to the riches of his Glory, that ye may be strengthened with
might, by his spirit in the inward man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by
Faith, that ye being rooted, and grounded in Love etc. The inward Man is the
same with the new Creature, the new principle of Grace in the Heart; This is
apt to be sick, to faint, and decay; the Apostle prays that it might be
strengthened; how is this to be done? how is it to be renewed, increased,
enlivened? It is, says he, by the mighty power of the Spirit; and then gives
you particular instances in the Graces which flourish and spring up
effectually, upon that strengthening they receive by the might and power of the
Spirit, as of Faith, Love, Knowledge, and Assurance: the increasing and
establishing of all which, is ascribed there unto him. He who bestows these
Graces on us, and works them in us, does also carry them on unto perfection.
Were it not for our inflowings from that spring, our Cisternes would quickly be
dry, therefore our Savior tells us, that he, the Spirit, is unto Believers, as
Rivers of living water flowing out of their bowels. Ioh: 7. 38, 39. A never
failing fountain, that continually puts forth living waters of Grace in us.

This may a little farther be considered and insisted on, being directly to our
main purpose in hand: It is true indeed, it does more properly belong unto
that, which I have assigned for the Second Part of this Treatise, concerning
the Ground or Principle of the Saints abiding with God for ever; but falling in
conveniently in this order, I shall farther press it from Ioh. 4. 14.
whosoever (says our Savior) shall drink of the water, which I shall give unto
him, shall not thirst for ever: but the water which I shall give unto him,
shall be in him a fountain of water, springing up unto eternal life.

The occasion of these words is known;. 29.
they are part of our Saviors Colloquie with the poor Samaritan Harlot;
having told her that he could give her another manner of water, and infinitely
better then that which she drew out of Jacobs well, (for which the poor
Creature did almost contemn him, and asked him, whence he had that water
whereof he spoke, how he came by it, or what he made of himself: Did he think
himself a better man then Jacob who drank of that well, which she was
drawing water out of) to convince her of the Truth, and reality of his Promise,
he compares the water, that he would and could give, with that which she drew
out of the Well, especially as to one eminent effect, wherein the water of his
Promise did infinitely surmount that which she so magnifyed; for v. 13. he
tells her, for that water in the well, though it allayed thirst for a season,
yet within a little while she would thirst again, and must come thither to
draw; but says he, whosoever drinks of the Water I shall give him, thirsts
no more; and this he proves from the Condition of the Water he gives, it is a
well of Water, not a drought, not a Pitcherfull, as that thou carryest away,
but it is a Fountain, a Well: yea perhaps in it self it is so, a Fountain or
Well, but he that drinks of it, he has but one draught of that water; Nay
says Christ, it shall become a Well in him, not a Well whereunto he may go,
but a Well that he shall carry about in him. He that has a continual spring
of living water in him, shall doubtless have no occasion of fainting for
thirst, any more; This our Savior amplifies, and clears up unto her, from the
nature and energy of this Well of water, it springs up unto everlasting life;
in these last words instructing the poor sinful Creature in the use of the
Parable, that he had used with her. Having taken an occasion to speak to her
of heavenly things, from the nature of the employment that she was engaged in
at present; Two or three things may be observed from the words, to give Light
unto their tendency to the Confirmation of the Truth we have under
consideration.

First,. 30.
the Water here Promised by our Savior, is the Holy and Blessed Spirit: this
needs no labor to demonstrate. The Spirit himself so interprets it, John 7.
38, 39. He who believes on me, (says our Savior) as the Scripture says
rivers of living Water shall flow out of his belly: But this he said of the
Spirit, which they should receive, who believe on him; that which in one place
he calls a Well of Water springing up to Life in us, is in the other, in
equivalent terms, called Rivers of living Water, flowing out of our bellies:
And the Holy Ghost tells us, that he himself, the Blessed Spirit, is signified
by that expression. Neither is there any thing bestowed on us, that can be
compared to a spring of water, arising up, increasing, and flowing out
abundantly upon its own account, but the Spirit only. It is only the Spirit,
that is a fountain of refreshment, from whence all Grace does abundantly flow.
It is (I say) the Spirit, whereof we have been speaking, who is procured for
us, and bestowed upon us by Jesus Christ, which, as an everlasting Fountain,
continually supplies us with refreshing streams of Grace, and fills us a new
therewith, when the Channells thereof in our souls are ready to become dry. And

Secondly, the state and Condition of them, on whom this living Water is
bestowed, in reference thereunto, is described. Says our Savior, he that has
this Spirit of Grace, this well of living Water, shall never thirst. It is most
emphatically expressed by two Negatives, and an Exegeticall additionall term for
weight and certainty. (...) he shall never thirst to eternity: or as it is
exprssed, John 6. 25. (...) he shall never thirst at any time. There is a two
fold thirst.

1. There is a thirst totalis indigentiae of a whole and entire want, of that
men thirst after: and this is the thirst, that returns upon men in their
natural lives: After they have allayed it once with natural water, they
thirst again, and their want of water returns as entire and full, as if they
had never drank in their lives: Such a spiritual Thirst does God ascribe to
wicked men Isa. 65. 13. My servants shall eat, but you shall be hungry: my
servants shall drink, but ye shall be Thirsty. Their hunger and thirst is the
total want of Grace, not that they do desire it, but that they have it not.
And this thirst of total want of Grace, is that, that never shall, nor can
befall them, who have received the Spirit of Grace, as a Well of Water in them.
They can never so thirst, as to be returned again into the Condition, wherein
they were, before they drank of that Spirit.

2. There is also a Thirst of desire, and complacency of the good Things
thirsted after. In this sense they are pronounced Blessed, who hunger and
Thirst after Righteousness. Math. 5.
And Peter instructs us to grow in this Thirst more and more, the 1 Pet. 2. 2.
As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby. The enjoyment of the Spirit does not take away this Thirst, but begin
it, and increase it: and by this Thirst, as one means, are we preserved from
that total want and indigency, which shall never again befall us.

Thirdly,. 31.
our Savior gives the reason, why, and whence it is, that they, who drink of
this Water, are made partakers of his Spirit, shall thirst no more, or never be
brought to the Condition of total want of Grace, which they were in, before
they received him: because the water which I shall give them (says he) the
Spirit, which I shall bestow upon them, dwells in them (as we have showed)
shall be a well of Water, a fountain of Grace, springing up in them to
everlasting Life, continuing and perpetuating the Grace communicated, unto the
full fruition of God in Glory. There are (among others) three eminent things in
this Reason, to confirm us in the faith of the former Assertion.

1. The condition or nature of the Spirit in Believers. He is a Well, a
Fountain, a Spring, that never can, nor will be dry to Eternity.

2. The constant supplies of Grace that this Spirit affords them, in whom he
is: He is Water always springing up: so that to say he will refresh Saints and
Believ^ers with his Grace, provided that they turn not profligately wicked, is
openly to contradict our Savior Christ, with as direct opposition to the
design in the words, as can be imagined. This springing up of Grace, which from
him is had and received, which is his work in us, is that, whereunto this
profligate wickedness is opposed: and whilst that is, this cannot be. There is
an everlasting inconsistency be^ween profligate wickedness, and a never
failing spring of Grace.

3. His Permanency in this work and efficacy by it; this living Water springs
up to everlasting Life: He ceases not, until our Spiritual Life be
consummated in Eternity. This then is the sum of this Promise of our Savior;
He gives his holy Spirit to his, who lives in them, and gives them such
continual supplies of Grace, that they shall never come to a total want of
it; as they do of Elementary Water, who have once drank thereof. And from
this spring does this Argument flow. They on whom the Spirit is bestowed to
abide with them for ever, and to whom he constantly yeildes such supplies of
Grace, as that they shall never be reduced to a total want for ever, they
shall certainly and infallibly persevere: but that this is the Condition of
all that come to Christ by Believing, or that Christ has promised, that so it
shall be with them, is clear from his own Testimony now insisted on: Ergo.

Unto their Argument from the Promise of our Savior,. 32.
Mr Goodwin endeavors an Answer, Chapter 11. Sect: 10. 11. 12. page 232. 233. and
in the Preface of it tells us, that this Scripture does but face (if so much)
the business in hand; To face it I suppose, is to appear at first view in its
defense; and this indeed cannot well or colourably be denied, the words of it
punctually expressing the very Truth we intend to prove thereby: And this
notwithstanding the allaying qualification (if so much) must needs somewhat
prejudice the ensuing evasions; But we are yet farther confident, that upon the
more diligent and strict examination, it will be found, to speak to the very
heart and soul of the business in hand: and the Considerations of his Reasons
to the contrary, does seem only to give us farther light herein, and assurance
hereof. He says then,

Here is no Promise made, that they who once believe, how unworthily soever
they shall behave themselves, shall still be preserved by the Spirit of God, or
the Spirit of God in Believing, or that they shall be necessitated always to
Believe.

Ans. This is the old play still: It is not at all our intendment, to produce
any Promise of safe-guarding men in the Love of God, how vile soever they may
prove, but of preserving them from all such unworthiness, as should render
them utterly incapable thereof: And this is plainly here asserted, in the
Assurance given of the perpetual residence of the Spirit in them, with such
continual supplies of Grace from him, as shall certainly preserve them from
any such state or condition as is imagined: Of being necessitated to Believe, I
have spoken formerly. The expression is neither used by us, nor proper to the
thing it self, about which it is used, nor known in the Scripture as to this
purpose, and therefore we justly reject it, as to its signifying any thing of
the way and manner, whereby we are preserved by the power of God, through faith
unto Salvation. If it denotes only the certainly, and infallibility of the
event, as the phrase or locution is improper, so to deny, that there is a
Promise of our being preserved, by the Spirit of God in believing, is not to
Answer our Argument, but to beg the thing in Question, yea to deny the positive
assertion of the Lord Christ: But if there be not such a Promise in the words,
what then is in them, what do they contain? Says he,

2. They are only a Declaration and Assertion made by Christ, of the
Excellency, and desireablenesse of that life, which he comes to give unto the
World, above the life of nature, which is common unto all; This, by comparing
the words with those in the former verse, is evident: whosoever Drinks of
this water, shall thirst again; but whosoever Drinks of the water, that I
shall give him etc. that is, the best means, that can be had and enjoyed, to
render this present life free from inconveniences, will not effect it: but
whosoever shall Drink, Enjoy, Receive, and Believe the Doctrine, which I shall
administer unto him, shall hereby be made partaker of such a life, which shall
within a short time, if men be careful in the interim to preserve it, by
reason of the nature, and perfect condition, and constitution of it, be exempt
from all sorrow, trouble, and inconvenience whatsoever, as being eternal.

Ans. 1. That these words are only an Assertion of the excellency and
desireablenesse of that eternal life, which Christ would give, above the
natural, that the Woman sued to sustain, and that this appears from the
Context, is said indeed, but no more. It is true, our Savior does divert the
thoughts of the Woman, from the natural life, and care for provision about it,
with an insinuation of a better life to be attained: but is this all he does,
or is this the intendment of the words under consideration? Does not the maine
of the opposition, or difference which at present he speaks unto, lie in the
supplies, that are given for the two kinds of Life, whereof he speaks? The
Water he tells her, which she drew from that Well, by which he fate, for the
supply of her natural life, was such, that after her drinking of it, she
should quickly return to the same Condition of thirst, as formerly before she
drank of it; But that which he gave, was such, as that who ever drank of it,
should thirst no more, but be certainly preserved in, and unto the full
fruition of that Life, whereof it is the means and supply. The opposition is
not between the lives continued, but the mean of consolation, and its efficacy.

2. It is not the Condition of the Life natural, which is subject to
dissolution, and not capable of perfection, that is the Reason why they thirst
again and again that have Water natural for the refreshment thereof. But it is
the nature of the means it self, which is supplied, that is not fitted nor
suited to permanency, and abiding usefullnesse, (as the Water, which Christ
Promises, is,) that he insists on. There is not any thing leads us to suppose,
that it is the Imperfection of Life, and not the Condition of the means of
natural life, that is primarily intended in the instituted Comparison: though
the frailty, and nothingnesse of that life also, be afterward intimated, in
the substitution of Eternal life unto the thoughts of the poor woman, in the
Room thereof.

3. (I say that) it is not the Doctrine of Christ, but his Spirit principally,
that he is here said to give as Water: and that this is not promised to make
men partakers of Eternal Life, if in the interim they be careful to preserve
it; but to preserve them to it, and to give them that Care, which, as a Grace,
is needful thereunto. The plain intendment of the Promise is, that by the
water they drink they shall be kept and preserved in the Life, whereof they
are made partakers, unto the fullness and perfection of it; which preservation
by the parenthesis ( if any be careful in the interim to preserve it) is
directly taken away from the Spirit that Christ promises, and assigned to men's
own care, even in contradistinction to all the benefits, which they receive by
him, being so bestowed on them. The difference then here between Jesus Christ,
and Mr Goodwin, is this; Christ says, the Water that he shall give, will be a
well springing up to Everlasting Life; Mr Goodwin, That it is the Care of men
to preserve themselves, that produces that Effect.

4. The present exemption, which we have by the Waters of Christ's giving, is
not from sorrow and trouble, but from thirst: that is, from what is opposed
unto, and is destructive of that Life, which he also gives: as natural thirst
is unto natural life. But of this thirst, and our exemption from it, I have
spoken before. It is not then the nature and condition of the Life promised,
that he points unto, no farther then as it is coincident with the means of it,
here spoken of. Indeed this means of life, is our life, as to the inchoation
of it here below, and its daily growing up unto perfection. But he adds Sect.
11.

1. That he does not oppose that Life, which accrues unto me^ by drinking that
Water which he gives the^,. 33.
unto the natural life, which they live, by other means, in respect of the
present Condition, or Constitution of it, or as it is enjoyed by men in this
present world, is evident from hence, because he asserts it free from thirst,
(shall never thirst,). Now we know that the Saints themselves, notwithstanding
that life of Grace, which is in them, by drinking that Water that Christ has
given them, are yet subject to both kinds of Thirst, as well that which is
corporeal or natural, as that which is Spiritual; yea the Spiritual Thirst,
unto which they are now subject, though it argues a deficiency of what they
would farther have, or desire to be; and in that respect, is troublesome, yet
is it Argumentative of the goodness of their Condition. Mat. 5. 6.

Ans, 1. The sum of this Answer is; that the Life here spoken of, and
promised, is not that Spiritual life, whereof we are here made partakers, but
eternal life, which is for to come, which, when any attain, they shall never
fail in, or fall from; but whether they may or shall attain it or no, here is
nothing spoken. But here is no notice taken, of the maine opposition insisted
on by our Savior, between the supplies of the Spirit for life Eternal, which
fail not, nor suffers them to thirst, to whom they are given, and the supplies
of natural life, by Elementary water, notwithstanding which, they, who are
made partakers thereof, do in a short season, come to a total want of it
again. Instead of Answers to our Argument from this place, we meet with
nothing but perpetual diversions from the whole scope and intendment of it,
and at last are told, that the Promise signifies only, that men should not want
Grace, when they come to Heaven.

2. To prove that there is no Promise of any abiding spiritual Life here,
those words they shall never thirst, are produced; That we shall have our life
continued to the full enjoyment of it unto eternity, because such are the
supplies of the Spirit bestowed on us, that we shall never thirst, is the
Argument of our Savior: That there is no such life promised, or here to be
attained, because in it we shall not thirst, is Mr Goodwins.

3. It is not the intendment of our Savior, to prove that we shall not thirst,
because we shall have such a life; but the quite contrary, that we shall have
such a life, and shall assuredly be preserved, because the supplies of the
Spirit which he gives, will certainly take away the thirst, which is so
opposite to it, as to be destructive of it.

4. It is true, the Saints notwithstanding this Promise, are still liable to
Thirst, that Thirst intimated Mat. 5.6. after Righteousness; but not at all to
that Thirst, which they have a Promise here to be freed from; a Thirst of an
universal want of that water, wherewith they are refreshed; and that their
freedom from this Thirst, is their portion in this life, we have the Testimony
of Christ himself, he that believes on me, shall thirst no more. Ioh. 6. 35.
And the reason of their not Thirsting, is the receiving, and drinking in that
water, which Christ gives them, which, as himself says, is his Spirit, which
they receive who believe on him. Ioh. 7. 38, 39. neither is that Thirst of
theirs, which does remain, troublesome, as is insinuated, it being a grace of
the Spirit, and so quieting, and composing; Though they are troubled for the
want of that in its fullness, which they Thirst after, yet their Thirst is no
way troublesome: That then which is farther added by Mr Goodwin, is exceeding
sophistical.

Says he,. 34.
by the way, this spiritual thirst, which is incident unto the life which is
derived from Christ, and the waters given by him unto men, as it is enjoyed and
possessed by them in this present World, is (according to the purport of our
Savior's own arguing) an Argument, that for the present, and whilst it is
obnoxious to such a thirst, it is dissolveable and may fail; for in the latter
part of the said passage, he plainly implies, that the eternallnesse of that
life, which springs from the drinking of this water, is the reason or cause,
why it is exempt from thirst. Let the whole passage be read and minded, and
this will clearly appear: If then the eternality of a life, be the cause or
reason, why it is free from the inconveniency of thirst, Evident it is, that such
a life, which is not free from thirst, is not, during this weakness or
imperfection of it, eternal, or Privileged against dissolution.

Ans. 1. That we cannot thirst under the enjoyment of the Life promised, proves
this life not here to be enjoyed, is proved, because the eternallnesse of this
life, is the cause of its exemption from Thirst; But that the plain contrary
is the intendment of the Holy Ghost, I presume is evident to all men. The
reason of our preservation to Eternal Life, and being carried on thereunto, is
apparently assigned to those supplies of the Spirit, whereby our Thirst is
taken away; The taking away of our Thirst, is the certain means of our
Eternal Life, not a consequent of the Eternity of it. All the proof of what
is here asserted, is, Let the whole passage be read, and minded, in which
appeal, I dare acquiesce before the judgment seat of any Believer in the
World, whose concernment this is. It is here then supposed, that the Eternity
of the Life promised, is the cause of their not thirsting, in whom it is, which
is besides the Text; and that they may thirst again (in the sense spoken of)
who drink of that water of the Spirit, which Christ gives, which is contrary
unto it: and of these two supposalls, is this part of this discourse composed.

The ensuing Discourse, rendering a reason upon the account whereof, Life may be
called eternal, though it be interrupted and cut off, we shall have farther
time, God assisting, to consider, and to declare its utter inconsistency with
the intendment of the Holy Ghost in the expressions now before us.

He adds then in the last place Sect. 12.. 35.
That the intendment of Christ is not, that the water he gives, shall always end
in the issue of Eternal Life, but that it lies in a tendency thereunto.

Ans. Which, upon the matter, is all one, as if he had said, Christ says
indeed, that the water which he gives, shall spring up unto Everlasting Life,
and wholly remove that Thirst, which is comprehensive of all interveniences,
that might hinder it, (as God said to Adam, In the day thou eatest of that
fruit, thou shall dye) but he knew full well, that it might otherwise come to
pass: which, whether it does not amount to a calling of his Truth, and credit
in his Word and Promises, into question, deserves (as I suppose) Mr Goodwins
serious consideration. To conclude then, our Savior has assured us, that the
Living Water which he gives us, shall take away such Thirst, all such total
want of Grace and Spirit, (be it to be brought about, not by this or that
means, but by what means soever) as should cause us to come short of eternal
life with himself, which we shall look upon, as a Promise of the Saints
Perseverance in Faith, notwithstanding all the Exceptions, which as yet to the
contrary has been produced.

Having thus long insisted on this influence of the Mediation of Christ,. 36.
into the continuance of the Love and Favor of God unto Believers, by
procuring the Spirit for them, sending him to them, to dwell in them, and abide
with them for ever, (the most effectual principle of their continuance with
God) give me leave farther to confirm the Truth of what has been spoken, by
remarking some inferences, which the Scripture holds out unto us, upon a
supposition of those Assertions, which we have laid down concerning the
Indwelling of the Spirit, and the Assistance which we receive from him on that
account, all tending to the end and purpose we have in hand. As,

1. First,. 37.
because the Spirit dwells in us, we are therefore to consider, and dispose of
our persons, as Temples of the Holy Ghost, that is, of this Indwelling Spirit:
the Scripture manifesting hereby, that the Doctrine of the Indwelling of the
Spirit, is not only a Truth, but a very useful Truth, being made the Fountain
of, and the inforcement unto so great a duty. He dwells in us, and we are to
look well to his habitation; our Savior tells us, that when the evil Spirit
finds his dwelling swept and garnished, Mat. 12.44.
he instantly takes possession, and brings company with him: he will not be
absent from it, when it is fitted for his turn. In reference to the Saints, and
their holy Indweller, this the Apostle urges. 1 Cor. 6. 19. Your Bodies are
the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which dwells in you, whence he concludes, whose
ye are, not your own, and therefore ought to glorify God in your Bodies; From
hence is the strength of his Argument, for the avoiding of all uncleanness. v.
16. 17. Know ye not that he who is joined to an Harlot, is one body? he who is
joined to the Lord is one spirit: fly Fornication, know ye not that your Body
is the Temple of the Holy Ghost? On this account also does he press to
universal holiness. 1 Cor: 3. 16. 17. Know ye not that ye are the Temples of
God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? if any man desile the Temple
of God, him shall God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye
are. In v. 12. 13. 14. the Apostle discovers the fruitlesnesse of Building hay
and stubble, light and unsound Doctrines or practices, upon the foundation of
Faith in Jesus Christ once laid, and tells us, that all such things shall burn
and suffer loss, and put the contrivers and workers of them to no small
difficulty, in escaping like men, when the Garments they are clothed withal,
are on fire about them. On the account of this sad event, of foolish and
careless walking, he presses v.16. as was said, earnestly to universal
Holiness, laying down as the great motive thereunto, that which we have
insisted on, viz. the Indwelling of the Holy Spirit in us: know ye not that ye
are the Temple of God? The Temple, wherein God of old did dwell, was built with
hewn stone, Cedar, Wood, and overlaid with pure Gold; and will ye now, who are
the spiritual Temple of God, build up your Souls with hay, and stubble? Which
he furthers, by that dreadful commination taken from the zeal of God for the
purity of his Temple; so that on each hand, he does press to the universal
close keeping of our Hearts in all Holiness, and purity, because of the
Indwelling of the Holy Spirit. And indeed, where ever we are said to be Temples
of God, or an Habitation for him, as it still relates to this cause of the
Expression which we now insist upon, so there is ever some intimation of
Holiness, to be pursued on that account. Ephesians: 2. 21. 22. In whom the whole
building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, in
whom ye also are builded together, for an habitation of God through the Spirit;
being made an habitation of the Lord, by the Spirits Indwelling in us, we grow
up, or thrive in grace, into an Holy Temple to the Lord, to be a more complete
and well furnished Habitation for him.

This then is that which I say: The Truth of what has formerly been spoken,
concerning the manner of the Spirits abode with us, being procured for us by
Jesus Christ, is farther cleared by this inference, that the Scripture makes
thereof. The Saints are exhorted with all diligence to keep themselves a fit
Habitation for him, that they may not be unclean and defiled lodgings for the
Spirit of purity and Holiness. This is, and this is to be, their daily Labor,
and endeavor; that vain thoughts, unruly passions, corrupt lusts, may not
take up any Room in their bosom; that they put not such unwelcome and
unsavory inmates upon the Spirit of Grace; that sin may not dwell, where God
dwells. On this ground they may plead with their own Souls, and say; Has the
Lord chosen my poor heart, for his Habitation? Has he said, I delight in it,
and there will I dwell for ever? Has he forsaken that goodly and stately
Material Temple, whereunto he gave his special presence of old, to take up
his abode, in a far more eminent way, in a poor sinful soul? Does that
Holy Spirit, which dwells in Jesus Christ, who was Holy, Blameless, Undefiled,
separate from sinners, who did no sin, neithere was guile found in his mouth,
dwell also in me, that am in, and of my self wholly corrupted and defiled? And
shall I be so foolish, so unthankful, as willingly to defile the Habitation,
which he has chosen? Shall I suffer vain Thoughts, foolish Lust, distempered
Affections, worldly aims; to put in themselves upon him there? He is a Spirit
of Grace: can he bear a Graceless Corruption to be cherished in his Dwelling?
He is a Spirit of Holiness, and shall I harbor in his Lodging a frame of
worldlynesse? He is a Spirit of Joy, and Consolation: and shall I fill my
bosom with foolish fears, and devouring Cares? Would not this be a grief
unto him? Would it not provoke the eyes of his Glory? Can he bear it, that,
when he is with me before his face, in his presence, I should spend my time in
giving entertainment to his enemies? He is the high and the Holy one, who
dwells in Eternity, and he has chosen to inhabit, with me also; Surely I
should be more brutish then any man, should I be careless of his Habitation:
And should not this fill my soul with an Holy scorn, and indignation against
sin? Shall I debase my soul unto any vile Lust. which has this exceeding
honor, to be an Habitation for the Spirit of God? Hence, upon a view of any
defilement of Lust, or passion, nothing troubles the Saints more, nor fills
them with more selfe-abhorrence and confusion of face, then this, that they
have rendered their hearts an unsuitable habitation for the Spirit of God. This
makes David, upon his sin, cry so earnestly, that the Spirit might not depart
from him, Psalm. 51.
being conscious to himself, that he had exceedingly defiled his dwelling
place; And were this Consideration always fresh upon the Spirits of the
Saints, were it more constant in their thoughts, it would keep them more upon
their Guard, that nothing might break in, to disquiet their gracious Indweller.

2. Secondly,. 38.
because be the Spirit we have guidance and direction, there is Wisdom given
unto us, and we are called to a holy discerning between the Directions of the
Spirit of Grace, and the delusions of the Spirit of the World, and the
seduction of our own Hearts. Christ gives this character of his Sheep, that
they know his voice, hear him, and follow him; but a stranger they will not
follow* John 10. 25. Christ speaks by his Spirit; in his guidance and
direction, is the voice of the Lord Jesus, He that has an ear to hear, let
him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches Rev. 2. 29. What Christ says,
as to the Fountain of Revelation, he being the great Prophet of the Church,
that the Spirit says, as to the Efficacy of the Revelation, unto the Hearts of
the Saints. And as the Unction teaches them, so do they abide in Christ, 1
John 2. 27. The seducements of the Spirit of the world, either immediately by
himself, or mediately by others, are the voice of strangers; between these and
the voice of the Spirit of Christ that dwells in them, the Saints have a Spirit
of discerning. This the Apostle affirms, 1 Cor. 2. 15. He that is Spiritual,
judges all things. He discerns between things, and judges aright of them.
He judges all things; that is, all things of that nature whereof he speaks,
that is, the things which are freely given us of God, v. 12. for the discerning
and knowledge whereof, the Spirit is given them; For the things of God knows
no man, but the Spirit of God v. 11. They know also the suggestions of the
Spirit of the world, and judge them. 2 Cor. 2. 11. We are not ignorant of his
devices. There is a twofold knowledge of the depths and devices of Satan: one
with Approbation, to the embracing, and practice of them: the other with
Condemnation; to their hatred and rejection. The first ye have mentioned Rev.
2. 24. As many as have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, Their
Doctrinall depths, so they call them: Of them our Savior there speaks; New
Doctrines were broached by Satan, unintelligible notions; some pretended to
attain an acquaintance with them, and boasted, it seems, in them as very
great and high Attainements. They called them depths, such as poor ordinary
Believers, that contented themselves with their low forms, could not reach
unto: Says Christ, they are depths, as they speak: indeed in themselves
nothing at all, things of no solidity, weight, nor Wisdom: but as managed by
Satan, they are depths indeed, such as whereby he destroys their souls. And
as some approve his Doctrinall depths, so some close with his Practical
depths, and embrace them. Men that study his ways, and paths, becoming
desperately wicked, maliciously fcoffing at Religion, and despising the
profession of it; But there is a knowledge also of the depths, and devices of
Satan, leading to judging, condemning, rejecting, and watching against them.
The suggestions of Satan, in their infinite variety, their Rise, Progress,
Efficacy, and Advantages, their various aims, and tendencyes unto sin,
against Grace, I do not now consider. But this I say, those who are lead by the
Spirit of God, who have directions from him, and guidance, they discern
between the voice of the Spirit, which dwells in them; and the voice of the
Spirit, which dwells in the world.

Now because this is not always to be done,. 39.
from the manner of their speaking, the Serpent counterfeiting the voice of the
Dove, and coming on, not only with earnestness and continuance of impulse, but
with many fair and specious pretenses, making good his impressions, laboring
to win the understanding over to that, wherewith he inticeth the Affections and
Passions of men, they use the help of such Considerations as these ensuing, to
give them direction in attending to the voice of that Guide, which leads them
into the paths of Truth, and to stop their ears to the songs of Satan,
which would transform them into Monsters of disobedience. Thus they know.

1. That all the motions of the holy Spirit, whereby they are, and ought to be
lead, are regular: that he moves them to nothing, but what is according to the
mind of Christ, delivered in the Word, which he has appointed for their Rule
to walk by; to no duty, but what is acceptable to him, and what he has
revealed so to be; 1 John 4. 1.
So that, as Believers are to try the spirits of others, by that standard,
whether they are of God or no, so because of the subtilty of Satan,
transforming himself into an Angel of Light, yea into a spirit of duty, what
ever immediate motions and impressions fall upon their Spirits, they try them
by the Rule. It Is no dishonor to the Holy Spirit, yea it is a great Honor to
have his motions within us, tried by the Word, that he has given for a Rule
without us. Yea when any preached by immediate inspiration, he commends those,
Acts 17. 10.
who examined what they delivered by that which he had given out before; He
does not now move in us, to give a new Rule, but a new Light and Power, as was
said before. The motions of the Spirit of the World, are for the most part unto
things, wherein, though the persons with whom he deals, may be in the dark or
blind, and darkened by him, yet themselves are against the Rule, or besides it,
in the whole, or in part, in respect of some such circumstances, as vitiate the
whole performance.

2. They know that the Commands and motions of the Spirit, which dwells in
them, 1 John 5. 1.
are not grievous. The commands of Christ, for the matter of them, Mal. 11. 30.
are not grievous, his burden is light, his yoke easy: and the manner,
whereby we are carried out to the performance of them, is not Grievous: where
the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty. 2. Cor. 3. 17. It carries out the
soul to duty, in a free, sweet, calm, ingenuous manner. The motions of the
Spirit of the World, even unto good things, and duties, (for so, for farther
ends of his, it often falls out that they are) are troublesome, vexatious,
perplexing, grievous, and tumultuating. Satan falls like lightning upon the
Soul, and comes upon the powers of it, as a Tempest: Hence acting in any
thing, upon his closing with, and provoking our convictions, is called a being
under the Spirit of bondage. Rom: 8. 15. which is opposed to the Spirit of God,
the Spirit of Adoption, of Liberty, boldness, power, and a sound mind.

3. They know that all motions of the Spirit whereby they are lead, are
orderly; as is Gods Covenant with us, ordered in all things, so the Spirit of
God carries us out unto every duty, in its own order and season; when as we see
some poor souls to be in such bondage, as to be hurried up and down, in the
matter of duties, at the pleasure of Satan. They must run from one to
another, and commonly neglect that which they should do; When they are at
Prayer, then they should be at the work of their calling; and when they are at
their Calling, they are tempted, for not laying all aside, and running to
Prayer; Believers know that this is not from the Spirit of God, which makes
every thing beautiful in its season.

4. They know that all the workings of the Spirit of God, as they are good, so
also they tend unto a good end. Does that stir them up to close walking with
God? It is that God may be glorified, his Graces exercised in them, their
souls strengthened in obedience, and their progress in Sanctification
furthered. Does it assure them of the love of God? It is that they may be more
humble, thankful, watchful? When all the compliances and combinations of
Satan, and men's corrupt hearts, even when they compel to good duties, are for
false, evil, and corrupt ends: Duty is pressed to pacify Conscience; Peace is
given to make men secure; Gifts are stirred up to tempt to Pride; and indeed it
may easily be observed, that the Devil never does any work, but he will
quickly come for his Wages. By the help ( I say) of these and such like
Considerations, the Saints of God, in whom this Spirit does dwell, are enabled
to discern and know the voice of their Leader and Guide, from the nearest
resemblance of it, that the Spirit, which is in the World, does, or at any time
can make show of. And this Indwelling of the Spirit yields a considerable
contribution of strength, toward the confirmation of the maine Theses
undertaken to be proved. Our Adversaries dispute about the removal of acquired
habits, but how infused habits may be cast out or expelled, they have not any
tolerable measure been able to declare. If moreover it shall be evinced as it
has been by plentiful Testimonies of Scripture, that the Holy Ghost himself
dwelles in Believers, what way can be fixed on for his Expulsion: That he
cannot be removed, but by his own will, the will of him that sends him, I
suppose will easily be granted: Whilst he abides with them, they are accepted
with God, and in Covenant with him. That God, whilst his Children are in such
a state and condition, does take away his Spirit from them, and give them up to
the power of the Devil, is incumbent on our Adversaries to prove.

But to return at length from this digression. Thus far have we proceeded
in manifesting, upholding, and vindicating that influence, which the Oblation
of Christ has into the preservation of the Saints, in the Love and Favor of
God unto the end. His Intercession being Eminently effectual also to the same
end and purpose, comes in the next place to be considered.

CAP. IX.
1. The Intercession of Christ. 2. The nature of it. Its aim, not only that
Believers continuing so, may be saved, but that they may be preserved in
Believing. 3. This farther proved from the Typical Intercession of the
Judaicall High Priest. 4. The Tenor of Christ's Intercession (as manifested loh:
17. v. 11.) opened, and v. 12. 13. 14. 15. 5. The result of the Argument from
thence. The Saints Perseverance fully confirmed. 6. Romans 8. 33, 34. at large
explained. 7. 8. M. G's Interpretation of the place in all the parts of it
confuted. Vain supposalls groundlessely interserted into the Apostles
discourse. What Christ Intercedes for, for Believers, farther manifested. The
sum of what is assigned to the Intercession of Christ, by M. G. How far it
is all from yielding the least consolation to the Saints, manifested. 9. The
Reasons of the foregoing Interpretation, proposed and answered. 10. The end
assigned of the Intercession of Christ, Answered. God works persevere actually:
a supply of mercies, that may not be effectual, not to be ascribed thereunto.
11. Farther objections Answered: Christ not the minister of sin by this
Doctrine. 12. Supposalls and Instances upon the former Interpretation,
disproved and rejected. 13. A brief account of our Doctrine concerning the
Intercession of Christ for Believers: and of the true end of the Act of his
Mediation. 14. The close of the Argument, and of the first Part of this
Treatise.

OF the Intercession of Christ,. 1.
both as to the nature of its typical Representation by the high Priests
entering into the Holy of Holyes, every year with blood, Heb. 9. 7.
and its effectual influence into the perfect, complete Salvation of
Believers, so much has been spoken by others, and the whole of the Doctrine
delivered, with so much clearness, spirituallnesse and strength, that I shall
not need to add any thing thereunto. That Christ intercedes for the
preservation of Believers in the Love and Favor of his Father, to the end, is
that which I intend to manifest, and which may (as I suppose) be very easily
undeniably evinced. Some few Considerations will make way for the demonstration
of the Truth, which is under Consideration, or Confirmation of the Perseverance
of Saints, from the Intercession of Christ.

First, the Intercession of Christ being his Appearance for us in the presence
of God (Heb. 9. 24. He is gone into Heaven,. 2.
(...) to make a legal Appearance, for our defense, before the Judgment seat
of God; and by being there is our Advocate. I John 2:1. he is said to save us
to the utmost. Heb 7. 25.) There is certainly some thing, or other, that he
puts in for, in the behalf of them, in whose Cause he appears and sues, that
so he may save them to the utmost. Now this must be, either, that being, and
continuing Believers, they may be Saved, or that they may believe and continue
Believers unto Salvation. That the first is not the sole import and aim of the
Intercession of Christ, may be manifested, from this double Consideration.

1. From the nature of the thing it self. There is nothing but the
establishment of the very Law of the Gospel, ( He that believes shall be
Saved) wrapped up in this interpretation of the Intercession of Christ. But this
neither has Christ any need to intercede for, it being ratified, confirmed,
and declared from the beginning, neither is there, or can there any Opposition
be made against it, to shake, weaken, or disturb it, in the least: it
depending solely on the Truth and Unchangeablenesse of God, not being vested by
any Condition whatsoever, in any other subject: nor would this be availing to
his Militant Church, whose preservation he aims at and intends in his
Intercession: For the whole of his desires may be granted him to the uttermost,
and yet his whole Church at any time militant, perish for ever. Though not one
soul should continue believing to the end, though the gates of Hell should
prevail against every one, that names the name of Christ in the world, yet that
Truth He that believes, shall be Saved, taken in the sense of our Adversaries,
for a Promise to Perseverance in believing, and not a promise to actual true
Believers, might stand firm for ever. To say then, that this is the whole
Intercession of Christ for his Church, is to say, that in his whole
Intercession, he Interceded not at all for his Church: Ioh. 11. 44.
He is heard in his Intercession, and he may be heard to the uttermost in this,
and yet his whole Church be so far from being saved to the ut most, as
utterly to be destroyed and consumed.

2. Doubtless the Intercession of Christ,. 3.
must answer the Representation of it, which the Apostle so much insists on
Heb. 7. 9. Of the Oblation of Christ there were many Types in the Aaronicall
Priesthood of the Law: Of his Intercession, but one principally; namely, that
solemn entrance of the high Priest with Blood and Incense into the Holiest of
Holyes, in the great Anniversary Sacrifice, on the tenth day of the seventh
month; (on the which day also the great Jubilee, or Joyful time of
deliverance, typifying our deliverance by Christ, began:) Here unto is added
the Priesthood of Melchisedec: whereof there is mention neither of its
beginning, nor ending, to secure us of the Continuance of our Mediator in the
act of his Priesthood, for ever. Now the end of the high Priests so entering
into this Holy place, was to carry on the work of Expiation and Atonement, to
persection, and complete peace with God, in the behalf of them, for whom he
offered, without. And therefore the Holy Ghost says, that his entrance with
Blood, was, to offer for himself, and the Errors of the people. Heb. 9. 7. It
being but a continuation of his Oblation began without, unto a complete
Atonement. And therefore there is no real difference between the efficacy of
the death of Christ, and that of his Intercession, upon the actual
Accomplishment of it. It being then the complete taking away of the sins and
Errors of the people, as to the guilt of them, and the Continuance of their
peace with God, which was intended by the high Priests entrance with blood into
the Holiest of Holyes, that, which answers thereunto, or the deliverance of
Believers from the whole guilt of sin, and their preservation in the Love and
Favor of God, is the intendment of Christ in his Intercession. Let the Effects
and fruits of the Oblation of Christ be bounded and limited to the procuring of
a new way of Salvation, without purchasing for any one person whatever, power
and Grace to walk in that way, and then exclude his Intercession, from any
influence into the preservation of them who do enter that way, therein; and
perhaps indifferent men will scarce think the Glory and Honor of the Lord
Jesus to be of any great regard with us.

3. That this is the import of Christ's Intercession for Believers,. 4.
is evident by that preface, which we have thereof, John 17. being a manifest
declaration on earth of that, which Christ lives for ever in Heaven to do. This
was the Incense, wherewith he entered into the Holy place, which he now prepared
and which was afterward beaten small, in his Agony, that it might be ready to
make a sweet perfume at his entrance into Heaven, as he was sprinkled with his
own Blood. That Christ Interceded, and for his Elect, for whom he dyed, that
they may believe, our Adversaries deny; but that he Intercedes for actual
Believers, has not hitherto been questioned. What it is, which he requests on
their behalf, the tenor of that Power of his ( John 17.) will manifest. v. 11.
(says he) Holy Father keep through thine own name, those whom thou have
given me, that they may be one as we are; keep them from sin and ruin,
every thing that will hinder them from union with me. What is it that our
Savior here prays for, and for who^ is he so engaged? that it is for
Believers, as such, for whom he puts up these supplications, our Adversaryes in
the cause in hand, do contend. That these may be kept through the Power of God,
unto Unity among themselves, which they have by their Union with him, is his
dying request for them. He prays not for any such oneness, as is consistent
with their separation from him, and his Fathers Love. Where now shall we fix
the supposed failure those, who effectually and eventually are kept up to
Spiritual Union, cannot fall out of, nor fall of from (totally nor finally)
the Love of God. Either Christ is not heard in his request, or the Father
cannot keep them by his Power, if these thus interceeded for, are not
preserved. Many Temptations, many oppositions, great Tribulations without,
strong Corruptions within, they must needs meet withal: these they have no
power in themselves to overcome, nor to resist. Should they be left to
themselves, they would never be able to hold out to the end; Says Christ, I
should loose these poor Sheep, for whom I have laid down my life to bring
them unto thee: Holy Father, do thou therefore keep and preserve them from all
these evils, that they may not prevail over the^. And keep the^ through thy
Nam^, thy Power, (for we are kept through the Power of God unto Salvation,) let
thy Power be exerted for their preservation. And what is too strong for thy
Power? Who can take them out of thy hand? Lay that upon them for their defense,
show it out in their behalf, that all their enemies may feel the weight, and
strength thereof. Keep them through thy Name, thy Grace, let that be
sufficient for them, let them have such supplies of Gospel Grace, and
pardoning Mercy, (concerning which, I manifested thy Name unto them v. 6. and
so revealed thee a Father) that they may be encouraged to trust in that Name of
thine, and to stay themselves upon thee; where the failure is, doubtless is
not easy to manifest. In the verse following our Savior adds many motives to
make his Intercession prevalent in their behalf.

First, v. 12. he says, that according to that Commission, that he had
received, he had faithfully preserved them, whilst that he was in the world;
and now being ready to leave them, as to his bodily presence, he urges the
special preservation of his Father as needful, that, after all the Care and
Cost, which he had laid out about them, they might not utterly perish. And then

Secondly, v. 13. he urges the necessity, that they should have some Assurance
of it in the midst of all their troubles and trials, that they may have
Consolation upon their confidence in the words, which Christ had spoken to
them, that they should be preserved through all difficulties unto the end. And
he farther urges,

Thirdly, v. 14. from the certain Opposition, that they should meet withal:
the world hates them, and will without doubt, use all ways and means
possible, for their ruin and destruction; giving also the Reason, why the
world hates them, and will oppose them, which is such an one, as must needs
engage the Heart and Goodwill of God for their preservation, to wit, because
they receive the Word of his dear Son, and upon that account, left the
world, separated from it, and became its enemies; and shall they now be left to
the rage and fury of the world in this condition? That be far from thee: Holy
Father keep them. Hereupon

Fourthly, v. 15. he renews his prayer in their behalf, with a farther
opening of his mind, as to what he had last spoken of. The world, the world
being vile, wretched, deceitful, and set upon Opposition against them, a man
would have thought, that the Lord Jesus should have desired, that his Saints
might be taken out from the midst of this world, and set in a quiet place by
themselves, where they might no more be troubled with the baits and oppositions
of it. But this is not that which he requests; he has another work for them
to do in the world, they are to bear witness to him and his Truth, by their
Faith and Obedience, to convince the wicked unbelieving world; They are to
Glorify his name by doing, and suffering for him; so that this is no part of
his request; I pray not (says he) that thou should take them out of the
world, but that they may not be prevailed on, nor conquered by the evil, that
is in the world. That they may be kept, and preserved from the power of evil,
which would separate them from me, and my Love. This he presses for, and this
he is heard in; and that, not only for his Apostles and present followers, but
as he tells you v. 20. for all that should believe on him, to the end of the
world.

The things prayed for, the Reason of his Intercession, the opposition against
the accomplishment of the things interceded for, the distinction put between
them for whom he Intercedes, and the perishing world, all delivered in plain
and express terms, evidently evince the intendment of Christ in his
Intercession, evidently to regard the safeguarding of Believers in the Love and
Favor of God, by their continuance in Believing, and preservation from the
Power of temptations, and oppositions, arising against their Perseverance in
communion with God.

The result of what has been spoken,. 5.
as to its influence into the confirmation of the Truth under Demonstration,
amounts unto thus much. That which the Lord Jesus Christ as Mediator
requesteth, and prays for continually of the Father, according to his mind,
in order to the Accomplishment of the Promises made to him, and Covenant with
him (all his desires being bottomed upon his exact perfect performance of the
whole will of God, both in doing and suffering) that shall certainly be
accomplished and brought to pass; But thus, in this manner, upon these
accounts, does the Lord Jesus intercede for the Perseverance of Believers, and
their Preservation in the Love of the Father unto the end; therefore they shall
undoubtedly be so preserved. It is confessed, that the Persons Interceded for,
are Believers, all Believers, that then were, or should be to the end of the
World, (the efficacy of this Intercession having commenced from the foundations
thereof) the thing prayed for is their Preservation in the state of Union with
Christ, and one another, the motives used for the obtaining this request in
their behalf, are taken from the work they have to do, and the opposition
they were to meet withal, and all the Saints being thus put into the hand of
God, who shall take them from thence? On what account is it, that they shall
not be preserved? To say they shall be thus preserved, in case themselves
depart not wilfully from God, is to say, they shall be preserved, in case they
preserve themselves, as will afterward be farther manifested.

This Argument is proposed by the Apostle,. 6.
in the most triumphant assurance of the Truth and Certainty of the inference
contained in it, that he any where uses, in any case whatsoever. Rom: 8. 33,
34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
justifies: Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
Intercession for us: he lays the immunity of the Elect and justified Persons,
from just crimination, or Condemnation, on the foundation of the Oblation and
Intercession of Christ; The first part of this Argument, from the Oblation of
Christ, ( who shall condemn? It is Christ that died) asserting the immunity of
Believers from Condemnation, upon the account of the punishing of all their
sins in Christ, and the perfect satisfaction made by his death for them,
whence the justice of God, in the issue, will not have any thing to lay to
their charge, we have formerly insisted on; The other, which the Apostle
induces emphatically and comparatively, though not in respect of procurement
and purchase made, yet of assurance to be given, with (...) in respect of his
Oblation* is that now before us. To make the Assurance of Believers plentiful,
that they may know both the Truth of his first general Assertion, that all
things shall work together for good to them; and this particular conclusion,
now laid down by way of interrogation, rejecting all evil opposed to their
former enjoyments, who shall lay any thing to their charge? who shall condemn?
He gives them a threefold consideration of the state, and actings of the Lord
Christ, after the Expiation of their sins by this blood, in reference to
them; 1. He is Risen. 2. He is at the Right hand of God. 3. Makeeth
Intercession for them; the First denoting his Acquitment, and theirs in him,
(for he died in their stead) from all the sins that were charged on him; For
he was declared to be the Son of God, accepted with him, and justified from
all that debt, which he undertook, in his Resurrection; and, if he be risen,
who shall lay any thing to the charge of them whom he died for, and for all
whose sins, in their stead, he was acquitted? The Second is his Exaltation
and Power; for, having purged our sins, he is sat down at the right hand of
the Majesty on High. Heb. 1. 3. receiving thereby a most plenary demonstration
of his Fathers good will to him and his, in respect of the work that he had
undertaken and gone through for them; For, if he had not made an end of sin,
when he was obedient unto death, the death of the Cross, he could not expect
that God should give him a name above every name, with fullness of power, to
give Eternal Life to all that the Father gave him; This to assure us that he
will do, having power in his own hand, the Apostle adds, who also Intercedes
for us; hereby (thirdly) testifying abundantly his good will and care for our
Salvation; Upon these considerations the Apostle leads the Faith of the Saints
of God, to make a conclusion, which is to be believed as a Divine Truth, that
tenders to us the Doctrine we have under Demonstration, triumphant against all
Objections and oppositions that can be made against it: And hence we thus
argue: Those against whom no Charge can be laid, who cannot by any means be
separated from the love of God in Christ; cannot totally and finally fall away
from Faith, and fall out of Gods Favor: but that this is the condition of all
true Believers, is evident from the Context. It is of all that are called
according to the Purpose of God, sanctified and justified, the proper
description of all and only Believers, that the Apostle affirms these things,
and to whom he ascribes the condition mentioned: Now that this is the state and
condition of those persons, the Apostle manifests from the causes of it, viz.
the Oblation and Intercession of Christ in their behalf: For those for whom he
Died, and does Intercede, are on that account, exempted from any such charge,
as might be of prevalency to separate them from God.

M. Goodwin attempts indeed once more to reinforce the triumphed over Enemies
of the Saints,. 7.
and to call them once more to make head against the Intercession of Christ,
but, with what ill success, the consideration of what Arguments he uses with
them, and for them, will demonstrate: thus then he addresseth himself to his
task Chapter 11. Sect: 33. page 248. I answer, It is no where affirmed, that
Christ Intercedes for the Perseverance of the Saints in their Faith, or, they
who once believed, should never cease Believing, how sinful and wicked soever
they should prove afterward; But Christ Intercedes for his Saints, ^s such,
and so continuing such, that no accusation from any hand whatsoever, may be
heard against them, that no afflictions or sufferings, which they meet with in
the World, may cause any alienation, or abatement in the Love of God toward
them: but that God will protect, and preserve them under them; and
consequently, that they may be maintained at an excellent rate of Consolation
in every state and condition, and against all interposures of any Creature to
the contrary.

This Answer has long since ceased to be new to us:. 8.
It is that indeed which is the shield, behind which Mr Goodwin lies, to
avoid the force of all manner of Arguments pointed against himself, though it
be the most weak and frivolous, that ever, I suppose, was used in so weighty a
matter; It is here cast (as he has many moulds and shapes to cast it in) into
a denial of the Assumption of our Syllogism, and a Reason of that denial;
First he denies, that Christ intercedes for Believers, that they may Persevere
in their Faith; he prays not for their Perseverance.

2. His Reason of this is two fold; 1. A supposall, that they may prove so
wicked, as not to continue Believing. 2. A description of what Christ
Intercedes for, in the behalf of Believers, viz. that they may continue in
Gods Love, if they do continue to Believe, notwithstanding all their
affictions: Homo homini quid interest? Whether men will or no, these must pass
for Oracular Dictates.

weighed, and see if there be not yet hope left for poor souls, that Christ
prays for them, that their Faith fail not; And, by the way, who will not
embrace this comfortable Doctrine, that will assure him in his Agonies,
Temptations, and Failings, that all help and supplies are made out to him, from
and by the Lord Jesus, in whom is all his hope; and that he receives of his
Father, upon his Intercession, all the fruits of his Death, and Bloudshedding
in his behalf* But that he should Believe, or being tempted should be
preserved in Believing, of that Christ takes no thought, nor did ever intercede
with his Father for any such end or purpose; Such consolation might befit Jobs
friends, miserable Comforters, Physicians of no value. (But of this before.)

wicked afterward to an inconsistency with believing, it has often been
corrected for a sturdy Beggar, and sent away grumbling and hungry, and, were it
not for pure necessity, would never once be owned any more by its Master;
Christ Intercedes not for Believers, that they may Persevere in the Faith upon
such foolish supposalls, whose opposite is Continuance in the Faith, and so is
coincident with the thing it self interceded for; To Intercede that they may
continue Believing, is, to Intercede that they may never be so wicked, as Mr
Goodwin supposes they may be. The end of Christ's Intercession for the Saints
asserted, is, that they may never wickedly depart from God; Does Mr Goodwin
indeed take this to be the tenor of the Doctrine he opposes, and of the
Argument which he undertakes to Answer? viz. That the Faith of Believers, and
the continuance of that, is interceded for, without any reference to the work
of Faith in Gospel Obedience, and communion with God in Christ? Or if he
thinks not so, why does he so often insist on this calumnious evasion?

3. In giving the aim of Christ in his Intercession for believers, cogent
Argument against our Position; Christ Intercedes for the things here by me
mentioned; therefore he does not Intercede for the Perseverance of the Saints;
But why so? Is there any inconsistency in these things, any repugnancy in
terms, or contrariety of the things themselves? Christ Intercedes, that
Believers may enjoy the Love of God; therefore he does not Intercede, that they
may be established in Believing?

2. The sum of all that is here ascribed to the Intercession of Christ, at
the best, is, that God will confirm and ratify that everlasting Law, that
Believers, continuing so to the end, shall be saved, which whether it be the
sum of Christ's Intercession for his Church or no, that Church will judge; If
there be any thing farther, or of more importance to them, in what is assigned
to it by M. Goodwin, it is wrapped up in the knot of etc. which I am not able to
untye.

3. Those words of the Apostle [ who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect] do not denote, this is that the Intercession of Christ for them, that no
accusation be admitted against the^, whilst they belive; which is no more, but
the confirmation of that general Proposition of the Gospel before mentioned.
But it is the Conclusion which they make upon the Account of the Intercession
of Christ in the Application of the Promise of the Gospel to their own
souls: Neither is there any more weight in that which follows, that there be
no abatement, or alienation of the Love of God from them, upon the account of
their sufferings and afflictions, which for the most part, are for his sake;
what Saints of God were almost so much as once tempted with a conceit, that
Gods Love should be abated, or alienated from them, because they suffered for
him?

And this is the Foundation of that excellent rate of Consolation at which the
Saints, upon the account of the Intercession of Christ, may be maintained. Into
Afflictions, Temptations, Trials, they may fall: but if they continue in
Faith, and Love, they shall not be rejected. No Creature shall be heard against
them; that Christ takes care for; But for the worst enemies they have, their
own Lusts, Corruptions, and Unbelief, the fiery Darts of Satan fighting
against their souls, their continuance in Believing, the falling, from whence
is indeed all the danger they are exposed to, (for whilst they continue so
doing; all other things are lighter then vanity) that Christ takes no care
about, (though he pray, that God would sanctify them and keep them,) but they
must shift for themselves as well as they can, he will not, does not Intercede
for them, that from these they may be preserved; Doubtless, he that shall
think to be maintained long at any high rate of Consolation, and laves in no
other, nor no better provision to live on, then this mentioned, will quickly be
reduced to a dry morsel.

But yet some Reasons of the foregoing interpretation of this place of the
Apostle Romans 8:: 9.
are offered unto us.

This to be the tenor and effect of Christ's Intercession for his Saints
(says he) is evident from the first of the three passages cited: And for that
demand [who shall separate us from the love of Christ] It is not meant from the
Love, wherewith we love Christ, but from the Love wherewith Christ loves us;
as we are Saints, and abide in his love, and keep his commands: neither is it
so to be conceived, as if sin, wickedness, looseness, profaneness, could
not unsaint men, and hereby separate them from them from that love, wherewith
Christ sometimes loved them, (for that Iniquity will separate between men, and
their God, is evident from Isa. 59. 2.) But the clear meaning is, that
nothing, no Creature whatsoever, person, or thing, can make Christ an enemy to
those, who shall in Faith and Love, cleave fast unto him.

Ans. 1. All this respects only one expression in this one place of
Scripture, and arises not, with the least power, against our Argument taken
from many places in Conjunction, explicatory one of an other; It runns also
upon the same mistake with the former, taking the exaltation of Believers, upon
the Intercession of Christ in their behalf, which holds out the Issue of it,
to be expressive of the matter of his Intercession, being only a demonstration
of the event of of it; But grant this to be the tenor and effect of Christ's
Intercession, that Believers may not be separated from his Love: is he heard
therein, or is he not? Whatsoever be the issue of the question, our procedure
will be facile. But it is said, that it is not the Love, wherewith we love
Christ, but that wherewith he loves us, that we shall not be separated from;
take this also for granted, that it is that, and that only: will this advantage
your Cause. If we be never separated from that Love that Christ bears us, is it
possible we should wholly be separated from that Love, that we bear him?
Wherein consists our separation from that Love, that Christ bears us? How is it
caused, or may it be procured? Is it not by the loss of our Faith and Love to
him? Or at least is it not an inseparable consequence thereof? Or can it
possibly come to pass any otherwise, then on that account? If then he
Intercedes that we may not be separated from that Love he bears us, and that
Love inferrs the continuance of ours, does he not withal Intercede, that we
may never loose that Love, wherewith we love him, by which we continue in his
Love? If the old shift be not at hand for a relief, this young part of the
Answer will instantly suffer loss. It is added therefore, he loves us, as we
are Saints and abide in his Love, that is, (for so we must understand it,)
whilst we are so; for that he bears any effectual Love to us, to keep us up
to Saintship, that is denied; it is true, Christ loves us as Saints, and as
abiding in his Commandments; but it is also his Love to keep us, and he
intercedeth that we may abide in that Condition, wherein alone it is possible
for us so to do: Neither is the Question, whether sin, looseness,
profaneness, do not separate between God and men, more or less; but whether
Believers shall not be preserved from such looseness and profaneness, as
would make a total separation between God and them; and if God intercedes, as
is added in the close, that nothing may make him an enemy to us, certainly he
must Intercede that no sin may do it; For indeed, sin is something in this
business; and this must be, as to the keeping us from it; I suppose no man
thinks any thing in all this Discourse of Mr Goodwin's, to look like the least
attempt of proof, that Christ does not Intercede for the Perseverance of
Saints. Neither has he confidence enough positively to deny it, and therefore
spends his whole Discourse hereabout in evasions, and diversions. Let it be
directly denied, that Christ does not intend, that the Faith of Believers may
not fail, that his Saints may be preserved, and Saved; and we know what we
have to apply our selves unto: And if the contrary cannot be proved, the Saints
know, what they have to trust unto, that they may no longer lean on that which
will yield them no supportment. If this will not be, let it on the other hand
be granted, that he does so intercede; for, de unoquoque affirmare, aut negare,
verum est. As to this then he proceeds

Secondly, Were it granted, that part of Christ's Intercession for his Saints,
is, that their Faith may never fail, yet the intent thereof would not
necessarily, nor indeed with any competent probability,.10.
be this, that no sin nor wickedness whatsoever, that shall, or can be
perpetrated by them, might cause them to make shipwreck of their Faith, but
rather that God would graciously vouchsafe such means and such a presence of
his Spirit unto them, as whereby they may be richly enabled, to keep
themselves in Faith and Good conscience, to the end.

Ans. Whether prejudiced men will grant it or no, it is clearly proved, if the
words of Christ themselves may be taken for proof, that he Intercedes for his
Saints, that their Faith may not fail, and that, notwithstanding the
interposition of any such sins, as they can or may ( suppositis supponendis,
amongst which is his Intercession) fall into; So he tells Peter upon the
prediction of his dreadful fall, that nevertheless he had prayed for him,
that his Faith should not fail; That they may fall into such sins, and
continue in such, as are inconsistent with their Acceptance with God,
according to the terms and tenor of the new Covenant, is that, which we have
been disproving all this while; and which our Author ought not, as he does in
all his Reasonings, to suppose; In the not failing or dying of their Faith, in
their preservation therein, is included their deliverance from the perpetration
of the sins intimated, or at least from such a manner of committing any
sin, as should utterly separate them from God. It is the continuance of a
living Faith, that Christ prays for; and where that is, there will be works
of new Obedience: and there will be the work of that Faith, in purifying the
Heart, and mortifying of the sins supposed. Farther, the way here prescribed
and limited to the Lord Jesus, how he shall intercede for his, and for what,
viz. not for actual Perseverance, and continuance in the Faith, to be wrought
in them by the exceeding greatness of the power of God, but for means to
enable them to preserve themselves, we are persuaded he walks not in; And that
much upon this account, that the way, whereby God begins and carries on
Believers, in the way of Faith and Obedience, is not by such a supply of
means, as leaves them to themselves to work and effect the things, for which
they are so supplied; but he himself works in them to will and to do of his
own good pleasure, fulfilling in them all the good pleasure of his Goodness,
and the work of Faith with power, giving them all their sufficiency, and
preserving them by his power, through Faith unto salvation; To make Faith, and
Perseverance therein, to follow such a supply of means, as leaves the
production of them, to the power of the wills of men, so that after God has
done, all that on his part is to be done or performed, that is, quickened them
being dead, giving them new Hearts and Spirtis, shone into their minds, to
give them the knowledge of his Glory in the Face of his Son etc. it is yet
uncertain, whether ^ver Faith shall be wrought in their Souls or no, or
rather, whether men so supplied with means will Believe and Persevere, or no,
is an Assertion, that will never be proved to Eternity; nor whilst Truth is
Truth, it is capable of proof: The granting of such means, and such a
presence of his Spirit, that men may be enabled to work for themselves, is an
expression exceedingly unsuited to all the Promises of the new Covenant; what
ever either of the Spirit of Grace, or the means of it, is given out to
Believers, Christ intercedes that his Father would keep them, not that they
should keep themselves: he was too well acquainted with our frame, and our
temptations, to desire we might be our own keepers; God forbid we should be
left to our own preservation, to the hand of our own counsel and power,
though compassed with all the supposed sufficient means: that may be, not
eventually effectually God creates a defense upon our Glory, and does not leave
it to our own safegarding. Our salvation is not in our own custody; That the
Father does not keep us, or preserve us, that the Son does not Intercede,
that we may be so preserved, that the Spirit does not make us meet for, and
keep us unto the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, but that, in the use of
means we are, as Adam was, our own keepers, are some of the Principles of that
new way of administering consolation to Believers, which Mr Goodwin has found
out. This then is the utmost, which Mr Goodwin will allow to be (for
disputation sake, not that he really believes it) granted, that Christ
intercedes for his Saints, as to their continuance and preservation in that
condition, viz. That God would give them such means, as they may use, or not
use, at their liberty, which may be effectual, or not effectual, as their own
wills shall choose to make use of them, which he also takes for granted, to be
common to all the World, and not to be peculiar unto Believers.

But it is farther argued, If Christ should simply and absolutely Intercede,
that no sin or wickedness whatsoever, may destroy the Faith of any true
Believer, and consequently deprive him of Salvation, should he not hereby
become that, which the Apostle rejects with indignation, as altogether unworthy
of him, I mean, a Minister of sin? Is therefore Christ the Minister of
sin? God forbid; or whereby, or wherein, can it lightly be imagined, that
Christ should become a minister of sin, rather then by interceding with his
Father, that such and such men, how vile and abominable soever they shall
become, may yet be precious in his sight, and receive a Crown of
Righteousness from his hand? Or does not such an Intercession, as some men put
upon him, as they who make him to Intercede simply and absolutely for the
Perseverance of Believers in their Faith, amount to an Intercession of every
whit as vile and unworthy Import as this?

Ans: That this is the tenor of Christ's Intercession with his Father, for men,
let them become as vile as they will, how vile and abominable soever, yet that
they may be still precious in his sight, and that he would give them a Crown
of Righteousness, M. Goodwin knows full well, not to be the Doctrine of them
he opposes; If he shall otherwise affirm, it will be incumbent on him to
produce some one Author, that has wrote about this Doctrine, in what language
soever, and so stated it; If he be ignorant, that this is not their Doctrine,
he ought not to have engaged into an opposition thereof: if he argue that it is
otherwise, this procedure is unworthy of him. That Christ Intercedes for his
Saints, that they may be kept from all such sins, as would separate them from
the Love and Favor of his Father, for which there is no Remedy provided in the
Covenant of Grace, and that their Faith may not fail or perish under such
sins, as they may through Temptation fall into, is the Doctrine, which he
opposes, or at least ought to oppose, to make good his undertaking; Now if
this be so, then (says he) is Christ the minister of sin: why so? He sees
and foretells, that Peter should deny him thrice, yet he prays, that Peter's
Faith may not fail under that sin and wickedness: is he therefore a
minister of sin? because he Intercedes, that his Saints may not be given up
to the power of sin, nor every time they are assaulted, lie conquered by
sin, is he therefore a minister of sin? or rather a deliverer from sin?
That very thing, which M. Goodwin affirms would make him a minister of sin,
he affirms himself to do in the case of Peter; how he will free himself from
this charge and imputation, ipse viderit.

2. What it is to Intercede simply and absolutely for Believers, that they may
continue believing, we are not so clear in; Christ Intercedes, that they may
be preserved by the power of his Father, in and through the use of those
means, which he graciously affords them, and the Powerful presence of the
Spirit of God with them therein; and that, not on any such absurd and foolish
conditions, that they may be so preserved by his Father, provided they preserve
themselves, and continue Believers, on condition they continue to believe; and,
if this be of a vile and unworthy import, the Gospel is so too, and one of the
most eminent Graces, that is inwrapped in the New Covenant, is so too.

What there is farther in M. Goodwin Sect. 34. Page 249, 250. unto this
Argument,. 12.
is either a mere repetition of what was spoken before, or a pressing of
Consequences upon such supposalls, as he is pleased to make, concerning the
Doctrine that he does oppose; As we cannot hinder any man from making what
supposals they please, and suiting inferences to them, manifesting their skill
in casting down what themselves set up, so we are not in the least concerned
in such Theatricall contests.

What it is,. 13.
that we teach of the Intercession of Christ for Believers, has been
sufficiently explayned; The end, and aim of it is, that they may be kept, that
they may not be lost, that the evil one may not touch them, that they may be
Saved to the utmost, and kept by the Power of God unto Salvation; All that the
Lord Jesus has for his Church, either by bis Oblation, or his Intercession,
procured, or does procure, being made out unto them by the Holy and Blessed
Spirit, which he sent them from his Father, as the first fruits of his
undertaking for them, by, and in the use of such means and ways, as he has
appointed for them to walk in, in reference to the end proposed: He Intercedes
that through supplies of that Spirit, their Faith fail not, that no temptation
prevail against them, that they may have suitable helps in time of need, and
so be preserved, according to the tenor of that Sanctification, which he is
pleased to give them in this life, which is imperfect, not from all sins,
(for it is the will of God, to keep them and walk with them in a Covenant of
pardoning Mercy,) not absolutely, from this, or that great sin, as is evident
in the case of David and Peter, whereof, under such sins, the one lost not
the Spirit, nor the other his Faith, but from such sins, or such a course or
way, in and under sin, as would disappoint him, and make his desires
frustrate, as to the end first proposed, of bringing them to Glory; so that, as
the intendment of his Oblation is, meritoriously, and by way of procurement, to
take away all our sins whatsoever; and yet in the application of it unto us,
as to the taking of them away, by purifying us to be an Holy People unto
himself, it is not perfected and completed at once, nor the work thereof
consummated, but by degrees; so in his Intercession, which respects the same
persons and things with his Oblation, he puts in for our deliverance from all
sins, and the power of them, but so and in a such manner, as the nature of
our present condition, whilst we are in via, and the condition of the Covenant,
whereunto God has graciously taken us, does require.

Through the Goodness of God,. 13.
we have now brought this first Part to an end. They, who are in any measure
acquainted, in what straights, under what pressing employments, and urgent
Avocations, and in what space of time this Offering was provided for the
Sanctuary of God, will accept it in him, whose it is, and from whom it was
received.

CAP. X.
1. The Improvement of the Doctrine of Perseverance in reference to the
Obedience and Consolation of the Saints; why its tendency to the promoting of
their Obedience is first handled, before their Consolation. 2. Five previous
Observations concerning Gospel Truths in general, (1.) That all are to be
received with equal reverence. (2.) That the end of them all is, to work the
soul into a conformity to God; proved by several Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Tit. 1. 1. etc. (3.) Some Truths have a more immediate tendency hereunto them
others have. 2 Cor. 5. 14. (4.) Most weight is to be laid by Believers upon
such. (5.) Men are not themselves to determine what Truths have most in them of
this Tendency. etc. 3. Gospel Obedience, what it is, and why so called. 5. Its
nature, (1) In the matter of it, which is All and Only the will of God. 5. (2)
In the Form of it, which is considered, (1.) In the Principle setting it on
work, Faith. (2.) In the manner of doing it, eying both Precepts and Promises.
(3.) The end aimed at in it, the Glory of God as a Rewarder. Heb. 11. 6. Romans
4. 4. 6. The Principle in us, whence it proceeds, which is the New man, the
Spirit: proved. Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. etc. 7. What kind of Motives conduce most to
the carrying on of this Obedience, namely, such as most cherish this New man,
which they do most, that discover most of the Love of God, and his good will
in Christ, such as these are alone useful to Mortification, and the subduing
of the contrary Principle of Flesh, which hinders our Obedience; proved Titus
2. 12. Romans 6. 8. What Persons the improvement of this Doctrine concerns, only
true Believers who will not abuse it. 9. How this Doctrine of Perseverance
conduces so eminently to the carrying on of Gospel Obedience in the hearts of
these true Believers. (1.) By removing discouragements. 10* 1. Perplexing Fears
which impair their Faith. 11. (2.) Hard thoughts of God, which weaken their
Love, without which two, Faith and Love, no Gospel Obedience performed. 12.
Unspeakable obligations to live to God, hence put upon the Souls of the
Saints. 13. Objection concerning the Abuse of this Truth, to presumption and
carelessnesse discussed, examined, at large and removed. 14. The mortification
of the Flesh, wherein it consists, how it is performed: The influence of the
Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance thereinto. Dread and terror of Hell not the
means of mortification: at large proved, by showing quite another means of
mortifying the Flesh, viz, The spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 13. applying the
Cross, and Death of Christ. Romans 6. 5, 6. 15. (3.) This Doctrine is useful to
promote Gospel Obedience, in that it tends directly to increase and strengthen
Faith and Love, both toward God, and toward our Lord Jesus Christ. 16. How it
strengthens their Love to God, viz. By discovering his Love to them, in three
eminent properties of it, Freedom, Constancy, Fruitfulness. 17. How it
strengthens their Love to Jesus Christ, viz. By discovering his Love to them,
in two eminent Acts of it, his Oblation and his Intercession. 18. (4.) This
Doctrine conduces etc. by giving Gospel Obedience its proper place and due
order. 19. (5.) By closing in with the ends of Gospel Ordinances, particularly
the Ministry, one eminent end whereof is, to perfect the Saints. Ephesians. 4. 12,
13. Which is done by discovering to them the whole will of God, both Precepts,
on the one hand, and Promises, Exhortations, Threatenings on the other. 20. That
of the Promises more particularly, and more largely insisted on.

THat which remains to complete our intendment,. 1.
as to that Part of the work, which now draws toward a close, is, the
importment of that Doctrine so long insisted on, (having in some measure
vindicated and cleared up the Truth of it) as to the effectual influence it
has into the Obedience, and Consolation of them that are concerned therein;
And this I shall do in the Order that I have named, giving the Preeminence unto
their Obedience; which more immediately respecting the Glory of God, and the
honor of the Gospel, is to be preferred before their Consolation; yea though
God should never afford his Saints any drop of that Consolation, which we
affirm to stream from the Truth discussed, yet it is Honor unspeakable for
them, that he is pleased to admit them, and enable them, to do him Service in
this life; and it will be their infinite Consolation, that they have done so,
to Eternity.

For the making our way clear to the demonstration of that influence, which
the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints has into their Obed^ence, and
close-walking with God, and so to manifest, what weight is to be laid upon it,
on that Consideration; I shall give some previous Observations, which may
direct, and give us light in our passage, both concerning Gospel Truths,
Gospel Obedience, and Gospel Motives thereunto; I hope it will not be thought
amiss, if I look a little backwards to fortify and clear this part of our
progress; there being no concernement of our Doctrine, that is more clamoured
by the Adversaries of it; nor can any respect of it, or any Truth of God, more
causelessly meet with such entertainment; as I hope will abundantly (in the
progress of our business) be evinced, to the consciences of all, who know
indeed, what it is to walk before God, in a course of Gospel Obedience, and
who have their communion with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. For the
first

1. Every Truth revealed from God is to be received not only with Faith, and
Love, but with equal Reverence to any that is revealed, though we are not able
to discern such an immediate tendency unto usefullnesse in our Communion with
him, as in some others we may; The formal Reason, whereunto our Faith, Love,
and Reverence unto the Word of God is resolved, is, that it is His: Now this is
common to the whole, for he is the Author of every part, and portion a like;
And though perhaps we may want some part of it, at a less fatal price then
some other, yet to reject any one title or jot of it, as that which is revealed
of God, is a sufficient demonstration, that no one jot or title of it, is
received as it ought; upon whatever this Title and Inscription is Verbum
Jehovae, there must we stoop and bow down our souls before it, and captivate
our Understandings to the obedience of Faith; Whatsoever then may hereafter be
spoken, concerning the usefulness of the Truth under Consideration, and that
comparative regard, which, in respect of others, ought on that account to be
had thereunto, does not in the least exalt it (as it is in it self, in respect
of Faith and Reverence due thereunto) above any other Truth whatsoever, that is
in Scripture revealed.

2. That next to the Revelation of God, his Will, and his Grace, the grand
immediate tendency of the whole Scripture is, to work them, to whom the
Revelation is made, into a conformity to himself, and to mould them into his
own Image: All Scripture, (the Apostle tells us. 2 Timothy 3.16.) is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good works; Hereunto all Scripture
tends, and is useful and profitable for this end; And the Gospel is called
the Truth, that is, according to Godliness. Titus 1. 1. As the end of the Law
is Charity out of a pure heart, and a Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. That which
in respect of the prime Author of it, is (...) the Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2 13.
and in respect of the principal matter of it, is (...) the Word of the Cross
1 Cor. 1.18. in respect of its end and tendency toward us, is (...) the Word,
or Truth, that is according to Godliness. The Word is that revealed Will of
God, which is our Sanctification. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. and the Instrument whereby he
works our Holiness, according to that prayer of our Savior. Sanctify them
by thy Word, thy Word is Truth. John 17. 19. And that, which when we are cast
into the mould of, our Obedience is in some measure wrought. Romans 6. 17 the
substance also or matter being written in our hearts, is the Grace, and
Holiness promised unto us in the Covenant. Jere. 31.33. And that this is the
Improvement, which ought to be made by Believers, of every Gospel Truth; or
rather that it has an Efficacy to this purpose, the Apostle tells us 2 Cor. 3.
18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord; By apprehensions of the glorious Truths discovered in the glass or
mirror of the Gospel, we are changed and molded into the frame and Image
therein discovered, by the power of the Spirit, effectually accompanying the
Word in the dispensation thereof; And unless this be done, whatsoever we may
pretend, we have not received any Truth of the Gospel, as it is in Jesus, in
the power of it. Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Ye have not (says the Apostle) so
learned Christ: If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him,
as the Truth is in Jesus; That ye put of, as concerning the former
conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts:
And be renewed in the spirit of your mind: and that ye put on the new man,
which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. Whatsoever men
may profess, if we have learned the Truth, as it is in Jesus, it will have
these Effects in us, even universal relinquishment, (as to sincerity) of all
ungodliness, and a through change, (both as to principles, and practices) unto
Holiness, and to Righteousness, which the Gospel teaches us, which, if we
have not learned, we have not yet learned it, as it is in Jesus: Tit. 2. 11,
12. The Grace of God, that brings Salvation, has appeared to all men,
teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily in this present evil world.

3. Some Truths have a more immediate, direct, and effectual tendency to the
promotion of Godliness, and Gospel Obedience, then others; This the Apostle
emphatically ascribes, as a privilege, to that Doctrine, that reveals the
Love of Christ unto us. 2 Cor. 5. 14. the Love of Christ constraines us; other
things effectually persuade, but the Love of Christ constraines us to live to
him; it has an importunity with it, not to be denied; an efficacy not to be
put off, or avoided; and what is in the things themselves, as in the love of
Christ, that is in its manner, in the Word of Truth, whereby it is revealed.

4. That there is, by all that walk with God, great weight to be laid on those
Doctrines of Truth, which directly and effectually tend to the promotion of
Faith, Love, Fear, Rever^nce of God, with universal holiness in their hearts
and ways: this being that, whereunto they are called, and whereby God is
glorified, Jesus Christ and the Gospel exalted, wherein his Kingdom in them
consists, on which their own peace in their own bosoms, their usefulness
unto others in this World, their being made meet for the Inheritance of the
Saints of Light, does much depend: If these things be of weight or moment unto
them, (as surely they are all, that is, so to Believers) then doubtless, great
valuation, and dear esteem will be entertained of those helps and
Assistances, which they have, leading and carrying them on thereunto.

5. That a Judgment of what Truths and Doctrines are peculiarly conducing unto
the promotion of Piety and Godliness, is not to be made upon the Apprehensions
and reasonings of men, wrested with a thousand Corruptions and prejudices, full
of darkness and vanity, but according to what the Scripture it self holds
forth, and the nature of the things themselves, (that is, the Evidence and
Consequence that is between the Truth revealed, and Obedience) does require; If
the Testimonies of the Sons of men must be admitted in this case, to
determine what Doctrine is according to Godliness, the cry and noise of them,
will be found so various, discrepant; confused, and directly contradictory to
it self, that none will ever thereby be lead to establishment; Then Papists
will cry out for their Merits, Penance, Vows, Purgatory; the Socinians,
Familists, Formalists, all contend upon the foundation of their own
persuasions, as to their tendency to Godliness, of their Abominations. That
Doctrine, which has no other proof of its Truth and worth, but that men, some
men profess, it tends to Godliness and Holiness of conversation, I dare say,
is a lie and vanity, and did never promote any thing, but vain, legal,
superstitious, counterfeit Holiness; Indeed upon a supposition of its truth,
it is of concernement for the Advancement of any Doctrine, in the esteem and
opinion of the Saints, to manifest, that it leads to Godliness: but to prove
it to be true, because men, who perhaps never knew any thing beyond Formal,
Legal, Pharisaicall Holiness all their days, say, it tends to the promotion
of Holiness, is but to obtrude our Conceptions upon others, that are no way
molded into the frame of them; That the imbracement of such a Truth, will
further us in our Obedience, and walking with God, therefore value and prize
it, is good arguing; but that such a Doctrine will further us in a way of
Godliness, therefore it is a Truth, when we may be mistaken both in Godliness
it self, and in the motives to it, and furtherances of it, is but a
Presumption. To commend then the Truth, which we have at large otherwise
confirmed, to the Hearts and Consciences of the Saints of God, and to lay a
foundation for the full removal of those vain and weak exceptions, which on
this account are laid against it: I shall manifest what influences it has into
their Obedience, and with what eminent efficacy it prevails upon their Souls,
to perfect Holiness in the fear of God; For the more clear Declaration
whereof, I shall give the Reader the sum of it, under the ensuing
Considerations concerning Gospel Obedience, and the mo^ves that are proper
thereunto.

1. That which I call Gospel Obedience,. 3.
wherein the Saints of God are furthered, by the belief of the Truth we have
in hand, is variously expressed in the Scripture; It may in General be
described to be, a voluntary orderly subjection to the whole will of God: I
call it Obedience, in reference unto the will of God, which is the Rule and
Pattern of it, and whereunto it is a regular subjection; The Psalmist
expresses it to the full, both as to the Root and fruit. Ps. 40. 8. I delight
to do thy will O my God, yea thy Law is within my Heart; the Law in the Heart
gives us to do, and to delight in doing the Will of God; Peter calls it, being
holy in all manner of conversation. 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15. Paul a Cleansing of our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7.
1. or, as it is more eminently described, Romans 12. 1, 2. in that Patheticall
exhortation of the Apostle thereunto; I beseech you Brethren, by the mercies of
God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service; And be not conformed unto this world,
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is
that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God, as he had formerly at
large described it, in the sixth Chapter of that Epistle, throughout. And I
call it Gospel Obedience, not that it differs in substance, as to the matter
of it, from that required by the Law, which injoynes us to love the Lord our
God with all our hearts, but that it moves upon principles, and is carried on
unto ends revealed only in the Gospel.

In reference to our design, there are these four things considerable in it.

First the Nature of it.

Secondly the Principle in us, from whence it proceeds.

Thirdly the Motives that are proper to the carrying it on, the cherishing and
increasing of it in them, in whom it is.

Fourthly the Persons, who are to be moved and provoked to a progress therein.

By a brief consideration of these things, we shall make way for what we have
undertaken; namely to manifest the efficacy of the Doctrine we have insisted
on, for the promotion of this Gospel Obedience, being accused and charged with
the clear contrary tendency; whereof, (God assisting) we shall free and
discharge it in the progress of this Discouse.

1.: 4.
First in the Nature of it I shall consider only these two things.

1. The Matter or Substance of it, what it is as it were composed of, and
wherein it does consist.

2. The Form or Manner of its performance; whence it receives its distinct
being, as such.

1. The Matter or Substance of it contains those things, or duties to God,
wherein it does consist. Now it consisting, as I said before, in Conformity and
Submission to the Will, that is, the Commanding revealed Will of God, the
matter of it must lie in the performance of all these things, and only those
things, which God requires of Believers, in walking before him: I say, all
those things, that God commands, with an equal respect to all his Precepts;
The Authority of God the Commander and Law Giver, is the same in every command;
And therefore was the Curse denounced unto every one, that continued not in all
things written in the Law to do them; and the Apostle tells us, that in the
transgression of any one precept, there is included the transgression of the
whole Law, because the Authority of the Law giver, both in the one, and the
other, is despised. James 2. 10, 11. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and
yet offend in any one point, he is guilty of all; For he that, said Do not
commit Adultery, said also Do not kill. And

2. I say, it is only to the Command; for in vain do men worship him, teaching
for Doctrines the Traditions of men. The most stupendous endeavors of men,
the most laborious drudgery of their souls in Duties not commanded, are so far
from Obedience, that they are as high Rebellions against God, as they can
possibly engage themselves into.

I might farther distinguish the matter, or substance of this Obedience, into
the internal elicite Act of our souls, in Faith, Love, and the like Acts of
moral, and everlasting Obedience, which are naturally, necessarily, and
indispensably required in us, upon the account of the first Commandment, and
the natural subjection, wherein we stand unto God, as his Creatures; improved
and enlarged by the new Obligation put upon us, in being his Redeemed ones:
(wherein indeed the maine of our Obedience does consist) And the outward
instituted Duties of Religion, which God has appointed for those former Acts
of Obedience to be exercised in, and exerted by; But the former description of
it, with the Intimation of its universality, may suffice.

2.. 5.
Secondly the Formality (if I may so speak) of this Obedience, or that which
makes the performance of Duties commanded, to be Obedience, consists in these
three things.

1. The Principle that begins it, and sets it on work immediately in us: and
that is Faith; without Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb: 11. 6. Could
a man do all that is commanded, yet if he did it not in Faith, it would be of
no value; hence it is called the Obedience of Faith. Romans 1. 5. not for
Obedience to the Faith, but the Obedience of Faith, which Faith brings forth;
Therefore are Believers called Obedient Children. 1 Pet. 1. 14. and we are said
to purify our souls in Obedience to the Truth v. 22. Christ dwells in our
hearts by Faith, and without him we can do nothing John 15. 5. All that we do
is no better, seeing we can no way draw near unto God with a true heart, but
in full Assurance of Faith. Heb. 10. 22.

2. The Manner of doing it, which consists in a due Spiritual regard to the
Will of God, in those ways, whereby he calls men out to this Obedience;
namely, in his Precepts, and Promises; There is no Obedience unto God, but that
which moves according to his direction; it must in every motion eye his Command
on the one hand, and his Promise, whether of Assistance for it, or Acceptance
in it, on the other; Says David, I have respect unto all thy Commandments.
Psalm. 119. and says the Apostle, having received these Promises, let us
cleanse our selves, from all filthiness both of flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1.

3. The principal End of it, which is the Glory of God, as a Rewarder: for he
that comes unto God, must believe that he is, and that he is the Rewarder of
them that seek him. Heb: 11. 6. The end of Legal Obedience was the Glory of
God, as a Rewarder according to Merit, in strict justice; the end of Gospel
Obedience is the Glory of God, as a Rewarder according to bounty, free Grace,
and mercy: under which consideration, neither needs the Obedience rewardable to
be commensurate to the Reward, nor is the Reward procured by that Obedience; If
it were, then it were of works, and not of Grace, as the Apostle tells us.
Romans 4. 4. So that the end of our Obedience, is to exalt God as a Rewarder; yet
that being as a Rewarder of Grace and bounty, the use of our Obedience is not
to procure that Reward, (for that were to work, and to have a reward reckoned
to us of Debt, and not of Grace,) but only to make the Lord gracious, and to
exalt him in our present subjection, and in his future gift of Grace, in
nature of a free bounteous reward. This I say is that Gospel Obedience, which
by the Doctrine insisted on, is promoted in the souls of Believers.

2. Secondly,. 6.
this being so (as was said) the Gospel Obedience, whereof we speak, it is
evident, what Principle it proceeds from; Whereas there are two contrary
Principles in every regenerate man, as shall more fully afterward be declared,
called in the Scripture flesh and Spirit, the Old and New man, indwelling sin
and Grace, which have both of them their Seats and Places in all, and the same
Faculties of the soul, it is most evident, that this Obedience flows solely
and merely from the latter Principle, the Spirit, new or inner man, the new
Creature, which is wrought in Believers; The strengthening and heightning of
this Principle, the Holy Ghost lays at the bottom of the renewall, and
increase of Gospel Obedience. Ephesians: 3. 16. 17. 18. 19. I pray, (says the
Apostle) that God would grant you, according to the Riches of his Glory, to be
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in
your hearts by Faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love may be able to
comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, and to know^ the Love of Christ which passes knowledge, that ye may be
filled with all the fulness of God; Their strengthening with might by the Spirit
in the inner man is the foundation of their acting of, and increasing in Faith,
Love, Knowledge, and Assurance unto all the fullness of God; It is the New man,
which after God is Created in Righteousness and Holiness, that carries men
out unto all acceptable Obedience, as c. 4. 23, 24. of the same Epistle. Look
whatsoever influences the other Principle of the flesh, has into our
Obedience, so far it is defiled; for that which is from the flesh is flesh,
Ieh. 3. 6.
and all the fruits of it are abominable; Hence are all the pollutions that
cleave to our Holy things. Yea if at at any time, poor and mere selfish
considerations do put men upon duties of Obedience, and abstaining from sin,
as fear of vengeance, and destruction, and the like, (which is made almost the
only motive to Obedience, by the Doctrine of Saints Apostasy) their Obedience
in doing or abstaining, is but as their fear of the Lord, 2 Kings 17. 34.
who were taught it by Lions, and abominable unto him; This then being the
nature of Gospel Obedience, and this the Principle, from whence it flows, it
is evident,

3. Thirdly, what are those motives, which are suited to the promotion and
carrying of it on, in the hearts of Believers, and what Doctrines have an
eminent and singular tendency thereunto,. 7.
is also to be considered: now these must all of them be such, as are suited to
the cherishing of that Principle of the new or inner man in the heart, to the
nourishing and strengthening of the new creature: such as are apt to ingenerate
Faith and Love, in the heart, unto God; such as reveal and discover those
things in his nature, mind, and will, as are apt to endeare and draw out the
heart to him in Communion; discouraging, perplexing Doctrines do but ill
manure the soil, from whence the fruits of Obedience are to spring and grow;
Look then (I say) whatsoever Gospel Truth is of eminent usefulness, to warm,
foment, stir up, and quicken the Principle of Grace in the heart, to draw
out, increase, and cherish Faith and Love, that Doctrine lies in a direct,
immediate tendency to the promotion of Holiness, Godliness, and Gospel
Obedience. Yea and whereas to the carrying on of that course of Obedience, it
is necessary that the contrary Principle unto it, which we mentioned before, be
daily subdued, brought under, crucified and mortified, there are no Doctrines
whatsoever, that are of such, and so direct and eminent a serviceablenesse to
that end and purpose, as those which inwrappe such discoveries of God, and his
good will in Christ, as are fitted for the improvement also, of the principle
of Grace in us; Hence the work of Mortification in the Scripture, Romans 6. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6.
is every where assigned peculiarly to the Cross and death of Christ; Romans 8.
13.
his Love manifested therein, and his Spirit flowing therefrom. Romans 7. 7.
The Doctrine of the Law indeed humbles the soul for Christ, Gal. 3. 23.
but it is the Doctrine of the Gospel, that humbles the soul in Christ; It is
the Grace of God that has appeared, 2 Cor. 5. 15.
that teaches us effectually to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, to
live soberly, and righteously, and Godly in this present world. Tit. 2. 12. He
that will but with a little heed read Cap. 6. to the Romans, will know from
whence Mortification flows; which truly (by the way) makes me admire at the
extreme darkness, and blindness of some poor men, who have of late
undertaken to give directions for Devotion and walking with God; who, indeed
sutably to the most of the rest of their discourses, all manifesting an
Ignorance of the Righteousness of God, Romans 10. 4.
and a zealous endeavor to establish their own, coming to propose ways and
means, for the mortifying of any sin or Lust, tell you stories of biting the
tongue, thrusting needles under the nails, with such like Trash, as might have
befited Popish devotions five hundred years ago; Were not men utterly
ignorant, what it is to know the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 10.
and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, Gal.
6. 14.
and being made conformable to his death, they could never feed on such husks
themselves, nor make provision of them, for those, whose good they pretend to
seek. Unto what has been spoken add

4. Fourthly,. 8.
who are the Persons, that are to be provoked to Holiness and Godliness by
the Doctrine insisted on; Now they are such, as do believe it, and are
concerned in it; We say, the Truth under consideration is of an excellent
usefulness, to farther Gospel Obedience in the hearts of Believers and Saints
of God, who are taught of God, not to turn the Doctrine of Grace into
wantonness: What use, or abuse rather, men of corrupt minds, and carnal
principles, who stumble at Jesus Christ, and abuse the whole Doctrine of the
Gospel by their prejudices and presumptions, will make of it, we know not, nor
are sollicitous; 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish; it is sufficient, that
the food be good and wholesome for them, for whom it is provided. If some will
come and steal it, 2 Cor. 2. 16, 27.
that have no right to it, and it prove, through their own distempers, gravel
in their mouths, or poison in their bowels, they must blame themselves, and
their own wormwood Lusts, and not the Doctrine which they do receive; It is
provided for them that fear God, and love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity,
not for dogs, swine, unbelievers; we shall not marvel, if they trample on
this pearl, and rend them that bring it; To such as these then, I say, the
Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints, or the stability or
unchangeablenesse of the Love of God unto Believers, and of their continuation
in Faith and Obedience, is full of exceeding effectual motives and
provocations unto Holiness, in all manner of Gospel Obedience, and holy
conversation, exceedingly advantaging the souls of men in a course thereof;
Now the influence it has into the Obedience of the Saints, flows from it
upon a twofold account.

1. By removing all discouragements whatsoever,. 9.
that are apt either to turn them aside from their Obedience, or to render
their Obedience servile, slavish, or unacceptable to God: it setts them
(through Christ) at perfect liberty thereunto.

2. By putting unconquerable and indissoluble Obligations upon them, to live
unto God, and the praise of his glorious Grace, and evidently draws them forth
unto the Obedience required.

1. It removes and takes out of the way all discouragements whatsoever, all
things which are apt to enterpose to the weakening of their Faith in God, or
their Love to God, which, as has been said, are at the bottom of all
Obedience and Holiness, that is acceptable to God in Christ; Now these may all
be referred unto two heads.

1. Of perplexing anxious fears,. 10.
which are apt to impair and weaken the Faith of the Saints. 2. Of hard
thoughts of God, which assault and shake their Love. That slavish, perplexing,
troublesome fears, are contrary to the free and ingenuous state of Children,
whereunto the Saints are admitted, and (however sometimes, yea oftentimes, they
are at the bottom, and the occasion of burden some, servile, and
superstitious Obedience) Impairers of their Faith, I suppose, I need not labor
to prove. That kind of Fear, whereof we speak, (of which more afterward) is
the greatest Traitor, that lurkes in the soul; To fear the Lord and his
Goodness, Hos. 3. 5.
is the souls Keeper; but this servile perplexing fear, is the Betrayer of
it, in all its ways, and that which sowres all its duties; A thing which the
Lord sets himself against, in rebukes, reproves, dehortations, as much as any
failing and miscarriage in his Saints whatever. It is the opposite of Faith;
hence the fearful and unbelieving are put together in their exclusion from
the new Jerusalem. Rev: 20. 8. it is that, which is direct contrary to that,
which the Apostle advises the Saints unto, Heb: 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. it is that
which mixeth Faith with staggering, Rom: 4. 20. Prayer with wavering, making it
ineffectuall: James 1. 6. 7.

Let us now suppose a man to have attained some assurance of the Love of God,
Romans 5. 1.
and Justified by Faith, to have Peace with him, (which, as to his present
condition, the Adversaries of the Doctrine of Perseverance acknowledge that he
may attain, though, how, upon their principles, I understand not) consider a
little, how he can safeguard his Peace for a moment, and deliver himself from
perplexing thoughts and fears, renouncing any interest in the engagement of
the Love and Faithfulness of God, for his preservation. He may say within
himself, I am for the present in some good state and condition, but were not
the Angels so, that are now Devils in Hell? were not they in a far better,
and more excellent state, then I am? and yet they are now shut up under chains
of everlasting darkness, to the judgment of the great day? Adam in Paradise
had no lust within him to tempt and seduce him, no World under the curse to
entangle and provoke him, and yet being in that honor, he had no
understanding, he abode not, but became like the beast that perishes; was it
not in their power to persevere in that condition if they would? Did they want
any means that were useful thereunto? And what hope is there left to me, Romans
7.
in whom there dwells no good thing, who am sold under the power of sin,
and encompassed with a world of temptations, that I shall endure unto the end?
I see thousands before mine eyes, partakers of the same heavenly calling with
my self, of the same Grace in Jesus Christ, every day falling into
irrecoverable perdition; There is not any Purpose of God, that I should be
preserved, nor Promise that I shall never depart from him, no prayer of Christ,
that my Faith may not fail, but I am rolled upon mine own hand, and what will
be the end of this whole undertaking of mine, in the ways of God, I know not.
Let, I say, a man be exercised with such thoughts as these, and then try if any
thing under heaven can bring his soul to any possible composure, until it be
cast into the mould of that Doctrine, which has been delivered; But of this
more directly afterward, when we come to treat of the Consolation, which from
the breast of it does flow.

2.. 11.
It is exceedingly suited to the deliverance of the Souls of the Saints from
all such hard thoughts of God, as are apt to impair and weaken their Love
toward him, and delight in him: so setting the two principles of all their
Obedience (Faith and Love) at liberty, and free from their intanglements, to
act in the duties they are called unto; He that had hard thoughts of his absent
Lord, as an austere man, though he was not excused in his disobedience by it,
yet he was evidently discouraged, as to his Obedience; When men shall be
taught, that God takes no more care of his Children in his family, but that the
Devil may enter in among them, and and take them away, making them Children of
Hell, when he might with the greatest Advantage of Glory and Honor to himself
imaginable, prevent it? That the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the
Sheep, takes no more care of his flock and fold, but that the Lion, Bears, and
Wolves may enter in, and make havocke, and spoil at their pleasure? May they
not think that God is little concerned in the Salvation of his? and that all
that, which is so Gloriously expressed of his peculiar and special Love,
carries nothing but an empty noise, the burden of their preservation being
thrown soly upon their own shoulders? And are not such thoughts fit only to
cast water upon their flames of Love to God, and insensibly to weaken that
delight, which they ought always to take in the riches of his Grace and Love?
Is there any thing possible more indearing to the heart of a Creature, then to
hear such a testimony, as that. Zeph. 3. 17. concerning the stability of the
Love of God, and its excellency, The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is
mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his
Love, he will joy over thee with singing; Gods resting in his Love toward his
Saints, fixes their souls in their Love to him.

3.. 12.
It puts high and unspeakable Obligations on the Saints to live to God, and to
perfect Holiness in the fear of the Lord; Saints we suppose to have their
Birth from above, to be begotten of the Will of God, through the immort all
seed of the Word, and to be quickened with a Noble Child-like Ingenuity,
befitting the family of God; Neither is any thing more injurious to the work
of God's Grace, then to suppose, that those, whom God calls Children, Friends,
Heirs of Heaven and Glory, his Crown, his Diadem, Brethren of his only Son,
are to be dealt withal, or that God deals with them, as if they were wholly
acted by a servile, slavish Principle, and were wholly under the power of such
an unworthy disposition.

There are two things usually spoken to the prejudice and disadvantage of: 13.
the Truth we have under Consideration, much insisted on by Mr Goodwin, Cap: 9.
As

1. That a perswision of the certain continuance of the Love of God to any
one, is a ready way to make them careless, negligent, and to give up
themselves to all manner of abominations.

But what Vipers, Snakes, and Adders, do such men suppose the Saints of God to
be, that their new nature, their Heavenly Principles (for what the flesh in
them, is prone unto, we now consider not,) should conclude, that it is good to
sin, that Grace may abound; that, because God Loves them with an Everlasting
Love, therefore they will hate him with a perpetual hatred: that, because he
will assuredly give them Grace to serve him with reverence and Go^ly fear,
therefore they will despise him, and trample on all his Goodness; because he
will never forsake them, that they will no more abide with him: What is in the
inner man, what is in the new Creature, what is in the nature of any Grace,
wherewith they are endowed, that is apt, or inclinable to make such hellish
Conclusions? If we hear of any such thing among the Sons of men, if we see a
Child, or a servant resolving to be profligate, wicked, stubborn, prodigal,
because his Father, or Master is kind, loving, and will not disinherit him, or
put him away; we look upon him as a monster in nature, and think that it would
be good service to the interest of mankind to take him off from the face of
earth; And yet such monsters are all the Saints of God supposed to be, who, if
their Father once give them the least Assurance of the Continuance of his Love,
they presently resolve to do him all the dishonor, despite, and mischeife
they can: I appeal to all the experience of all the Saints in the world,
wheth^^, if any such thought at any time arise in them, that they may continue
in sin, because Grace has abounded, that they may live in all filth, and
folly, because God has promised never to forsake them, not turn away his Love
from them, they do not look upon it, as an hellish abuse of the Love of God,
which they labor to crucify, no less, then any other work of the flesh
whatsoever; Presuppose indeed the Saints of God to be Dogs and swine, wholly
sensual and unregenerate, that is, no Saints, and our Doctrine to be such,
that God will Love them, and save them continuing in that state, wherein they
are, and you make a bed for Iniquity to stretch it self upon; But suppose that
we teach that the wrath of God will certainly come upon the Children of
disobedience, that he that Believes not, shall be damned, and that God will
keep his own by his power through Faith unto Salvation, and that in, and by
the use of means, they shall certainly be preserved to the end: and the mouth
of iniquity will be stopped.

2. They say it takes away that strong curb and bridle,. 14.
which ought to be kept in the mouth of the flesh, to keep it from running
headlong into sin and folly, namely the fear of Hell and punishment, which
alone has an influence upon it, to bring it to subjection, and under Obedience.

But now, if there be nothing in the world, that is of use for the
mortification and crucifying of the flesh, and the lusts thereof, but it
receives improvement by this Doctrine, this crimination must of necessity
vanish into nothing.

1. Then, it tells that the flesh, and all the deeds thereof, are to be
crucified and slain, God having ordained good works for us to walk in; That
for the works of the flesh the wrath of God comes upon the Children of
disobedience; and if any say, let us continue in sin because we are not under
the Law, or the condemning power of it for sin, but under Grace, it cries
out, God for bid. Romans 6. 15, 16. And says, this is Argument enough, and
Proof snfficient, that sin shall not have dominion over us, because we are
not under the Law, but under Grace; It tells you also, that there is a twofold
fear of Hell, and punishment of sin.

First, of Anxietie, and doubtfullnesse, in respect of the end.

Secondly, Of Care and diligence, that respects the means.

And for the first it says, that this is the portion of very many of the
Saints of God, of some all their days, though they are so, yet they know not
that they are so; and therefore are under anxious and doubtful fears of Hell,
and Punishment, notwithstanding that they are in the arms of their Father,
from whence indeed they shall not be cast down; as a man bound with chains on
the top of a tower, he cannot but fear, and yet he cannot fall; He cannot
fall, because he is fast bound with strong chains: He cannot but fear,
because he cannot actually, and clearly consider, often times, the means of
his preservation.

And for the latter, a fear of the ways and means leading to punishment, as
such, that continues upon all the Saints of God in this life; neither is there
any thing in this Doctrine, that is suited to a removal thereof. And this, it
says, is more, much more of use for the mortification of the flesh, then the
former.

2. It says, that the great and Principal means, of mortification of the
flesh, is not fear of Hell and Punishment, but the Spirit of Christ, as the
Apostle tells us. Romans 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of
the flesh, ye shall live. It is the Spirit of Christ alone, that is able to do
this great Work; We know, what bondage and Religious drudgery some have put
themselves (...), upon this account, and yet could never in their lives attain
to the mortification of any one sin. It is the Spirit of Christ alone, that
has sovereign power in our souls, of killing and making alive; As no man
quickneth his own soul, so no man upon any Consideration whatsoever, or by
the power of any threatenings of the Law, can kill his own sin; There was
never any one sin truly mortified by the Law, or the threatening of it; All
that the Law can do, of it self, is but to entangle sin, and thereby to
irritate, and provoke it, like a Bull in a net, or a beast lead to the
slaughter. It is the Spirit of Christin the Gospel, that cuts its throat and
destroys it; Now this Doctrine was never in the least charged with denying the
Spirit of God to Believers, which whilst it does grant and maintain, in a way
of opposition to that late Opinion, which advances it self against it, it
maintains the mortification of the flesh, and the lusts thereof, upon the only
true, and unshaken foundations.

3. It tells you, that the great means, whereby the Spirit of Christ works
the mortification of the flesh, and the Lusts thereof, is the Application of
the Cross of Christ, and his Death, and Love therein, unto the soul; and
says, that those vain endeavors, which some promote and encourage, for the
mortification of sin, consisting for the most part, in slavish, bodily
exercises, are to be bewailed with tears of blood, as abominations, that
seduce poor souls from the Cross of Christ; For it says, this work is
truly, and in an acceptable manner only performed, when we are planted into the
likeness of the death of Christ, having our old man crucified with him, and
the body of sin destroyed. Romans 6. 5, 6. and thereupon by Faith reckoning our
selves dead unto sin, but alive unto God. v. 11. It is done only by knowing
the fellowship of the sufferings of Christ, and being made conformable to his
death. Phil. 3. 10. by the Cross of Christ is the world crucified unto us, and
we unto the world. The Spirit brings home the power of the Cross of Christ to
the soul, for the accomplishing of this work; and without it, it will not be
done: Moreover it says, that by the way of motive to this duty, there is
nothing comes with that efficacy upon the soul, as the love of Christ in his
death, as the Apostle assures us. 2 Cor. 5. 14. for the Love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
dead, and that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him, which died for them, and rose again: now
it was never laid to the charge of this Doctrine, that it took off from the
virtue of the Death and Cross of Christ, but rather on the contrary, though
falsely, that it ascribed too much thereunto; so that (these importune
exceptions notwithstanding) the Doctrine in hand does not only maintain its
own innocence, as to any tendency unto looseness, but also manifestly
declares its own usefulness to all ends and purposes of Gospel Obedience
whatsoever; For,

3. It stirs up,. 15.
provokes, and draws out into action, every thing, that is free, noble,
ingenuous, filial, and of an heavenly descent in the Saints of God; thus:

1. It strengthens their Faith in God, and in Jesus Christ, which is the
bottom of all acceptable Obedience whatsoever; All that, which proceeds from
any other Root, being but a product of laboring in the fire, which in the end
will consume both Root and Branch. That which prevails upon, and draws out
the soul to Faith and believing, I mean, as it is peculiar to the Gospel,
and Justifying, that is, as it is in God as a Father, and in the Lord Christ as
a Mediator, is the discovery of the good will of God to the soul in Christ,
and his design to advance his Glory thereby; I speak not of the formal cause
of Faith in general, but the peculiar motive to Faith, and Believing in the
sense before mentioned. So our Savior giving the command in general to his
Disciples Ioh. 14 1. ye believe in God, believe also in me, in the whole
ensuing Chapter, provokes them to it, with gracious discoveries of the good
will of God; his Fathers, and his own good will toward them; And indeed,
propose what other considerations ye will, provoke the soul by all the fear
and dread of Hell, and the most dismal representation of the wrath to come,
until it be convinced of this, it will never take one step toward God in
Christ; Now our Adversaries themselves being Judges, the Doctrine we have had
under consideration, abounds above all others with the discoveries of the good
will and kindness of God to poor sinners; yea the great crime, that is laid
to the charge of it, is, that it extends it too far; it does not only assert,
that God freely begins the good work in them, but that he will also
powerfully perfect it to the day of Jesus Christ; It assures the souls of the
poor Saints of God, that he, who looked upon them in their blood, and said unto
them Live, when no eye pitied them; who quickened them, when they were dead in
trespasses and in sins, begetting them of his own will, by the word of Truth,
that they should be a kind of first fruits to himself, wasting them in the
blood of his Son, and delivering them from the old Tyrant Satan, that he will
not now leave them to themselves, and to the Counsel of their own hands, to
stand or fall according as they shall of themselves, and by themselves, be able
to withstand opposition and seduction: but that he will keep them in his own
hand, giving them such constant supplies of his Grace and Spirit; as that in
the use of means, they shall wait upon him to the end; And that howsoever, or
whenever, by the power of Temptation, and surprisalls of corruptions, they
are carried aside from him, he will heal their backslidings, and receive them
freely, and though they change every day, yet he changes not, and therefore
they are not consumed. And hereby, I say, it confirms and strengthens their
Faith in God, as a Father in Jesus Christ, taking everlasting care of them.

2. Of their Love there is the same reason; Gods love to us is of his free
Grace; he loves us because so it seems good to him; Our Love to him, is purely
ingenerated by his Love to us, and carried on, and increased by farther
Revelations of his desireablenesse and excellency, to our souls; Herein is
Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us first: There is no Creature
in the least guilty of sin, that can put forth any acceptable Act of Love
toward God, but what is purely drawn out, upon the Apprehension of his Love
and loveliness in his Grace and mercy; A man, I confess, may love God, when
he has no sense of his Love to him in particular: but it must all be built
upon an apprehension of his Love to sinners, though he may come short in the
Application; it is the terror of the Lord, that causes us to persuade others,
but it is the Love of Christ that constrains us to live to him. She loved
much, to whom much was forgiven; Look then, the more abundant discoveries are
made of the loveliness and desirablenesse in the riches of his Grace, the more
effectual is the sole and only motive we have to love him, with that fi^iall,
chaste, Holy Love, that he requires.

For the Love of God to his Saints, our Doctrine of their Perseverance, sets it
forth, with the greatest Advantage, for the indearement of their souls, to
draw out their streams of Love to God; especially does it give it its Glory in
three things.

1. In its freedom; It setts forth the Love of God to his Saints, as that
which they have no way in the least deserved, as has been manifested from Isa.
48. 8, 9, 11. and chap. 54. 9, 10. As he first loved them, not because they
were better then others, being by nature Children of wrath, and lying in their
Blood, when he said to them Live, quickening them when they were dead in
trespasses and sins: So he does not continue his love to them, nor purpose so
to do, because he fore sees, that they will so, and so, walk with him in
Holiness and uprightness (for he ^oresees no such thing in them, but what he
himself purposes effectually to work, upon the account of his loving them)
but he resolves to do it, merely upon the account of his own Grace; He
neither resolves to continue his Love to them, on Condition that they be so and
so holy, at random, and with uncertainty of the Event, but freely that they
may and shall be so. Ephesians. 1. 4.
And this is the Glory of Love, the most Orient pearl in the Crown, of it:
It Is not mercenary nor selfe-ended, nor deserved; but, as a Spring and
fountain, freely vents and powers out it self upon its own account: And what
ingenuous, truly noble, Heavenly descended heart can hold out against the power
of this Love? It is effectually constraining to all manner of suitable returns;
let the soul but put it self in to the actual Contemplation of the Love of
God, as it lies represented in this property of it, every way free, undeserved,
the great Love of God, to a poor worm, a sinner, a nothing; and it cannot but
be wrought to a serious Admiration of it, delight in it, and be pained and
straightened, until it make some suitable Returns of Love and Obedience unto
God; If not, it may well doubt it never tasted of that Love, or enjoyed any
fruits of it.

2. It gives the Love of God the Glory of its Constancy and Unchangeablenesse;
This is another Star of an eminent Magnitude in the Heaven of Love; It is not
a fading, a wavering, an altering thing, but abides for ever; God rests in his
Love* Zeph. 3. 17. It is a great thing indeed, to apprehend that the great God
should fix his Love upon a poor Creature. But add hereunto, that he may love
them one day, and hate them the next, embrace them one hour, and the next cast
them into Hell, one day rejoicing over them with joy; another rejoicing to
destroy them, as it is dishonorable to God, and derogatory to all his Divine
Excellencies, and Perfections: so in particular, it clotheth his Love, with the
most uncomly and undesirable Garment, that ever was put upon the Affections of
the meanest worm of the earth; What can ye say more contemptible of a man?
more to his dishonor among all wise and knowing men, or that shall render his
Respects and Affections more undesirable, then to say, He is free of his Love
indeed, but he abides not in it? What a world of Examples have we of those, who
have been in his bosom, and have again been cast out? Though among men
something may be pretended in excuse of this, with respect unto their
ignorance, the shortness of their foresight, disability to discern between
things and appearances; yet in respect of God, before whom all things are open
and naked, in whose eye all incidences and Events lie as clearly stated, as
things, that are already passed and gone, what can be said of such a vain
supposall, for the vindication of his Glory? It is said, that men change from
what they were, when God loved them, and therefore his love changes also: But
who first made them fit to be Beloved? Did not the Lord? Do they make
themselves differ from others? On what account did he do it? was it not merely
on the acount of his own Grace? Can he not as well preserve them in a state of
being beloved, as put them into it? And if he determined that he would not
preserve them in that Condition, why did he set his Love upon them, when
himself knew that he would not continue it to them? was it only to give his
Love the dishonor of a Change? I say then, the Doctrine contended for, gives
the Love of God the Glory of its Immutability, asserts it to be like himself,
Unchangeable, that there is not indeed, in its self, the least shadow of
turning; it may be eclipsed and obscured, as to its beams and influences, for
a season: but changed, turned away, it cannot be. And this consideration of it
renders it to the souls of the Saints inestimably precious: the very thought
of it, considering that nothing else could possibly save, or preserve them, is
marrow to their bones, and health to their souls, and makes them cry out to
all that is within them, to love the Lord, and to live unto him.

3. It gives it the Glory of its Fruitfulness: A barren Love is upon the
matter no Love. Love that has no breasts, no bowels, that pitties not, that
assists not, deserves not that Heavenly name: Will ye say she is a tender,
loving mother, who can look on a languishing, perishing Child, yea see a
ravenous beast, whom yet she could easily drive away, take it out of her arms,
and devour it before her face, and not put forth her strength, for its
assistance or deliverance? Or will ye say, she is a Tygre, and a monster in
Nature? And shall we faigne such a Love in God toward his Children, which is
such that all the bowels of a tender Parent to an only Child, are but as a
drop to the Ocean, in comparison of it? As that he looks on whilst they
languish and perish, fall, sink, and dye away into everlasting calamity; yea
that notwithstanding it, he will suffer the Roaring Lion to come and snatch
them away out of his Arms, and devour them before his face. That he will look
upon them sinking into eternal separation from him, and such destruction, as
that it had been infinitely better for them never to have been borne, without
putting forth his Power, and the efficacy of his Grace for their preservation:
Ah foolish people and unwise! shall we thus requite the Lord? as to render him
so hard a Master, so cruel a Father to his tender ones, the Lambs of his
Son, washed in his Blood, quickened by his Spirit, owned by him, smiled on,
embraced ten thousand times, as to suffer them so to be taken out of his hands?
Is there nothing in his Love to cause his Bowels to move, and his repentings
to be kindled together toward a poor dying Child, that surely departs not,
without some sad looks toward his Father? Nemo repent fit turpissimus. Is
this the kindness, which he exalts above the Love of a Woman to her sucking
Child, of a Mother to the fruit of her Womb? Oh that men should dare thus
foolishly to charge the Almighty, to ascribe such a barren fruitless Love to
him, who is Love, toward his Children, who are as the Apple of his eye, his
dear and tender ones, as would be a perpetual blot and stain to any earthly
Parent, to have righteously ascribed to him; I say then, our Doctrine gives the
Love of God the Glory of its fruitfulness. It asserts it to be such a
Fountaine-love, as from whence continually streams of Grace, kindness, mercy,
and Refreshment do flow: because he loves us with everlasting Love, therefore
he draws us with Loving-kindnesse. Ier. 30. 1, 2* from that Love proceeds
continual supplies of the Spirit and Grace, by which those, of whom it is
said, they abide, are preserved lovely, and fit by him to be beloved. It tells
us, that because God loves his people, therefore are they in hi^ hand. Deuteronomy:
33. 3. It declares it to be such a Love, as is the Womb of all mercy: whence
pardon, healing, recovery from wounds, sicknesses, and dying pangs do
continually flow; A Love upon the account whereof, the Persons loved may make
conclusion, that they shall lack nothing. Psalm. 23. 1. A Love whose
fruitfulness is subservient to its own constancy, preserving the Saints such,
as he may rest in it unchangeably. Romans 8. 29, 30. A Love, whereby God sings to
his vineyard, watches over it, and waters it every moment. Isa. 27. 2, 3. And
now what flint almost in the Rock of stone, would not be softened and dissolved
by this Love? When we shall think, that it is from the Love of God, that our
wasted portion has been so often renewed, that our dying Graces have been so
often quickened, our dreadful backslidings so often healed, our breaches and
decays so often repaired, and the pardon of our innumerable transgressions so
often sealed, unless we suck the breasts of Tigers, and have nothing in us,
but the nature of Wolves and unclean Beasts; can we hold out against the
sweet, gracious, powerful, effectual in^luences, that it will have upon our
souls; Thus I say, does the Doctrine, which we have in hand, set out the Love
of God unto us in his eminent endearing properties, wherein, he being embraced
through Christ, a Foundation is laid, and eminent promotion given unto the
Holiness and Obedience, which he requires of us.

2. This Doctrine renders Jesus Christ lovely to our souls, to the souls of
Believers;. 17.
It represents him to them, as the Standard bearer to ten thousand, as one
altogether lovely: As exceeding desirable in the work of his Oblation, lovely
and amiable in the work of his Intercession, as has been manifested.

1. It imports him as one, who in his death has made an end of the Controversy
between God and our souls. Dan. 9. 39. Becoming our peace. Ephesians. 2. 14. having
obtained for us Eternal Redemption. That he has not suffered all that sorrow,
anguish, pain, torment, dereliction, whereunto for our sakes he was given up,
and willingly exposed himself, for an uncertain end, not fighting, in his
death, as one beating the air, nor leaving his work in the dust, to be
trampled on, or taken up, as it seems good to us, in our polluted, dark, dead
estate of nature: But has filled it with such immortal seed, that of it
self, by it self, and its own unconquerable Efficacy, it has sprung up, to
the bringing forth of that whole fruit intended in it, and the accomplishment
of all the ends aimed at by it. That is, that it shall certainly and
infallibly bring all those to God, for whom he offered, by Sanctifying,
Justifying, and preserving them, through the Communication of his own Spirit
and Grace to them, for that end and purpose, All his Promises being yea and
Amen, in him, confirmed by his death. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Heb. 10. 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. Some of those, who indeed abuse the Truth we have insisted on, pretend to
grant, That by his death he made satisfaction for sin, but only on condition
that men believe on him, and continue so doing; That they shall so believe, and
so continue (though he is said to be the Captain of our Salvation, and the
Author and finisher of our Faith, though it be given unto us for his sake, to
believe on him; and we are blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in him,) that he takes no care about, beyond the general administration
of outward means. He neither procured any such thing by his Oblation, nor does
intercede for it; these things are left unto men to be educed, drawn forth,
and exercised by virtue of sundry considerations, that they may take upon
themselves. Never doubtless did men take more pains, to stain the beauty and
comeliness of our dying Savior.

2. For his Intercession, the Doctrine hitherto insisted on, renders him
therein exceeding lovely and desirable. It tells you, that he does pray the
Father, and thereupon sends us the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, for all the
gracious acts and works, ends and purposes before mentioned, with innumerable
other privileges that the Saints by him are made partakers of, and that to
abide with us for ever, never to leave us, nor forsake us. That he continually
appears in the presence of God for us, interceding that our Faith may not
fail, pleading for us, in, and under all our decays, making out to us suitable
supplies in all our Distresses, Temptations, Trials, Troubles, taking care
that no Temptation befall us, but that a way also of escape be given to us,
together with it. It tells us his Eye, even now he is in glory, is still upon
us, seeing our wants, taking notice of our weakness, and providing for us, as
his only concernment in the World, that we be not lost; That he has not left
one jot of that kindness, which he bare to his flock, his Lambs, his little
ones. But pursues with all his strength, and all the interest he has in
Heaven, the work of their Salvation, which he came from his Fathers bosom to
enter on, and returned to him again, to carry it on unto perfection; That, as
the High Priest of old, he bears our names in his breast, and on his shoulders
continually before his Father: So that in all our falls and failings, when we
are in our selves helpelesse and hopeless, when there is nothing in us, nor
about us, that can do us any good, or yield us any help or Consolation, yet on
this account we may say, the Lord is our Shepherd, we shall lack nothing. He
has undertaken for us, and will bear us in his Arms, until he bring us to
the bosom of his Father. Now whether such cosiderations as these, of the
Oblation and Intercession of Christ, do not fill his Love in them, with a more
constraining efficacy, and more draw out the hearts of the Saints unto Faith
and Love, then any instruction can do, informing men of the uselesnesse of the
one or other of these eminent Acts of his Mediation, for any of the ends and
Purposes mentioned, let Believers judge. That which men repose upon in their
greatest necessities, and for the things of the greatest concernement, thereof
they have the greatest valuation, and the thoughts of it are most fixed in
their minds. What is there of so great concernement in this World unto the
Saints, as their abiding with God unto the end? How many, how great, urging,
pressing, are the difficulties, dangers, troubles they meet withal in their so
doing? What then they have most frequent recourse unto, and what they rest most
upon under their pressures, in the things of that concernement before
mentioned, that will deserve the name of their Treasure, where their hearts
will and ought to be. Now if this (setting aside, as things of no Consideration
in such a case, the Purposes, Covenant, and Promises of God, the Oblation and
Intercession of the Lord Christ) be men's own rational Abilities, to consider
what is for their good, and what will be hurtful and destructive to them; what
can hinder but that men will, (yea and that they often should) spend the flower
and best of their Affections, upon, and about themselves and their own Wisdom,
in and for their preservation; That doubtless will take up their hearts and
thoughts; so that there will be very little room left for the entertainment
of the Lord Jesus Christ, with any regard or respect on this account. If that
then may pass, which was formerly laid down, namely that the Doctrines and
things, which are Apt and suited to the ingenerating, quickening, increasing, and
building up of Faith and Love toward God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, are the
most eminent Gospel motives, to spiritual acceptable Obedience, (as it is an
unquestionable Truth and certainty) doubtless that Doctrine which represents
the Father and Son, so rich in mercy, so loving and lovely to the soul, as
that does, which we insist upon, must needs have a most effectual influence
into that Obedience.

4. The Doctrine insisted on,. 18.
has an effectual influence into the Obedience of the Saints, upon the
account of giving it its proper place, and setting it aright upon its basis,
carrying it on in due order; It neither puts upon it the fetters of the Law,
nor turns it loose from the Holy and righteous Rule of it; Let men be as
industrious as can be imagined, in the performance of all commanded duties, yet
if they do it on legal motives, and for legal ends, all their performances
are vitiated, and all their duties rejected; This the Apostle asserts against
the Jews, Rom: 9. 31. They ^ought for righteousness, but as it were by the
works of the Law, and therefore he tells them Chap. 10. 3. That being ignorant
of Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness,
they did not submit to the Righteousness of God; And the Papists will one day
find a fire proceeding out of their Doctrine of merits, consuming all their
good Works, as hay and stubble. There are also many other ways and
principles, whereby Obedience is vitiated, and rendered an abomination instead
of Sacrifice, wherein our Doctrine is no sharer; But this I must not enter
into, because it would lead me into other Controversies, which with this I
shall not intermixe.

5. It naturally and sweetly mixeth with all the Ordinances of Christ,. 19.
instituted for the end under Consideration. In particular, with that great
Ordinance The Ministry of the Gospel, in reference to the great fruit and
effect of it mentioned. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. The perfecting of the Saints, the
edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and
of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. That which the Lord Jesus aimed at, and
intended principally, in giving Pastors and Teachers to his Church, was that
they might carry on the work of the Ministry, for the Perfecting of the
Saints, and their filling up the measure allotted unto them; And this they do by
revealing the whole Council of God unto them, keeping back nothing that is
pro^itable for them as was the practice of Paul Act. 20. 27. Of this Council
or Will of God, as by them managed, there are two parts.

1. The discovery of God to them, and his Will, as to the state and Condition
whereto he calls them, and which he requires them to come up unto: And this
consists in doctrines, revealing God and his Will; which contain Rules, and
Precepts for men to walk by, and yield Obedience unto.

2. That which is suited ^o the carrying on of men in the state and Condition,
whereunto they are called, according to the mind of God, as also to prevail
with them, to whom the Word does come, to enter into the state of Obedience,
and walking with God: and this is usually branched into three general heads of
Promises, Exhortations, and Threatenings; The management of these aright with
power and efficacy, with Evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, is no small
part, yea it is the greatest part of the work of the Ministry, the greatest
portion of what is Doctrinall in the Word or Book of God, relating to these
heads; And of this part of that Ordinance of Christ, the Ministry of the Word,
the pressing of men into a state of Obedience, and to a pogresse in that
estate, by Promises, Exhortations, and Threatenings, I shall briefly speak,
either by way of Demonstration and proof of what lies before me, or
vindication of what is affirmed in the same kind, from the Objections and
Exceptions of Him in particular, with whom I have to do; aiming still at my
former Assertion, that the Doctrine I have insisted on, naturally and clearly
closes with those Promises and Exhortations, to help on their efficacy and
energy for the accomplishment of the work intended.

For the first, let us take a taste of the Promises, which are, as it were,. 20.
the very life and beauty of the Covenant of Grace, and the Glory of the
Ministry committed unto men: and they are of two sorts, both of which have
their effectual influence into the obedience of Saints.

1. There are promises, which express only the work of Gods grace, and what
he will freely do, in, and upon the hearts of his thereby, as to the working
Holiness, and Obedience in them, as also of his pardoning mercy, in his free
acceptance of them in Jesus Christ: And these are in a peculiar manner, those
better Promises of the Covenant of Grace, upon the account whereof, it is so
exceedingly exalted above that of Works, which by sin was broken and
disanulled. Heb: 8. 6, 7* 8, 9, 10.

2. There are Promises of what Good and great things, God will farther do
unto, and for them who obey him. As that he will keep them, and preserve them,
that they shall not be lost, Heb. 9. 10.
that their labor and Obedience shall end in the enjoyment of God himself,
with an immortal Crown of Glory which shall never fade away. Now the Doctrine
of the Saints Perseverance, and the stability of the Love of God unto them,
closes with the Promises of both these sorts, as to the end of carrying on,
and increasing Obedience and Holiness in them; Take an instance in the first.
The Promises of the work of Gods Grace in us and toward us are effectual, as
appointed to this end; so in that Great word Gen: 17. 1. which the Apostle
calls the Promise. Gal. 4. I am God Almighty, I am so and will be so to thee,
and that for, and to all ends and purposes of the Covenant whatsoever. The
inference is, walk before me and be thou perfect; Walking with God in
uprightness and sincerity, is the proper fruit in us, of the Promise of God to
us, to be our all sufficient God in Covenant. As Ier. 31. 33. our becoming the
People of God, in walking with him in all ways of Obedience, is the effect of
his Promise to be our God, and to write his Law in our hearts; not only because
by the Grace of the Promise, we are brought into a state of Acceptance, and
made the People of God, but also upon the account of the engagement, that is
put upon us, by that gracious Promise, to live unto him; Whence in the close it
is affirmed, we shall be his People. The word of the Gospel, or the word of
Faith, does mainly consist in this: And what the aim of that is, the Apostle
declares. Titus 2. 11, 12. The Grace of God, which appears unto us, teaches
us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and Godly in this present world. Which general purport of the
Promises in this way, is farther asserted 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having then, says he,
these Promises, Let us cleanse our selves from all silthinesse of flesh and
spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of the Lord. And most eminently, is
this assigned to the Promises of that sort, which we now peculiarly insist
upon. 2 Pet: 1. 3. 4. To know the way, whereby these, or any other Promises are
effectual to the end and purpose intimated, two things are considerable.
First, what is required to make them so effectual. Secondly, wherein, and how
they do exert that efficacy that is in them. For the First, the Apostle
acquaints us, on what account alone it is, that they come to be useful in this
or any other kind: Heb: 4 2. the word of the Gospel, the Promise Preached to
them of old, did not profit them, did them no good at all; And the reason of
this sad success in the Preaching of the Gospel, and Declaration of the
Promises, he gives you in the same words; It is, that the word was not mixed
with Faith in them that heard it; It is the mixing of the Promises with Faith,
that renders them useful and profitable; Now to what ever Faith is required,
the more firm, strong, and stable it is, the more effectual and useful it
is; That then, which is apt to establish Faith, to support and strengthen it,
to preserve it from staggering, Romans 4. 20.
that renders the Promise most useful and effectual for the Accomplishment of
any work, whereunto it is designed. Now Faith in the Promises, respects the
Accomplishment of the things promised; as the Apostle tells us in that
commended, and never enough imitated Example of the Faith of Abraham. Rom 4.
19, 20, 21. Being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own body, now dead,
when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs
womb he staggered not at the Promise of God through unbelief, but was strong
in Faith, giving glory to God, being fully persuaded that what he had promised,
he was able also to perform; Laying aside all considerations that might tend
to the impairing of his confidence, he firmly believed, that it should be to
him, as God had promised. That the Doctrine we insisted on, is clearly
conducing to the establishing of Faith in the Promises, cannot tolerably be
called into Question. Whatsoever is in those Promises, whatsoever
Considerations, or concernements of him whose they are, as his Faithfulness,
Unchangeablenesse, and Omnipotency, that are apt to strengthen Faith in them,
it preserves entire and exalts; It is a wild Assertion, which men scarce
search their own hearts, (if indeed men know what belongs to believing in
sincerity) when they make: that the efficacy of the Promises unto our
Obedience, should arise from hence, that the things promised may not be
fulfilled: and that the weakness of Faith, (as every such supposall does at
least weaken it, yea and tends to its subversion) should render the Promise
useful, which has no use at all, but as it is mixed with Faith; For instance,
those Promises, that God will be an All-sufficient God unto us, that he will
circumcise our Hearts, and write his Law in them, that we shall fear him, is,
as was manifested before, an useful Meditation, for the ingenerating and
quickening of Obedience and Holiness in us; That it may be such a means, it is
required, that it be mixed with Faith in them that hear it, as was declared.
According as Faith is strong or weak, so will its usefulness be; I ask then,
whether this be a way proper to set this Promise on work, for the end
proposed, namely to persuade them that should believe it, that all this may be
otherwise; God may cease to be their God, their hearts may not be circumcised,
nor the Law mentioned written in them? Is this the way to strengthen their
Faith, and to keep them from staggering? Or rather to subvert, and cast down
all their confidence to the ground? The Doctrine we have under consideration,
continually sounds in the ears of Believers, 1 Cor. 1. 9.
that God is faithful in all his Promises, that he can, that he will make them
good, that his own Excellencies, his own Perfections require no less at his
hands; And this it does, not on any Grounds that carry any thing with them,
that may seem to incline to the least neglect of God, or contempt of any
Property, Excellency, or word of his, and so be apt to breed presumption, and
not Faith: But on such only, as give him the Glory of all, that he has
revealed of himself unto us: and therefore its genuine tendency must be, to
beget and increase precious and saving Faith in the hearts of men, which we
conceive to lie in a more direct way of efficacy toward Holiness, and
Obedience, then the ingenerating of servile fears gendering unto bondage, can
do.

This then we have obtained; first that the Promises peculiarly insisted on,
are motives to, and furtherances of Obedience; secondly, that the way, whereby
they become so, is by being mixed with Faith; and the stronger Faith is, the
more effectual will the working of those Promises unto Holiness be; thirdly,
that the Doctrine of the Perserverance of the Saints, and stability of God's
Love to them, giving him the Glory of all his Excellencies, which in his
Promises are to be considered, is suited to the carrying on of Faith, in its
growth and increase. Indeed, that which makes our belief of the Promises of
Faith divine, is the rise it has, and the bottom whereinto it is resolved;
viz. The Excellencies of him, who makes the Promises: As that he is True,
Faithful, Alsufficient; the Glory of all which is given him in Believing, as
the Apostle informs us, Romans 4. 20, 21. Yea and all this He must be received
to be, in reference to the accomplishment of his Promises, or we Believe them
not with divine, supernatural, (if that term may be allowed) and saving
Faith. Surely they must needs think us very easy of belief, and wholly
unexperienced of any Communion with God, who shall suppose that we will be
persuaded, that the Doctrine which eminently asserts and ascribes unto God, the
Glory of all his Attributes, which he would have us to eye in his Promises,
strengthening Faith on that account, does annihilate the Promises in the Word of
the Ministry, as to their usefulness unto our Obedience. Let us deal by
instance: God has promised to begin and perfect a good work in us: according
as this Promise is mixed with Faith, so it will be useful and profitable to us;
If there be no Faith it will be of no use: if little, of little; if more, of
more; Let a man now be supposed to be wavering about his mixing this Promise
with Faith, whereupon the issue of its Efficacy and Fruitfulness (as was
said,) does depend: And let the Doctrine we teach be called in, to speak in
this Case, and let us try whether what it says be prejudicial to
establishment of Faith, or whether it be not all that looks toward its
Confirmation. It says then unto the soul of a Believer, why art thou so cast
down, thou poor soul? And why are thy thoughts perplexed within thee? It is
true thou art weak, unstable, ready to fall away, and to perish: thy
temptations are many, great, and prevalent, and thou have no strength to stand
against the power, and multitude of them. But look a little upon him, who has
promised, that thou shall never depart from him; who has promised to finish
the good work begun; he is Unchangeable in his Purposes, Faithful in his
Promises, and will put forth the exceeding greatness of his power, for the
Accomplishment of them, so that though thou failest, he will cause thee to
renew thy strength, though thou fallest, thou shall not be cast down: He has
undertaken to work, and who shall let him? The Council of his heart, (as to
the fulfilling of it) does not depend on any thing in us; what sin thou art
overtaken withal, he will pardon and will effectually supply thee with his
Spirit, that^ thou shall not fall into, or continue in such sins, as would
cut off thy Communion with him; And does not this mix the forementioned
Promises with Faith, and so render it effectual to the carrying on of the
work of Love and Obedience, as was mentioned? And as this Doctrine is suited
to the establishment of the soul in Believing, and to the stirring of men up
to mix the the Promises with Faith, so there is not any thing that is, or
canbe thought more effectual, to the weakening, impairing, and shattering of
the Faith of the Saints, then that which is contrary thereunto, as shall
afterward be more fully manifested. Tell a soul, that God will write his Law
in him, and put his fear in his inward parts, that he shall never depart from
him, what can ye pitch upon possibly to unsettle him, as to a persuasion of the
Accomplishment of this Promise, and that it shall be so indeed, as God has
spoken, but only this: according as thou behavest thy self, (which is left
unto thee,) so shall this be made good, or come short of accomplishment; If
thou continue to walk with God, (which that thou shall do, he does not
promise, but upon Condition thou walk with him,) it shall be well: and if thou
turn aside, which thou may do, notwithstanding any thing here spoken, or
intimated, then the word spoken shall be of none effect, the Promise shall not
be fulfilled toward thee? I know not what the most malicious Devil in Hell
(if they have degrees of malice) can invent more suitable to weaken the Faith
of men, as to the accomplishment of Gods Promise, then by affirming, that it
does not depend upon his Truth and Faithfulness, but solely on their good
behavior, which he does not effectually provide, that it shall be such, as is
required thereunto; God himself has long since determined this difference,
might he be attended unto.

What has been spoken of the Promises of the first sort, might also be
manifested concerning those of the second; And the like might also be cleared
up, in reference to those other weapons of Ministers warfare, in casting down
the strong holds of sin in the hearts of men, to wit, Exhortations and
Threatenings.

But because Mr Goodwin has taken great pains, both in the general, to prove
the unsuitablenesse of our Doctrine to the promotion of Obedience, and an Holy
Conversation: and in particular, its inconsistency with the Exhortations and
Threatenings of the Word, managed by the Ordinances of the Ministry. What is
needful farther to be added, to the purpose in hand, will fall in with our
vindication and rescuing of the Truth from the false criminations, wherewith it
is assaulted, and reproached, as to this particular: And therefore I shall
immediately address myself to the Consideration of his long Indictment, and
charge against the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints, as to this very
thing.

CAP. XI.
1. The Entrance into an Answer to Mr G's Arguments against the Doctrine of the
Saints Perseverance: His sixth Argument about the usefulness of the Doctrine
under consideration to the work of the Ministry proposed. 2. His pr^ofe of the
minor Proposition. 3. Considered and Answered. Many pretenders to promote
Godliness by false Doctrines. M. G.'s common interest in this Argument. 4. His
proofs of the usefulness of his Doctrine unto the promotion of Godliness. 5.
Considered and Answered. The inconsequence of his Arguing discovered. 6. The
Doctrine by him opposed, mistaken, ignorantly or wilfully. 7. Objections
proposed by Mr* G. to himself to be Answered. 8. The Objection, as proposed,
disowned. Certainty of the Love of God, in what sense a motive to Obedience. 9.
The Doctrine of Apostasy denies the unchangeablenesse of Gods Love to
Believers: places Qualifications in the Room of persons. 10. How the Doctrine
of Perseverance promises the continuance of the Love of God to Believers. 11.
Certainty of Reward, encouraging to regular Actions. Promises made to Persons
qualified, not suspended upon those Qualifications. Means appointed of God for
the accomplishment of a determined end, certain. 12. Means not always
conditions. 13, M. G's strange inference concerning the Scripture, 14.
Considered: The word of God by him undervalued, and subjected to the judgment
of vain men, as to its Truth and Authority. 15. The pretended reason of the
former proceeding, discussed: The Scripture the sole judge of what is to be
ascribed to God, and believed concerning him. 16. The Doctrine of the Saints
Perseverance, falsely imposed on, and vindicated. 17. Mr G's next Objection
made to himself, against his Doctrine: its unseasonablenesse, as to the
Argument in hand, demonstrated. 18. No Assurance of the Love of God, not Peace
left the Saints by the Doctrine of Apostasy. The ground of Peace, and Assurance
by it taken away. 19. Ground of Paul's Consolation: 1 Cor. 9. 27. the meaning of
the word (...). 20. Another Plea against the Doctrine attempted to be proved by
M. G. That attempt considered. Not the weakness of the Flesh naturally, but
the strength of Lust spiritually pretended. 21. The cause of Sin in the
Saints farther discussed. 22. The Power ascribed by M. G. to men, for the
strengthening and making willing the Spirit in them, considered. 23. The
Aptness of the Saints to perform, what, and whence. The opposition they have
in them thereunto. 24. Gospel Obedience how easy. 25. The Conclusion. 26.
Answer to Chap. 13. of his Book proposed.

THE Argument,. 1.
wherein Mr Goodwin exposes the Doctrine under contest to the trial,
concerning its usefulness, as to the promotion of Godliness, in the hearts
and ways of them, by whom it is received, he thus proposes. Cap. 13. Sect.
32. Page 333. That Doctrine, which is according to Godliness, and whose
natural and proper tendencie, is, to promote Godliness in the hearts and
lives of men, is Evangelicall, and of unquestionable comportance with the
Truth; such is the Doctrine, which teaches the possibility of the Saints
declining, both totally, and finally: Ergo,

Of this Argument he goes about to establish the respective propositions,. 2.
so as to make them serviceable to the enforcement of the Conclusion he aims
at, for the exaltation of the Helena, whereon he is enamored: and for the major
Proposition (about which, rightly understood, we are remote from contesting
with him, or any else, and will willingly and cheerfully at any time drive the
cause in difference to Issue, upon the singular Testimony of the Truth wrapped
up in it) he thus con^irmeth it.

The Reason of the major Proposition, though the truth of it needs no light
but its own to be seen by, is, because the Gospel it self is a Doctrine,
which is according unto Godliness, a ministry of Godliness, is a Doctrine,
Truth, and Mystery, calculated, contrived, and framed by God with a singular
aptness, and choicenesse of ingredients, for the advancement of Godliness in
the world; therefore what particular Doctrine is of the same Spirit, tendency,
and import, must needs be a natural branch thereof, and bath perfect accord
with it; this Proposition then it unquestionable.

Ans. According to the principles formerly laid down, I have something to say
(though not to the proposition it self,: 3.
as in the terms it lies, but) only as to the fixednesse, and stayednesse of
it, that it may not be a nose of max, to be turned to and fro at every ones
pleasure, to serve their turns; for what sort of men is there in the world,
professing the name of Christ, that do not lay claim to an intrest in this
Proposition, for the confirmation of their Opinions It is but as a Common
Exordium in Rethoricke, a useless flourish; The Doctrine which is according to
Godliness, that is, which the Scripture teaches to be true, and to serve for
the promotion of Godliness, (not what Doctrine soever any dark brainesicke
Creature does apprehend so to do) in the state and Condition, wherein the
Saints of God walk with him, is a branch of the Gospel: I add, in the state
and condition, wherein we walk with God: for in the state of innocence, the
Doctrine of the Law, as a Covenant of Life, was of singular aptness, and
usefulness to promote Obedience, which yet is not therefore any branch, or
part of the Gospel, but opposite to it, and destructive of it. All the
advantage then Mr Goodwin can expect from this Argument to his cause, depends
upon the proof of the minor Proposition, which also must be effected in
aswerable proportion to the restrictions and qualifications given to the Major,
or the whole will be void and of none effect; That is, he must prove it by the
Testimony of God, to be according to Godliness, and not give us in (by a pure
begging of the thing in Question,) that it is so in his Apprehesion, and
according to the principles whereon he does proceed, in the teaching and
asserting of Godliness: Mr Goodwin knows, that there is no less difference
btween him and us, about the nature and causes of Godliness, then there is
about the Perseverance of the Saints: and therefore his asserting any Doctrine
to be suited to the promotion of Godliness, that Assertion being proportioned
to his other Hypothesis of his own, wherein we accord not with him, and in
particular to his notions of the causes and nature of Godliness, with which
conceptions of his we have no communion, it cannot be of any weight with us,
unless he prove his affirmation according to the limitations before expressed;
Now this he attempteth in the words following.

What Doctrine (says he,) can there be more proper and powerful to promote
Godliness,. 4.
in the hearts and lives of men, then that, which, on the one hand promises a
crown of Blessedness, and eternal Glory to those, that live Godlily without
declining; and on the other hand, threatens the vengeance of Hell fire,
eternally against those, that shall turn aside into profaneness, and not
return by repentance: whereas the Doctrine, which promises, and that withal
possible certainty and assurance, all fullness of Blessedness and Glory; to
those that shall at any time be Godly, though they shall the very next day or
hour, degenerate, and turn loose, and profane; and continue never so long in
such a course, is most manifestly destructive to Godliness, and encouraging
above measure unto profaneness.

Ans. There are two parts of this Discourse: the one ((...) or) confirmatory of
his own Thesis;. 5.
the other ((...) or) destructive of that which he opposes; For the first, it
is upon the matter, all that he produces for the confirmation of his Minor
Proposition, wherein any singular concernement of his opinion does lie: Now
that being, in a sold sense, the common Inheritance of all that profess the
Truth, under what deceits or mistakes soever; the sum of what is here
insisted on, is, that the Doctrine he maintains concerning the possibility of
the Saints defection, promises a crown to them, that continue in Obedience,
and threatens vengeance of fire to them, that turn to profaneness, which
taken as a proof of his former assertion is liable to some small exceptions. As

1. That this does not at all prove the Doctrine to be a branch or parcel of
the Gospel, it being, is it stands severally by it self, the pure tenor of
the Covenant of Works, which we confess to have been of singular importance
for the propagation of Godliness and Holiness, in them to whom it was given,
or with whom it was made; being given and made for that very end and and
purpose; but that this alone by its self is a peculiar branch or parcel of
the Gospel, or that it is of such singular importance for the carrying on of
Gospell-Obedience, as so by it self proposed, that should here have been
proved.

2. As it is also a part of the Gospel declaring the Faithfulness of God, and
the End and Issue of the proposal of the Gospel unto men, and of their
receiving or refusing of it, so it is altogether foreign to the Doctrine of
Mr Goodwin under contest: and he might as well have said, that the Doctrine of
Apostasy is of singular import for the promotion of Holiness, because the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith is so; for what force of consequence is
betwixt these two? that God is a rewarder of them that Obey him, and a punisher
of them that rebel against him, is an incentive to Obedience: therefore the
Doctrine that true Believers united to Jesus Christ, may utterly fall out of
the Favor of God, and turn from their: Obedience, and be damned for ever,
there being no Promise of God for their preservation, is also an incentive to
Holiness.

3. What virtue soever there may be in this truth, for the furtherance and
promotion of Holiness in the world, our Doctrine lays as clear claim to
it, as yours; (that is) there is not any thing in the least in it inconsistent
therewith all; we grant God threateneth the vengeance of Hell fire, unto those
that turn aside from their profession of Holiness, into profaneness, the
Gospel it self becoming thereby unto them a savor of death unto death; the
Lord thereby proclaiming to all the world, that the wages of sin and
infidelity is death, and that he that believes not, shall be damned; but that
any thing can hence be inferred for the Apostacy of true Believers, or how
this assertion comes to be appropriated to that Doctrine, we see not.

The latter part of this Discourse,: 6.
whereby its Author aims to exclude the Doctrine hitherto asserted by us,
from any claim laid to usefulness for the promotion of Godliness, is either
a mistake of it, through ignorance of the opinion he has undertaken to oppose,
or a wilful perverting of it, contrary to his own science and conscience; Is
that the Doctrine you oppose? Is it so proposed by those who through Grace have
labored to explain, and vindicate it? Does not the maine weight of the
doctrine turn on this hinge, that God has promised to his Saints, true
Believers, such supplies of the Spirit and Grace, as that they shall never
degenerate unto such loose and profane courses, as are destructive to
Godliness? Doubtless that Doctrine is of a most spotless untainted
innocence, which its Adversaries dare not venture to strangle, before they have
violently and treacherously defloured it.

And thus Mr Goodwin leaves his Arguments in the dust, like the Estriches
eggs under the feet of men, to be trampled on with ease.

The residue of this Discourse onwards to the next Argument,. 7.
beingspent in the answering of pretended Objections, put in against himself
in the behalf of the Doctrine of Perseverance, not at all called out by the
import of his present Arguments and Discourses, I might pass them over: but in
as much as that which is spoken thereunto, tends to the further clearing of
what formerly has been evidenced, concerning the suitableness of the Doctrine
contended for, unto the promotion of Holiness, I shall farther consider what
he draws forth on this occasion. Sect. 33. he gives us an Objection; and a
four fold answer theruuto page 333, 334, 335. That which he calls an
Objection he lays down in these words.

If it be objected and said: yea but Assurance of the Unchangeablenesse of
God's Love toward him, that is Godly, is both a more effectual and persuading
motive unto Godliness, and more encouraging to a persevering in Godliness,
then a doubtfulnesse, or uncertainty, whether God will be constant in his
Affection, to such a man or no; Certainty of reward is more encouraging unto
action, then uncertainty.

Ans. If any one has been so weak,. 8.
as to make use of this plea in behalf of that Doctrine it seems to defend,
(which I scarcely believe) it will I doubt not, be an easy task to undertake,
that he shall be no more admitted, or entertained as an Advocate in this cause;
The assurance of the Unchangeablenes of Gods Love to them that are Godly, is
but one part of the Doctrine in hand, and that such, as may perhaps be common
to it with that Which is brought into competition With it: It is the Assurance of
the Unchangeablenes of Gods Love to a man, to keep him up to Godliness, to
preserve him in that state and Condition of Holiness to the end, and of the
certainty of the continuance of the Love of God unto him, on that account and
in that way, that is that great Gospel motive to Obedience, wherein, as its
peculiar, our Doctrine glories, as has formerly been manifested. Perhaps Mr
Goodwin does not think, that any man is bound to lay more blocks in his own
way, then he judges himself well able to remove: and therefore he framed that
Objection so, that he might be sure to return at least a specious answer
thereunto, and this he attempteth accordingly, and tells us in his first
Paragraph three things.

1. That the Doctrine teaching the Saints defection,. 9.
does also maintain the Unchangeableness of the Love of God, to them that are
Godly.

Ans. But what Love (I pray you) is that, which, when it might prevent it, will
yet suffer those Godly ones, to become such ungodly Villains and wretches, as
that it shall be utterly impossible for the Lord to continue his Love to them?
Is the Love you mention indeed a Love to their Persons, or only an Approbation
of their Duties and Qualifications? If the First, whence is it that God cease
at any time to love them? Does he change, and alter his Love like the Sons of
Men? Why, they change, therefore he changes also; That God changes not, and
therefore we, who are subject to change, are yet preserved from being consumed,
we have heard; But that upon the change that is in men, God also should change,
we are yet to be instructed; and the Immutability of God, has taken greater
hold upon our understandings, and in our hearts, then that we should easily
receive any thing so diametrically opposite thereunto; If the Love mentioned be
only an Approbation of the Qualifications that are in them, and of the Duties
that they do perform, then is it no more a Love to them, or to their persons,
then it is to the persons of the most profligate wretches that live. The object
is Duty, solely where ever it may be found, and not any person at all; for it
is an Act of Gods approving, not purposing, or determining Will. This is not
our sense of the continuance of the Love of God, to them that are Godly; so
that there is no comparison betwixt the Doctrines under contest, as to the
Asserting of the Love of God to Believers, or to them that are Godly; Wherefore
he says,

2. That the Doctrine he opposes,. 10.
Promises Gods Love, and the unchangeable continuance of it unto men, though
they change to Profaneness; Though this is said over and over an hundred
times, yet I cannot believe it, because the Doctrine openly affirms the
continuance of the Love of God to them that are Godly, to be effectually and
eventually preventive of any such profaneness, as is inconsistent
therewithal; and therefore much more vain is that, which he affirms in the
third place.

3. Namely, that the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints, does not so
much absolutely promise the Love of God to them that are Godly, as it promises
it conditionally, to them that are profane, in case they have been Godly: that
is, it teaches, that God promises the certain continuance of his Love to him,
that is Godly, on condition he cease to be so, and turn profane;

Claudite jam rivos pueri -- we have enough of this already.

2ly He adds yet,. 11.
Neither is certainty of reward, in every sense or kind, more encouraging unto
Action, then uncertainely in some kind: to promise with all possible Assurance,
the same reward or prize, to him, that shall not run in the race, which is
promised to him that shall run, is not more encouraging unto men, thus to
run, then to promise it conditionally upon their running, which is a
promising of it with uncertainty in this respect, because it is uncertain,
whether men will run in the said race, or no; and consequently, whether they
shall receive the said prize or no, upon such a promise. Uncertainty of reward
is then, and in such cases, more encouraging unto action, then certainly, When
the certainty of obtaining or receiving it, is suspended upon the Act, not when
it is assured unto men, whether they Act or no.

Ans. 1. Persuade your servants, your laborers if you can, of that great
encouragement that lies in the the uncertainty of a reward, above that which
may be had from an Assurance thereof: We are not as yet of that mind; And yet

2. We do not lay the only motive unto obedience, tendered by the Doctrine we
contest for, on the certainty of reward which it asserteth: which yet is such,
that without it all other must needs be of little purpose: but it has also
other advantageous influences into the promotion of Holiness, which in part
have been insisted on.

3. It seems, we say that God promises a Reward to them that shall not run
a Race, because we maintain, that he promises it to none, but those who do
run in a Race; promising withal to give them strength, power and will, that
they may do so to the end.

2. For the close, which amounts to this, That the certainty of reward, when
it is uncertain (for so it is made to be when it is suspended on Actions that
are uncertain) is more encouraging to Action, then certainty of reward not so
suspended; I shall add only, (because I know not indeed how this discourse
hangs on the business under Consideration,) that we neither suspend the
certainty of Reward upon our Actions, in the sense intimated, neither do we
say, that it is assured to men, whether they act or no; but say, that the
Reward which is of Grace, through the Unchangeable Love of God, shall be given
to them that act in Holiness, and through the same Love shall all Believers be
kept to such an acting of Holiness, as God thinks good to carry them out
unto, for the fulfilling of all the good pleasure of his Goodness in them, and
making them meet for the inheritance of his Saints in Light; We do not think,
mediums designed of God for the Accomplishment of any End, are such that
conditions of the End, that it is suspended on them in uncertainty, in respect
of the Issue before its accomplishment. Neither do we grant, or can it be
proved, that God assigns any medium for the accomplishment of a determinate
End, (such as we have proved the Salvation of all Believres to be) and leave it
in such a Condition, as that not only it shall be effected and produced,
suitably to the nature of the immediate cause of which it is, whether free,
necessary, or contingent, but also shall be so far uncertain, as that it
may, or may, not be wrought and accomplished.

The former part of this third Paragraph is but a Repetition of an Assertion,.
12.
which upon the Credit of his own single Testimony we have had often tendered;
( viz.) That an Assurance given him, that is Godly, of the Love of God, not
depending on any thing in him, which it is uncertain whether he will perform
or no, is no motive to men to continue in the ways of Holiness. This (as I
said before) I cannot close withal: That that which is a motive to Faith, and
Love, and eminently suited to the stirring of them up, and setting them on
work, is also a motive to the Obedience, which is called Love, and Obedience
of Faith, has been declared. If there be any thing of the new and Heavenly
nature in the soul, any Quality, or disposition of a Child therein, what can
be more effectual to promote or advance the Fear, Honor, and Reverence of
God in it, then an Assurance of his Spirit, to continue and preserve them in
those ways, which are well pleasing unto him. It is confessed, that in many
Promises of Acceptance here, and Reward hereafter, the things and duties, that
are the means, and ways of enjoying the one, and attaining the other, are
mentioned not as conditions of the Grace and Love, of God to them, to whom the
Promises are made, as though they should depend on any thing of their
uncertain accomplishment as has been declared, but only as the means, and
ways, which God has appointed for men to use, and walk in, unto those ends,
and which he has absolutely promised to work in them, and to continue to them.

4. The close of this Paragraph in the fourth place,. 13.
deserves a little more clear consideration, it containing an Assertion,
which some would not believe, when it was told them, and has stumbled not a
few at the repetition of it. Thus then he proceeds.

Besides, whether any such Assurance of the unchangeablenesse of the Love of
God toward him that is godly, as the Objection speaks of, can be
effectually, and upon sufficient grounds cleared and proved, is very
questionable, yea I conceive there is more reason to judge otherwise then so.
Yea that which is more, I verily believe, that in case any such Assurance of
the unchangeablenesse of Gods Love, were to be found in, or could regularly be
deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground, to any intelligent and
considering man, to question their Authority, and whether they were from God,
or no: For, that a God infinitely righteous and holy, should irreversibly as
sure the immortal and undefiled inheritance of his Grace and Favor, unto any
Creature whatsoever: so that though this creature should prove never so
abominable in his sight, never so outragiously and desperately wicked and
prohane, he should not be at liberty, to withold his inheritance from him, is
a saying doubtless too hard for any man, who rightly understands and
considers the nature of God, to bear:

Ans.. 14.
The Love mentioned in the foregoing Objection, is that which God bears to
them that are godly in Jesus Christ, exerting it self partly in his Gracious
acceptance of their Persons in the Son of his Love, partly in giving to them
of his Holy Spirit and Grace, so that they shall never depart utterly and
wickedly from him, and forsake him, or reject him from being their God. Whether
an assurance of this Love may, on good grounds, be given to Believers, has
been already considered, and the Affirmative, I hope in some good measure
confirmed. The farther Demonstration of it awaiting its proper season, which
the will of God shall give unto it. This Mr Goodwin says to him is
questionable; yea I suppose it is with him out of question, that it cannot be,
else surely he would not have taken so much pains in laboring to disprove it;
And that this us his resolved judgment, he manifests in the next words, I
verily believe, that in case any such assurance were to be found in etc. That
is, Si Deus homini non placuerit, Deus non erit. What more contemptible could
the Pagans of old have spoken of their dunghill Deities, with their Amphibolous
Oracles? were it not fitter language for the Indian Conjurers, who beat and
afflict their hellish Gods, if they answer not according to their desires. The
whole Authority of God, and of his Word in the Scriptures, is here cast down
before the consideration of an intelligent man (forsooth) or a vain man, that
would be wise, but is like the wild Asses colt; and this intelligent man (it
seems) may contend to reject the Word of God, and yet be accounted most wise;
Of old, the Prophet thought not so. To what end is any farther dispute? If the
Scripture speaks not to Mr Goodwins mind, (for doubtless he is an
intelligent and considering man), he sees sufficient ground to question its
Authority. By what way possible, any man can more advance himself into the
Throne of God, then by entertaining such thoughts and conceptions as these, I
know not. An intelligent man is supposed to have from himself, and his own
Wisdom and Intelligence, considerations of Gods nature and perfection, by
which he is to regulate and measure all things, that are affirmed of God, or
his will, in the Scripture. If what is so delivered suit these conceptions of
his, that Scripture wherein it is delivered may pass for Canonical and
Authentic: If otherwise, eadem facilitate rejicitur qua asseritur; which was
sometimes spoken of Traditionalls; but it seems may now be extended to the
written Word. The Scriptue is supposed to hold out things contrary to what this
intelligent Man has conceived and considered, and this is asserted, as a just
ground to question its Authority. And if this be not a Progress in the
contempt of the Word of God, to what ever yet Papists, Socinians, or
Enthusiasts have attempted, I am deceived. To the Law, and to the Testimony,
with all the conceptions and notions of the most intelligent man: if they
answer not to this Rule, it is because there is no truth in them.

But he adds the Reason of this bold Assertion:. 15.
for (says he) That a God infinitely righteous and holy, should irreversibly
etc.

Ans. Neither yet does this at all mend the matter. Neither does the particular
instance given alter at all, but confirm the first general Assertion: ( viz.)
that If there be any thing in the Scriptures contrary to those thoughts of God,
which an intelligent man (without the Scripture) does conceive of him, he has
just grounds to question their Authority, which wholly casts down the Word of
God from its Excellency, and sets a poor, dark, blind creature, under the
notion of an intelligent man, at liberty from his subjection thereunto, making
him his own rule, and guide, as to his Apprehensions of God and his Will: And
is it possible, that such a thought should enter into the heart of a man
fearing God, and reverencing his Word, which God has magnified above all his
name? There is scarce any one Truth in the whole Book of God,but some men,
passing in the world for intelligent and considering men do look upon it, and
profess it to be unworthy of an infinitely Righteous, and Holy God. So do the
Socinians think of the Doctrine of the Satisfaction of Christ, the great
treasure of the Church; At the rate that men pass at in this world it will be
difficult to exclude many of them from the number of intelligent and
considering men; And are they not all absolved here by Mr G. in this Principle,
from bowing to the Authority of God in the Scriptures, having just ground to
question, whether they are from God or no. The case is the same with the
Papists and others in sundry particulats. Frame the supposition how you will,
in things never so uncouth and strange, yet if this be the position, That in
things which appear so to men, upon their consideration, if any thing in the
Scripture be held out, or may be deduced from this to the contrary, they are at
liberty from submitting their understandings to them, and may arraigne them as
false and suppositions their whole divine Authority is unquestionably cast
down to the ground, and trampled on by the feet of men. (for (...)) God will
take care for the vindication of the honor of his Word.

2. The opposition here made by Mr Goodwin,: 16.
and imposed on his Adversaries, is as has been showed, wretchedly false, not
once spoken or owned by them, with whom he has to do, nor having the least
color given unto it by the Doctrine they maintain: yea is diametrically
opposite thereunto. The maine of what they teach, and which Mr Goodwin has
opposed in this Treatise, endeavoring to answer that eminent place of the 1
John 3. 9. with many others produced and argued to that purpose, is, that God
will according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, so write his Law in the
hearts of his, and put his fear in their inward parts, that they shall never
depart from him, so as to become desperately and outragiously profane, but be
preserved such to the end, as that the Lord with the greatest advantage of
Glory to his infinite Wisdom, Righteousness, and Holiness, may irreversibly
assure the immortal Inheritance of his Love and Favor unto them. So that Mr
Goodwin's Discourse to the end of this Section, concerning the Continuance of
the Love of God to them that are wicked, with an equal measure of Favor to
them that are Godly, according to this Doctrine, is vain, and grossly
sophistical, and such as he himself knows to be so. To say, every one that
does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and that he delights in him,
(that is) he approves wicked and ungodly men, we know is sufficiently
dishonorable: to him: but yet to say that he delighted in his Church, and
People, washed and made Holy in the Blood of Christ, notwithstanding their
failings, or their being sometime over taken with great sins, when he pleases
in an extraordinary way, for ends best known to himself, to permit them to
fall into them, (which yet he does seldom and rarely,) is that, which himself
affirms, and ascribes to himself in innumerable places of Scripture, (if
their Authority may pass unquestioned) to the praise of the Glory of his
Grace. But it seems, if we take any care, that Mr Goodwin may not call the
Authority of the Scriptures into question, (being fully resolved, that the
Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance is unworthy of a Holy and Righteous God,)
we must give over all attempts of farther deducing it from them; But yet for
the present, we shall consider what he has farther to object against it.

Sect. 34.. 17.
He father objecteth against himself and his Doctrine, in the be half of that
which does oppose in these words.

It is possible, that yet some will farther object against the Argument in
hand; Unless the Saints be assured of the perpetuity of their standing, in the
Grace and Favor of God, they must needs be under fears of falling away, and
so of perishing; and fear we know is of a discouraging and infeebling nature;
an enemy unto such actions, which men of confidence and courage are apt to
undertake.

Ans. What this objection makes in this place, I know not; it neither
asserteth any eminency in the Doctrine by Mr Goodwin opposed, as to the
promotion of Godliness, nor immediately challenges that, which he does
maintain of a contrary tendency, but only intimates, that the Sts Consolation
and peace is weakened by unnecessary fears, such as his opinion is apt to
ingenerate in them; But however thus far I own it, as to the maine of the
Observation in hand, that the Doctrine of the Apostasy of Believers, is apt and
suited to cut the Saints of God, and heirs of the Promise short of that strong
Consolation, which he is so abundantly willing that they should receive, and to
fill their Souls, and perplex their consciences, with cares, fears, and
manifold intanglements, suited to weaken their Faith, and Love, and alienate
their hearts from that delight in God, which they are called, and otherwise
would be carried forth unto. They being all of them, in some measure,
acquainted with the strength, subtility, and power of indwelling Sin, the
advantages of Satan in his manifold Temptations, the eminent success, which
they see every day the Principalities, and Powers in heavenly places which they
wrestle withal, to have against them, and being herewithall taught, that there
is neither Purpose, nor Promise of God for their Preservation, that there is
nothing to that purpose in the Covenant of Grace the Consideration of their
Condition must of necessity fill them with innumerable perplexities, and make
them their own tormentors all their days; thus far (I say) I own the
Objection; That is not properly courage, or confidence, but Faith, Love, and
Reverence, that are the Principles of our Actions in walking with God, has
been declared.

But what says Mr Goodwin to the Objection,. 18.
as by himself laid down? Beside what he relates, of his conquest of it in
other places, he adds

That the Saints, notwithstanding the possibility of their final falling away,
have, or may have, such an Assurance of the perpetuity of their standing, in
the Grace and Favor of God, as may exclude all fear, at least that, which is
of a discouraging or enfeebling nature, The Apostle, as we have formerly
showed, lived at a very excellent rate both of courage, and confidence;
notwithstanding he know that it was possible for him to become a Reprobate; The
assurance he had, that upon a diligent use of those means, which he know
assuredly God would vouchsafe unto him, he should prevent his being a
Reprobate, was a Golden foundation unto him, of that confidence, and courage,
wherein he equalized the Holy Angels themselves.

Ans. 1. The grounds asserted by Mr Goodwin, on which Believers may build the
Assurance pretended of the perpetuity of their standing in the Grace and Favor
of God, notwithstanding the possibility of their defection, (the assertion
whereof costs no less, then the denying of all, or any influence from the
Purpose, Promises, Covenant, or Oath of God, or Mediation of Christ, into their
preservation) I have formerly considered: and manifested them to be so
exceeding unable, to bear any such building of Confidence upon, as is
pretended, that it is almost a Miracle, how any thoughts of such a structure on
such quicksands, could ever find place in the mind of a man, any thing
seriously acquainted with the ways of God; The whole of the Saints
preservation in the Love and Favor of God, (as it is also expressed in this
Section) is resolved into men's selfe-considerations, and endeavors. Being
weary it seems, of leaning on the Power of God, to be kept thereby unto
eternal Salvation, men begin to trust to themselves, and their own Abilities,
to be their own keepers: But what will they do in the end thereof? The sum
of what Mr Goodwin has formerly said and what he repeateth again to the end
of this Section, is, Men need not fear their falling away, though it is
possible, seeing they may easily prevent it, if they will; Expressions
sufficiently contemptive of the Grace of God, and the Salvation that God
assures us thereby; an assertion, which those Ancients, which Mr Goodwin
labors to draw into communion with him, would have rejected, and cast out as
Heretical. Man's ability thus to preserve himself, in the Grace and Favor of
God, to the end, is either from himself, or from the Grace of God? If from
himself? Let us know, what that Ability is, and wherein it does consist, and
how he comes by it? Christ tells us, that without him we can do nothing, and
the Apostle that we are not sufficient of our selves to think a good thought,
but that all our sufficiency is of God: So that this self ability for
preservation extends not to the thinking a good thought: indeed is nothing:
Is it from the Grace of God? Then the Assurance of it must be, either because
God promised absolutely, so to work in him to will and to do, of his own good
pleasure, as that he should certainly be preserved, which you will not say,
(as I suppose,) or because he will so afford him his Grace, as that he may make
use of it to the end proposed, if he please: But now, what Assurance has he,
that he shall so make use of his Grace, as to make it effectual for the end
designed? And is this good use of Grace, of himself, or of Grace also? If of
himself, it is nothing; as was showed from that of our Savior John 15. 5.
Neither can a man promise himself much Assistance, from the Ability of doing
nothing at all. If you shall say it is of Grace, the same Question arises as
formerly, manifesting that there is not the least Assurance imaginable of our
continuance in the Grace and Favor of God, but what arises from his Faithful
Promises (efficaciously overcoming all interveniences) that we shall so do.

2. He tells us,. 19.
that Paul lived at an excellent rate of Assurance, and yet knew that it was
possible for him to be a Reprobate; I confess indeed he lived at an excellent
rate of Assurance, which he manifests himself to have received upon such
Principles, and Foundations, as were common to him with all true Believers,
Romans 8. 32, 33, 34, 35. That it was possible in respect of the Event, that He
might have been a Reprobate, who was chosen from Eternity, is not proved. He
says indeed 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep my body in subjection, least by any means I
should be found (...). That by (...) there, any more is intended, then not
approved or accepted in that service be had in hand, Mr Goodwin labors not
to evince; and if that be the sense of the words (as the scope of the whole
manifests it to be) then all that Paul there expresses, is, that he
endeavored always to approve himself, and by all means, an acceptable
workman not to be rejected, or disallowed in the labor of Preaching the
Gospel which he had undertaken; and we acknowledge that this thought, and
contrivance may well become him, who lives at the greatest rate of Assurance,
that God affords to any here below; yea that such thoughts and endeavors do
naturally and genuinely flow from the Assurance of the Love of God, we also
grant. But yet, supposing that being a Reprobate, by a Metonymie of the effect,
may here signify to be damned, how does this prove, that it was possible in
respect of the event, that he should be damned? Why, because he labored that
he might not be so; That is, no man can use the means of avoiding any thing,
but he must be uncertain, whether in the use of those means it may be avoided
or no; This looks like begging the thing in question; Paul laboring and
endeavoring in the ways expressed, evidently manifests such a labor and
endeavor, in such a way, to be the appointed means of avoiding the Condition
of being (...). That there is an infallible connection betwixt the use of such
means, and the deliverance from that state, is proved. But that Paul had not
assurance of the sufficiency of the Grace of God with him, for his certain use
of those means, and certain infallible deliverance from that end, nothing in
the least in intimated in the Text, or brought in from any place else by Mr
Goodwin, to give color thereunto. But of this Scripture at large afterward,

Supposing himself to have fairly quit himself of the former plea,. 20.
in the behalf of our Doctrine, as by himself proposed, he adds another
Pretension in the behalf of the same plea formerly produced, which he
attempteth also to take out of the way, having in some measure prepared it, in
his proposal of it for an ea^y removal Thus then he proceeds. To pretend
that the weakness of the flesh in the best of Saints considered, and their
aptness to go astray, they must needs lie under many trouble some and
tormenting fears of perishing, unless they have some promise or assurance
from God to support them, notwithstanding any declinings or goings astray
incident unto them, yet they shall not loose his favor, or perist, is to pret
and nothing but what has been thoroughly answered already, especially in Cap. 9.

Ans. Before I can admit this plea to be put in, in our behalf, I shall crave
leave a little to rectify, and point it more sharply against the Doctrine it
aims to oppose. I say then,

1. It is not the weakness of the flesh, or the feebleness and disability of
our natural man to act in, or go through with great duties and trialls, but
the strength and wilfulness of the flesh, ( i.e.) of the corrupted man, even
in the best of saints, continually provoking and seducing them with sometimes
an insuperable efficacy, leading them captive, and working in them continually,
with a thousand baits and wiles, (as has been in part discovered) laboring to
turn them aside from God, That fills the Saints of God with tormenting,
perplexing fears of perishing, and must needs do so, if they have no promise
of God for their preservation; Besides all this strength and wilfulness of the
flesh, they are exposed to the Assaults of other most dreadful Adversaries,
wrestling with Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, and contending
with the World, as it lies under the curse all their days; To refer all the
oppositions that Believers meet withal, in the course of their obedience, and
which may fill them with fears that they shall one day perish, if not supported
by an Almighty hand, and kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation,
unto the weakness of the flesh, which, in the place where the expression is
used, plainly points at the disability of the natural man to abide in, and
go through with great duties and trialls, is a most vain and empty
contemplation. Those who have to do with God in the matter of Gospel
obedience, and know what it is indeed to serve him under temptations, can tell
you another manner or story: and among them M. Goodwin could do so to the
purpose, when his thoughts were not prejudiced by any byasing opinions that
must be leaned unto.

2. We do not say that the Saints of God in the condition mentioned, stand in
need of any Promise of God, that notwithstanding any declinings or goings
astray incident unto them, they shall not loose his favor or perish, but that
they shall have such a presence of his spirit, and sufficiency of his grace
with them all their days, that they shall never, notwithstanding all the
oppositions and difficulties they meet withal, utterly fail in their Faith,
nor be prevailed against, to depart wickedly and utterly from God. And now I
see not but that supposing that it is necessary, that the Saints be delivered
from troublesome perplexing fears of perishing, and that God has made
provision for that end and purpose, which that he has, seems to be granted by
our Author, I say I cannot see but that this Plea, strikes at the very heart
of the Apostasy of Sts, though not very fitly brought in, in this place, in
reference to the Argument that occasioned it; but our Author, knowing his
faculty to lie more in evading what is objected against him, than in urging
Arguments for his own opinion, does every where, upon the first proposal of
any Argument, divert to other considerations, and to the answering of
Objections, though perhaps not at all to the Plea in hand, nor any way
occasioned by it. But what says he now, in defense of his dearly beloved, thus
attempted, to vindicate it from this sore imputation of robbing and despoiling
the Saints of God, of their Peace and Assurance purchased for them at no less
rate then the blood of the Lord Jesus? He tells you then three things;

1. That the weakness of the flesh, or aptness of miscarrying through this,
is no reasonable ground of fear*. 31.
to any true Believer of his perishing: considering that no manlooseth, or
forfeiteth the Grace and Favor of God, through sins of weakness or
infirmity: It is only the strength of sin, and corruption in men, that
exposes to the danger of loosing the Love of God.

Ans. The latter part of these words plainly discovers the vanity of the
former as produced for any such end and Purpose as that in hand: For though I
willingly grant, that that which is termed the weakness of the flesh, is
enough to make any man what ever fear, that he shall not hold outin the course
of his Obedience to the end, if he have no Promise of supportment and
preservation by an Almighty power, (notwithstanding it is affirmed that it
draws men only to sins of weakness or infirmity, which I thought had not
been called so from the weakness of the flesh, but of Grace in Believers) yet
it is the strength, the power the Law, the subtillty of the flesh, or
indwelling sin, that is the matter of our plea in this case. Not that which
Paul gloried in even his infirmity, but that which made him cry out, Oh!
wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death, Romans
7. 8. 1.
and from the distress by reason whereof he found no deliverance, but only in
the Assured Love of God in Jesus Christ. So that notwithstanding this Reply,
shaped to fortify the minds of men against their failings, upon the account of
the weakness of Grace, rather then of the flesh, (which yet it is not able to
do, for if there be no Promise to the contrary, why may not the principle which
carries men forth to lesser, carry them also forth to greater, and more
provoking sins, what boundaries will you prescribe unto these sins of
infirmity.) The pretension from the strength of the flesh, (yea from the
weakness of it) holds good against the Saints establishment in Peace and
Assurance, upon the account of their being destitute of any Promise of
preservation by God.

2. If the Saints be willing ( says he) to strengthen the Spirit in them,. 22.
and make him willing proportionably to the means prescribed, and vouchsafed
unto them by God for such a purpose, this will fully balance the weakness of
the flesh, and prevent the miscarriages and breaking out hereof; This I say
then (says the Apostle) walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh; and again, If you be lead by the Spirit you are not under
the Law, and consequently, are in no danger of loosing the Favor of God, or of
perishing for such sins, which under the conduct of the Spirit you are
subject unto.

Ans. But that all now must be taken in good part, and nothing called strange
or uncouth, since we have passed the pikes in the last Section, I should
somewat admire at the Doctrine of this Paragraph; For

1. Here is a willing in reference to a great Spiritual duty supposed in men,
antecedent to any Assistance of him who works to will and to do of his own
good pleasure. What he works, he works by the Spirit. But this is a willing
in us, distinct from, and antecedent to, the appearing of the Spirit for the
strengthening thereof.

2. That whereas we have hitherto imagined that the Spirit strengthens the
Saints and that their supportment had been from him, as we partly also before
declared (at least we did our mind to be so persuaded) it seems they
strengthen the Spirit in them, and not he them; How or by what means, or by
what principles in them it is, that so they do, is not declared. Besides what
is here intended by the Spirit, is not manifested; If it be the Holy and
Blessed Spirit of God, be has no need of our strengthening; he is able of
himself, to make us meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; If it be
the gracious principles that are bestowed upon the Saints, that are intended,
the new Creature, the inwardman, called the Spirit in the Scripture, in
opposition to the flesh, if our strengthening this Spirit, be any thing, but the
acting of the Graces intended thereby in us, I know not what you mean.
Especially, in what is or consists their acting to make the Spirit willing
proportionably to the means we do receive, am I to seek, to say, that we
receave outward means of God, (for so they must be, being distinguished from
the Spirit) and thereupon of our selves do make the Spirit willing, and
strengthen him to the performance of God, surely holds out a very sufficient
power in Spiritual things, inbred in us, and abiding with us whereof there is
not the least Line or appearance in the whole Book of God, nor in any Author
urged by Mr Goodwin to give countenance to his persuasion, neither

2. Is the sum of all this Answer any other, but this, If we are willing and
will prevent all miscarriages from the weakness of the flesh, we may. But how
we become willing so to do, and what Assurance we have, that we shall be so
willing, seeing all in us by nature, John 3. 6.
as to any Spiritual duty, is flesh, is not intimated in the least; This is
strenuously supposed all along, that to be willing unto spiritual good, in a
spiritual manner, is wholly in our own power, and an easy thing it is, no
doubt; The plea in hand is, that such is the strength of indwelling sin in
the best of the Saints, and so easily does it beset them, that if they have not
some Promise of God to assure them, that they shall have constant supply of
Grace from him, and by his power be preserved, it is impossible but that they
must be filled with perplexing fears, that they shall not hold out in giving
him willing Obedience to the end; Their Will, being in an especial manner
entangled with the power of sin: It is answered, If men be but willing etc.
they need not fear this, or any such issue; (i. e.) If they do the thing which
they fear, and have reasons inviucible to fear, that they shall not, they
need not fear, but that they shall do it: which is nothing but a most absurd
begging of the thing in Question. Nether is there any thiug in the Scripture
that will give a pass to this Beggar, or shelter him from due correction; The
Apostle indeed says that If we walk in the Spirit, we shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh. And good Reason there is for it, for as he told us these
are contrary to one an ^ther, and opposite to one another, and bring forth such
diverse and contrary fruits, in them, in whom they are, that if we walk in the
one, we shall not fulfill the lusts of the other. But what assurance have we,
that we shall walk in the Spirit, if it be not hence, that God has promised
that his Spirit shall never depart from us And if we are lead by the Spirit we
are not under the Law; Which by the way, lets us see that the Spirit leads
us, (that is) makes us willing and strengthens us, not we him;) But on what
account shall or dare any man promise to himself, that the Spirit will
continue so to do, if God has not promised that he shall so do* Or if his
leading of us, be only on condition that we be willing to be lead, how shall we
be in the least assertained, (supposing us in any measure acquainted with the
power of indwelling sin) that we shall be always so willing, let then this
pass with what was said before as nothing to the thing in hand.

3. It is answered then ( 3ly and lastly) there is no such aptness or
pronenesse unto sin,. 23.
sins I mean of a disinheriting import in Saints, or true Believers as is
pretended: But on the contrary a strong propension or inclination unto
Righteousness reigns in them; we heard formerly from the Apostle 1 John 3.
9. That he that is borne of God cannot sin: and also from the 1 John 5. 3.
From these suppositions with many other of like import, it is evident that
there is a pregnant strong, over pouring propension, in all true Believers to
walk Holily, and to live Righteously, so that to refrain sinning in the kind
intended, is no such great mastery, no such matter of difficulty, unto such men
and that when they are overcome and fall into sin, it is through a mere
voluntary neglect; and thus we see all things unpartially weighed, and debated
to and fro, that the Doctrine which supposes a possibility of the Saints
declining, is the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, and the corrivall
of it an enemy thereto.

Ans. We have here an Assertion, an Inference, and a Conclusion; The Assertion
is, that there is no such aptness and pronenesse to sin in Believers, as is
intimated; and that because there is such a strong propensity in them to
Righteousness, which that they have is proved from sundry places of Scripture;
That is, because the Spirit is in Believers, the flesh is not in them. Because
they have a new man in them, they have not an old; because they have a
principle of Life, they have not a body of death. That is, where the Spirit
lusts against the flesh, the flesh lusts not against the Spirit. We thought
the Doctrine of Paul, Romans 7. Gal. 5. and in innumerable other places, with the
experience off all the Saints in the World had lain against this piece of
Sophistry. It is true, their propension unto Righteousness reigns in them,
but it is as true, their propension unto sin, rebelleth in them. Though the
Land be conquered for Christ, yet the Canaanites will dwell in it; and if the
Saints leave of but one day, the work of killing, crucifying and mortifying,
they will quickly find an actual rebellion in them, not easy to be
suppressed. They have indeed a propension to Holiness ruling in them, but also
a propension unto sin dwelling in them, so that when they would do good ^vell
is present with them, and the good they would do, they cannot; But when Mr
Goodwin can prove this consequence, that Saints have strong inclinations to
Righteousness, therefore they have not so to sin, for my part I will
forbear for ever disputing with him; If he can beat us, not only from
Scripture, but all our Spiritual sense and experience, doubtless it is to no
purpose to contend any longer with him; Hence then

2. He infers,. 24.
that to abstain from sinning, that is, sinning customarily, and against
conscience, so as to endanger the loss of the Favor of God, is no such great
mastery, no such matter of difficulty to such men. This abstaining from such
sins, (on the one hand) is the whole course of our Gospel Obedience, which
it seems however it be compared to running in a race, striving for masteries,
called resisting unto blood, wrestling with principallities and powers,
requiring for its carrying on the exceeding greatness of the power of God,
with suitable help in time of need from Jesus Christ, who is sensible of the
weight of it, as no small matter, knowing what it is to serve God in
Temptations, yet is it indeed but a trifling thing, a matter of no great
difficulty or mastery. Do men Watch, Pray, Contend, Fight, Wrestle with God,
and Satan, does the Lord put forth his Power, and the Lord Jesus Christ
continually intercede for the preservation of the Saints, Ad quid perditio
haec? to what end is all this toil and labor, about a thing of little or no
weight? Egregiam vero laudem! We know indeed, the Yoke of Christ is easy, and
his Commandment not grievous, that we can do all things through him that
inableth us, but to make Gospel obedience, so slight a thing, that it is no
great mastery* or matter of no great commendation, to hold out in it to the
end, this we were to learn till now, and are as yet slow of heart to receive it.

The Conclusion is: Io,. 25.
P^an, vicimus: all things unpartially weighed, the case is ours, and
Godliness exceedingly promoted by the Doctrine of the possibility of the
Saints defection ((...)) and the corrivall of it an enemy to it: to prove which
not one word in the Argument has been spoken, nor, to free the other from a
charge of a direct contrary importance, one word to the purpose; and of Mr
Goodwins sixth Argument for his Doctrine of the Apostasy of Saints, this is the
end.

But this is not all he has to say in this case,. 26.
in hand. Indeed the maine design of his whole 13. Chap. consisting of 41.
Sections, and about so many pages in his Book, and containing all which in an
Argumentative way, he insisteth on in the case in hand, looks this way; and
therefore having already plucked away one of the maine propps of that discourse,
I shall apply my self to take away those which do remain, that the whole may
justly fall to the ground; and therefore shall as briefly as I can, consider
the whole of that discourse, containing nine Arguments against the Perseverance
of Saints, for the possibility of their total and final defection.

CAP. XII.
1. M. G. entrance and preface to his Arguments from the Apostasy of the Saints
considered. 2. The weakness of his first Argument: The import of it. 3. Answer
to that first Argument. Doctrine may pretend to give God the glory of being no
accepter of Persons and yet be false: Justification by works, of that rank and
order. 4. Acceptance of Persons what, and wherein it consists. No place for
it with God: contrary to distributive Justice. 5. The Doctrine of the Saints
Perseverance charged with rendering God an accepter of Persons. 6. Unjustly,
what it says looking this way. 7. The sum of the charge against it
considered and removed. 8. M. G. second Argument, and the weight by him hanged
thereon: the original of this Argument: by whom somewhat insisted on. 9. The
Argument it self in his words proposed: of the use and end of the Ministry:
whether weakened by the Doctrine of Perseverance. 10. Entrance unto an Answer to
that Argument. The foundation laid of it false and when: it falsely imposes on
the Doctrine of Perseverance, sundry things by it disclaimed: the first
considered. 11. The iniquiry of those impositions farther discovered. 12. The
true state of the difference as to this Argument declared. 13. The Argument
satisfied. 14. The reinforcement of the Minor attempted, and considered. 15.
The manner of Gods operations with, and in, natural and voluntary Agents
compared. Efficacy of Grace and liberty in man consistent. 16. An Objection to
himself framed by M. G. that Objection rectified; Perseverance how absolutely
and simply necessary, how not. 17. The removal of the pretended Objection
farther insisted on by M. G. 18. That discourse discussed, and manifested to be
weak and sophistical. The consistency of Exhortations and Promises farther
cleared. 19. The manner of the operation of Grace, in, and upon the wills of
men considered. 20. The inconsistency of exhortations with the efficacy of
Grace, disputed by M. G. 21. That discourse removed, and the use of
Exhortations farther cleared. Obedience to them twofold, Habitual, Actual: of
the Physical operation of Grace, and means of the word: their compliance, and
use. How the one and the other affect the will. 22. Inclination to Persevere
when wrought in Believers. 23. Of the manner of Gods operation on the wills of
men: M. G. discourse and judgment. 24. Considered. 25. Effects follow as to
their kind, their next causes. 26. The same Act of the will Physical and
Moral upon several accounts: Those accounts considered. 27. God by the real
efficacy of the Spirit, produces in us Acts of the will, morally good: that
confirmed from Scripture. 28. Conclusion from thence. 29. Of the terms,
Physical, Moral, and necessary, and their use in things of the nature under
consideration. Moral causes of Physical effects. 30. The concurrence of
Physical and Moral causes for producing the same effect: the efficacy of
Grace, and exhortations. 31. Physical and necessary, how distinguished. Moral
and not necessary. Confounded by M. G. 32. M. G. farther progress considered.
33. What operation of God on the will of man he allows. All Physical
operation by him excluded. 34. M. G's sense of the difference between the
working of God and a Minister on the will: that it is but graduall. 35.
Considered and removed. All working of God on the will by him confined to
persuasion: persuasion gives no strength or ability to the person persuaded.
36. All immediate acting of God to good in men, by M: G. utterly excluded. 37.
Wherein Gods persuading men does consist according to M. G. 1 Cor. 3. 9.
considered. 38. Of the concurrence of diverse Agents to the production of the
same effect. 39. The sum of the 7 Section of Gh. 13. The will how
necessitated, how free. 40. In what seuce M. G. allows Gods persuasions to be
irresistible. 41. The dealings of God and men ill compared. 42. Paul's
exhortation to the use of means, where the end was certain, Acts 24.
c^df^dered* God deals with men as men, exhorting them, and as corrupted men
assisting them. 43. Of Promises of Temporal things whether all conditional.
44. What condition in the Promise made to Paul Act. 27. 45. Farther of that
Promise, its infallibility and means of Accomplishment. 46. The same
considerations farther prosecuted. 47. 48. Of Promises of Perseveran^e, and
what relations to perform in conjuction. 49. M. G. opposition hereunto. 50.
Promises and protestations in conjunction 1 Cor. 10. 12, 13. discussed. An
absolute Promise of Perseverance therein evinced. 51. Phil. 1. 12, 13. to the
same purpose considered. M. G. Interpretation of that place proposed removed.
52. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 9. to the same purpose insisted on. 53. Of the consistency o^
Threatenings with the Promises of Perseverance. 54. M. G. opposition hereunto:
55. Considered and removed. What Promises of Perseverance are asserted how
absolute and infrustable. Fear of Hell and punishment twofold. The fear
intended to be ingenerated by threatenings, not inconsistent with the Assurance
given by promises. 56. Five Considerations about the use of Threatenings: the
first etc. 57. Hipocrites how threatened for Apostasy: of the End and Aim of
God in Threatenings. 58. Of the proper End and Efficacy of Threatenings, with
reference unto true Believers. 59. Fear of Hell and punishment, how far a
principle of Obedience in the Saints. 60. Of Noah's fear Heb. 11. 7. 61. M. G's
farther arguings for the Efficacy of the fear of Hell, unto Obedience in the
Saints; proposed, considered, removed. 62. 1 Ioh. 4. 18. cons^dered. 63. Of the
Obedience of Saints to their heavenly Father, compared to the obedience of
Children to their natural Parents: M. G's monstrous conception about this
thing. 64. How Fear or Love, and in what sense are principles of Obedience.
That which is done from Fear, not done willingly, not cheerfully. 65. How
Fear, and what fear has torment. 66. Of the nature and use of Promises.
Close of the Answer to this Argument.

IT will be needless to use many words unto the Discourse of the first
Section;. 1.
seeing it will not in the least prejudice our Cause in hand, to leave Mr
Godwin in full possession of all the Glory of the Rethoricke thereof. For
although I cannot close with him in the Exposition given of that expression 1 Timothy 6. 16. God inhabiteth Light inaccessible, some thing in my weak
apprehension, much more glorious and divine being comprised therein, then what
it is here turned aside unto; Neither am I in the least convinced of the truth
(...) of the former Discourse, in the close of the whole, asserting a
deliverance to be obtained from our thoughts of the Doctrine of the defection
of the Saints, which he intimates to be, that it is anti-evangelicall,
tormenting, and bringing souls under bondage, by a narrow, and unprejudicate
search into it, finding my self every day more and more confirmed in thoughts
of that kind concerning it, by my engagement into such an enquiry (which has
been observed in this present Discourse, as far as my weakness will permit;
yet it being not in the least Argumentative, but for the whole frame and
intendment of it Commune exordium, and that which any man of any opinion in the
world might make use of, I shall not insist upon it.

His second Section contains his first Argument,. 2.
drawn forth in the defense of his Doctrine of the possibility (as he calls
it, but indeed what it is, we have heard) of the defection of Believers; Of
this, I presume he intended no more use but (as a forlorn,) to begin a light
Skirmish with his Adversaries, ordering it to retreat to his maine Body
advancing after, or desperately casting it away, to abate the Edge of his
Combatants Weapons, it is so weak and feeble; and therefore I shall be very
brief in the consideration of it; thus then he proposes it.

That Doctrine which renders God free from the unrighteousness which the
Scripture calls the respecting of persons of men, is a Doctrine of perfect
consistence with the Scripture, and the truth; The Doctrine which teaches the
possibility of the Saints declining, and this unto death is a Doctrine of this
import: Ergo.

Ans. 1.. 3.
The first proposition must be supposed Universal, of else the whole will
quickly be manifested to be unconclusive. If it be only Indefinite, and so
equivalent (as it lies) to a particular, the conclusion is from all
particulars, and of no force, as Mr Goodwin well knows. Take it universally,
and I say it is evidently false, and might easily be disproved by innumerable
Instances. Not that any error or falsehood can indeed give God the Glory of
any one of his Attributes; but that they may be fitted and suited for such a
service, were not their throats cut, and their mouths stopped, by the Lies that
are in them, which Mr Goodwin's Doctrine is no less liable to then any other,
and not at all exempted from that Condition, by its seeming subserviency unto
Gods Aprosopolepsia. Does not the Doctrine of Justification by Works even in
the most rigid sense of it, according to the tenor of the old Covenant,
absolutely render God free from the Unrighteousness of Accepting of Persens?
And yet for all that, it has not one jot the more of Truth in it, nor is it
the less Anti-evangelicall. This foundation then being removed, what ever is
built upon it mole ruit su^. Neither is it in any measure restored, or laid a
new, by the reason of it given by Mr G. viz. That the Scripture affirms in
sundry places that God is no accepter of persons: for he that shall hence
conclude, that what ever Doctrine affirms, directly, or by consequence, that
God is no Aceepter of persons, what ever other abomination it is evidently
deeming with all, is yet true, and according to the mind of God, shall have
leave notwithstanding the antiquated Statute of our University against it, to
go and read Logic at Stamford. On this account do but provide that a
Doctrine be not gnilty of any one crime, and you may conclude that it is guilty
of none. For instance, That Doctrine which impeacheth not the Omnipresence of
the Diety, is true and according to the Scripture, for the Scripture abounds
with clear Testimonies of the Presence of God in all places. Now the Doctrine
of the Vbiquity of the humane nature of Christ, does no way impeach the
omnipresence of the Diety; therefore it is true and according to Scripture.

I might supersede all further considerations of this Argument, having rendered
it altogether useless, and unserviceable, in this warfare, by breaking its
right leg, or rather cruteh, whereon it leaned: but something also may be
added to the Minor, because of its reflection in the close of its proof upon
the Doctrine we maintain, intimating an inconsistency of it, with that
Excellency of God spoken of, namely, that he is no Accepter of Persons.

Prosopolepsia,. 4.
or Accepting of Persons, is an evil in Judgment, when he who is to determine
in causes of righteousness, has respect to personal things, that concerue
not the merit of the Cause in hand, and judges accordingly. This properly can
have no place in God, as to any bestowing of free Grace, Mercy, or Pardon;
There is Room made for it, only when the things that are bestowed, or wrought,
by it, are such, as in Justice are due; it being an Iniquity solely and
directly opposed to distributive Justice, Exodus 23. 2, 3 6, 7, 8, 9.
that renders to every one according to what is Righteous and due. Job. 31. 34.
That with God there be no Accepting of Persons there is no more required, but
this, that he appoint and determine equal Punishments, to equal faults, and
give equal Rewards, to equal deservings. If he will dispose of his pardoning
Mercy, and free Grace, to some in Christ, not to others, who shall say unto him
what do thou? May he not do what he will with his own? So he gives a penny
to him that labors all day, he maygive a penny also to him that works but
one hour. Now suppose that Mr G's Doctrine render God free from this, (or
rather charge him not with it,) yet if withal it calls his Truth,
Righteousness, Faithfulness, Oath, and Immutabillity into question, shall it
pass for a Truth, or be embraced ever the sooner?

But the sting of this Argument lies in the Tail,. 5.
or close of it, in the Reflection insisted on upon the common Doctrine of
Perseverance as it is called: viz. that it teaches God to be an accepter of
Persons: This is Mr Goodwin's way of Arguing all along; When at any time he
has proposed a proof of the Doctrine he goes about to establish, finding
that as something heavy work to lie upon his hand, and not much to be said in
the case, he instantly turns about and falls upon his Adversaries, in
declaiming against whom, he has a rich and overflowing Vein. There is scarce
any one of his Arguments, in the pursuit and improvement whereof, one fourth
part of it, is spoken to that head, where in he is engaged.

But wherein is the Common Doctrine of Perseverance guilty of this great
crime?. 6.
It teaches, that He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not,
shall be damned. It teaches, that God has allotted equal punishments to
equal Transgressions, and appointed equal Rewards to equal ways of
Obedience. That the Wages of every sin is death, and that every sinner must
dye, unless it be those, concerning whom God himself says, Deliver them, I
have found a Ransom: Job. 33. 24.
that he is a like displeased with sin in whomsoever it is, and that in a
peculiar and eminent manner when it is found in his own. Indeed if this be to
impute Acceptance of Persons to God, to say, that he has Mercy on whom he
will have Mercy, and whom he will, he hardens, that he is tender to his own,
as a Father to his only Child that serves him, and will recover them (being
faithful in his Promises) from their sins, and heal their backeslidings,
though he suffer others to lie wallowing in their rebellions, and pollutions
all their days; that he will not give pardon to any finner, but upon Faith and
Repentance, but will give Faith and Repentance to those whom he has chosen,
and given unto Jesus Christ, to be saved: If this (I say) be acceptance of
Persons, our Doctrine owneth the imputation of ascribing it to God, and
glories in it: we being ascertained that God takes all this to himself,
clearly, and plentifully in the Word of Truth.

The sum of what our Author gives in,. 7.
to make good his charge upon the common Doctrine of Perseverance is, That it
affirms, that though Saints and Believers fall into the same sins of
Adultery and Idolatry, and the like, with other men, yet they are not dealt
withal as other men, but continued in the Love and Favor of God. To wave the
consideration of the false impositions (by the way) on the Doctrine opposed (as
that is that it teaches the Saints to fall into, and to continue in them to
the significancy of that expression ( never so long) under Abominations) and to
join Issue upon the whole, of the matter, I say,

1. That in, and with this Doctrine, and in perfect Harmony, and Consistency
therewith, Romans 1. 32.
we maintain, that the judgment of God is the same in respect of every sin
in whomsoever it is, and that he that does it on that account, is worthy of
death; and

2. That the sentence of the Law, is the same toward all, cursing every one
that continues not in all things written in the Book thereof, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
to do them.

3. That in, and under the Gospel, wherein a remedy is provided in reference
to the rigor and severity of both the former Apprehensions, yet the Judge of
all, deals with all men equally, according to the tenor of it, He that
Believes, shall be Saved, and he that Believes not, shall be damned; Men in
the same condition, shall have the same recompense of reward: But you will say,
Do not the same sins, put men into the same condition, and deserve the same
punishment in one as in another?

Ans. 1. They do deserve the same punishment: God is equally provoked, and had
not Christ answered for the sins of Believers, they could not, they should
not have escaped the wrath due to them. 2. That the same sins do not argue
men always under the Gospel, to be in the same Condition, as shall be
afterward fully manifested, for (1.) They do not find them in the same state:
some are in a state of Death and sin, others of Life and Grace, being
translated from the one to the other, having a Title to the Promise of Mercy in
Christ. (2.) And chiefly, as there is a twofold justification, of the Person,
and of the Fact, and the one, may be without the other, so there is a twofold
condemnation or dis-approbation, of the Fact, and of the Person* As to the
particular dis-approbation of God, in respect of any sinfnll Act, it is the
same in reference unto all Persons, Believers and Unbelievers: As to their
Persons, there are in the Gospel, other ingredients to the judgment of them,
beside particular Facts, or Acts, in answer to the Law, or the rule of
Righteousness, viz. Faith and Repentance, which alter the case of the Person,
even before the judgment seat of God: To suppose the Saints to fall into the
same sins with other men, in the same manner, and to continue in them,
without Faith and Repentance, is to beg the thing in Question. Suppose them
to have (what we affirm God has promised) those conditions of Evangelicall
mercy, and M. Goodwin himself, will grant it no acceptance of Persons, to
deal otherwise with them, then with others, who have committed like sins
with them, in whom those conditions are not wrought or found; that is, he that
Believes shall be Saved, he that Believes not shall be Damned. This is all we
say in this thing: but of the difference between Believers and unbelievers in
their sining, we shall speak afterward at large, to the full removal of this
and another Objection. For the present this shall suffice, though Believers
fall, or may fall into the same sins with other men, yet they fall not into
them, in the same manner with them, and they have a relief provided, to
prevent the deadly malignity of sin, which those who believe not, have no
interest in, no right unto.

Mr Goodwins second Argument is,. 8.
that which of all others in this case, he seems to lay most weight upon:
and which he pursues at large in 17 Pages, and as many Sections, treating in
it concerning the Ministry of the Gospel, and the usefulness of the
Exhortations, Threatenings, and Promises thereof. For an entrance into the
consideration of it, I must needs say Non venit ex pharetris ista sagitta tuis.
For besides that M. Goodwin has taken very little pains in the improvement of
it (considering how it was provided to his hand by the Remonstrants at the
Synod of Dort, and that which he has done farther, consisting in a mere
useless and needless stuffing of it, with sundry Notions taken out of their
first Argument and fifth ( De modo conversionis) of the manner of the Spirits
operation in and upon the Soul, in its first conversion to God) it was the old
song of the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians, in their dealing with Austine,
Fulgentius, Hilarious, Prosper, by them at large confuted, renewed by Castallio,
and Erasmus, against Luther, after it had been sifted and rejected by the more
learned Schoolmen in former ages: What ever it be, and how ever it is now come
to hand, being taught to speak out Language, and that in the best fashion, the
consideration of it must not be declined. And thus it is proposed.

If the common Doctrine of Perseverance, renders the Ministry of the Gospel,.
9.
so far as it concerns the Perseverance of the Saints, vain, impertinent,
and void, then is it not a Doctrine of God, but of men, and consequently, that
which opposes it is, the truth: But certain it is, that the said Doctrine, is
of this unchristian tendency and import; Ergo. The first part of the consequent
of the Major is granted. The Work of the Ministry, being for the edification of
the body of Christ, and the perfecting of the Saints, (Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.) that
which frustrateth the End whereunto of Christ himself it is designed, can be
no Truth of his. Of the farther inference, That the Doctrine which opposes it,
or is set up in opposition to it, is the Truth, more will be spoken afterward.
For the present I cannot but insist upon the former observation; That
notwithstanding Mr Goodwins pretense of proving, and arguing for the Doctrine
he maintains, yet upon the matter, he has not any thing to say, in the
carrying on of that design, but instantly falls to his old work of raising
Objections, in their very setting up prepared to be cast down, (for the most
part) which with all his might he labors to remove.

The stresse of the whole, (as far as we are concerned in it) lies on the
Minor, which is thus farther attempted to be made good: The Minor Proposition
is Demonstrated thus, The Doctrine which renders the Labor and Faithfulness
of a Minister in pressing such Exhortations, Threatenings, and Promises, which
tend to the preservation of the Saints, in Faith and holiness to the end,
useless, renders the Ministry of the Gospel, as far as it concerns the
encouragement, or inabling of the Saints to Persevere, needless and vain: but
guilty of such a tendency as this, is the commonly received Doctrine of
Perseverance: Ergo.

Ans. This labor might have been saved, and both these Syllogismes very easily
reduced to one: but then another seeming Argument (as we shall find afterward)
insisted on, would have been prevented. Our trade in such cases as this is by
weight, and not by number: the Minor then, is still to be confirmed; which he
labors thus to do.

The common Doctrine of Perseverance, requires and commands all Saints or
true Believers, to be fully persuaded, and this with the greatest and most
indubitable certainty of Faith, that there is an absolute and utter
impossibility, either of a total, or final defection of their faith: that
though they should fall into ten thousand enormous and most abominable sins,
and lyewallowing in them, like a swine in the mire, yet they should remain all
the while in an estate of Grace, and that God will by a strong hand of
irresistible grace, bring them off from their sins, by Repentance, before
they dye: but the Doctrine which requires and commands all this, and much
more of like import, to be confidently believed by true Believers, renders the
pressing of all Exhortations, Threatening, Promises upon them in order to
prevail with them, or make them careful to Persevere, bootlesse and
unnecessary. Ergo.

Ans. 1.. 10.
What weight M. Goodwin, (with all those with whom as to his undertaking under
consideration He is in fellowship) does lay upon this Argument, is known to
all. The whole foundation of what is afterward at large insisted on, for the
establishment of it being laid upon the proof of the Minor Proposition
formerly denied, here laid down; It will easily be granted, that it was
incumbent on him to make sure work here, and not to leave any thing liable to
any just Exception. An error, or a mistake in the foundation, is not easily
recoverable; All that is afterward heaped up, bears it self on a
supposition of the Truth of what is here delivered. If this fail in the least,
we may spare our Labor, as to any farther consideration of what follows; Now
the maine of the proof here insisted on, lies in the Declaration of that
which he calls, the Common Doctrine of Perseverance, and concerning this he
informs his Reader.

1. That it commands all Saints to he fully persuaded, and that with the
gseatest and most indubitable certainty of Faith, that there is an absolute and
utter impossibility either of a total, or final defection of their Faith.

Ans. 1. What is the intendment of these Aggravating expressions of, [ fully
persuaded, greatest and most indubitable certainty of Faith] I know not. Will
it please you, if it should require them to be persuaded, but not fully
persuaded, Believe it, but with little and dubitable cetainty of Faith, or
uncertainty rather? Full persuasion, greatest certainty, without doubting or
staggering, are all of their perfections of Faith, and of the Saints in
believing: which without doubt, they are in all that they are to Believe, to
press after: so that all this is no more, but that this Doctrine requires men
to believe what it affirms God to have promised. It requires men to mix the
Promises of God with Faith,) Crimen in auditum. But though the manner of
Believing which it requires, be not blameable, yet the thing which it
proposes to be believed is false. What is that? That there is an Absolute or
utter impossibility either of a total or final defection of the Faith of true
Believers. Its requiring this to be Believed is the bottom, and also corner
stone, of Mr Goodwin's ensuing Argument: if it does not do this, he has
nothing in this place to say to it; Let him then produce any one that ever
wrote in the defense of it, that has in Terms, or by just consequence,
delivered any such thing, and on Herbam; there shall be an end of this dispute;
I presume Mr Goodwin knows what is meant by an absolute and utter
impossibility. An absolute Repugnancy unto being, in the nature of the things
themselves concerning which any Affirmation is, and not any external or
foreign consideration does entitle any thing to an absolute and utter
Impossibility; did ever any one affirm, that in the nature of the thing it
self, the defection of the Sts is absolutely impossible? Is it not by them
that believe the Perseverance of the Sts constantly affirmed that in themselves
they are apt, yea prone to fall away, and their Faith to decay and dye, which
in it self possibly may be done, though Mr Goodw: cannot tolerably show how.
The whole cerrainty of their continuance in, and of the preservation of their
Faith, depends merely on supposition of something that is extrinsecall in
respect of them, and of their state, which as to their Condition might, or
might not be. Farther, the Perseverance of the Saints, is by the same persons,
constantly affirmed to be carried on, and to be perfected in, and by the use of
means. It is their keeping, by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation;
And can then an absolute impossibility of their defection be asserted, or only
that which is so upon supposition, viz. of the Purpose of God etc. There was no
Absolute Impossibility that the bones of Christ should not be broken, they
being in themselves as liable to be broken as his flesh to be pierced; yet in
respect of the event, it was impossible they should be so. I cannot well
imagine that Mr Grodwin is not fully persuaded with the greatest and most
indubit able certainty that a Persuasion in things of this kind, will admit,
that the Common Doctrine of Perseverance, does not require Saints to believe,
that there is an absolute impossibility of their defection, but only that God
has promised to Preserve them from that, which in themselves and in respect of
any thing in them, they are obnoxious unto, in, and by the use of means,
suited and appointed by him, to the carrying on of that work, and compassing
of the end proposed. But yet it pleases him here to make show of a contrary
Apprehension, and to show his confidence therein, he aggravates it, with this
annexed supposition and case: It does so, (says he) though they should fall
into 10000 enormous and most abominable sins, and lie wallowing in them like
Swine in the mire, yet that they shall remain all the while in an estate of
Grace.

Ans. Truly this is such an enormous and abominable Calumny,. 11.
that I cannot but admire how any sober and Rational man, durst venture upon
the owning of it; The question now is, what Faith the Doctrine insisted on
ingenerates in particular persons, that should enervate and make void the
Exhortations etc. of the Ministry? Now though the Doctrine should teach this
Indefinitely, that though men did sin so, and so, as is here expressed, yet
they should be kept in a state of Grace, as is mentioned, (which yet is lowdly
and palpably false, as has been declared) yet that it does require particular
men to Believe for themselves, and in reference to the Guidance of their own
Ways, that they may lie and wallow in their sin like swine in the mire, and
yet continue in a state of Grace and Acceptance with God, is so notoriously
contrary to the whole tenor of the Doctrine, the genius and nature of it, with
all the Arguments whereby it is asserted and maintained, that if conscience had
but in the least, been advised with all in this contest, this charge had been
without doubt omitted; All that is produced for the confirmation of this
strange imposition on the persuasion under consideration, is his own Testimony
that makes the charge, that it is the known voice of the common Doctrine of
Perseverance, and that being said, is laid as a Foundation of all that
follows. The whole Discourse still relating to a supposition that this is the
Doctrine which it opposes, from the very next words to the end. Nor is there
the least farther attempt for the confirmation of this grand Assertion; But is
this the known voice of our Doctrine of Perseverance? Who ever heard it but Mr
G. and men of the like prejudicate Spirits aganist the Truth? The worst that
can be charged with looking this way, is its asserting the promised efficacy of
the Grace of God, for the preserving of Believers by the use of means, from
such wallowing in abominable sins, as is supposed that it affirms they may
be exposed unto. In brief! it says not.

First, That all Believers are certain of their Perseverance; Nor

Secondly, That any one can be certain of it upon such supposals as are here
mentioned: such a persuasion would not be from him that calls them; Nor

Thirdly, That the End can be obtained, without the use of means, though by
them, it shall certainly be so; But

Fourthly, That all the hope of their Perseverance, is built on the Promises of
God, to preserve them by, and in the use of means; So that in Truth there is
no need of any farther process for the removing of the Argument insisted on,
but only a disclaimer of the Doctrine by it oposed, if it be that which is here
expressed:

That indeed which Mr Goodwin has to dispute against,. 12.
if he will deal fairly and heartily in the carrying on of his design, is
this, That the certainty of an end to be obtained by means suited thereunto,
does not enervate nor render vain the use of those means, appointed for the
accomplishment of that end; The Perseverance of the Saints is the thing here
proposed to be accomplished: that this shall be certainly effected and brought
about according to the Promises of God for the effectiug of it, God has
appointed the means under debate, to be managed by the Ministry of the
Gospel: that the Promise of God, concerning the Saints Perseverance to be
wrought and effected, as by others, so by these means in their kind, does not
invalidate or render useless and vain the use of those means, but indeed
establishes them, and ascribes to them their proper efficacy, is that which in
this Doctrine is asserted, and which Mr Goodwin ought to have disprooved, if he
would have acquitted himself as a fair Antagonist in this cause; The Promse
(we say) that Hezekiah had of the continuance of his Life, Isa. 33. 5. 21.
did not make useless but called for the plaster of figs that was appointed
for the healing of his sore.

I might then (as I said) save my self the labor of farther engaging,. 13.
for the casting down of this Fabric, built on the sandy foundations of
falsehood, and mistake. But because something may fall in, of that which
follows, more indeed to the purpose, than an orderly pursuit of these
Assertions laid down in the entrance would require, that may more directly
rise up against the cause in whose defense I am engaged, I shall consider the
whole ensuing Discourse which without doubt will administer farther occasion
for the Illustratihn or Confirmation of the Truth in hand; He proceeds then,

The reason of the Minor is,. 14.
because a certain knowledge and persuasion, that God will by an irresistible
hand of power, preserve a man, in the state of Grace, how desperately
careless, negligent or wicked so ever he shall be, clearly disolves the
usefulness, and necessity of all other means whatsoever, in reference to this
end. If I know certainly that the corn which I have sown in my field will
whether I wake or sleep grow and prosper, would it not be a very impertinent
address, for any man to come to me, and admonish me in a serious and grave
manner, to take heed, I sleep not, but keep my self waking, least my corn
should not grow, or prosper, or that it may grow and prosper, if my corn
grows, thrives, and prospers, by the irresistible hand of God, by the course
of a Natural and standing providence, my watchfulness in order to a
procurement of these things is absolutely vain etc.

Ans. That this is not the Doctrine which Mr Goodwin has undertaken to oppose,
has been more than once already declared; That he is not able with any colonr
of Reason to oppose it, unless he first impose his own false and vain
inferences upon it, and them upon his Reader for the Doctrine it self from his
constant course of proceeding against it, is also evident; What advantage this
is like in the close, to prove to his cause in the Judgment of considerate men,
the event will discover: The Assertion of the stability of the Promises of God
in Jesus Christ given to Believers concerning his effectual preserving them to
the End, from such sins as are Absolutely inconsistent with his Grace and
Favor according to the tenor of the new Covenant, or such continuance in any
sin as is of the same importance by his Spirit and Grace, in the use of
means, does no way tend to the begetting in any, a certain Knowledge,
Assurance and persuasion, that God will continue them in a state of Grace, how
desperately careless or wicked soever they shall be.

What is intended by the frequent repetition of this gross Sophistry,. 15.
or what success with the intelligent Christian ponderers of things he can
hope for thereby, I am not able to guess; Neither is any improvement in the
least given to what the intendment of this Argument is, so far as the Common
Doctrine of Perseverancc is concerned therein, from the comparison ensuing
instituted between the growth of Corn, and the walking of Believers in
Obedience before God; For notwithstanding the Identity in respect of the
comparison of that expression [ Irresistible] which indeed is proper to
neither, there is a wide difference between the growing of corn in a mere
natural way, and the moral actings of an Intelligent, Rational Creature;
What ever operations of God are about, and in the one, or the other, yet they
are suited to their Subejects about which they are; God carries on the growth
of corn by a way of Natural and necessary causes, but his acting of Rational
Agents is by such ways and means, as may entirely preserve their Liberty:
that is, preserving them in their being, and leaving them to be such Agents. As
then God causes the corn to grow by the shining of his sun, and the falling
of his rain, so he causes Believers to persevere in Obedience, by
Exhortations, Promises, and Threatenings, and such ways and means, as are
suited to such Agents as they are. The fallacy of this Discourse lies in an
insinuation that God by his Effectual (or as they are called irresistible)
operations for the preservation of Believers in Gospel Obedience, (a thing he
has undertaken over and over, to perform) does change their nature, and
render them not free and intelligent Agents, fit to be wrought upon by the
proposal of suitable and desirable Objects to their understandings, but mere
bruit and natural principles of all operations flowing from them; a conceit as
gross and ridiculous, as certainly destructive to all the efficacy of the
Grace of God. All the rest of this Section as far as it concerns us is only
an affirming this way, and that, that an Assurance of the End to be obtained by
the use of means, renders those means altogether useless; which when he
proves, the Controversy may be nearer to an issue, than otherwise he has any
Reason to hope that it is or will be, to his advantage.

Sect. 4. Leaving the farher confirmation of his Argument he enters upon the
removeall of a plea insisted on,. 16.
to the Justification of the Doctrine opposed and vindication of it from the
crime wherewith here by him it is charged: this he tells you is, that the
Exhortations, Comminations, and Promises, spoken of, are means appointed of
God for the accomplishing and effecting of the Perseverance of the Saints,
which he has made simply and Absolutely necessary by his decree. This (he
says,) has neither any Logical, nor Theological virtue in it, for the
purpose for which it is produced: but is a notion irrelative to the business the
accommodation whereof it pretends.

Ans. It may be so, suffer you to frame the Objection, and who will doubt of
your Abilityes of giving an Answer; But who (I pray) says that God by his
Decree, has made the Perseverance of the Saints simply and Absolutely
necessary; that it is certain in respect of the event, from the Decree of God,
we grant; and do we thereby overthrough the means whereby it is to be
accomplished* Yea, we establish them; We are of the mind that God has
purposed, and thereupon Promised, the Accomplishment of many things, (as the
selling of Joseph into Egypt, the bringing of the Children of Israel from
thence, and the like) which yet were to be carried on to their Accomplishment,
and brought about through innumerable contingences, by the free rational,
deliberative actings of men; If by simply and Absolutely necessary, you intend
that the thing Decreed is to be wrought of men, simply and Absolutely
necessarily by their operations, as to the manner of them, we simply and
Absolutely deny any such Decree; If by those expressions you improperly intend
only the certainty of the Event, or Accomplishment of the thing decreed with
respect to the means appointed and fitted thereunto, we say this establishes
those means, neither have they the nature of means to an End from any Reason
what ever, but as so appointed of God thereunto: But he proceeds in the proof
of his former Assertion, and says

First that the Exhortations whereby the Saints are exhorted to Perseverance,.
17.
are no means by which the Promises of Perseverance made, as our Adversaries
suppose to them are Accomplished or effected, is thus clearly evinced;
Whatsoever is a means for the bringing of any thing to pass, ought not to
contain any thing in it, Repugnant or Contrary unto that which is intended to
be brought to pass by it, for means ought to be subordinate to their ends,
not repugnant; But the Scripture Exhortations unto perseverance, contain that
which is repugnant to the Promises of Perseverance if supposed such as our
Adversaries suppose them to be, therefore they can by no means effect those
Promises; the Minor is evident by the light of this consideration; such
Exhortations as these to the Saints, take heed least at any time there be an
evil heart of unbelief in you, least you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin; least you fall from Grace, least you receive the Grace
of God in vain, least you fall from your own steadfastness; in their natve
and proper tendency import a danger, and serve to raise a fear in men, least
the danger imported, should come upon them; whereas such Promises as these made
unto the same persons, and that not conditionally as is supposed, that there
shall never be an heart of unbelief in you, that they shall never be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin, that they shall never fall away from the
Grace of God, exclude all danger or possiblity of falling away, and tend
directly to prevent or extinguish all fear in men of any such danger;
therefore such Exhortations are in their Nature and genuine import, contrary to
such Promises in theirs, and consequently can be no means of bringing them to
pass.

Ans. 1. Exhortations are not so properly the means whereby the Promises are
accomplished,. 18.
as the means whereby the things mentioned in the Promises are wrought; God
by, and through them, stirring up those Graces, which he promises to work,
continue, and to increase in his Saints.

2. Exhortations divine, must be so apprehended as to be subservient to an End,
in respect of God, fore-knowne and determined; `Tis true, we Exhort men (or
may) to those things of whose Event we are wholly uncertain; but to God this
cannot be ascribed: He does foreknow* and has fore-determined the End and
Issue that every one of his Exhortations shall have; and therefore such a
nature and no other is to be ascribed to them, as is consistent with, and
subservient to, a determined end.

3. To the confirmation of his Minor Proposition, the Answer is easy, from the
consideration; first of the end of the Exhortations insisted on unto
Perseverance; And then of the Promises of Perseverance, themselves, which are
no way inconsistent therewith. For the first, (I say) those Exhortations take
heed least there be in you an evil heart of unbelief, and the like, are not
given to ingenerate a fear of falling away, (which is a thing in it self
evil and opposite unto that steadfastness of Faith, and full Assurance, which
we should press unto, so far is it from any Act of Faithful Obedience, that
God should aim to work in the hearts of his, and apply means thereunto) but
only to beget an holy Care and Diligence in them to whom they are made or given
for the using of the means appointed of God, for the avoiding of the evil
threatened to follow upon a neglect of them; which directly falls in, and
sweetly conspires with the End, and Use of the Promises of Perseverance by us
urged and insisted upon. Nothing is imported by them, but only the connection
that is between the things mentioned in them: as unbelief, and rejection from
God. This God aims at in those Exhortations, in their particular respect unto
Believers, that by them, they may be stirred up to the use of those means,
which he has appointed for them, to be by them preserved in the Grace, and
Mercy which he has infallibly promised to continue to them.

And 4. The end of the Promises of Perseverance on which we have infisted,
being their mixing with Faith to establish the souls of the Saints, in
believing the kindness and Faithfulness of God in his Covenant in Jesus
Christ, they do not take away, nor prevent all danger of perishing, and so
consequently not that fear in any measure which stirs them up so to the use
of means that they may not perish, but only are effectual for their
deliverance out of those dangers which are apt and able of themselves to
destroy them: As our Savior himself prays for them John 17. 15. I pray not
that thou should take them out of the world (where whilst they are, they
will be sure to meet with dangers and perplexityes enongh) but that thou
should keep them from the evil, wherewith they must reckon to be
exercised. There is not then the least contrariety, or diverse Aspect, between
the Assurance of Faith about the end, which the Promises tend unto, and the
care and Godly fear about the means instituted and appointed with respect to
the end, which Exhortations do beget, and will notwithstanding those Promises.

5. The greatest inconsistency that can be imagined between Exhortations and
Promises, as by us explained, is no more than this, that in one place God
promises that unto us, as his Grace, which in an other he requires of us, as
our duty, between which two, who ever feignes an Opposition, he does his
endeavor to set the Covenant of Grace, as to us proposed and declared, at
variance with it self.

The whole ensuing Discourse unto Sect 12.. 19.
drawing deep upon an other Controversy ( viz. the manner of the Operation of
Grace) and being for the most part borrowed from what is delivered on that head
in the Arminian writings, Acta Synodal.
might be past over, as not of any necessary consideration in this place. What
we assign to the Exhortations of the Word and their consistency with whatever
else we teach of the Saints Perseverance being already heard, this Argument is
at its properissue. But the task undertaken is not to be waved or avoided, I
shall therefore proceed to the discussion of it. Thus then he goes on,

If ( says he) such Exhortations as we speak of, be a means to effect the
Perseverance, which our Adversaryes suppose to be Promised in the Saints, then
must the Act of Perseverance in the Saints, necessarily depend upon them; so as
that i^ cannot, nor will not be effected without them, i.e. without the Saints
submitting themselves to them. But persevering upon these terms clearly
supposes a possibility of non-persevering, for whatsoever depends upon a
mutable condition, and which possibly may not be performed, may be also
possible never to come to pass.

Ans. 1. Exhortations are improperly said to be a means to effect
Perseverance: We say only that they are means to stir up, quicken and
increase those Graces in the exercise whereof, the Saints according to the
Purpose and Promise of God do persevere.

2. The Perseverance of the Saints does consist in the abiding and continuance
of those Graces in them, which those Exhortations do so stir up, and further
or increase. And in that regard, there is a connection between the Perseverance
of the Saints, and the Exhortations mentioned: yea a dependence of the one on
the other. But this dependence arises not from the nature of the things
themselves, whence such a Certainty as is asserted would not arise, but from
the purpose and Appointment of God that they should be effectual to that end:
And therefore

3. A Perseverance on these terms supposes a possiblity of non-persevering,
if you regard only the nature of the things themselves, and set aside all
Consideration of the Purpose, and Promises of God concerning the end, which is
to beg the thingin hand; yea the Promise of God extends it self, to the
certain Accomplishment, of the Saints submission to those exhortations; So
that the end aimed at does not depend on a mutable condition (If I understand
any thing of that Expression, so unsuited to the business in hand) the
performance of the condition (or the yiedling of such Obedience as is required
to the essence of the Saints Perseverance,) being certain also from the
Promises of God.

His fifth Section is as follows,. 20.
If it be said, that the said Exhortations are means of the Saints persevering
in this respect, because God by his Spirit, irresistibly and infrustrably
draws and persuades the Saints to obey these Exhortations, as means of their
persevering: I Answer, It cannot be proved that God does draw, or persuade his
Saints upon any such terms to obey these Exhortations, Nay frequent
experience shows, and our Adversaries Doctrrne frequently mentioned,
expressly grants that the Saints many times are so far from obeying these
Exhortations, that they walk for a long time, in full opposition to them, is
in security looseness, vile practices: nor have they yet proved, nor (I
believe) ever will prove, but that they may walk, yea and that many have thus
walked, I mean in full opposition to the said exhortations to their dying day.
Secondly, If God by his Spirit irresistibly draws his Saints to obey the
Exhortations we speak of, he thus draws them, either by such a force or
power immediately acted upon their wills by which they are made willing to obey
them; or else he makes use of the said Exhortations so to work or affect
their wills that they become willing accordingly; If the former be asserted.
Then first, the said Exhortations are no means, wereby the Perseverance of the
Saints is effected, but God alone irresistibly by his Spirit; for if the Will
be thus immediately affected by God after such a manner and wrought to such a
bent and inclination, as that it cannot but obey the said Exhortations or do
the things which the said Exhortations require, Then would it have done the
same things whether there had been any such Exhortations in being or no, and
consequenly these Exhortations could have no manner of efficiency about their
Perseverance; For the Will according to the common saying is of it self a
blind faculty, and follows its own predominant bent and inclination without
taking knowledge whether the ways and actions toward which it stands bent be
commanded or exhorted unto by God or no: 2. If the will of a St be immediately
so affected by God that it stands inclined and bent to do the things which are
proper to cause them to Persevere; then is this bent and inclination wrought in
the Will of such a person, after his being a St and consequently, is not
essential to him as a St, but merely Accidental, and Adventitious: and if
so, then is there no inclinations or bent in the Will of a St as such or from
his first being a St to Persevere, or to do the things which accompany
Perseverance, but they come to be wrought in him, afterward; Which how
consistent it is with the principles either of Reason or Religion, or their
own, I am content that my Adversaries themselves should judge. 3. If God does
immediately and irresistibly incline, or move the wills of the Sts to do the
things which accompany Perseverance, the said Exhortations can be no means of
effecting this Perseverance; for the will being Physically and irresistibly
acted and drawn by God, to do such and such things, needs no addition of
Moral means, such as Exhortations are (if they be any) in order hereunto;
What a man is necessitated to, he needs no farther help or means ^o do it.
4. The things which accompany Perseverance, import a continuance in Faith and
Love to the end; If then the wills of the Sts be immediately and irresistibly
moved by God thus to continue, I mean, in Faith and Love to the end, what
place is there for Exhortations to come in with their efficiency) toward that
Perseverance? Need they be exhorted to continue in Faith and Love, or to
Persevere after the end? Thus then we clearly see, that the former of the two
Consequents mentioned cannot stand; God does not by his Spirit irresistibly
draw or move the wills of the Sts to do things which are necessary for the
procuring their Perseverance immediately, or withont the isntrumental
interposure of the said Exhortations.

Ans. First,. 21.
the intendment of this, as also of some following Sections, is to prove and
manifest, that the use of Exhortations cannot consist with the efficacy of
Internal Grace, and the work of the Spirit in producing and effecting those
Graces in us, which in those Exhortations we are provoked and stirred up unto.
A very sad undertaking, truly, to my apprehension, and for weh the Church of
God will scarce ever return thanks to them that shall engage in it; He was of
an other mind, who cried Da Domine qvod jubes, and jube quod vis; yea, and the
Holy Ghost has in innumerable places of Scripture expressed himself of another
mind, promising to work effectually in us, what he requires earnestly of us;
by the one manifesting the efficacy of his Grace, by the other the exigeney of
the Duty which is incumbent upon us. Nay never any Saint of God once prayed in
his life, seeking any thing at the hand of God, but was of another mind, if he
understood his own supplications: To what is here urged against this
Catholic Faith of Believers, I say.

That Exhortations are the means of Perseverance, in as much as by them in
their place and kind, and with them the Spirit of God effectually works this
Peseverance or the matter of it in the Saints. Those cloudy expressions [of
irresistibly and unfrustrably] we own no farther then as they denote the
certainty of the event, and not the manner of the Spirits operation, which also
they do very unhandsomely. We leave out then in the proposal of our Judgment
about the use of Exhortations, which Mr Goodwin opposes, those terms, and
add in their Room, by and by with those Exhortations which he omitts.

He says then, This cannot be proved, because the Saints live, and dye often
times in opposition and disobedience unto these Exhortations.

But Obedience is twofold; First, as to the general frame of the heart,
Obedience in the habit; and so it is false that the Saints live at any time in
an ordinary course, much less dye in opposition to those Exhortations; the Law
of God being written in their hearts, and they delighting in it in their inward
man, they abide therein; the fruit of Obedience for the most part being brought
forth by them; And this suffices as to their Perseverance

Secondly, It regards particular acts of Obedience, and in respect of them we
all say, that yet they all sin, ( Optimus ille est, qui minimis urgetur) but
this prejndiceth not their Perseverance, nor the general end of the
Exhortations afforded them for that purpose.

But he adds Secondly, If God by his Spirit irresistibly draws his Saints to
persevere, ut supra.

But this is sorry Sophistry, which may be felt (as they say) through a pair
of mittins, For

First who says that God works by force immediately upon the wills of men? Or
who makes force and power to be terms equivalent? Or that God cannot put
forth the exceeding greatness of his power in them that believe, but he must
force or compel their wills: or that he can not work in us to will and to do
of his own goodpleasure, immediately working in and with our wills, but he
must so force them.

Secondly, whence arises the disjunctive force of this Argument? Either by
immedate actings upon their wills, or he makes use of those Exhortations? As
though the one way were exclusive of the other, and that the Scripture did not
abundantly and plentifully ascribe both these unto God; both that he exhorts us
to know him, love him, believe in him, and gives us an understanding, and an
heart so to do; working Faith and Love in us, by the exceeding efficacy of his
power and Spirit: I say then that God works immediately by his Spirit, in, and
on the wills of his Saints: that is, he puts forth a real Physical power that
is not contained in those exhortations, though he does it by, and in, and with
them: The impotency that is in us to do good, is not amiss termed
Ethico-physica: both Natural and Moral; and the Applications of God to the
soul in their doing good, are both Really and Physically efficient, and Moral
also; the one consisting in the efficacy of his Spirit, the other lying in the
exhortations of the Word; yet so as that the efficacy of the Spirit is exerted
by, and with the Moral efficacy of the Word; his works being but Grace or the
Law in the heart, the Word, being the Law written, so that all the ensuing
Reasonings are bottomed upon things Male divisa, that stand in a sweet harmony
and compliance with each other.

But Mr Goodwin tells you That if God work by his Spirit and his Grace
immediately on the wills of men, to cause them to persevere, then are
Exhortations no means of their Perseverance.

Why so I pray? It seems we must have no internal effectual Grace from God,
or no outward Exhortations of the Word; But he tells you it must be so because,
If the will be Physically and Irresistibly acted and drawn by God, to do such
and such things, it needs no adition of Moral means, such are Exhortations
thereunto: That is, if the will be effectually inclined to the ways of God, by
his Grace, there is then no need of the Exhortations of the Word. But yet

First, the Spirit of God though he have an immediate efficacy of his own, by
and with those Exhortations, yet by those Exhortations he also inclines the
will; and as he works on the will as Corrupt and impotent, by his Grace, so he
works on the will as the will (or as such a faculty is apt to be wrought upon
by a mediation of the understanding) by Exhortations.

Secondly, to say Obedience would have been produced and wrought had there been
no Exhortations, is not required of us, what efficacy soever we ascribe to
Grace, unless we also deny Exhortations to be appointed of God, and to be used
by the Spirit of God, for the producing of that Obedience. Neither

Thirdly, does God work upon the will as a distinct faculty alone of it self
without suiting his operations to the other faculties of the soul; Nor is
Grace to be wrought or carried on in us, merely as we have Wills but as we
have Understandings also, whereby the Exhortations he is pleased to use, may be
conveyed to the will and affect it in their kind; in a word, this is but
repeating what was said before; If there be any effectual Grace, there is no
use of Exhortations; If exhortations be the means of continuing or increaseing
Grace, what need the efficacy of Grace or immediate actings of the Spirit,
working in us to will and to do of Gods good pleasure; what validity there is
in these inferences, will be easily discerned; God works Grace in men, as
men, and as men impotent and corrupted by sin; As men he works upon them by
means suited to their Rational being, by Precepts and exhortations: but as
men impotent and corrupt by sin, they stand in need of his effectual power,
to work that in them, which he requires of them: Of the terms wherewith his
arguing in this case is clowded and darkened, enough has been remarked already.

His second Argument to this purpose,. 22.
viz. That the Inclination of the will to good, and to persevere in a Saint,
must be after his being made a Saint; is as weak and no less Sophysticall
than the former; That inclination is radically wrought in every Believer at his
Conversion, the Spirit being bestowed on him, which shall abide with him for
ever, and the Seed of God laid in his heart that shall remain, and never
utterly fail, with an habitual inclination to the exercise of all those
Graces wherein their persevering does consist. Actually this is wrought in them
according to the particular duties, and actings of Grace, that are reqnired of
them, which they are carried forth unto, by the daily influence of Life, Power,
and Grace, which they receive from Christ their head, without whom they can do
nothing.

Neither is the third Exception of any more validity, being only a Repetition
of what was spoken before, rendered something more impedite, dark, and
intricate, by the terms of Physically, Irresistibly, and Necessitated, which
how far, and wherein we do allow, has been frequently declared. The sum
of what is spoken amounts to this, Gods real work in and upon the Soul by
his Spirit, and Grace, is inconsistent with the exhortations to Obedience:
which we have before disproved, and do reject it as an Assertion destructive to
all the efficacy of the Grace of God, and the whole work of it, upon the
Souls of Men.

What his Fourth Argument also is, but a Repetition of the same things before
crudely Asserted in other terms, let them apprehend that can; If God work
Faith and Love, in the hearts of his Saints, and support them, in them, to the
end, what place is left for Exhortations? I say their own proper place, the
place of means; of means appointed by God to stir up his to Perseverance,
and which himself makes by his Spirit, and the immediate efficacy thereof,
effectual to that end and purpose; And I know no use of that Query, Are
exhortations effectual to persuade men to Persevere after the end? being built
only on his false Hypothesis, and begging of the thing in Question, viz. That
if God work Faith and Love, and continuance of them in our hearts effectually
by his Grace, there is no need, no use of exhortations, though God so work
them, by, and with those exhortations; And this is his first Attempt, upon the
first member of the Division made by him self, wherein what success he has
obtained is left to the judgment of the Reader; And, but that I shall not,
having now the part of one that Answers incumbent on me, turn aside unto the
proof of things denied, I should easily confirm what has been given in, for
the removal of his Objections, from the Testimony of God, by innumerable
places of Scripture.

He proceeds then Sect. 6. and says,. 23.
Secondly, Neither can the latter of the said consequences stand, God does not
make use of the said Exhortations, to influence or effect the Wills of the
Saints upon any such terms, as hereby to make them Infallibly, Infrustrably,
Necessitatingly willing to Persevere, or to do the things upon which
Perseverance depends.

For first, If so, then one and the same act of the Will should be both
Physical and Moral, and so be specifically distinguished in, and from it
self; for so far as it is produced by the irresistible force or power of the
Spirit of God, it must needs be Physical, the said irresistible working of the
Spirit, being a Physical action, and so not proper to produce a Moralleffect;
Again, as far as the said Exhortations are means to produce or raise this
Act of the Will, or contribute any thing toward it, it must needs be moral,
because Exhortations are Moral causes, and so not capable of producing
Physical, Natural, or Necessary effects; Now then if it be impossible that
one and the same Act of the Will should be both Physical and Moral, that is
Necessary and not Necessary, impossible also it is, that it should be produced
by the irresistible working of God, and by exhortations of this joint
efficiency.

It may be Objected, they who hold or grant such an influence, or operation of
the Spirit of God, upon the Will which is frustrable, or resistible, do, or
must suppose it to be a Physical action, as well as that which is
irresistible; If so, then the act of the Will, so far as it is raised by the
means of this action, or operation of God, must according to the tenor of the
former Arguments be Physical also, and so the pretended Impossibility, is no
more avoided by this opinion then by the other.

I Answer. Though such an operation of God upon the Will, as is here mentioned,
be in respect of God, and of the manner of its proceeding from him Physical,
yet in respect of the Nature and Substance of it, it is properly Moral, because
it impresseth, and affects the Will upon which it is acted, after the manner of
Moral causes, properly so called, that is, Perswadingly, not Ravishingly, or
Necessitatingly. When a Minister of the Gospel in his preaching presses or
persuades men to such and such duties or actions, this act as it proceeds
from him, I mean as it is raised by his natural abilityes of under standing or
speaking, is Physical or Natural, but in respect of the substanceo^ native
tendency of it, it is clearly Moral, viz. because it tends to incline or
move the wills of men, to such or such Elections, without necessitating them
thereunto; and so comports with those Arguments or Exhortations in their manner
of efficiency by which he presses or moves them to such things; By the way,
to prevent stumbling and quarrelling, it no way follows from the Premises,
that a Minister in his preaching or persuading unto duty's should do as much
as God himself does in or toward the persuading of men hereunto, it only
follows that the Minister does cooperate with God, which the Apostte himself
affirms in order to one and the same effect, (i.e.) that he operateth in one
and the same kind of efficiency with God, Morally or perswadingly, not
necessitating, for where one necessitates, and another only persuades they
cannot be said to cooperate, or work the one with the other, no more than two,
when the one runs and the other walks a soft pace, can be said to go or
walk together. But when two persuade in one and the same action, one may
persuade more effectually by many degrees than the other, may have a peculiar
Act or method of persuading above the other.

That which is now undertaken to be proved is,. 24.
That God does not make use of Exhortations, as means for the establishing of
the Saints in believing, and confirming their Perseverance; This is that which
by us is assigned unto them, and this all that the Nature of them does require,
that they should be used unto: the certainty of the event whereunto they are
applied depending not on their Nature, as such means, but on the purpose of
God, to use them for that end which he has designed, and promised to bring
about and accomplish.

Before he ventures on any opposition to the intendment of this Assertion, he
phraseth it so, as either to render it unintelligible to himself and others,
or (if any thing be signified by the expressions he uses) to divert it wholly
from the mind of them, and their sense, with whom he has to do: Who ever said
that God by Exhortations, does influence the Wills of men upon such terms, as
to make them Infrustrably, and necessitatingly willing to Persevere. Or, can he
tell us what is the meaning of those terms, [ Infrustrably, Necessitatingly
willing to Persevere;] Though it is easy to guess at what he here intends, yet
it is far above my shallow capacity, to reach the sense of these expressions.
How any of these terms, relating to the event and issue of things, and in what
sense they may be used, I have often showed; As relating either to the manner
of Gods operation in, and upon the Will, or the Wills elicitation of its own
act, (any farther then by relation to that Axiom, Vnumquodque quod est, dum
est, necesse est) they express neither our sense, nor any bodies else that I
know; That which I shall make bold to take up for M. Goodwins intendment is;
That God does not by Exhortations effectually cause the Saints to Persevere; To
be willing to Persevere, is to Persevere: to be Necessitatingly willing, is, I
know not what; Now if such an efficacy be ascribed to Exhortations, as teaches
the certainty of the effect, so that the certainty of the effect, as to the
event, should be asserted to depend on them as such means, this is nothing to
us; we ascribe an efficacy to them in proprio genere, but the certainty of that
event to whose production they concur, we affirm, as has been abundantly
declared, to depend on other causes.

But the proof of what is here Asserted, outrunnes for uncouth strangeness,.
25.
the Assertion it self, equis albis, as they say: For, says he, if this be so
(that is, as you have heard above, how, neither he nor we know) then the same
Act of the Will should be both Physical and Moral; And

First, Why so? Because Physical and Moral means are used for the producing
of it; as though sundry causes of several kinds, might not concur to produce
one uniforme effect, far enough from a necessity of receiving so much as a
Denomination from each of them; In the concurrence of several causes, whereof
some may be Free and Contingent, others Natural and Necessary, the Effect
Absolutely follows, its next and immediate cause alone; God causes the Sun
to shine freely; yet is the shining of the Sun, a necessary Effect of the
Sun, and not any way free or contingent. God determined the peircing of
Christ's side, and so as to the event made it necessary, but yet was the doing
of it in then that did it, free, as to the manner of its doing and no way
necessary.

But Secondly,. 26.
suppose the same act of the will, should be said to be both Physical and
Moral upon several accounts;; And what if every Act of the will in, and about
things good or bad be so? And it be utterly impossible it should be otherwise?
Yea, But then the same Act should be specifically distinguished in, and from it
self.

Yea, but who told you so? The terms of Physical and Moral, as related to
the Acts of the will, are very far from constituting different kinds or
species of Acts; being only several Denominations of the same individual acts
upon several regards and accounts; The acts of the will as they flow from that
Natural faculty, or are elicited thereby, are all Physical: but as they
relate to a Law, whence they are good, or evil, they are Moral; the one
term expresses their being, the other their regularity and conformity to
some Rule whereunto their Agents are obliged: Quid dignum tanto? If by
Physical and Moral, Mr Goodwin intends Necessary and Free, being the first
that ever abused those words, and in that abuse of them not consistent with
himself, (affirming afterward, the act of a Ministers preaching as proceeding
from his Abilityes of Understanding and speaking to be Physical or Natural,
which yet he will not aver to be Necessary, but Free,) he should have told us
so, and then though we would not grant that the same Act, may not in several
respects be both Necessary, and Free, the latter in respect of the manner of
its performanee, and nature of its imediate cause, the former in respect of the
Event and the determination of its first Causes, yet its consequent, is so
palpably false as to the advancing of his former Assertion that it would have
been directly denied without any farther trouble.

But he adds;. 27.
It must needs be Physical, because it is produced by the Physical working of
the Spirit of God, which being a Physical Action cannot produce a Moral
effect.

Ans. By Physical Operation of God on and with the will, we understand only
that which is really and effectually so, as different from that which is only
Moral, and by way of motive and persuasion; Now this we say is twofold. The
first consisting in the Concourse of God as the first cause, and Author of all
Beeings to the producing of every entity; such as the acts of the wills of men
are; and this in such a way, as is not only consistent with the Liberty of the
Will, in all its Acts and Actings whatever; but also, as, is the Foundation of
all the Liberty that the will has in its actings; And in respect of this
Influence of God, the effect produced is only Physical or Natural, having
such a being as is proper to it; as also it is in respect of the will it self,
and its concurrence in operation. The other is that which Mr Goodwin here calls
The irresistible force or power of the Spirit: destinguishing the efficacy of
the Spirit and Grace of God, in their working in us, to will, and to do,
producing those effects, as they are good and Gracious, in reference to their
Rise, End, and Rule, whereunto they are related. This then is that which by Mr
Goodwin is here asserted; That if there be such an effectual, real working of
the Spirit and Grace of God in us, to the producing of any act of the Wills of
men, they cannot be Moral. That is, they cannot-have any goodness in them
beyond that which is entitative; And so far, are we now arrived. All
efficacious working of the Spirit of God on us, must be excluded, or all we do,
is good for nothing; Away with all Promises, all Prayers, yea the whole
Covenant of Grace, they serve for no other end, but to keep us from doing
good; Let us hear the Scripture speak a little in this cause; Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy seed, to Love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may
live. Jere. 31. 33. and the 32. 39. This shall be the Covenant that I will make
with the House of Israel after those days says the Lord, I will put my Law in
their inward parts and write it in their Hearts, and will be their God and they
shall be my people; Chap. 32. 39. I will give them one heart and one way that
they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and their Children after
them. Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I
put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I
will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them; Act.
16. 14. God opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended to the things spoken
of Paul; Phil. 1. 29. It is given to you in the behalf of Christ not only to
Believe on him but also to suffer for his sake; and Chap. 2. 13. For it is God
which work the in you both to will and to do of his own good pleasure; as
also Ephs. 1. 19. That ye may know what is the exceeding greatness of his
power to us ward who Believe according to the working of his mighty power which
he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. We
pray always for you that our God would fulfill all the good pleasure of his
goodness and the work of Faith with power; So also in 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any
man be in Christ he is a new Creature: for Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. God who is rich in
Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he Loved us, even when we were dead in
sins has quickened us together with Christ; Causing us Chap: 4. 24. to put on
that new man which after God is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness;
with the like Assertions. John 3. 3: James 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23. John 5. 21. 2
Cor. 3. 5. etc:

What may be thought of these and the like expressions?. 28.
Do they hold out any real, effectual, internal Work of the Spirit and
Grace of God, distinct from Moral persuasions, or do they not? If they do how
comes any thing so wrought in us, and by us to be Morally good? If they do not
we may bid farewell unto all Renewing, Regenerating, Assisting, Effectual
Grace of God; That God then by his Spirit and Grace cannot enable us to act
Morally, and according to a Rule, is not yet proved; What follows?

Says he So far as Exhortatious are means to produce these Acts,. 29.
they must be Moral, for Moral causes are not capable of producing Natural
or Physical effects.

But if Mr Goodwin think that in this Controversy, Physical and Necessary as
applied to effects are (...) he is heavenly wide. Physical denotes only their
being Necessary, a manner of being as to some of them which have Physically a
being. The term Natural is ambiguous, and sometimes used in the one sense,
sometimes in the other; sometimes it denotes that which is only, sometimes that
which is in such a kind; By a Physical effect, we understand an Effect with
respect to it is real existency, as by a Moral effect, an effect in respect of
its Regularity. And now, why may not a Moral cause have an influence in its
own kind, to the production of a Physical effect? I mean an influence suited
to its own Nature and manner of operation by the way of motive and persuasion?
What would you think of him that should persuade you to lift your hand above
your head, to try how high you could reach, or whether your Arm were not out
of joint?

Secondly,. 30.
It has been sufficiently showed before, that with these Exhortations, which
work as appointed means, Morally God exerteth an effectual power for the
real production of that wherento the Exhortation tends, dealing thus with our
whole souls suitably to the Nature of all their faculties, as every one of
them is fitted and suited to be wrought upon, for the accomplishment of the End
he aims at, and in the manner that he intends; Briefly, to every Act of the
Will as an act in genere entis there is required a really operative and
Physical concurence of the Providentiall power of God in its own order, as
the first Cause. To every Act; as good, or gracious the operative concurrence,
and influence of the Spirit of Grace; which yet hinders not but that by
Exhortations, men may be provoked and stirred up to the performance of Acts as
such, and to the performance of them, as good and gracious.

This being not the direct Controversy in hand,. 31.
I do but touch upon it; Concerning that which follows, I should perhaps say,
we have found Anguem in herba, but being so toothlesse and stinglesse as it is
to any that in the least attend to it, it may be only termed, the padde in the
straw. Physical and Moral are taken to be terms, it seems, Equipollent to
Necessary, and Not-necessary; which is such a wresting of the terms
themselves, and their known use, as men shall not likely meet withal: Hence
is it that Acts Physical and Necessary are the same; Every Act of the most
free agent under Heaven, yea in Heaven or Earth, is in its own Nature, and
Being, Physical; Acts also are Moral, i. e. good or evil, consequently in
order of Nature to their existence, (of which Necessary or Not-necessary are
the Adjunct manner,) in reference to the Rule, or Law, whereunto their
conformity is required; How Moral and Not-necessary come to be terms of the
same import, Mr Goodwin will declare perhaps heareafter, when he shall have
leisure to teach as much new Philosophy, as he has already done Divinity; In
the mean time we deny that any influence from God on the wills of men, does
make any Act of them Necessary as to the manner of its production; And so this
first Argument for the Inconsistency, of the use of Exhortations with the real
efficiency of the Grace, and Spirit of God, is concluded.

That which follows in this Section to the end,. 32.
is a pretended Answer to an Objection of our Authors own framing; being only
introduced, to give farther Advantage, to express himself against any real
efficiency of the Spirit, or Grace of God, in the hearts or on the wills of
men; Not to insist upon his darkening the Discourse in hand, from his miserable
confounding of those terms Physical and Moral, formerly discovered, I shall
as near as I can, close with his aim in it, for the more clear consideration
thereof.

First, he tells us, That the operation of God on the will of man, is in
respect of its proceeding from him, Physical, but in respest of its nature,
and substance, it is properly Moral.

But First,: 33.
if a man should ask Mr Goodwin, what he intends by this Operation of God on
the will of man, to the end intended, I fear he would be very hard put to it,
to instance in any particular: It is sufficiently evident, he acknowledges
none in this kind, but what consists in the Exhortations of the Word.

Secondly, having told us before, that Physical, is as much as Necessary, and
Moral as Not-necessary: How comes it about that the same operation of God, the
same Act of his Power is become in several regards Physical and Moral? That
is, Necessary and Not-necessary? is Mr Goodwin reconciled to the Assertion,
That the same thing may be said to be Necessary, and Not-necessary, in sundry
respects?

Thirdly, how comes the same Act or Operation in respect of its manner of
proceeding from its Agent, to be Physical, and in respect of its Substance to
be Moral; Or, is any act Moral in respect of its substance, or is its
Morality an Adjunct of it, in respect of the regard it has to some Rule, and
farther End: It is an easy thing for any to heap up such crude Assertions, and
in the mean time not to know what they say, nor whereof they do affirm; But
the reason, why the Acts of God intimated are Moral, is because they persuade
the Will only, or work perswadingly, not ravishingly, or necessitatingly: that
is in plain terms, There is no operation of the Grace or Spirit of God, in the
working of any good in the Heart or Wills of men, but only what consists in
persuasion of them thereunto. For any real efficiency, as to the communication
of strength, inworking in us to will and to do, it is wholly excluded; God only
persuades, men have the power in themselves, and of themselves they do it, let
the Scripture say what it will to the contrary; For those terms of
Ravishingly, or Necessitatingly, which are opposed to this Moral persuasion,
whereunto the operations of God, for the production of any good in us, are tied
up and confined, we have been now so inured to them, that they do not at all
startle us; When M. Goodwin shall manifest, That God cannot by the greatness
of his power, work in us to Will, without ravishing our wills, if we guess
aright at the intendment of that expression, he will advance to a considerable
success in this contest, not only against us, but God himself.

But an objection presents its self to our Author,. 34.
which he sees a Necessity to attempt the removal of, least an Apprehension of
its truth, should prove prejudicial to the receiving of his dictates; And this
it is, That if it be so, that God works on the will of man by the way of
persuasion only, he does no more then the Ministers of the Gospel do, who
persuade men by the Word to that which is good; To this he tells you, That it
indeed follows, that God and Ministers work on the Will of man, in the same
way, with the same kind of efficiency, but yet in respect of degrees, God may
persuade more effectually than a Minister.

That all really efficient,. 35.
internal working grace of God, was denied by M. Goodwin, was before
discovered; there only it is more plainly asserted. All the workings of God on
the Wills of men unto good, are merely by persuasion: Persuasion we know gives
no strength, adds no power, to him that is persuaded to any thing; it only
provokes him, and irritates him, to put forth, exert, and exercise the power
which is in himself, unto the things whereunto he is persuaded, upon the
motives and grounds of persuasion proposed to him; and the whole effect
produced on that account, is in Solidum, to be ascribed to the really efficient
cause of it, howsoever incited, or stirred up; whereas then, men by Nature are
dead, blind, unbelieving, enemies to God, he persuades them only to exert the
power that is in them, and thereby to live, see, believe, and be reconciled to
him, And this is to exalt the free grace of God by Jesus Christ; We know full
well who have gone before you in these paths, but shall heartily pray, that
none of the Saints of God may follow after you, into this contempt of the work
of his Grace. But Secondly;

If nothing but Persuasion be allowed to God in the work of men's Conversion,:
36.
and in the carrying on of their obedience to the end, Wherein does the
Persuasion of God consist, in distinction from the Persuasion used in, and from
the Word by Ministers, which it is pretended that it may excel (though it is not
affirmed that it does) many degrees; Let it be considered (I say) in what Acts
of the will, or power of God his persuasion, so distinct as above mentioned,
does consist: Let us know what Arguments he uses, by what Means he applies
them, how he conveyes them to the Wills of men, that are not coincident, with
those of the Ministry; I suppose at last 'twill be found, that there is no
other operation of God in Persuading men, as to the ends under consideration,
but only what lies, or consists in the persuading of the Word, by the Ministers
thereof; God looking on, without the exerting of any efficacy whatever, which
is indeed that which is aimed at, and is really exclusive of the Grace of God,
from any hand in the Conversion of sinners, or Preservation of Believers.

3. He does not indeed assert any such Persuading of God;: 37.
but only tells you, that from what he has spoken, it does not follow, that God
does no more then Ministers in Persuading men; And that when two persuade to
one and the same Action, one may be more effectual in his persuading than
another: but that God is so, or how he is so, or wherein his peculiar
persuasions do consist, there is not in his discourse the least intimation.

Fourthly, There is in men a different power as to Persuasion; some having a
faculty that way, far more eminent, and effectual than others, according to
their skill and proficiency in Oratory and Persuasive Arts; this only is
ascribed to God, that he so excells us, as one man excells another; But how
that Excellency of his is exerted, that's not to be understood; But there is
proof tendered you of all this, from 1 Cor: 3. 9. Where Ministers are said, to
cooperate with God, which they cannot do, unless it be with the same kind of
efficiency; (well said) And that when one works Necessitatingly, and another
by Persuasion; they cannot be said to cooperate, no more then one that runs,
or another that walks, can be said to walk together: Certainly our Author
never dreamed that any man whatever, would put himself to the trouble of
examining these dictates, or he would have been more wary of his asserting
them, and we had not had so much not only new and strange Divinity, but new and
uncouth Philosophy, heaped up without any considerable endeavor of proof or
confirmation.

First,. 38.
That two Agents cannot concur, or cooperate to the producing of the same
effect, but with the same kind of efficiency, is a rare notion indeed; Was he
never persuaded to do any thing in his life? What thinks he of David's, and
the Amorites killing of Vriah? of a Judge, and an Executioner slaying a
Malefactor; of God and Satan, moving David to number the People; of God and
Joseph's brethren, sending him to Egypt? But what need I mention Instances? Who
knows not that this so confounds all causes Efficient, and that principal,
and Isntrumental, Material, Final, Formal, which in their production of
effects, have all their distinct efficiency, and yet their cooperation.

Secondly, The proof from the Scripture mentioned, extends only to the
interesting of Ministers in the great honor of Cooperating with God, in the
work of begetting, and increasing Faith in their own sphere, according to the
work to them committed. But that God, and they, do work with the same kind of
efficiency, it is the maine intendment of the Apostle in the place cited, 1 Cor:
3. to disprove; He tells you indeed, there is a work of Planting and watering,
committed to the Ministers of the Gospel; but the giving of increase, (a
peculiar working with a distinct kind of Efficiency) that is alone to be
ascribed to God; It is (I say) his design, (who every where abundantly
informs us, that Faith is the gift of God wrought in us by the exceeding
greatness of his Power,) to prove in this place, that though the dispensation
of the Word of the Gospel be committed unto men, yet their whole Ministry will
be vain, and of none effect, unless by an immediate efficacy, or working of
his Spirit, giving and bestowing Faith on his Elect, God do give an increase.

Thirdly, For the term of [ Necessitating] put upon the real effectual work
of Gods Grace on the wills of men, giving them power, assistance, and working
in them to will and to do, as different from that which is purely Moral or
Persuasive, only which communicates no strength or power, I shall need no more,
but to reject it with the same facility, wherewith it is imposed on us; The
similitude of one walking, and another running, wherewith the inconsistency of
a Real efficient work of Grace, with persuasions, so far as that they should
be said to cooperate to the producing of the same effect, does not in the
least, illustrate what it is intended to set off; for though one run, and
another go softly, (as suppose one carrying a little loaf, another a great
burden of meat for a supper, and both going to the same place, Why may not
they be said to cooperate to the providing of the same supper? Must all Agents
that cooperate to the producing of the same effect, be together in one place?
You may as soon bring Heaven and Hell together as prove it: And why must real
efficiency, be compared to running, and Persuasion to soft walking? As though
one were supposed to carry on the work faster than the other: when we say only,
That in the one there is a distinct power exerted from what is in the other;
which that it may be done, might be proved by a thousand instances, and
illustrated by as many similitudes, if any pleasure were taken to abound in
causa facili; God or man then cooperate in respect of the tendency of their
working unto the event, not in respect of the kinds of their efficiency.

Of the seventh Section (whereon we shall not need long to insist): 39.
which in the entrance frames an Objection, and pretends an Answer to it, there
are three parts In the first he says that we affirm, That though the will be
necessitated by God, yet it is free in her Election, which how it may be he
understands not; But if this were all the inconvenience that Mr G. could not
understand how to salve the Operation of God in man, with the Liberty of his
will, seeing as wise men as himself, have herein been content to Captivate
their Understandings to the Obedience of Faith, it were not much to be stumbled
at; but the truth is, the Chimaera whose nature he professes himself
unacquainted withal, is created in his own imagination, where it is easy for
every man to frame such notions as neither himself nor any else can bring to a
consistency with Reason or Truth: Of Necessitating the Will to Election, we
have had occasion more than once already to treat, and shall not burden the
Reader with needless Repetitions.

In the second division of the Section,. 40.
he gives you his judgment of the manner of the work of God upon the soul
unto the doing of that which is good, and the effect produced thereby; Whereof
the one as was said before consists in persuasions, which he says are thus
far irresistible, that they who are to be persuaded cannot hinder but that
God may persuade them or exhort them, though he prevail not with them; Which
doubtless is a notable Exaltation of his Grace. Thus Mr Goodwin works
irresistibly with one or other, perhaps every day; And the effect of this
persuasion is (that is, when it is effectual,) that impression which it leaves
upon the soul to the things whereunto it is persuaded: As the case is in the
dealing of men one with an other, for my part, I see no reason why our Author
should so often, so heedfully, deliver his Judgment concerning this thing,
especially without the least attempt of any Scripturall proof, or endeavor to
answer those innumerable clear and express places of Scripture, which he
knows are every where and on all occasions produced and insisted on to prove a
real efficient acting of God in and with the wills of men for the producing,
working and accomplishing that which is good in a way distinct from that of
persuasion, which contributes no real strength to the Person persuaded,
concurring only Metaphorically in the producing of the effect. Let this at last
then suffice; we are abundantly convinced of his denial of the work of Gods
Grace in the Salvation of souls.

. 41.
In the third place we have a Rhethoricall flowrish over that which he has
been laying out his strength against all this while being a mere repetition of
what has been already tendered, and given into consideration over, and over;
If God cause the Saints effectually to persevere (his terms of irresistibly
and Necessitating, have been long since discharged from any farther attendance
or service in this warfare) by Exhortations, then are all his Promises of
Perseverance in vain; But why so? May not God injoyne the use of means, and
promise by them the attainement of the End? May he not Promise that to us,
which he will work himself effectually in us? If God effectually work in us,
to give us by what means so ever a new heart, may he not promise to give us a
new heart? Yea but amongst men this would be incongruous, yea ridiculous that a
Father should Promise his son an inheritance and then persuade him to take
heed that he may obtain it.

But First, If this be Incongruous, yea ridiculous amongst men in their
dealings with one another, does it therefore follow, that it must be so as to
Gods dealings with men? Are his thoughts as our thoughts, and his ways as our
ways? Is not the wisdom of God foolishness with men, and theirs much more so
with him? Are men bound in their dealings with others to consider them not only
in their Natural and Civil relations, but as impotent and corrupted men, as
God in his dealings with them does?

Secondly, Neither is this course so Ridiculous amongst men, as Mr Goodwin
imagines; that a Father having promised his son an Inheritance, and instated
it on him, or assured it to him, should exhort and persuade him to be have
himself worthy of his kindness, and to take heed that he come to the
enjoyment of the Inheritance which he has provided for him, by the means that
he has appointed, (for the prescription of means for the enjoyment of the
Inheritance must be supposed to go along with the promise and assurance) is
far from being a course so ridiculous as is pretended.

Neither Thirdly, is this similitude Analogous with that which it is produced
to illustrate. For

1. A man may know how, and when, and on what account an Inheritance is settled
on him by his Father; Of what God promises we have Faith only not Knowledge,
properly so called; nor always the Assurance of Faith as to the enjoyment of
the thing promised, but the Adherence of Faith, as to the Truth and
Faithfulness of the Promiser. Nor

2. Can a Father work in his Son that Obedience which he requires of him,
as He can do who Creates a new heart in us and writes his Law and Fear therein.

3. This Absolute engagement to bestow an Inheritance, whether the means of
obtaining it be used, and insisted on or no, is a thing most remote from what
we ascribe to the Lord in his Promises of Perseverance, which are only that
Believers shall Persevere by the use of means, which means he exhorts them to
use, and yet dealing with them in a Covenant of Grace and Mercy, entered into
upon account of their utter insufficiency in themselves to do the things that
are well pleasing to him, whereunto they are so exhorted, He himself
effectually and Graciously, according to the tenor of that Covenant works in
them what he requires of them, bearing them forth, in the power of his Grace,
to the use of the means appointed.

His Sections 8,: 42.
and 9, contain an endeavor for the taking off, an Instance usually given of
pressing to the use of means, where the end is infallibly promised to be
accomplished and brought about, in and by the use of those means. And this is
in the passage of Paul Acts 27. whereof something formerly has been spoken;
Paul receives a Promise from God That none of the lives of the persons with him
in the ship should perish; this he declares to his company and how deeply he
was concerned in the accomplishment of the Promise, and his prediction
thereupon, upon the account of the undertaking wherein against almost all the
World, he was then engaged, and the cause for which he was committed to their
company and custody, was formerly declared. Notwithstanding this, he afterward
exhorts them, and directs to the use of all means imaginable, that were
suitable for the fulfilling of the Promise he had, and the Prediction he had
made. Evident it is then, that there is no Inconsistency, nor any thing
unbecoming any perfection in God, in that compliance of Promises, and
Exhortations which we insist upon: He having directed Paul, to walk in that
very way and path. God (we say) in the Covenant of Grace, has promised that
his Saints shall never leave him, nor forsake him; that he will abide in
unchangeable constancy to be their God; that he will preserve them, and keep
them in his hand unto the Kingdom of his Son in glory, saving his Redeemed
ones, with an everlasting Salvation, to the accomplishment of the End Promised,
which he will upon the account of his Truth and Faithfulness bring about, by
Means suitable unto, and instituted by him for that end. In the compassing and
effecting of this great work, God deals with men under a twofold
consideration.

First, As Rational creatures; So he discovers to them the end promised, with
its Excellency, Loveliness, and Satisfaction. thereby stirring up in them
desires after it, as that eminent, and proportioned good, which they in the
utmost issue of their thoughts and desires aim at. Farther on the fore
mentioned account, that they are Rational Creatures, endued with a rational
Appetite or Will, for the choosing of that which is good, and an Understanding,
to judge of it, and of the means for the attainment of the end, God reveals
to them the means conducing to the end, proposing them to them to be chosen
and embraced, and closed withal for the compassing of the end proposed; And
that they may be yet dealt withal agreeably to their Nature, and those
principles in them, which they are created withal, that God might have glory
by their acting suitably to such a Nature, and such principles, He exhorts, and
provokes them to choose those ways and means, which he has so allotted, (as
before mentioned) for the end aimed at; And that they should be thus dealt
withal, their very Natural condition of being free intellectual Agents does
require.

Secondly, As Sinners, or Agents disenabled in themselves for the work
prescribed to them, and required of them, for the attaining of the end they
aim at, namely, in Spiritual things: And on that account, he puts forth
toward them, and in them the Efficacy of his Power, for the immediate and
special working of those things in them, and by them, and which as Rational
Creatures, bound unto an orderly obedience, they are Pressed and Exhorted unto:
To manifest the inconsistency of such a procedure, and the unanswerablenesse of
it, to the infinite Wisdom of God (though the Scripture expressly deliver it in
innumerable places, as has been shown) is that which by Mr Goodwin is in this
discourse attempted; His particular endeavor in the place under Consideration
is, to manifest that, when God promises to bring about and effect any thing
infallibly (by the use of means) it is in vain altogether, that any
Exhortation should be urged on them, who are to use the means so appointed,
for the accomplishment of it. And to the instance above mentioned, concerning
Paul he replies Chapter 13. Sect: 8.

First,. 43.
It is the generally received opinion of Divines, that Promises of Temporal
good things, are still Conditional, and not Absolute; which Opinion they
maintain upon grounds not easily shaken; Now evident it is, that the Promise
under Question, was a Promise of this Nature and Kind, relating only to the
preservation of the Temporal Lives of Men.

Ans. That all Promises of Temporal things without exception, are
Conditional, that is, so as to be suspended on any Conditions, not promised to
be wrought with equal Assurance to that which depends on them, is not the
judgment of any Divine I know, unless it be of Mr Goodwin, and those of the
same persuasion with him in the matter of our present Controversy; Who ever but
they will say, (if they will) that the Promise of bringing the Children of
Israel out of Egypt was Conditional? Let them that do say so assign the
condition on which the Accomplishment of that Promise was suspended: The
Promise made to the Parents of Sampson of his birth, and mighty actions, what
Condition was it suspended on? And yet was it a promise of a Temporal thing;
Though this may be accounted a general rule because for the most part it is so,
yet may not God make a particular exception thereunto? Did he not so in the
case of Hhezekiah, as to his living 15. years, as also in those cases before
mentioned? It Is true all such Promises have appointed means for their
Accomplishment, but not Conditions whereon their fulfilling is Absolutely
suspended.

But he adds Those words of Paul to the Centurion and Soldiers lately
mentioned,. 44.
(except these abide in the ship ye cannot be safe) undeniably prove the said
Promise to have been not Absolute, but Conditional; for in case God should
have Promised Absolutely and without all exception that they should have been
safe, Paul had plainly contradicted the truth of it by affirming, not that they
should not, but that they could not be safe otherwise than upon the Condition
of the Mariners abiding in the ship.

Ans. 1. This is boldly ventured; God promises that the End shall be
accomplished; Paul exhorteh to the use of the means for the attainment of that
End, and in that contradicts the Truth of Gods Promise, if it be not
Conditional; And why so? Who ever said that God promised that they should be
safe and preserved in the neglect of means; They were men, and not stones that
God promised so to safeguard. And it was by his blessing upon means that he
intended to preserve them; therefore he that stirred them up to the use of
means, contradicted the promise, unless it were Conditional, Paul says
indeed, they could not be safe unless the Mariners abode in the ship; not
suspending the certainty of Gods Promise upon their continuance in the ship,
but manifesting the means whereby God would bring about their safety.

That which insues in the two following Exceptions, (as Paul's persuading them
to take meat, which conduced to their safety, and their casting the wheat into
the sea for the same end) amounts no higher than the Affirmations already
considered, Asserting an infallible Promise of an end to be attained by means,
and an Exhortation to the use of means with the actual use of them on the
account of their necessity as means, are inconsistent; which is plainly
without the least show of proof or truth, to beg the thing in Question.

Neither is his Case in hand at all promoted, by comparing this particular
Promise given at such a time and season, with those general Promises of
Earthly Blessings made to the Obedience of the Jews in the Land of Canaan,
mentioned Deuteronomy. 28. 3, 4.

Of that which Sixthly follows in the ninth Section, being a marvilous pretty
Discourse about the Promise here made, as though it should be only this, that
though the ship were lost and miscarried, yet none of them in it should perish
thereby (merely upon the account of the ships miscarrying) though on some other
account, they might be drowned at the same time; Which upon narrow scanning he
has at last found out to be the sense of the place, may well deserve the
consideration of them who have nothing else to do; for my part I have other
employment.

That which we affirm concerning the Words of God by his Angel,. 45.
to Paul, is, That that they were such a Promise as could not but infallibly be
accomplished, according to the tenor of what is in those words expressed, nor in
respect of the Faithfulness of God could it otherwise be, but that it must so
fall out and come to pass as was appointed, although the accomplishment of it
was to be brought about by the eminent Blessing of God, upon the means that
were to be used by them to whom, and concerning whom it was given.

For first, the Promise was not only concerning the Mariners and the rest in
the ship, for the preservation of whom the means formerly mentioned were used,
but of Paul's apearance before Caesar, a great and eminent work whereunto he
was designed Acts 9. 15. Fear not Paul thou must be brought before Caesar,
Look then what infallibility in respect of the Event there was, as to Paul's
appearance before Caesar, the same there was in the preservation of the lives
of the rest with him; Now although the staying of the Mariners from going out
of the ship, was a means that Paul was kept a live to be brought before
Caesar, yet can any one be so forsaken of common sense as to say, that it was
the Condition of the purpose of God concerning the fulfilling of that
Testimony, which according to his appointment Paul was to make at Rome, with
all the mighty and successful travel for the propagation of the Gospel,
which he after this was engaged in, Was it all now cast upon the fall of an
uncertain condition not at all determined of God as to its accomplishment?
Does the infinitely wise God delight to put the purposes of his heart, and
those of so great concernement to the Kingdom of his Son and his own Glory
in the everlasting welfare of innumerable souls to such uncertain hazards,
which by various ways obvious and naked before his eyes, he could have
pretended.

Secondly,. 46.
It is part of the prediction of Paul from the promise he had received, (and
therewith a Revelation thereof) that they should be cast upon a certain
Island, God having some work for him there to do; Now was this part of the
Promise Conditional or no? If it be said that it was, Let the Condition on
which it depended be assigned. Nothing can be imagined unless it be that the
Wind sat in such or such a quarter; It Is then supposed that God promised Paul
and his company should be cast on an Island for their preservation, provided
the Wind served for that end or purpose: But who I pray commands the Winds and
Seas? Does the Wind so blow where it lists, as not to be at the command of
its Maker? Is it not enough that we cast off his yoke and sovereignty from
men, but must the residue of the Creation be forced so to pay their homage to
our free wills as to be exempted thereby from Gods disposal? If this part of
the Promise were infallible and Absolute, as to the certainty of its
accomplishment, why not the other part of it also?

Thirdly, Paul makes confession of his Faith to his Company, concerning the
Accomplishment of this Promise.. 47.
I believe God (says he) (...). It shall so come to pass in the same manner
as it was told me; clearly engaging the Truth and Faithfulness of that God
which he worshipped (for his Testimony to whose Truth he was then in bonds) for
the accomplishment of what he had spoken to them: viz. that not one of them
should be lost: Now supposing that any one person had by any accident fallen
out of the ship, Mr Goodwin tells you there had been no opportunity or
possibility left unto God to have fulfilled his Promise; true, for it had bin
wholly frustrated, He having undertaken for the lives of every one of them; but
supposing that engagement of his, he that says any one might have so perished,
is more careful doubtless to defend his own Hypothesis than the honor of
the Truth, and Faithfulness of God.

Evident then it is notwithstanding the Tortures, Rackes, and Wheels applied
by Mr Goodwin to this Text, with the confession pretended, (and but pretended)
to be extorted from it, (which but that it has gotten Sanctuary under his name
and wing, would be counted ridiculous,) that here is a Promise of God making an
Event infallible and necessary in respect of its relation thereto, by a clear
consistency with Exhortations to the use of free, and suitable means, for the
Accomplishment of the thing so promised.

Sect.. 48.
10. He Objects farther to himself, That in sundry places of Scripture, as 1
Cor. 10. 12, 13. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 9. there are Promises of
Perseverance, and Exhortations unto it joined together, and therefore men who
deny a regular and due consistency between them do impute folly and weakness
to the Holy Ghost; Whereunto he Answers sundry things to the end of the
eleventh Section. As,

First they are many degrees nearer to the guilt of the crime specifyed, who
affirm the conjunction mentioned to be found in the said Scriptures, than they
who deny the Legitimacy of such a conjunction; the incongruity of the
conjunction has been sufficiently evinced, but that any such conjunction is to
be found either in the Scriptures coted or in any others is no man's vision, but
his who has darkness for vision.

Ans. If our Adversaryes ipse dixit may pass current we shall quickly have
small hopes left of carrying on the Cause under consideration. All our
Testimonies must be looked upon as cashired long since from attending any
longer on the trial in hand, and all our Arguments as blown away like flies in
the summer; The very things here in Question. viz. That there is an
Inconsistency between Promises of Perseverance, and Exhortations to the use of
the Means whereby it may be effected; that God has made no such Promises, or
appointed no such Exhortations, an that those who appehend any such things have
darkness for vision, are all confirmed by the renewed stamp of test meipso;
to which proof, I shall only say Valeat quantum valere potest.

But he adds,: 49.
That in none of the places cited, is there any Promise of Perseverance, is
evident to him that shall duly consider the tenor and import of them.

For First, it is one thing to say and each, that God will so limit as well the
force as the continuance of temptations, that the Saints may be able to bear;
another to make a Promise of Absolvte Perseverance; yea those very words, That
ye may be able to bear it, clearly import that all that is here promised unto
the Believing Corinthians, is an exhibiting of means to Persevorance, if they
will improve them accordingly, not an infallible certainty of their
Perseverance; And that caveat Let him that thinks he stands take heed least
he fall, plainly supposes a possibility of his falling, Who thinks upon the
best grounds that he stands sure; for that this caveat was not given to
Hypocrites or unsound Believers, or to such who please themselves with a loose
and groundless conceit of the Goodness of their condition Godward is evident,
because it were better that such men should fall from their present standing of
a groundless conceit than continue their standing; nor would the Apostle have
ever cautioned such to take heed of falling away, whose condition was more like
to be made better than worse by their falling; And besides to understand the
said caveat of loose believers overthrows the pertinency of it to their cause
who insist upon it, to prove a due consistency between Exhortations to
Perseverance, and Promises to Perseverance, as is evident; If then it be
directer to true and sound Believers, it clearly supposes a possibility at
least of their falling, in case they shall not take heed, or else their taking
heed would be no means at least no necessary means of their standing; And
farther it supposes also a possibility at least of their non-taking heed, or
that they might possibly not take heed hereof otherwise the caveat or
admonition had been in vain; men have no need of being admonish't to do that
which they are under no possibility to omit; If then the standing or
persevering of the Saints depends upon their taking heed least they fall, and
their taking heed in this kind be such a thing which they may possibly omit,
evident it is that there is a possibility of their non-persevering.

Ans.. 50.
This last divison of the tenth Section labors to evince that in the first of
the places above mentioned, viz. 1 Cor. 10. 12, 13. There is not a Promise of
Perseverance, in Conjunction with Exhortations unto the use of means unto that
end. The words are, Wherefore let him that stands take heed least he fall,
There has no temptation taken you but such as is common to man but God is
Faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to
bear it. But

First, it is not in the least measure Necessary, or can be upon any account
whatever required of us, that we should produce Texts of Scripture in an
immediate dependence and coherence in the same place, containing both the
Promises and Exhortations mentioned; they being for the most part proposed upon
most different accounts, and for immediately different ends and purposes; the
one (namely) as in the Revelation of them, respecting of our Consolation, the
other our Obedience; Nor can they ever the more be denied to be in a
Conjunction and consistency, though they were not to be found but in different
places of Scripture, (which that they are, (especially as to that case which is
Questioned) has been abundantly declared) than if they were still combined in
the same Coherence and connection of words. But yet

Secondly, I say there is in the place forenamed a most patheticall Exhortation
to the use of the means whereby we may persevere, and a most infallible
Promise, that we shall so persevere, and not by any Temptation whatever, be
utterly cast down or separated from God in Christ; The first in v. 12.
Wherefore let him that thinks he stands take heed least he fall: and v. 14.
Wherefore my dearly beloved flee from Idolatry; the latter in v. 13. There
has no temptation taken you etc. First that there is an Exhortation to the use
of means for Perseverance, is not denied by our Author, but granted with an
attempt to improve it for the furtherance of his own design: That there is a
Promise also of Perseverance is no less evident; the diversion and turning
away of any Believer from God must be by temptation; Temptations are of various
sorts, both in respect of their immediate Rise, Nature and Efficiency; What
ever (whence ever it proceed) turns from God, more or less, in part or in
whole, as is imagined, is temptation; Now the Apostle here ingageth the
Faithfulness of God in the preservation of Believers from the power of
Temptations, so as it shall not prevail against them to the ends before
specified; God (says he) is Faithful; And there is no need of his mentioning
that property of God, which is his immutable constancy in the performance of
his Promises, but only to assure Believers that he will preserve them as he
has spoken; the thing promised by the Apostle in the name of God, is (not only
that the Sts may be able to bear temptations that shall befall the^, (...) and
(...) having quite another importance than what is here intimated in the
expression may be able, in Capital letters) that he will not suffer any
Temptation to come upon them, that shall be above that strength (and pervalent
against it) which he will communicate to them: and for those which do befall them
he will make way for their escaping, that with, and by the strength received
they may bear them. So that not only sufficiency of means to persevere, but
Perseverance it self by those means, and Gods ordering all things so in his
Faithfulness, that no assault shall befall them above the power of the
strength given them to bear, is here asserted. Now the Promise here given is
either Absolute or Conditional. If Absolute, that is, so far as that it
shall infallibly be accomplished, not so depending on any thing that in respect
of the Event may, or may not be, as to be left at uncertainty for its
fulfilling, It is all that is of us desired. If it shall be said that it is
Conditional, I desire that the Condition from whence it is so said to be, may
be assigned; If it shall be said (as it is) that it is, in case they willingly
suffer not themselves to be overcome of Temptations; I ask whether the
strength and Ability that God affords to his Saints to resist Temptations, be
not in the strengthening and confirming their Wills against them? And if so,
whether this Promise so interpreted does not resolve it self into this
proposition, I will not suffer my Saints to be overborne by Temptations, above
the strength I will give them to bear, provided they be not pressed with
Temptations above the strength I give unto the. The Promise then is Absolute,
either that no Temptations shall befall Believers above that they have
received, or that strength not to be overcome, shall be afresh communicated to
them upon the assaults of any new Temptations.

3. This being established that here is a firm Promise of Perseverance, against
which M. G. opposes scarce any thing at al, and nothing at all to the purpose,
his whole ensuing Discourse falls of it self; for from the caveat used at the
entrance of this Promise, and the Exhortation at the close, both tending to
stir up the Saints, to whom the Promise is, made (many of whom have no
distinct Assurance of their interest in this, or any other Promise) to be
heedfully careful in using the means of Perseverance, and avoiding the sins
that in their own Nature tend to the interruption of it; no other possibility
of falling away can be concluded, but such as may have a Consistency with the
Faithfulness of God in the Promise he has given: that is, a possibility as
they say in sensu diviso, without respect had to the infallibly preventing
Causes of it; not in sensu composvo. A possibility in reference to the nature
of the things themlelves, which is a sufficient bottom for caveats to be
given, and Exhortations to be made to them concerned in them; not at all in
respect of the purposes and Promises of God, infallibly preventing the reducing
into Act, of that possibility; These exceptions then notwithstanding it
appears in the 1 Cor. 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. verses, there is a Conjunction
of a gracious Promise of Perseverance, with effectual Exhortations to the use
of means whereby we may persevere; and consequently they who deny a due
consistency between them, do impute folly or weakness to the Holy Ghost;
(...).

He proceeds to the next place pointed to by himself,: 51.
to prove a consistency between Promises and Exhortations under Consideration:
to wit Phil. 2. 12, 13. Wherefore my beloved as ye have always obeyed, not as
in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own
Salvation with Fear and Trembling; For it is God that works in you both to
will and to do of his good pleasure: Evident it is that you have here conjoyed
by the Holy Ghost as weighty and patheticall an Exhortation, as He almost any
where uses in the Scripture, with an Assertion of Grace, as eminently
operative and effectual, as by any means can be expressed.

But says he It Is one thing to affirm that God works in man as to will, so
to do, i. e. to enable men to do or put in execution what they first will, or
to assist in the doing or executing it self, another to Promise or work
infallibly, and without all possibility of frustration in men, Perseverance;
There is little or no affinity between these: But how and in what sense God is
said to be (...), working in men both to will and to do of his good pleasure,
we shall have occasion to open more at large in the latter part of this Work.

Ans. I dare say, an Indifferent Reader will conclude, that Mr Goodwin was very
hard put to it for an Answer, finding him contenting himself with such sorry
shifts, and evident pervertings of the words of the Text, as those here
mentioned. For first, How come the words to be changed into a working, as to
will, so to do, that is, perhaps neither the one nor the other? who taught him
to render (...), as to will, so to do? But Secondly, the chief of the sport
made with the words, consists in the Exposition given of them, as they lie in
this new Translation, to work in them as to will, so to do, that is, to do,
what they first will, not that he works in them to will, but that he assists
them in doing what they first will; but what is now become of the tam, quam,
above mentioned? how does he work in them as to will, so to do, if he only
assists them in doing, what of themselves without his assistance they first
will? Rather than it shall be granted, that God by his grace works effectually
on the Wills of men, to the producing of their elicite acts of Believing and
Obedience, any course may be warranted for the perverting of the expressions,
where such an operation seems to be held out. Perhaps this persuasion also of
the efficacy of the grace of God on the wills of men is such, that if it be
found in any place of Scripture, to be declared or asserted, it is enough to
make wise and considering prudent men to question their Authority. But Thirdly,
(says he) This is not infallibly to work Perseverance. I say, show what else
is required to Perseverance, but to will and do, according to the mind of God,
which of his own good pleasure, he promises effectually to work in Believers,
and you say something that may render your reasonings considerable; but it
seems we must be kept in abeyance for an answer to this, until his criticisme
be ready to manifest, how God is said to be (...), working in men, perhaps what
is never wrought without any such effect as is imagined; What may by him be
brought forth to this purpose, time will show; But if he be able to make (...),
God is working in you to will and to do, forsooth from the Participall
expression of the verb, he will manifest more skill in Greek, then he has
hitherto in Divinity, in all his Learned Treatises: So that here is a Second
instance of a conjunction of Promises of Perseverance, with Exhortations to use
the means suited thereunto; which who so denies to have a just and sweet
consistency, do charge the Holy Ghost with folly or weakness; (...).

Thirdly,. 52.
The verses pointed to out of Heb. 6. 4, 5, 9. do not so directly express the
conjunction insisted on, as those places already considered do; only the
discourse there used by the Apostle is peremptory, that men may without any
disparagement to their wisdom or reason, earnestly deal with others and
exhort them to avoid falling away from God, though they are fully persuaded,
that those whom they so exhort, by the help of those Exhortations, and upon
other considerations, shall abide with God to the end, or be attended with
things accompanying Salvation. But had Mr Goodwin been pleased to look to the
following verses, wherein the Apostle gives an account of the ground of this
persuasion of his, he might have found something to exercise the best of his
skill upon. The words are, Beloved we are persuaded better things of you, and
things that accompany Salvation, though we thus speak; for God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of Love which you have shown
toward his name, in that ye have Ministered to the Sts and do Minister, and we
desire that every of you do show the same diligence to the full assurance of
hope unto the end; he tells them v. 10. it is upon the account of the
Righteousness of God, in carrying on the work of their Labor of Love which
was begun in them, and which they had shown or manifested, that he had this
persuasion concerning them, which in the ensuing verses, he farther pursues,
clearing up the engagement of the Rightcousnesse of God in his Oath, of which
else where; So that notwithstanding any thing attempted to the contrary,
evident it is that in carrying on the work of our Salvation, the Holy Ghost
does make use of Promises of effectual Grace for Perseverance, and eminent
Exhortations to abide with God, in such an harmony and consistency, as is well
suited to the things themselves, and in a course which takes Sanctuary under
the shade of his wisdom from all the charges of folly and weakness, which
poor weak and foolish men may under their Temptations, and in their
darkness rise up against it withal; whether there are express Promises of
Perseverance in the Scripture, some advantage I hope will be given to the pious
Reader to judge, from what has been spoken, and what by the Lords Assistance,
may be insisted on to that purpose.

Unto this debate about the Exhortations of the word we find a Discourse of the
same nature and importance subjoyned about the Threatenings that are therein,:
53.
which as it is asserted are rendered useless and ineffectuall for the end
whereunto they are of God appointed, by that Doctrine of Perseverance, weh is
opposed; We freely acknowledge, That if any Doctrine whatever, do enerv^te and
render vain any Ordinance or institution of God as to the Ends and purposes
wherereunto itis of him appointed, that, that Doctrine is not of God, whose
paths are all plain and equal, and whose commands do not enterfere one with
an other; Now that the principles of the Doctrine of Perseverance do destroy
the efficiency of Threatenings, is attempted to be proved by an Induction of
observations which being the sum of all that is spoken to this head, must be
transcribed at large, and is as follows.

Sect. 12.. 54.
If the principles of the Doctrine we speak of, dissolve the efficiency of the
said Threatenings toward the end, for the accomplishment whereof they are
given, then they render them unsavory, useless and vain; But the principles
of this Doctrine are guilty of this offense: Ergo, The terms of the Major
proposition are sufficient witnesses of the truth thereof; in order to the
proof of the Minor, we suppose first that the end intended by God in such
Threatenings, which threaten those that shall Apostatize, with eternal death,
is to prevent Apostasy in the Saints, and to work or cause them to persevere;
2. That this is one of the principles of the common Doctrine of Perseverance,
God hathabsolutely promised final Perseverance unto the Saints; and this
another, God will certainly, infrustably, and infallibly work this
Perseverance in the Saints. These two things only supposed, the light of the
truth of the said Minor proposition breaks forth from between them with much
evidence and power: For First if the said Threatenings be intended by God for
the prevention of the Apostasy of the Saints, and consequently to effect their
Perseverance the way and manner wherein this end intended by God is to be
effected by them, must needs be by their ingenerating or raising a Fear, or
Apprehension in the Saints of Eternal Death; it being the native property of
Fear, mixed with hope to awaken and provoke men to the use of such means
which are proper to prevent the danger or evil feared; there is no otherway
imaginable how or whereby the Threatenings we speak of should operate toward
the Perseverance of the Saints for the preventing of their Apostasy, but that
mentioned, viz. by Working in them a fear or dread of the evil threatened.
Therefore Secondly evident it is that such Promises made, and made known unto
the Saints by which they are made uncapeable of any such Fear, are absolutely
destructive of the efficiency, which is proper to the said threatenings, to
exhibit toward the prevention of Apostasy in the Saints, or for the causing of
them to Persevere. And Lastly, it is every whit as evident, that such Promises
whereby God should assure the Saints, that they shall not Apostatize, but
Persevere, are apt and proper to render them incapable of all fear of Eternal
Death, and consequently are apperently obstructive of, and destructive unto the
native tendency of the said Threatenings toward, and about the Perseverance of
the Saints; these Threatenings can do nothing, contribute nothing toward the
Perseverance of the Saints, but by the mediation of the Fear of evil in them,
upon their nonpersevering; therefore whatsoever hardens them against this
fear, or renders them uncapeable of it, supersedes all the virtue and vigor
which are to be found in these Threatenings, for or toward the effecting of
their Perseverance.

Ans.. 55.
First, be it granted that one end of God in his threatenings, is to prevent
Apostasy in the Sts, by stirring them up to take careful heed to the ways and
means whereby they may persevere, and that they no otherwise work or cause
Perseverance, but as they so stir up and provoke men to the things wherein
they are to abide; But this is not their only end. They are also discoveryes to
all the world of the severity of God against sin, and that it is his
Judgment, that they who commit it are worthy of death.

Secondly, If by Absolute Promises of Final Perseverance, you intend such
Promises of Perseverance, in, and by the use of means, instituted and
appointed by God himself for the accomplishment of the end promised, which are
not made or given, upon the Consideration of any worth in them to whom they are
made, nor do depend as to their Accomplishment, on any such condition in them
as in the event and issue may not be fulfilled, this observation also is
granted. You may add also, that God will certainly, effectually and
infallibly work in them an abiding with him to the end, or put his Law in
their hearts that they shall never depart from him; If by infrustrably also,
you intend only that he will so work it as that his Counsel and Purpose shall
not in the end be frustrated or disappointed, we grant that also, for he has
said his Counsel shall stand and he will do all his pleasure.

These things being thus supposed, let us try the inferences from them, that
must make good the former Assertion concerning the frustration of the use of
Comminations by them, for they are singled out to bear the weight of this
charge.

To the first Assumption then and Inference I say, there is a twofold fear of
eternal death and destruction. 1. An Anxious perplexing Fear, in respect of
the End it self; 2. A Watchful careful Fear in respect of the means
leading thereunto; In respect of the first, it is utterly denied, that the use
and end of the Threatenings of God, in respect of his Saints, are to ingenerate
any such Fear in them, it being directly opposed to that Faith, Assurance,
Peace, Boldness Consolation, and Joy, that God is pleased to afford to them
and abundantly exhorts them to live up unto; Yea an Anxious abiding Fear of
Hell, is fully contrary to that very Conditional Assurance of Salvation, which
Mr Goodwin hinselfe in respect of their present Condition allows to them; Nor
has the Lord instituted his Ordinances at such a difference and Opposition one
to another, as that at the same time toward the same persons, they should be
effectual to beget opposite and contrary frames and principles. For the other,
or a Watchful heedfull Fear for the avoiding of the way and means, that
would lead them, and do lead others to destruction, that is not in the least
inconsistent with any Assurance, that God is pleased by his Promises to give to
his Saints of their Perseverance. God will have them expect their Perseverance
in the way wherein he has promised it; that is, by the use of such and such
Means, helps, and Advantages, as he has appointed for the effectual
Accomplishment thereof. And therefore nothing is in vain, or useleslly applied
to them, which according to his appointment is suited to the stirring of them
up to the use of the means ordained for that end, as before mentioned.
Therefore to Mr Goodwin's second Assertion which he calls evident: I say

First that it is not the making, or the bare making known to the Saints of
the Promises of God, that will work the end for which they are given to them,
or enable them to mix them with Faith; and according to the strength of that,
and not according to the Truth that is in the Promises themselves, is their
Assurance of the things promised; And therefore notwithstanding all the clear
Promises of Perseverance which are made, and made known to them we see very
many of them not to come up to any such Assurance thereof, as to be freed from
the First sort of Fear mentioned, which yet is the proper issue of unbelief,
to the begetting whereof in them, God has not instituted any Ordinance.

Secondly that none of the Saints of God are by the Promises of Grace which we
assert, freed from that Fear which is the proper product and effect of Gods
Comminations in respect of them, and therefore by them there is no obstruction
laid in the way of the proper efficiency of those threatings; What is added in
the third and last place, is only a Repetition of what was before spoken,
without any attempt of Proof; unless he would have it looked upon as a
Conclusion from the premises, whose weakness being discovered as to the
intent and purpose in hand, we need not farther trouble our selves with it.
Instead of Mr Goodwin's now considered, take these few Observations which will
give so much light into the whole matter under debate, as may supersede his
whole ensuing Discourse.

First then,: 56.
it may be observed (as it was by the way in the foregoing Discourse) that
notwithstanding the Promises of Perseverance which are given to the Saints, yet
many there are, who are not enabled all their days to mix them with Faith
(although their interest and portion lies in them, no less than theirs who
through Grace attain the greatest Assurance) and on that account do never all
their days get free from some bondage by reason of the Fear of Death and
destruction: And in respect of such as these, the Comminations and threatenings
insisted on, may have much of that End accomplished which by Mr Goodwin is
assigned to them; not that such a frame is directly aimed at in them, Christ
dying to deliver them, who, by reason of Death were in bondage all their days,
from that bondage which the Fear of Death for since does keep the souls of
men in and under, but that it follows and will follow upon their darkness
and weakness of Faith.

Secondly, that the Promises of Perseverance being of the effecting and
accomplishment of it, by and in the use of means, do not, nor will give
deliverance to them to whom they are made from fear of death and Hell, but
only whilst they conscientiously use the means appointed for them to walk in:
so that upon their deflexion from the Rule which is attended with Mercy and
Peace, the threatenings of God to sin and sinners, to Apostasy and Apostates,
do lay hold on them in their full force and efficacy; especially to the ingene
rating in them a Terror of the Lord (as the Apostle speaks) and an abhorrency
of their ways, a loathing of them as not good, that would cause them to fall
into the hands of the Living God; So that all Mr Goodwin's Arguings, not being
levied against the certaintey of Perseverrance but men's Certainty that they
shall Persevere (which some never attain unto some loose either in whole, or
in part, oftentimes) are not to the business in hand.

Thirdly, that eternal death and destruction is not the only subject of God's
Threatenings, nor all the evil that they may have a fear of, whom he deals
withal by them; Desertion, Rejection, Rebukes, sharp and keen arrows,
blows of Gods hand, Temporal death it self, with the like, are also
threatened; yea and so often in an eminent and dreadful manner, have been
inflicted, that though they might be supposed to have always some comfortable
Assurance of Deliverance from the wrath that is to come, yet the Threatenings of
God may be suited to beget in them this fear of evil to such an height, as
may make their bowels to flow like water, rottemesse to enter into their bones
and all their joints to tremble.

Fourthly, that the end of the Threatenings of God, being to discover to men the
connection that is by his Appointment, between the sins exagitated and the
punishment threatend, whence the Fear mentioned does consequently ensue, they
may obtain their full and primary effect, though that Fear be not
ingenerated, If they be prevailed on, by any other Considerations, so that the
sin be avoided.

Fifthly, that when The Saints do walk orderly, regularly, and closely with
God, in the use of means by him appointed, and so doing, from the Promises of
Perseverance do receive a comfortable Assurance that they shall be kept by the
power of God through Faith unto Salvation, the begetting in them of Fears of
Death and Hell, is neither useful in it self, nor are they intended of God to
be their portion. But if at any time they turn aside from the holy
Commandment, and thereby fail of the persuasion of their Perseverance (as
their Faith will be by such means impaired) though the certainty of the thing
it self be no less infallible than formerly, yet by the Threatenings of God to
them it may be needful, to rouse them (by the terrors of the Lord in them)
from the Condition whereinto they have cast themselves.

I doubt not but that from the light of these and the like Considerations which
might farther be insisted on, it will appear that there may be, and is an
harmonious consistency between the Promises and Threatenings of the Scripture,
notwithstanding the mist that is raised in a long and tedious Discourse, to
interrput the evidence thereof.

In the 13 Section,. 57.
under pretense of Answering an Objection, a long Discourse is drawn forth
farther to varnish over what was before spoken, Nothing of importance to my
best observation being added; It may be reduced to these four heads.

First an Assertion, hat the Threats against Apostasy do not belong to
Hypocrites; that is, to them that are not really Regenerate, let their
profession be what it will; for Hypocrites ought not to Persevere in the way
wherein they are to the end, and therefore there is no danger of their falling
away from it: Which is a Ridiculous piece of Sophistry; For though they may not
be exhorted to continue in their Hypocrisy which corrupts and vitiates their
profession, yet they may in their profession, which in it self is good. And
though there is no danger of leaving their Hypocrisy, yet there is of their
waxing worse and worse, by falling from the beginnings of Grace which they have
received, the profession which they have made, and the Regular Conversation
which they have entered upon; So that notwithstanding any thing said to the
contrary, the comminations under consideration may principally belong to some
kind of professors, who notwithstanding all their gifts and common Graces
which they have received, yet in a large sense may be termed Hypocrites, as
they are opposed to them who have received the Spirit, with true and saving
Grace.

Secondly he says It is evident that they belong unto true Believers from Heb.
6. 4, 5, 6, and 9. and Heb. 10. 26, 27, and 29. but if there were no better
evidence of the concernment of true Believers in the threatenings made to
Apostasy, than what can be drawn from the places mentioned, I dare undertake
that Mr Goodwin shall never prove any such concernment of theirs therein,
whilst his eyes are open; but about this I shall not at present contend.

Thirdly he tells us; That the end and aim of God in these threatenings is the
good of Believers; Of which as far as they are concerned in them, I much
less doubt, than I do of the clearenesse of the proof of this Assertion, from
Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak
peace to his people and to his Sts but let them not turn again to folly; A
place that I presume was hooked in here violently, for want of a fitter
opportunity to wrest it with a by interpretation, because it looks so hardly
on the Doctrine which our Author has undertaken to defend; But let this pass
also.

His fourth Assertion which he pursues at large, or rather with many words, is,
That these Threatenings have no tendency to the good of Believers, but only by
begetting in them a fear of Hell and Destruction; which that they ought to do
is strongly proved from Luke 12. 4, 5. Where we are bid to fear him who can
cast both body and soul into Hellfire; Now though the Logic of this
Argument does scarce appear to me, or the strength of the inference from the
text, there being a great difference between fearing him who can cast both body
and soul into Hellfire, and fearing of Hellfire; between fearing God for his
Severity and Power, in Opposition to the weakness and limitednesse of
Persecutors, (even whilst we fear not their fears, but sanctify the Lord of
hosts in our hearts, making him our dread and our fear) and such a fear of
punishment as is inconsistent with the Promises of God that we shall be
preserved in Obedience, and so be free from it; Yet I shall consider the
following Discourse that is built thereon. Supposing all that Mr Goodwin
observes from this Text, and that the reason of the fear here enjoined, is
taken from the power of God to cast into Hell, yet the whole of the Argument
thence amounts but thus far, because such who are threatened to be persecuted
by men who can only kill their bodies, ought rather to fear God who can extend
his power of punishing to the destruction of body and soul: of those that
offend him, therefore there is such a fear ingenerated in the Saints by the
Threatenings of the Word as is inconsistent with the truth of Gods steadfastness
in his Covenant with them, to keep them up to Obedience unto the end.

Sect.. 59.
the 14. he farther pleades from Heb. 11. 7. 2 Kings 22. 19, 20. That the
eminentest and Holiest men that live may do many things from a principle of
fear or of being afraid of the Judgments of God that they should come upon
them, and upon that account have been put upon ways that were acceptable to
God.

Ans. We know that the Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom: and that
the Fear of the Lord and his Goodness, is a great Mercy of the Covenant of
Grace; This is not the thing here pleaded for: it is a thing quite of another
nature, even that ascribed to the strange nations that were transplanted into
Samaria, by the King of Syria, upon the captivity and removeall of the ten
tribes, and frightened by Lions that destroyed some of them, who did yet
continue to worship their own Idols, under the dread of God which was upon
them, which is called the Fear of the Lord. To complete this fear it is
required that a man have such an Apprehension of the comeing of Hell and Wrath
upon him, as that he be not relieved against it, by any interposall of Promise,
or ought else from God, that he should be preserved in the way and path whereby
he shall assuredly find deliverance, from that which he fears; How far this
kind of Fear, the fear of Hell, not as declarative of the terror of the
Lord, but as probable to betide, and befall the persons so fearing it, and that
solely considered as an evil to himself, may be a principle of any act of
acceptable Gospel Obedience is not cleared by Mr Goodwin, nor easily will be
so. For

1. That it is not the intendment of any divine Threatenings to beget such a
Fear in reference to them that believe, has been declared.

2. It is no fruit or product of the Spirit of Life and Love, which as has
been shown is the principle of all our Obedience and walking with God.

3. It holds out a frame of Spirit directly contrary to what we are called and
admitted unto under the Gospel; For God has not given us the Spirit of fear,
but of ^^wer, of Love, and of a sound mind. 2. Tim. 1. 7. and Romans 8. 15. We
have not received the Spirit of bondage unto fear, but the Spirit of Adoption
whereby we cry Abba Father. The Spirit of this Fear and Dread, and the
bondage that attends it, is at open variance with the Spirit of Liberty,
Boldness, Power, Adoption, and a sound mind wherewith Belivers are endued. And

4. It is that which the Lord Christ intended to remove and take away from his,
by his death, Heb. 2. 15. He dyed that he might deliver them, who for fear of
death were in bondage all their days.

This fear then I say, which is neither Promise of the Covenant, nor fruit of
the Spirit, nor product of saving Faith, will scarce upon strict inquiry be
found to be any great furtherer of the Saints Obedience; what use the Lord is
pleased to make of this dread and terror in the hearts of any of his, for the
hedging up their ways from folly, and staving them off from any Actual evil
when through the strength of Temptation they do begin to cast off the Law of
Life and Love whereby they are governed, is not in the least prejudiced by any
thing asserted in the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance; Toward some who
though they are persuaded of the Perseverance of the Saints Indefinitely, yet
have no persuasion, or at least no prevailing chearing Assurance that
themselves are Saints (which Mr Goodwin thinks to be the condition of far the
greatest part of Believers) it has its full power and extent, its whole
efficacy depending on the Apprehensions of the mind wherein it is. Toward the
residue, who upon abiding grounds and sure foundations have obtained a
comfortable, Spiritual persuasion of their own Interest in the Promises of
God, That the consideration of Hell and Judgment as the due debt of sin and
necessary vindication of the Glory of God has also its Effects and influence,
as far as God is pleased to exercise them therewith, acquainting them
continually with his Terror, and filling them with an abhorrency of those
ways which in and of themselves, tend to so dismal an end and issue, has
beendeclared.

Secondly,. 60.
the places of Scripture mentioned by Mr Goodwin doubtless will not reach his
intendmend. Of Noah it is said, that he was (...), after he was (...); Being
warned of God of that flood that was for to come upon the World of ungodly men,
and the Salvation of himself and his Family by the Arc; being filled with the
Reverence of God and assured of his own preservation, he industriously sets
himself about the use of the means, whereby it was to be accomplished. That
because a man assured of an end from God himself, in and by the use of means,
did with a Reverentiall Fear of God, not of any evil threatened which he was
to be preserved from, set himself to a conscientious use of means whereby the
promised end of God's own institution is to be brought about; Therefore the
Fear of Hell, (such a Fear as has been decribed) is one principle of the
Obedience of the Saints in their walking with God, and such as they ought to
cherish, as being a means appointed of God for that end and purpose, is an
Argument of no great value here with us. Neither surely will the Conclusion
intended be more evidently educed, from the tenderness of the heart of Josiah
under the preaching of the Law, mentioned in the second place, and therefore I
shall not need to call it into Examination.

But it is added farther Sect. 14. p. 314. The present state and frame of the
hearts and souls of the Saints duly considered,: 61.
which are made up as well of flesh and corruption, as of Spirit and Grace, the
former having need of bridles for restraint, as well as the latter of spurs
for quickening, evident it is that Arguments or motives drawn from fear of
punishment, are as necessary and proper for them in respect of the one, as
incitements from Love, in respect of the other. A whip for the Horse (says
Solomon) a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the Fools back; The flesh even
in the wisest of men, is a fool, and would be unruly without a rod ever and a
non shaken over it; nor should God have made such gracious, bountiful and
effectual provision, for the Perseverance of the Saints, as now he has done,
had he not engaged as well the passion of Fear within them, as of Love to be
their guardian keeper. It Is true perfect love casts out Fear, but who
amongst the Saints themselves can say either that his heart is clean, or his
Love perfect? Perfect Love casts out flesh, as well as Fear, yea true Love
until flesh be cast out preserves fear, for its Assistant and fellow helper;
the flesh would soon make Love, a wanton and entice her unto folly, did not
fear dissolve the enchantment and protect her Chastity:

Of this last Division of the 34. Section, there are two parts; The first
Confirmative of what was spoken before, concerning the usefullnesse of the
Fear of Hell and punishment for the furthering of the Saints Obedience. The
other Responsatory to what is urged to the contrary from 1 John 4. 18. Perfect
Love, casts out Fear: For the first, it is granted, that there are those two
contrary principles of Flesh and Spirit, Corruption and Grace, in the hearts of
all, even even the best and most eminent Saints; whilst they continue here
below. But that these two, should be principles acting themselves in their
Obedience, the one moved, incited, and stirred up by Love, the other from the
Fear whereof we are speaking, is a Fleshly, Dark, Anti-evangelicall conceit;
That the principle in Believers which the Scripture calls Flesh, and
Corruption, needs incitement to Obedience, or is to be incited there unto, as
is affirmed, is no less corrupt than what was before mentioned. Look
whatsoever Influence Flesh or Corruption has into any of our Obedience, so far
that Obedience is vitiated, corrupted, rendered unclean and unacceptable
before God; The Flesh is to be crucified, slain, destroyed, not stirred up,
and provoked to Obedience, being indeed Disobedience in the Abstract? enmity to
God. You may as well persuade darkness to shine, as the Flesh to Ob^y; It is
not a fool (as that Allusion bespeaks it from Prove. 26. 3.) that would ever
and anon be unruly, were not a rod shaken over him; but it is folly it self,
that is not to be cured, but killed, not stirred up, but mortifyed. How that is
to be done, has been formerly at large declared: It is by the Spirits bringing
the Cross and power of the death of Christ into the heart of the sinner, and
not by any consideration of Hell, and punishment, that we can take upon our
selves (which never did, nor never will fortify any sin, to the end of the
world) that this work is to be wrought.

Secondly, that which is added of God's bountiful provision for the
Perseverance of the Saints by engaging the passion of Fear, as well as Love,
is of no better a frame, or Constitution than that which went before. That our
gracious Father has made fuller, larger, and more certain provision for our
Perseverance, than any can be afforded by the engaging of our passions, by
consideration of punishment or reward, I hope, has been sufficiently
demonstrated; And if Mr Goodwin intend no more by his Love, and Fear of God,
than the engaging of those natural passions in us, by the cons^derations
intimated, I shall not be Rival with him in his Persuasion; The Love we intend
is a Fruit of the Spirit of God in us, and the Fear contended about, of the
Spirit of Bondage: which though it be not pressed on us as our duty, yet we
hope that bountiful provision is made for our Perseverance, as shall
effectually support and preserve us to the end: Blessed be his name, his Saints
have many better Guardians and keepers, then a bondage frame of Spirit, upon
the account of the wrath to come, from whence they are delivered by Christ;
They are in his own hand, and in the hand of his Son, and are kept through
Faith by his power to Salvation. If this be the end of Mr Goodwin's Preaching
the threatenings of God at any time, viz. that the natural passion of Fear,
being stirred up with the apprehensions of Hell, the Flesh that is in Man, may
be incited to obedience, I hope he has not many consenting with him in the
same intendment.

Thirdly, To an Objection framed from 1 Ioh: 4. 18. That perfect Love casts out
fear,. 62.
First, That it may be so, but whose Love is perfect. Secondly, That Love
cherishes Fear, until the Flesh be quite cast out. Thirdly, That the Flesh
would make Love wanton, and entice it to folly, did not Fear dissolve the
enchantment: But,

First, Though Love be not perfect to all degrees of Perfection here, yet it
may have, yea it has in the Saints the perfection of Uprightness and
Sincerity, which is all that is here intended, and all that is required to it,
for the casting out of that Tormenting Fear of which the Apostle speaks. Fear
(says he) has torment: And if our Love cannot amount to that perfection, as
to cast it out, it being only to be cast out thereby, it is impossible we
should ever be freed from Torment all our days, or be filled with joy and
Consolation in believing; which would frustrate the glorious design of God,
which he has sworn himself willing to pursue, Heb: 6. 13. and the great End
of the death of Christ, which he has perfectly accomplished, Heb: 2. 15.

Secondly, It is true; there is a Fear, that Love cherishes; the Fear that
God has promised in the Covenant of Grace, to preserve in our hearts all our
days; But to say, it cherishes the Fear we speak of, and which the Holy
Ghost in this place intends, is expressly to make the Holy Ghost a liar, and
(...) contradict him to his face.

Thirdly; What Love in us, is that, that the Flesh can or may entice to folly^
Are the fruits of the Spirit of God, Graces of his own working and creating in
us, of such a Temper and Constitution, as that they may be enticed to
uncleanness and folly? And is it possible that such a thought should enter
into the heart of a man, professing the Doctrine of the Gospel? that ink
should stain paper, with such filth cast upon the Spirit and Grace of God? The
Fear of Hell ere-while was suited to the use of the Flesh, but now (it seems)
it serves to keep the Love of God it self in order, that otherwise would wax
wanton, fleshly, and foolish. Foolish Love, that will attempt to cast out this
tormenting Fear, not being able to preserve it self from folly, without its
assistance.

Sect: 15. is spent in an Answer endeavored to an Objection, placed in the
beginning of it, in these words.

If it be farther demanded, But does it not argue servility in men, to be drawn
by the Iron cord of the Fear of Hell, to do what is their duty to do? Or
does any other Service or Obedience become Sons and Children, but only that
which is free and proceeds from Love?

Hereunto you have a threefold Answer returned.

First, That God requires that it should be so; which is a downeright begging
of the Question.

Secondly, He puts a difference between the Obedience of Children to their
Parents, and of the Saints unto God; The discourse whereof discovering some
mysteries of the new Doctrine of Grace, much pressed and insisted on, take as
follows. There is a very different consideration of the Obedience of Children
to their Natural Parents, and of the obedience of the Children of God unto
their Heavenly Father; The Obedience of the former, is but by the Inspiration
of Nature, and is an act not so much raised by Deliberation, or flowing from
the will, by an interposure of judgment, and conscience to produce the
Election, as arising from an innate propension in men, accompanying the very
constituting principles of their Nature and being; Whereas the latter, the
Obedience of the Children of God, is taught by Precepts, and the Principle of
it, I mean that Rational frame of Heart, out of which they subject themselves
to God, is planted in the souls of men by the engagement of Reason, Judgment,
and Conscience to consider those grounds, arguments, and motives, by which
their Heavenly Father judges it meet to work and fashion them unto such a
frame; So that though the obedience of Natural Children to their Natural
Parents, be the more genuine and commendable, when it flows freely from the
pure instinct of Nature, and is not drawn from them by fear of punishment, yet
the Obedience of the Children of God is then most genuine and commendable, and
like unto it self, when it is produced, and raised in the soul, by a joint
influence and contribution, not of one or of some, but of all those Arguments,
Reasons, Motives, Inducements whatsoever, and how many soever they be, by which
their Heavenly Father uses to plant and work it in them; for in this case, and
in this only, it has most of God, of the Spirit of God, of the Wisdom of God,
of the Goodness of God: in and upon this account it is likeliest to be most
free, uniforme, and permanent.

The sum of this Answer amounts to these three things.

First that there is an Instinct or inspiration of Nature in Children to yield
Obediedce to their Parents.

Secondly that there is no such Spiritual Instinct or inclination in the
Saints to yield Obedience to God.

Thirdly, that the Obedience of the Saints arises merely and solley from such
Considerations of the Reason of that Obedience, which they apprehend in
contradiction to any such genuine principles as might incline their hearts
thereunto.

For the first, That the obedience of Children to their Parents, though it be a
prime dictate of the Law of Nature wherewith they are endued, proceeds from a
pure Instinct, any otherwise than as a principle suiting and inclining them to
the Acts of that Obedience, so as to exclude the promoting and carrying of it
on, upon the Moral condsideration of Duty, Piety etc. it is in vain for Mr
Goodwin to goabout to persuade us, unless he could not only corrode the Word
of God where it presses that Obedience as a Duty, but also charm us into
beasts of the field, which are acted by such a bruit instinct, not to be
improved, stirred up or drawn forth into exercise by Deliberation or
Consideration; There is, it is true in Children an impresse of the power of the
Law of nature, suiting them to Obedience (which yet in many has been quite
cast out and obliterated, being not of the constituting principles of their
Nature, which whilst they have their being as such, cannot be thrown out of
them) and carrying them out unto it with Delight, Ease, and Complacency, (as
habits do to suitable actings,) but withal that this principle is not
regulated and directed as our Obedience to God by a Rule, and stirred up to
exert it self, and they in whom it is, provoked by Rational and Conscientious
considerations, to the performance of their duty, in that Obedience, is so
contrary to the experience I suppose of all sharers with us in our Mortality,
that it will hardly be admitted into debate. But

Secondly, the worst part of this Story lies in the middle of it, in the
exclusion of any such Spiritual principle in Believers, as should carry them
out unto Obedience, at least to any such as is not begotten in their minds by
Rational considerations; What ever may be granted of acquired habites of Grace
(which that the first should be, that a Spiritual habit should be acquired by
natural actings, is a most ridiculous fiction,) all infused Habits of Grace
that should imprint upon the soul a new natural inclination to Obedience,
that should fashion and frame the hearts of men into a state and Condition
suited for, and carry them out, unto Spiritual Obedience, are here decryed;
All it seems that the Scripture has told us of our utter Insufficiency,
Deadness, Disability and indisposednesse to any thing that is good, without a
new Life and principle, all that we have apprehended, and Believed concerning
the new Heart, and Spirit given us, the new Nature, new Creature, divine
Nature, inward man, Grace in the Heart, making the Root good that the Fruit
may be so: All that the Saints have expressed concerning their Delight in God,
Love to God upon the account of his writing his Laws in their hearts and
Spirits, is a mere delusion. There is no principle of any Heavenly, Spiritual
Life, no new Nature with its bent and instinct lying toward God and Obedience
to him, wrought in the Saints, or bestowed on them by the Holy Spirit of Grace;
If this be so we may even fairly shut our Bibles, and go learn this new
Gospel of such as are able to instruct us therein; Wherefore I say

Thirdly, that as in Children there is an instinct, an inclination of nature,
to induce them and carry them out to Obedience to their natural Parents, which
yet is directed, regulated, provoked, and stirred up, and they thereby, to that
Obedince, by Motives and Considerations suited to work upon their Minds and
Consciences, to prevailewith them thereunto, so also in Believers, the Children
of God who are begotten of the will of God, of the Word of Truth, and borne
again not of the Will of the flesh but of the will of God, there is a new
Spiritual principle, a constituting principle of their Spiritual Lives
wrought and implanted in the^ by the Spirit of God: a principle of Faith, Love,
enabling the^ for, suiting them unto, and inciting them to that Obedience which
is acceptable and well pleasing to their Father which is in Heaven: In which
Obedience, as they are regulated by the Word, so they are stirred up unto it by
all those motives, which the Lord in his infinite wisdom has fitted to
prevail on persons endued with such a principle from himself, as they are; It
is not incumbent on me to enter upon the proof and demonstration of a Title to
a Truth, which the Saints of God have held so long in unquestionable
possession, nothing at all being brought to invalidate it, but only a bare
insinuation that it is not so. Then

Fourthly, I deny not but that the Saints of God are stirred up to Obedience,
by all the Considerations and inducements which God lays before them, and
proposes to them, for that end and purpose; And as he has spread a principle
of obedience over their whole souls, all their Facultyes and Affections, so he
has provided in his Word, motives and inducements to the Obedience he
requires, which are suited unto, and fit to work upon all that is within them
(as the Prophet speaks) to live to him; Their Love, Fear, Hope, Desires are
all managed within, and provoked without to that end and purpose. But how it
will thence follow, that it is the intendment of God by his Threatenings, to
ingenerate such a Fear of Hell in them, as is inconsistent with an Assurance
of his Faithfulness in his Promises not to leave them, but to preserve them to
his Heaveuly Kingdom, I profess I know not: The Obedience of the Saints, we
look upon to proceed from a principle wrought in them with an higher Energy
and efficacy, than mere desires of God to implant it by Arguments and Motives;
that is by persuading them to it, without the least real contribution of
strength or power, or the ingrafting the Word in them, in, with, and by, a new
principle of Life; And if this be the Phyllis of our Authors Doctrine, Solus
habeto. Such a working of Obedience, we cannot think to have any thing of God,
of the Spirit of God, of the Wisdom of God, or the Goodness of God in it,
being exceedingly remote from the way and manner of Gods working in the Saints,
as held out in the Word of Truth, and ineffectuall to the end proposed, in that
Condition wherein they are. The true use of the Threatenings of wrath in
reference to them who by Christ are delivered from it, has been before
manifested and insisted on.

In the last division of this Section,. 64.
he labors to prove that what is done from a principle of Fear may be done
willingly and chearefully, as well as that which is done from a principle of
Love. To which briefly I say

First, Neither Fear nor Love as they are mere natural Affections, are any
principle of Spiritual Obedience as such.

Secondly, That we are so far from denying the usefulness of the Fear of
the Lord to the Obedience of the Saints; That the continuance thereof in them
to the end, is the great Promise for the certain Accomplishment whereof, we do
contend.

Thirdly, That Fear of Hell in Believers, as a part of the wrath of God, from
which they are delivered by Christ, being opposed to all their Grace of Faith,
Love, Hope, etc. is no principle of Obedience in them, whatever influence it
may have on them as to restraint when managed by the hand of Gods Grace.

Fourthly That yet Believers can never be delivered from it but by Faith in the
Blood of Christ, attended with sincere and upright walking with God; which when
they fail of, though that Fear supposed to be predominant in the soul, be
inconsistent with any comfortable chearing Assurance of the favor of God, yet
it is not with the certain continuance to them of the thing it self, upon the
account of the Promises of God.

Section the sixteenth contains a large Discourse in answer to the Apostle,.
65.
affirming that Fear has torment, which is denied by our Author upon sundry
Considerations; The Fear he intends is a Fear of Hell, and wrath to come;
This he supposes to be of such predominancy in the soul, as to be a principle
of Obedience unto God; That this can be without Torment, Disquiet, Bondage and
vexation he will not easily evince to the consciences of them, who have at any
time been exercised under such a frame; What Fear is consistent with Hope,
What incursions npon the souls of the Saints are made by dread and bondage,
and Fear of Hell, and the use of such fears, How some are, though true
Believers, scarcely delivered from such Fears, all their days, I have
formerly declared: and that may suffice as to all our concernement in this
Discourse.

In the seventeenth Section, somewhat is attempted as to Promises,: 66.
answerable to what has been done concerning Exhortations and Threatenings; the
words used to this end are many, the sum is, That the use of Promises in
stirring men up to Obedience, is solely in the proposal of a good thing, or
good things to them to whom the Promises are made which they may attain, or
come short off. Now if men are assured as this Doctrine supposes they may be,
that they shall atttaine the end whether they use the means or no, how can
they possibly be incited by the Promises to the use of means proposed for the
enjoyment of the end promised: That this is the substance of his Discourse, I
presume himself will confess, and it being the winding up of a tedious
Argument, I shall briefly manifest its usefullnesse, and lay it aside. I say
then,

First, what is the True use of the Promises of God, and what Influence they
have into the Obedience and Holiness of the Saints, has been formerly
declared. Neither is any thing there asserted of their genuine and natural
tendency to the ends expressed, enervated in the least by any thing here
insisted on, or intimated by Mr Goodwin; so that without more trouble I might
refer the Reader thither to evince the falsenesse of Mr Goodwin's Assertions,
concerning the uselessnesse of the Promises unto Perseverance, upon a
supposition that there are Promises of Perseverance.

Secondly, Though we affirm that all true Saints shall Persevere, yet we do
not say, that all that are so, do know themselves to be so; and toward them at
least the Promises may have their Efficacy in that way, which Mr Goodwin has
by his Authority confined them to work in.

Thirdly, we say that our Savior was fully persuaded, that in the issue of his
undertakings and sufferings, he should be Glorified with his Father, according
to his Promise: Heb. 12. 2.
and yet upon the account of that Glory which he was so assured of, being set
before him, he addressed himself to the sharpest and difficultest passage to
it, that ever any one entered on; He endured the Cross, despised the shame, for
the Gloryes sake, whereof he had assurance, Heb. 12 And why may not this be the
state of them to whom in his so doing he was a Captain of Salvation? Why may
not the Glory and Reward set before them, though enjoyed in a full Assurance of
Faith, in the excellency of it when possessed, as promised, stir them up to
the means leading thereunto.

4. The truth is, the more we are assured with the assurance of Faith, (not of
Presumption) that we shll certainly obtain and enjoy the end whereunto the
means we use do lead (as is the Assurance that arises from the Promises of
God,) the more eminently are we pressed in a Gospel way, if we walk in the
Spirit of the Gospel, to give up our selves to Obedience to that God, and
Father, who has appointed so precious and lovely means, as are the paths of
Grace, for the obtaining of so Glorious an end as that whereunto we are
appointed. And thus I doubt not but that it is manifest, by these
Considerations of Mr Goodwins Objections to the contrary, that the Doctrine of
the Perseverance of the Saints, asby us taught and delivered, does not only
fall in a sweet Compliance withal the means of Grace, especially those
appointed by God to establish the Saints in Faith and Obedience, that is, to
Work Perseverance in them, but also to be eminently useful to give Life,
Vigor, Power and Efficacy in a peculiar Gospel manner, to all Exhortations,
Threatenings and Promises appointed and applied by God, to that end and purpose.

CAP. XIII.
1. The maintainers and propagators of the several Doctrines under contest,
taken into consideration. 2. The necessity of so doing from M. G. undertaking
to make the comparison. This inquiry confined to those of our own Nation. 3.
The chief Assertors of this Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance in this Nation
since it received any opposition, what was their Ministry, and what their
Lives. 4. M.G's plea in this case. 5. The first Objection against his Doctrine
by him proposed, Second, and Third. 6. His Answers to these Objections
considered. Removed: His own Word and Testimony offered against the experience
of Thousands. 7. The Persons pointed to by him, and commanded, considered. 8.
The principles of those Persons he opposes vindicated. 9. Of the Doctrine of
the Primitive Christians, as to this head of Religion. Grounds of mistake in
reference to their judgments. 10. The first Reformers constant to themselves
in their Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance. 11. Of the influence of M.
Perkins his judgment on the propagation of the Doctrine of the Saints
Perseverance. 12. Who the Persons were on whom his judgment is supposed to
have such an influence. 13. The consent of Foreign Churches making void this
surmize. 14. What influence the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance had into
the holiness of its Professors. 15. Of the unworthiness of the Persons who in
this Nation have Asserted the Doctrine of Apostasy: the suitableness of this
Doctrine to their practices. 16. Mr G. attempt to take off this charge. 17. How
far men's Doctrines may be judged by their lives. 18. Mr G's Reasons why
Episcopalise, Arminianised, the first. 19. Considered and disproved. 20. His
discord, etc. 21. General Apostasy of men entertain the Arminian tenants. 22.
The close.

AS to the matter in hand,. 1.
about the usefulness of the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints, in,
and unto the Ministry of the Gospel, and the obstruction pretended to be laid
unto it thereby, It may be somewhat conducing and of Concernment to consider
who the Persons are, and were, and what has been and is the presence of God
with them, in their Ministry who have been Assertors and Zealous maintainers of
this Doctrine: And withal who they were, and what they have been in their
Ministry, and the Dispensation of the Word committed unto them, who have risen
up in opposition thereunto; How also those different Parties have approved
their Profession to the World, and acquitted themselves in their Generation in
their walking with God, may be worth our Consideration; doubtless, if the
Doctrine, whose declaration and defense we have thus far engaged in, be of such
a pernicious tendency, as is pretended, so destructive to Gospel Obedience,
and so evidently rendering that great Ordinance of the Ministry useless, it
may be traced to its product of these effects, in some measure, in the Lives,
Conversations and Ministry of those, who have most zealously espoused it, most
earnestly contended for it, and been most given up to the form and mould
thereof. It were a thing every way miraculous if any Root should for the most
part bring forth fruit disagreeing to the nature of it.

A Task this is,. 2.
(I confess) which were we not necessitated unto, I could easily dispense with
my self from engaging therein. But (Mr Goodwin having voluntarily entered the
list, as to this particular and instated a comparison, between the Abbettors of
the several Doctrines under Contest, (Chap. 9. of his Book, (a matter we
should not have expected, from any other man) it could not, but be thought a
gross neglect, of duty, and high ingratitude, toward those great and Blessed
Souls, who in former and latter days, with indefatigable, pains and eminent
success watered the Vineyard of the Lord, with the dew of this Doctrine, to
decline the Consideration of the comparison made, and dressed up to our hand.
Now because it is a peculiar task allotted to us, to manifest the imbracement
of this Truth, by those who in the Primitive Church, were of greatest note and
Eminency for Piety, Judgment, and skill in dividing the Word aright, with the
Professed Opposition made unto it, by such, as those with whom they Lived, and
succeeding Ages, have branded for men unsound in the Faith, and leaving the
good old Paths, wherein the Saints of old found peace to their Souls: As also
to manifest the receiving and propagation of it, by all (not any one of name
excepted) those Great and Famous Persons whom the Lord was pleased to employ in
the Reformation of his Church, walking in this, as in sundry other particulars,
closer up to the Truth of the Gospel, than some of their Brethren, that at the
same time fell off from that Church, which was long before fallen off from the
Truth, I shall in my present inquiry, confine my self to those of our own
Nation, who have been of Renown in their Generation for their Labor in the
Lord, and of name among the Saints for their work in the service of the
Gospel.

For the one half of that small space of time,. 3.
which is passed since the breaking forth of the light of the Gospel in this
Nation, we are disenabled from persuing the Comparison instituted: The one part
being not to be considered, or at least not being considerable; The time when
first Head was made against the Truth we profess, and Criminations like those
managed by Mr Goodwin hatched and contrived to Assault it withal, was, when it
had been eminently delivered to the Saints of this Nation, and all the Churches
of Christ, by Reinolds, Whitakers, Greenham and others like to them, their
fellow laborers in the Lords Vineyard. The poor weak Worms of this present
Generation, who embrace the same Doctrine with these men of name, are thought
to be free (some of them at least) from being destroyed by the poisonous and
pernicious embracing of it, by their own weakness and disability, to
discern the natural genuine Consequences and Tendency, in the progress of
that, which in the Root and Foundation they embrace. Their ignorance of their
own Doctrine in its compass, and Extent, is the Mother of that Devotion, which
in them, is nourished thereby. So our great Masters tell us, against whose
Kingly Authority in these things there is no rising up. For the Persons
formerly named, the like relief cannot be supposed. He that shall provide an
Apology for them, Affirming that they understood not the state, nature,
consequences, and tendences of the Doctrines they received, defended, preached
contended for, will scarce be able by any following defensative, to vindicate
his own credit, for so doing. In the lives then and the Ministry of those men,
and such as those, if any where are the fruits of this Doctrine to be seen. If
it corrupted not their lives, nor weakened their Ministry, if it turned not them
aside from the paths of Gospel Obedience, nor weakened their hands in the
Dispensation of the Word, in the Promises, Threatenings and Exhortations
thereof, to the Conversion of souls, and building up of those who by their
Ministry were called, in their most holy Faith, it cannot but be a strong
presumption, that there is no such venomous infectious quality in this
Doctrine, as of late some Chimicall Divines pretend themselves to be able to
extract out of it: Now what I pray were these men? What were their Lives? What
was their Ministry? All those who now oppose Mr Goodwin's Doctrine, do it
either out of Ignorance, or to Comply with Greatness, and men in Authority,
thereby to make up themselves in their Ambitious and worldly aims, and to
prevail themselves upon the opinion of men: for what cause else in the world
can be imagined why they should so engage? what though they really believed,
the whole fabric of his Doctrine wherein he has departed from the Faith, he
once (as they say) professed, to be a lie; A lie of dangerous and pernicious
Consequence to the souls of men, a lie derogatory to the Glory of God, the
efficacy of Grace, the merit of the Death of Christ, and the honor of the
Gospel, and full of disconsolation to poor soule^; being in and under
Temptation. What though they suppose it secretly to undermine the maine
fundamentals of the Covenant of Grace, and covertly to substitute another
Covenant in the Room thereof, what though they have observed that the Doctrine
they have received, was Embraced, Preached, prized, by all those great and
blessed souls, which in the last Generation, God magnified with the conversion
of so many thousands in this Nation, given into their Ministry whilst they
spent their days under continual Aflictions and persecutions? what though
they have the general known consent of all the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas with them, in their zeal for the Doctrine under consideration? What
though under these and the like apprehensions, they profes in the presence of
God, his holy Angels and men, that the eternal Interest of the precious souls
of men, is more valuable to them ten thousand times than their own lives, and
that that is the sole Reason of their opposition to M. (...) in his attempts
against the Doctrine they have so received and embraced, yet it is meet for us
to Judge, and for all to whom evil surmises are not esteemed to be among the
works of the flesh, that all their opposition, is nothing but a co^plyance
with, and pursuit of those worldly low and wretched aims, that they are filled
withal. But as to those Persons before mentioned, what shall we say? Their
Piety, Literature, Zeal, Diligence, Industry, Labor with success in the
work of the Ministry, (and that under manifold discouragements) are so
renowned in the world, that how or wherewith they shall be shifted of, from
being considerable in their Testimony, I cannot imagine. If ever Persons in
these latter Ages had written upon their breasts, Holiness to the Lord, If
ever any bare about, a conformity to the Death and resurrection of our Lord
Jesus Christ, they may put in for an eminent esteem, and name among them; and
will doubtless be found at last to be of the thirty, if they attain not to
the first Rank of the Worthyes of Christ in these ends of the world. How is it
that they were not retarded, in the course of their Gospel Obedience, by their
entertainment of this wretched Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance? But what
though they kept themselves Personally from the pollution of it yet possibly
their Ministry was defiled and rendered useless by it. And who I pray is it
that in this Generation can so support himself with success in the Ministry,
as to rise up with this accusation against them? Many thousands who were their
Crown, their Glory, and Rejoicing in Christ, are fallen a sleep, and some
Continue to this day. Of the Reasons given by Mr Goodwin why all the Zealous,
Fruitful, Faithful Preachers, of former days, embraced this Doctrine, we
shall instantly undertake the Consideration. In the mean time this seems
strange, that God should magnify, and make famous the Ministry of so many,
throughout the world, and give in that visible blessing to their Labors
therein, which has filled this Island with such an increase of Children to
Sion, as that she has not lengthned the cords of her Tabernacle, to such an
extent and compass, in any proportionable spot of earth under Heaven, if any
one eminent part of their Doctrine, and that whereon they laid great weight in
their Ministry, which they pressed with as much fervency and contention of
Spirit as any head of the like importance, should indeed be so apparently
destructive of Holiness, and of such a direct and irresistible efficiency to
render useless that great Ordinance of the Ministry committed to them, as this
is clamoured to be. What will be the success of them, in their Ministry, who
shall undertake to deny and oppose it, I hope the People of God in this Nation,
will not have many Instances to Judge by: The best conjecture, we can for the
present make of what will be hereafter, must be taken from what has already
come to pass; and the best guess of what events will be, are to be raised
from the consideration of what has been; from a like disposition of Causes, to
an Answerablenesse of Events.

What Mr Goodwin has to plead in this Case he insists on,. 4.
Chap. 9. Sect. 24, 25, 26, 27. Page 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172. The sum
and aim of his Discourse, is to Apologize for his Doctrine against sundry
Objections, which in the Observations of men it is liable and obnoxious unto.
Now these are such as whatever the Issue of their Consideration prove,
doubtless it can be of no Advantage unto his Cause, that his Doctrine is so
readily exposed to them.

The first of these is,. 5.
that the Doctrine he Opposes, and in Opposition whereunto that is set up,
which he so industriously asserts, has generally been received and embraced,
by men eminent in Piety and Godliness, famous on that account in their
Generations, with the generality of the People of God, with them. And this is
attended with that which naturally insues thereon, viz. The Scandalousnesse of
the most of them (yea of them all of this Nation is it spoken, who have
formerly asserted the Doctrine which Mr Goodwin has lately espoused; Whereunto
in the third place an Observation is subjoyned, of the Ordinary defection of
men to loose and unsavory practices, after they have once drunk in the
principles of that opinion, which he now so industriously mixeth and tempereth
for them; It is usually said there is no smoke, but where there is some fire;
It would be strange if such Observations as these, should be readily and
generally made by men, concerning the Doctrine under Contest, unless there
were some evident occasion Administered by it thereuto. And I must needs say,
that if they prove True, and hold under Examination, they will become as urging
a prejudice, as can lightly be laid against any cause in Religion whatsoever.
The Gospel being a Doctrine according unto Godliness, several persuasions
pretending to be parts and portions thereof, if one shall be found to be the
constant Faith, and profession of those, who also have the life and power of
Godliness in them; the other to be maintained by evil men and seducers, who
upon their receiving it, do also wax worse and worse; it is no small advantage
to the first, in its plea for admittance to the right and title of a truth of
the Gospel.

To Evade this charge Mr Goodwin premises this in General.. 6.


The experience Asserted in the Objection, is not so unquestionable in point of
Truth, But that if the Asserters were put home upon the proof, they would (I
sear) ( doubtless he rather hopes it) account, more in presumption than in
reasonablenes of Argument: For if Persons of the one judgment, and of the
other, were duly compared together, I verily believe there would be found every
whit, as full a proportion of men, truly Conscientious and Religious, amongst
those whose judgments stand, and have stood for a possibility of falling away,
As on the other side: but through a foolish and unsavory kind of partiality,
we are apt, on all hands, according to the Proverb, to account our own Geese
for Swannes, and other men's Swannes Geese; Certain I am, that if the writings
of men of the one judgment, and of the other, be compared together, and an
estimate made from thence of the Religion, Worth, and Holiness of the Authors
respectively, Those who oppose the common Doctrine of Perseverance, do account
it no Robbery to make themselves every way equal in this honor with their
opposers; The truth is, If it be lawful for me to utter what I really
apprehend, and judge in the case, I do not find that spirit of holiness, to
breath with that Authority, height or Excellency of power, in the writings of
the latter, which I am very sensible of in the writings of the former; These
call for Righteousness, Holiness, and all manner of Christian conversation,
with every whit as high a hand as the other, and add nothing to check,
obstruct, or infeeble the Authority of their demands in this kind; when as the
other, though they before many times in their exhortations, and conjurements
unto holiness; yet other while render both these and themselves in them,
contemptible, by avouching such principles, which cut the very sinews, and
strength of such their exhortations, and fully balance all the weight of those
motives, by which they seek to bind them upon the Consciences of men. And for
men truly holy and Conscientious, doubtless the Primitive Christians for three
hundred years together and upwards, next after the times of the Apostles, will
fully balance with an abundant surplusage, both for numbers, and truth of
Godliness, All those in the Reformed Churches; who since Calvin's days, have
adhered to the common Doctrine of Perseverance: And that the Churches of Christ
more generally during the said space of three hundred years and more, held a
possibility of a total and final defection, even in true and soun^ Believers,
is so clear from the Records yet extant of those times, that it cannot be
denied.

Ans. To let pass M. Goodwins Proverb, with its Applycation, (it being very
facile to return it to its Author, there being nothing in the World by him
proposed, to induce us to such an estimation of his associates, in the work of
teaching the Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy, and their labors therein, or any
other undertaking of theirs, as he labors to beget, in guilding over their
Worth and Writings, but only his own judgment, and an overweening of their
Geese for Swans,) Let us see what is offered by him to evince the Experience
Asserted, not to be so unquestionable as is pretended. He offers First, his own
Affirmation, That if an estimate may be made of men's Worth and Holiness by
their writings, Those who oppose the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, will
be found in the promotion of Holiness, and the practice of it, to out go
their Adversaries. Their writings, he tells us, breath forth a spirit of
holiness, such as he cannot find in the writings of others; But first, for
this you have only M. Goodwins naked single Testimony: And that, opposed to the
common experience of the people of God; What weight this is like to bear with
men, the event will show. It is a hard thing for one man upon his bare word, to
undertake to persuade a multitude, that what their eyes see, and their ears
hear, is not so; M. Goodwin had need have Pythagorean Disciples for the
embracing of these dictates of his; The experience of Thousands, is placed to
confirm the observation insisted on: says M. Goodwin, It is not so, they are
in my judgment all deceived. But,

Secondly,: 7.
who are they in whose writings Mr Goodwin has found such a Spirit of
Holiness, breathing with Authority, as is not to be found out, nor perceived
in the writings of them, that assert the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the
Saints. Calvin, Zanchius, Beza, etc. (and to confine our selves home) Reynolds,
Whitaker, Perkins, Greenham, Dodde, Preston, Boulton, Sibbs, Rogers,
Collverwell, Cotton, etc. (whose fame upon this very account, of the eminent
and effectual breathing of a Spirit of Holiness in their writings, is gone
out into all the Nations about us, and their Remembrance is blessed at home and
abroad,) are some of the men who have as has been showed, labored in
watering the Vineyard of the Lord, with the dew and rain of this Doctrine:
Who, or where are they who have excelled them in this undertaking? Let the men
be named, and the writings produced that Mr Goodwin, may have some joined with
him, in a search after, and Judgment of that Spirit that breathes so
excellently in them, that we be not forced to take his Testimony of we know not
what, nor whom; Those amongst our selves of chiefest name, who have appeared in
the Cause that Mr Goodwin has now undertaken, are Tompson, Mountagu etc. with
an obscure Rabble of that Generation. I shall easily allow Mr Goodwin to be a
man more sharp sighted than the most of those with whom he has to do, in this
present contest; as also to have his senses more exercised, in the Writings of
those eminent Persons last named; But yet that he is sensible of such a Spirit
of Holiness, breathing in their writings* which for the most part are stuffed
with cruel scoffings at the Professors of it, and horrible contempt of all
close walking with God) I cannot easily and readily believe; should he add to
them Arminius, with all that followed him, in the Low Countries, their most
Learned Corvinus, Drunk and Sober; As also such among the Papists, and
Lutherans, as are his Companions in this work, and swell the^ all with the
Rethorick of his commendations until they break, I dare say he will never be
able before indifferent Judges, to make out his Assertion of the excellency of
their writings, for the futherance of Holiness, compared with the Labors of
those great and holy Souls, who have both among our selves, and abroad;
Labored in the work I am at present engaged in. The World of men professing
the Reformed Religion have long since in their Judgments determined this
difference, nor does it deserve any farther debate.

Secondly, That those who maintain the Perseverance of the Saints, are sore
indeed in their Exhortations to Holiness,: 8.
but contemptible in their Principles upon which they should build those
Exhortations, Is an insinuation that Mr Goodwin sometimes makes use of,
handsomely to beg the thing in Question, when he despaires to carry it by any
convincing Argument in a fair dispute: That the Principles of this Doctrine
are eminently serviceable, to the furtherance and promotion of Holiness, has
been formerly evinced beyond all possibility of Contradiction from them, who in
any measure understand what true Godliness is, and wherein it does consist.
Neither ought Mr Goodwin if he would be esteemed as a man disputing for his
persuasion, so often to beg the thing in Question; knowing fullwell, that he
has not so deserved of them with whom he has to do, as to obtain any thing
of this nature, on those terms at their hands.

Thirdly,. 9.
what was the judgment of the Primitive Christians, as in others, so in and
about this head of Christian Religion, is best known from that rule of
Doctrine, which it is confessed they attended unto, being delivered unto them;
and in the defense whereof, and to give Testimony whereto, so many Thousands of
them, loved not their lives unto death. Of those that committed over to
posterity, any thing of their thoughts, in that space of time limited by M.
Goodwin, (viz. three hundred years,) he names but two; of whom I shall not say,
that if they failed in their Apprehensions of the Truth in this matter, It is
not the only thing wherein they so failed; And yet that it can be evident in
the least, that they were consenting in judgment with M. Goodwin, wherewith
from us he differs, is absolutely denied. This elsewhere is already farther
considered. It is a common observation, and not destitute of a great evidence
of Truth, that the Liberty of Expression which is used by men in the delivery
of any Doctrine, especially if it be done obiter by the way, before some
opposition has been framed, and stated thereunto, has given advantage to
those following of them, (when death has prevented all possibility for them to
explain themselves, and their own thoughts) to draw them into a participation
with them, in that, which their Souls abhorred. The plea of Arius and his
Associats, concerning the judgment of the Doctors of the Church, in the days
before him, about the great Article of our Faith, The Diety of Christ, is
known. That there are in many of the Ancients, sundry expressions seemingly
varying from that Doctrine we Assert, upon the account of their different
apprehensions of the terms, of Faith, being Regenerated, Holiness, and the
like, (which are all of them still with us, as in the Scripture, of various
significations, and not clearly expressive of any one sense intended by them,
until distinguished) is not denied. Speaking of all those who had been
Baptized, and made profession of their Faith as Believers, it is no wonder if
they granted that some Believers might fall away. But yet in the mean time the
most eminent of them, constantly affirmed that there is a sort of Believers,
who upon the matter with them, were the only true and Real Believers (being
such as we formerly described) that could not fall either totally or finally;
but as for this I hope full satisfaction is tendered, the Learned Reader in the
Preface of this Discourse. So that these Exceptions notwithstanding, the
prejudices that Mr Goodwin's Doctrine labors under, from the opposition made
to it, and against it, in the defenee of that which it rises up to overthrow,
by that Generation of the Saints of God, lies upon the shoulders thereof, as a
burden to heavy for it to bear.

Secondly,. 10.
Mr Goodwin farther proceeds, Sect. 27 to inform us of some other mistakes in
the instance given, to make good the former observation, For as for Calvin,
Musculus, Martyr, Bucer, with the Ministers of this Nation who in the last
Generation so Zealously opposed, the persecutions and innovations of some
returning with speed and violence to Rome, He tells us they were very far
from having their Judgments settled, as to the Doctrine under contest so as
resolvedly to have embraced the one, and rejected the other.

I should willingly walk in the heigh way for the manifestation and clear
eviction of the untruth of this suggestion: viz. by producing their Testimonies
in abundant plentiful manner to, confirm their clearenesse and Resolution in
the Truth we profess, with their Zealous endeavors for the establishment,
confirmation and propagation of it, but that some few Considerations, delivered
me from engaging in so facile a task. For

First I am not able to persuade my self, that any man who ever read the
writings of the first sort of men mentioned, and knows the constant Doctrine
to this day, of the Churches which they planted and watered, or ever did hear
of the latter, will entertain this Assertion of Mr Goodwins with any thing but
Admiration, upon what grounds he should make it. And

Secondly, Himself discovering in part on what account he does it, namely
because of their Exhortations to watchfulness, carfulness, and close walking
with God, with their denuntiations of threatenings to them, that abide not in
the Faith, which he fancyes to be inconsistent with the Doctrine of
Perseverance, so as by him opposed (which inconsistency we have long since
fully manifested, to be the issue and offspring of his own imagination,
begotten of it by the cunning Sophystry of his Pelagian Friends) I know not why
I should farther insist upon the wiping away of this Reproach, cast upon those
Blessed Souls whom God so magnified in the work of the Gospel of his Son
in their Generation; I remember Navaret a Dominican Friar, upon his Observation
of the subtiltyes of the Jesuits, to wrest many sayings of the Ancients in
favor of their Opinions, in those Doctrines wherein those two Orders are at
variance, Affirms That he was afraid that when he was dead, although he had
written and disputed so much against them, they would produce him for a
Testimony and Witness on their side. What he feared concerning himself, Mr
Goodwin has attempted, concerning many more worthy Persons: cutting off
sentences from what goes before, and follows after, restrayning general
expressions, imposing his own Hypothesis on his Reader, in making application
of what he quotes out of any Author, he has spent one whole Chapter to
persuade the world, that men of as great Abilityes and Judgments, as any in the
world, since the Apostles fell a sleep, have usually expressed themselves, in a
direct contradiction, to what they are eminently and notoriously known, as
their professed deliberate Judgments, to have maintained.

Secondly He farther informs us,: 11.
how this Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints, came to be so generally
entertained by the Godly, Zealous and Able Ministers of this Nation, that when
we see how they fell into it, their Testimony given thereto, may be of the
less validity withus.

This ( he tells you) was the Permission of M. Perkins his Judgment, to be
overruled by the Texts of Scripture commonly insisted on for the proof of this
Doctrine, the great worth of the Person commended therefore the worth of the
Opinion, and he verily believes, as men were then induced to receive this
Opinion, s^ to a relinquishment of it, they went nothing but the countenance
and Authorty of so^ Person of popular acceptance to go before them; And the
Reason he gives of this his Faith is, the Observation of the Principles they
usually hold forth, especially in the Applicatory part of their Sermons.

Ans. What,: 12.
and who they were, who are thus represented by Mr Goodwin, in their receiving
and embracing of that Doctrine, which with the great travel of their Souls
all their days they Preached and pressed to, and upon others, is known to
all. The Persons I named before, (one of them only excepted) with all those
eminent, burning, and shining Lights, which for so many years have labored
with Renown and success, to the astonishment of the world in the Preaching of
the Gospel in this Nation, are the men intended. Doubtless such thoughts have
not in former days been entertained of them, however the contemplation of any
man's own ability may now raise him to contempt of them. M. Perkins received
this Doctrine, and therefore all the Godly Ministers of this Nation did so to.
If any one of the like esteem with him did fall off from it; (Now whom they
should obtain to lead them, of equal reputation and acceptance with him who
has in vain attempted it, I know not,) they would quickly follow, (not like
Shepherds but Sheep) into an opposition thereunto. Those who have not very
slight thoughts of the^, which doubtless they that are fallen a sleep did not
deserve, will scarcely suppose that they entertained a Truth of so great
importance as this upon so easy terms as these insinuated; or that they
would have parted with it, at so cheap a rate.

Farther,. 13.
why the Ministers of England should be thought to entertain this Doctrine
merely upon the Authority and countenance of Mr Perkins given thereunto, when
the universality of the Teachers of all other Reformed Churches, of the same
confession in other things with them, did also embrace the same Doctrine, and
do continue in profession of it to this day, what reason can be assigned? Had
there been a particular inducement to the Ministers of England for the
receiving of it, which was altogether foreign unto them, who as to our Nation
are forraigners, whence is it that there should be such a a coincidence of
their Judgments with them therein? Or why may not ours be thought to take it
upon the same account with them, upon whose Judgments and understandings the
Authority of Mr Perkins cannot be supposed to have any influence? Is M. G. the
only Person, who, in this Nation has impartially weighed all things of
concernement, to the refusing or embracing any matters or Doctrines in
Religion? Have no other in the sincerity of their hearts s^earched the
Scriptures, and earnestly begged the guidance of the Spirit, according to that
encouraging Promise left by their Master, that they should receive him so
doing? The good Lord take away from us all high thoughts of our selves, and all
contempt of them that profess the Fear of the Lord, with whom we have to do.
For the Reason of Mr Goodwin's Faith in this thing, concerning the readiness
of the Godly Ministers of this Nation, to Apostatize from the Doctrine of the
Saints Perseverance, namely, their manifesting themselves to be possessed of
many Principles of a contrary tendency unto it, in the applicatory parts of
their Sermons; the vanity of it has been long since discovered; so that there
is no farther need to lay open the unreasonablenesse thereof.

M. Goodwin mistrusting his ability to persuade men,. 14.
that the Persons of whom he has discoursed were not clear in their
Judgments, as to an opposition to that Doctrine which he positively owneth, and
zealously contendeth for, and knowing that it cannot be denied but that they
were men of eminency for Godliness, and close walking in Communion with God
all their days: Yet he excepteth as his last refuge, That it cannot be
manifested, that this Opinion had the least influence in their pious
conversation, which is wholly to be ascribed to other commendable Principles
that they embraced. This indeed may be said of any part of the Doctrine
whatsoever that they received, and some of them suffered for. Atheists may say
it, of the whole profession of Christianity, and ascribe the goodness of the
lives of the best of them that profess it, to some other principles common to
them with the residue of mankind, and not at all to any of those whereby they
are distingunished, as such. This they professed to have a powerful Efficacy
to prevail with them for that exactness in walking with God, which by his
Grace they attained unto. And why they should not be believed herein, as far
a sany men whatever, bearing the like Testimony to any Doctrine whatever, I
know not. Besides the intendment of this instance of the Persons and their
Piety who formerly Believed, and spoke forth this Doctrine, was, to manifest by
an eminent experiment, that there was not in it, nor is, any tendency to a
contrary frame unto Piety and Holiness, which it is injuriously charged withal;
and if by the consideration thereof, we do not obtain that it has a proper
and direct serviceablenesse to the promotion of Godliness, yet at least we
have a convincing demonstration that it is no way obstructive to it.

Nextly,. 15.
Sect. 26. Mr Goodwin enters upon his defensative to the charge against his
Doctrine, whose Foundation is laid in the unworthiness of its Authors in this
Nation before it fell upon his hand. These he confesses to be the worst of our
late Bishops, with such as Romanized, and ^yrannized among them, with their
Clergy creatures and favorites, Persons many of the^ of superstition, loosenes
and much profanenes. Of the Apology shaped for the clearing of the Doctrine he
maintains from aparticipation with them in their unworthiness, there are
three parts. In the 1. whereof, he denies, that this Doctrine did any way
induce them to the looseness that was found upon them: In the other two,
gives as many Reasons of their receiving of it, and cleaving to it.

As for the first part, I shall willingly assent to him that the Holiness or
unholinesse of Professors: is not to be charged on the Religion they profess
(I mean appearing Holiness in the profession of it,) unless there be an
evidence of a connection betwixt their principles and practices; which in this
case, to us and our apprehension of them who charge this Doctrine with the
miscarriages of those men, there is; At least we may insist on this, that there
is a suitableness in the whole Systeme of the Doctrine, whereof the Apostasy
of the Saints is an eminent parcel, to that frame of Spirit which is in men of
loose and superstitious ways, enemies of the Grace of God and power of
Godliness. Neither can there any other reason be tollerably assigned or
alleged, for the embracement of that Doctrine, by those Persons formerly
mentioned, but only their ignorance of, and envy to the great Misteryes of the
Gospel, the Covenant of Grace with union, communion and close walking with
God. A design was upon them written with the beams of the Sun, to cry up a
barren, outside, light and loose profession, with a vain, superstitious,
selfe-invented Worship of God, instead of the Power of a Gospell-conversation
and Ordinances of Christ according to his appointment; Seeking after a
Righeousnesse as it were by the works of the Law, and being ignorant of the
Righteousness of Christ, they found the whole Doctrine whose defense M. G.
has lately undertaken, suited to their principles and aims; and therefore
with greediness drunk it down like water, until they were swelled with the
Dropsy of Pride and self conceit, beyond what they could bear, whatever be
now pretended, it was little disputed then, and in those days which Mr Goodwin
points unto, but that looseness of Life, inclination to Popery, enmity to
the power of Godliness, were at the bottom of the entertainment of the
Arminian Principles, by that generation of men.

But Mr G. proceeds to alleviate this charge,. 16.
and informs us thus, That if the soundnes and rottennes of Opinions, should
be esteemed by the goodness or badnes of the Lives of any parcel or number of
Persons professing the same, as well the Opinion of Atheism which denies the
being of any God, as the opinion of Polytheisme which affirms a plurality of
Gods, must be esteemed better and more sound, than that which maintains the
being of one God and of one only; for certain it is that there have been many
Heathens Professors some of the one, and some of the other of those Opinions,
who have quitted themselves upon fairer terms of honor and approbation in
their lives than many Christians professing of the last opinion have done.

I am not willing to wring this Nose too far least blood should follow; The
lives of many Atheists and Pagans are preferred before the lives of many
professing Christianity. By Professors of Christianity, Mr Goodwin intends
those who are so indeed, and seasoned with the Power of the Principles of that
Religion, or such only as making an outward profession of it are indeed acted
with Principles quite of another nature, which notwithstanding all their
Profession renders them in the truth of the thing it self, enemies of the
cross of Christ, their God being their belly, their glory being in their
shame, and their end being destruction, Philip. 3. 18, 19. If the former be
intended, as the Assertion is most false, the Gospel only effectually teaching
men to deny all ungodliness, and to live soberly, righteously, and Godly in
this present world, so it tends directly to the highest derogation from the
honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his glorious Gospel. He that would be
thoroughly acquainted with the notorious untruth of this insinuation, let him a
little consult Tertullian, Arnobius, Lactantius, Austin, and others, handling
the Lives and Conversations of the best of the Polytheists and Heathens, before
and in their days, if he be not contented to take a shorter course, and rest
in the Authority of the Apostle, or rather of the Holy Ghost describing them
and their conversations to the Life, as they lay under the just hardening
Judgments of God Romans 1. 18. to the end. If the latter sort of men called
Christians be intended, the comparison instituted between them and Atheists, is
to no purpose; they themselves being disclaimed and disowned by Christ and his
Gospel, and reckoned among them with whom they are compared; So that upon the
matter this is but the comparing one sort of Atheists, with an other, and
giving in a Judgment, that of all, those are worst, whose practices are so,
and yet pacify their own Consciences, and deceive the world, with a pretense
and flowrish of a glorious profession.

I shall not now enter upon any long enquiry what influence the ungodly and
profane lives of any ought to have upon the Judgments of men, in discovering
and discerning of the Doctrines that they bring, especially if such as consent
in any Doctrine, do also concur in a dissoluteness of conversation. That it
will be of no small consideration, the experience of all Ages has evinced. The
Athenians refused a virtuous Law, because the Person was vicious who proposed
it; and it is generally esteemed that there is a correspondency betwixt the
principles and practices of those men, who earnestly profes the promotion of
those principles, so that they are mutual producers or advantagers one of
another. This is all at present that was aimed at in the charge upon Mr
Goodwin's Doctrine, which he undertakes to wave. It was generally embraced at
its first broaching in our world, by men only of a loose and scandalous
Conversation, supersticious in their ways of worship, and enemies of the power
of Godliness: which being confessed, for the Argument from thence, valeat
quantum valere potest.

But M. Goodwin gives us two Reasons,. 18.
why this Doctrine of his was so gladly received, and zealously asserted by
that Generation of men. The first which he tells you is plain and easy to be
given in, is this. Being professed enemies to the most Religious and Zealous
Preachers and Ministers of the I and, with their adherents, whom they termed
Puritans, whom they both hated and feared, as a generation of men, by whom
rather than any other they apprehended themselves in danger of being dethroned,
Nec eos fefellit Opinio. Upon this ground they judged it a very material point
of their interest to oppose and keep under this faction, as they termed them;
In order thereunto they studied and cast about how to weaken their intrest, and
repute, with the generality of the people, or at least with all those that were
intelligent and in that respect considerable; to this end wisely considering
that nothing was like to prejudice them more in their esteem with most men,
than to detect them of error and unsoundnesse in their Doctrine, and
perceiving withal (as with half an eye they might, being so fully disengaged
as they were from all high thoughts of those that held them) that they were not
in any Doctrine besides, which they were generally known to hold and teach,
more obnoxious to such a detection, than in those which they held and taught in
opposition to the Remonstrants, hereupon they politickly fell to profess and
teach Remonstrantisme, that so they might have the more frequent occasion and
opportunity to lay open the Puritan Doctrine, before the people, and to show
the inconsistency of it with the Scriptures, as also with many of the most
manifest principles as well of Reason as Religion besides.

Ans. That this is a most vain and groundless conjecture,. 19.
I presume any one that will but cast back his thoughts upon the posture of
Affairs during the reign of that Generation of men, and a little consider the
ways and means whereby they were through the righteous Hand of God, reduced
to that condition and state wherein they now are, will quickly determine. The
truth is, they were so far from advantaging themselves against their
Adversaryes, and prevailing upon them, in the esteem of the most rational and
knowing men in the Nation, by their entertaining the Arminian Doctrine, that
utterly on the other side they dishonored their cause of Ceremonys,
discipline, and conformity, which with succes they had so long carried on with
the Generality of the Nation, and exposed themselves to the power of the people
of the Land in Parliament, from whence as to all other differences they were
sheltered by an appearance of Legal Constitutions; so that after some forward
Person of that faction, (the most contemptible indeed as to any real worth,
one or two individualls only excepted, of the whole tribe) had upon the grounds
forementioned, taken up and made profession of the Opinions and Doctrine we are
speaking of, they fell daily before their Adversaries, as to the esteem of
all, or at least the greatest part of those who cordially and thoroughly adhered
to them as to the discipline, and Worship then established. Certainly the
Prelaticall party themselves, will not say, they prevailed on that hand, as to
any ends and purposes for the establishment of their interest, or making good
their ground against their opposers. Nay the most sober and Learned of that
sort of men, do to this day ascribe in no small measure the downfall of the
whole fabric whereof they were parts and members to the precipitating
rashness, and folly of some few, in advancing and pressing the Arminian
errors that they themselves were given up unto. As for the zealous and Godly
Ministers of the Nation, usually termed Puritans, (who are here acknowledged by
Mr Goodwin to have all generally opposed the Doctrine he striveth to build up,)
though they had in many Parliaments wherein the most intelligent and rational
men of the Nation are usually convened, made by their friends sundry attempts
for their relief against the Persecutions of the other as is evidenced by
their Peritians, and Addresses still on Record, yet were never able to attain
the least redress of their grievances, nor to get one step of ground against
their Adversaries, until the Advantage of their Arminianisme was administered
unto them, on which by several degrees they prevailed themselves in the issue
to the utter breaking of the Yoke of their Taske-masters. It is true, He who
takes the crafty in their own imaginations, and mixeth the council of the
Wise with madness and folly, causing them to err in their ways as a drunken
man in his vomit, does oftentimes turn the devices of men upon their own
heads, and make those things subservient to their ruin, which they fixed upon
as the most expedient mediums for their establishment and continuance, such
perhaps was the case with them in their Canonical Oath attempted to be
imposed, in one of their last Convocations. But that the taking up, and
asserting of the Arminian Doctrine was a design of that party of men, to get
upon the Judgments and Affections of the people, and to expose the
Puritanicall Preachers to their contempt and reproach, is an imagination that
cannot likely fall upon any one, who had his eyes open in the days wherein
those things were publicly acted on the stage of this Nation. For that
insinuation in the close of Mr Goodwin's Discourse, concerning the Advantages
given that sort of men, by the inconsistency of the Doctrine of the Puritans
(which they opposed) with the Principles of Religion and Reason, I shall only
say that it being once more through the Providence of God, called forth to a
public debate, it neither stands, nor falls to the Judgment of any
single man, muchlesse of one who is professedly engaged in an opposition
thereunto.

Another Reason of the same evidence with the former,. 20.
is tendered in these words, It is generally known that the Cathedral
generation of men throughout Christendom, were generally great admirers of the
old Learning (as some call it) I mean the Writing, and Tenants of the Fathers,
and of Austine more especially, and that they frequently made Shield and
Buckler of their Authority to defend themselves, against the Pens and Opinions
of later Writers, whom their manner was according to the exigency of their
interest (at least as they conceived) to slight and vilify in comparison of the
other. Now the judgments of the Fathers more generally, and of Austine more
particularly, stood for the possibility of the Saints defection, both total
and final, wherein it seems the greater part of our Modern Reformed Divines
have departed from them.

That this pretense is no whit better than that that went before, will be
evidenced by the light of this one consideration. viz. That those among the
Bishops and their adherents, who were indeed most zealous of, and best versed
in the Writings of the Fathers, were generally of the same judgment about the
Grace of Christ, and the Will of Man, etc. with the residue of the reformed
Churches, and the Puritan Preachers of our own Nation. They were a company of
Sciolists in comparison, and men of Nothing, who Arminianized: Men, as the
Bishop of Lincoln once told them, whose Learning lay in a few unlearned
Liturgies: It is true; they had gotten to such a Head, and to such a Height,
not long before their fall, that they were ready to accuse, and charge their
Associates as to Discipline, Worship, and Ceremony, of Puritanisme, who failed
not to retort Arminianisme and Popery back again to them. We know who said of
the other, that they were Tantum non in Episcopatu Furitani; and who returned
to him and his Associates, Tantum non in Vxoratu Pontificii. The truth is,
those among them, as there were many among them, both Bishops, and men, (as
they speak and think) of Inferior Orders, who were solidly Learned, especially
in the writings of the Ancients (of whom many are yet alive, and some are
fallen a sleep) were universally, almost to a man of the same judgment with
Calvin, in the heads of our Religion under consideration. Jewel, Abbot,
Morton, Usher, Hall, Davenant, and Prideaux, (great names among the World of
Learned men) with a considerable retinue of men of repute for Literature and
Devotion, (with whom on no account whatever the Arminianizing party of the
Prelates and their followers, are to be named the same day) have sufficiently
testified their thoughts in this matter to all the World. From what Ambiguity
of expression it is, that any sentence is stolen from Austine, and others of
the Ancients, seeming to countenance the Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy, has
been elsewhere discovered, and may farther be manifested as occasion shall be
administered; And without pretense, to any great skill in the old Learning, this
I dare assert, (whereof I have given some account in the Preface to the Reader)
that not one of the Ancients (much less Austin) did ever maintain such an
Apostasy of Saints, and such a Perseverance as that which M. Goodwin contendeth
for.

This being that which M. Goodwin has to offer for the clearing of the
Doctrine he maintains,. 21.
from the two first parts of the charge exhibited against it, he applies
himself in the last place, to contend with a common Observation made by
Christians, weighing and pondering the principles and ways of men in the days
wherein we live; Namely, the degeneracy of the most of men, who at any time
embrace it from their former Profession, and their turning aside to the paths
of looseness and folly. An observation which if true, (though M. Goodwin is
pleased to assert that any considering man (like himself) will laugh it to
scorn,) will not easily be digested in the thoughts of them, that are willing
to weigh aright the usual presence of God with his Truths, especially at the
first embracement and entertainment of them. Neither will this observation be
diverted from pursuing the Doctrine against which it is lifted up, by comparing
it with that of the Unhappiness of Marriages made between Cousen-Germans,
there being nothing in that Relation, that should be a disposing cause, to any
such issue as is pretended; much less with that farther observation, That some
Apostatise from the Protestant Religion, yea from Christianity it self; there
being not the least Parity, or indeed Analogy in the instances. If it might be
affirmed of men, that after their embracing of Christianity, or the Protestant
Religion, they generally decline, and grow worse, (as to their Moral
Conversation,) then they were before, I do not know at present what Apology
could be readily fixed on, that might free the one, and the other, from
grievous Scandal. To fall from a Profession of any Religion, or any head or
part of a Religion, upon the account of the corruption that is in them, that so
fall from it, is rather an honor, then a reproach to the Religion so deserted.
But in, and upon the embracement of any Religion, or any Doctrine in Religion,
for men to decline from that, which is the proper end of all true Religion
(which is the observation that rises up against the Doctrine M. Goodwin
asserteth in reference to very many that embrace it) doubtless is not the
Crown and Glory of that which they profess. Neither is this observation built
on so slight experience, as to be muzled with Proverbs of Swallows and
Woodcocks. The streets of our Cities, and paths of our Villages being full of
those fowls, or rather foul spirits, that give strength unto it.

This is the whole of what M. Goodwin thought good to tender for the protection
of his Doctrine,. 22.
from the charge laid down at the entrance of this digression; on the
consideration whereof, I doubt not but it is evident how unable he is to shield
it from the wound intended unto it thereby. And shall we now? Can we entertain
any other thoughts of it, but that, (having constantly hitherto been denied and
opposed by the most zealous, painful, Godly, successful Preachers of the
Gospel, that these latter Ages, have been through the goodness of God blessed
withal, entertained chiefly by Men of loose, dissolute principles and
practices, enemies to the power of Godliness, and the profession thereof, and
strongly suspected to corrupt the minds and conversations of Men that do
embrace it) it is the only serviceable relief and assistance for the making of
the Ministry of the Gospel useful and fruitful, ingenerating holiness and
obedience in the Lives and ways of Men.

CAP. XIV.
1 Mr. G's Third Argument proposed and considered. The Drama borrowed by M. G.
to make good this Argument. 2. The frame of speech ascribed to God according to
our Doctrine by the Remonstrants weighed and considered. 3. The dealing of God
with Man, and the importance of his exhortations, according to the Doctrine of
the Saints Perseverance manifested. 4. In what sense, and to what end
Exhortations and Threatenings are made to Believers. 5. The fallacious Ground of
this Argument of M. G. 6. M. G. Fourth Argument proposed to consideration,
considered. Eternal Life, how, and in what sense a Reward of Perseverance. 7.
The enforcement of the Major proposition considered. 8. The Proposition new
molded to make it of concernement to our Doctrine: and denied from the example
of the obedience of Jesus Christ. 9. Efficacy of Grace not inconsistent with
Reward. 10. The Argument enforced with a new consideration: that consideration
examined, and removed. 11. Farther of the consistency of Effectual Grace, and
Gospel Exhortations.

A Third Argument is proposed Sect. 18. Cap. 13. in these words,. 1.
That Doctrine which represents God as weak, Incongruous, and In coherent
with himself, in his applications unto men, is not from God, and consequently
that which contradicts it, must needs be the truth: but the Doctrine of
Perseverance opposed by us, puts this great dishonor upon God, represents
him weak, Incongruous, etc. Ergo. For the proof of the Minor Proposition, to
make good the charge in it exhibited against the Doctrine of Perseverance,
there is a Drammaticall scheme induced, to whose framing and Application M.
Goodwin contributed no more but the pains of a Translator, taking it from the
Anti-Synod: p. 276. 277. in these words. You that truly Believe in my Son,
and have been once made partakers of my Holy Spirit, and therefore are fully
persuaded and assured from my will and command given unto you in that behalf,
yea according to the infallible word of Truth which you have from me, that you
cannot possibly, no not by all the most horrid sins and abominable practices,
that you shall, or can commit fall away either totally or finally from your
Faith; for in the midst of your foulest actions and courses there remains a
seed in you which is sufficient to make you true Believers, and to preserve you
from falling away finally, that it is impossible you should dye in your sins;
you that know and are assured, that I will by an irresistible hand work
Perseverance in you, and consequently that you are out of all danger of
condemnation, and that Heaven and Salvation belong unto you, and are as good as
yours already, so that nothing but giving of thanks appertains to you which
also you know that I will, do what you will in the mean time, necessitate you
unto; you I say that are fully and thoroughly persuaded and possessed with the
truth of all these things, I earnestly charge, admonish, exhort, and beseech,
that ye take heed to your selves, that ye countinue in the Faith, that there
be not at any time an evil heart of unbelief in any to depart from the Living
God, that you fall not from your own steadfastness, yea I declare and profess
unto you that if you shall draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in you,
that if you shall deny me, I will deny you, that if you be again overcome of
the lusts of the world, and be entangled here with, that your latter end shall
be worse than your beginning, that if you shall turn away, all your former
Righteousness shall not be remembered, but you shall dye in your sins, and
suffer the veugeance of Eternal fire. On the other hand if you shall continue
to the end, my Promise is, that you shall be Saved; therefore strive to enter
in at the strait gate, quit your selves like men, labor for the meat that
indureth unto Everlasting Life, and be not sloathfull, but followers of them,
who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. He that shall duly weigh
and consider, what a senseless and indeed ridiculous incongruity there is,
between these Exhortations, Adjurations, Threatenings, and latter Promises, and
those Declarations, Applications, and former Promises doubtless will confess
that either the one, or the other of them are not from God, or according to the
mind of God.

Ans.. 2.
The incongruity of this fiction, with the Doctrine it is framed against, is so
easily manifested that it will not much concern us, to consider the
incongruity that the several parts of it have one with an other. For

First the whole Foundation of this fanatic Fabric, is ridiculous in it
self, and ridiculously imposed on the Doctrine of Perseverance. For whereas it
says not that all Saints have any comfortable Assurance of their Perseverance
and so may by all Gospel ways whatever, by Promises, and Threatenings, be
stirred up to the use of those means whereby Perseverance is wrought, and
Assurance obtained, so it says that no one Saint in the world, ever had, can
have, or was taught to expect his Perseverance or the least sense, or Assurance
of it under such an uncouth supposition, as falling into and continuing in sins
and Abominations; the Promises they have to assure the^ of their inseparable
abode with God to the end, are, that he will write his Law in their hearts, and
put his Fear in their inward parts; that they shall never depart from him; and
they shall be kept up thereto, by the use of means suitable as appointed of
God for the attaining of the end proposed, being kept by the power of God, but
throngh Faith unto Salvation. God does not call (nor does the Doct: of
Perseverance of the Saints, or of the stability and Unchangeablenesse of his
Promises in Christ to Believers assert it) any to Believe that they shall never
fall away from him, what sins and Rebellions so ever they fall into, neither
has he promised any such things unto the^, but only that he will through his
Grace preserve them in the use of means from such Rebellions, as are
inconsistent with his Love and free acceptance through Christ according to the
Tenor of the Covenant of Grace; so that instead of the first part of this
fiction, whose inconsistency with the latter is after Argued, let this acording
to the Analogy of our Doctrine be instituted.

You that truly Believe in my Son Jesus Christ,: 3.
and are made partakers of my Holy Spirit, who being heirs of the Promises, and
so have a Right to that abundant Consolation, that Joy in believing, which I am
willing all of you should receive; I know your Fears, doubts, perplexityes and
Temptations, your failings, sins and backslidings, and what sad thoughts on
the account of the evil of your own hearts and ways you are exposed to, as
that you shall never abide, nor be able to continue with me, and in my Love to
the end: let the feeble knees be strengthened and the hands that hang down be
lifted up: behold I have ordained goodworkes for you to walk in, as the way
wherein you are to walk for the attainement of the end of your Faith the
Salvation of your souls; And to quicken you and stir you up hereunto, I have
provided and established Effectual Ordinances, revealed in the Word of my
Grace, whereunto you are to attend, and in the use of them according to my
mind, to grow up into Holiness, in all manner of holy conversation, Watching,
Fighting, Resisting, Contending with, and against all the Spiritual Enemy's of
your souls; And as for me, this is my Covenant with you, that my Spirit which
gives Efficacy to all the means, Ordinances and Advantages of Gospel
Obedience, which I have afforded unto you, by whom I will fulfill in you all
the goodpleasure of my Goodness, and the work of Faith with Power, so making
you meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, and Preserving you to my
Heavenly Kingdom, shall never depart from you; so that you also having my Law
written in your hearts, shall never utterly and wickedly depart from me; And
for such sins and follies as you shall be overtaken withal, I will
graciously heal your backslidings and receive you freely.

This is the Language of the Doctrine we maintain, which is not (we full well
know) obnoxious to any Exceptions or Consequences what ever, but such as bold
and prejudiced men, for the countenance of their vain conceits and opinions,
will venture at any time to impose and fasten on the most precious Truths of
the Gospel; That God should say to Believers, as is imposed on him,, fall into
what sins they will, or abominations they can, yet he will have them believe,
that by an irresistible hand, he will necessitate them to Persevere; that is,
in and under their Apostasy, (which is evidently employed in their falling into
sins and abominations in the manner insisted on) is a ridiculous fiction, to
the imagination whereof the least color is not supplied, by the Doctrine
intended to be ^raduced thereby.

Secondly,. 4.
for the ensuing Exhortations, Promises, and Threatenings, as far as they are
really Evangelicall, whose use and tendency is argued to be inconsistent with
the Doctrine before proposed, I have formerly manifested. What is their proper
use and efficacy in respect of Believers, and their consistency with the truth
we maintain, apprehended as it is indeed, and not visarded with ugly and
dreadful appearances, will I presume scarcely be called in question by any,
who having received a Kingdom that cannot he shaken, do know what it is to
serve God acceptably with reverence and Godly fear; It is true, they are made
unto, and have their use in reference unto them that Believe, and shall
Persevere therein: but they are not given unto them, as men assured of their
Perseverance; but as men called to the use of means for the establishing of
their souls in the ways of obedience; They are not in the method of the
Gospel, irrationally happed on such intimations of unchangeable Love, or
proposed under such wild Conditionalls, and Suppositions, as here by our
Author; but annexed to the Appointment of those ways of Grace and Peace, which
God calls his Saints unto, being suited to work upon the new nature wherewith
they are endued, as spreading it self over all the facultyes of their
Rational Souls, wherein are Principles fit to be excited to Operation by
Exhortations and Promises.

Thirdly,. 5.
all that is indeed Argumentative in this Discourse is built on this
Foundation; that a Spiritual Assurance of attaining the end by the use of
means, is discouraging and disswasive to the use of those means; A
Proposition so uncouth in it self, so contradictory to the experience of all
the Saints of God, so derogatory to the Glory and Honor of Jesus Christ
himself, (who in all his Obedience had doubtless an Assurance of the end of it
all) as any thing that can well fall into the imaginations of the Hearts of
men; Might not the Devil have thus replied upon our Savior, when he tempted
him to turn Stones into Bread, and cast himself from a pinnacle of the Temple,
and received Answer that man lives not by Bread alone but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God but alas! thou Jesus the Son of the Living
God, that art persuaded thou art so, and that God will preserve thee, whether
thou usest any means or no, that thou shall never be starved for want of
Bread, nor hurt thy self by any fall, whatever thou clost, the Angels having
charge that no evil shall come nigh thee, nor thy foot be hurt against a
stone, thou may now cast thy self headlong from the Temple, to manifest thy
Assurance of the Love and Faithfulness of God with his Promises to thee; If
our Savior thought it sufficient to stop the mouth of the Devil, to manifest
from Scripture, that notwithstanding the Assurance from God that any one has
of the end, yet he is to use the means tending thereunto, (a neglect whereof
is a sinful tempting of God;) we shall not need to go farther for an Answer
to the same kind of Objections in the mouth of any Adversary whatever.

His 19th Section contains his fourth Argument,. 6.
in these words;

If there be no possibility of the Saints falling away finally, then is their
Persevering incapable of reward from God. But their final Perseverance is not
incapable of reward from God; Ergo, The minor Proposition I presume contains
nothing but what is the sense of those who deny the conclusion: or how ever it
contains nothing but what is the express sense of the Lord Christ, where he
says, that he that endures to the end, the same shall be saved; Therefore I
suppose we shall be excused from farther proof of this, without any prejudice
to the cause in hand.

Ans. I grant, Eternal Life may be called the Reward of Perseverance in the
sense that the Scripture uses that word, applied to the matter in hand; It is
afterward neither procured by (properly and Morally as the deserving cause) nor
proportioned unto the obedience of them by whom it is attained; a Reward it is,
that withal, is the free gift of God, and an Inheritance purchased by Jesus
Christ; a Reward of Bounty and not of Justice, in respect of them upon whom it
is bestowed, but only of faithfulness in reference to the promise of it. A
Reward, by being a gracious encouragement, as the end of our obedience, not as
the procurement or desert of it; so we grant it a Reward of Perseverance,
though those words of our Savior, he that endures to the end, the same shall
be saved, expressed a consequence of things only, and not a connection of
causality of the one upon the other: of the foundation of this discourse
concerning a possibility of declining, immediate consideration shall be had. He
proceeds then.

The consequence of the Major Proposition,. 7.
stands firm upon this foundation; No act of the Creature whereunto it is
necessitated, or which it cannot possibly decline, or but do, is by any Law of
God, or rule of Justice rewardable; therefore if the Saints be necessitated by
God to Persevere finally, so that he leaves unto them no possibility of
declining finally, their final Perseverance is not according to any Law of
God, or man, nor indeed to any principles of Reason or Equity, capable of
reward; no whit more than actions merely natural are: Nay of the two, there
seems be more reason why acts merely natural (as for example, Eating,
Drinking, Breathing, Sleeping,) should be rewarded, in as much as these flow in
a way of necessity, yet from an inward principle and connaturall to the Agent,
than such actions whereunto the agent is constrained, necessitated, and
determined, by a principle of power from without, and which is not intrinsecall
to it.

And this is the strength of the Argument which will quickly appear to be very
weakness. For

First the efficacy of these Expressions ( whereunto it is necessitated, and
from which they cannot possibly decline) as to their influence into this
Argument, arises clearly from their Ambiguity; we deny any to be necessitated
to Persevere, or that our Doctrine affirms any such thing taking that
expression to hold out a power upon their wills, in their operations,
inconsistent with the utmost liberty whereof in Spiritual things having
received a Spiritual principle) men are capable; They are not so necessitated
to Persevere as that all the Acts of their Obedience, whereby they do Persevere
should not be free, but necessary, indeed they are not at all, nor in any sense
necessitated to persevere: There is no Necessity attends their Perseverance,
but only in respect of the event, with reference to the Unchangeable purpose
and infallible Promise of God; the like may be said of that other expression (
possibility of declining,) God leaves in them a possibility of declining, as to
their way and manner of walking with him, though he leaves not to them a
possibility of declining or falling totally from him, as to the issue and event
of the whole matter, which does not in the least necessitate them to, or in any
of their operations.

Secondly,. 8.
the proposition must be cast into an other mould, before it will be of any
determinate signification in opposition to the Doct: it opposes, and tuned to
an other mood before it will give a certain sound to any battle against it;
and this is, that no Act of the Creature that is wrought in order to the
obtaining of any end promised to be certainly attained thereby, is rewardable
of God; (though for Perseverance it is not any act of the Creature, but only a
modus of its Obedience) and thus it looks toward the concernement of this
Doctrine; yet before this proposition pass, to omit sundry other things that
would gladly rise to the destruction of it, I desire one query may be assailed
concerning the Obedience of Jesus Christ, Whether it were not necessary that
the end of his Obedience should follow? and Whether it were not impossible he
should decline from his Obedience? And if it were, whether it were impossible
that God should give a Reward thereunto?

But thirdly,. 9.
the intendment of this Proposition, as far as it concerns us, (and that
indeed is with a respect to our Doctrine of the Efficacy of Grace, and not this
of Perseverance) is this, That which is wrought in us, by the Effectual Grace
of God is not capable of Reward from God; A Proposition which though capable of
some plea and color, taking Reward in a pure Legal sense; supposing the
Persons seeking after it, to do it by a service, and duties proportioned unto
it, yet is so openly and directly contradictory to the tenor and design of
God in the Covenant of Grace by Jesus Christ, with the whole dispensation of
the Spirit given to abide with Believers, for all the ends and purposes as to
their Obedience, as I shall content my self to deny it expecting M. Goodwin's
proofs of it; When rivers run backward, heavy things ascend etc.

Fourthly, for the flourish added to these Assertions, by comparing the acts of
the Saints Obedience upon a supposition of the Grace of God working them in
them, with their Natural actions of eating, drinking, sleeping as to their
tendency to exalt the Glory of God in rewarding, it proceeds either from
gross ignorance of the Doctrine opposed, or wilful prevaricating from that
Light of it which he has who ever taught that God's operations in and toward
Believers, as to their Perseverance in Faith and Obedience did consist in an
outward constraint of an unwilling principle. God gives a principle of
Obedience to them, he writes and implants his Law in their hearts, and moves
them effectually to act suitably to that inward principle they have so
received; which though Spiritual and Supernatural in respect of its rise and
manner of bestowing, yet is connaturall to the^ in respect of its being a
Principle of Operation; we are not then in the least beholding to our Author
for his following concession; That as a Prince may give great things to them
that eat and drink and breath, but not as rewards, so God may give Eternal
Life to them that are so necessitated by him to Persevere, though not as a
reward; For although we will not contend with God about Eternal Life; that he
give it us under the notion of a Reward, and desire to be much affected with
the Consideration of it, as a free gift of Grace, an eminent purchase of the
Blood of God, and look upon it merely as a Reward of bounty, so called as
being the end whereunto our Obedience is suited and the rest of our Labors,
yet we say, in an Evangelicall sense and acceptance, it is properly so
proposed to that Obedience and Perseverance therein, which is wrought in us by
the efficacy of the Grace of God, as it lies in a tendency unto that end, which
to be attained by those means, he has infallibly determined.

He proceeds therefore to enforce his Argument with a new Consideration.. 10.


If we speak of Rewards Promised in order to the mooving or inclining of the
wills of men toward such or such actions and ways, of which kind also the
Rewards mentioned in the Scriptures, as yet remaining to be conferred by God
upon men, are, the case is yet more clear, viz. That they are appropriate unto
such actions and ways, unto the Election and choice whereof men are not
necessitated in one kind or other; especially ^ot by any Physical or
foreign power; For to what purpose should a Reward be Promised unto me, to
Persuade or make me willing to engage in such or such a course, or to perform
such and such a service in case I be nessitated to the same engagement or
performance otherwise? Or what place is there left for a Moral inducement,
where a Physical necessity has done the execution^ or if the Moral
inducement has done the execution, and sufficiently raised and engaged the
will to the action, with what congruity of Reason, yea or common sense, can a
Physical necessity be superinduced.

Ans. What there is more in this than what went before, unless Sophystry and
Falsity, I see not. For first, though I conceive that Eternal Life is proposed
in the Scripture as our Reward rather upon the account of supporting and
chearing our Spirits in the deficiency's, Temptations, and intanglements
attending our Obedience, than directly to engage into Obedience (though
consequently it does that also) whereunto we have so many other unconquerable
engagements and inducements yet the consideration there of in that sense also,
as it moves the wills of men to Actions suitable to the attainement of it, is
very well consistent with the Doctrine in hand; That old Calumny an hundred
times repeated and insisted on in this contest, of our wills being necessitated
and deprived of their choice and Election, unless it could be tolerably made
good, will be of no use to M. Goodwin as to his present purpose. The whole
strength of this Argumentation, is built on this supposall. That the effectual
Grace of God in its working the will and deed in Believers, or the Spirits
doing of it by Grace, with Gods fore determination of events, does take away
the Liberty of the will inducing into it a necessary manner of Operation,
determining it to one, antecedently in order of time to its own determination
of it self, which is false and nowise inferred from the Doctrine under
Consideration. Yea as Gods Providentiall concurrence with men and determination
of their wills, to all their Actions as Actions is the Principle of all their
natural Liberty so his Gracious Concurrence with the^, or operations in the^
as unto Spiritual Effects, working in the^ to will, is the Principle of all
their true Spiritual Liberty: when the Son makes us free then are we free
indeed; the Reward then is proposed to an understanding enlightened, a will
quickened and made free by grace, to stir the^ up to actions suitable to them
who are in expectation of so bountiful a close of their Obedience: (which
actions are yet wrought in them by the Spirit of God, whose fruits they are)
and this to very good purpose, in the hearts of all that know what it is to
walk with God and to serve him in the midst of Temptations unless they are
under the power of some such particular error, as turns away their eyes from
believing the Truth.

Secondly,. 11.
The opposition here pretended between a Physical necessitating, and a Moral
inducement, for the producing of the same effect, is in plain terms intended
between the Efficacy of Gods internal grace, and the use of External
exhortations and motives; If God give an Internal Principle, or Spiritual
Habit, fitting for, inclining to spiritual actions and duties, if he follows
the work so begun in us, (who yet of our selves can do nothing, nor are
sufficient to think a good thought) with continual supplies of his Spirit and
Grace, working daily in us according to the exceeding greatness of his power,
the things that are well pleasing in his sight, then, though he work upon us,
as Creatures endued with Reason, Understandings, Wills, and Affections,
receiving glory from us according to the Nature he has endued us withal, all
Exhortations and Encouragements to Obedience required at our hands, are vain
and foolish; Now because we think this to be the very Wisdom of God, and the
opposition made unto it, to be a mere invention of Satan, to magnify corrupted
nature, and decry all the Efficacy of the Grace of the new Covenant, we must
have something besides, and beyond the naked Assertion of our Author, to cause
us once to believe it.

Thirdly, The great Execution that is made by Moral inducements solely,
without any internally efficacious grace, in the way of Gospel Obedience is
often supposed, but not once attempted to be put upon the proof or
Demonstration; It shall then suffice to deny that any persuasions, outward
motives or inducements whatever, are able of themselves to raise, engage, and
carry out the will unto Action, so that any good spiritual Action should be
brought forth on that account, without the effectual influence, and Physical
operation of internal grace; And M. Goodwin is left to prove it, together with
such other Assertions derogatory to the free Grace of God, Dogmatically imposed
upon his Reader in this Chapter, whereof some have been already remarked, and
others may in due time. The residue of this Section (the 13th) spent to prove
that Eternal Life is given as a Reward to Perseverance, having already
manifested the full consistency of the Proposition, in a Gospel acceptance of
the word Reward, with whatever we teach of the Perseverance of the Saints, I
suppose my self inconcerned in: And therefore passing by the triumphant
conclusion of this Argument asserting an Absolute power in men to exhibit or
decline from Obedience, I shall go on to that, which in my apprehension, is of
more importance, and will give occasion to a Disconrse, I hope, not unusefull
or unprofitable to the Reader; I shall therefore assign it a peculiar place
and Chapter to it self.

CAP. XV.
1. M* G's fifth Argument for the Apostasy of true Believers. 2. The weight of
this Argument taken from the sins of Believers. The difference between the sins
of Believers and unregenerate persons proposed to consideration. 3. lames 1.
14. 15. The rise and progress of Lust and Sin. 4. The fountain of all sin,
in all persons is Lust. Romans 7. 7. 5. Observations clearing the difference
between Begenerate and unregenerate persons in their sinning, as to the common
fountain of all sin: The first. 6. The second of the universality of Lust in
the soul by nature. 7. The Third, in two inferences: the first, unregenerate
men sin with their whole consent. 8. The Second inference concerning the
reign of sin, and reigning sin. 9. The Fourth, concerning the universal
possession of the Soul by renewing Grace. 10. The fifth, that true Grace bears
rule where ever it be. 11. Inferences from the former considerations. The
first, that in every regenerate person there are diverse principles of all
Moral operations. Rom 7. 19. 20. opened. 12. The second, that sin cannot
reign in a Regenerate person. 13. The third, that Regenerate persons sin not
with their whole consent. 14. Answer to the Argument at the entrance proposed.
Believers never sin with their whole consent and wills. 15. M. G's attempt
to remove the Answer. 16. His exceptions considered and removed. Plurality of
Wills in the same person in the Scripture sense: of the opposition between
flesh and spirit: that no Regenerate person sins with his full consent
proved. 17. Of the Spirit and his Lustings in us. 18. The Actings of the spirit
in us free, not suspended on any conditions in us. 19. The same farther
manifested. 20. M. G's discourse of the first and second motions of the spirit
considered. 21. The same considerations farther carried on. 22. Peter Martyrs
Testimony considered* 23. Romans 7. 19. 20. considered. 24. Difference between
the opposition made to sin in persons Begenerate, and that in persons
unregenerate farther argued. 25. Of the sense of Romans 7. and in what sense
Believers do the works of the flesh. 26. The close of these considerations.
27. The Answer to the Argument at the entrance of the Chapter opened. The
Argument new formed: the Major Proposition limited, and granted, and the Minor
denied. 28. The proof of the Major considered. Gal. 5. 21. Ephesians. 5. 5. 6. 1
Cor: 6. 9. 10. 29. Believers how concerned in comminations. 30. Threatening
proper to unbelievers for their sins. 31. Farther objections proposed and
removed. 32. Of the progress of Saints intempting to sin. 33. The effect of
Lust in tem ptations. 34. Difference between Regenerate and unregenerate
persons as to the tempting of Lust, (1.) in respect of universality, (2.) of
Power. 35. Objections Answered. 36. Whether Believers sin only out of
infirmity 37. Whether Believers may sin our of Malice, and with deliberation.
38. Of the stare of Believers, who upon their sin may be excommunicated. 39.
40. Whether the Body of Christ may be dis^^embred. What body of Christ it is
that is intended. 41. Mr G. thoughts to this purpose examined 42 M. G.
discourse of the way whereby Christ keeps or may keep his members examined. 43.
Members of Christ cannot become members of Satan: 1 Cor. 6. 15. considered. 44.
of the sense and use of the word (...). 45. Christ takes Members out of the
power of Satan, gives up none to him. 46. Repetition of Regeneration asserted
by the Doctrine of Apostasy. 47. The Repetition disproved. 48. M.G. notion of
Regeneration examined at large and rebuked. 49. Relation between God and his
Children indissoluble. 50. The farther progress of Lust for the production of
sin, it draws often, and entangles: drawing away what it is. 51. The distance
between Regenerate and unregenerate persons in their being drawn away by Lust.
52. Farther description of him who is drawn away by Lust: and of the difference
formerly mentioned. 53. Of Lusts enticing. 54. How far this may be fall
regenerate men. To do sin Romans 7. what it intends. 55. Lusts conceiving,
wherein it consists. 56. Of the bringing forth of sin, and how far the
Saints of God may proceed therein. 57. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. opened: the scope of the
place discovered: 58. Vindicated. 59. The words farther opened. The proposition
in the words universal: inferences from thence (...) 60. The subject of that
Proposition considered, every one that is borne of God, what is affirmed of
them: what meant by committing of sin. 61. M. G. opposition to the sense of
that expression given. Reasons for the confirmation of it. 62. M. G. Reasons
against it, proposed and considered. 63. The farther Exposition of the word
carried on: How he that is borne of God cannot sin: several kinds of
impossibility. 64. M. G. attempt to Answer the Argument from this place. 65.
Particularly examined. 66. The Reasons of the Proposition in the Text
considered: of the seed of God abides: the nature of that seed, what it is,
wherein it consists. 6^. Of the abiding of this seed. 68. Of the latter part of
the Apostles Reason, he is borne of God: our Argument from the words. 69. M. G.
endeavor to evade that Argument: his exposition of the words removed. 70.
Farther of the meaning of the word abides. 71. The Close.

MR Goodwin's Fifth Argument for the Saints Apostasy,. 1.
is taken from the Consideration of the sins which they have fallen into, or
possibly may so do, and it is thus proposed. Sect. 20.

They who are in a capacity, or possibility of perpetrating the works of the
flesh, are in a possibility of perishing, and consequently in a possibility of
falling away, and that finally from the Grace and favor of God, in case they
be in an estate of this Grace and Favor at the present; But the Saints, or
true Believers are in a possibility of perpetrating the works of the flesh,
and therefore also they are in a possibility of perishing, and so of falling
away from the Grace and Favor of God, wherein at present they stand. The Major
Proposition of this Argument, to wit, They who are in a possibility of
perpetrating, or customarily acting the works of the Flesh, are in a
possibility of perishing, is clearly proved from all such Scriptures which
exclude all workers of iniquity, and fulfillers of the Lusts of the flesh from
the Kingdom of God; of which sort are many; Of the which says the Apostle,
speaking of the Lusts of the flesh, Adultery, Fornication, etc. I tell you, as
I have also told you in times past, that they who do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; so again, For this ye know, that no Whoremonger
or unclean person, nor Covetous man, who is an Idolator, has any Inheritance
of the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words,
for because of these things comes the wrath of Cod upon the Children of
disobedience. yet again, know ye not that the nnrighteous shall never inherit
the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters shall
inherit the Kingdom of God; from such passages as these, which are very
frequent in the Scriptures, it is as clear as the light of the Sun at
noonday, That they who may possibly commit such sins as those specified,
Adultery, Fornication, Idolatry, may as possibly perish and be for ever
excluded the Kingdom of God.

Ans.. 2.
Because of all Arguments whatever used against the Truth we assert, this
seems to me to wear the best colors on its back, and to have its face best
painted viz. with that plea of the Inconsistency of sin with the Favor and
acceptance of God seeming to have a tendency to caution Believers in their
ways and walkings, to be more careful in watching against Temptations, I
shall more largely insist on what the Lord has been pleased to reveal
concerning the sins and failings of such as he is yet pleased to accept in a
covenant of Mercy, whom though he chastens and sorely rebukes, yet he gives not
their Souls over unto death, nor takes his Loving kindness from them forever;
now because the inside and strength of this Objection, consists in a comparison
instituted between the sins of Believers, and the sins of unregenerate
Persons, which being laid in the balance are found of equal burdensomenes
unto God, and therefore are in expectance of a like Reward from him, I shall in
the first place, before I come in particular to answer the Argument proposed,
manifest the difference that is between Regenerate persons, and Unregenerate in
their sinning, and consequently also between their sins, wherein such
principles shall be laid down and proved, as may with an easy Application
remove all that is added in the farther carrying on, and endeavored
vindication of the Argument in hand.

A foundation of this discourse we have laid in James. 1. 14. 15.: 3.
Put every man is tempted, says the Holy Ghost, when he is drawn away of his
own Lust, and enticed; Then when Lust has conceived, it brings forth sin,
and sin when it is finished, brings forth death. The Holy Ghost discovers
the fountain of all sin, and pursues it in the streams of it into the dead
sea, whereinto it falls; All sin whatever, is from temptation, that which
tempts to sin is the cause of it, and that which tempts to all sin is the
cause of all sin; This Fountain of sin is here Discovered, the principle,
proper, criminal cause of sin, in the beginning of the 14. verse. The
Adversative but, is exclusive of any other faulty cause of sin, that should
principally fall under our Consideration, especially of God, of whom mention
was made immediately before; now this is affirmed to be every man's lust. The
general way and means that this Original of all sin uses for the
production of it is also discovered, and that is Temptation: every man's own
lust tempts him; The progress also it makes in carrying on of sin whereunto it
tempts is farther described in the several parts and degrees of it. 1. It
draws away and intices, and the persons toward whom it exerts this efficacy,
are drawn away or enticed. 2. It conceives, Lust conceives, the subject being
prepared, answering its drawing away and enticing, without more ado, it
conceives sin, and then it brings it forth into Action; that is, either into
open perpetration, or deliberate determination of its accomplishment, and then
it finisheth sin, or comes up to the whole work that sin tends to:
Whereuuto is subjoyned the dismal end and issue of this progress of sin
which is Death; Eternal Death is in the womb of finished sin and will be
brought forth by it.

This being the progress of sin from the first Rise which is Lust, to the last
end which is Death the way and path that the best and most refined Unregenerate
men in the world do never thoroughly forsake, though they may sometimes step out
of it, or be stopped in it, a way wherein who ever walks to the end, may be sure
to find the end. I shall consider the several particulars laid down, and show
in them all at least the most material, the difference that is between
Believers and Unbelievers, whilst they do walk or may walk in this path, and
then manifest where, and when all Saints break out of it forever; so that they
come not to the close thereof; and therein shall give a full Answer unto the
whole strength and design of the Argument in hand, which consists as was
said in a comparison instituted between the sins and demerits of Believers, and
Unbelievers.

1. The Fountain,. 4.
principle and cause of all sin whatever in all persons whatever is Lust, every
ones own Lust is the cause of his own sin; This is the mother, womb, and
fomes of sin, which Paul says he had not been acquainted withal but by the
Law, Romans 7. 7. Nay I had not known sin but by the Law, for I had not known
Lust except the Law had said thou shall not Covet; That which in the entrance
he calls sin indefinitely, in the close he particularly terms Lust; as being
the hidden secret cause of all sin, and which once discovered swallows up
the thoughts of all other sin, it being altogether in vain to deal with them,
or to set a man's self in opposition to them, whilst this sinful womb of them
is alive and prevalent; this is that which we call Original sin, as to that
part of it which consists in the universal alienation of our hearts from God,
and unconquerable, habitual, natural inclination of them to every thing that
is evil; for this sin works in us all manner of concupiscence Romans 7. 8.
This I say is the womb, cause, and principle of sin, both in Believers and
Unbelievers; The Root on which the bitter fruit of it does grow where ever it
is; no man ever sins but it is from his own lust. And in this there is an
agreement between the sins of Believers, and others, they are all from the
same Fountain, yet not such an agreement but that there is a difference herein
also; for the clearing whereof observe.

First that by nature this Lust,. 5.
which is the principle of sin, is seated in all the facultyes of the Soul,
receiving diverse Appellations according to the variety of the subjects wherein
it is; and is sometimes expressed in terms of Privation, Want and Deficiency,
sometimes by Positive inclination to evil. In the Understanding it is
Blindness, Darkness, Giddiness, Folly, Madness. In the Will Obstinacy and
Rebellion. In the Heart and Affections, Pride, Stubbornenesse, Hardness,
Sensuality: In all Negatively and Privatively, Death: Positively, Lust,
Corruption, Flesh, Concupiscence, Sin, the Old man, and the like; There is
nothing in the soul of a man that has the least influence into any Action as
Moral, but it is wholly possessed with this depraved vicious habit, and exerts
it self always, and only, in a suitableness thereunto.

Secondly thar this Lust has so taken possession of men by Nature, that in
reference to any Spiritual Act or duty they are nothing else but Lust and
Flesh;. 6.
that which is borne of the flesh is flesh, John 3. 6. It is all so, it is all
Spiritual Flesh; That is, it is wholly and habitually corrupt, as to the doing
any thing that is good. If any thing in a man might seem to be exempted, it
should be his mind the seat of all those things which are commonly called the
Relickes of the Image of God, but that also is flesh as the Apostle at large
Asserts it Romans 8. and enmity to God; Neither is it of any weight, which is
Objected. That there is in Unregerate men, the knowledge of the Truth which
they retain in ungodliness, Romans 1. 18. Conscience accusing, and excusing Rom
2. 14. The knowledge of sin which is by the Law with sundry other endowments
which they say doubtless are not flesh. I Answer, they are all flesh, in the
sense that the Scripture uses that word; The Holy Ghost speaks of nothing in
man, in reference unto any duty of Obedience unto God, but it is either Flesh
or Spirit, these two comprehend every man in the world; every man is either in
the flesh, or in the Spirit, Romans 8. The utmost improvement of all natural
facultyes whatever, the most complete subjection whereunto they are brought by
convictions yet leaves the same impotency in them to Spiritual good, as they
were borne withal the same habitual inclination to sin, however entangled
and hampered from going out to the Actual perpetrating of it; neither are they
themselves any thing the better, nor has God any thing of that Glory by them,
which arises from the willing Obedience of his Creatures.

Thirdly,. 7.
it being the state of every man's proper Lust, which is the Fountain of all
sin, two things will follow.

First, That in whomsoever it is, in its compass and power as above described,
as' it is in every unregenerate Man, how ever convinced of sin, he sins with
his full and whole consent; all that is within him consents to every sin he
commits; Unregenerate men sin with their whole hearts and souls. In every
act their carnal minds are not, will not be subject to the Law of God; their
wills and all their Affections delight in sin; and this because there is no
principle in them, that should make any opposition to sin, I mean such a
spiritual opposition, as would really take off from their full consent; It is
true Conscience repines, witnesses against sin, reprooves, rebukes, excuses
or causes; but Conscience is no real principle of operation, but either a
Judge of what is done, or to be done, or a moral inducer to doing or not
doing; and whatever Conscience does, however it tumultuate, rebuke, chide,
persuade, trouble, cry, and the like, whatever conviction of the guilt of sin
may show into the judgment, yet sin has the consent of the whole soul.
Every thing that has a real influence into operation, consents thereto,
originally and radically, how ever any principle may be dared by Conscience. To
take off any thing from full consent, there must be something of a spiritual
Repugnancy in the mind and will, which when Lust is thus enthroned, there is
not.

Secondly, That sin reigns in such persons, Many have been the inquiries of
Learned men about reigning of sin. As What sins may be said to reign,. 8.
and what not? Whether sins of ignorance may reign, as well as sins
against knowledge? What little sins may be said to reign, as well as great?
Whether frequent relapses into any sin, prove that sin to be reigning?
Whether sin may reign in a Regenerate person? Or whether a Saint may fall
into reigning sin, whereabout Divines of great note and name have differed;
all upon a false bottom and supposall; The Scripture gives no ground for any
such inquiries or disputes, or Cases of Conscience, as some men have raised
hereupon: And indeed I would this were the only instance, of men's creating
Cases of Conscience, and answering them, when indeed, and in truth, there are
no such things; so insnaring the Consciences of Men, and intangling more by
their Cases, than they deliver by their Resolutions; The truth is, there is no
mention of any reigning sin, or the Reigning of any sin in the whole Book
of God, taking sin for this or that particular sin; But of the Reign of
this Indwelling original Lust, or fountain of all finne there is frequent
mention. Whilst that holds its power and universality in the soul, and is not
restrained, nor straightened by the Indwelling spirit of grace, with a new vital
principle of no less extent, and of more power than it, be the Actual sins
few or more, known or unknown, little or great, all is one; sin reigns,
and such a person is under the power and dominion of sin: so that in plain
terms, to have finne reign, is to be unconverted: and to have sin not to
reign is to be converted, to have received a new principle of Life from above;
This is evident from the 5. and 6. Chapter of the Epist. to the Romans, the
seat of this Doctrine of reigning sin; The opposition insisted on by the
Apostle is between the Reign of Sin and Grace, and in pursuit thereof he
manifests how true Believers are tanslated from the one to the other. To have
sin reign is to be in a state of sin; to have Grace reign, is to be in a
state of Grace. So Chapter 5. 21. %As sin reigned unto death, so Grace
reigns through Righteousness unto eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord; The
sin he speaks of is that whereof he treates in all that Chapter; the sin
of Nature, the Lust whereof we speak, this by nature reigns unto Death, but
when Grace comes by Jesus Christ, the soul is delivered from the power
thereof, so in the whole 6. Chap. It is our change of state and Condition that
the Apostle insists on in our delivery from the reign of sin, and he tells
us, this is that that destroys it, our being under Grace v: 14. Sin shall
not have dominion over you because you are not under the Law, but under Grace;
Plainly then there are two Lords and Rulers, and these are Original or
Indwelling sin and Grace or the Spirit of it; The first Lord the Apostle
discovers with his entrance upon his Rule and Dominion, Chap. 5. and this all
men by nature are under; The second he describes Chap. 6. which sets out the
Rule and reign of Grace in Believers by Jesus Christ. And then

Thirdly the place that both these Lords have in this life in a Believer, Cap.
7. This then is the only reigning sin and in whomsoever it is in its power and
compass as it is in all unregenerate men, in them, and in them only does sin
reign, and every sin they commit is with full consent, (as was manifested
before) in exact willing Obedience to the sovereign Lord that reigns in them.

Fourthly,. 9.
observe that the Grace, new Creature, Principle or Spiritual Life that is
Given to, bestowed on, and wrought in all, and only Believers, be it in the
lowest and most remiss degree that can be imagined, is yet no less
universally spread over the whole soul, than the contrary habit and principle
of Lust and sin, whereof we have spoken; In the Understanding it is Light in
the Lord, in the Will Life, in the Affections Love, Delight, etc. those being
reconciled, who were alienated by wicked works. Where ever there is any thing,
the least of grace, there something of it is in every thing of the soul, that
is a capable seat for good or evil habits, or dispositions; He that is in
Christ is a new creature, 2 Cor: 5. 17. not renewed in one or other particular,
he is a new Creature.

Fifthly, that where ever true Grace is, in what degree soever,. 10.
there it bears Rule; though sin be in the same subject with it; As sin
reigns before grace comes, so Grace reigns when it does once come: And the
reason is, because sin having the first Rule, and Dominion in the heart,
abiding there, there is neither Room nor place for Grace, but what is made by
conquest. Now who ever enters into a possession by right of Conquest, what
resistance soever be made, if he prevail to a Conquest, he reigns. In every
regenerate man, though Grace be never so weak, and Corruption never so strong,
yet properly the Sovereignty belongs to Grace. Having entered upon the soul,
and all the powers of it by Conquest so long as it abides there, it does
reign; So that to say a Regenerate man may fall into reigning sin, as it is
commonly expressed, (though as we have manifested no sin reigns, but the sin
of Nature, as no good Act reigns, but the spirit and habit of Grace) and yet
continue Regenerate, is all one as to say, he may have, and not have true Grace
at the same time.

Now from these considerations,. 11.
some farther inferences may be made; First, That in every regenerate person,
there are in a spiritual sense, two Principles of all his actings: Two Wills;
There is the Will of the Flesh, and there is the Will of the Spirit; a
Regenerate man is spiritually, and in Scripture expression two men, a new man,
and an old: an inward man and a body of Death; and has two Wills, having two
Natures, not as Natural faculties, but as Moral principles of operation; and
this keeps all his actions as Moral, from being perfect, absolute, or
complete in any kind. He does good with his whole heart upon the account of
sincerity, but he does not good with his whole heart upon the account of
perfection; and when he does evil, there is still a non-submitting, an
unconsenting principle; this the Apostle complains of, and declares, Romans 7.
19. 20. The good that I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not, that
do I; now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwelles in me; I find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is
present with me; For I delight in the Law of God after the inward man: There
is an [I] and an [I] at opposition, a will and not willing; a doing and not
doing; a delighting and not delighting, all in the same person; so that there
is this difference at the entrance, between what sin soever of Regenerate
persons, and others, though the principle of sinning be the same for the kind
and nature of it, in them and others; all sin, every man's sins, be who he
will be, believer or unbeliever, being tempted by his own Lust: yet that Lust
possesses the whole soul, and takes in the vertuall consent of the whole man,
notwithstanding the controwle and checks of conscience, the light of the
judgment, in him that is unregenerate; but in every Regenerate person, there
is an unconsenting principle, which is as truly the man himself, that does not
concur in sin, that does expressly dissent from it, as the other is, from
whence it flows.

Secondly,. 12.
That sin neither can, does, nor ever shall reign in Regenerate Persons. The
reason of this I acquainted you with before, and the Apostle thinks this a
sufficient proof of this assertion, because they are under grace. Romans 7. 14.
Whilst the principle of Grace abides in them, which reigns where ever it be,
or the free acceptance of God in the Gospel is toward them, it is impossible
upon the account of any actual sin whatever, whereinto they may fall, that
sin should reign in them: nothing gives Sin a Reign and dominion, but a
total defect of all true grace whatever, not only as to the exerting it self,
but as to any habitual relicts of it; It may be overwhelmed sometimes with
Temptations and corruptions, but it is Grace still, as the least spark of fire
is fire, though it should be covered with never so great an heap of ashes, and
it reigns then.

Thirdly, That Regenerate persons sin not with their whole and full consent,.
13.
Consent may be taken two ways; First Morally, for approbation of the thing
done; so the Apostle says, that in the inward man, he did consent to the Law,
that it was good. Romans 7. 16. that is, he did approve it as such, like it,
delight in it as good; and thus a Regenerate man never consents to sin; no
nor unregenerate persons neither, unless they are such as being past feeling
are given up to work lasciviousness with greediness; a Regenerate person is
so far from thus consenting to sin, that before it, in it, after it, he
utterly condemns, disallowes, hates it as in himself, and by himself
committed. Secondly, Consent may be taken in a Physical sense, for the
concurrence of the commanding, and acting principles of the soul unto its
operations: and in this sense an unregenerate man sins with his full consent,
and his whole will; a Regenerate man does not, cannot do so; For though there
is not in that consent to sin, which his will, inclined by the remaining
disposition of sin in it, does give, an actual sensible Reaction of the
other principle, yet there is an express, not consenting; and by the power
that it has in the soul, (for habits have power in, and over the Subjects
wherein the are) it preserves it from being wholly engaged into sin; and this
is the great intendment of the Apostle, Romans 7. 19 20. 21. 22.

From what has been spoken will easily appear what Answer may be given to the
former Argument, to wit, That notwithstanding any sins that either the
Scripture or the experience of men, do evince that the Saints may fall into,
yet that they never sin or perpetrate sin with their full and whole
consent, whereby they should be looked upon, in and under their sins, in the
same state and condition with unregenerate persons, in whom sin reigns,
committing the same sin, and how insufficient any thing produced by Mr
Goodwin in defense of the argument laid down at the entrance of this Chapter,
is to remove the Answer given unto it from Believers not sining with their
whole consent may easily be demonstrated; This he thus proposes.

Some to mainetaine this position, That all the sins of true Believers are
sins of infirmity, lay hold on this shield, such men, they say never sin
with their whole wills, or with full consent, therefore they never sin but
through infirmity; that they never sin with full consent, they conceive they
prove sufficiently from that of the Apostle, for the good that I would I do
not, but the evil that I would not that I do, Now if I do that I would not it
is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. I Answer, first that
the Saints cannot sin but with their whole wills or full consents is
undeniably proved by this consideration; viz. Because otherwise there should be
not only a plurality or diversity, but also a contrariety of wills in the same
person, at one and the same instant of time, viz. when the supposed act of
evil is produced, now it is an impossibility of the first evidence that there
should be a plurality of acts and these contrary one to the other in the same
subject or agent, at one or the same iustant of time; it is true between the
first movings of the flesh in a man toward the committing of the sin, and
the completing of the sin by an Actual and External patration of it, there
may be successively in him not only a plurality but even a contrariety of
Volitions or Motions of the will according to what the Scripture speaks
concerning the flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh; But when the flesh having prevailed in the combat, brings forth her
desire into act the Spirit cease from his act of Lusting; otherwise it would
follow that the flesh is greater and stronger in her lusting; than the Spirit
of God in his; and that when the flesh lusts after the perpetration of such
or such a sin, the Spirit as to the hindering of it lusts but in vain,
which is contrary to that of the Apostle, greater is he that is in you
(speaking as it is clear of the Spirit of God unto true Believers) than he that
is in the world, meaning Satan and all his Auxiliaries Sin, Flesh,
Corruption.

Ans. What we intend by the Saints not sinning with their whole wills has been
declared;. 16.
that there is not a consistency in the explanation we have given Mr Goodwin
asserts; because it would infer a plurality yea a contrariety of wills in the
same person at the same time; That there is a plurality yea a contrariety of
wills in the Scripture sense of the expression of the will of a man was before
from the Scripture declared; not a plurality of wills in a Physical sense, as
the will is a natural faculty of the soul, but in a Moral and Analogicall
sense as it is taken for a habit or principle of good or evil; The will is a
natural faculty, one nature has one will, in every Regenerate man there are
two natures, the new or divine, and the old or corrupted. In the same sense
there are in him two wills as was declared; But says he It is an impossibility
of the first evidence that there should be a plurality of Acts in the same
subject at the same time and these contrary one to another. But

1. If you intend acts in a Moral Consideration, unless you add about the
same Object which you do not, this Assertion is so far from any evidence of
truth that it is ridiculously false; May not the same person love God and hate
the Devil at the same time. But

2. How pass you so suddenly from a plurality of wills to a plurality of acts;
by the will we intend in the sense wherein we speak of it an habit, not any
act; i.e. The will as habitually invested with a new principle and not as
actually willing from thence, and by virtue thereof; Arminius from whom our
Author borrowes this Discourse fell not into this Sophystry, he tells you There
cannot be contrary wills or volitions about the same Act; But is it with M.G.
or Arminius an impossibility that there should be a mixed action partly
voluntary, and partly involuntary; actions whose principles are from without by
persuasion may be so, a man's throwing his goods in the Sea to save his own
life; Now the principles whereof we speak Flesh and Grace are internal and
contrary, and shall not the actions that proceed from a faculty wherein such
contrary principles have their residence, be partly voluntary, partly
involuntary.

3. But he tells you, That though there might be lusting of the Spirit against
the flesh before the act of sin, yet when it comes to the acting of it then
it cease and so the act is wrought with the whole will.

First though this were so, yet this does not prove but that the Action is mixed
and not absolutely and wholly voluntary; Mixed Actions are so esteemed from the
antecedent deliberation and dissent, though the will be at length prevailed
upon thereunto, and I have showed before that in the very action there is a
vertuall dissent, because of the opposite principle that is in the will. But

Secondly, How does it appear that the Spirit does not lust against the flesh
though not to a prevalency even in the exertion of the acts of sin; In every
good act that a man does, because evil is present with him, though the
prevalency be of the part of the Spirit, and the principle of Grace, yet the
flesh also with its lustings does always in part corrupt it; Thence are all
the spots, stains, and imperfections of the holy things and duties of the
Saints; and if the flesh in its lusting will immix it self with our good
Actions to their defilement and impairing why may not the Spirit in the ill,
not immix its self and its lustings threwith, but bear off from the full
influence of the will into them which otherwise it would have.

But says he If the spirit does not cease lusting before the flesh bring forth
the act of sin, then is the Spirit conquered by the flesh, contrary to that
of the Apostle, 1 John. 4. 4. %Stronger is he that is in you, than he that is
in the world. But

First, If from hence the flesh must be though and conceived to be stronger
than the Spirit, because it prevails in any act unto sin, notwithstanding the
contending of the Spirit, how much more must it be judged to prevail over it
and to conquer it if it cause it utterly to cease, and not to strive at all; He
that restraines an other that he shall not oppose him at all, has a greater
power than he who conquers him in his resistance; But why does Mr Goodwin fear
least the flesh should be asserted to be stronger in us than the Spirit? Is not
his whole design to prove that it is, or may be so, so much stronger and more
prevalent than it, that whereas it is confessed on all hands, that the Spirit
does never wholly conquer the flesh that it shall not remain in the Saints in
this life, yet that the flesh does wholly prevail over the Spirit and conquer
it to an utter expulsion of it, out of the hearts of them in whom it is.

Secondly, In the prevalency of the flesh, it is not the Spirit himself that
is conquered, but only some motions and actings of him in the heart; Now though
some particular actings and motions of his may not come out eventually unto
success yet if he generally bears Rule in the heart, he is not to be said
(even as in us and acting in us) not to be stronger than the flesh; He is, as
in us, on this account, said to be stronger than he that is in the world,
because notwithstanding all the opposition that is against us, he preserves us
in our state and condition of Acceptance with God and walking with him with an
upright heart in good works and duties for the most part, though sometimes the
flesh prevails unto sin, from which yet he recovers us by Repentance.

Thirdly, To speak a little to Mr Goodwin's sense; By the Spirits
insufficiency it is manifest from the Text urged and from what follows in the
same place, that he intends not a Spiritual vital principle in the will,
having its residence there, with its contrary principle the flesh (perhaps he
will grant no such thing) but the Spirit of God himself. How now does this
Spirit lust? Not formally doubtless, but by causing us so to do; and how does
it do that in Mr Goodwin's judgment? Merely by persuading of us so to do; so
that to have the flesh prevail against the Spirit, is nothing in his sense,
but to have sin prevail, and the motives of the flesh above the motives used
by the Spirit, which may be done, and yet the Spirit continue unquestionably
stronger than the flesh.

Fourthly, The sum is, If the Spirit and the flesh, Lust and Grace, may be
looked on as habitual qualityes and principles in the wills of the same persons
so that though a man has but one will, yet by reason of these contrary
qualityes, He is to be esteemed as two diverse principles of operation, it is
evident that having contrary inclinations continually, the will has in its
actings a Relation to both these principles, so that no sin is committed by
such an one with his whole will and full consent; That contrary qualityes in a
Remiss degree may be in the same subject is known, Lippis and Tonsoribus;
These adverse principles the Flesh and Spirit, are as those contrary qualityes
of the same subject; and the inclinations, yea and the elicite acts of the
will, are of the same nature with them; so that in the same act they may both
be working though not with equal efficacy. Notwithstanding any thing then said
to the contrary, it appears that in the sins which the Saints fall into,
they do not sin with their whole wills and full consent; which of it self is
a sufficient Answer to the foregoing Argument.

Sect. 25. contains a discourse,. 17.
too long to be imposed upon the Reader by a transcription: There are three
parts of it, the first rendering a Reason, whence it is, that if the Spirit be
stronger than the flesh, yet the flesh does often prevail in its lustings.

The second, The way of the Spirits return, to act in us after its motions
have been rejected.

The third endeavors a proof of the Proposition denied, That the Saints sin
with their full and whole consent, by the example of David.

For the first, he tells you, That the spirit acts not to the utmost efficacy
of its vigor and strength, but only when his preventing motions are
entertained: and Seconded, with a suitable concurrence in the hearts and wills
of men: through a deficiency, and neglect whereof, he is said to be grieved,
and quenched: i. e. to cease from other actings, or movings in men. This Truth,
is the ground of such, and such sayings, in the sayings of Paul: for if you
live after the flesh, ye shall dye: but if ye through the spirit, do mortify
the deeds of the Body, ye shall live: for as many as are led by the spirit of
God, they are the Sons of God, etc.

Ans. The Spirit here intended by M. Goodwin, is the Holy and Blessed spirit of
Grace. What his actings to the just efficacy of his vigor and strength are M.
Goodwin does not explain. nor indeed notwithstanding the seeming significacy
of that expression is able; It must be to act, either as much as he can, or as
much as he will. That the Holy Spirit in opposing sin, acts to the utmost
extent of his Omnipotency in any, I suppose will not be affirmed. If it be as
much as he will, then the sense is, he will not in such cases, act as much as
he will; what that signifies, we want some other expressive phrase to declare.
To let this pass; let us see in the next place, what his actings to this just
efficacy are suspended upon, it is them in cafe, his first preventing motions
be received, and seconded.

But then secondly; What are these first preventing motions of the spirit?. 18.
And what is it to entertain them with a suitable concurrence of the Will? For
the First, M. Goodwin tells us in this Section, they are motions of a cool and
soft inspiration; such clowdy expressions, in a thing of this moment, are we
forced to embrace: preventing motions of the spirit, are either Internal
Physical Acts in, with, and upon the Wills of men, working in them to will and
to do, (called preventing from the actings of the wills themselves) or they
are Moral insinuations, and persuasions to good, according to the Analogy of
the Doctrine M. Goodwin has espoused: it is the latter only, that are here
intended. The preventing motions of the spirit, are his Moral persuasions of
the Will, to the good proposed to its consideration.

See then in the next place, what it is to second, and entertane these motions
with a suitable concurrence in the heart and Will; Now this must be, either to
yield Obedience to these motions, and to do the good persuaded unto, or
something else; if any thing else, we desire to know of M. Goodwin, what it is,
and wherein it consists; if it be to do the good persuaded too, then what
becomes (I pray you) of those subsequent Helps, which are suspended upon this
obedience, when the thing it self is already performed, which their help and
assistance is required unto: They may well be called subsequent motions, which
are never used nor applied, but when the things, whereunto they move, and
provoke, are before hand accomplished and performed, yea they are suspended on
that condition.

Farther wherein do these subsequent helps as it is expressed, which move at a
more high, and glorious rate consist? We have had it sufficiently argued
already to a thorough conviction of what is Mr Goodwins judgment in this
matter; viz. That he acknowledges no operations in, or upon the wills of men,
but what are Moral, by the way of persuasion; contending to the utmost
efficacy of his vigor, and strength in disputing; that there is an
inconsistency between Physical internal operations, in or upon the Will of
men, and Moral exhortations, or persuasions, as to the production of the same
effect; This then is the frame of this fine Discourse. If upon the Spirits
first persuasion to good, men yield Obedience and do it accordingly, the Spirit
will then with more power, and vigor, move them when they have done it, and
persuade them to do it; That this discourse of his does readily administer
occasion, and advantage to retort upon him his third Argument formerly
considered, of imposing incoherent and inconsistent reasonings, and actings
upon God in his dealings with men, the intelligent Reader will quickly find
out; and it were an easy thing to erect a Theater, and upon Mr Goodwins
principles, to personate the Almighty, with an incongruous, and incoherent
discourse; but we fear God.

Thirdly, That the Spirit is grieved with the sins of Believers, and their
walking unworthily of, or not answerable to, the grace they have received, is
clear. ( Ephesians 4. 31.) The Apostle admonishes Believers to abstain from
the sins he there enumerates, and consequently others of the like import,
having put on, and learned Christ, unto sanctification, that they do not
grieve the Spirit, from whom they have received that great mercy, and
privilege of being sealed to the day of Redemption; But that therefore the
subsequent and more effectual motions of the spirit, are not free as the
first, but supended on our performance of that, which he first moves unto, and
so consequently, that there is neither first our second motion of the Spirit,
but may be rendered useless, and fruitless, or be for ever prevented, is an
Argument not unlike that of the Papists, Peter feed my sheep, therefore the
Pope is head of the Church.

The ensuing discourse also is not to be passed without a little
Animadversion;. 20.
thus then he proceeds. Believers (says he) do then mortify the deeds of the
body by the spirit, when they join their Wills unto his, in his preventing
motions of grace, and so draw, and obtain farther strength, and assistance
from him, in order to the great, and difficult work of mortification, in
respect of which concurrence also with the spirit in his first, and more gentle
applications of himself to them, they are said to be led by the Spirit, as in
their comportments with him, in his higher, and farther application, they
become filled with the spirit, according to the expression of the Apostle, Be
ye filled with the spirit, i.e. follow the spirit close in his present motions,
and suggestions within you, and you shall be filled with him, i.e. ye shall
find him moving and assisting you upon all occasions at a higher and more
glorious rate.

Ans. First, what this joining of our Wills of the spirit is, was in part
manifested before; The Will of the spirit is, that we be mortified. His motions
hereunto are his persuasions, that we be so; To join our Wills to his, is in
our Will, to answer the Will of the spirit; that is, upon the spirits motions
we mortify our selves. By this also (he tells us) we draw or obtain farther
strength, or assistance from the spirit, for that work which we have done
already; but how so? why he tells you afterward, that this is the Law of the
Spirit: It seems then, that by doing one thing, we obtain or procure the
assistance of the spirit for another, and that by a Law; I ask by what Law? by
the Law of works? by that Law the Apostle tells you, that we do not at all
receive the spirit, therefore by a parity of Reason, we obtain not any farther
supplies from him, by that Law; By the Law of Faith, or Grace? that Law knows
nothing of such terms, as that we should by any acting of ours, procure the
Holy Spirit of God, which he freely bestows, according to the maine tenor of
that Law. Farther; How is this second grace obtained, and what is the Law of
the Spirit therein? is it obtained ex congruo, or ex condigno? produce the Rule
of Gods proceeding with his Saints, or any of the sons of men, in the matter
of any gracious behovement of his, and you will out-doe what ever your
Predecessors, whether Pelagians, Papists, Arminians, or Socinians, could yet
attain unto. Our Lord has told us, that without him we can do nothing: yea
all our sufficiency is of God, and without him we cannot think a good thought;
that he works in us to will and to do; not only beginning, but perfecting
every good work, fulfilling in us, all the good pleasure of his goodness, and
the work of Faith with power, ascribing the whole of the great work of
Salvation to Himself, and his Holy Spirit, working freely and graciously, as
he wills, and pleases; Of this order of his dealing with men, that his first,
or preventing Grace should be free, but his subsequent Grace procured by us,
and bestowed on us, according to our working, and cooperation with his first
grace, invented by Pelagius, Iulianus, and Celastinus, and here introduced a
new by M. Goodwin, he informs us nothing at all. In brief, this whole
discourse, is the mere Pelagian figment, wrapped up in general clowdy
expressions, with allusions to some Scripture Phrases (which profane, as well
as erring spirits are prone to) concerning the bestowing of the Grace of God,
according to the differing deportments, and deservings of men, differencing
themselves from others, and in comparison of them, holding out, what they have
not received.

But Secondly,. 21.
to Answer the first and gentle motions of the spirit, is to be led by him, and
then we shall be filled by the spirit; But how does M. Goodwin prove, that to
be led by the spirit, is to answer his first gentle motions, and thereby to
obtain his farther, and more glorious actings and persuasions? Is it safe,
thus to make bold with the word of God? or is not this to wrest it, as
ignorant, and unstable men do unto perdition? Saints, being led by the spirit
of God, and walking after the spirit, are in Rom: 8. expressions of that
Effectual sanctification exerting it self in their conversation, and walking
with God, which the spirit of God works in them, and which is their duty, to
come up unto, in opposition to living, or walking after the flesh. If this now
be attained, and the Saints come up unto it, antecedently to the subsequent
Grace of the Spirit, what is that subsequent grace, which is so gloriously
expressed, and wherein does it consist? Neither does that expression of led by
the Spirit, hold out the concurrence, or comportment of their Wills, as it is
phrased, with the gentle motion of the spirit, but the powerful and effectual
Operation of the spirit, as to their Holiness, and walking with God; (...), is
not, they comport, or concur with the Spirit in his motions, but by the
spirit, they are acted, and carried out to the things of God: Neither has this
any relation to, or coherence with that of the Ephesians 5. 18. %Be filled with
the spirit, neither is there any such intendment in the expression, as is here
intimated of a promise of receiving more of the spirit, on condition of that
compliance, concurrence, and comportance with his motions, as is intimated.
That the spirit is sometimes taken for his Graces, sometimes for his Gifts,
habitually, sometimes for his actual operations, is known; The Apostle in that
place dissuading the Ephesians from turning aside to such carnal, sinful
Refreshments, as men of the world went out unto, bids them, not be drunk with
Wine, wherein is excess, but to be filled with the Spirit: to take their
refreshment in the joys of the spirit, speaking to themselves in Psalms and
Hymns and spiritual Songs, v. 20. Could I once imagine that M. Goodwin had
the least thought, that indeed there was any thing in the Scripture, looking
toward his intendment in the producing of it, I should farther manifest the
mistake thereof; To play thus with the word of God, is a liberty we dare not
make use of yet.

Thirdly he concludes That the reason why Believers are overcome by the
Lustings of the flesh is not because the Spirit is not stronger than the flesh,
but because men have more will to harken to the Lusts of the Flesh, than to the
Spirit.

Fortunam Priami cantabo, and nobile bellum.

This is the issue of all the former swelling Discourse, men's sins are from
their own wills, and not because the Spirit is not stronger than the flesh;
And who ever doubted it, the Conclusion you were to prove, is, That Believers
sin with their whole will and full consent of their wills, and that the new
principle that is in them, does not cause their wills to decline from acting in
sin to the just efficacy of all their strength and vigor; But of this (...),
for the insinuation in that expression of the Will hearkening to the lusts of
the flesh, and not the lusting of the Spirit, in a sovereigne indifferency to
both, and a liberty for the performance of either, in a way exclusive of good,
or vicious habitual Principles of operation in the will it self, I shall not
now divert to the consideration of.

What else remains in this Section,. 22.
either does not concern the business in hand, as the fine notions of the
Spirits return to move Believers when his motions have been rejected, with the
manner, whereof according to his conception, must be afterward considered
apart, as the fall of David into Adultery and Murder; if there be need to go
forth to the consideration of his examples and instances: and therefore I shall
not longer insist upon it; only the close of it consisting of an inference made
from some words of Peter Martyr deserves consideration; Upon David's sin
(says he) Peter Martyr, makes this observation, That the Saints themselves
being once fallen into sin, would always remain in the pollution of it, did
not God by his mighty Word bring them out of it; which saying of Martyr
clearly also implies that the Saints many times sin with their whole wills
and full consents, because were any part of their wills bent against the
commiting of the sin at the time, when it is committed, they would
questionless return to themselves and repent immediately after the beat and
violence of the Lust being over, by reason of the satisfaction that has been
given thereunto.

Ans. The close insinuation in Peter Martyr's words, of the Saints sinning with
their whole wills, and the Logic of Mr Goodwin's inference from them I
believe is very much hidden from the Reader; To the Theology of it, I say, that
the Saints (...), do immediately return to God by Repentance, (as Peter did)
upon their surprisalls into sin; nor have they any rest in a condition, of
the Eclipse of the countenance of God from them, as upon sin it is always
more or less; of David's particular case, mention may afterward be made; But
the proof, that they sin with their whole wills and full consent because
they would continue in sin, did not the Lord relieve and deliver them by his
word and Grace, is admirable; I would adventure to cast this Argument into as
many shapes, as it is tolerably capable of, had I the least hope to cause it to
appear any way Argumentatives; we deny then that Believers have any such power
habitually residing in them, as whereby without any new supplies of the Spirit
or concurrence of actual Grace; they can effectually and eventually recover
themselves from any sin whatever; Which supplies of the Spirit, and Grace, we
say and have proved are freely promised to them in the covenant of Graces; But
what will here follow to the supportment of Mr Goodwin's Hypothesis, that
therefore in all their sins or in any of their sins, they sin with the
full and whole consent of their wills, I suppose he alone knows.

Sect.. 23
26. He endeavoures to take off that of the Apostle Romans 7. 19, 20. from
appearing against him in this cause of the Saints finning with their whole
wills and consents; not not-willing the things they do, to this end he tells us
That when the Apostle says the evil which I would not that I do, his meaning
is not that he did that which at the same time, that he did it, he was not
willing either in whole or in part to do, but that he sometimes did that upon a
surprisall by temptation or through incogitancy, which he was not habitually
willing or disposed in the inward man to do; But this no ways implies but that
at the time when he did the evil he speaks of, he did it with the full and
entire consent of his will.

Ans. 1. It is probable the Apostle knew his own meaning, and also how to
express it, having so good a teacher to that end and purpose as he had; now he
assures us in the person of a Regenerate man that as what He would He did not,
so what He did He would not, He hated it v. 15, 16. And again he did that
which he would not, and therein consented to the Law by his not willing of that
he did) that it was good; which whether it express not a Renitency of the
will, to that which was done in part, and so far as to make the Action it
self remiss and not to enwrappe the whole consent of the will, he farther
declares v. 17. telling us that there is a perfect unconsenting I, or internal
principle in the very doing of evil; Is is no more I that do it, but sin
that dwells in me.

2. The Apostle does not say, what he was not habitually willing to, but what
he was habitually unwilling to; that is, what the bent of his will lay
habitually against, having actual inclinations, and elicite acts always to
the contrary, though sometimes overcome; Neither in his discoursing of it, does
he mention at all the surprisall of sin upon incogitancy, and inadvertency but
the constant frame and temper of a regenerate man, upon the powerful acting,
and striving of the principle of lust and sin dwelling in him, and remaining
with him; which says the Apostle, does often carry them out to do those
things, which are contrary to the principle of the inward man, which habitually
condemns and actually wills not, or rather nills the things that are so done,
even in their doing. And this does manifest sufficiently that when he did the
evil he speaks of; he did it not with the full and entire consent of his will
as men do, in whom there is no such principle opposite to sin, and sinning,
as is in him that is Regenerate; there being very much taken off by the
habitual principle of Grace that is in them, and its constant inclinations to
the contrary.

But he farther argues,. 24.
If we shall affirm, that the contrary bent or motions of his will, at other
times, is a sufficient proof, that when he did the evil, we speak of, he did
it not with his whole will, or fullness of consent, in such a sense is a
distinguishing Character betwixt men Regenerate and unregenerate, we shall
bring Herod, and Pilate, and probably Judas himself into the list, of men
Regenerate with a thousand more whom the Scripture knows not, under any such
name or relation; viz. all those whose Judgments and consciences stand against
the evil of the ways and practices wherein they walk.

And this he proves at large to the end of the Section, in the instance of
Herod, and Pilate proceeding against their own Judgments and Consciences in
the killing of John and of our Savior.

Ans. First, we do not only assert a contrary bent and inclination in the Wills
of Believers at other times, but also that in and under the prevalency of
indwelling sin, there is in them an I that does it not, and a not-willing it
from a Principle, though by reason of the present prevalency of the other, its
actings and stirrings are not so sensibly perceived. So that though they
prevail not, to the total prevention of the will, from exerting the Act of
sin, yet they prevail to the impairing, weakening, and making remiss its
consent thereunto.

Secondly, The residue of this Paragraph is intolerably Sophistical,
confounding the Renitencie of the inward man, the principle of grace that is in
the wills of Believers, with the Convictions of the judgments and consciences
of unregenerate persons, and their striving against sin on that account. The
judgments and consciences of wicked men, tell them what they ought to do, and
what they ought not to do without respect to the principle in their wills that
is predominant. But the Apostle mentions the actings of the will it self, from
its own regenerate principle. We wholly deny that any unregenerate man has
any vital principle in his will not consenting to sin, what ever the
dictates of his judgment and conscience may be; or how effectual soever to
prevail unto an abstinence from sin. To discover the differences that are
between the contest, that is between the wills in unregenerate men, wholly set
upon sin, on the one hand, and their judgments and Consciences enlightened to
an apprehension and approving of better things on the other, and the contest
that is between the Flesh, and Spirit lusting to contrary things, in the same
will, as it is in regenerate men, is a common place; that I shall not go forth
unto. We grant then, that in unregenerate men, there may be, there is, and was
in some degree, perhaps in Herod, in Pilate, a conviction of conscience and
judgment, that the things they do are evil; but say withal, that all this
being foreign to their wills, it hinders not but that they sin with the
full uncontrouled consent of their wills, which are at perfect Liberty, or
rather in perfect bondage unto sin. That the Spirit should lust against the
flesh, and the flesh against the spirit, both in the same will. (as it appears
they do. Gal. 5. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. for the fruits that they both bring
forth, are acts of the will) in any unregenerate man, we deny; and this is
that, and not the former, which abates, and takes off from the wills consent to
sin.

He concludes the whole; 25.
And to the passage of the Apostle, mentioned Romans 7. I answer farther, that
when he says, the evil which I would not, that do I, he does not speak of
what he always, and in all cases did, much less of what was possible for him
to do, but of what he did ordinarily and frequently, or of what was very
incident unto him, through the infirmity of the flesh, viz. through
inconsiderateness and anticipation by temptations to do such things, which
when he was in a watchful and considerate posture, and from under the
malignant influence of a temptation, he was altogether averse unto: now what a
man does ordinarily, is one thing, and what he does sometimes, and in some
particular cases, especially what it is possible for him to do is another:
that true believers whilst such, ordinarily sin not upon worse terms, then
those mentioned by the Apostle concerning his sinning, I easily grant; but it
no ways follows from hence, that therefore they never sin upon other
terms, much less that it is impossible that they should sin upon others;
and thus we see all things thoroughly and impartially argued, and debated to and
fro, that even true Believers themselves as well as others, may do those works
of the flesh, which exclude from the Kingdom of God, and that inrespect
thereof, they are subject to this exclusion as well as other men.

The sum of this part of the Reply is, that what Paul speaks is true, of the
ordinary course of Believers, but not of extraordinary surprisals; this seems I
say to be the tendency of it, though the direct sense of the whole is not so
obvious to me: by that expression, the evil that I would not, that I do, you
intend either the expression of, he would not, or, that he did; if the latter;
then you say, he did not sin ordinarily and frequently, but only upon
surprisalls, which is freely granted, but is not at all to your purpose, but
rather much against it; If you attend that part of it, which holds out his
Renitency against the evil he did, in the expression of I would not, then you
say, it was not ordinary with the Apostle to nill the evil that he did, but in
case of surprisall to sin, which I believe is not intended; for is it
credible, that any one should think that in the ordinary course of a man's
walking there should be no opposition made to sin, the falling whereinto men
are liable, but upon surprizalls and anticipations by temptation, as it is
phrased there should. Nor is it on the other side, that he intends the things
that he did ordinarily, but was surprised by temptation, then it might be
otherwise. But first, is a Saint to be supposed to sin ordinarily, to sin
not prevailed on by temptation? is not all sin from temptation? do they
sin actually but upon the surprisall of temptation? to impose this upon the
Apostle, that he should say truly for the most part, or in my ordinary walking,
I do not sin, but withal, I will it not, but when I am surprised with
temptations, then it is otherwise with me, there is no Renitency in my will to
sin, is doubtless to wrong him; He does not limit his not willing of the
evil he did to any consideration whatever, but speaks it generally, as the
constant state and condition of things with him.

Secondly, in the beginning of this Section, the nilling of sin, was
antecedent to the sin: here, it is something that may be allowed in ordinary
cases, but not at all in extraordinary; so that these two expositions put
together amount to thus muh. Ordinarily the Apostle antecedent to any sinning
before the lusting of the spirit ceased, did not will the thing that he did,
which was evil, but in case of temptation it was not so; that is antecedently
to his acting of that which was evil, he had no opposition in the inward man
unto it, nor lusting of the spirit against it, which how it can be made good
against him, whose heart is upright, and who hates every evil way, I know not.

Thirdly it is confessed that ordinarily Believers sin at no worse a rate
than that expressed by the Apostle; But what does that contain? If would not,
be referred to their doing of sins, then you grant that which all this while
you have endeavored to oppose, and are reconciled to your own contradiction
in the first evidence sin cannot ordinarily or extraordinarily be committed
but by an act of the will, and yet ordinarily, there is a dissent of the will
also thereunto. If you adhere to your other former interpretation that the
willing against sin committed, is antecedent to the commitment of it, and laid
a sleep before the perpetration of any sin, then this also is imposed on
you, that there are sins whereunto they may be surprised by temptations, that
antecedently to the commitment of them, they do not, not-will; that as to them,
the Spirit lusts not against the flesh; which is notoriosly false; for the
flesh lusts against the Spirit and all the ways of it and all the fruits
thereof, and the Spirit lusts against the flesh, with all its ways and
fruits.

Fourthly it appears then that this being the description of a Regenerate man,
which the Apostle gives, as to indwelling sin, and all the fruits thereof,
that it is most ridiculous to exempt his frame in respect of such sins as
they may fall into by surprisalls of temptations, from this description of him,
and so to frame this distinction to the Apostles general Rule, that it holds
in cases ordinary, but not in extraordinary, when nothing in the whole Context
gives the least allowance or continuance to such a limitation.

It appears then notwithstanding any thing offered here to the contrary, upon
due consideration of it, that Believers sin not with their whole wills and
full consents; at any time,. 26.
nor under the power of what temptation soever they may fall for a season, and
that because of the Residence of this principle of a contrary tendency unto
sin in their wills which is always acting, either directly in inclining
unto good, or in taking off, or making remiss the consent of the will to
sin, not withstanding the prevalency of the principle opposite thereunto, by
its committing of sin.

And hence have we sufficient Light for the weakening of the Argument proposed
in the beginning of this Chap.. 27.
For though it is weak in its Foundation (as shall be showed) concluding to
what the Saints may do, from what is forbidden them to do, that prohibition
being the Ordinance of God certainly to preserve the^ from it, yet taking it
for granted that they may fall into the sin intimated, yet seeing they do it
not customarily, not maliciously, not with the full and whole consent of their
wills, that there is a principle in them still opposing sin, though at any time
weakened by sin, and the conclusion of that Argument concerns them not. I
say then, First to the Major proposition, they who are in a capacity and
possibility, that is, (an universal possibility not only in respect of an
internal principle but of all outward prohibiting causes as the purpose and
Promise of God, of perpetrating the works of the flesh, not of bringing forth
any fruits of the lusting of the flesh, which are in the best, willingly and
ordinarily with the full and whole consent of their wills, in which sense alone
such works of the flesh are absolutely exclusive from the Kingdom of Heaven,
they may posibly fall out of the favor of God and into destruction. This
proposition being thus limited, and the terms of it cleared, for to cause it
to pass; I absolutely deny the minor, that true Believers do, or can so sin;
that is, so bring forth the works of the flesh, as to leave no room for the
continuance of Mercy to them, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace.

But now frame the Proposition so, as the Assumption may comprise Believers,
and we shall quickly know what to judge of it; Those who are in a capacity or
possibility of falling into such sins, as deserve rejection from God, or of
perpetrating works of the flesh though they do so, overborne by the power of
temptation, nilling the things they do, not abiding in their sins may fall
totally and finally from God: but Believers may so do. As the matter is thus
stated the Assumption may be allowed, to pass upon Believers, but we
absolutely deny the Major Proposition in the sense wherein it is urged. I shall
only add that when we deny that Believers can possibly fall away, it is not
any absolute impossibility we intend, nor an impossibility with respect to any
principle in them, only that in, and from it self is not perishable, nor an
impossibility in respect of the manner of their acting, but such an one, as
principally respecting the outward removing cause of such an actual defection,
will infallibly prevent the event of it. And thus is the cloud raised by this
fifth Argument, dispelled and scattered by the light of the very first
consideration of the difference in sinning, that is, between Regenerate and
unregenerate men: so that it will be an easy thing to remove, and take a way
what afterward is insisted on for the reinforcement and confirmation of the
several Propositions of it.

The Major Proposition he confirms from Gal.. 28.
5. 21. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. All affirming that neither whoremongers,
nor adulterers, nor idolaters nor the like have any inheritance in the Kingdom
of God, or can be Saved; That the intendment of the Apostle is concerning them,
who live in a course of such sins, who sin with their whole wills, and from
an evil root, with whose sap they are wholly leavened, and tainted
throughout, not them who through the strength of temptation, and the
surprisalls of it, not without the renitency in their wills, unto all sin, any
sin, the sin wherewith they are overtaken, may possibly fall into any such
sin (as did David and Peter) was before declared, and in that sense we grant
the Proposition.

For the proof of the Minor Proposition, which should be, that Believers may
perpetrate the Works of the flesh, in the sense intended, in the places of
Scripture before mentioned, he insists on two things. First, the direction of
those Scriptures unto Believers. Secondly, the Experience of the ways of such
persons, that is of Believers. The Apostle tells Believers, that they who
commit such and such things, with such, and such circumstances in their
commitment, cannot be saved; therefore Believers may commit those sins in the
manner intended: What has been said before of the use of threatenings, and
denunciations of judgments on impenitent sinners, in respect of Believers,
will give a sufficient account (if there be need of any) for our denial of
this consequence; and for the Second, that the experience of such men's ways
and walking evinceth it; it is a plain begging of the thing under debate, and
an assuming of that, which was proposed to be proved, a thing unjustly charged
by him on his Adversaries, as though they should confess, that Believers might
sin to the extent of the lines drawn out in the places of Scripture
mentioned, and yet not loose their faith, when because they cannot loose their
Faith, they deny that they can sin, to that compass of excess and riot
intimated.

I cannot see then,. 29.
to what end and purpose the whole ensuing discourse from the beginning of this
Argument to the end of the 21. Sect. is. It is acknowledged that all those
places do concern Believers; The intendment of the Holy Ghost in them, being
to discover to them, the nature of the sin specified, and the end of the
committing of them, in the way intended, and that God purposes to proceed
according to the importance of what is threatened to those sins, so committed,
with all that do them, that so they may walk watchfully, and carefully
avoiding not only those things themselves, but all the ways and means leading
to them, (though if any one of them sin, any of those sins without the
deadly attendants of them mentioned in Scripture, they have an Advocate with
the Father Jesus Christ the Righteous) but that from thence it may be inferred,
that Believers may, and some do so sin, and that God intends as it is
expressed, to destroy them if they so do, when he has promised they shall
never do so, is a very weak and ridiculous Argumentation: They are a medium
of acquainting them with the desert of sin, the tenor of the Law, to them that
are under it, and the riches of Grace in their deliverance.

It is true,. 30.
unbelievers are (as you say) in our judgment, (and I wonder what yours is in
the case) in a state of exclusion from the Kingdom of God, whether they
perpetrate the works of the flesh mentioned or no: Unbelief is in our
Judgment, sufficient of it self to exclude any one from the Kingdom of God.
But yet withal in our Judgment (and we desire to know yours) it is impossible
that Unbelievers (we mean those who are Adulti) should not perpetrate the same
evils mentioned, or others of the import, all the thoughts, and imaginations
of their hearts being evil, and that continually, and thereupon be farther
exposed to the wrath of God, which is revealed against all that do evil. If
therefore the discovery of a man's desperate condition, that he may be stirred
up to labor, and strive for a deliverance from it, does concern him, then
these and the like passages do properly and primarily concern Unbelievers
whose state with the issue of it, is particularly described therein. And to say
(as our Author does) that it is a vain thing for the Spirit of God to threaten
wrath to men upon the committing of sin, if by unbelief they are exposed
antecedently to that wrath, is to question the wisdom of him with whom,
(whatever become of us poor worms) he cannot contend. He has told us, that
all men by nature are Children of wrath and unclean, so far as not to be
able to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless they be washed and borne
again and yet we hope without the least deficiency in wisdom, has farther
revealed his wrath from Heaven, against the ensuing ungodliness that is
committed by these Children of wrath to be executed in tribulation and anguish
against every soul that so does evil: not to detain the Reader, what has
been said, and shall farther be argued concerning the difference that is
between Believers and unbelievers in their sinning, with that also which has
been spoken of the concernement of Believers, in these and the like passages of
Scripture, sufficiently arguing that no such inference as is made for the
confirmation of the Assumption of the Argument under consideration according to
Mr Goodwins thoughts and apprehensions of it, can possibly be drawn out from
them.

Sect.. 31.
22. is a pretty pageant, and by the Readers favor I shall show it him once
more. If it be objected that true Believers have a Promise from God that they
shall never loose their Faith. I answer, first that this has of been said, but
never so much as once proved. Secondly upon examination of those Scriptures
wherein such Promises of God are pretended to reside, or to be found, we find
no such thing in them, we find indeed many Pomises of their Perseverance, but
all of them Conditional, and such whose Performance in respect of actual and
complete Perseverance, is suspended upon the diligent and careful use of
means by men to persevere. And lastly to affirm that true Believers can by no
commission of sin or sins whatsoever, how freequently soever reiterated,
how long continued in soever, ever make shipwreck of their Faith or fall away
from the Grace and Favor of God so as to perish, what is it but to provoke the
flesh to an outragiousnesse in sinning, and to encourage that which remains of
the old man in them to bestirre it self in all ways of unrighteousness; and
doubtless the bringing of that Doctrine has been the casting of a snare upon
the World, and has caused many, whose feet God has guided into ways of
peace, to adventure so far into desperateness of sinning, that through the
just Judgment of God their hearts never served them to return.

Ans. First, The foundation of this whole discourse, is a supposall of promises
of preserving believers in their Faith, upon the ridiculous supposition after
mentioned, to be asserted by the Doctrine of the Saints perseverance and the
defenders of it, which Mr Goodwin knows fulwell to be far otherwise.

Secondly, It has sufficiently been proved, that Believers have a promise, yea
many promises, to be kept by the power of God, from all, and any such sin, or
any such circumstance of sin, or continuance in sin, as is wholly
inconsistent with Believing, and that therefore they shall be preserved in
Believing.

Thirdly, Upon our calling the examination of the proofs of this assertion to
an account, we have found them to be made up, of trivial exceptions, and
sophistical suppositions, confident beggings, and cravings of the things under
contest and debate, (all the endeavors to prove the promises of Perseverance
to be conditional, having also involved in them, an absolute contradiction to
the Truth, and to themselves) no way sufficient to evince, that the promises
and work of Gods grace, are suspended upon any conditions in men whatsoever.

And Fourthly, We say that the intrusion of this vain Hypothesis, that
believers should continue so, under the consideration here intimated by you of
sin, when the maine of the Doctrine contended for, consists in a full and
plain denial that they can, or shall fall under them (according to the import
of 1 Ioh. 3. 9. immediately to be insisted on, being preserved by the Spirit
and grace of him who so works his Law in their hearts, that they shall never
depart from him) is the great engine you have used in all your attempts against
it, being indeed a mere begging of the thing in question.

Fifthly, That there is nothing in this Doctrine, in the least, suited to turn
aside the Saints of God from the holy Commandment, but that on the contrary,
it is of an excellent usefulness, and effectual influence for the promotion
of all manner of Godliness, in those that are truly Saints, howsoever any man
may abuse it, (as any other discovery of the grace of God) turning it into
Lasciviousness, has been declared: what use has been made of the contrary
Doctrine in the world, we have hitherto had experience; only in the Pelagians,
Papists, Socinians, and Arminians, and with what fruits of it they have
abounded, the Church of God does partly know. What it is like to bring forth,
being now translated into another soil, or rather, having won over to it,
men sometimes of another profession, is somewhat, though not altogether, yet in
obeyance.

Let us then with the Apostle,. 33.
having proceeded thus with M. Goodwin, that a foundation may be the better
laid, for the removal of what he farther adds, proceed to consider the
progress of sin, and to remarke from thence the difference that is between
Regenerate and Unregenerate men in their sinning.

The second thing proposed in the Apostles discourse of the Rise and progress
of sin, is the general way that Lust proceeds in, for the bringing of it
forth, and that is Temptation: every one is tempted of his own Lust; This is
the general way that Lust proceeds in, for the production of actual sin. It
tempts, and he in whom it is, is tempted: There is a Temptation unto sin only,
and a Temptation unto sin by sin: The first is no sin in him that is so
tempted; our Savior was so tempted; he was tempted of the Devil, Math. 4. 1.
%He was in all points tempted like as we are, without sin. That his temptations
were unto sin, is apparent from the story of them; but the Prince of this world
coming had nothing in him. John 14. 30. Found nothing in him to Answer and
close with his Temptations; and therefore though he was tempted, yet was he
without sin. Now though this sort of temptations from Satan, are not
Originally our sins but his, yet there being tinder in our souls that
kindles more or less, in and upon every injection of his fiery darts, there
being something in us to meet many, if not all of his Temptations, they prove
in some measure in the issue, to be ours. Indeed Satan sometimes ventures upon
us, in things wherein he has doubtless small hope of any concurrence, and so
seems rather to aim at our disquiet, than our sins: as in those whom he
perplexes with hard and blasphemous thoughts of God; a thing so contradictory
to the very principles not of Grace only, but of that whereby we are men, that
it is utterly impossible there should be any assent of the soul thereunto; to
think of God, as God, is to think of him, every thing that is Good, Pure,
Great, Excellent, incomprehensible in all perfection: Now at the same time, to
have any Apprehensions of a direct contradictory importance, the mind of man is
not capable. Were it not for the unbelief, causeless fears, and
discontentments, that in many do ensue upon Temptations of this nature, which
are consequents, and not effects of it, Satan might keep this dart in his
own forge, for any mischeife he is like to do with it. The Apostle speaks
here of Temptations by sin as well as unto sin; and these are men's sins,
as well as their Temptations, they are Temptations as tending to farther evil;
they are sins as being irregular and devious from the rule. Now this tempting
of Lust compriseth two things.

First,. 33.
The general active inclination of the Heart unto sin, though not fixed as
unto any particular act, or way of sin; the motus primo primi; of this you
have that Testimony of God concerning man, in the state of nature Genesis 6. 5.
%Every figment of the thought of his heart, is only evil every day; the
figment or imagination of the thoughts, is the very root of them; their
general moulding, or active preparing of the mind, for the exerting of them;
so 1 Chrou. 28. 9. %God understands all the imaginations of the thoughts. The
figment of them: The next disposition of the soul unto them; and 2 Cron. 29.
19. Keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of their hearts, or
keep their hearts in a continual framing posture and condition, of such good
thoughts. This (I say) is she first way of Lusts, Temptation; it makes a mint
of the heart, to frame readily all manner of evil desires, and thoughts that
they may as our Savior speaks proceed out of the heart Mat. 15. 19. Their
actual fixing on any object, is their proceeding, antecedent whereunto, they
are framed and formed in the heart; Lust actually disposes, inclines, bends
the heart to things suitable to it self, or the corrupt habitual principle
which has its residence in us.

Secondly, The actual tumultuating of Lust, and working with all its power and
policy, in stirring up, provoking to, and drawing out thoughts and contrivances
of sin, with delight and complacency in inconeiveable variety: the several
degrees of its progress herein being afterward described.

In the first of these there is no small difference between Regenerate and
Unregenerate persons,. 34.
and that in these two things.

First, In its universality; In Unregenerate men, every figment of their heart
is only evil and that every day; there is an universality of actings expressed
positively, and exclusively, to any actings of another kind; every figment of
their heart is only evil; and of time, every day: whatever good they seem to
do, or do, whatever duties they perform, that in them all, which is the proper
figment of their heart, is only evil. On this account, take any duty they do,
any work they perform, and weigh it in the balance and it will be found in
respect of principles, and circumstances, or aims, to be wholly evil. That
indeed there is nothing in it that is acceptable to God: and their hearts are
casting, minting, and coining sin, all the day long. With Believers it is not
so, there is also a good treasure in their hearts, from whence they bring out
good things; there is a good Root in them that bears good fruit; though they
are, or may be overtaken with many sins yea with great sins, yet lust does not
tempt the^ as it does unregenerate men, with a perpetual continual active
inclination unto evil, even some way or other in all the good they do. The
Spirit is in them, and will, and does in what state so ever they are, dispose
their hearts to Faith, Love, Meekness, and actuates those Graces, at least in
the elicite acts of the will; for a good tree will bring forth good fruit,
never any Believer is, or was so deserted of God, or did so forsake God, as
that every figment of his heart should be evil only, and that continually;
That no one act of sin, can possibly expel his habit of Grace, has been
formerly showed; neither is he ever cast into such a condition, but from the
good principle that is in him. There is a panting after God, longing for his
Salvation with more or less efficacy; the spark is warm and glowing, though
under ashes.

Secondly, In respect of power. Lust tempts in unregenerate men out an
absolute, uncontrouleable dominion, and that with a morally irresistible
efficacy; All its dominion, as has been showed, and very much of its strength
is lost in Believers; this is the intendment of the Apostles discourse Romans 6.
concerning the crucifying of sin, by the death of Christ. The power,
strength, vigor, and efficacy of it, is so far abated, weakened, mortified,
that it cannot so effectually impell unto sin, as it does when it is in perfect
life and strength.

But you will say then, 35.
If Lust be thus weakened in Believers, more than in others, how comes it to
pass, that they do at any time fall into such great, and heinous sins, as
sometimes they do, and have done? Will not this argue them, to be even worse
than unregenerate persons, seeing they fall into sin upon easier terms, and
with less violence of impulse from Indwelling sin than they?

Ans. First, The examples of Believers falling into great sins, are rare, and
such as by no means are to be accommodated to their state, in their ordinary
walking with God; it is true there are examples of such falls recorded in the
Scripture, that they might lie as bwoys to all generations, to caution men of
their danger, when the waves of Temptation arise, to show what is in man, in
the best of men, to keep all the Saints of God humble, selfe-empty, and in a
continual dependence on him, in whom are all their springs, from whom are all
their supplies; but as they are mostly all Old Testament examples, before grace
for grace was given out by Jesus Christ, so they are by no means farther to be
urged, nor are, but only to show that it is possible that God can keep alive
the root, when the tree is cut down to the ground; and cause it to budde
again by the sent of the water of his Spirit, flowing toward it.

Secondly, That Believers fall not into great sins at any time, by the mere
strength of Indwelling sin, unless it be in conjunction with some violent
outward Temptation, exceedingly surprising them, either by weakening all ways
and means, whereby the principle of Grace should exert it self, as in the
case of Peter, or by sudden heightning of their corruption, by some overpowring
objects, attended with all circumstances of Prevalency, not without Gods
withholding his special grace in an eminent manner, for ends best known to
himself, as in the case of David: Hence it is, that even in such sins, we say,
they sin out of infirmity, that is, not out of propense deliberation, as to
sin, not out of malice, not out of Love to, or delight in sin; but merely
through want of strength, when overborne by the power of Temptations.

This Mr Goodwin frames as an Objection to himself,. 36.
in the pursuit of the vindication of the Argument under consideration; Sect.
23.

Others plead that there is no reason to conceive that true Believers, though
they perpetrate the works of the flesh, should be excluded from the Kingdom
of heaven upon this account; because when they sin in this kind, they sin
out of Infirmity, and not out of malice.

Ans. I was not to choose what Objections M. Goodwin should answer, nor had the
framing of them, which he chose to deal withal: and therefore must be
contented with them, as he is pleased to afford them to us; Only if I may be
allowed to speak in this case, and I know I have the consent of many concerned
in it, I should somewhat otherwise frame this Objection or Answer:being partly
persuaded, that M. Goodwin did not find it, but framed it himself, into the
shape wherein it here appears. I say then, that the Saints of God sin out of
Infirmity only, not maliciously, nor dedita opera in cool blood, nor with
their whole hearts, but purely upon the account of the weakness of their
graces, being overpowred by the strength of Temptation, and therefore cannot so
perpetrate the works of the flesh, and in such a way as must according to the
tenor of the Covenant wherein they walk with God, not only deserve rejection
and damnation, but also be Absolutely and Indispensably exclusive of them, from
the Kingdom of God. What Mr Goodwin has drawn forth to take off, in any
measure, the Truth of this Assertion, shall be considered. He says then,

To say that true Believers, or any other men do perpetrate the works of the
flesh, out of infirmity, involves a contradiction: For to do the works of the
flesh, implies the dominion of the Flesh in the doers of them, which in sins
of infirmity has no place; the Apostle clearly insinuates the nature of sins
of infirmity in that to the Galatians; Beloved if any man be overtaken with a
fault, ((...)) be prevented, or taken at unawares; when a man's foot is taken in
the snare of a temptation, only through a defect of that spiritual watchfulnes
over himself, and his ways which he ought to keep constantly, and so sins
contrary to the habitual and standing frame of his heart, this man sins out
of iufirmity, but he that thus sins cannot in Scripture phrase be said
either to walk, or to live according to the Flesh, or to do the works of the
Flesh, or to do the Lusts or desires of the Flesh, because none of these are
any where ascribed unto, or charged upon true Believers, but only upon such
persons who are enemies unto God, and Children of death.

Ans. This being the substance of all that is spoken to the business in hand,
I have transcribed it at large, that with its Answer it may at once lie under
the Readers view. I say then

First we give this reason that Believers cannot perpetrate the works of the
flesh in the sense contended about, because they sin out of insirmity, and do
not say that they so perpetrate the works of the flesh out of infirmity. But
if by perpetrating the works of the flesh, you intend only the bringing forth
at any time, or under any Temptation whatsoever, any fruits of the flesh, such
as every sin is, that this may not be done out of infirmity, or that it
involves a contradiction to say so, is indeed not to know what you say, to
contradict your self, and to deny that there be any sins of infirmity at
all, which that there are you granted in the words foregoing, and describe the
nature of it in the words following. They doubtless in whom the Flesh always
lusts against the Spirit are sometimes lead a way and enticed by their own
Lusts, so as to bring forth the fruits of it.

Secondly, If to do the works of the flesh, imports with you, as indeed in it
self it does, the predominancy and dominion of the flesh in them that do the
works thereof, we wholly deny that Believers can so do the works of the
flesh, as upon other Reasons, so partly because they sin out of infirmity,
which sufficiently argues that the Flesh has not the dominion in them; for
then they should not through Infirmity be captivated to it, but should
willingly yield up their members, as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin.

Thirdly, The description you give of a sin of infirmity from Gal 6. 1. Is
that alone which we acknowledge may befall Believers, though it has sometimes
befallen them in greater sins. It is evident from hence, that a sin
becomes asinne of infirmity, not from the nature of it, but from the manner of
men's falling into it. The greatest actual sin, may be a sin of infirmity,
and the least, a sin of Presumption. It is possible a Believer may be
overtaken, or rather surprised, with any sin, so he be overtaken or
surprised. A surprisall into sin through the power of Temptation, subtilty of
Satan, strength of indewlling sin, contrary to the habitual standing frame
of the heart, (not always neither through a defect of watchfullnesse) is all
that we grant a Believer may be liable to: and fo upon Mr Goodwins confession
he sins only out of infirmity; such sins being not exclusive of the Love and
Favor of God. And therefore

Fourthly we say that true Believers cannot be said to walk according to the
flesh, to do the works of the flesh, to do the Lusts and desires of the flesh,
which the Holy Ghost so cautions them against, which as Mr Goodwin observes are
none of them charged upon true Believers, but only such persons as are enemies
of God, and Children of wrath; so that those expressions hold out to Believers
only what they ought to avoid in the use of the means which God graciously
affords them, and do not discover any thing of the will of God, that he will
suffer them, contrary to his many Faithful Promises to fall into them. And so
the close of this Discourse is contrary to the beginning; M. Goodwin granting
that true Believers cannot fall into these sins, but only such as are enemies
to God; and yet he has no way to prove that true Believers may cease to be so,
but because they may fall into these sins, which that they may do, he here
eminently denies. Wherefore he adds*

If by sinning out of malice they mean sinning with deliberation, with
plotting,. 37.
and contriving the methods and means of their sinning, sinning against
Judgment, against the dictates of conscience (and what they should mean by
sining out of malice but sinning upon such terms as these I understand not)
certain it is that true Believers may so sin out of malice, or at least such
as were true Believers before such sining, and this our Adversaries them selves
confess.

Ans. All this falls heavy on the shoulders, (as it is supposed) of poor
David, and yet we think it evident, that God took not his holy Spirit from
him, but that his Covenant continued with him, ordered in all things and sure,
and that sin had not dominion over him. The reasons of this persuasion of
ours concerning him, shall farther be insisted on, when we come to the
consideration of his case in particular, in the mean time I confess the
dreadfnll falls of some of the Saints of God, are rather to be bewailed than
aggravated; and the riches of Gods Grace in their recovery, to be admired than
searched into: yet we say,

First, That no one Believer whatever in the world, upon any temptation
whatever, did fall into any sin of malice, that is, accompayned with any
hatred of God, or despite of his Grace, or whole delight of his will in the
sin, whereunto he was by temptation for a season captivated and though they may
fall into sin, against their judgments and dictates of their consciences, as
every sin whatever, that they have, or may possibly have knowledge of, or
acquaintance with, in their own hearts and ways, is; Yet this does not make
them to sin out of malice; for that would leave no distinction between sins
of infirmity whereinto men are surprised by Temptation, and of Malice. Even
sins of infirmity being in general and particular directly contrary to the
dictates of their enlightened, sanctified judgments and consciences.

Secondly, for sinning with deliberation, plotting, and contriving the methods
and means of sinning, (the proof whereof, that so they may do, will ly as was
before obseved, on the instance of David) I say it being the will of God for
ends and purposes known to his infinite Wisdom, to give us, as to his fall,
his dark side, and his sin to the full, with the Temptations wherewith he
was at first surprised, and afterward violently hurryed upon carnal reasonings
and considerations of the state whereinto he had cast himself, having lost his
old friend and counselor as to any shines of his countenance for a season,
not acquainting us at all with the frame, and working and striving of his
Spirit, in, and under that fall, I shall not dare to draw his case into a Rule,
that what he then did a Believer now may do, judgeing of his frame in doing of
it, only by what is expressed. That Believers may have morosam cogitationem, or
deliberation upon some sins, whereunto they are tempted, upon the strength of
indwelling sin, which may possibly so over come and prevail against the
workings of Grace for a season, as to set the flesh at liberty to make
contrivances to fulfill the lusts thereof (I say) many have granted, and I
shall not (for the sake of poor returning souls, whose backslidings God has
promised to heal,) deny: but yet I say all their actings in this kind, are
but like the desperate actings of a man in a fever, who may have some kind of
contrivance with himself to do mischief, (as I have known some my self) and
aim at opportunityes for the accomplishment of it; all the facultyes of their
fowls being discomposed, and rendered unserviceable to them through their
distemper; Through the violence of temptation, and the tumultuating of lusts,
the whole new man may be for a season so shattered, and his parts laid out of
the way, as to such a due Answering to another, that the whole may be
serviceable to the work of Faith, (as a disordered army, wherein is all its
fundamental strength as well as when it is rallied in battalia, is altogether
unserviceable, 'till it be reduced to order) that sin taking the opportunity
to fill their corrupt part (as far as it is corrupt) with its pleasure and
desireablenesse, and so to set the thoughts of it on work to continue means
for its accomplishment; Now as through the goodness of their Father and
supplies of Grace, which through the Covenant thereof, they do receive, this
distemper seiseth not Believers but rarely and extraordinarily, so it does no
way prove them to sin with malice, or without hatred of, and opposition
(secret opposition, which may be as secret, as some inclinations to sin are
not known to our selves) to the things they do in and under that condition.

That which follows in this Section being suited to the apprehension of some
particular men, though of great name and esteem, according to their worth and
desert in the Church of God, as Vrsin, Paraeus and the rest, about reigning
sin, wherein (as I have declared) my thoughts fall not in with them I shall
not need to insist any longer upon it, Paraeus after all his aggravations of
the sins of Believers, yet adds that they sin not (nor did David) ex
contemptu Dei, but through a preoccupation or surprisall of sin; which I
believe to be the persuasion of far the greatest number of Saints in the world;
whatever Mr Goodwin is pleased to think or say to the contrary; nor is their
apprehension weakened by Nathans charging upon David, his despising of the
commandment of the Lord. in doing evil; which as it is virtually done in
every sin, and in great sins in an eminent manner, so that it did amount
indeed, not only to a consequentiall but a formal voluntary contempt of God,
Mr Goodwin shall never prove. A Father often and severely charge upon his
sons, a despising of his command, when he has been carried out to
transgress it, when yet he kowes his son honors and reverenceth him in
his heart, and is exceedingly remote from any resolved contempt of him.

The close of all is a concession of the Contra-Remonstrants at the Hague
Conference;. 38.
That Believers might fall into such sins, as that the Church according to
the Commandment of Christ, must pronounce that they shall no longer abide in
her communion, and that they shall have no part in the Kingdom of Christ;
which being usually made an argument for the Apostasy of the Saints, I shall
consider how it is here improved by M. Goodwin.

Certainly (says he) their sense was, That true believers may sin, above the
rate of those, who sin out of infirmity, in so much as there is no
commandment of Christ, that any Church of his should eject such persons out of
their Communion, who sin out of infirmity only; so that by the confession of
our Adversaries themselves, even true Believers may perpetrate such sins,
which are of a deeper demerit, than to be numbered amongst sins of infirmity,
yea such sins, for which the Church of Christ, according to the Commandment
of Christ, stands bound to judge them for ever excluded from the Kingdom of
God without repentance; from whence it undeniably follows, that they may
commit such sins, whereby their Faith in Christ will be totally lost, because
there is no condemnation unto those that are by Faith in Jesus Christ, whether
they repent or not, and therefore they that stand in need of Repentance, to
give them a right and title to the kingdom of God, are no sons of God by
Faith; for were they sons, they would be heirs also, and consequently have
right and title to the inheritance; so that to pretend that howsoever the
Saints may fall into great and grievous sins, yet they shall certainly be
renewed again by Repentance before they dye, though this be an assertion
without any bottom on Reason or Truth, yet does it no ways oppose, but
suppose rather a possibility of the total defection of Faith in true Believers.

Ans. First, That true Believers may sin, above the rate of sins of
Infirmity, because they may so sin, as that according to the appointment of
Jesus Christ, they may be cast out of a particular Church, is not attempted to
be proved: M. Goodwin think none may be excommunicated but such as have sinned
themselves out of the state of Grace? That a man may through infirmity, fall
into some such sin, as for it to be amoved from a Church society, (that a
motion being an ordinance of Christ, for his recovery from that sin) I know
not that it can be reasonably questioned. So that by our confession, that true
Believers may so sin, as to be righteously cast out of the external visible
society of a particular Church, does no way enforce us to acknowledge that they
may sin above the rate of them, who are overtaken with, or surprised in
sin, upon the account of their weakness or infirmity.

Secondly, The Church of Christ in rejecting of one from its society, according
to the appointment of Jesus Christ, is so far from being obliged to judge any
one for ever excluded from the Kingdom of God; that they do so reject a man,
that he may never be excluded from that Kingdom: It is true he may be
Ecclesiastically and Declaratively excluded from the visible Kingdom of God,
and his right and title to the outward Administration of the good things
thereof; but that such an one is, and must be thought to be properly and really
excluded from his interest in the Love of God, and grace of the Convenant,
(being still by the appointment of God, and command of Christ, left under the
power of an ordinance, annexed by him, to the Administration of that Covenant,
it does not follow.

Thirdly, The non-restauration of persons cast out of communion, by the Church,
to their place in the Kingdom of God, but upon Repentance, holds proportion
with what was spoken before upon exclusion, The Repentance intended is such, as
is necessary for the satisfaction of the Church, as to its expressenesse and
being known; yet we grant withal, that all sins whatever without Repentance,
in that kind and degree, that is appointed and accepted of God, are exclusive
of the Kingdom of God; and we do much wonder that M. Goodwin to the Text Romans
8. 1. should add, whether they repent or not, which is not only beyond the
sense of what went before, but directly contrary to that which follows after,
that walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit; not to repent of sin, is,
doubtless to walk after the flesh, and no one of them who are freed from
condemnation in Christ, does good and sins not; The words we confess, are
not the condition in the intention of God, on which their non-condemnation is
suspended, but yet they are a description infallible of them, who through Grace
are made partakers of it. We say then, that Believers may so fall, as that
being on that account, rejected from the communion of the Church, so as not to
be restored, but upon the evidence of their Repentance (and we say that
Repentance is required for all sins, or men cannot be saved, wondering what Mr
Goodwin according to his principles intends by the addition to the Text of Romans
8. 1. unless it be, that no man stands in need of Repentance, unless he have
cast off all Faith and interest in God; a most Anti-evangelicall assertion) and
yet not commit such sins, as whereby their Faith must needs be wholly lost.

Fourthly, There Is a twofold Right and Title to the Kingdom of God; a Right
and Title by the profession of a true Faith to the external Kingdom of God,
in regard of its outward Administration, and a Right and Title to the Eternal
Kingdom of God by the possession of a true Faith in Christ: The former, as it
is taken for jus in re, believers may loose for a season; though they may not
in respect of a remote, original, fundamental Root which abides; the latter
they never loose, nor forfeite: We say also that repentance for sin being a
thing promised of God, for those that come to him in Christ, upon the account
of the engagement of his Grace, for the Perseverance of Believers; All such
fallers into sin, shall certainly return to the Lord by Repentance, who
heales their backslidings, which Mr Goodwin has not been able to disprove; Of
whose Arguments, and his endeavors to vindicate them from exceptions, this is
the chief.

But yet there being two or three things,. 39.
that M. Goodwin is pleased to add to what went before, as objections against
his doctrine in general, though not of this last Arguments concernment, any
more than of any others he makes use of, because there are in them
Considerations of good advantage to the Truth in hand, I shall a little insist
upon them, before I proceed with my intended discourse.

The First is,. 40
that the Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy, maimeth or dismembreth the Body of
Christ, and brings in, an uncouth and unseemely interchange of members between
Christ and the Soul; which howsoever slighted by M. Goodwin, is a plea not of
the least importance, in the case in hand. The body of Christ intended, is that
mystical and spiritual, not that Political and visible; His body in respect
of the real union of every member of it, unto him as the head, described by
the Apostle in its Relation unto him. Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. It grows up unto him,
in all things, which is the head, even Christ, from whom the whole body fitly
joined together, and compacted, by that which every joint supplieth according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
body unto the edifying of it self in Love: So also Collos. 2. 19. the Body we
intend, whereof Christ is the Head, is that, not only in a Political sense, as
the supreme governor of it, but in a Spiritual, according to the Analogy of
an Head Natural, from whence life, and all influence of it unto the Members do
flow; Of this body, some are in their Spirits already consummated, and made
perfect in Heaven, some are as yet pursuing their Warfare in all parts of the
World, pressing forward to the mark of the high-calling set before them: Now
that any member of his Body, bone of the bone, flesh of the flesh of Christ,
given him to make up his fullness, and mystical perfection, joynted unto him,
washed in his blood, and loved by him, according to the Love and care of a head
to its members, should be plucked off, to be cast into the sire, and after it
has so closely and vitally been admitted into the participation of his
fullness and increase, being united to him, become a child of the Devil, an
Enemy to him, and his sometimes fellow members, so as to hate his head, and to
be hated of his head (when yet no man ever yet hated his own flesh) this we
suppose no way to answer that inexpressibly intense Love, which the Lord Jesus
bears toward his members, and to be exceedingly derogatory to his honor and
Glory, in reference with his dealing to Satan, the great enemy of his
Kingdom. But to this M. Goodwin Answers.

First, For dismembering the Body of Christ, is it not the Law of Christ
himself, in every particular Church, or body of his, that as any of their
members putrify and discover themselves to be rotten and corrupt,. 41.
they should be cut off by the Spiritual sword of excommunication, and does
not such a dismembring as this, rather tend to the honoring and adorning the
Body of Christ, than any ways to maime or deforme it? And for such a
dismembring of the Body of Christ which the Doctrine in hand supposes to be
causable by the members themselves, by the voluntary disfaithing of themselves,
through sin and wickedness neither is the permission of this, upon such
terms as it is permitted, either unworthy Christ, or inconvenient to the Body
it self. Reply.

First that there is no Argument will tolerably arise from what is practicable
and comely in a visible Ecclesiastical Body of Christ, to the Mystical
Spiritual Body; that is, from a particular visible, to the Catholic Church of
Christ. As to the matter in hand, this is evident by the light of this single
consideration, that in such an Ecclesiastical body of Christ, there are
always or may be, and Christ himself in the rules and Laws that he has
given for the government thereof did suppose that there always would be good,
and bad, true Saints and empty professors; whereas in the Body whereof we
treat, there is no soul actually instated, but who is actually united to the
head, by the inhabitation of the same Spirit. There never was nor shall to
eternity, any dead member be of that Body. They are all living stones, built
upon him who is the Foundation; now surely this is an inference attended with
darkness to be felt, because it may be comely for those to whom the
Administratione of Ordinances in the visible Church of Christ, is committed, to
cut of a dead member, from the membership which he holds by his confession of
the Faith, when he discovers himself not to answer the confession he has
made, in his walking and Conversation; Therefore Christ himself, does cut off,
or on way, or other, loose any living members of his body Mystical, and
actually by Faith instated in the unity of his Body with him. And if it shall
be objected that even living members and such as are truly so, may yet for, and
at a season, be cut off from a visible particular body of Christ. I Answer,

1. It is true, they may so, in respect of their ordinary present right to the
enjoyment of Ordinances, not in respect of their remote fundamental Right that
still abides.

2. They are so, or may be so, for their amendment, not for their destruction.
That separation for a season being an expression of as much Love and
tenderness to them in Christ as his joining of them to the Body was from
whence they are so separated. And

3. This makes not at all to the impairing of the true compleatnesse of the
mystical Body of Christ, and the perfection of its parts; for as in particular
visible bodies of Christ there may be, and are dead members which have no place
in the body, but are as excressencyes in the vine, and yet the body is not
rendered monstrous by them; so a true member may be removed and the Body not be
maimed in the least. The member though perhaps, from any such visible body, for
a season and yet the true Spiritual sick and pineing, continuing a member
thereof still; Now there is nothing of all this that will in any measure agree,
to the plucking off a member from the Mystical Body of Christ, whereof alone
we speak. If any should be so separated, it must not only be to his present
actual enjoyment of Union, but to the loss of his Spirit also, and with him
of all right and title, plea, or claim whatever, to any interest therein;
Neither is it possible that it should be a means for the correction and
amendment of such an one; it lying in a direct tendency to inevitable
destruction; separation from all interest in Christ can look no other way; so
that still the uncouthnesse of such a procedure abides.

Secondly, The reason that is added to put some color and gloss upon this
Assertion. viz. That such persons as are affirmed to be so separated from the
Body of Christ, do voluntarily disfaith (as it is called) themselves, is not to
the purpose in hand. For

1. The question is about the thing it self, whereunto this Answer de modo, is
not satisfactory; It Is urged by the Argument, that it cannot be allowed any
way, the answer is, it is done this way.

2. Were Mr Goodwin desired to explain unto us the manner how Believers
voluntarily do, or may disfaith themselves, I suppose he would meet with no
small difficultyes in the undertaking; However this sounds handsomely.

3. That they should so disfaith themselves, through sin, and wickedness,
without being overcome by the temptations of Satan, and the power of the
enemies, with whom they have to do and wrestle, doubtless will not be
affirmed, whilst they continue in their right wits, and if they loose them,
twill be difficult to manifest how they can voluntarily disfaith themselves.
The state wherein they are described to be by Mr Goodwin, and the
considerations which for their preservation he allows them, should not, me
thinks, suffer him to suppose that of their own accord, without provocations,
or temptations, they will wilfully ruin their own souls. Now that Believers
should by the power of any Temptation, or opposition whatever, or what
affliction soever, arrising against them, be prevailed upon to the loss of
their Faith, and so to their dismembring from Christ, is that which is objected
as an unseemely uncouth thing, which in this Answer Mr Goodwin earnestly
begges, may not be so esteemed, and more he adds not as yet.

The following Discourse,: 42.
wherein he pursues the business in hand, is so pretty, as that I cannot but
once more present it to the Reader. Says he,

As to a politic or civil corporation, it is better that the Governers should
permit the members respectively to go or be at liberty, that so they may follow
their business and occupations in the world, upon the better terms, though by
occasion of this liberty they may behave themselves in sundry kinds very
unworthily; than it would be to keep them close prisoners though hereby the
said inconveniences certainly be prevented; in like manner it is much better for
the Body of Christ, and for the respective members of it, that he should leave
them at liberty to obey and serve God, and follow the important affairs of
their souls, freely and without any Physical necessitation, though some do
turn this liberty into wantonness, and so into destruction, than I would be
to deprive them of this liberty and to cause and constrain them to any course
whatsoever out of necessity: though it is true, the committing of much sin and
iniquity would be prevented hereby in many; the dismembring of the body of
Christ's Apostles, by the Apostasy of Judas was no disparagement either to
Christ himself, or it.

Ans. The sum of the whole discourse is, that the Lord Jesus Christ has no
way to keep and secure his members to himself, that none of them perish, but
by taking away their liberty which rather than do, it is more to his honor to
let them abuse it, to their everlasting destruction; and to this end sundry
sine supposalls, are scattered through the whole Discourse. As

1. That the liberty of Believers, is a liberty to sin, which they may abuse
to their own destruction. The Apostle is of an other mind, Romans 6. 17, 18, 19.
God bethanked that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the
heart that form of Doctrine, which was delivered to you; being then made free
from sin ye became the servants of Righteousness etc. 2. That there is no
real efficacy of Grace that will certainly fulfill in Believers the good
pleasure of Gods Goodness, and bring forth the fruits of an abiding Holiness,
but what must needs deprive them in whom it is of their liberty: and suitably
hereunto, 3. That God having through Christ made his Saints Spiritually free,
from sin unto Righteousness, so that with the utmost liberty that they are
capable of as Creatures, they shall surely do good, cannot by his Spirit
continue them in that condition, infallibly without the destruction of their
liberty. 4. That the Spiritual operation of God in, and with the wills of men,
induces a necessitation as to their manner of operation, that they must act on
that account, as necessary, and not as free Agents: with such other the like
supposals, which are so many gross figments whereof M. G. shall be able to
prove no one to Eternity; For the removeall then of all the fine words here
tendered out of our way, it may suffice to tell their Author, that he who is
made Redemption to his Saints, that sets them free from their bondage to sin,
by his Spirit, which is always accompanied with Liberty, and makes them
willing, ready, and free to Righteousness, and Holiness in the day of his
power toward them, whose effectual Grace enlarges and improves all their
facultyes, in their operations, with the choicest attendences as to the manner
their of working, can, and does, by, in, and with the perfect exercise of their
liberty, keep them to himself, in their union, and communion with him for
ever. That this pretended liberty unto sin, is a bondage, from which Christ
frees his Saints, neither is any thing that can be imagined more derogatory to
the glory of his Grace, than to affirm, that he cannot keep those committed
to him, infallibly, to the end, without depriving them of the liberty which
they have alone through him. Of Physical necessitation enough has been spoken
before; Judas was never a member of the Body of Christ, or of Christ in the
acceptance whereof we speak. By the body of the Apostles, is intended only
their number, of which Judas (though he was never of that body whereof they
were members) was one.

Farther the wickedness of this Apprehension,. 43.
that Christ should loose any of those who are true, and living members of his
Mystical body, is aggravated upon the account of that state and condition,
whereinto he parts with them. They being thereby made members of Satan, and
his Kingdom; God and the Devil so interchanging Children to the great
dishonor and reproach of his name: to his M. Goodwin replies, in the 28.
Section.

For the interchange of members between Christ and Satan, the Scripture
presents it, as a thing possible, yea as frequent and ordinary, know ye not
(says the Apostle) that your Bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I then
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot; in the
original it is, (...), etc. i. e. taking away the members of Christ, shall I
make them, etc. meaning that true Believers who only are the members of Christ
disrelate themselves to him, cease to be members of his body, whilst they live
in a course of whoredom and Adultery, and make themselves members of another
far different relation, viz. of those harlots with whom they will fully commit
sin, and consequently, in such a sense of the Devil.

Ans. First, for the sense of that place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 15. As far
as it relates to the merit of the cause in hand, I shall have occasion to
speak unto it, at large hereafter, and so shall not anticipate my self, or
Reader; For the present I deny that there is the least mention made of any
interchange of members between Christ and the Devil, much less of any such
thing as frequent and ordinary; It Is true the Apostle says that he that is
joined to an harlot makes his members the members of an harlot, and on that
consideration, and conclusion, with part of the dignity of Believers, whose
persons are all the members of Christ, persuades them from the sin of
Fornication; That they may so much as fall into that sin, he does not here
intimate. That men not only in respect of themselves, and their principles of
sin, and pronenesse unto it, within, with the prevalency of Temptations, but
also eventually, notwithstanding any regard or respect to other external
prohibiting causes, may fall into all the sins from which they are dehorted,
Mr Goodwin has not proved as yet, nor shall I live, to see him do it.

Secondly, for a man to make himself the member of an harlot, is no more but
to commit Fornication: which whether it be Mr Goodwin's Judgment or no, that
none can fall into or be surprised with, but he is ipso facto cut of from the
Body of Christ thereby, I know not; Taking in the consideration of what was
spoken before, concerning the manner of Regenerate persons sinning, with what
shall be farther argued, I must profess, I dare not say so; In the mean time,
it is punctually denied, that Believers can fall into, or live in a course of
Whoredom and Adultery, and without such a course, they cease not according to
M. Goodwin's sense of these words, to be members of Christ, nor do they
otherwise become members of the Devil. There is nothing here then that
intimates such an interchange in the least.

Thirdly, for M. Goodwins criticisme upon the word (...): it is hardly worth
taking notice of.

For First, If by taking, there be meant taking away, the sense must be, that
they are first taken away from being members of Christ (the word expressing a
time past in that tendency) and then, made members of an Harlot: which First,
is not suited to the mind of M. Goodwin, who endeavors to prove their ceasing
to be members of Christ, by becoming members of an Harlot; the efficient cause
of their ceasing to be joined to Christ, consisting in their being joined with
an Harlot. And Secondly, destroys the whole scope of the Apostles reasoning in
the place, from the great unworthiness of such a way, or practice, as making
the members of Christ, to be the members of an Harlot, because none should so
be made, but those who had first creased to be members of Christ; and so his
Assertion instead of an effectual persuasive, should upon the matter be
entangled in a contradiction to it self.

And Secondly,. 44.
as there is nothing in the place to enforce that sense of the word, so there
is nothing in the word, to impose that sense upon the place; When our Savior
speaks to his Disciples Luke 9. 3. (...), he does not bid them take nothing
away for their journey, but take nothing with them. And so Mark 6. 6. Where
his command is, that (...), and in that of Math: 4. 6. When the Devil urged to
our Savior, (...), he did not intimate that the Angels should take him away
in their hands, but support him from hurt: when Jesus Ioh: 11 41. (...): he did
not take away his eyes out of his head, and cast them upward, no more then the
Angel did his hand, when (...), Rev: 10. 5. or the Apostles their voice, when
(...), Acts 4. 24. Nor does Christ command us to take away his yoke, in that
heavenly word of his, (...), Math: 11. 29. so that here is little help left to
this sense imposed on the place, under consideration, from the importance of
the word, and so consequently not the least countenance given to that horrible
interchange of members between Christ and the Devil, which is asserted as an
usual and frequent thing.

What he adds in the close of the Section,. 45.
is no less considerable than the beginning of it; for (says he) if it be no
dishonor to Christ, to take in such as have been members of the Devil, why
should it be any disparagement to him to reject such, who by their wicked and
abominable ways render themselves unworthy of such a Relation.

Ans. Believers hold not their Relation to Christ, upon any worthiness that is
in themselves for it, but upon the account merely of Grace, according to the
tenor of the Covenant of Mercy. That they may fall into such wicked and
abominable ways, as shall render them altogether unmeet for that Relation,
according to the Law of it, is that great Argument called petitio principii
which Mr Goodwin has used in this case an hundred times. But the comparison
instituted in the first words is admirable; Confessed it is, that it is no
dishonor to Jesus Christ; yea, that it is his great honor, seeing he came to
destroy the works of the Devil, to bind the strong man, to spoil his goods,
to destroy him that had the power of death, and to deliver them who by reason
of death were in bondage all their days, to deliver his people from their
sins, washing them in his blood, and to make them a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works; that it is no dishonor (I say) for him to
translate them from the power of Satan, into his own Kingdom, making them
meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, by redeeming them from their
vain Conversation, to do according as he intended, and to take his own, given
him of his Father, out of the hands of the Tyrant which held them under
bondage. Therefore having undertaken to keep them and preserve them, having so
overcome Satan in them, for them, by them, broken the head of the Serpent,
it is no dishonor for him, to loose ground given for his Inheritance, with his
subjects, members, brethren, children, bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, into the hand of the Devil again; what fort is so strong as to hold
out against such a battery? If it be no honor for Christ to bind Satan, and
to spoil his goods, then it is no dishonor for him to be bound by Satan and
to have his goods spoiled.

Another burden upon the shoulders of Mr Goodwin's Doctrine,. 46.
whereof he labors to deliver it, is the great Absurdity of the Repetition of
Regeneration, whereof there is no mention at all in the Scripture, and which
yet must be Asserted by him, unless he will affirm all that fall away at any
time irrecoverably to perish; which howsoever he waves at present, were with
much more probability according to his own principles, to be maintained, than
what he insisteth on.

But this repetition of Regeneration (says he) is not unworthy God, and for
men a blessed and happy accommodation; whether it be unworthy God or no, the
Scripture, and the nature of the thing will declare. The Accommodation that it
seems to afford unto men, being a plain encouragement to sin at the highest
rate imaginable, will perhaps not be found so Happy and Blessed unto them. With
great noise and clamor, has a charge been managed against the Doctrine of the
Saints Perseverance, upon the account of its giving supportment to the thoughts
of men, in and under the ways of sin; whether Truth and Righteousness have
been regarded in that charge, has been considered. Doubtless it were a matter
of no difficulty, clearly to evince that this Doctrine of the Repetition of
Regeneration, is of the very same tendency and import, which is falsely and
injuriously charged upon that of the Perseverance of the Saints; The worst that
a man thinks he can do by any act of sin, is but to sin himself quite out of
the favor of God, into a state of death, and desert of wrath. He can no
farther injure his soul, than to cast it into the condition of men by nature;
Tell this man, now, whom you suppose to be under the temptation to sin, at
least that he has in him that great fool the flesh which longs for Blessed
Accommodations to its self, whilst it makes provision to fulfill its lusts,
that if he should so do, this is an ordinary thing for men to do, and yet to be
renewed again and to have a Second Regeneration; do you not encourage him to
venture boldly to satisfy his sinful desires, having such a relief against
the worst that his thoughts and fears can suggest to him?

But whatever it be in respect of God or men, yet that so it may be Mr Goodwin
proves from. Heb. 6. 6. Where it is said, that it is impossible to renew some to
repentance, wherefore some may be renewed; and in Jude 12. Men are said to be
twice dead, therefore they may live twice Spiritually; The first proof seems
somewhat uncouth. The persons spoken of in that place are in M. G. judgment
Believers; there is no place of Scripture wherein he more tryumphs in his
endeavored confirmation of his Thesis. The Holy Ghost says expressly of the^,
that it is impossible to renew the^: therefore says M.G. it is possible; what is
of emphasis in the Argument mentioned arises from two things. 1. That they are
true Believers of which afterward. 2. That they fall totally away; This then
is the importance of M. Goodwins plea, from this place, If true believers fall
totally away, it is impossible they should be renewed to Repentance, therefore
if true Believers fall totally away, it is possible they should be renewed to
and by Repentance; that there is a falling away, and a renewing again by
Repentance of the same persons, we grant. That falling away is partial only,
which is incident unto true Believers, who, when God heales their backslidings,
are renewed by Repentance. To be renewed also by Repentance, is taken either
for the renovation of our Natures, and our change as unto state and condition,
and so it is the same with Regeneration and not to be repeated; or for a
Recovery by Repentance in respect of personal failings, so it is the daily
work of our lives. Jude says, some are twice dead; that is, utterly so, an
hyperbolicall expression to aggravate their condition. Those to whom the
Gospel is a favor of Death unto Death, may well be said to be twice dead;
unto the Death that they are involved in, and are obnoxious to by nature, they
add a second death, or rather, seal up their souls under the power and
misery of the other, by contempt of the means of Life and recovery; therefore
Regeneration may be reiterated: Quod erat Demonstrandum.

Much of the Section that remains, is taken up, in declaring in many words
without the least attempt of proof, that it is agreeable to the honor of God,
to renew men totally fallen away; that is, when those who have been quickened by
him, washed in the blood of his Son, made partakers of the Divine nature,
embraced in the arms of his Love, shall despise all this, dis-faith
themselves, reject the Lord and his Love, trample on the blood of the
Convenant, kill their souls, by depriving them of spiritual life, proclaim
to all the world, their dislike of him, and his Covenant of Grace; yet though
he has not any where revealed, that he will permit any one so to do, or that
he will accept of them again, upon their so doing; yet M. Goodwin affirming
that for him so to do, is agreeable to his Holiness and Righteousness, it is
fit that those who conceive themselves bound to believe what ever he says,
should think so too; for my part I am at liberty.

I should not farther pursue this discourse, nor insist on this digression, but
that M. Goodwin has taken advantage by the mention of Regeneration, to deliver
some rare notions of the nature of it, which deserve a little our farther
taking notice of, for which end doubtless he published them. To make way then
for his intendment, he informs us ( Sect: 29.) That Regeneration it self,
according to the Grammatical and proper signification of the word imports a
reiteration, or repetition of some generation or other; it cannot import a
Repetition of the natural all Generation of men; the sense of Nicodemus in
this point was Orthodox, who judged such a thing impossible, therefore it must
import a repetition of a spiritual generation, unless we shall say (which I
think is the road opinion) that it signifies only the spiritual generation
with a kind of reflection upon, and unto the birth Natural.

Ans. First, That the Grammatical sense of the word imports a Reiteration of
some generation, is only said; (...) has other signification in composition,
besides the intimating of a reiteration of the same thing: either in specie, or
individually, the same again; (...) would seem rather to enforce such an
Interpretation, than (...), which yet it does not: It is spoken of that which
has no birth properly at all, as Philo de Mundo, (...) of it self is only
through,

(...) Hom. (...). through a woody Country; (...), Resurrection, does not
import again, after another rising before, but a restoration from a lost
state; so is (...) used Math: 19. 28. to be regenerate, is to have a new, and
another generation, not any one repeated; In the place mentioned of John by M.
Goodwin, there is mention neither of a repetition of a former generation, nor
directly of a new one: Though it be so, it is not there called so; our Savior
at first says, (...), unless a man be borne from above: as the word is
elsewhere rendered, and properly signifies, as John 3. 31. %John 19. 11. %Mark.
15. 38. %James 3. 17. and sometimes of old or former days, as Acts 26. 5. once
only, it signifies again, Gal: 4. 9. but there joined with (...), which
restraines it. And in the exposition afterward of what he intended by that
Expression, he calls it simply a being borne of the water and the spirit, v. 5.
without the least intimation of the repetition of any birth; but only the
asserting of a new spiritual one; called a birth indeed, with allusion to the
birth Natural, which is the road opinion, well beaten ever since Christ first
trod that path. Besides, the very same thing which is expressed under the name of
Regeneration, being a spiritual birth, which a man had not before, is also
delivered unto us in such words, and terms, as manifest no reiteration of any
state, condition, or thing to be included therein; as Conversion to God, a
Quickening from death, Sanctification by the spirit, etc. all which manifest the
induction of a new Life and form, and not the Repetition of another; hence the
ancients called Baptism, Regeneration; being the initiall ordinance of
Christianity, and expressive of the new life, which in, and through Christ, we
receive; and that from Tit. 3. 5. Regeneration then neither in the import of
the word, nor in the nature of the thing, does require a reiteration of any
generation, but only the addition of a new one, to that which a man has
before; and whereunto this does allude. The receiving of a new spiritual Birth
and Life, is our Regeneration, Renovation, Resurrection, Quickening, implanting
into Christ, and the like: so that the foundation of all the ensuing discourse,
is a mere quagmire, where no firm footing can be obtained; and of the same
Nature is that which ensues; It is (says he) the common sense of Divines, that
the two generations mentioned, the Natural and spiritual, are membra
dividentia, and contra-distinguished the one unto the other; and so the Apostle
Peter too seems to state and represent them; as also our Savior himself Ioh:
3. 6. %Now there can hardly any instance be given, where the introducing of one
contrary form or quality into the Subject, is termed a reiteration, or
repetition of the other; Calefaction (for example) is never termed a repetition
of Frigefaction, nor Calefaction called a reiteration of Frigefaction; nor when
a Regenerate or mortifyed man dies his natural death, is he said to reiterate
or repeat his Spiritual death.

Ans, That in the term Regeneration two births are employed, may be granted:
that the same is intimated to be repeated, is denied: and not proved at all;
And therefore Mr Goodwin says well, that the introducing of a contrary form,
is not called the reiteration of an other, no more is it here; our new birth is
called our Regeneration, or new generation, in allusion to our natural birth,
not as a repetition of it, neither is the Allusion in respect of the contrary
qualityes wherewith the one, and the other are attended, but in respect of the
things themselves, in which regard, as they are not the same, so they are not
contrary but diverse. They are both births, the one Natural the other
Spiritual; Natural and Spiritual in that sense are not contrary qualityes,
but diverse adjuncts; and so are the two births compared, 1 Pet. 1. 23. John 1.
13. In which last place our Regeneration is expressed under the simple term of
being borne, with distinction to the natural birth, and not the least
intimation of the iteration of any birth or Generation subjoyned; so also is it
James 1. 18. so that hitherto little progress is made by Mr Goodwin toward
his intendment whatever it be; thus then he expresses it.

I rather ( says he) conceive that Regeneration which the Scripture makes
appropriable only unto persons living to years of discretion,. 48.
who generally in the days of their youth, degenerate from the innocence of
their childhood and younger years, and corrupt themselves with the principles
and ways of the world, relates not to the Natural generation as such, I
mean, as natural, but unto the Spiritual estate and condition of men in
respect of their Natural generation and birth, in and upon which they are if
not simply and absolutely yet comparatively, innocent, harmeles, free from
pride and malice; and inrespect of these qualifications, in Grace and favor
with God, upon the account of the death and sufferings of Christ for them, as
we shall afterward prove.

Here you have the sum of the design, and the Doctrine of Regeneration
cleared from all those vain and erroneous opinions, wherewith it has so long
been clouded. It is, the returning of men into the good state and condition
wherein they are borne, after they have degenerated into ways of wickedness;
we thought it had been the quickening of them, who are by nature dead in
trespasses and sins, their being begotten again by the will of God, the
bestowing of a new principle of Spirit and Life upon them, a Translation from
Death to Life, the opening of blind eyes, making them who were darkness, to be
light in the Lord. It seems we have all this while been in the dark, and that
Regeneration indeed, is only a returning to that condition from whence we
thought it had been a delivery; but let us a little see the Demonstration of
this new notion of Regeneration.

First, (he says) the Scripture makes it appropriable only to them who come to
years of discretion. Sir, your proof; we cannot take your bare word in a
thing of this importance. In the place your self chose to mention, as the
foundation you laid of the inferences you are now making, our Savior says,
it is a being borne of the spirit; does the Scripture make this appropriable only
unto men of discretion? Men only of discretion then can enter into the Kingdom
of God; for none, not so borne of the Spirit shall enter therein Ioh. 3. 5. If
none but men of discretion can be borne of the Spirit, then infants have no
other birth but only that of the flesh; and that which is borne of the flesh is
flesh, v. 6. Not capable of entering into the Kingdom of heaven; surely you
better deserve the title of durus pater infantum, than He to whom of old 'twas
given; perhaps a grosser figment was never framed by a man of Discretion.

Secondly, It is true, Infants are comparatively innocent, in respect of
Actual Transgressions but equally nocent and guilty with Sinners of
discretion, in respect of natural state and condition. They are no less
obnoxious to that death, from whence our Regeneration is a delivery, by the
bestowing of a new Spiritual life, than a sinner of an hundred years old; A
returning to this condition, it seems, is Regeneration. Quantum est in rebus
inane!

Thirdly, The qualifications of Infants not Regenerated, are merely negative
and that in respect of the acts of sin, not the habitual seed and root of
them; for in them dwells no good; that in respect of these qualifications of
Innocence that are in them by nature Antecedent to any Regeneration (all which
are resolved into a Natural impotency of perpetrating sin) they are accepted
in Grace and favor with God, had been another new notion, had not Pelagius and
Socinus before you fallen upon it; without Faith it is impossible to please God
Heb. 11. 6. And his wrath abides on them that Believe not. John 3. 36. That
Infants have or may have Faith, and not be regenerated, will scarcely be
granted by them who believe the Spirit of Christ to cause Regeneration where he
is bestowed Tit. 3. 5. And all Faith to be the Fruit of that Spirit; Gal 5. 26,
27. Farther for the qualifications of Infants by Nature; how are they brought
clean, from that which is unclean? Are they not conceived in sin and
brought forth in iniquity? Or was that David's hard case alone? If they are
borne of the flesh, and are flesh, if they are unclean, how come they to be in
that estate, upon the account of their Qualifications accepted in the Love and
favor of him, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity? If this be the
Doctrine of Regeneration that M. G. preaches I desire the Lord to bless them
that belong unto him, in a deliverance from attending thereunto. Of the Effects
of the death of Christ, in respect of all children I shall not now treat; That
they should be saved by Christ not washed in his Blood, not sanctified by his
Spirit, (which to be is to be Regenerate,) is another new notion of the new
Gospel.

The Countenance which Mr Goodwin would beg to his Doctrine, from that of our
Savior to his Disciples, Except ye be turned and become as little Children ye
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; reproving their ambition and worldly
thoughts from which they were to be weaned that they might befit for that
Gospel state and employment whereunto he called them, and wherein they were to
serve him, does no more advantage him nor the cause he has undertaken, than
that other caution of our Savior to the same persons to be wise asserpents and
innocent as Doves, would do him that should undertake to prove that Christians
ought to become pigeons or snakes: Thus much then we have learned of the mind
of M. G. by this digression; 1. That no children are Regenerate; 2. That they
are all accepted with God through Christ, upon the account of the good
Qualifications that are in them; 3. That Regeneration is a man's returing to the
state wherein he is borne; And having taken out this Lesson, which we shall
never learn by heart whilst we live, we may now proceed.

I shall only add to the maine of the business in hand,. 49.
that so long as a man is a child of God, he cannot, he need not to repeat his
Regeneration. But that one who has been the child of God, should cease to be
the child of God, is somewhat strange. How can that be done amongst men? that
he should cease to be such a man's son, who was his son? Those things that
stand in Relation, upon any thing that is past, and therefore irrevocable,
cannot have their beings continued, and their Relation dissolved; it is
impossible but that cause and effect must be related one to another; such is
the relation between Father and Son; The foundation of it is an act past and
irrevocable, and therefore the Relation it self is indissoluble; Is it not so
with God and his Children; when they once stand in that Relation, it cannot be
dissolved. But of these things hitherto.

To proceed with that place of Scripture which I laid as the foundation of this
discourse.. 50.
The general way of Lusts dealing with the soul the bringing forth of sin,
whereof there are two acts expressed, v. 14. the one of drawing away, the other
enticing, is to be insisted on. Upon the first, the person tempted is (...),
drawn off, or drawn away; and upon the second he is (...), enticed, or
entangled.

The First stirring of sin is to draw away the soul from what it ought to be
fixed upon, by its rising up irregularly to some delightful object. For a man
to be drawn away by his lust, is to have his Lust drawn out to some object
suited to it, wherein it delights. Now this drawing away, denotes two things.

1. The turning of the soul from the actual rectitude of its frame toward
God. Though the soul cannot always be in actual Exercise of Grace toward
God, yet it ought always to be in an immediate readiness to any Spiritual
duty, upon the account whereof, when occasion is administered, it does as
naturally go forth to God, as a vessel full of water flows forth when vent
is given unto it. Hence we are commanded to pray always. Our Savior gives a
Parable to instruct his Disciples, that they ought to pray (...) Luke 18. 1.
And we are commanded to pray (...), without ceasing or intermission, 1 ^hess.
5. 17. Which the same Apostle in an other place calls praying (...) in every
place: namely as occasion is administered. It is not the perpetual exercise of
this duty (as the Jews some of them have ridiculously interpreted the first
Psalm of reading the Law day and night) which would shut out and cut off all
other duties, not only of men's Callings and Employments as to this Life, but
all other duties of the ways and worship of God whatever; But it is only the
readiness and promptitude of the heart in its constant frame to that necessary
duty, that is required; Now he who is (...) by lust, is drawn off from this
frame; that is, he is interrupted in it by his lust, diverting unto some
sinful object. And as to this particular, there is a great difference betwixt
the sinning of Believers, and those who arise not beyond that height which the
power of Conviction bears them oftentimes up unto. For

1. The maine of a true Believers watching in his whole life,: 51.
and in the course of his walking with God, is directed against this
off-drawing from that habitual frame of his heart by lust and sin. His great
business is, as the Apostle tells us, to take the whole armor of God to
him, that sin if it be possible, may make no approach to his soul. Ephesians. 6.
13. It is to keep up their spirits to a hate of every evil way and to delight
in God continually; and because they cannot attain in this life unto
perfection, they cry out of the power of sin leading them captives to the Law
thereof. They would have their wills dead to sin, wholly dead, and have
trouble that they are not so, as to the general frame of of their spirits how
often so ever they be drawn off. For other persons they have truly no such frame
at all, whatever they may be cut into the likeness of, by the sharpness of
Scripturall convictions that come upon them; and therefore they watch not, as
to the keeping of it. The deeper you dive into them, the more near you come to
their hearts, the worse they are: their very inward parts is wickedness, I
speak now of the ordinary frame of the one and other.

This drawing of by sin in Believers, is by the power of sin, in opposition
to their Will. Their wills lie against it to the utmost: thev would not (as was
showed,) be so drawn off. But as for the others as has been shown, however
their minds may be enlightened, and their consciences awakned, and their
Affections corrected and restrained, their wills are wholly dead in sin.

Secondly, when a man is (...) or drawn away there are stricken out between
the lust and the pleasing object, some glances of the heart, with thoughts of
sin. When lust has gone thus far, if a violent temptation fall in, the
person to whom it does so befall, may be carried, or rather hurried out and
surprised into no small advance toward the perpetration of sin, without the
least delight in the sin or consent of the will unto it, if he be a godly
man. So was it in the case of David in the cutting of the lap of the garment of
Saul. Lust stirred in him, drew him off from his frame of dependence on God,
and by the advantage of Saul's presence stirred up thoughts of selfe-security,
and advantage in him, which carried him almost to the very act of sin, before
he recovered himself. Then ( I say) is a man drawn away, not only in respect
to the Term from whence, but also of that whereunto, when the thoughts of the
object presented as suitable to lust are cast in, though immediately rejected.
This I intend by this acting of sin; Which although it be our sin, as
having its rise and spring in us, and is continually to be lamented, yet when
it is not accompaned with any delight of the Heart or consent of the Will, but
the thought of it, is like a piece of fiery iron cast into water which makes a
sudden commotion or noise, but yet is suddenly quenched, it is that which
regenerate men are, and may be subject to; which also keeps them humble all
their days. There is more in this drawing away, than a single thought or
apprehension of evil amounts to, (which may be without the least sin. To
know evil is not evil) but yet is short of the souls consent unto it.

The second way wherein lust proceeds in tempting is by enticing the soul,:
53.
and he who is so dealt withallby it is said to be (...), to be enticed. There
is something more in this, than in being only drawn away. The word here used is
twice mentioned in the 2 Epistle of Peter 2 chapter. Once it is rendered to
beguile (...), v. 14. And in the other alluring v. 18. It comes (as is
commonly known) from (...), a bait, which is from (...), or (...) deceit,
because the end of a bait is to deceive, and to catch by deceiving. Thence
(...) is to entice, to allure, to entangle, as men do fishes, and birds with
baits. That which by this expression the Holy Ghost intends, is the
prevalency of Lust in drawing the soul unto that, which is by the Casuists
termed Delectatio morosa, a secret delight in the evil, abiding some space
upon it. So that it would do that which it is tempted and enticed unto, were it
not forbidden; as the fish likes the bait well enough, but is afraid of the
Hook. The soul for a season is captivd to like the sin, and so is under the
power of it, but is afraid of the guilt. It sticks only at this, how shall
it do this great thing and sin against the Lord. Now though the mind never
frame any intention of fulfilling the evil, wherewith the soul is thus
entangled, or of committing that sin whereunto it is allured and enticed, yet
the affections having been cast into the mould of sin for a season, and
conformed unto it by delight, (which is the conformity of the affections to the
thing delighted in) This is an high degree of sin; and that because it is
directly contrary to that death unto sin, and the crucifying of the flesh and
the lusts thereof, which we are continually called unto. It is in a sense, a
making provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: provision is made
though the flesh be not suffered to feed thereon, but only delight it self
with beholding of it:

I shall not deny but this also may befall a true Believer,. 54.
it being chiefly employed in Romans 7. But yet with wide difference, from the
condition of other persons, in their being under the power of the deceits and
beguilements of sin. For first this neither does nor can grow to be the
habitual frame of their hearts; because as the Apostle tells us they are
dead to sin and cannot live any longer therein Romans 6. 2. And, their old man
is crucified with Christ that the body of sin might be destroyed, v. 6. Now
though a man should abst^ine from all actual sins or open committing of
sin all his days, yet if he have any habitual delight in sin, and
defiles his soul with delightful contemplations of sin, he lives to
sin, and not to God, which a Believer cannot do, for he is not under the Law
but under Grace. To abide in this state, is to wear the garment spotted with
the flesh. But now take another Person, however heightened, and wrought up by
convictions, unless it be when Conscience is stirred up, and some affrightment
is put upon him, he can as his leisure affords, give his heart the swing in
inordinate affections, or what else pleases and suiteth his state, condition,
temper and the like.

2. A Believer is exceedingly troubled, upon the account of his being at any
time led captive to the power of sin in this kind; and the review of the
frame of his spirit, wherein his affections were by delight conformed to any
sin, is a matter of sore trouble and deep humiliation to him I am of Austins
mind, De Nup-Concupis. Cap. 8: that it is this perpetrating of sin, and not
the actual committing of it, which the Apostle complains of Romans 7. Two
things persuade me hereunto. First, That it is the ordinary course and walking
of a regenerate man, that Paul describes in that place; and not his
extraordinary falls and failings, under great and extraordinary temptations.
This is evident from the whole manner of his discourse, and scope of the place.
Now ordinarily, through the grace of God, the Saints do not do outwardly, and
Practically, the things they would not; that is, commit sin actually, as to
the outward act; but they are ordinarily only swayed to this intanglement, by
the baits of sin. Secondly, It is the sole work of Indwelling sin, that
the Apostle there describes, as it is in its self, and not as it is
advantaged by other Temptations, in which it carries not Believers out to
actual sins, as to such accomplishment of them, which is their state in
respect of great temptations only. It is then I say the great burden of their
souls, that they have been in their affections at any time dealing with the
baits of sin, which causes them to cry out for help, and fills them with
a perpetual selfe-abhorrency and condemnation.

3. In such surprisalls of sin, although the Affections may be ensnared, and
the judgment, and Conscience by their tumultuating, dethroned for a season,
yet the Will, still makes head against sin in Believers, and cries out,
that whether it will or no, it is captived, and violently overborne, calling
for relief, like a man surprised by an enemy. There is an active renitency in
the Will, against the sin, whose bait is exposed to the Soul, and wherewith
it is enticed, allured, or entangled; when of all the faculties of the Soul,
if any thing be to be done in any act of sin in Unregenerate men, the will is
the ringleader. Conscience may grumble, and Judgment may plead, but the Will
runs headlong to it. And thus far have I (by way of digression) proceeded
in the difference there is, betwixt Regenerate and Unregenerate men, as to the
root and foundation of sin, as also to their ordinary walking: what is
farther added by the Apostle, in the two following degrees, in the place
mentioned, because thence also may some light be obtained to the business in
hand, shall be briefly insisted on.

The next thing in the Progress of sin,. 55.
is Lusts conceiving. When it has turned off the heart from its Communion with
God, or consideration of its duty, and entangled or hampered the Affections, in
delight with the sinful object proposed, prevailing with the soul to dwell
with some complacency upon the thoughts of sin, it then falls to
conceiving; that is, it warmes, foments, cherishes thoughts and delights of
the sin entertained, until it so far prevail upon the will, (in them in
whose wills there is an opposition unto it) that being wearied out with the
solicitations of the flesh, it gives over its power, as to its actual
predominant exercise, and sensibly dissenteth not, from the sin whereunto it
is tempted. That this may sometimes befall a Regenerate Person, I have granted
before, and what is the difference herein betwixt them, and Unregenerate
persons, may be collected from what has been already delivered.

Of the next step of sin,. 56.
which is, its bringing forth, or the actual accomplishment of the sin so
conceived as above expressed, there is the same Reason. (...), it brings out
of its womb, the Child of sin, which it had conceived; it is the actual
perpetration of sin formerly consented unto, that is expressed under this
Metaphor. I have little to add upon this head, to what was formerly spoken.
For,

1. As they are not the sins of daily infirmities that are here intended, in
the place of the Apostle under consideration, but such as lie in an immediate
tendency unto Death, as to their eminent guilt; as also being the fruit of the
hearts conception of sin, by fomenting and warming thoughts of sin, with
delight, until consent unto it be prevalent in the soul, so falls of this
nature in the Saints, are extraordinary, and always attended with their loss of
peace, the weakeneng of their Faith, wounding of their souls, and
obnoxiousnesse, without Repentance unto death. God indeed, has provided better
things for them, but for themselves, they have done their endeavor, to destroy
their own souls.

2. That God never suffers his Saints to fall thus, but it is for the
accomplishment of some very glorious end of his, in their afflictions, trialls,
patience, humiliation, which he will bring about. These ends of God are many
and various: I shall not enter into a particular discourse concerning them.

3. That an impenitent continuance in, and under the guilt of such a sin, is
a sore sign of an heart, that neither has, nor ever had any true faith. In
others, there is a truth of that of Austin, who affirmed, that he dared say,
that it might be good for some, to have fallen into some eminent particular
sin, for their humiliation and caution all their days.

4. That this frequent conception of sin, and bringing of it forth, in
persons who have been heightened by conviction to a great regularity of walking
and conversation, is the means, whereby they do go forth unto that which is
mentioned in the last place; which is finishing of sin; that is, so to be
brought under the power of it, as to complete the whole work of sin. Now
men bring it forth by the temptations, and upon the surprisalls forementioned;
but they that come to finish it, or do the work of it, in them it will bring
forth death. This I take to be the intendment of that expression, (...), sin
perfected; The word (...), is no where used in the New Testament* (...), and
(...), are; there is (...), which is, not to do any one act which the Law
requires, but to walk studiously, and constantly, according to the rule
thereof: and so (...), as the Apostle uses it Philip: 1. 6. where we translate
it, as here (...). To perfect the good work, is to walk in the way of Grace,
and the Gospel, unto the end. So to perfect sin, is to fulfill the work of
sin, and to walk in the way of sin, to be under the dominion and reign of
sin so far, as to be carried out in a course of sinning; and this is that
alone, which we exempt Believers from; which that they are exempted from, unto
all that has formerly been spoken, I shall add the consideration of one place
of Scripture, being turned aside from my thoughts of handling this at large, as
the second part of the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, the former being
grown under my hands, beyond expectation.

Now this place is, the I John 3. 9. Whatsoever is borne of God, does not
commit sin,. 57.
for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is borne of God.
A place of Scripture, that always has amazed the adversaries of the Doctrine,
which hitherto through the Grace of God, we have asserted; being in its self,
fully sufficient to captivate every understanding, unto the obedience of its
Truth, that is not resolved to cleave to a contrary Conclusion, let what
Demonstration soever lie against it. In the defense of the Doctrine under
consideration, should we use Expressions of the same importance, with these
here used by the Apostle, as we should abundantly satisfye our selves, that we
had delivered our minds and sense, to the understanding of any indifferent
Person, with whom we might have to do, so we should by no means, avoid all
those imputations of folly and error, that our Doctrine suffers under, from
the men that have entertained an enmity against it, as it is held forth in
equivalent expressions by us. The Authority of the Holy Ghost, has gained thus
much upon our Adversaries, that when he asserteth in express, and expressive
terms, the very thing, or things that in us are called folly, that evasions
should be studied, and pains taken to rack his words, to a sense which they
will not bear, rather than plainly to deny his Authority. But let the words,
with the scope and tendency be considered. (^.) The scope and intendment of the
Apostle in the place is to give a discriminating character of the Children of
God, and the Children of the Devil; thus he fully expresses himself unto us
v. 10. In this (says he) the Children of God are manifested, and the Children
of the Devil, whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that
loves not his Brother. And withal to press on an Exhortation against sin,
whereunto he uses the Argument that lies in the following words. If any one
sin that thinks himself to be borne of God, he deceives himself. v. 7.
Little children let no man deceive you; he that does righteousness, is
righteous even as he is righteous, He that commits sin is of the Devil:
But how proves he this? In these words, Whosoever is borne of God sins not,
does not, cannot sin. Such is the Genius and Nature of the Children of God,
of them that are borne of him, that they do not, they cannot sin. You are
persuaded that you are so borne of God, therefore you must press after such a
frame, such an ingenie and disposition, such a principle, as that thereby you
cannot sin: it must manifest its self to be in you, if you be the Children
of God.

Now whereas it is offered by M. Goodwin Cap. 10. Sect: 27. page 194.. 58.
That the context, or scope of the whole place, does not invite such an
Exposition as is usually insisted on, because ( says he) the intent and drift
of the Apostle from verse 3. even to the end of the Chapter (as he that does
but run the context over may read) is not to show or argue, Whether the
sons of God, may possibly in time so degenerate, as to live sinnefully, and
dye impenitently, but to evince this, that these who claim the great honor
and privilege of being the Children of God, cannot justify or make good this
claim neither unto others, nor unto themselves: but by an Holy and Christian
Life and conversation, now it is one thing to argue, and prove, who are the
Sons of God at present; another, whether they who are such at present must of
necessity always so continue. The former is the Apostles theme in the
Context, the latter he is wholly silent of.

I say, it is evident that the scope of the place, is to evince, that in the
Children of God, those that are borne of him, there is such a Principle,
Genius, a new nature, as that upon the account thereof, they cannot sin, and
therefore that those who have not such principles in them, what ever their
pretenses be, are not indeed borne of God; and in this he manifests, that
those who are indeed borne of God, cannot possibly so degenerate, as to fall
into total impenitency, so as to become Children of the Devil, which he
emphatically affirms.

2. He does indeed declare, that none can make good their Title to be children
of God, but those who can justify their claim, by an holy and Christian
conversation; but yet moreover, he makes good the Assertion by this farther
discovery which he makes of their new nature, to be such, as that they cannot
sin, or degenerate into a condition of lying under the power of a vain
conversation: so that though his intent should not be primarily, to manifest
that those who are at present the Children of God, cannot Apostatize, but must
so continue; yet it is to confirm their Nature, and Genius, to be such, with
the principles which from God they have received, that so it shall be with
them, so they shall abide; and to this he is not silent, but eminently
expressive.

The Context being thus clear,. 59.
the words themselves are a Proposition or Thesis, and a Reason for the
confirmation of the Truth of that Proposition. The Proposition is ready at hand
in the words: He that is borne of God, does not, cannot commit sin. The
Reason of the Proposition confirming the Truth thereof, is twofold; 1. Because
he is borne of God; 2. Because, his seed whereof he is so borne remains.

The Proposition is universal, (...); every one that is borne of God; whence
these two things ensue. 1. The truth of it, has a necessary cause or causes;
Universal Propositions must have so, or they are not true. If that which is
their ground may be otherwise, it invalidates their certainty; such then must
be the cause of this Assertion of the Apostle.

2. That it compriseth all and every one that is interested in that which is
the cause of the certainty of this universal Assertion or proposition; every
on who is borne of God, that has this seed, be he young or old, weak or
strong, wise or foolish, exercised in the ways of God, or newly entered into
them, all is one; whosoever is thus interested in the foundation, is equally
interested in the inference:

In the proposition it self may be considered,. 60.
the subject, and what is affirmed of it. The subject is, every one that is
borne of God. That which is affirmed of it, is, sins not, cannot sin.

1. For the first viz. the Subject; they are those which are borne of God; and
who they are that are so borne of God, the Scripture is clear in; neither is
there any difference of importance, as to the intendment of this expression.
Those who suppose that Believers of some eminency only are denoted in it, do
not consider that all Believers whatever are shares in the Grace intended
therein; they are all said to be borne again not of the will of flesh but of
God, John 1. 13. For it is ascribed to all Believers on the name of Christ v.
12. He begets them all of his own will. James 1. 18. as also 1 Epistle of
Peter 1. chapter 23. verse, he is said to beget them, as to quicken them 2.
Ephesians. 11 And they to be borne of him, as they are quickened or raised from the
dead. Two things are intimated in this Expression.

1. A new principle, habit or Spiritual Life which such persons have; hence
they are said to be borne; as they who are borne in the world are partakers of
a vital principle, that is the foundation of all their actions, so have they
here a new Life, a new vital principle, by their being borne are they made
partakers of it.

2. The divine original of that principle, or life is from God. They have the
principle of Life, immediately from him, and therefore are said to be borne of
God, and both these considerations are here used as descriptions of the
Subject: and in the close of the Reason of the Proposition, they are insisted
on, as the cause of that Effect of not sinning; he sins not because he is
borne of God; both the nature of the principle it self which in it self is
abiding, and the rise or original that it has from God, have an influence
into that causality that is ascribed to it; but about this there can be no
great contest.

2. Secondly That which is affirmed of every such person,: 61.
is, that he commits not sin. That this Expression is to be attended with
its restrictions and limitations is evident, from that contrariety wherein, in
its whole latitude it stands to sundry other Testimonies in the Book of God;
yea in this very Epistle. There is none that does good and sins not, says
Solomon 1 Kings 8. and In many things we sin all says James in the 3. James
4. And this Apostle puts all out of question, by convincing the best of
Saints, that have communion with the Father and Son, that by saying we have
no sin, by a denial of it, we involve our selves in the guilt of it. If we
(we Apostles, we who have fellowship with the Father and the Son,) say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, 1 John 1. 8. ( does not commit sin
then, cannot be taken absolutely for does not sin at all.) There is a
Synechdoche in the words; and they must be restrained to some kind of sin, or
to some manner or degree in, or of sinning. Some say he does not, cannot sin,
is, they do not commit sin with delight, not deliberately and with their
full and whole will, without reluctance and opposition in their wills unto
sin; (which reluctance is at a vast distance, from the reluctance that is
raised in wicked men from the convictions of their Concience and judgment,)
which sense is canvassed by M. Goodwin to no advantage at all Sect. 25. For in
the way and manner formerly explained, this may well take place. Commits not
sin then, is, does not so commit sin as that sin should reign in him
spoken of and prevail with him to death: There is an Emphasis and intention in
the words; Commits not sin; that is, does not so commit it, as to be given
up to the power of it; he does not commit sin in such a way as to be
separated from communion with God thereby; which is only done when sin takes
the Rule or reign in any Person.

This Exposition M. Goodwin says,. 62.
if it can be made to stand upright, will bear the weight of the whole cause
depending alone, but as it is, it argues weakness to determine for our own
sense, in a Controversy or Question, without giving a very substantial Reason
for the Exposition. I doubt if M. Goodwins discourses in this Treatise, were to
be tried by this Rule, a man might upon very substantial grounds and reasons
call many of his assertions into Controversy; and because he adds that such
is his hard hap he can meet with no reasons at all, I must needs question
whether he made any dilligent search or no, to this purpose shall supply him
with one, or two, that lie hard at hand.

This then to be the intendment of the words is evident.

1. From the scope of the place and aim of the Apostle therein: This is to
distinguish (as was said) betwixt the Children of God and of the Devil. The
children of the Devil commit sin v. 8. He that commits sin is of the
Devil, as he gives an instance of one that did so sin, v. 12. Cain (says he)
was of the Devil, he was of that wicked one and he commits sin. How did
Cain commit sin? impenitently, to death, that is the committing of sin
which is ascribed to them that are of the Devil, of the wicked one; Now (says
he whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin; that is, he does not so
commit sin as the Children of the Devil that wicked one do; He sins not to
death with impenitency.

2. The same Apostle does most eminently clear his own intendment in this
expression Chap: 5. v: 17, 18. of this Epistle, All unrighteousness is sin
there is a sin not unto death, we know that whosoever is borne of God,
sins not, but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked
one touches him not. That expression v. 18. Sineth not, stands in opposition
to the sin mentioned v. 17. Sin unto death: there is a sin unto death;
but he that is borne of God sins not unto death; So that both the context
and the Exposition of the words, given in a parrallell place, affords us the
sense insisted on.

Three reasons are tendered by Mr Goodwin against this exposition,. 63.
and many more (says he) are at hand, which it seems he is willing to spare
for another season. Of those that he is pleased to use, I have already
considered that which is of the chiefest importance, being taken from the scope
of the place. It has been already declared, not only that the sense by him
urged, is not suitable to the intendment of the Holy Ghost, and that M. G. is
not a little mistaken in his Analysis of the Chapter, but that the exposition
insisted on by us, is from thence enforced.

1. His other reasons are, First, That the Grammar or letter of the Phrase
breaths not the least air of such a sense.

Ans. That the Expression is Synecdochicall was before affirmed, what it
imports under the power of that figure, is the Grammatical sense of the
words. To the Grammatical regularity, and signification of them, does their
figurativenesse belong. Let the words be restrained, as the figure requires,
and the sense is most proper, as was signified.

2. But Secondly, says he, The Phrase of committing sin, is no where in the
Scripture found in such a sense, as to sin with final impenitency or to
sin to death.

Ans. The contrary has been demonstrated. The same phrase necessarily
imports no less. v. 8. of this Chapter, and an equivalent expression beyond
all contradiction intending the same, Chap: 5. 17, 18. Besides a Phrase may be
so circumstantiated, as to be in one, only place, restrained to a sense, which
it does not elsewhere necessarily import. So that notwithstanding these
Exceptions, the Exposition of the words is clear, as before given in. And yet
this is all M. G. produces as his ground, and foundation, whereon to stand in
denying ths proposition, he that is borne of God sins not, that is, falls
not under the power of reigning sin, sins not to death as the Children of
the wicked one, which I shall leave under that consideration wherewith it is
educed from the scope of the Text, and the parallel place of Chap. 5. 16, 17.
The truth is there is not much need to contend about this expression, M. G.
granting that the intendment of it is, that such as are borne of God do not
walk ordinarily and customarily in any ways of known sin Sect: 28. Which (as
he says) is the import of that Phrase (...), (the contrary whereof might yet
be easily evinced) he makes no trade or occupation of sinning, that is, he
does not sin in an inconsistency of communion with God, in the Covenant of
his Grace. Now in this sense he grants this Proposition, he that is borne of
God sins not, i. e. ordinarily or customarily, that is so as not to be
accepted of God: that is, no Believer sins at such a rate as not to be
accepted with God. Add now hereunto the ground and reason of this Assertion,
viz. His being borne of God, and the abiding of the seed in him, and we have
obtained all that we desire to evince from this place. Because such an one is
borne of God, (which is a Reason which holds good to Eternity being an act
irrevocably past) and because the seed abides in him, he cannot sin
ordinarlly or customarily: which kind of sinning alone (as is supposed) can
eject the abiding seed; that is, he sins not beyond the rate of sins of
infirmity, nor in any such way as should render him incapable of communion or
acceptance with God.

The Apostle nextly advances farther with his design and says, He that is
borne of God cannot sin: that is, That sin which he sins not, he cannot
sin;. 64.
He cannot fall under the power of reigning sin unto death. I confess the
words can and cannot, are variously used in the Scriptures; some kind of
impossibility in one respect or other (for things may be in some regard
impossible, that are not so absolutely) it always denotes. The whole of the
variety in this kind, may be referred to two heads.

1. That which is morally impossible. Of that it is said, that it cannot be
done 2 Cor. 13. 8. Says Paul, we can do nothing against the Truth. And Acts 4.
20. Say the Apostles, we cannot but speak the things we have seen and heard.
It was morally impossible that ever any thing should have been done by Paul
against the truth; or that the Apostles having received the Spirit should not
speak what they had seen and heard of Christ. And of many things that are thus
morally impossible, there are most certain and determinate causes, as to make
the thing so impossible as in respect of the event, to be absolutely
impossible. It is morally impossible that the Devil should do that which is
Spiritually good, and yet absolutely impossible. There is more in many a thing
that is morally impossible than a mere opposition to Justice; as we say Illud
possumus quod jure possumus. The causes of moral impossibility may be such, as
to tie up the thing which it relates unto, in an everlasting nonfu^urition.
There is also

2. An impossibility that is Physical, from the nature of the things
themselves. So Jerem. 13. 23. %Can the Aethyopian change his skin? that is, He
cannot. Mat. 7. 18. %A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an
evil tree bring forth good fruit. That is, nothing can act contrary to its
own natural principles: And as we shall see afterward, there is of this
impossibility in the [ cannot] here mentioned. They cannot do it, upon the
account of the new Spiritual nature wherewith they are endued.

Now there may be a third kind of impossibility in Spiritual things, arising
from both these, which One has not ineptly called Ethico-physicall, or
morally-naturall, partaking of the nature of both the other. It is moral
because it relates to duty, what is to be done or not to be done. And it is
Physical because it relates to a cause or principle that can, or cannot
produce the effect. So our Savior tells the Pharisees; How can ye being
evil, speak good things. Or ye cannot Mat. 12. 34. %You cannot hear my words
John 8. 43. It was morally impossible they should either speak or hear, that
is, either believe or do that which is Spiritually good, having no principles
that should enable them thereunto, having no root that should bear up unto
fruit; being evil trees in themselves, and having a principle, a root
continually, universally, uninterruptedly, inclining, and disposing them an
other way, to acts of a quite contrary nature. Of this kind is that
impossibility here intimated. The effect denied is morally impossible, upon the
account of the internal Physical cause hindering of it.

However then the word in the Scripture may be variously taken, yet here it is
from adjacent circumstances, evidently restrained to such a signification as in
respect of the event, absolutely rejects the thing denied. The gradation of
the Apostle also leads us to it. He sins not, nay, he cannot sin: He
cannot sin, rises in the Assertion of that before expressed He sins not:
which absolutely rejects the gloss that some seek to put upon the words,
namely, that cannot sin is no more but cannot sin easily: and cannot sin
but as it were with difficulty, such is the Antipathy and habitual opposition
which they have to sin, which Mr Goodwin adhereth unto: For besides,

That this is in it self false, there being no such Antipathie in any to
sin, but that they may easily fall into it, yea and with great difficulty and
labor do restrain from it, as the Apostle argues at large Romans 7: So is it
also flatly contradictory to the words themselves: the Apostle says, He that
is borne of God sins not; cannot sin; He can sin (says this Gloss)
though difficultly; now he that can sin difficultly, can sin: can sin,
and cannot sin, are flatly contradictory; He cannot then sin at all, the
sin that is intended in the place, of whom it is said he cannot sin.

Thus we have cleared the first Proposition in the words, both as to the
Subject, every one that is borne of God; and the Predicate, sins not, cannot
sin, Which last expression, taken in its only proper and most usual
signification, denotes an Impossibility of the event, and plainly confirms
in direct terms the position we insist on from the words.

Mr Goodwin knows not well,. 65.
(If I am able to gather any thing of his thoughts, from his expressions to the
Argument in hand,) what to say to this Assertion of the Apostles. The Argument
he intends to deal withal from the place he casts into this form, He
that sins not neither can sin, cannot fall away, whosoever is borne of God
sins not, neither can sin: Ergo,

Coming to the consideration of that expression [ cannot sin] he finds out,
as he supposes, four several acceptations in the Scripture, of the word [
cannot] and gives us an account of his thoughts upon the consideration of
the^, that in respect of these senses both Propositions are false. Now one of
the Propositions being the express language and literal Expression of the
Holy Ghost, not varyed in the least, there is no way to relieve himself, from
being thought and conceived to give the lie to the Blessed Spirit of God, by
flatly denying what he peremptorily affirms, but only by denying the word [
cannot] to be taken in this place, in any of the senses before mentioned; Does
he then fix on this course for his own extrication? Does he give in another
sense of the word, which he accepts and grants that in that sense the
affirmation of the Holy Ghost may be true? Not in the least? Yea plainly for
one of the senses he supposes himself to have found out of the word [ cannot]
viz. That it is said of men, they cannot do such or such a thing, because of
their averseness and indisposition to it, which he exemplifyeth in that of
Christ to the Pharisees John 8. 43. He afterward more than intimates, that
this is the sense, wherein the words cannot sin are in this place to be
taken. Sect. 34. So that he will not allow the Holy Ghost to speak the truth,
although he take his words in what sense he pleases. Yea and adding a fifth
sense, Sect. 31. Which is all it seems he could find out, (for we hear not
of any more) he denies that to be the meaning of the place, and so shuts up
the mind of the Holy Ghost into some of those significatio^s, wherein if the
words be taken (he says) they are false. The Discourse of Mr Goodwin Sect. 28,
29, 30. (being taken up with the Consideration of the various significations of
the word [ cannot] and his inferences thereon; taking it in this place, this
way or that way, then it is so or so, showing himself very skillful at fencing
and warding off the force of our Arguments, as perhaps his thoughts of himself
were upon a review of what he had done) we are not concerned in. And though it
were very easy to mnifest that in the distribution of his instances, for the
exemplification of the several significations which in part he feigneth, and
fastneth upon the words, he has been overtaken with many gross mistakes, some
of them occasioned by other corrupt principles than those now under
consideration, yet none of the senses insisted on by him, coming really up to
the intendment of the Holy Ghost without any disadvantage to our cause in hand,
being wholly inconcerned therein, we may pass by that whole Harangue.

That which looks toward the Argument under Consideration, appears first
in Sect. 31. which he thus proposes: If the said Argument understands the
Phrase [cannot sinne] according to the fifth and last import mentioned of the
word [cannot] wherein it sounds an utter and absolute incapacity and
impossibility, then in this sense the major Proposition is granted: viz. He
that does not, nor can sin cannot fall away from his Faith: yet the minor is
tardy which says, Whosoeoer is borne of God sins not, neither can sin;
for he that is borne of God is in no such incapacity of sinning; of sinning I
mean in the sense formerly asserted to the Scripture in hand, which amounts
to an absolute impossibility for him so to sin.

Ans. Because this seems to be the sense intended in the Argument, and the
minor Proposition in this sense to be built upon the Scripture in hand, let us
consider whether the Reason which is assigned for the said Assertion, does
necessarily enforce such a sense thereon. What we understand by this Phrase
both as to that sin that is here intended, and that impossibility of
commiting it, or falling into it often, in that expression [ cannot] has been
before discovered. An impossibility it is of the event, from the causes above
mentioned that the holy Ghost intends. An utter, and absolute incapacity to
sin, on any account, we assert not; An impossibility of so sinning, in
respect of the event, for the reasons and from the causes above mentioned, the
holy Ghost averreth. In this sense the first Proposition is granted, He that
does not commit sin nor can sin, cannot fall away from his Faith, or cannot
utterly loose it. The Minor which is the express language of the holy Ghost is
questioned and found tardy, that is, (as I suppose) false: and the Reason is
added namely, that he that is borne of God is in no such incapacity of sinning;
that is, of sinning in that kind of sinning which is here intended, which
amounts to an impossibility for him so to sin: Not to play fast and loose,
under those ambiguos expressions of incapacity and absolute impossibility, the
Event is positively denied upon the account of the prohibiting causes of it,
and the incapacity asserted, relates not to the internal frame and principle
only, but respects also other Considerations. Whether these are such as to
bear the weight of this Exposition, is that which comes nextly to be
discussed. viz. The causes of this state and condition, of those who are thus
borne of God, and the Reasons investing that universal Proposition, every one
that is borne of God cannot sin: with a necessary truth.

In the Reasons added of the former affirmation, there is an emphaticall
distribution of the two parts of the praedicate of the former Proposition, by
the way of ascending to a more vehement confirmation of them. He that is borne
of God sins not, But why so? His seed remains: neither can be sin, why
so? because he is borne of God. It is an expressive pursuit of the same thing;
and not a redoubling of the Proposition; And this contexture of the Words, is
so emphatically significant, that it seems strange how any head of opposition
can be made against it; There is no reason then to resolve the words into two
Propositions, of distinct consideration, each from other; it being one and the
same thing, that the Apostle intends to express, though proceeding to
heighten the certainty of the thing, in the minds of them to whom he delivered
it, by the contexture of the words which he makes use of. What is meant, or
intended by the seed of God, we need not dispute; the Argument of the Apostle,
lies not in the words ( seed of God) nor in the word ( abides) but in the
whole, The seed of God abides; and therefore it were to no purpose at all, to
follow M. Goodwin in his considerations of the word Seed, and then of the seed
of God, and then, of the word ( abides) divided one from another. The sum of
his long answer is, The word (Seed) does not import any such thing as is aimed
at from the Text; nor the word ( abide:) but to the whole proposition, the seed
of God abides in him, as produced to confirm the former assertion of the not
sinning of the Persons spoken of, there is nothing spoken at all; I shall
therefore briefly confirm the Argument in hand, by the strength here
communicated unto it, by the Holy Ghost, and then consider what is answered to
any part of it, or objected to the interpretation insisted on. That he, that
sins not, neither can sin, in the sense explained, shall never fall away
totally or finally from God, is granted. That Believers sin not, nor can
sin, so, or in the manner mentioned, besides the Testimony of the Holy Ghost,
worthy of all acceptance, in the clear assertion of it, we have the Reason
thereof manifested, in the discovery of the causes of its truth. The first
Reason is, Because the seed of God abides in them. A tacit grant seems to
be made; that fruit sometimes may not visibly appear upon them, as the case is
with a Tree in winter, when it casts its leaves: but its seed remains. Grace
may abide in the habit, in, and under a winter of Temptation, though it does
not exert its self in bearing any such actual fruit, as may be ordinarily
visible. The Word of God is sometimes called seed incorruptible; seed
causatively, as being an instrument in the hand of God, whereby he planteth the
seed of Life and holiness in the heart; That it is not the outward word, but
that which is produced, and effected by it, through the efficacy of the Spirit
of God, that is by seed intended, is evident from the use and nature of it. And
it is abiding in the Person in whom it is. Whatever it is; it is called seed,
not in respect of that from whence it comes, as is the cause and Reason of
that appellation of other seed, but in respect of that which it produces,
which arises and insueth upon it: and it is called the seed of God, because
God uses it for the Regeneration of his. Being from God, being the principle
of the Regeneration of them in whom it is, abiding in them even when it has
brought forth fruit, and continuing so to do, it can be no other but the New
Creature, New Nature, inward Man, new principle of Life, or habit of Grace,
that is bestowed upon all Believers, whence they are Regenerate, quickened, or
borne again, of which we have spoken before.

This seed (says the Holy Ghost) abides,. 67.
or remains in him. Whatever falling or withering He may seem to have, or
has, this seed, the seed of God remains in him. The principle of his new
life abides, some exceptions are made as we shall see afterward, to the
signification of the word ((...)) remains, and instances given where it
signifies for to be, and denotes the essence of a thing not its duration.
That to abide, or remain is the proper signification of the word, I suppose
will not be questioned. That it may in some place be used in another sense, is
not dispuited. All that lies under consideration here, is, whether the word in
this place be used properly according to its genuine and first signification,
or no? It supposes indeed ( to be) also; but properly signifies only to abide
or remain. Now if nothing can be advanced from the Text, ot context, from the
matter treated on, or the parallel significancy of some expression that is in
conjunction with it, that should enforce us to carry it from its proper use and
signification, the instancing of other places, if any such be, wherein it is
restrained to denote being, and not duration, is altogether impertinent to the
business in hand. When an Argument is urged from any place of Scripture, to
pick out any word in the Text, and to manifest that it has been used
improperly, in some other place, and therefore must be so in that, is a
procedure so far from an ingenious Answer, that it will scarce pass for a
tolerable shift or evasion. To remain then, or to abide, is the proper
signification of this word, and nothing is in the least offered to manifest
that it must necessarily in this place be diverted from its proper use.

According to the import of the word, the seed of God remains in Believers;
now that remaining of the seed, is the cause of their not sinning that sin,
or in that manner, as the Apostle here denies them to be liable to sin. For
that is the Reason he gives why they cannot sin, even because the seed of
God remains in them. Mr Goodwin grants, that this seed remains in
Believers always, unless they sin by a total defection from God. Of not
sinning the sin of total de^ection from God, the remaining or abiding of
this seed is the cause. Whilst that abides, they cannot sin, that sin, for
it is an unquestionable cause and uncontrouleable of their not so doing. This
seed therefore must be utterly lost, and taken away, before any such sin can
be committed. Now if the seed cannot be lost, without the commission of the
sin which cannot be committed till it be lost, neither can the seed be lost,
nor the sin becommited. The same thing cannot be before, and after its self,
He that cannot go sucha journey, unless he have such a horse, and cannot have
such a horse unless he go such a journey, is like to stay at home. In what
sense the words [ cannot sin] are to be taken, was before declared. That there
are sins innumerable, whereinto men may fall notwithstanding this seed, is
confessed. Under them all, this seed abides; so it would not do under that
which we cannot sin, because it abides; but because it abides, that sin
cannot be committed.

The latter part of the Reason of the Apostles assertion,. 68.
is, for he is borne of God; which is indeed a driving on the former to its
head, and fountain* What it is to be borne of God we need not dispute. It was
sufficiently discovered in the mention that was made before of the seed of God.
God by his Holy Spirit bestowing on us a new Spiritual Life which by nature we
have not, and in respect of whose want we are said to be dead, is frequently
said to beget us, James 1. 14. And we are said to be borne of God. He is the
Sovereign disposer, dispenser, and supreme fountain of that Life, which is so
bestowed on us, which we are begotten again unto, and are borne with, and by;
And Jesus Christ the Mediator, is also said to have this Life in himself,
Joh: 5. because he has received the spirit of the father, to give to his, for
their quickening; who takes of his, and thereby begeteth them a new. And this
Life which Believers thus receive, and whereby indeed radically they become
Believers, is every where in Scripture noted as Permanent and abiding. In
respect of the original of it, it is said to be from above, from Heaven, of
the will of God, of God; As to its principle, to be not of flesh, or blood, or
of the will of man, or of any thing done by us, but of the seed of God,
incorruptible seed, seed that abides; in respect of its duration to be
eternal, and that it may so be, to be safeguarded, being hid in God with
Christ. In this place Receiving this Life from God, is placed as the cause; and
cannot sin, as the effect. He cannot sin, for, or because he is borne of
God. The connection that is between this cause and effect, or wherein the
causality of Being borne of God to a not sinning does consist, needs not be
inquired into. That it has such a causality, the holy Ghost has asserted, and
our Argument rests thereon. If that be the nature of Regeneration, or being
borne of God that it does exclude Apostasy, then he that is Regenerate, or
borne of God, as every Believer is, cannot so sin as to Apostatize, or fall
totally from God: But that such is the nature of Regeneration whereby any one
is borne of God, the holy Ghost here declares; For he denies Apostasy upon
the account of Regeneration; He cannot sin because he is borne of God, which
is that which we intended to demonstrate from this text of Scripture.

To evade the force of this Argument,. 69.
M. Goodwin (as has been declared) undertaketh to give an Exposition of this
place of Scripture, turning every stone, and laboring to wrest every word in
it. The several significations of the words in other places are set out, and
suppositions made of taking them this way, or that way: but in what sense the
scope of the matter treated on, the most usual known common acceptations, call
for their Use, in this place, nothing is spoken: neither is any clear Answer
once attempted to be given to the words of the Text, speaking out, and home, to
the conclusion we intend: or to the Argument thence deduced. What I can gather
up from Sect. 31. and forwards, that may obstruct the thoughts of any, in
closing with the Interpretation given, I shall consider, and remove out of the
way. 1. Then, he gives you this Interpretation of these words sineth not, or
cannot sin: Every one that has been borne of God (sins not) i. e.
Whosoever has by the Word and Spirit of God been made partaker of the Divine
nature, so as to resemble God in the frame and constitution of his heart and
soul, does not under such a frame, or change of heart as this make a trade or
practice of sinning, or walking in any course of inordinatenesse in the world.
Yea (says he) in the latter Proposition every such person does not only or
simply refrain sinning in such a sense, but he cannot sin; (i. e.) He has a
strong and potent disposition in him which carries him an other way, for he
has a strong Antipathy or averseness of heart and soul against all sin,
especially all such kind of sinning.

Ans. 1. What is meant by being borne of God, the way whereby any come so to
be, the Universality of the expression requiring a necessary cause of its
verity, with the like attendencies of the Proposition have been before declared.

2. What M. Goodwin intends by such a frame and constitution of spirit and
soul, as may resemble God, with his denial of the bestowing on us from God a
vital principle of Grace, wherein the Renovation in us, of his image should
consist, has in part also been already discovered, and will yet farther be so,
in our consideration of his rare notion of Regeneration, and its consisting in
a man's returnall to the innocent and harmless estate, wherein he was borne.

3. That ( sins not) is sins not that sin, or so sins, not as to
break his Relation to God as a child, has been already also manifested, and
the Reader is not to be burdened with Repetition.

4. In the interpretation given of the latter phrase he cannot sin, I cannot
so sin against the light of the Text, as to join with M. Goodwin in it: It
is not the Antipathie of his heart to sin, but the Course of his walking with
God, in respect of sin, that the Apostle treats on. His internal
principaling against sin, he has, from being borne of God, and the abiding
of his seed in him, of which this, that he cannot sin, is asserted as the
effect. He cannot sin, that is, he cannot so sin, upon the account of his
being borne of God. (Thence indeed he has not only a potent disposition
another way, and Antipathie to evil, but a vital principle, with an
everlasting enmity, and repugnancy to, and inconsistency with any such sin, or
sinning as is intimated,) and that he cannot sin, is the consequent and
effect thereof, and is so affirmed to be by the Holy Ghost.

Nextly,. 70.
M. Goodwin gives you the Reason of this Assertion used by the Apostle, why
such an one, as of whom he speaks, sins not, and cannot sin. Now the
Reason says the Apostle, why such a person commits not sin in the sense
explained, is because his seed, the seed of God, by whom, of which, he was
borne of him, remains in him, ( i. e.) is, or has an actual and present
being, or residence in him: and that in this place it does not signify any
perpetual abiding, or any abiding in relation to the future, is evident:
because the abiding of the seed here spoken of, is given as the Reason, why he
that is borne of God, does not commit sin, ( i. e.) does not frequently walk
in any course of known sin; now nothing in respect of any future permanency,
or continuance of being, can be looked upon as the cause of an effect, but only
in respect of the present being or residence of it. The Reason why the soul
moves to day, is not because it will move, or act the body to morrow or
because it is in the body to day, upon such terms, that it will be in it to
morrow also, much less because it is an immortal substance; but simply
because it is now or this day in the body. So the Reason why Angels at this day
do the will of God, is not because they have such a principle of holiness, or
Obedience in them, which they cannot put off, or loose to eternity, but because
of such a principle as we speak of, residing in them at present: therefore
when John assigns the remaining of the seed of God in him that is borne of
him, for the reason why he does not commit sin, certain it is that by this
remaining of the seed he means nothing else but the present residence or
abode thereof in this Person; and if his intent had been either to assert, or
imply a perpetual residence of this seed, in him, that is borne of God, it had
been much more proper for him to have saved it for a reason of the latter
proposition, [he that is borne of God cannot sinne] then to have subjoyned it
as a reason of the former; for though the future continuance of the thing in
being, can be no reason of the effect present, yet it will be a ground or
reason of the continuance of a present effect.

Ans: I have thus at large transcribed this discourse, because it is the sum of
what Mr Goodwin, has to offer for the weakening of our Argument from this
place, of what weight this is, will quickly appear. For

1. This Reason (the seed abides in him) though brought in illatively, in
respect of what was said before, [ he does not commit sinne] yet has its
causall influence chiefly into that which follows, he cannot sin. To make
good what was first spoken, of his not committing sin that is borne of God,
the Apostle discovers the cause of it, which so far secureth the truth of
that expression, as that it causes it to ascend, and call them up higher, to a
certain impossibility of doing of that which was only at first simply denied.
Neither is this Assertion the seed of God abides in him, any otherwise a
Reason of the first Assertion He commits not sin, than as it is the cause
of the latter He cannot sin. Now Mr Goodwin grants in the close of his
Discourse, that the future continuance of a thing in being, is, or may be the
cause of the continuance of an effect which at present it produces; and what
Mr Goodwin may more curiously discover of the intent of the Apostle, his words
plainly assert the continuance and abode of the seed of God in them in whom it
is; and using it as he does, for a reason of the latter cla^se of that
Proposition [ He cannot sinne] he speaks properly enough, so great a Master
(of one language at least) as Mr Goodwin being judge.

2. The Reason insisted on by the Apostle, is neither from the word [ seed] nor
from the word [ abideth] nor from the nature of the seed simply conside^ed, nor
from its permanency and continuance [the seed abides;] So that it is no
exception to the intendment of the Apostle, to assert the abiding of the seed,
not to be a sufficient cause of the Proposition, because its abiding or
permanencie is not a cause of present not sinning, for it is not asserted that
it is. His present not sinning in whom it is, is from God, his being borne of
God by the seeds, his continuance and estate of not sinning, (both which are
intended) is from the abiding of the seed. The whole condition of The Person,
that He sins not, neither can sin, (which te^mes regard his continued
estate) is from the whole Proposition, The seed of God abides in him. Separate
the permanency of the seed, which is asserted in the consideration of it, and
it respects only, and solely, the continuance of the effect which is produced
by it as seed, or of the estate wherein any one is placed, by being borne of
God. All that Mr Goodwin has to offer in this case, is, that the abiding of
the seed, is so asserted to be the Reason of that part of the Proposition He
commits not sin, as not to be the cause (...) ( he cannot sin.) When the
abiding of the seed, singly considered is not used as any reason at all of the
first, nor in the proposition as it lies, the seed abides any otherwise, but
as it is the cause of the latter, (he cannot sin).

3. Even the expression [he commits not sin,] denotes not only the
present actual frame, and walking, of him of whom it is spoken, but his estate
and condition: being once borne of God he commits not sin; no one that is
so borne of God does; none in the state and condition of a Regenerate Person
does so; that is, in his course and walking to the end; and this is argued not
so much distinctly to the permanencie of the seed, as from the seed with such
an Adjunct.

4. Mr Goodwin's Allusions, to the soul, and the Obedience of Angels, are of
little use, or none at all to the illustration of the business in hand. For
though the Reason why the soul moves the body to day, is not because it will
move it to morrow, yet the reason why the body moves, and cannot but do so, is
because it has the Soul abiding in it, and he that shall say, he that lives
moves, for he has a soul abiding in him, and cannot but move, shall speak
properly enough. And the reason why the Angels do the will of God in Heaven,
that is, actually continue in so doing is, because they have such a confirmed
and uncontrollable principle of Obedience: So that all these Exceptions amount
not to the least weakening of the Apostles Arguments.

Sect. 32.. 71.
Our Author gives two instances to prove that the word [(...)] in the
Scripture, signifies sometime only to be, and not to abide, and they are the
one, John 14. And the other 1 John 3. 14. And one Argument, to manifest that in
the place under Consideration, it must needs signify a present abode and being,
and not a continuance etc.

Ans. 1. If any such places befound, yet it is confessed that it is an unusual
sense of the word, and a thousand places of that kind, will not enforce it to
be so taken in another place, unless the circumstances of it, and matter
whereabout it treats, enforce that sense, and will not bear that which is
proper.

2. M. G. does not make it good by the instances he produces that the word is
tied up in any place, to denote precisely only the being of a thing, without
relation to its abiding and continuance Of the one John 14. 17. %But ye know
him because he remains with you, and shall be in you: (says he) the latter
clause [shall be in you] will be found a mere Tautologie, if the other phrase
[abideth with you] importetha perpetual residence or inbeing.

But that this phrase [ abides with you] imports the same with the phrase in
the foregoing verse, where it is clearly expounded by the addition of the
term forever (that he may abide with you forever) I suppose cannot be
questioned. Nor

2. Is there any the least appearance of a Tautology in the words. His
remaining with Believers, being the thing promised, and his inbeing, the manner
of his abode with them. Also the 1 John 14. (...), does not simply denote an
Estate or Condition, but an estate or condition in its nature, without the
interposition of Almighty Grace, abiding, and permanent: so that neither have
we yet any instance of restraining the significancy of the word, as pretended,
produced: nor if any place could be so, would it in the least enforce that
Acceptance of the word in this place contended about. Wherefore M. Goodwin (as
I said) adds an Argument, to evince that the word must necessarily be taken
in the sense by him insisted on in this place, which is indeed a course to the
purpose, if his Argument prove so in any measure; It is this. Because such a
signification of it, would render the sense altogether inconsistent with the
scope of the Apostle, which is to exhort Christians unto righteousness and
Love of the brethren, now it is contrary to common sense its self, to signify
unto those whom we persuade to any duty, any such thing, which imports an
absolute certainty, or necessity of their doing it, whether they take care, or
use any means for the doing of it or no: and a clear case it is, that the
certainty of a perpetual remaining of the seed of God, in those that are borne
of him, imports a like certainty of their perpetual performance of that
duty, whereunto they are exhorted.

Ans. If this be all it might have been spared. The Argument consists of two
parts. 1. An aspersion of the infinite wisdom of God, with a procedure
contrary to all Reason, and common sense. 2. A begging of the thing in
question, betwixt its Author, and its Adversaries. That there is any thing at
all in the Text, even according to our Interpretation of it, that imports an
absolute necessity of men's doing any thing, whether they take care to use the
means of doing it or no, the Reader must judge. The abiding of the Seed, is
that we say, which shall effectually cause them, in whom it is, to use the
means of not sinning, that eventually they may not do so; and that a
certainty of the use of means, is imported, is no Argument to prove, that
their necessity of Persevering is proved, whether they use means yea or no. To
take care, to use means, is amongst the means appointed to be used, and this
they shall do, upon the account of the abiding seed. That indeed which is
opposed, is, that God cannot promise to work effectually in us by the use of
means, for the accomplishment of an appointed end, but that withal renders
useless and vain, all his exhortations to us to use those means. This is M.
Goodwins Argument from the place it self, to enforce that improper Acceptance
of the word remains in us.

What remains of M. Goodwins long discourse upon this Text of Scripture,. 72.
is but a fencing with himself, and raising of Objections, and Answering them,
suitably to his own principles, wherein we are not in the least concerned.
There is not any thing, from the beginning to the end of it, that tends to
impeach our Interpretation of the place, or impede the progress of our
Argument, but only a flourish set upon his own Exposition, which if he were
desired to give in briefly, and in terms of a plain downeright significancy,
I am verily persuaded, he would be hardly put to it, to let us know what his
mind, and conceptions of this place of Scripture are. But of this subject, and
in Answer to his Fifth Argument, with this Chapter, this is the issue.

CAP. XVI.
1. M. G's seventh Argument about the tendency of the Doctrine of the Saints
Aposlas^ as to their consolation proposed. 2. Considered: what that doctrine
offers for the consolation of the Saints, offered: the impossibility of its
affording the least true consolation manifested. 3. The influence of the
Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance into their consolation. 4. The medium
whereby M. G. confirms his Argument examined: what kind of Nurse for the Peace
and consolation of the Saints, the Doctrine of Apostasy is; whether their
obedience be farthered by it: what are the causes and springs of true
consolation. 5. M. G. Eight Argument proposed to consideration. 6. Answer
thereunto: the minor Proposition considered: the Holy Ghost not afraid of the
Saints miscarriages. 7. The confirmation of his Minor Proposition proposed and
considered. 8. The Discourse assigned to the Holy Ghost by M. G. according to
our principles: 9. Considered: 10. Exceptions against it, the First: 11. The
Second. 12. The Third. 13. The Fourth. 14. The Fifth. 15. The Sixth. 16. The
Seventh. 17. The foundation of M.G. Pageant everted. 18. The proceedings of
the Holy Ghost in exhortations according to our principles: 19. Sophismes in
the former discourse farther discovered. 20. His farther plea in this case
proposed: 21. Considered: 22. The instance of Christ and his obedience
considered, and vindicated as to the application of it, to the business in
hand. 23. M.G. last Argument proposed. 24. Examined. 25. 1 Ioh* 2. 19.
explained. 26. Vindicated. 27. Argument from thence for the Perseverance of the
Saints. 28. M.G. exceptions thereunto. 29. Considered; and 30. Removed. 31, 32,
33, 34, 35, 36, 37. The same words farther perused. 38. M.G. Consent with the
Remonstrants manifested by his trascriptions from their Synodalia. 39, 40, 41,
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47. Our Argument from 1 Ioh. 2. 19. fully cleared. 48. The
conclusion of the examination of M. G. Arguments for the Apostasy of the Saints.

THE seventh Argument which Mr Goodwin insisteth upon,. 1.
in the 36. Section of his 13. Chapter contains one of the greatest Rarities,
he has to show in the whole pack, concerning the influence of the Doctrine of
the Saints Apostasy into their Consolation in their walking with God, an
undertaking so incapable of any Logical Confirmation, as that though Mr
Goodwin interweave his Discourse concerning it with a Sillogisme, yet he
quickly leaves that thorney path, and pursues it only with a Rhetorical
flourish of words, found out and set in order to deceive; At the head then of
his Discourse he places this Argument as it is called.

That Doctrine whose genuine and proper tendency is to advance the peace and
joy of the Saints in Believing, is of a natural sympathy, with the Gospel,
and upon this account a truth; such is the Doctrine, which informs the Saints
of a possibility of their total and final falling away: Ergo.

The Proposition of this syllogism he supposes we will grant,. 2.
and (not to trouble the Reader with the Qualifications, and limitations
formerly annexed, to that which proposed the furtherance of the obedience of
the Saints, as a proof of the truth of any Doctrine) for my part I do. For the
proof of the Assumption wherein alone Mr Goodwin's interest in this Argument
does lie, He referrs us to his 9. Chapter: where, as he tells us, (if we may
believe him) he has undenyably demonstrated the truth of it. But we have
considered whatever looks that way in that Chapter, and have found it all as
Chafe and stubble, before the breath of the Spirit of the Lord in the Word.
That which lies upon his shoulders, to support; (A burden too heavy for him to
bear) and whose demonstration he has undertaken is, that it tends to the
Peace, Joy, and Consolation of the Saints of God, in their walking with him
(which arises from, and solely depends upon that assurance they have of their
eternal fruition of him through Christ) to be instructed, that indeed they are
in themselves weak, unable to do any thing as they ought, that they have no
strength to continue in the Mercy of God, but carry about with them a body of
death, and that they are continually exposed to a world of Temptations, whereby
many strong men fall down, thrust through and are slain every day, and that in
this condition there is no consideration of the Immutability or
Unchangeableness of God, that may secure them of the continuance of his Love
to them, no eternal purpose of his that he will preserve them, and keep them,
through his power, no Promise of not leaving them, or of giving them such
supplies of his Spirit and Grace that they shall never forsake, nor leave him,
nothing in the Covenant, or Oath of God whereby it is confirmed, to Assure them
of an Abiding, and a not-to-be destroyed communion with him, that Christ by his
death and oblation has not so taken away the guilt of their sins, nor laid
such a sure foundation, for the destruction of the power of them, as that they
shall not arise either way to their ruin: That he intercedes not for their
Preservation in Faith and Holiness, upon the account of which state and
condition, of things, many of the most eminent Saints that ever served God in
this world, have utterly fallen out of his Love and Favor, and have been cast
out of covenant from whence though perhaps some few have been recovered, yet
for the greatest part of them, have perished everlastingly (as is the state in
reference unto many in every Generation,) only such may do well to consider
what a fearful and desperate issue, their Apostasy will have, if they should
so fall, and what an eminent reward, with what Glory is proposed to them if
they persevere. That I say the instruction of the Saints, in this Doctrine, is
a singular means of promoting their Consolation and establishing their peace,
is that which (doubtless with undervaluing thoughts of all with whom he has
to do) he has undertaken to prove. I doubt not but that Mr Goodwin thought
sometimes of the good old Rule, sumite materiam vestris qui scribitis aequam
viribus and versare di^ quid far recusent, quid veleant humori.
Selfe-confidence is hereby settled and fixed with considerations: and though M.
G. in the close of this Section, tells us, That sundry Godly and seriously
Religious persons, when they heard this Doctrine published which he now
asserts, with their wbole hearts blessed God for it: Yet truly I cannot but
question whether, yea I must positively deny that ever any Saint of God
received Consolation by the doctrine of the Saints Apostasy, a lie exceedingly
unsuited to the production of any such effect, any further than that all Error
whatsoever is apt to defile and cauterise the Conscience, so deceiving it with
sencelessenesse for peace; Perhaps some of Mr Goodwin's hearers who either were
so ignorant, or so negligent, as not to be acquainted with this Doctrine
before, in the attempts made for that the propagation of it, by the latter
brood of Prelates and Arminians amongst us, upon his delivery of it with
enticing words of humane wisdom, helped on by the venerable esteem they have
of his transcendent parts and abilityes, through the cunning of Satan,
improving the itching after new Doctrines, which is fallen upon the minds and
spirits of many professors in this age, have rejoiced under the shadow of this
bramble, set up to rule in their Congregation: And (according as is the
constant manner of all, in our days that are ensnared with any error be it
never so pernicious) have blessed God for it, professing they never found rest
nor peace before; yet I no way question for such as fear the Lord, and are yet
bowed down under the weight, and carried away with the strength of Mr
Goodwin's Rethoricke for a season, will quickly find a fire proceeding out of
that newly enthroned Doctrine, preying upon and consuming all their Joy, Peace,
and Consolation, or (which I rather hope) a fire proceeding out of their Faith,
(the Faith once delivered to the Saints) to the utter confusion and consumption
of this bramble scratching error in the mean time if the eminent appearance
of many thousands of the Saints of God, in this Nation (whereof many are fallen
asleep, and many continue to this day) testifying and bearing witness to the
Joy and Consolation they have found, and that upon Spiritual demonstrative
grounds in being cast into the mould of the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance
for many days, be of no weight with Mr Goodwin, I know not why his single
Testimony (which yet as to the matter of fact I no way question) concerning
some few Persons by himself seduced, into a persuasion of their Apostasy,
blessing God for the discovery made to them (the constant Practice of all
persons in their first intanglement, in the foulest and grossest errors
whatever) should sway us much to any good liking of it.

The influence of the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance,. 3.
into their consolation, has been sufficiently already evinced, when we
manifested, the support of their Faith and Love, the conquest of their fear
and troubles thereby; so that I shall not need, farther to insist thereon. It
was in my thoughts indeed, to have handled the nature of Gospel Consolation,
that which God is so abundantly willing the heirs of promise should receive,
at large, both as to the nature and Causes of it, the means of its
preservation; The oppositions that lie against it: and by all the
Considerations of it, to have manifested, That it is utterly impossible to keep
it alive one moment in the heart of a Believer, without the contribution of
supportment it receives from the Doctrine in hand. And that those who refuse to
receive it, as usually delivered, indeed have none, nor can have any drop of
it, but what is instilled into them, from, and by the power and efficacy, which
secretly in and upon their hearts that truth has, which in words they oppose:
all their peace and comfort, being indeed absolutely proportioned, to that
which the Doctrine of the Saints perseverance tends to confirm, and to nothing
else. But this Discourse growing under my hands beyond all thought or
expectation, I shall now only keep close to the removal of the Exceptions made
against it, and hasten to a close.

I must not leave this Argument,. 4.
without taking notice of the Medium, whereby M. Goodwin supposes himself to
have confirmed the truth of the assumption, laid down at the entrance, or, to
have manifested the good complexion (as he phrases it) of that nurse he has
provided for the Consolation of the Saints (a Nurse with breasts of flint, and
a heart of Iron, has, this Cruel man provided for them; a Nurse whom God will
never admit into his family, nor ever expose his childrens lives, to any such
Wolf, or Tygre, as will certainly starve them, if not devour them: Rather a
cursed, yea an accursed step-dame, than a nurse; who when the children ask for
bread, gives them a stone; and when they beg for fish, gives them a Scorpion:
A false and treacherous hireling, doing not the least service for God, but
laboring to stir up strife in his Family, to set his poor children, and
their heavenly Father at variance, filling them, with hard thoughts of him, As
one that takes little or no care for them, And discouraging them in that
obedience, which he requires at their hands, continually belying their Father
to them, and that in reference to the most desirable Excellencies of his
Faithfulness, Truth, Mercy, and Grace; never speaking one good or comfortable
word to them all their days, nor once urging them to do their duty, But
withholding a rod, yea Scorpions over their backs; And casting the eternal
flames of Hell into their faces; this is that sanguine, indeed truly
spiritually bloody Complexion of this new Nurse, which is offered to be
received in the room of that sad Melancholy piece, of the Perseverance of the
Saints. Thus then he proceeds.

The Consolation of true Believers, depends upon their obedience, their
obedience is farthered by this Doctrine, and therefore their Consolation also.

Ans. What are the springs of true spiritual heavenly Consolation, the
consolation which God is willing Believers should receive; whence it flows;
the means of its continuance and increase, how remote it is from a sole
dependency on our own Obedience, has been in part before declared; But yet if
the next Assertion can be made good, (viz.) That the Doctrine of the Saints
Apostasy, has a tendency instituted of God, to the promotion of their
Obedience and Holiness, I shall not contend about the other, concerning the
issuing of their consolation from thence. All that really is offered in the
behalf of Apostasy, as to its serviceablenesse in this kind is, that it is
suited, to ingenerate in Believers, a fear of Hell, which will put them upon
all ways of mortifying the flesh, and the fruits of it, which otherwise would
bring them thereunto: And is this indeed the great mystery of the Gospel? Is
this Christ's way of dealing with his Saints? Or is it not a falling from Grace,
to return again unto the Law? Those of whom alone we speak, who are concerned
in this business are all of them taken into the Glorious liberty of the Sons
of God, are every one of them partakers of that Spirit with whom is liberty,
are all endued with a living principle of Grace, Faith and Love, and are
constrained by the Love of Christ to live to him, are all under Grace and not
under the Law, have their sins in some measure begun to be mortifyed, and the
flesh with the lusts thereof, the old man, with all his ways and wiles
crucified, by the Death and Cross of Christ, brought with their power and
efficacy by the Spirit into their hearts, are all delivered from that bondage
wherein they were for fear of Death and Hell all their days, by having Christ
made Redemption unto them? I say that these persons should be most effectually
stirred up to Obedience, by the dread and terror of that Iron rod, of
vengeance and Hell, and that they should be so, by Gods appointment, is such a
new, such another Gospel, as if preached by an Angel from Heaven, we should
not receive. That indeed no motive can be taken from hence, or from any thing
in the Doctrine by Mr Goodwin contended for, suited to the principle of Gospel
Obedience in the Saints, that no sin or lust whatsoever was ever mortifyed by
it, that it is a clog, hinderance and burden to all Saints as far as they have
to do with it, in the ways of God, has bin before demonstrated: And therefore
leaving it withal the Consolation that it affords, unto those who of God are
given up thereunto, we proceed to the Consideration of another Argument his
eighth in this case which is thus proposed Sect. 37.

That Doctrine which evacuates and turns into weakness and folly,. 5.
all the gracious counsels of the Holy Ghost, which consist partly in the
diligent information which he gives unto the Saints from place to place,
concerning the hostile, cruel and bloody mind and intention of Satan against
them, partly in detecting and making known all his subtle stratagems, his
plots, methods, and dangerous Machinations against them, partly also in
furnishing them wiih special weapons of all sorts, whereby they may be able to
grapple with him, and to triumph over him, partly again in those frequent
admonitions and Exhortations, to quit themselves like men in resisting him,
which are found in the Scripture: And lastly in professing his fear least
Satan should circumvent and deceive them, that Doctrine I say which reflects
disparagement and vanity upon all these most serious and gracious applycations
of the Holy Ghost, must needs be a Doctrine of vanity and error, And
consequently that which opposes it by a like necessity, a truth: But such is
the common Doctrine of absolute and infallible Perseverance: Ergo.

Ans. Not to engage into any needless contest about ways of Arguing,. 6.
when the design and strength of the Argument is evident, I shall only remarke
two things upon this.

First the Holy Ghost professing his fear least Satan should beguile
Believers, is a mistake. It was Paul that was so afraid, not the Holy Ghost,
though he wrote that fear, by the appointment and inspiration of the Holy
Ghost. The Apostle was jealous least the Saints should by the craft of Satan
be seduced into errors and miscarriages; which yet argues not their final
defection, this indeed he records of himself; but of the fears of the Holy
Ghost arising from his uncertainty of those issue of the things and want of
power to prevent the coming on of the things feared, I suppose there is no
mention. And

Secondly that the consequent of the supposition in the inference made upon it,
is not so clear to me as to Mr Goodwin. viz. Suppose any Doctrine to be false,
whatsoever Doctrine is set up in opposition to it, is true; I have known and
so has Mr Goodwin also, when the truth has layen between opposite Doctrines,
assaulted by both, entertained by neither; with these Observations I pass the
Major of this Sillogisme the Minor he thus confirms.

If the Saints be in no possibility of being finally overcome by Satan, or of
Miscarrying in the great and most important business of their Salvation by his
snares and subtilties,. 7.
all that operousnesse, and diligence of the Holy Ghost, in those late
mentioned Addressements of his unto them, in order to their final conquest
over Satan, will be found of very light consequence, of little concernement to
them: yea if the said Addressements of the Holy Ghost, be compared, with the
State and Condition of the Saints, as the said Doctrine of Perseverance
represents and affirms it to be, the utter uselesnesse, and impertinency of
them, will much more evidently appear.

Ans. What possibility or not possibility the Saints are in, of final Apostasy
from God, what assurance themselves have, may have, or have not, concerning
their Perseverance, with what is the use of Admonitions and Exhortations to
them in that condition, has been already declared; for the present, I shall
only add; That let their final Apostasy, in respect of the Event, be never so
impossible, yet in the state and condition wherein they are, and from the
things which they are exercised about, with the Principles on which they
proceed, and the ways whereby they are led on, considerations enough, may be
raised to set forth those Exhortations, Admonitions, and Encouragements,
appointed by the Holy Ghost, to be used and insisted on, in the Administration
of the Word, in the Beauty and splendour of infinite Wisdom, Love, and
Kindness. The glory of God being so eminently concerned, as it is, in the
Obedience, and fruitfulness of the Saints; the honor of the Lord Jesus in
this World, with the advancement, and propagation of the Gospel, in like
manner relating there unto; Their own peace lying so much, as it does upon
their close walking with God, the spirit being so grieved by their falling into
sin, as he is, God so dishonored, and themselves exposed to such fearful
desertions, darkness, trouble, sorrow, and disquietments as they are, upon
their being overcome by the temptations of Satan, and prevailed upon to turn
aside into ways and sins, short of total Apostasy, and it being the purpose
of the Lord, to lead them on in obedience, in ways suitable to that nature, he
created them withal, and that New nature wherewith he has endued them, (both
apt to be wrought upon by Motives, Exhortations, and Persuasions) without any
such supposall, as that of final Apostasy; There is a sufficient bottom and
foundation of exalting the motives and admonitions insisted on, to the
possession of that Glory, of Wisdom, and Goodness which is their due. But M.
Goodwin having borrowed another Pageant from the Remonstrants, had a great mind
to show it to the World, in its English dress, and therefore introduces the
Holy Ghost, thus speaking in the Admonitions above pointed at.

Suppose we then the Holy Ghost should speak thus unto the Saints,. 8.
Oh ye that truly Believe, who by virtue of the promises of that God that
cannot lie, are fully persuaded and possessed that ye shall be kept by God, by
his irresistible Grace, in true Faith until Death; so that though Satan should
set all his wits on work, and by all his stratagems, snares, and cunning
devices, seek to destroy you, yea though he should entice you away from God, by
the allurements of the World, and entangle you with them again, yea and should
cause you to run and rush headlong against the Light of your own Consciences,
into all manner of horrid sins, yet shall all his attempts and assaults upon
you in every kind be in vain, and you shall be in never the more danger, or
possibility of perishing: Unto you (I say) attend and consider how sore and
dangerous a contest you are like to be engaged in, for you are to wrestle not
against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities and Powers, the governors
of this World, and spiritual wickednesses, against that old Serpent the
Devil, the great red Dragon who was a murderer from the beginning, and who
still goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, Who will set
himself with all his might, to thrust you headlong into all manner of sins,
and so to separate 'tweene you and your God for ever; And truly I am afraid,
least as the Serpent by his subtilty deceived Eve, so your minds should be
corrupted from the Simplicity which is in Jesus Christ, least the tempter
should any way tempt you, and my labor about you be in vain; Therefore Watch,
Pray, Resist him steadfast in the Faith; Take unto you the whole armor of God,
that you may be able to resist in an evil day, and having done all things
stand fast; Stand having your loins girt with the girdle of truth, and the
brestplate of Righteousness upon you: Would such an Oration or speech as this
be any way worthy the Infinite wisdom of the Holy Ghost? Or is it not the
part of a very weak and simple person to admonish a man and that in a most
serious and solemn manner of a danger threatening him, or hanging over his
head, and withal to instruct him with great variety of direction and caution
how to escape this danger, when as both himself knows, and the person
admonished knows likewise that it is a thing altogether impossible that ever
the danger should befall him, or the evil against which he is so solemnly
cautioned come upon him? Therefore those who make the Holy Ghost to have part
and fellowship in such weakness as this are most insufferably injurious unto
him.

Ans. To support the Stage for to act this part of the pageant in hand upon,. 9.
there are many supposalls fixed by our Author, that are to bear up the weight
of the whole, which upon trial will appear to arrant false pretenses, painted
anticks, that have not the least strength or efficacy for the end and purpose
whereunto they are applied.

First,. 10.
It Is supposed, that the end of all these admonitions, is merely and solely to
prevent the Saints from final Apostasy; and that they are to beware of the
wiles and assaults of Satan, only least he prevail over them, to cause them to
depart utterly from God; That this is supposed in this discourse is evident,
because upon the granting of a promise, that they shall not be so prevailed
against, they are judged all useless and ridiculous: Now who knows not but
that Satan may winnow, and in some measure prevail against the Saints, to the
Dishonor of God, the Reproach of the Gospel, Grieving of the Spirit, and
Scandal of the Church, although they fall not totally and finally from God;
And that many of those Admonitions, tend to the preservation of Believers, from
such falls and failings, is more evident than to need any Demonstration by
consideration of the particular instances.

Secondly,. 11.
It supposes as is expressed, that Believers may fall into all manner of horrid
sins and Abominations, which is the thing in Question, and by us punctually
denied: What ever their surprizalls may be, yet there are sins which they
cannot fall into: and the great abomination of every sin, that it is committed
with the whole heart, and with full consent, they are not at all exposed or
liable unto, as has been proved.

Thirdly, 12.
That there is an inconsistency between Promises and Precepts, in reference to
the same Object; that God should promise to work any thing effectually in us,
and yet require it of us, is thought ridiculous, and on this account the great
folly here imputed to the discourse framed for the Holy Ghost, is proposed to
consist in this, that God should exhort us, to watch against the assaults of
the Devil, and yet promise that by his Grace, he will effectually work in us,
and for us, the very same thing; A supposall destructive to the whole nature of
the New Covenant, easily disproved by innumerable instances.

Fourthly,. 13.
That Believers are to be wrought upon to obedience always, whatever the frame
of their spirits be, by the same ways and means; Thence it is that promises,
promises of highest and greatest assurance, are in this discourse, coupled with
cautions of the deepest charge, as though they must at the same time operate
the same way to Believers, or else the Holy Ghost be liable to be traduced, as
inconsistent with himself. When the great variety that is in their spiritual
frame and temper, the manifold Temptations wherewith they are assaulted, the
Light and Dark places they walk through etc. give occasion sufficient to the
exercising toward them, all the piping and mourning that is provided for them.

Fifthly,. 14.
That all Believers are assured of their Perseverance, and that to such a
degree as not to fear any Apostasy, or to care what becomes of them (that is
assured to presumption not Believing,) and therefore are those Cautions and
Admonitions of the Holy Ghost on that Account, tending to stir up in them any
Godly care or fear rendered frustrate; when M. Goodwin himself, thinks that
very few of them, do upon any good and abiding foundation, know themselves to
be Believers. And we never once supposed that all of them have Assurance of
their Perseverance, nor any of them upon the terms here proposed; all the
strength of what is here insinuated lies in this that God gives Assurance to
men of the steadfastness, and constancy of his Love, under supposall of their
falling into all manner of abominable sins; Which supposall alone renders an
inconsistency between the sense of the Promises we embrace, and that of the
Admonitions that are given to the Saints charging them to walk heedfully and
to watch diligently against the attempts and assaults of Satan. Now this
supposall is in it self false and ridiculous: Neither ever did the Lord, nor
do we ever say he did, tender men Assurance of his Love on such terms; Neither
is it possible for any one for ever to have a true persuasion of his own
Perseverance under such notions.

Sixthly,: 15.
That there is an inconsistency betwixt Faithful Promises of attaining an end
by the use of means, and Exhortation with Admonitions, to make use of those
means; so that if it be supposed that God promises that Satan shall not in
the issue prevail over us prescribing to us the means whereby we shall be
preserved from his prevalency, it is in vain to deal with us for the
application of our selves, unto the use of those means.

Seaventhly,. 16.
It Is also supposed that an Assurance of the Love of God and the continuance of
it to the Saints unto the end, so that they shall be never utterly rejected by
him is an effectual way and means to induce them to carnal and loose
walking, and a negligence in those things, which are a provocation to the eyes
of his Glory, and therefore if he Promise Faithfully never to leave us nor
forsake us, it is an inducement for us to conclude, let the Devil now take his
swing and do with us what he pleases. To exhort us to take care for the
avoidance of his subtiltyes and opposition is a thing altogether ridiculous;
The vanity of this supposall, has been sufficiently before discovered and it
self disproved.

Upon such Hypotheses as these (I say) upon such painted posts,. 17.
is the whole pageant erected which we are here engaged withal; and these
being easily cast down, the whole rushes to the ground, in the room whereof
according to our principles this following Discourse may be supplied.

You that are true Believers,. 18.
called, Justified, Sanctified by the Spirit and Blood of Christ, adopted into
my family ingrafted in, and united unto the Son of my Love, I know your
weakness, insufficiency, disability, darkness, how that without my Son
and continual supply of his Spirit, you can do nothing, the power of your
Indwelling sin, is not hid from me, how with violence it leads you captive to
the Law thereof, and though ye do believe, yet I know you have yet also some
unheal'd unbelief and on that account are often overwhelmed with Fears,
Sorrows, Disconsolations and Troubles, and are ready often to think that your
way is passed over form me, and your Judgment hidden from your God: And in this
Condition, I know the Assaults, Temptations, and Oppositions of Satan that you
are exposed to, how he goes up and down like a roaring Lion seeking to destroy
you, his ways, Methods, wiles and baits (that he lays for you, and whereby he
seeks to destroy you) are many, he acts against you as a Serpent subtly and
wisely; as a Lion dreadfully and fearfully, and with snares not of you, by
your selves to be resisted: you have Principallityes, and Powers to wrestle
withal, and the darts of the wicked one to defend your selves against,
Wherefore beware of him, be not ignorant of his devices, stand fast in the
Faith, take to you the whole armor of God, resist him, overcome him, cast him
out by prayer, and the blood of the Lamb, watch night and day that you be not
surprised nor seduced (as Eve was) by him, that he turn you not out of the way
into paths leading to destruction, and thrust you headlong, into such sins
as will be a dishonor to me, a grief to my Spirit a scaudall to the Church,
and bitterness to your own souls; And as for me, who know your disability of
your selves to do any of these things, and so to hold to the end, because it
pleased me to love you, and set my heart upon you, having chosen you before the
Foundation of the world, that you should be holy and unblameable before me in
Love, and having given my only Son unto you, who is your peace and through
whom you have received the Atonement, with whom I will not deny you or
withhold from you any thing that may safeguard your abiding with me unto
Salvation, I will through the riches of my Grace, work all your works for
you, fulfilling in you all the good pleasure of my Goodness and the work of
Faith with power, I will tread down Satan, this cruel, proud, Malicious,
bloody enemy of your Souls, under your feet, and though at any time he soil
you, yet ye shall not be cast down, for I will take you up, and will certainly
preserve you by my power, to the end of your hope, the Salvation of your
souls; whatever betide you, or befall you, I will never leave you, nor forsake
you, the mountains may depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall
never be removed from you, comfort ye, be of good courage, and run with joy
the race that is set before you.

This (I say) is the language which according to the tenor of the Doctrine
whose maintenance we are engaged in, God speaks to his Saints and Believers,
and if there be folly and inconsistency found therein, let the Scriptures
vindicate and plead for themselves.

Secondly, For the close of this Discourse of our Author, charging this course
of proceedure with folly; viz. To give admonition to the use of means, when
the end is certainly determined to issue upon the use of those means, he must
first evince it as to the application of it to the business in hand, before I
can close with him in the managing thereof: for the present I rather think the
folly of this charge, as far as it looks toward the Doctrine under
consideration to arise from other things. As

First, An Impertinent comparison instituted between God and man in their
Admonitions and dealings with men; as though nothing might beseem him in
Spiritual things of eternal concernement, but what is squared to the rules of
our proceedings one toward another, in things Natural or Civil. And*

Secondly, A false supposall that the end is promised and assured to any,
without or besides the use of means, or walking according to the rules,
precepts, and instructions given for that purpose, or for Attainement of the
end so promised. Now what folly there is to charge men to use means for the
attaining of an end, when they are, although Exhorted, also Assured, that in
their so doing, they shall attain the end aimed at, is yet under contest? And
may pass for the present with those other Ridiculous supposalls, formerly
mentioned.

But Mr Goodwin proceeds farther in the vindication of this Argument Sect.
38.. 20.


And whereas ( says he) they still plead, or pretend rather, that such
admonitions as these lately specifyed may well stand with an unconditioned
Promise of Perseverance, we have formerly showed, that they are not able to
make good this plea, nor to give any reasonable account of it, whereas they
add that their sense and opinion is not, that it is a thing absolutely or every
way impossible for true Believers to fall away totally or finally from their
Faith, but that they willingly grant that true Believers what through their
own weakness, and what through the subtle baits and temptations of Satan
may so fall away.

I Answer, But this is but a fig-leafe sought out to cover the nakedness of
their Opinion, which has no strength at all nor weight in it. For what though
it were in a thousand other respects never so possible for true Believers to
perish, yet if it be altogether impossible in such a respect which over rules
all those others, and which will and of necessity must hinder the coming of it
to pass, all those other notwithstanding, it is to be judged simply and
absolutely impossible, and all those respects wereby it is pretended possible are
not to be brought into account in such a case.

Ans.. 21.
Whether we are able to make good our plea concerning the consistency of
Admonitions with the Promises of Perseverance, Mr Goodwin is not the sole
Judge; Neither do either we, or our plea stand or fall at his Arbitrament; What
has been lately spoken for the reinforcement of that plea against his
Exceptions, he may if he please, take time to consider.

Secondly, For what is now added in this place as a part of that plea of ours,
as it is here proposed we own not; We doenot grant that true Believers may fall
away on any account whatever totally and finally, if the expression, may fall
away, relate to the issue and event; We say indeed that by the temptations of
Satan Believers may be prevailed against, to the committing of many sins, the
root whereof is in themselves, whilst the lust remains in them which tempts
and insnareth them, whereby God may be dishononred, and their own Consciences
wounded, which is a sufficient ground and bottom for all the Admonitions that
are given them to beware of his deceits, to strengthen themselves against his
assaults, to be built upon, though through the Grace and Faithfulness of God
and his goodwill manifested, and secured unto them in his Covenant and
Promises, he can never totally prevail against them.

We say moreover, that it is not from Believers themselves, nor any thing in
them, nor from any Faith that they have received, that they cannot so fall
finally away; there being in them a pronenes to sin, and the seed of all sin
still remaining, yea a root of bitterness ready to spring up and trouble them;
but from those outward principles of the Will, Purposes, Covenant and Promises
of God which we have formerly insisted on. Farther, that there is no need of
granting any such possibility taking that term, as relating to the issue and
event, and not the internal principle of operation in men, to manifest the
Harmony that is between the Admonitions under consideration, and the Promises
we have insisted on; it being sufficiently evinced on other considerations; So
that Mr Goodwins ensuing Discourse concerning Absolute Impossibility is not at
all related to any thing that we have asserted.

Thirdly, Neither yet does the Reason by Mr Goodwin produced, in any measure
convince what he intends though we be not concerned therein; He will not easily
persuade us that that which is possible in any respect, much less in many, and
impossible only in one, is always to be judged Simply and Absolutely
impossible; much less are we concerned in it, who say that Simply and
Absolutely the falling away of Believers is Possible, namely, as the term
possible relates to the principle of operation in them; But in some respects
only it is impossible, that is, not of it self, but in respect of the
external prohibiting cause. It was Absolutely and simply possible, that the
bones of our Savior should have been broken, in the nature of the thing it
self: impossible, in respect of the decree of God; So are a thousand things
Absolutely possible in their own nature, as to the power of the causes whereby
they might be produced, but impossible in respect of some external prohibiting
cause; Absolutely possible in respect of their proper cause and principle;
impossible in respect of the event, upon the the account of some external
prohibiting cause as was showed. So it is in the business in hand; We assert
not any possibility in respect of the event; As though in the issue it might so
come to pass, that Believers should fall totally and finally from God, which
is the thing we oppose: but it grant, in respect of the causes of such
apostasy, with reference to the nature of the thing it self; Though how the
possibility might be reduced into act Mr Goodwin cannot declare; As for the
close of this Section concerning the Absolute, Peremptory, irresistible decrce
of Perseverance which he ascribes to us as our assertion, when he shall have
convinced us of the Conditional, Non-peremptory, reversible decree of God,
which he endeavors to introduce in the place thereof, he may here more of us,
in the mean time (...).

Section 39.. 22.
40. he seeks to alleviate the instance commonly given of our Savior Christ,
who though assured of the end, (and in respect of whom 'twas utterly impossible
that his glorious exaltation, should not follow in the issue, he being wholly
out of all danger of being detained under the power of Death,) yet he Labored,
and prayed, and fasted, and resisted Satan's temptations, and watched against
him, and dealt with him, by weapons taken out of the word of God; And in
especial when the Devil urged him with the argument in hand, that there is no
need of means or the using of them, when there is a certainty of the end, and
an impossibility that it should otherwise fall out, or the End not be brought
about and accomplished, as he did when he tempted him to cast himself headlong
from a pinnacle of the Temple because the Angels had charge over him, that not
so much as his foot should be hurt against a stone, whatever he did, as Satan
intimated, which is the tenor of the Argument wherewith we have to do, he
returns to him the very Answer that we insist upon, viz. that though it be the
good pleasure of God to bring us to the end we aim at, yet are we not to tempt
him by a neglect of the means which he has appointed; it is true, there are
Arguments used to us that could have no place with Christ, being taken from the
Estate and Condition of infirmity and weakness through sin, wherein we are;
which is a ground only of an Inference, that if Christ who was Holy,
Harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, did yet watch and pray and
contend against Satan, much more should we do so. But this does not at all
take off from the parity of Reason that is in case of Diligent using of the
means, for the compassing of the end, that in some respect is under an
impossibility of not being accomplished; For the removeall of this instance Mr
Goodwin enters into a large Discourse of the cause and Reason vesting the Lord
Christ with an immutability in good, and how it is not competent to any
Creature: which that it is, never entered into the thoughts of any to assert
that I ever heard of; Nor is it of the least importance to the removeall of our
Instances as to its serviceablenesse unto the end, for which it is produced; He
tells us also, That in case men be caused necessit atingly and unavoidably to
act Righteously, it will take away all rewardablenesse from their actings; And
the Reason is, because such a necessitating of them, makes them merely passive
they having not any internal principle of their own to contract such a
necessity; which Discourse is pursued with many other words to the same
purpose; And a Discourse it is

First, Exceedingly Irrelative to the business in hand; there is not any thing
now under consideration, that should minister occasion at all, to consider the
manner of our yiedling Obedience, and the way of Gods Grace, in the bringing
forth the fruits thereof, but only of the consistency that is between
Admonitions for the using of the means, when it is supposed impossible that the
end prevented by them should ever come to pass, which may, or may not be so,
whatever be the manner and way of our yielding Obedience upon the exertion of
the Efficacy of the Grace of God; Diversion is one of Mr Goodwins ordinary
ways of warding those blows, which he is not able to bear.

Secondly false, charging a crime on the Doctrine which he does oppose whereof
it is not guilty; Neither it, nor they that maintain it, affirming that there
is a necessitation upon the wills of men by the Grace of God, such a
necessitation as should in the least prejudice their freedom, or cause them to
elicite their acts as principles Natural and necessary; All the necessity
ascribed by them to the efficacy of the operation of the Grace of God, respects
only the event; They say it is necessary that the good be done, which God works
in us by his Grace, when he works it in us; but for the manner of its doing,
they say, it is wrought suitably to the state and Condition of the Internal
principle whence it is to proceed, and does so, and of the Agents whereby it is
wrought, which are free; Neither do they say that good is not wrought by any
Native and inward Principle that is in men, unless they will allow no
principle to be Native but what is in them by nature; And then indeed they say,
that though Naturally and Physically there is, yet Morally and Spiritually
there is not in them any Native principle to that which is Spiritually good;
seeing, in that sense no good thing dwells in men. But if it may suffice to
evince that they work from a Native inward principle, that their wills which
are their Natural facultyes, quickened, improved and heightened, by inward,
indwelling habits of Grace, properly theirs when bestowed on them, are the
principles of all their actings, then they assert them to work no less from a
native internal principle than Christ himself did; So that notwithstanding
this diversion given in to supply the Absence of an Answer, the instance as to
that alone, wherein the parallel was intended, stands unmoved, and Mr
Goodwin's whole charge of folly and inconsistency on the proceeding of the Holy
Ghost falls to the ground, which is the issue of his eight Argument in this
case; His last follows.

The last Argument which he proposes Sect.. 23.
41. and ends his Chapter withal, is faint, and as the droppings after a
shower, will easily be blown over, he thus proposes it.

That Doctrine which Naturally, and directly tends to beget and foment
jealousyes, and evil surmises between brethren in Christ, or such as ought
cordially to Love, Reverence and Honor one another is not confederate with the
Gospel, nor from God, and consequently, that which contradicts it must needs
be a truth: The common Doctrine of unqnestionable and unconditioned
Perseverance, is a Doctrine of this tendency, apt to beget and foment
jealousyes, suspicions and evil surmises between brethren, or such as ought to
Love and Respect one the other as brethren in Christ: Ergo.

Ans. Not to take notice of any thing by the by, which sundry Expressions and
one inference at the least, in this Argument do readily administer occasion
unto. I awaite the proof of the Minor, which in the following Discourse
amounts to this: That judging all those who fall finally away not to have been
true Believers, we cannot but have evil surmises, of all that stand, that they
are not true Believers, seeing as good as they have fallen away, hence
jealousyes of their Hypocrysy will arise. And he tells us for his part, he
knows no Christian in the world, that he has more reason to judge a true
Believer, than he had to judge some, who are turned wretched Apostates. To
which I say briefly,

First,. 24.
I doubt not but Mr Goodwin knows fullwell, that this is not a Rule given us
to make a judgment of Believers by, with whom we walk, and toward whom it is
required we bear Love without dissimulation, Romans 12. 18.
toward such as show us their Faith by their works; Our rule of walking from
the principle of Love, and Charity is laid down in 1 Cor. 13. And if all that
any man knows at this day professors in this world, should turn Apostates,
save only one, and he had reckoned that one, and them that are Apostatized,
before their Apostasy, of the same rank of Believers, and had no evil
thoughts of that one above the rest, he was bound without any evil surmises to
believe all things, and to hope all things, and not to let go his sincere Love
toward that one, embracing of him, delighting in him, holding communion with
him to his lives end without suspicion of Hypocrisy, or other hard thoughts of
him unles he also should degenerate; It Is said Joh. 2. 23. That many believed
on Christ because of the profession of Faith that they made, and Ioh. 6. 34.
They pray earnestly to be fed with the bread of Life; So that they were
accounted among his Disciples v. 60. and yet upon a temptation they left our
Savior, and walked no more with him, v. 66. Now notwithstanding the profession
of these men our Savior plainly says, that they believed not, v. 64. They
falling thus away who had professed to believe, and were accounted as
Believers, so called and named among the Disciples of Christ, and Christ
declaring on the account of their Apostasy, that indeed they did never believe,
how was it that the remaining Twelve had not hard thoughts and jealousyes one
of another, (especially considering that there was one Hypocrite still left
among them) whether they had true Faith or no^ seeing our Savior had declared
that those who so fell off, as those before mentioned, had none? Doubtless
they were instructed to walk by a better and streighter Rule, than that Mr
Goodwin here assigns to Believers; Let him who will or can fall away, whilst
we are taught of God to love one another, and are acted by the principle of
Love which thinks no evil, and do contend against evil surmizes as the
works of the flesh; There is not any thing in the least attending the
discovery of one man's Hypocrisy, to work us to a persuasion that another (not
in any thing discovered) is so also; that because we see some goodly house fall
under storms and temptations to the ground, and so manifest it self to have
been built on the sand, that therefore we must conclude that those which stand,
are not built upon the Rock, is not suited to any principle or Rule that our
Master has given us to walk by, in order to the exercise of that Love, which
he calls for in us toward one another.

Secondly,. 25.
I say this way of proceeding in our thoughts and judgments does the Holy
Ghost lead us to: 1 John 2. 19. The Apostle giving an account of some who had
formerly walked with him in the profession of the Faith, and of the fellowship
which they had with the Father and Son, fell away from Christ into an
opposition against him, so far as to deserve the title of Antichrists, having
not only forsaken the Gospel, but making it also their business to oppose it,
and to seduce others from the simplicity of the same; These he informs the
scattered Believers of the Jews were Apostates, having formerly walked with
them, but deserted their fellowship, and thereby manifested themselves never to
have been true Believers, nor ever indeed to have had fellowship with the
Father and the Son, no more than they of whom our Savior spoke in the place
before mentioned; And yet doubtless the Apostle may not be supposed to lay a
foundation for jealousyes, evil suspicions, and surmises among Believers,
though he plainly and evidently affirm that those who fall away were never
true Believers, and that if they had been so, they would have continued in
their Faith and fellowship with the people of God. They went ous from us (says
he) but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would (no doubt)
have continued with us, but they went out, that they might be made manifest
that they were not all of us.

A passage (by the way) clearly confirming the maine of the Doctrine we have
hitherto insisted on;. 26.
And therefore I shall turn aside, before I come to the close of this Chapter,
having this occasion administered, to vindicate it from the exceptions Mr
Goodwin gives in against the Testimony it bears in this case.

The Argument that it readily furnishes us withal, is of this import,: 27.
If all they who fall away totally from the fellowship, and society of the
Church, and Saints of God, what ever their profession were before that
Apostasy, were never true Believers, and are thereby manifested never to have
been so, then those who are true Believers cannot fall away: But the First is
true, therefore the latter; The words are so disposed as to be cast into an
Hypotheticall Proposition, which virtually includes a doubleArgument as every
discrete Axiom does; it is not thus, therefore thus; If true Believers might so
depart and Apostatise as those here mentioned, no unquestionable proof could
be drawn from such Apostasy, that men were never true Believers, which yet is
plainly insisted on, in the Text.

M. Goodwin Cap.. 28.
10. Sect. 21, 22, 23, 24. Page 189, 190, 191, 192. gathers up sundry
Exceptions from the Remonstrants which, (as they also did) he opposes to this
Interpretation of the words, and the Inferences from them insisted on; I shall
briefly consider and remove them in that order as by him they are laid down.
He says,

First, This Inference presumes many things, for which neither it, nor any the
Authors of it, will ever be able to give any good security of proof, As

First, That this phrase [they were not of us] imports that they were never
true Believers; this certainly can never be proved, because there is another
sense, and this every whit as proper to the words, and more commodious for the
Context, and scope of the place, which may be given of them, as we shall see
anon.

Ans.. 29.
That there is not any thing presumed for the eduction of the Inference
proposed, but what is either directly expressed, or evidently included, in the
words of the Text, will appear in the farther consideration of what M. Goodwin
has to offer to the contrary. That expression [ they were not of us] imports
evidently, that they were not of them, in the fellowship and communion, which
he was now exhorting Believers to continue and abide in. He tells them at the
head of this Discourse Cap. 1. 3. that the end of his writing to them, was to
draw them into, and keep them in communion with himself, and the Saints with
him; which Communion or Fellowship, he tells them, they had with the Father and
the Son. But as for the Persons, of whom in these words he is speaking to
them, describing them by their former and present condition, with the causes of
it, he tells them, that though they abode with them for a season, yet they were
never of them, as to the Communion and fellowship they had with the Father and
Son, and so were never true Members of the Church; The only reason M. Goodwin
gives to Invalidate this sense of the Words is, that he is able to give another
meaning of them (in his own judgment) more proper to the words, and more
commodious to the scope of the place: which whether it have any more efficacy
to take in the force and evidence of the Interpretation given, lying plain and
clear in the first view of the words, and Context, than it has to evade the
eduction of any Truth whatever, from any place of Scripture whatever, seeing
some or other suppose themselves able to give another sense of the words, let
the Reader judge: But he adds

Secondly,. 30.
That this Expression [they were of us] signifies that they were true Believers
is presumed; of the uncertainty of this supposition we shall ( says he) give
the like account.

Ans. When we come to take M. Goodwin's farther Account, we shall be able (I
make no doubt) to reckon with him, and to discharge his Bill; In the mean
time, we say, that supposition [ if they had been of us] (whence our Inference
is made) evidently includes a fellowship and communion with the Apostle and
true Believers in their fellowship with God, which is asserted as a certain
Foundation of men's abiding in the communion of the Saints.

But says he,

Thirdly,. 31.
it is supposed, that these words [they went out from us] signify their final
defection, or abdication of the Apostles communion, or their total and final
renunciation of Christ, his Church, and Gospel; This supposition has no
bottom at all, or color for it.

Ans. Divide not the words from their coherence, and the intendment of the
place, and the signification denied is too evident and clear for any one, with
the least color of Reason, to rise up against it; They went out, so out from
the communion of the Church, as to become Antichrists, opposers of Christ, and
seducers from him; and certainly in so doing, did totally desert the Communion
of the Apostle, renounce the Lord Christ, as by him Preached, and forsook
utterly both Church and Gospel, as to any fellowship with the one or the
other: And we know full well, what is the bottom of this and the like
Assertions, that such and such things have no bottom at all; which never yet
failed M. Goodwin at his need.

Fourthly ( says he). 32.
It Is supposed that this clause [ they would no doubt have continued with us]
signifies they would have continued in the same Faith, wherein we Persevere and
continue; nor is there (says he) any competent Reason to enforce this sense of
those words, because neither does the Grammatical tenor of them require it,
and much less the scope of the passage.

Ans. The Fellowship John invited Believers unto, and to continue in, (as has
been often observed with him,) and the Saints with him, was that which they
held with the Father and the Son, to continue with them therein, in the
Litterall Grammatical sense of the words, is to continue in the Faith: It
being Faith whereby they have that fellowship or Communion; this also is
evident from the scope of the whole passage, and is here only impotently
denied. But says he,

Fifthly, The said Inference supposes that John certainly knew, that all those
who for the present remained in his communion, were true Believers, for, if
they were not true believers, they that were gone out from them in the sense
contended for, might be said to be of them, that is, persons of the same
condition with them; But how improbable this is, I mean that John should
infallibly know, that all those who as yet continued with them, were true
Believers, I refer to consideration.

Ans. Had M. Goodwin a little poised this passage before he took it up, perhaps
he would have cast it away, as an useless trifle; But his masters having
insisted on it, perhaps he thought it not meet to question their judgments, in
least, for fear of being at liberty to deal so with them in matters of
greater importance. I say then that there is not the least color for any such
supposall from the inference we make from the text; nor is there any thing of
that nature intimated, or suggested in the words, or Argument from them; the
body of them whom the Apostates forsook, were true Believers; and their
abiding in the fellowship of the Saints, was a manifestation of it sufficient
for them to be owned as such, which the others manifested themselves never to
have been, by their Apostasy. But says he,

Sixthly,. 33.
The inference under contest yet farther supposes, that John certainly knew,
that they who were now gone out from them, neither were, now, nor ever before
true Believers, yea and that he certainly knew this by their departure or
going out from them.

Ans. This is the very thing that the Apostle affirms, that he certainly knew
those Apostates never to have been true Believers, and that by their Apostasy,
or falling totally from the Gospel, becoming seducers and opposers of Christ;
Let him argue it out with the Holy Ghost, if he can, whose plain and clear
expression this is, and that confirmed by the ensuing Argument of the
Perseverance of them who were true Believers, and whose fellowship is with the
Saints, in their communion with the Father and the Son; Wherefore says he,

Lastly it presumes yet farther that all true Believers do always abide in
the external communion of the Church;. 34.
and that when men do not so abide they plainly declare herein, that they never
were true Believers, which is not only a manifest untruth, but expressly
contrary to the Doctrine it self, of those men who assert the inference; for
they teach (as we heard before) that a true Believer may fall so foulely and so
far, that the Church according to the command of Christ, may be constrained
to testify that she cannot tolerate them in her external communion, nor that
ever they shall have any part or portion in the Kingdom of Christ, unless
they repent; Doubtless to be cast out of the Church according to the
institution and command of Christ (who commands no such thing but upon very
heinous and high unchristian misdemeanors) is of every whit as sad importance,
as a voluntary desertion of the Churches communion can be for a season.

Ans. It supposes that no true Believers fall so off from the Church, as to
become Antichrist's, opposers of Christ, and the Church, so as to deny that
Christ is come in the flesh, which was the great business of the Antichrists in
those days; It Is true, and granted by us, that a true Believer may forsake the
outward communion of some particular Church for a season, yea and that upon his
irregular walking and not according to the rule of Christ, he may by the
Authority of such a Church, be rejected from its communion for his amendment
and recovery into the right way, of which before: But that a true Believer, can
voluntarily desert the communion of the Saints, and become an Antichrist, that
this text denies, and we from it, and the many other witnesses of the same
truth, that have been produced: Notwithstanding then all Mr Goodwin exceptions,
there is nothing presumed in the inference, we make from these words, but what
is either expressly contained, or evidently included in them.

But Mr Goodwin will not thus give over,. 35.
he prefers his exceptions to this Testimony in another whole Section: which
because the Demonstration of the truth in hand from this place, though here
handled by the by, is of great importance, and such as by its single strength,
is sufficient utterly to cast to the ground the figment set up in opposition to
it, I shall present entirely to the Reader (that our Author may be heard out
and nothing omitted that he pleads, for the waving of the force of the Argument
in hand) that whole Section. Thus then he proceeds.

Suppose that these two suppositions be granted to the Inference makers;. 36.
First, That this phrase [to go out from us] signifies voluntarily to forsake
the society and communion of Christians; And Secondly, That this expression [to
be of us] signifies true and inward communion with those from whom they went
out, yet will not these contributions suffice, for the firm building of the
said Inference; The Reason is, Because the Apostle expressly says; that they
would have continued with [us,] not that they would have continued such, as
they were, in respect of the Truth or Essence of their Faith; and if the
Apostles scope in this place were to prove or affirm, that they who are once
true Christians, or Believers, always continue such, then, when he says they
would have continued with us, he must of necessity mean, either that they
would have continued Faithful as we continue Faithful, or else that they
would have continued always in our society, or in the profession of
Christianity: But that neither of these senses are of any tolerable
consistency, is evident, by the light of this Consideration, viz. That the
Apostle then must have known, that the persons he speaks of, and who went out
from them, neither were nor ever had been true Christian Believers, when they
went thus from them; Now if he had this knowledge of them, it must be supposed
either that he had it by extraordinary Revelation (but this is very improbable,
and howsoever cannot be proved;) or else that he gained and obtained it by
their departure or going out from them; but that this could be no sufficient
Argument or ground, to beget any such knowledge in the Apostle concerning them,
is evident from hence, Because it may very easily, and does very frequently
come to pass, That they who are true Christians, do not always continue in
the society to which they have joined themselves, no nor yet in the external
profession of Christianity it self; yea, our opposers themselves, frequently
and without scruple teach, that even true believers themselves, may through
Fear, or shame, or extremity of sufferings, be brought to deny Christ, and
without any danger of being ship-wrack't of their Faith forbear making a
profession of the name of Christ afterward.

Ans.: 37.
First, What is meant and Intended by those expressions [ went out from us, and
to be of us] has been declared; We are not to teach the Holy Ghost to speak;
What ever conceit we may have of our own abilities, when we deal with Worms
of the Earth, like our selves, to his will, to his expressions, we must veil
and submit; He is pleased to phrase their continuance in the Faith, their
continuance with us, that is, with the Saints in the fellowship and communion
of the Gospel, which they had with God in Christ; The expression is clear and
evident to the purpose in hand, and there is no contending against it.

Secondly, we do not say, that it is the direct scope and intent of the Apostle
in this place, to prove that those who are true Believers, cannot fall away,
and depart from the Faith, which he afterward does to the purpose, Cap. 3. 9
but his mind and intendment was, to manifest, that those who forsake the
Society of Christians, and become Antichrists, and seducers, were indeed never
true Believers; useing the other Hypothesis as a medium for the confirmation of
this Assertion.

Thirdly, By that phrase, they would have continued with us, the Apostle
intends their continuance in the society and fellowship of the Faithful by the
profession of Jesus Christ, whom now they opposed; denying him to be come in
the flesh; that is, they would not have so fallen off, as they have done, upon
the account of the Estate and Condition of true Believers, and real Saints,
who are kept by the power of God to salvation.

Fourthly, The Apostle did know, and professed himself to know, that they were
not, nor ever had been true Believers, when they were once so gone out from
them, as they went; as our Savior Christ professed them not to have been true
believers, who followed him for a while, were called and accounted his
Disciples, when they fell in an hour of Temptation; Neither have we the least
reason to suppose, that the Apostle had this knowledge by Revelation, seeing
the thing it self in reference and proportion to the principles he lays down
of the continuance of Believers, did openly proclaim it.

Fifthly, That true Christians or Believers, can so fall away from the society
of the Saints, as these here mentioned did, is denied; and a grant of it ought
not to be begged at our hands; it is true, that (as was before granted) a true
believer may for a season desert the communion or fellowship of a Church,
wherein he has walked, and that causelessly; yea, he may be surprised through
Infirmity, to deny, under mighty temptations, in words, for a moment, the Lord
Christ, whom yet his Heart loves, and honors, as in the case of Peter was too
evident, But that such an one, may forsake the external profession of
Christianity, or cease profession making, and betake himself to a contrary
interest, opposing Christ and his ways, as those here insisted on did; that is
denied, and not the least attempt of proof made to the contrary.

Whilst I was upon the consideration of these exceptions of Mr Goodwin's,. 38.
to our Testimony from this Text of Scripture by us insisted on, there came to
my hands, his Exposition on the 9. Chapter to the Romans; In the Epistle
whereof to the Reader, he is pleased, Sect. 6. Studiously to wave the
imputation of having borrowed this Exposition from Arminius and his followers:
An Apology perhaps unworthy his prudence, and great abilityes: which Testimony
yet I fear, by having cast an eye on the body of the Discourse, will scarcely
be received by his Reader, without the help of that vulgar Proverb Good Wits
jumpe: But yet on that occasion I cannot but say, however he has dealt in that
Treatise, this Discourse I have under consideration is purely translated from
them, the condition of very much of what has been already considered, having
the same which I had there thought to have manifested, by placing their Latin
against his English in the margent: but these things are personal, not
belonging to the cause in hand M. G. is sufficiently known to have Abilityes of
his own such as wherewith he has done (in sundry particulars) considerable
service to the Truth, as sometimes they have been unhappily engaged in ways of
a contrary nature, and tendency.

It being evident from these Considerations that our Author is not able in the
least to take off this witness from speakeing home to the very heart of the
cause in hand,. 39.
that it may not seem to be weakened and impaired by him in the least: I shall
farther consider that diversion which he would entice the words unto, from
their proper channel and Intendment, and so leave the Apostasy of the Saints
dead, at the foot of it: He gives us then, (Sect. 23, 24.) an Exposition of
this place of Scripture, upon the Rack whereof, it seems not to speak what
formerly we received from its mouth, For the occasion of the words, he says,

For the true meaning of this place,. 40.
it is to be considered, that the Apostles intent in the words* was to prevent,
or heal an offense, that weak Christians might take, at the Doctrine which
was taught and spread abroad by those Antichrists or Anticristian teachers,
spoken of in the former verse; and they are said to have been many, and that
especially because they had sometimes lived and conversed with the Apostles
themselves in Christian Churches, and had professed the same Faith and Doctrine
with them; by reason hereof some Christians not so considerate or judicious as
others, might possibly think or conceive, that surely all things were not well
with the Apostles, and those Christian societyes with which they consorted;
There was something not as it ought to have been, either in Doctrine, or
manners, or both, which ministered an occasion to these men to break communion
with them, and to leave them.

Ans.. 41.
First The intendment of the Apostle in the Context, is evidently to caution
Believers against seducers, acquainting them also, with the sweet and gracious
provision, that God had made for their preservation, in the abiding, teaching,
anointing, bestowed on them: In the verse under present consideration, he gives
them a description of the persons that did seduce them, in respect of their
present state and condition; They were Apostates; who though they had sometimes
made profession of the Faith, yet indeed were never true Believers, nor had any
fellowship with Jesus Christ, as he and the Saints had, which also they had
abundantly manifested by their open Apostasy, and ensuing opposition to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and the eternal Life manifested therein.

Secondly, That any Christians whatsoever, from the consideration of these
seducers falling away did entertain any suspicion that all things were not
well in that society of which the Apostle speaks (not with the Apostles, which
were all dead, himself only excepted, when John wrote this Epistle) either as
to Doctrine or manners, so supposing them to take part with the Apostates, in
their departure, is a surmize whereunto there is not any thing (in the least)
contributed in the Text, or Context, nor any thing like to it, being a mere
invention of our Author, found out to serve this turn, and confidently without
any induction looking that way; or attempt of proof, imposed upon his
credulous Reader; if men may assume to themselves a liberty of creating
occasions of words, discourses or expressions in the Scripture, no manner of
way insinuated, nor suggested therein, they may wrest it to what they please,
and confirm whatever they have a mind unto.

This false foundation being laid he proceeds to build upon it,. 42.
and suitably thereunto feignes the Apostle to speak what never entered into
his heart, and unto that, whereof, he had no occasion administered.

To this ( says he) the Apostle answers partly by Concession, partly by
Exception; First by Concession, in those words [they went out from us] which
words do not so much import their utter declining or forsaking the Apostles
communion, as the advantage or opportunity which they had, to gain credit and
respect, both to the Doctrine, and Persons, among professors of Christianity
in the World; In as much as they came forth from the Apostles themselves as men
sent and commissioned by them to teach; The same phrase is used in this sense,
and with the same import where the Apostles write thus to the Brethren of the
Gentiles, Acts 15. 24. For as much as we have heard, that certain that went out
from us have troubled you, with words subverting your souls, saying you must
be circumcised and keep the Law, to whom we gave no such commandment; So that
in this clause [ they went out from us] the Apostle grants; First, That those
Antichristian teachers had indeed for a time held communion with them; And
Secondly, That hereby they had the greater opportunity, of doing harm in the
World, by their false Doctrines. But Secondly. He Answers farther by way of
Exception (but they were not of us) whilst yet they conversed with us, they
were not men of the same spirit and principles with us; we walked in the
profession of the Gospel, with single and upright hearts, not aiming at any
secular greatness, or worldly accommodations in one kind or other; these men
loved this present World, and when they found the simplicity of the Gospel,
would not accommodate them to their minds, they brake with us, and with the
truth of the Gospel it self at once.

Ans.. 43.
First, I suppose it is evident (at the first view) that this new gloss of the
Apostles words, is inconsistent with that, which was proposed for the occasion
of them in the words foregoing; There an Aspersion is said to be cast upon the
Churches, and societyes whereof the Apostle speaks, from the departure of
these seducers from them, as though they were not sound in Faith or manners;
here an insinuation quite of an other tendency, is suggested, as though these
persons found continuance in their teachings and seductions, from the society
and communion which they had had with the Apostles; as though they had
pretended to come from them, by commission, and so instead of casting reproach
upon them by their departure, did assume Authority to themselves, by their
having been with them; But to the thing it self I say,

Secondly, That the Apostle is not answering any Objection, but describing the
state and condition of the Antichrists, and seducers, concerning whom, and
their seduction, he cautioneth Believers, has been formerly beyond
contradiction manifested and maintained; That expression then [ they went out
from us] is not an Answer (by concession) to an Objection* but a description of
seducers by their Apostasy; Which words also in their regard to the Persons as
before by him described, do manifest their utter declining and forsaking the
Communion of the Saints, they so going from them, as also going into an
opposition to the Doctrine of the Gospel.

Thirdly, That the Apostle here insinuates an advantage these Antichrists had,
to seduce, from their former communion with him, (a thing not in the least
suggested (as was observed) in the occasion of the words, as laid down by Mr
Goodwin himself) is proved from the use of the words [ they went out from us]
Acts 15. 24. Whence this undeniable Argument may be educed. Some who went out
from the Apostle, had repute and authority in their preaching thereby, these
Antichrists went out from the Apostle, therefore they had repute and authorety
thereby; younger men than either Mr Goodwin or my self, know well enough what
to make of this Argument; Besides, though there be an agreement in that one
Expression, all the neighboring parts of the Description, manifest that in the
things themselves, there and here pointed at, there is no affinity; Those in
the Acts pretended to abide still in the communion and Faith of the Apostles,
these here expressively departed both from the one and the other, to an
opposition of them both: The former, seemed to have pretended a commission from
the Apostles, these according to Mr Goodwin himself did so far declare
against them, that it was a scandal to some, fearing that all had not been
well among the Apostles.

Fourthly, That which is called an Answer by way of Exception (as in it lie the
expression of it so used upon the matter, is as much as we urge from these
words; The import of them is said to be, they were not of us, though they were
with us, yet they were not such as we are, didnot walk in that uprightness of
heart, as we do, they were not men of the same principles and spirit with us;
that is, they were not true, thorough, sincere and sound Believers at all, no
not while they converst with the Apostles. Now evident it is that in those
words, as is manifest by the assuming of them again for the use of an
inference ensuing [ for if they had been of us, they would have continued with
us] the Apostle yields a Reason and Account, how they came to Apostatize and
fall to the opposition of the Gospel from the profession wherein they walked;
'twas because they were not men of thorough and sound principles, true
Belivers: and consequently he supposes, and implies, that if they had been so
they would not, they could not have so Apostatized: for if they might there had
been no weight in the account given, of the Reason of their revolt.

In what follows,. 44.
that these words, but they were not of us, do not necessarily imply they were
Believers formerly, but perhaps they had been so, and were before fallen away,
being choked by the cares of the world, an observation is insinuated, directly
opposite to the Apostles design, and such as makes his whole Discourse
ridiculous; An account he gives of men's falling away from the Faith, and tells
them it is because, though they have been professors, yet they were never true
Believers, yea but perhaps they were true Believers, and then fell away, and
after that fell away; that is, they fell from the Faith, and then fell from the
Faith: for that is plainly intimated in, and is the sense of this doubty
Observation.

But to proceed with his exposition:. 45.
he says, It follows, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us; in these words the Apostle gives a reason of his Exception
telling them, to whom he writes; that this was a sign and Argument that those
Antichristian teachers, were not of them in the sense declared; viz. That they
did not continue with them, that is, they quitted their former intimacy and
converse with the Apostles, refused to steer the same course, to walk by the
same principles, any longer with them, which (says he) doubtless they would
not have done, had they been as sincerely affected toward Jesus Christ and the
Gospel as we; by which Assertion John plainly vindicated himself and the
Christian Churches of his communion, from giving any just occasion of offense
unto those men, whereby they should be any ways induced to forsake them, and
resolves their unworthy departure of this kind into their own carnal and
corrupt hearts, which lusted after some fleshly accommodations and
contentments, that were not to be obtained, or enjoyed, in a sincere profession
of the Gospel with the Apostles and those who were perfect of heart with them.

Ans. First, That no aspersion was cast on John, or the Churches of his
Communion, by the Apostasy of the Antichrists, of whom he speaks, from which
he should need to vindicate himself and them, was before declared: There was
not, indeed, nor possibly could be, the least occasion for any surmize of evil
concerning them, from whom men departed, in turning ungodly opposers of Christ;
For any thing that is here offered, it is but an obscureing of the Light that
breaks forth from the words, for the discerning of the Truth in hand; it is
granted that the Apostle manifests, that they were not of them, that is, true,
upright, sound believers, that walked with a right foot in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, because they forsook the communion of the Saints, to fall into the
condition of Antichristianisme, wherein they were now engaged. Now if this be
an Argument that a man was never a true believer, in the highest profession
that he makes, because he falls from it, and forsakes it, certainly those that
are true believers, cannot so fall from their steadfastness; or the Argument
will be of no Evidence or conviction at all; Neither is any thing here offered
by M. Goodwin, but what upon a through consideration, does confirm the
inferences we insist upon, and make to the work in hand; Truth will at one
time or other, lead captive those who are most skillful in their Rebellion
against it.

What is added (Sect. 24.) concerning the Righteous Judgment of God,. 46.
and the gracious tendency of his dispensations to his Churches use, in
suffering these wretches so to discover themselves, and be manifested what they
were, I oppose not. The discovery that was made, was of what they had been
before, that is not true Believers, and not what now they were; yea, by what
they now showed themselves to be, was made manifest what before they were;
Words of the like import you have 1 Cor. 11. 19. %For there must be also
heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among
you; as here those who fall away are manifested to be corrupt, so there are
those who abide to be sincere.

From what has been occasionally spoken of the intendment and scope of this
place, of the design which the Apostle had in hand, of the direct sense of the
words themselves,. 47.
M. Goodwins exceptions to our Interpretation of the words and inferences from
it, being wholly removed, and his Expofition, which he advances in the room
of that insisted on, manifested to be, as to the occasion and scope of the
place assigned, utterly foreign unto it, and as to Explication of the
particulars of it, not of any strength or consistency for the obscurenig of the
true sense and meaning of the place, in the eye of an intelligent Reader, it is
evidently concluded beyond all colorable contradiction, that those who are
true Believers indeed, having obtained communion with the Father and his Son
Christ Jesus, cannot fall into a total Relinquishment of Christ, or of the
Faith of the Gospel, so as to have no portion nor interest in the communion
they formerly enjoyed.

To return to M. Goodwins close of this 13.. 48.
Chap. and nine Arguments (as he calls them) from which he labors to Evince
the Apostasy of Believers, he shuts up the whole with a Declamation against,
and revileing of the Doctrine he opposes, with many opprobrious and
reproachful expressions, calling it an Impostor, and an Appearance of Satan in
the likeness of an Angel of Light, with such like terms of reproach, as his
Rhetoric at every turn is ready to furnish him withal; threatening it
farther, with calling it in Question before I know not how many Learned men of
all sorts, and to disprove it by their Testimony concerning it; and so all that
is required for its destruction is, or shall be speedily dispatched; God knows
how to defend his Truth, and as he has done this in particular, against as
fierce assaults as any M. Goodwin has made, or is like to make against it, so
I no way doubt, he will continue to do; It Is not the first time, that it has
been conformeable to its Author; in undergoing the contradiction of men, and
being laden with reproaches, and crucified among the theevish principles of
Error and profaneness. Hitherunto it has not wanted in due time its
Resurrection, and that continually with a new Glory, and an added estimation to
what before it obtained among the Saints of God; and I no way doubt, but that
it will grow more and more, until the perfect day, when those opinions and
inventions of men, derogatory to the Grace and Covenant of God, his Truth,
Unchangeablenesse, and Faithfulness, which now make long their shades, to
eclypse the beauty and luster of it, shall consume and vanish away before its
brightness; In which persuasion I doubt not, but the Reader will be confirmed
with me, upon the farther consideration of what M. Goodwins endeavors are in
an opposition thereto, wherewith now by the grace of God, contrary to my first
intendment, I shall proceed.

CAP. XVII.
1. The cause of proceeding in this Chapter. 2. M. G's attempt Cap. 12. of his
Book. 3. Of the Preface to M. G's discourse. 4. Whether Doctrine renders men
proud and presumptuous. 5. M. G's Rule of judging of Doctrines called to the
Rule. 6. Doctrine pretending to promote Godliness, how far an Argument of
the Truth. 7. M. G. pretended advantages in judging of Truths examined. The
first of his knowledge of the general course of the Scriptures. 8. Of the
experiences of his own heart: And his observations of the ways of others. 9.
Of his Rational abilities. 10. Eyek 18. 24, 25. proposed to consideration:
M.G's sense of this place: The words opened observations for the opening of the
Text. 11. The words farther weighed, an entrance into the Answer to the
Argument from hence: the word Hypotheticall not absolute: 12. M. G. Answer
proposed and considered. 13. Whether the words are Hypotheticall. 14. The
severalls of the Text considered: the righteous man spoken of, who. 15. M. G.
proof of his interpretation of a Righteous man considered. 16. D. Prideaux his
sense of the Righteous person here intended, considered. 17. Of the commination
in the words: shall dye. The sense of the words: what death intended. 18. Close
of the consideration of the Text insisted on. 19. Mat. 18. 32, 33. taken into a
review. 20. Whether the Love of God be mutable. what the Love of God is. 21. 1
Cor. 9. 27. 22. In what sense it was possible for Panl to become a Reprobate.
23. The proper sense of the place insisted on, manifested. 24. Of the meaning
of the word (...). 25. The scope of the place farther cleared. 25. Heb. 6. 4,
5, 6. Chap. 10. 26, 27. proposed to consideration: whether the words be
conditional. 27. The genuine and true meaning of the place opened, in fix
observations. 28. M. G's exceptions to the Exposition of the words insisted on,
removed. The Persons intended not true Believers: this evinced on sundry
considerations. 29. The particulars of the Texts vindicated. 30. Of the
illumination mentioned in the Text. 31. Of the Acknowledgement of the Truth
ascribed to the Person mentioned. 32. Of the sanctification mentioned in the
Texts. 33. Of tasting the heavenly gift. 34. To be made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, what. 35. Of tasting the good word of God, and power of the world to
come. 36. Of the progress made by man not really regenerate in the things of
God. 37. The close of our Considerations on these Texts. 28. Heb. 10. 38, 39.
M. G's arguings from thence. 39. Considered and answered: of the Right
Translation of the word: Beza vindicated, as also our English translations. 40.
The words of the Text, effectual to prove the Saints Perseverance. 41. Of the
Parable of the stony ground Math. 13. 20, 21. 42. M. G. arguing from the place
proposed and considered. 43. The similitude in the Parable farther considered.
44. An Argument from the Text, to prove the Persons described not to be true
Believers. 45. 2 Pet. 4. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 46. Mr G. arguings from this place
considered. etc.

THough I could willingly be spared the labor of all that must ensue to the
end of this Treatise,. 1.
yet it being made necessary by the endeavors of men not delighting in the
Truth (which hithertto we have asserted) for the opposition thereof, and lying
I hope under the power and efficacy of that Heavenly Exhortation of contending
earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, I shall with all
chaerfulnesse address my self thereunto; yea, the service and homage I owe to
the Truth it self, causing this engagement for its rescue from under the
captivity wherein by the chains of Mr Goodwins Rhethoricke it has been
sometimes detained, being increased and doubled by the pressing and violent
wresting of sundry Texts of Scripture to serve in the same design of bondaging
the Truth with him, is a farther incitation, to add my weak endeavors, to
break open those doors and bars, which he has shut and fastened upon them
both, for their joint deliverance.

In Mr Goodwins 12.: 2.
Chapter he takes into participation with him, as is pretended, 8. places of
Scripture, endeavoring by all means possible to compel them to speak
comfortable words, for the relief of his fainting and dying cause: Whether He
has prevailed with them to the least compliance, or whether He will not be
found to proclaim in their name what they never once acknowledged unto him,
will be tried out in the process of our consideration of them.

In the first and second Section he fronts the Discourse intended with an
eloquent Oration,. 3.
partly concerning the tendency of the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance,
which he girds himself now more closely to contend withal, partly concerning
Himself, his own Ability, Industry, Skill, Diligence, and Observation of
Doctrines and Persons, with his rules in judging of the one and the other.

For the First,. 4.
He informs us, that his judgment is, that many who might have attained a
Crown of Glory, by a presumptuous conceit of the Impossibility of their
miscarrying, are now like to suffer the vengeance of eternal fire; men thereby
gratifying the flesh, with wresting the Scripture to the encouragement thereof.

That the Proud and Presumptuous conceits of men, are like to have no other
issue or effect, than the betraying of their souls to all manner of Looseness
and Abomination, so exposing them to the vengeance of eternal fire, we are
well assured; and therefore knowing the terror of the Lord do persuade men
(what we are able) to cast down all high thoughts and imaginations concerning
their own Abilities to do good, to believe, to obey the Gospel, or to abide
in the Faith thereof, and to roll themselves freely, fully, wholly on the free
Grace and faithfulness of God, in the covenant of Mercy, ratifyed in the blood
of his Son, wherein they shall be assured to find Peace to their souls. On
this foundation do we build all our endeavors, for the exalting the
sovereign, free, effectual grace of God, in opposition to the proud and
presumptuous conceits of men, concerning their own imbred, native power in
spiritual things; an Apprehension whereof we are well assured, disposes the
heart into such a frame as God abhorres, and prepares the soul to a battle
against him, in the highest and most abominable Rebellion imaginable; I no
ways doubt, but that the way and means whereby innumerable poor creatures
have been hardened to their eternal Ruin, have had all their springs and
fountains, ly in this one wretched reserve, of a power in themselves to turn
to God, and to abide with him. That any one by mixing the promises of God with
Faith, wherein the Lord has graciously assured him, that seeing he has no
strength in himself to continue in his mercy, he will preserve and keep him
in, and through the Son of his Love, has ever been, or ever can be turned
wholly aside to any way or path not acceptable to God, or not ending in
everlasting peace, will never be made good whilst the Gospel of Christ finds
honor and credit amongst any of the sons of men There may be some indeed,
who are strangers to the covenant of promise, what ever they do pretend, who
may turn this Grace of God in the Gospel, as also that of the Satisfaction of
Christ, Redemption by his blood, and Justification by Faith, (the whole
Doctrine of the covenant of Grace in Christ) into lasciviousness; but shall
their unbelief make the Faith of God of none effect^ shall their wickedness
and Rebellion, prejudice the mercy, peace, and Consolation of the Saints?
Because the Gospel is to them the savor of Death unto Death, may it not be
the savor of Life unto Life unto them that do embrace it? What ever then be
the disasters, (of which themselves are the sole cause) of men with their
presumptuous conceits of the impossibility of miscarrying (seeing every
presumptuous conceit of what kind soever, is a desperate miscarriage) their
ruin and destruction cannot in the least, be ascribed to that Doctrine, which
calls for Faith in the promises of God, a Faith working by Love, and decrying
all presumptuous conceits whatever; A Doctrine without which, and the necessary
concomitant Doctrines thereof, the whole bottom of men's walking with God, and
of their obedience, is nothing but presumption and conceit, whereby setting
aside the cold sitts they are sometimes cast into, by the checks of their
consciences, they spend their days in the distemper of a Fever of Pride and
Folly.

In the ensuing Discourse Mr Goodwin informs us of these two things.. 5.
First, What Rule he proceeds by in judging of the Truth of contrary opinions
when (as he phraseth it) the tongue of the Scripture seems to be cloven about
them.

And Secondly, Of his own Advantages and abilityes to make a right judgment
according to that Rule. The Rule he attends unto upon the information he has
given us is, The Consideration of which of the Opinions that are at any time
Rivalls for his judgment and acceptance tend most unto Godliness; the
Gospel being the truth which is according to Godliness, of his own
advantages and abilityes to make a right judgment according to this rule, there
are several heads and springs; as his knowledge of the general course of the
Scripture, the Experience of his own heart, his long observation of the
Spirits and ways of men, but chiefly that light of Reason and Understanding
which he has. And by this Rule with these Abilityes proceeding in the
examination of the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, He condemns it and
casts it out as an abominable thing, preferring that concerning their final
defection far above it. Some Considerations I shall add to attend upon his
Rule and principles.

First,. 6.
It is most certain, that the Gospel is a Doctrine according unto Godliness
whose immediate and direct tendency as in the whole frame and course of it, so
in every particular branch and stream is to promote that Obedience to Go^ in
Christ, which we call Godliness; This is the will of God revealed therein even
our Sanctification, and whatever Doctrine it be that is suited to turn men off
from walking with God in that way of Holiness, it carries its brand in its
face, whereby every one that finds it, may know that it is of the unclean
Spirit, the evil one; But yet that there may be fearful and desperate
deceits in the hearts of men judging of truths, pretending their rise and
original from the Gospel, by their suitableness to the promotion of
Godliness and Holiness, has been before in part declared, and the Experience
of all Ages does sufficiently manifest. Among all those who profess the name
of Christ more or less in the world, though in and under the most
Antichristian opposition to him, who is there that does not pretend that this
tendency of opinions unto Godliness, or their disserviceablenesse thereunto,
has a great influence into the guidance of their judgment in the receiving or
rejecting of them. On the account of its destructivenesse to Godliness and
obedience do the Socinians reject the Satisfaction and merit of Christ; and on
the account of conducingnesse thereunto, do the Papists assert and build up the
Doctrines of their own merits, Penance, Satisfaction and the like. On that
principle did they seem to be acted, who pressed Legal and Judaicall
suppositions with a show of wisdom or will worship, and humility and
neglecting the body, Col. 2. 23. Neither did they fail of their plea
concerning promotion of Godliness in the Worship of God, who reviled, rejected
and persecuted the Ordinances of Christ in this Generation, to set up their own
Abominations in the Room; Yea, it is generally the first word wherewith every
Abomination opens its mouth in the world, though the men of those Abominations
do rather suppose this pretense of Godliness to be serviceable for the
promotion of their opinions, than their opinions any way really useful to the
promotio^ of godliness: Neither need we go far to enquire after the Reasons of
men's miscarriages, pretending to judge of Truth according to this Rule, seeing
they ly at hand, and are exposed to the view of all; for besides that very many
of the pretenders to this plea may be justly suspected to be men of corrupt
minds, dealing falsely and treacherously with their own souls and the truth,
the pretense of furthering Holiness being one of the cunning sleights
wherewith they ly in wait to deceive (which may justly be suspected of them who
together with this plea, and whilst they make it, are apparently themselves
loose and remote from the power of a Gospel conversation, as the case has
been with not a few of the most eminent assertors of Arminianisme) How few are
there in the world, who have indeed a true notion and Apprehension of the
nature of Holiness in its whole compass and extent, as in the Fountain,
Causes, Rise, and Use, and end thereof; And if men know not indeed what
holiness is, how shall they judge what Doctrine or Opinion is conducing to the
furtherance thereof, or is obstructive to it; Give me a man who is persuaded
that he has power in himself, being by the discovery of a Rule directed
thereinto, to yield that obedience to God, which he does require, who supposes
that threats of hell and destruction are the greatest, and most powerful and
effectual motive unto that obedience that the Spirit and Grace of God to work
and create a new heart in him as a suitable principle of all holly actings, are
not purchased nor procured for him by the Blood of Christ, nor is there any
holiness wrought in him by the Almighty efficacy of that Spirit and Grace, he
having a sufficiency in himself for those things, that there is not a real
Physical concurrence of the Grace of God for the production of every good act
whatever, and that he is Justified upon the account of any act or part of his
Obedience, or the whole, and I shall not be much moved or shaken with the
Judgment of that man, concerning the serviceablenesse and suitableness of any
Doctrine or Doctrines to the furtherance of Godliness and Holiness; There are
also many different opinions about the nature of Godliness, what it is, and
wherein it does consist. I desire to be informed how a man may be directed in
his Examination of those opinions, supposing him in a straight and exigency of
thoughts between them, in considering which of them is best suited to the
promotion of Godliness. I do not intend in the least to derogate from the
certain and undoubted truth of what was premised at the beginning of this
Discourse. viz. That every Gospel Rule whatever is certainly conducing to the
furtherance of Gospel Obedience in them that receive it in the Love and power
thereof; Every error being in its utmost Activity (especially in corrupting
the principles of it) obstructive thereunto, much les do we in any measure
decline the trial of the Doctrine which I assert, in opposition to the
Apostasy of the Saints, by this touchstone of its usefulness to Holiness,
having formerly manifested its eminent Activity and efficacy in that service,
and the utter averseness of its corrivall to lend any assistance thereunto;
But yet I say, in an inquiry after, and dijudication of truth, whatever I have
been, or may be straightened between different persuasions, I have and shall
rather close in the practice of Holiness in prayer, Faith and waiting upon
God, to search the Scripture, to attend wholly to that Rule, having plentiful
promises for guidance and direction, than to weigh in any Rational
consideration of my owue, what is conducing to Holiness, what not; especially
in many truths which have their usefullnesse in this service, (as is the case
of most Gospel Ordinances and institutions of Worship) not from the connection
of things, but the mere will of the appointer. Of those Doctrines (I confess)
which following on to know the Lord, we know from his Word to be from him, and
in which doing the will of Christ, are revealed to us to be his will, a
peculiar valuation is to be set on the head of them, which appear to be
peculiarly and eminently serviceable to the promotion and furthering our
Obedience; as also that all opinions what ever, that are in the least seducers
from the power, truth and Spirituality of obedience are not of God, and are eo
nomine to be rejected; yet having a more sure rule to attend unto, I dare not
make my apprehensions concerning the tendency of Doctrines, any Rule (if God
has not so spoken of them) for the judging of their truth or false-hood: if my
thoughts are not shut up and determined by the power of the Word.

The next proposal made by M. Goodwin,. 7.
is of the advantages he has to judge of Truths, which he has done unto
plenary satisfaction, according to the Rule now considered. The first thing he
offers to induce us to close with him in his judgment of Opinions is, the
knowledge he has of the general course of the Scripture; what is intended by
the general course of the Scripture, well I know not: and so am not able to
judge of M. Goodwins knowledge thereof by any thing exposed to public view; If
by the general course of the Scriptures, the matter of them is intended, the
importance of the expression seems to be coincident with the Analogy, or
proportion of Faith, a safe rule of Prophesy; but what ever M. Goodwins
knowledge may be of this, I am not perfectly satisfied that he has kept close
unto it in many Doctrines of his Book entitled Redemption Redeemed; and so the
weight of his skill in judging of truths on this foundation, will not balance
what I have to lay against it, for the inducement of other thoughts, than those
of closeing with him. The course of the Scripture, cannot import the manner of
the expressions therein used: in that there is so great and so much variety
therein, that it can scarce be cast into one course and current: and if the
general scope, aim, and tendency of the Scripture may pass for the course of
it, there is not any one thing that lies so evident and clear therein, as the
decrying of all that Ability and strength, and power to do good in men, which
M. Goodwin so much pleads for, and Asserts to be in them, with an Exaltation of
that rich and free Grace in the efficacy and the power of it, which he so much
opposes.

The experiment all knowledge he has of his own heart,. 8.
the workings and reasonings thereof, (a thing common to him with others) and
what advantages he has thereby I shall not consider; Only this I shall dare to
say, that I would not for all the World, have no experience in my heart of the
truth of many things which M. Goodwin in this Treatise opposes; or that my
weak experience of the Grace of God, should not rise above that frame of heart
and spirit, which the teachings of it seem to discover; I doubt a person under
the Covenant of works, heightened with convictions, and a low or common work
of the Spirit, induced thereby to some Regular walking before God, may reach
the utmost of what in this Treatise is required to render a man a Saint, truly
gracious, regenerate and a Believer; And in this also I doubt not, lies the
deceit of what is thirdly insisted on, viz. His observation of the ways and
spirits of men, their firstings and lastings in Religion; A sort of men there
are in the world, who escape the outward pollution of it, and are clean in
their own eyes, though they are never washed from their iniquityes, who having
been under strong convictions by the power of the Law, and broken thereby from
the course of their sin, attending to the Word of the Gospel with a
temporary Faith do go forth unto a profession of Religion, and walking with God
so far as to have all the lineaments of true Believers (as Mr Goodwin somewhere
speaks) drawn in their faces, hearing the Word gladly as did Herod, receiving
it with joy as did the stony ground, attending to it with delight as they did
in Ezech. 33. 31. Repenting of former sins, as did Ahab and Judas, until
they are reckoned among true Believers, as was Judas and those John 2. 23. who
yet were never united unto Jesus Christ, of whose ways and walking Mr Goodwin
seems to have made observation, and found many of them to end in visible
Apostasy; But that this observation of them, should cause him to judge them when
Apostatized to have been true Believers, or that he is thereby advantaged to
determine concerning the truth of several Opinions pretending to his
acceptance, I cannot grant, nor does he go about to prove.

For what he mentions in the last place of the light of reason and
understanding,. 9.
which he has, I do not only grant him to have it in common (as he says) with
other men, for the kind of it, but also as to the degrees of it to be much
advanced therein, above the generality of men; yet I must needs tell him in the
close, that all these helps and advantages, seeming to be drawn forth and
advanced in opposition to that one great assistance which we enjoy by promise
from Christ; of his Spirit leading us into all truth, and teaching us from God
by his own anointing, are to me hay and stubble, yea loss and dung, of no
value nor esteem; Had we not other ways and means, helps and advantages to
come to the knowledge of the Truth than these here unfolded and spread by Mr
Goodwin, actum esset, we should never perceive the things that are of God. The
Fox was acquainted with many wiles and devices; the Cat knew unum magnum
wherein she found safety. Attendance to the Word, according to the direction of
the usual known Rules, and helps, agreed on for the interpretation of it,
with humble dependence on God waiting for the guidance of his Spirit according
to the Promise of his dear Son; asking him of him continually that he may
dwell with us, anoint and lead us into all truth, with an utter abrenunciation
of all our skill, abilityes, wisdom and any resting on them, knowing that it
is God alone that gives us understanding is the course that hitherto has been
used in our enquiry after the mind of God, in the Doctrine under consideration,
and which (the Lord assisting) shall be heeded, and kept close unto, in that
discussion of the Texts of Scripture wrested by Mr Goodwin (as by others before
him) to give countenance to his opposition to the Truth hitherto uttered,
confirmed and vindicated from his contradictions thereunto.

The place of Scripture first insisted on,. 10.
and on the account whereof, he triumphs with the greatest confidence of
success, is that of Ezech. 18. 24, 25. Unwhich words he subjoynes a Triumphant
Exulting Exclamation.

What more ( says he) can the understanding judgment soul and conscience of
a man, reasonably desire for the establishment in any truth whatsoever, than is
delivered by God himself in this passage, to evince the possibility of a
righteous man's declining from his righteousness, and that unto death.

The council given of old to the King, may not be unseasonable to Mr Goodwin
in that dominion which he exercises in his own thoughts in this work of his,
let not him that puts on this armor boast like him that puteth it off. You
have but newly entered the lists; and that, with all pressed Soldiers
unwilling so much as once to appear in that service they are forced to. If you
will but suspend your triumph, until we have made a little trial of your
forces, and your skill in managing of them to the battle, perhaps you may be a
little taken off from this confidence of success, notwithstanding the facing
of this Scripture upon the Truth, being cut off and taken away from that
coherence and connection, and station wherein it is placed of God (which is not
at the least enquired into) it will be found in that issue to bear it no ill
will at all; As will also be manifested by the light of the ensuing
consideration.

1. The matter under enquiry, and into a disquisition of whose state we have
hitherto been engaged in the condition of the Saints of God; and his dealing
with them, in and under the Covenant of Grace in General. For our guidance and
direction herein, a Text of Scripture evincing the Righteousness of Gods
dealings with a number of persons in a peculiar case, which was under debate,
is produced and by the tenor of this, and according to the tenor of the
reasonings therein, must all the Promises of God, in the Covenant of Grace,
mape and ratifyed by the Blood of Christ, be regulated and interpreted. We have
been told by as Learned a man as Mr Goodwin, that Promises made to the people
of the Jews peculiarly, and suited to the peculiar state and condition wherein
they were, do not concern the People of God in general; And why may not the
same be the condition of Threatenings given out upon a parralell account
Compedes quas fecit ipse ut ferat aequum est.

2. That it is the determination and stating of a particular Controversy,
between God and the people of the Jews, suited to a peculiar dispensation of
his Providence toward them which is here proposed, is evident from the
occasion of the words laid down v. 2, 3. What mean ye etc. that use this
proverb concerning the Land of Israel, saying, the Fathers have eaten sower
Grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge? As I live says the Lord, etc.
It is the use of a Proverb concerning the Land of Israel, that God is descrying
and disproving the truth of the Proverb it self under consideration, and that
this should be the standard and Rule of Gods proceeding with his people, in the
Covenant of mercy, no man that seems to have either understanding, judgment
or conscience can reasonably imagine.

3. That it is not the nature and tenor of the Covenant of Grace, and Gods
dealing with his chosen secret ones, his Saints, true Believers, as to their
eternal condition, which in these words is intended, but the manifestation of
the Righteousness of God in dealing with that people of the Jews, in a
peculiar dispensation of his providence, toward the body of that people, and
the Nation in general, appears farther from the occasion of the words, and
the provocation given the Lord to make use of these expressions unto them. The
proverb that God cuts out of their lips and mouths, by the sword of his
Righteousness in these words; was concerning the Land of Israel: Used perhaps
mostly by them in captivity: but it was concerning the Land of Israel, not
concerning the Eternal state and condition of the Saints of God, but
concerning the Land of Israel, v. 2. God had of old given that Land to that
people by Promise, and continued them in it for many Generations; until at
length for their wickednesse', Idolatry, Abomination and obstinacy in their
evil ways, he caused them to be carried captive unto Rabylon. In that
Captivity the Lord revenged upon them not only the sins of the present
Generation, but as he told them also those of their Forefathers, especially
the Abomination, Cruelty, Idolatry exercised in the days of Manasseh, taking
this season for his work of vengeance in the Generations following, who also
so far walked in the steps of their Forefathers, as to Justify all Gods
proceedings against them; Being wasted and removed from their own Land, by the
Righteous Judgment of God, they considered the Land of Israel, that was
Promised to them (though upon their good behavior therein) and how instead of
a plentiful enjoyment of all things in peace and quietness therein, there
were now a small remnant in captivity, the rest, the far greatest part, being
destroyed by the sword and famine in that Land. In this state and condition,
being as all other of their frame and principle, prone to justify themselves,
they had hatched a proverb among themselves concerning the Land of Israel
promised to them, excedingly opprobrious and reproachful to the Justice of
God, in his dealings with them; The sum of the intendment of this saying that
was grown rise amongst them, was, that for the sin of their Forefathers,
many, yea the greatest part of them was slain in the Land of Israel, and the
rest carried from it into bondage and captivity. To vindicate the
Righteousness and equity of his ways, the impartiallity of his Judgments,
the Lord recounts to them by his Prophet many of their sins, whereof
themselves with their Fathers were guilty, in the Land of their nativity, and
for which he had brought all that calamity and desolation upon them, whereof
they did complain: confirming under many supposalls of rising and falling,
that principle of rising and falling, that principle he laid down in the
entrance of his dealings with them, that every one of them suffered for his own
iniquity, whatever they suffered, whether death or other banishment, and not
for the sins of their fore Fathers: Whatever influence they might have upon
the procuring of the general vengeance, that overtooke the whole Nation in the
midst of their iniquity. This being the aim, scope, and tendency of the place,
the import of the words and tenor of Gods intendment in them, I cannot but
wouder how any man of understanding and Conscience, can once imagine that God
has given any Testimony to the possibilty of falling out of Covenant with him,
of those whom he has taken ^igh to himself through the Blood of his Son, in
the Everlasting bond thereof. As though it were any thing of his dealing with
the Saints, in reference to their Spiritual and Eternal Condition, that the
Lord here reveals his will about; being only the tenor of his dealings with
the House of Israel in reference to the Land of Canaan.

4. This is farther manifest in that principle and Rule of Gods proceedings in
the matter laid down v. 4. which is not only a line from, but also directly
opposite unto, that which is the principle in the Covenant of Grace. The soul
that sins he shall dye. That soul and person and not another, when in that
Covenant of Grace, he sets forth his Son to be a propitiation through faith
in his Blood, giving him up to death for all, causing the just to dye for the
unjust, the soul that never sinned for the souls that had sinned, that they
might go free. And I would feign know, on what solid grounds an answer may be
given to the Socinians triumphing in the 4. v. against the satisfaction of
Christ, nolesse than Mr Goodwin in the 24, 25. against the Perseverance of the
Saints; If you do not manifest the whole tendency of this place, to be
accommodated to Gods providentiall dispensation of temporal Judgments, and
Mercyes in respect of that people, and the Covenant whereby they held the Land
of Canaan; and not at all to respect the general dispensation of his
Righteousness and Grace in the Blood of Christ. So that

5. The whole purport and intendment of the Scripture under consideration is
only to manifest the tenor of Gods Righteous proceeding with the people of
Israel in respect of his dispensation toward them in reference to the Land of
Canaan, convicing them of their own abominations, confuting the profane proverb
invened and reared up in the reproach of his Righteousness, beating them from
the vain pretense of being punished for their Fathers sins, and the conceit of
their own Righteousness, which that people was perpetually puffed up with
all; He letts them know, that his dealing with them and his ways toward them,
were equal and righteous, in that there was none of them but was punished for
his own sin: and though some of them might have made some profession, and
done some good, yet upon the whole matter first or last, they had all declined,
and therefore ought to own the punishment of their sins; God dealing
severely, and unto death, and destruction, with none but those who either,
wholly, or upon the sum of the matter, turned away from his Judgments and
Statutes. So that

6. This being the tenor and importance of the words insisted on, this their
tendency, aim, and accommodation to the objection levied against the
Righteousness of God in dealing with that people, this their rise, and end,
their spring, and fall, it is evident beyond all Contradiction from any thing
but prejudice it self, that all the enquiries and disputes about them, as
whether the declaration of the mind of God in them be Hypotheticall or
Absolute; what is meant by the Righteous Person, what by his turning away, and
what by the death threatened, (all which expressions of the Text are in
themselves ambiguous and must be limited from the circumstances of place) are
altogether useless, and needless, the words utterly refusing any
accommodation to the business of our present debate. So that

7. This dependence of the words scope of the Context, design of the place,
and intendment of God in it, the accommodation of the whole discourse to the
removeall of the Objection, and disproving of the proverbiall self
Justification of a sinful People, the only directoryes in the investigation of
the true, proper, native, genuine sense and meaning of them, eyed, weighed nor
considered by Mr Goodwin, who knew how much it was to his advantage, to rend
away these two verses, from the body of the Prophets discourse, I might well
supersede any farther proceeding in the Examination of what he has prepared for
a Reply to the Answers commonly given to the Argument taken from this place:
yet that all security imaginable may be given to the Reader, of the
inoffensivenesse of this place, as to the Truth we mainetaine; I shall briefly
manifest, that Mr Goodwin has not indeed effectually taken up and off, any one
Answer, or any one parcel of any such, that has usually been given by our
Divines unto the Objection against the Doctrine of Perseverance hence levied.

That which naturally first offers it self to our Consideration,. 11.
is, the form and tenor of the Expression here used: which is not of an
absolute nature, but Hypotheticall; The import of the words is, If a righteous
man turn from his Righteousness and continue therein he shall die: True, say
they who make use of this Consideration; God here proposes the desert of sin,
and the connection that is by his appointment, between Apostasy and the
punishment thereunto allotted; but this not at all inferres, that any one who
is truly righteous, shall or may everlastingly so Apostatize. Such comminations
as these God makes use of to caution Believers of the evil of Apostasy, and
thereby to preserve them from it, as their tendency to that end* by the
appointment of God, and their efficacy thereunto, has been declared. So that
to say, because God says If a righteous man turn from his Righteousness he
shall dye; the whole Emphasis lying in the connection, that is between such
turning away, and dying, to conclude considering what is the proper use and
intendment of such threatenings) that a man truly Righteous may so fall away, is
to build up that which the Texts contributes not any thing to in the least.

Against this plea Mr Goodwin rises up with much contempt and indignation,. 12.
Chap. 12. Sect. 9. in these words.

But this Sanctuary has also been profaned, by some of the chief Guardians
themselves of that cause, for the protection and safety whereof it was built.
There needs no more be done (though much more might be done, yea and has been
done by others) than that Learned Doctor (so lately named) has done himself
for the demolishing of it. Having propounded the Argument from the place in
Ezekiel according to the import of the interpretation asserted by us; Some
(says he) answer that a condition proves nothing in being: which how true
soever it may be in respect of such Hypotheticalls, which are made use of only
for the amplyfication of matters, and serve for the aggravating either of the
difficulty or indignity of a thing; (as if I should climb up into Heaven thou
art there Psalm. 139. It were ridiculous to infer, therefore a man may climb
up into Heaven;) yet such conditionoll sayings upon which Admonitions,
Promises, or Threatenings are built, do at least suppose something in
possibility, however by virtue of their tenor and form, they suppose nothing
in being. For no man seriously intending to encourage a student in his way
would speak thus to him; If thou will get all the Books in the University
Library by heart, thou shall be Doctor this Commencement. Beside in the case in
hand, he that had a mind to deride the Prophet, might readily come upon him
thus: But a righteous man according to the Judgment of those that are
Orthodox, cannot turn away from his righteousness: therefore your Threatening
is in vain. Thus we see to how little purpose it is, to seek for starting
holes in such Logic quirkes as these; Thus far the great Assertor of the
Synod of Dort, and the cause which they maintained, to show the vanity of such
a sense or construction, put upon the words now in debate; which shall render
them merely conditional, and will not allow them to import so much as a
possibility, of any thing contained or expressed in them.

Ans. Doctor Prideaux his choosing not to lay the weight of this Answer, to the
Argument of the Arminians from this place, on the Hypotheticall manner of the
expression used therein, is called a defiling this Sanctuary by the Guardians
of the cause whose protection it undertakes. Criminarasis, librat in
Antithesis; doct as posuisse figuras laudatur? what are my thoughts of it, I
need not express, being unconcerned in the business, as knowing it not at all
needful to be insisted on, for the purpose for which it is produced, the Text
looking not at all toward the Doctrines under consideration: yet I must needs
say, I am not satisfied with the Doctors attempt for the removal of it, nor
with what is farther added by the Remonstrants, in the place which we are sent
unto by M. Goodwins marginall directions, though it should be granted, that
such conditional expressions do suppose, or may (for that they always do is
not affirmed, and in some cases it is evident they do not) that there is
something in posse, as the Doctor speaks, whereunto they do relate, yet they
do not infer, that the possibility may by no means be hindered from ever
being reduced into Act. We grant a possibility of desertion in Believers, in
respect of their own principles of operation, which is ground sufficient for to
give occasion to such Hypotheticall expressions, as contain comminations, and
threatenings in them, but yet notwithstanding that possibility on that account
supposed, yet the bringing forth of that possibility into an actual
accomplishment, may not be effectually prevented by the spirit and grace of
God, the Doctor says nothing. This I say is ground sufficient for such
Hypotheticall comminations, that in respect of them, to whom they are made, it
is possible to incur the thing threatened, by the means therein mentioned,
which yet upon other accounts is not possible. That God who says, if the
Righteous man turn from his Righteousness, he shall dye, and says so on
purpose to preserve Righteous men from so doing, knows full well, that the
thing in respect of themselves, of whom, and to whom he speaks, is
sufficiently possible, to give a clear foundation to that expression. So that
if M. Goodwin has not something of his own to add, he will find little
relief from the conceptions of that Learned Doctor: wherein yet, I should not
have translated some phrases and expressions, as M. G. has made bold to do.

He adds therefore Page 276.. 13.
To say that God puts a case in such solemnity and emphaticalnesse of words
and phrase, as are remarkable all along in the carriage of the place in hand,
of which there is no possibility, that is should ever happen, or be exemplifyed
in reality of event; and this in vindication of himself, and the equity of his
dealings and proceedings with men, is to bring a scandal and reproach of
weakness upon that infinite Wisdom of his, which magnifyes it self in all
his works, which also is so much the more unworthy and unpardonable, when
there is a sense commodious every way worthy, as well the infinite wisdom as
the Goodness of God, pertinent and proper to the occasion he has in hand,
which offers it self plainly and clearly. So far He.

And this is all it seems which Mr Goodwin has to add: and indeed this all
is nothing at all, but only the repetition of what was urged before from the
Doctor, in more swelling, and less significant terms. What possiblity there
is in the thing, has been before manifested; that this possibility should
necessarily be exemplifyed in reality of event to give significancy to this
expression, I suppose is not Mr Goodwins own intendment; True Believers
according to the Doctrine he asserts (as he pretends) are only in such a remote
possibility of Apostasy, as that it can scarce be called danger. Now doubtless
it is possible that such a remote possibility may never be reduced into Act.
But now if Mr Goodwin will not be contented with such a possibility, as may,
but also will have that, must be exemplifyed in reality of event, he is
advanced from a possibility in all, to a necessity in some to Apostatize.

2. Had M.G. a little more attended to what here drops from him, viz. that the
words are used for the vindication of the justice of the proceedings of God,
(namely) in the particular case formerly opened and cleared, perhaps he would
himself have judged the edge of this weapon, to be so far blunted, as to
render it wholly useless to him, in the combat wherein he is engaged; I hope
at least that by the light of this spark, he may apprehend the
Emphaticallnesse of all the expressions used in this place, to be pointed
toward the particular case under consideration, and not in the least to be
expressive of the possibility he contends for; God knows what beseemes his own
infinite wisdom, and has given us rules to judge thereof, as far as we are
called thereto in his word; And from thence, whether M. Goodwin will pardon us
or no, in our so doing, we doubt not to evince, that it exceedingly becomes the
infinite wise God, emphatically to express that connection, that is between one
thing and another (sin and punishment, believing and salvation) by his
appointment, though some never believe unto salvation, nor some sin, to the
actual inflicting of punishment on them; and as for M. Goodwins commodious
sense of this place, we see not any advantage in it, for any but those, who are
engaged into an opposition to the Covenant of the grace of God, and his
faithfulness therein: so that once more upon the whole matter, this Text is
discharged from farther attendance in the trial of the truth in hand.

The severalls of the Text come nextly under consideration,. 14.
and amongst them; First, The subject spoken of (that we may take the words in
some order, M.G. having roved up and down, backwards and forwards, from one
end of the Text to the other, without any at all) and this is, a Righteous man,
that is such an one as is described, v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. but if a man etc. that
is, such an one that walks up to the judgments, and statutes, and ordinances
of God, so far as they were of him required in the Covenant of the Land of
Canaan, and according to the tenor of it, whereby they held their possession
therein, whereby heavenly things were also shadowed out: That this is the
person intended, this his Righteousness, and that the matter upon which he is
here tried, is clear in the contexts, beyond all possible contradiction. So
that all farther inquiries into what Righteousness is intended, is altogether
needless; what with any color of probability can be pretended from hence, as
to the matter in hand, arises from the analogy of Gods dealings with men in
the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of the land of Israel,
which yet are eminently distinguished in the very foundation of them: The one
being built upon this bottom, the soul that sins it shall dye; the other
upon a dispensation of another import, as has been declared: We do then
plainly supererogate as to the cause in hand, by the confutation of the
Answers, which Mr Goodwin farther attempts to remove, and his endeavor therein
which yet shall not be declined.

Sect. 8. one exposition by some insisted on, of this term a righteous man, is
thus proposed by Mr Goodwin: Notwithstanding some formerly (it seems) in
favor of the Doctrine, attempted an escape from that sword of Ezechiel lately
drawn against it, by pretending that by the Righteous man mentioned in the
passages in hand, is not meant a person truly and really righteous, but a kind
of formal Hypocrite, or outside professor of Righteousness.

Those who insist on this interpretation of the place, tell you that in the
commands of God, there is the mere end of them considerable, and the manner of
their performance, which is as the life and form of the obedience to them
which is acceptable to God. Farther that many persons wrought upon by the power
of conviction from the Law of God, and enabled in some measure with common
gifts and Graces, do go forth in such a way to the performance of the
command, of God, as to the substance and matter of them, (wherein also they are
not Hypocritical in the strict sense of the word but sincere) and so are
called and counted righteous, comparatively so, in respect of those, who live
in open rebellion against the Lord and his ways: And such as these they say,
as they are often times useful in their Generations, and bring Glory to God by
their profession, so (especially under the old legal dispensation of the
Covenant) they were rewarded in a plentiful manner of God in this Life, in the
enjoyment of the abundance of all things in peace and quietness. Of this sort
of men, that is men upright and righteous in their dealings with men, and in
the world, conscientious in their trust, yiedling professed subjection to the
judgments and institutions of God, performing outwardly all known duties of
Religious men, they say, that after they have made a profession of some good
continuance, having never attained union with God in Christ, nor being built on
the rock, many do fall into all manner of spiritual and sensual abominations,
exposing themselves to all the Judgments and Vengeance of God in this life,
which also under the old Testament generally overtook them, God being (as here
he pleades) righteous therein: In this description of the Righteous person here
intended, there is no occasion in the least administered to Mr Goodwin to
relieve himself against it, by that which in the close of this Section he
borrows from D. Prideaux, viz. That if the Righteous man, should turn himself
away from his counterfeit and Hypocritical righteousness, he should rather
live than dye: For they say not that this Righteousness is Hypocricall or
counterfeit, but true and sincere in its kind; only the person himself is
supposed, not to be partaker of the Righteousness of God in Christ, and a
principle of life from him, which should alter his Obedience, render it
spiritual and acceptable to God in the Son of his Love.

What more says Mr Goodwin unto this exposition of the words? With many
scornful expressions cast both upon it (as by himself stated and laid
down) and the Synod of Dort, he tells you it was rejected by the Synod. That
some in the Synod looking on it perhaps under such sense and apprehension as Mr
G. proposes it in, did not see cause to close with it, may be true: Yet that
it was rejected by the Synod, Mr Goodwin can by no means prove, whatever he is
pleased to say, and to insult thereon, upon the judgments of very learned men,
whom he has no reason upon any account in the world, to despise: The labors
of very many of them praising them in the gates of Syon, exceedingly above the
cry and clamor of all Reproaches whatever mustered to their dishonor. But to
let pass those poor contemptible wretches, let us see how this Master in our
Israel, in his indignation deals with this silly shift, whereby poor men
strive to avoid his fury. Says he then.

And indeed the whole series and carriage of the Context from v.. 14.
20. to the end of the Chapter, demonstratively evinceth, that by the Righteous
man all along, is meant such a man, as was or is truly righteous, and who, had
he persever'd in that way of Righteousness, wherein he sometimes walked,
should have worn the Crown of Righteousness, and received the reward of a
Righteous man. As by the wicked man all along opposed to him, is meant not a
person seemingly wicked, but truly and really so (as is acknowledged on all
hands) so that the Antithesis or opposition between the righteous and the
wicked, running* so visibly quite through the body of the Discourse, must needs
be dissolved, if by the Righteous man should be meant, a Person seemingly
righteous only; he that is Righteous in this sense being truly and really
wicked.

Ans. The maine series and context of the Chapter, without the least endeavor,
to give any light or illustration thereunto, by the scope, occasion, or
dependence of the parts of it one upon another, does more than once stand Mr
Goodwin instead, when nothing else presents it self to his relief. It is true
the whole context of the Chapter, grants the persons spoken of, to be righteous
in the performance of the duties mentioned in the Chapter, in opposition to the
wicked man and his intentions, and ways described therein, in proportion to
the dispensation of the Covenant, whose Rule and principle is placed in the
head of v. 20. which M. Goodwin directs us unto; viz. The soul that sins it
shall dye; And as there is nothing in all this contrary to any thing in the
Exposition by Mr Goodwin opposed, so there is not any thing more proved, nor
once attempted to be here by M. Goodwin himself, than what is confessed
therein.

It is acknowledged that the person spoken of, is truly and really righteous,
with that kind of righteousness which is intended, and wherein if he
continued, he was to receive the reward of righteousness, then under
consideration; and yet, though such an one might be truly and really united
unto Christ, yet there is nothing in the Text, nor Context, enforcing that such
an one, and none else is intended here: and more in this case Mr Goodwin has
not to add; nor does he threaten us with any more than he has delivered, as
he did upon the consideration of the tenor of the words, and our enquiry
whether they are of an hypotheticall or absolute nature and importance.

It is true he adds, that Calvin in his Exposition on the place,
notwithstanding his wariness to manage it so, as that the Doctrine of
Perseverance which he maintained, might suffer no damage, (which perhaps M. G.
was not so wary in expressing, contending so much as he does, to manifest, that
he had thoughts lying another way) and therefore asserting the person here
spoken of, to be a person seemingly righteous only, yet lets fall such things,
as declared nothing to be wanting in this Righteous person, but Perseverance.
But that Calvin grants in any expression of his, this person, or him concerned
herein, to be in such an estate, as to want nothing but Perseverance, to render
them everlastingly blessed, is notoriously false; neither does any thing in the
expressions cited by M. Goodwin come from the body of his discourse, in the
least look that way, as might easily be manifested, did I judge it meet in a
Context of this nature, to trade in the Authorities of men; so that I cannot
but wonder with what confidence, he is pleased to impose such a sense upon his
words; all this while then, notwithstanding any thing our Author has to say to
the contrary, the Righteous Person here intended, may be only such an one, as
was described in the entrance of this Consideration of his; and that it is not
requisite from the Text, or Context, that he should be any other, is more
evident than that it is to be contended against.

Sect. 7. He deals with another Exposition of the words, which has no small
countenance given unto it from the Scriptures, which for to prevail himself
upon an expression or two, by the by, he sets down in the words of D. Prideaux
Lect. 6. and they are these. There is ( says he) a double Righteousness, one,
inherent, or of Works, by which we are sanctified; another, imputed, or of
Faith, whereby we are justified; A righteous man may turn aside from his own
Righteousness: viz. from his Holiness, and fall into very heinous sins: but
it does not follow from hence, that therefore he has wholly shaken off from
him [or out of him] the Righteousness of Christ. To this he adornes a
threefold reply.

1. The Doctor here persents us with a piece of new Divinity, in making
Sanctification and Justification, no more intimate friends, than that one can
live without the company and presence of the other. Doubtless if a man's
justification, may stay behind when his Holiness is departed, that assertion
of the Apostle will hardly stand; without Holiness no man shall see the Lord.
Heb. 12. 14. And if they that are Christ's [ i.e. who believe in Christ, and
thereby are justified] have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts
(another assertion of the same Apostle) how their relation unto Christ should
stand, and yet their Holiness sink and fall, I understand not. But I leave
his friends to be his enemies in this.

Ans. How little advantage Mr Goodwin has obtained by attempting a diversion
from the Consideration of the matter insisted on; (which is all he does in this
Paragraph) will quickly appear. From the Righteousness of Sanctification
there is (or may be supposed) a twofold fall. First from the exercises of it,
in all or any of the fruits thereof, according to the will of God. Secondly
from the Habit and Principle of it, in respect of its root and gronndworke in
the soul; it is the former that the Doctor asserts. A man says he, may fall
away from the zealous practice of the duties of holiness, and with, or under
violence of Temptation (as to fruit-bearing) decay in close walking, until the
whole seem really to dye, so as through the righteous judgment of God, to be
exposed to calamityes, corrections and punishments in this Life, yea the great
death it self, as it fell out in the case of Josiah, who fell by the sword in
undertaking against the mind and will of God: but now for the work and
principles of Holiness, none who have once received it, can ever cast it up,
and he come wholly without, and between this, and the righteousness of
justification, there is that strict connection, that the one cannot, does not
consist without the other; if now Mr Goodwin understands not, how a Justified,
Sanctified person, may decline from the ways, and pretenses of Holiness for a
season, so as to provoke the Lord to deal sharply, yea and sometimes terribly
with him, take vengeance of his invention, and yet that person not loose his
relation to Christ, nor his interest in the Love and favor of God, I shall not
presume to instruct him in the knowledge thereof; but refer him to them who
are better able so to do, wherein upon the account of his aptness to hear as
well as teatch, I presume their undertakings will not be difficult. He adds.

2. He seems by his word (penitus) wholly, thoroughly, or altogether, to be
singular also in another strain of Divinity, and to teach magis and minus in
Justification. For in saying that from a man's apostatizing from his own
righteousness, it does not follow that therefore he has wholly or altogether
shaken off the imputed righteousness of Christ, does he not imply, that a man
may shake off some part of the righteousness of Christ from him, and yet keep
another part of it upon him? Or else that by sinning, he may come to wear the
entire garment, or clothing of it so loosely, that it will be ready to drop or
fall off from him every hour? And consequently that the righteousness of
Christ sits faster, and closer upon some than upon others; yea upon the same
person at one time than another.

Ans. That this is a second attempt, for to lead the Reader off from the
consideration of the business in hand, and to prepare him by a diversion, to
an acceptatio^ of what he afterward tenders, in way of reply, that he may not
perceive how insufficient, it is for the purpose, by an immediate comparing of
it, with the answer it self, is evident. Truly when in my younger days, I was
wont to hear that Doctor in his Lectures, and other exercises, I did not think
then I should have afterward found him called in question for want of skill to
express himself, and the sense of his mind in Latin, he having a readiness
and dexterity in that Language equal to any that ever I knew, neither yet am I
convinced that his word penitus, upon which Mr Goodwin criticiseth, (being
commonly as might by innumerable instances be made good) used to increase and
make emphaticall the import of the word wherewith it is associated) will evince
any such meaning in his expression, as is there intended by Mr Goodwin.
Justification is, and it was so taught by the Doctor to be ( Lect. de Just.) in
respect of all persons that are partakers of it equal: and equal to every
person so partaking of it, at all times; though in regard of sense, and
perception, and the peace and comfort, wherewith (when perceived, and felt) it
is attended, it is no less subject to increases and wanings than
Sanctification it self. So that this also might be attended by the Doctor
without the least strain of new Divinity, that Justified and Sanctified
persons, though they might so decline from the course of close walking with
God, as for a season to be like a tree in Winter, whose substance is in his
roots, his leaves and fruit falling off ceasing to bring forth the fruits of
Holiness, in such degrees as formerly, and so loose their sense of acceptance
with God, through Christ, and the peace, with consolation, and joy wherewith it
is attended, yet they could not, nor should not, wholly be cast out of the
favor of God; the nature and essence of their Justification being abiding; and
what singular strain of Divinity there is, in the tendency of such a discourse
I know not. Besides that teaching of magis and minus in Justification should be
any singular thing in Mr Goodwin, I do not well understand; for if the matter
of our Righteousness, or that upon the imputation whereof unto us, we are
Justified, may have its degrees, and receive magis and minus, as certainly our
Faith, may and does; why our Justification may not do so too, I see no Reason.
But he comes at length to the matter and adds.

3. Lastly, were it granted unto the Doctor, that from a man's turning aside
from his own Holiness, it does not follow, that therefore he has wholly
divested himself of the Righteousness of Christ imputed; yet from Gods
determination, or pronouncing a man to be in an estate of condemnation, and of
death, it follows roundly, that therefore he is divested of the Righteousness
of Christ imputed (if ever he were invested with it before) because no man with
that Righteousness upon him, can be in such an estate. Now we have upon
several grounds proved, that the Righteous man under that Apostasy, wherein
Ezechiel describes and presents him, is pronounced by God, a child, not of a
temporal, but eternal death and condemnation, This indeed the Doctor denies,
but gives no reason of his denial, for which I blame him not. Only I must
crave leave to say, that the Chair weighs not so much, as one good Argument,
with me; much less, as many. So that all this while, he that spoke, and still
speaks unto the world, by Ezekiel, is no friend to that Doctrine, which
denies a possibility of a righteous man's declining even unto death.

Ans. If this be all that Mr Goodwin has to say, for the removal of this
Answer, that cuts the throat of his Argument, if it be not removed, he has
little Reason for the confidence wherewith he closes it, concerning Gods
speaking in this place of Ezechiel, against that Doctrine which in innumerable
places of his Word he has taught us, as a Doctrine enwrapping no small portion
of that Grace, which in a Covenant of Mercy he dispenses to his Chosen,
Redeemed, Justified, Sanctified ones: neither is here any need to add, the
weight of the Chair (wherein yet that person spoke of, behaved himself
worthily in his Generation, and was in his Exercises herein, by no means by Mr
Goodwin to be despised) be laid upon the Reasonings of the Doctor in this case,
they proving singly of themselves, too heavy for Mr Goodwin to bear. In brief
that the substance of the reply in hand, is merely a begging of the thing in
Question, any one that has but half an eye in the business of this nature,
may easily discern; that it is supposed that a man truly Righteous, and
Justified in the blood of Christ, may so fall away, as to be pronounced of God
to be in a state of damnation, and so fallen really from his former condition (
Romans 8. 1.) is the thing that Mr Goodwin has to prove; Now says he, this must
needs be so, because God here upon such a supposall, pronounces such a man to
be in the estate of condemnation, what this is with other men, I know not; but
to me, it is no proof at all; nor should I believe that to be the sense of the
place, though in variety of expressions he should significantly affirm it a
thousand times; the Reader also is misinformed that the Doctor attempts not any
proof, that by death, eternal death is not in this place intended he that
shall consult the plaee will find himself abused; but we must speak more of
this anon.

And this is all our Author offers as to the persons spoken of in the place of
Scripture under consideration, wherein though he has taken some pains to
little or no purpose, to take off the exposition of the words, and the
description of the person given by others, yet he has not attempted to give so
much as one Argument, to confirm the sense he would impose on us, concerning
the condition of the person spoken of; And I must crave leave to say, that
naked assertions be they never so many, in the Chair or out, weigh not so much
with me, as one good Argument, much less as many.

There is nothing remains to consideration,. 17.
but only the Comminatory part of the words, or the expression of the
punishment allotted of God, to such as walk in the ways of Apostasy here
expressed, in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he
has sinned, in them shall he dye; that is, He shall be dealt withal, as many
of their Nation were in the Land of Israel; my judgments shall overtake him;
it shall not advantage him, that either he had Godly Parents that have walked
with me, or that he himself, had so behaved himself in a way of
Righteousness, as before described, if he turn to the profaneness and
abominations, which are laid down as the ways of wicked men, or into any
paths like them, he shall even dye, or be punished for his sins, according to
the tenor of the truth, laid down in the entrance of the Chapter, and
repeated again v. 20. the soul that sins it shall dye. But now whereas it
might be replied, that such an one, notwithstanding his degeneracy, might yet
perhaps recover himself, to his former way of walking, obedience, and
righteousness in conversation; And is there then no hope, nor help for him,
but having once so Apostatised, he must suffer for it? To prevent any such
misprision of the mind of God, there is added the terms of his duration in
that state of Apostasy, that is even unto death; if he commiteth iniquity, and
dies in it, that is, repents not of it, before his death, the judgments of
God shall find him out, as was before expressed. If by his Repentance, he
prevent not his calamities, he shall end his sinning in destruction; in which
expressions of the persons continuance in his Apostatised condition, and of the
judgments of God falling on him on that account, there is not the least
appearance of any Tautology, or incongruity in the sense; the same word is used
to express diverse concernements of it; which is no Tautology though the same
word be used, yet the same thing is not intended, Tautology reflects on things
not words, otherwise there must be a Tautology where ever there is an (...), as
John 1. 4. %to commit iniquity, and to dye therein, is no more but to continue
in his iniquity impenitently until death; now to say that a man was put to
death for his fault, because he committed it, and continued impenitent in it,
even unto the death, which he was adjudged to, and which was inflicted on him
for his fault, is an incoherent expression, it seems will puzle, as great a
master of Language as M.G. to make good.

M.G. endeavors to make the punishment threatened in the words ( he shall dye
for his iniquity) precisely and exclusively to signify eternal death (which
the former interpretation does not exclude) which he is no way able to make
good. what he offers Sect. 3. concerning the incongruity of the sense, and
tautology of the expression of it, be not so understood, has been already
removed: the comparison ensuing instituted between these words, and those of 1
Cor. 9. 10. Should have been enforced with some consideration of the
coincidence of the scope of either place, with the expressions used in them and
though Repentance (which is also added) will not deliver them from temporal or
natural death, yet it will and may as did Ahab in part, from having that death
inflicted, in the way of an extraordinary Judgment.

Sect. 4. Mr Goodwin offers sundry things, all of the same importance and
tendency, all animated by the same fallacyes or mistakes, to make good the
sense he insists on, exclusively to all others, of these words, he shall dye,
and he tells you, that, If the Righteousness such men have done, shall come
into no account, that it shall not profit him as to his temporal deliverance,
then it is impossible it should profit him as to his eternal Salvation. But
first, according to our interpretation of the words, there is no necessity
incumbent on us, to affirm that the persons mentioned, shall obtain
Salvation, though we say that eternal death, is not precisely threatened in the
words; but yet that a man may not by the just hand of God be punished with
temporal death for his faults and iniquityes, (as Josiah fell by the sword,)
and yet have his righteousness reckoned to him as to his great recompense of
reward, is a strain of doctrine that Mr Goodwin will scarce abide by. I dare
not say that all who dyed in the wilderness of the Children of Israel, went to
Hell, and came short of eternal Life; and yet they all fell there because of
their iniquityes. But he adds.

Sect. 4. Again that which God here threatens against that double, or twofold
iniquity of backsliding, is opposed to that life, which is Promised to
Repentance, and Perseverance in their well-doing: But this Life is confessed by
all to be eternal Life, therefore the death opposite to it, must needs be
Eternal, or the second death. When the Apostle says the wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal Life through Christ Jesus our Lord.
Romans 6. 23. Is it not evident from the antithesis, or opposition in the
tendency, between the death and life mentioned in it that by that death, which
he affirms to be the wages of sin, is meant eternal death, how else will
the opposition stand?

Ans. It is true the Life and Death here mentioned, the one promised v. 9. the
other threatened in those insisted on, are opposed, and of what nature, and kind
the one is, of the same is the other to be esteemed. It is also confessed, that
the Life Promised in the Covenant of Mercy to Repentance, is eternal Life, and
the wages of sin mentioned in the Law, is Death eternal; but that therefore,
that must be the sense of the words when they are made use of, in answer to an
Objection expressed in a proverb concerning the Land of Israel, and when it was
temporal death that was complained of before in the proverb, the Fathers have
eaten sower graps, and the childrens teeth are set on edge, (they did not
complain that they were damned for their Fathers sins) that Mr Goodwin does
not attempt to prove; and I do not blame him for his silence therein. He says
yet again.

When God in the Scriptures threatens impenitent persons with death for their
sins, doubtless he intends and means, eternal death, or that Death which
is the wages of sin. Otherwise we have no sufficient ground to believe or
think, that men dying in their sins without Repentance, shall suffer the
vengeance of eternal fire, not only a temporal or natural death; which those
who are righteous and truly eminent themseves suffer as well as they; therefore
to say that God threatens impenitent Apostates (in the place in hand) with a
temparall Death only, when as elsewhere he threatens impenitency, under the
lightest guilt of all, with eternal death, is (in effect) to represent him as
vehement and fore in his diswasives from ordinary and lesser sins; as
indifferent and remiss in dissuading from sins of the greatest provocation.

Ans. The sum of this Reason is, if the death there threatened to those men of
our present contest, be not death eternal, we have no sufficient ground to
believe, that God will inflict any death on impenitent Apostates, but only that
which is temporal or natural, which others dye as well as they, and why so I
beseech you; is there no other place of Scripture, whence it may be evinced,
that eternal death is the wages of sin? or is every place thereof where
death is threatened to sin, so circumstantiated as this place is? Is the
threatening every where given out upon the like occasion, and to be accommodated
to the like state of things? These Discourses are exceeding loose,
sophistical, and inconclusive neither is a violent death counted natural,
though it be the dissolution of nature.

Neither is there any thing more added by Mr Goodwin in all his considerations
of the words of this passage of the Scriptures, than what we have insisted on:
that he nextly mentions ( that if God here threatens impenitent siners only
with temporal death, then why should the most profligate sinners fear any
other punishment?) is of more energie, for the confirmation and building up the
sense which he imposes on the words, than that which went before, they with
whom he has to do, will tell him that he does all along most vainly assume,
and beg the thing in question, viz. That the persons intimated, are absolutely
impenitent sinners; and not so under some considerations only; that is, that do
never recover themselves from their degeneracy from close walking with God; nor
do the words indeed necessarily import any thing else; and for impenitent
sinners in general (not those who are only so termed) there are testimonies
sufficient in the Scriptures concerning Gods righteous judgment, in their
eternal condemnation.

And this is the first testimony produced by Mr G. for the proof of the Saints
Apostasy,. 18.
a witness which of all others, he does most rely upon, and which he brings
in, with the greatest acclamation of success, (before the trial) imaginable.
That when he has brought him forth, he gives us no account in the least,
whence he comes, what is his business, or what he aims to confirm, nor can
make good his speaking one word on his behalf. Indeed as the matter is
handled, I some thing question, whether lightly a weaker Argument has been
learned on, in a case of so great importance, than that which from these words
is drawn for the Apostasy of the Saints; for as we have not the least attempt
made, to give us an account of the context, scope, and intendment of the place,
(by which yet the expressions, in the verses insisted on, must be regulated) no
more can any one expression in it, be made good, to be of that sense, and
signification, which yet alone will, or can yield the least advantage to the
cause, for whose protection it is so earnestly called upon; Now the leaders and
Captains of the forces Mr Goodwin has mustered in this 12. Chapter, being
thus discharged, the residue, or the followers thereof, will easily be
prevailed with, to return every one to his own place in peace.

The next place of Scripture produced to consideration,. 19.
Mr Goodwin ushers in ( Sect. 11.) with a description of the Adversaries with
whom in this Context, he has to do, and sets them off to public view, with
the desirable qualifications, of ignorance, prejudice, and partiality, having
it seems, neither ingenuity enough heartily, and fairly themselves to search
into, and to weigh the Scriptures, wherein the case in question is clearly
determined; nor skill enough to understand and receive them, when so
dexterously opened to their hand by M. G. What they are, the Lord knows, will
judge, determine, and in the appointed time declare: and it may be the day,
that shall manifest all things, will vindicate them from those reproaches; in
the mean time, such expressions as these, ly in the middle, between all
parties at variance, exposed to the use of any that is pleased to take them up:
the place insisted on in the sequel of this Preface, is the Parable of our
Savior Mat. 18. 32, 33. the whole extent of the Parable is from v. 20. to the
end of the Chapter: Hence M. G. thus infers Sect: 11.

Evident it is from our Saviors rendition or application of the Parable (so
likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if etc.) (speaking unto
his Disciples, v. 1. and to Peter more particularly v. 21.) that Persons truly
regenerate, and justified before God (for such were they, to whom in special
manner he addresseth the Parable, and the application of it, and indeed the
whole carriage of the Parable shows, that it was calculated, and formed only
for such) may through high misdemeanors in sinning, as (for example) by
unmercifulness, cruelty, oppression, etc. turn themselves out of the
justifying Grace and Favor of God, quench the spirit of Regeneration, and come
to have their portions with Hypocrites and Unbelievers.

Ans. This is not the only occasion whereupon we have to deal with this
Parable: The Socinians wrest it also with violence, to disprove the
satisfaction of Christ, from the mention that is made in it, of the free
forgiveness of sins, and the Lords injoyning others to do what he did; they
doubtless being to forgive without satisfaction given or made, as to any
crimes committed against them. M. Goodwin with much less probability, of
drawing nigh to the intendment of our Savior in this place, makes use of it,
or rather abuses it, to countenance his Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints:
To both I say, Parables have their bounds and limits, their lines and
proportions, scope and peculiar intendment, beyond which they prove nothing at
all: to wring the nose of a Parable or similitude, to force it to an universal
compliance, will bring forth blood. There is nothing so sottish, or foolish, or
contradictious in, and to it self, as may not be countenanced, from teaching
Parables to be instructive, and proving, in every parcel or expression that
attends them. The intendment of the Parable here used, that wherein from the
proportion, and answerablenesse of the comparats it argues, is neither that
God forgives without satisfaction to his justice, being the judge of all the
World, nor that Believers may fall away by sins of unmercifulness and
oppression, and so perish everlastingly, but that men upon the account of
mercy, and forgiveness received from God in Christ, ought to extend mercy, and
kindness to their Brethren, God threatening, and revenging unmercifulness and
oppression, in, and on whomsoever it is found; whether it be Ignorance in us,
or what it be, the Lord knows, and will judge: but we are not able to stretch
the lines of this Parable one step toward what M. Goodwin would lengthen them
unto; that no persons whatever, must or ought to expect, the grace, and
pardoning mercy of God to them, who have no bowels of compassion toward their
brethren, is clearly taught; in making the rest of the circumstances of the
Parable argumentative, we cannot join with our Adversary, he himself in his
so doing, working merely for his own ends.

2. Finding his Exposition of this Parable,. 20.
liable and obnoxious to an exception, in that it renders God changeable in his
dealings with men, and a knot to be cast on his Doctrine, which he is not able
to untie, he ventures boldly to cut it in pieces, by affirming that indeed God
loves no man at all, with any love, but the approbation of the qualifications
that are in him, and that he cannot be said to change in reference of that,
which is not in him at all: This he sets out, and illustrates variously with
the dealings of men, and the Laws that are made amongst them, rewarding what is
good, and punishing what is evil, etc. words fully fitted in his apprehension,
to the clearing of God, from any shadow of alteration in that course of
proceeding, which to him he ascribes, and tells you the root of the mistake
concerning the Love of God toward any man's person, lies in that Capital
error, of personal Election, or a purpose of God to give Grace, and Glory to
any one in Christ: (...). That M. Goodwin does at all understand the love of
God, if his apprehension of it be uniforme to what he expresses here in
disputation, I must question. An eternal, unchangeable love of God, to some,
in Christ, is not now my task to demonstrate: it may through the patience, and
goodness of God, find a place in my weak endeavors for the Lord, ere long:
When it will be a matter of delight, to consider the Scriptures, and
Testimonies of Antiquity, that M.G. will produce for the eversion of such a
personal election; for the present I shall only take notice of the face of his
judgment in the thing, which ( Sec. 13.) he here delivers: All the Love which
God bears to men, or to any person of man, is either in respect of their
nature, and as they are men, in respect of which he bears a general or common
love to them, or in respect of their qualification as they are good men, in one
degree or other, in respect whereof he bears a more special love to them: What
that common love is, in M. Goodwins doctrine, which God bears to all men, as
men, we know full well: He also himself is not unacquainted how often it has
been demonstrated to be a vain and foolish figment (in the sense by him and
his associates obtruded on us) derogatory to all the glorious Properties of the
nature of God, and inconsistent with any thing, that of himself he has
revealed. The Demonstration and farther eviction whereof, waits its season,
which I hope draws on. The special love which he bears persons in respect of
their qualifications, is only his Approbation of those qualifications, where
ever they are, and in whomsoever: That these qualifications are Faith, Love,
Repentance, Gospel obedience, etc. Is not called into question: I would feign
know of M. Goodwin on what account and consideration, some men and not all, are
translated from the condition of being objects of Gods common love, to become
objects of his peculiar love; or from whence spring these qualifications, which
are the procurement of it; whether they are from any love of God to them, in
whom they are? If not, on what account do men come to have Faith, Love,
Obedience, etc. If they are from any Love of God, whether it be from the common
Love of God to man, as men? and if so, why are not all men endowed with those
qualifications? If from his peculiar Love, how come they to be the effects and
causes of the same thing? Or whether indeed this assertion be not destructive
to the whole Covenant of Grace, and the effectual dispensations of it in the
blood of Christ? And to his second Testimony I shall add no more.

The third place insisted on, is that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 9. 27. Hence he
thus argues.. 21.


If Paul, after his conversion unto Christ, was in a possibility of being, or
becoming a Reprobate, or cast away, then may true Believers fall away both
totally and finally (for finally ever includes totally) But the Antecedent is
true: Paul after his conversion, was in the possibility mentioned: ergo, the
Major Proposition (I presume) will pass without control.

Ans. That Mr Goodwin is not able to make good eitheir of the Propositions in
this syllogism, will evidently appear in the conclusion of our examination,
of what he draws forth, new and old to that purpose; of the Major he gives you
only this account: It will pass I presume with out controulc: but by his
favor, unless cleared from ambiguity of expressions and fallacy, it is not
like to obtain so fair a passage, as is presumed, and fancyed.

Though the term of possibility in the supposition, and, may be, in the
inference, seem to be equipollent, yet to render them of the same
significancy, as to the Argument in hand, they must both be used in the same
respect, but if a possibility of being a reprobate, (that is, one rejected of
God, by a metonymy of the effect,) be ascribed to Paul in respect of himself,
and the infirmity of his own will as to abiding with God, in which case alone
there is any appearance of truth in the Assumption of this supposition, and the
term of may be, in respect of Believers falling totally and finally away,
respects the event, and purpose, decrees or Promise of God, concerning it, (in
which sense alone, it is any step to the purpose, in hand) I deny the
inference, and thereby at the very entrance, give check, and control to Mr
Goodwin's procedure: That which is possible to come to pass, that term
possible, affecting the end, or coming to pass, must be every way, and in all
respects possible: this is the intendment of the inference: That which is
possible in respect of some certain causes, or principles, (the terms of
possibility affecting the thing it self, whereof it is spoken in its next
causes) may be impossible on another account; and in this sense only is there
any color of truth contained in the supposition; so that the Major Proposition
of this Syllogism, is laid up and secured for doing any farther service in
this case.

The Minor is,. 22.
But Paul after his conversion was in a possibility of becoming a Reprobate or
castaway.

Ans. He was not in respect of the event, upon the account of the purpose and
promises of God of him, and to him made in Christ; though any such possibility
may be affirmed of him, in respect of himself, and his own will, not confirmed
in Grace, unto an impossibility of swerving: Now this Proposition he thus
farther attempts syllogistically to confirm.

That which Paul was very sollicitous and industrious to prevent, he was in a
possibility of suffering or being made. But Paul was very sollicitous and
industrious to prevent his being made a cast-way, as the Scripture in hand
plainly avoucheth; he kept under his body and brought it in subjection, in
order to prevent his becoming a castaway: Ergo, He was in danger or
possibility of being made a castaway. The reason of the consequence in the
Major Proposition, is, because no man of understanding will be sollicitous to
prevent or hinder the coming to pass of such a thing, the coming to pass
whereof, he knows to be impossible.

Ans. Once more, The major is questioned: Paul might and ought to labor in the
use of means, for the preventing of that, which in respect of himself he
might possibly run into, God having appointed those means to be used for the
prevention of the end feared, and avoided; although in respect of some other
preventing cause, it was impossible he should so do: He who complained that in
him, that is in his flesh dwells no good, that he had a law in his members
leading him captive to the Law of sin, and sin working in him all manner of
concupisence, for whose prevention from running out into a course of sinning,
God has appointed means to be used, might use those means for that end,
notwithstanding that God had immutably Purposed, and Faithfully Promised, that
in the use of those means, he should attain the end aimed at; And the Reason
Mr Goodwin gives for the confirmation of the consequence is no other, but that
which we have so often exploded, viz. That a man need not, ought not to use
means for attaining of any end, though appointed and instituted of God for
that end, and purpose; if so be the end for which they are ordained, shall
certainly and infallibly be compassed, and accomplished by them. Our Savior
Christ, thought meet to use the ordinary ways for the preservation of his
life, notwithstanding the Promise of keeping him by the Angels: and Hezechiah
neglected not the means of Life, notwithstanding the infallible promise of
Living so long, which he had received: Paul was careful in the use of means,
to prevent that which inhimselfe, it was possible for him to run into, though
he had or might have assurance, that through the faithfulness and power of
God, in the use of those means, (as an antecedent of the consequent, though
not the conditions of the event) he should be preserved certainly and
infallibly from what he was so in himself apt unto. So that whatever be the
peculiar intendment of the Apostle in this place, taking the term (...) in the
largest sense possible, and in a significancy of the greatest compass, yet
nothing will regularly be inferred thence, to the least prejudice of the
Doctrine I have undertaken to maintain.

And this may suffice as to the utmost of what Mr Goodwins Argument from this
place does reach unto.. 23.
There is another, and that a more proper sense of the place, and accommodated
to the context and scope of the Apostle wherewith the Doctrine endeavored to
be confirmed from hence, has not the least pretense of communication. And this
arises (as was before manifested) from the scope of the place, with the proper
native signification of the word (...), here translated a castaway.

The business that the Apostle has in hand, from v. 15. of the chapter, and
which he presses to the end, is a relation of his own principles, ways, and
deportment in the great work of the preaching of the Gospel to him committed;
in the last words of the chapter he acquaints us with one especial aim he had
in the carrying on of that work, through the whole course of his employment
therein. And is his such care, and endeavor after personal mortification,
holiness, and selfe-denyall, that he might no way be lifted up, nor entangled
with the revelations made to him; therein providing in the midst of the great
certainety, and assurance which he had ( v. 26.) that he might approve himself
a workman not needing to be ashamed, as not only preaching to others for their
good, but himself also accepted of God, in the discharge of that employment,
as one that had dealt uprightly, and faithfully therein. v. 17. he acquaints us
with what is the state and condition of them that preach the Gospel, their
work may go on, and yet themselves not be approved in the work: this he
labored to prevent, walking uprightly, faithfully, sincerely, zelously, humbly
in the discharge of his duty: (...) says he (...), least having preached to
others he should not himself be approved and accepted in that work, and so
loose the reward mentioned (v. 17.) peculiar to them, who walk in the
discharge of their duty with a right foot, according to the mind of God. The
whole context, design, and scope of the Apostle, with the native signification
of the word (...), leading us evidently and directly to this interpretation, it
is sufficiently clear, that Mr Goodwin is llke to find little shelter for his
Apostasy, in this Assertion of the Apostle. And besides, whatever be the
importance of the word, the Apostle mentions not any thing but his
conscientious diligent use of the means, for the attaining of an end, which
end yet may fully be promised of God to be so brought about, and accomplished.

Mr Goodwin tells us indeed,. 24.
that the word (...) is in the writings of the Apostle, constantly translated
Reprobate, as Romans 1. 28. 2 Cor. 13. 5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Tit. 1. 16. %or is
expressed by a word equivalent, as Heb. 6. 8. how rightly this is done, in his
judgment he tells us not: that it is so done, serves his turn; and he has no
cause farther to trouble himself about it: The truth is, in most of the places
intimated, the word is so restrained, either from the causes of the thing
expressed, as Romans 1. 28. or the condition of the persons of whom it is
affirmed, with some adjunct in the use of it, as 2 Timothy 3. 8. %Tit. 1. 16. that
it necessarily imports a disallowance or Rejection of God, as to the whole
state and condition wherein they are, of whom it is asserted, joined with a
profligate disposition to farther abominations in themselves; that in any place
it imports, what Mr Goodwin would wrest it here unto, a man finally rejected of
God, what ever may be the thought of others, he will not assert; and what ever
the translation be, I would know of him, whether in any place, where the word
is used, he does indeed understand it in any other sense, than that which here
he opposes; only with this difference, that in other places it regards the
general condition and state of them, concerning whom it is affirmed, here only
the condition of a man, restrained to the particular case of laboring in the
Ministry, which is under consideration 2 Cor. 13. 5, 6, 7. the word cannot be
extended any farther, than to signify a condition of men, when they are not
accepted nor approved; which is the sense of the word contended for; nor yet
Heb. 6. 8. though it be attended with those several qualifications of nigh
unto cursing etc. The Apostle ascending by degrees in the description of the
state of the unfruitful barren land, says first it is (...), or disallowed by
the Husbandman, as that which he has spent his cost and labor about in vain;
so that not only the original first signification of the word, (as is known,)
stands for the sense contended for, but it is also evidently restrained to that
sense by the context, design and scope of the place, with the intendment of
the Apostle therein, the word being the same that in all other places of the
writings of the same Apostle, unless where it is measured, as to its extent
and compass, by some adjoined expression, which is interpretative of it, as to
the particular place, being still of the same signification.

Mr Goodwins ensuing discourse, is concerning the judgment of Expositors upon
the place, particularly naming Chrysostom, Calvin, Musculus, Deodate, the
English Annotators, of whom notwithstanding, not any one do appear for him,
so unhappy is he in his quotations, though sundry of good note, (and amongst
them Piscator himself) do interpret the word in the sense by him contended
for; knowing full well, that it may be allowed in its utmost significancy,
without the least prejudice to the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, as has
been manifested: of these mentioned by M. Goodwin, there is not any one, from
first to last, but restrained the word to the reproachablenesse or
inreproachablenesse of the Apostle, in the discharge of the work of the
Ministry, the sense of it, which we also insist upon, to spend time and labor
in searching the expressions of particular men, weighing and considering the
coherence, design, and circumstances of their writings, is besides my
intention; the judgment of what has been affirmed, is left to the intelligent
Reader, who supposes it of his concernment, to inquire particularly into it.

. 25.
What is added of the Scope of the place Sect. 15. page 280. alone requires any
farther consideration, this he then thus proposes.

5. The scope of the place from verse 23. evinceth the legitimacy of such a
sense in both, above all contradiction; for the Apostle, having asserted this
for the reason, motive, and end, why he had made himself a servant to all men,
in bearing with all men's weaknesses and humors in the course of his Ministry,
viz. that he might be partaker of the Gospel ( i.e. of the saving benefit or
blessing of the Gospel) with them, v. 23. and again, that what he did, he did
to obtain an incorruptible Crown, v. 25. plainly shows, that that which he
sought to prevent, by running and fighting at such an high rate as he did, was
not the blame and disparagement of some such misbehaviour, under which
notwithstanding he might retain the saving love of God, but the loss of his
part and portion in the Gospel, and of that incorruptible Crown which he
sought by that severe hand, which he still held over himself, to obtain.

Ans. The scope of the place was before manifested, in answer to its dependence
on the whole discourse foregoing, from v. 15. where the Apostle enters upon the
relation of his deportment, in the work and service of the Gospel, with a
particular eye to his carriage therein, as to his use, or forbearance of the
allowance of temporal things, from them to whom he Preached, which was due to
him, by all right, whereby any claim in any kind whatever, may be pursued,
together with the express institution of the Lord Jesus Christ, by him before
laid down. In this course he behaved himself with wisdom, zeal and
diligence, having many glorious aims in his eye, as also being full of a sense
of the duty incumbent on him ( v. 6.) to whose performance he was constrained
by the Law of Jesus Christ, as he also here expresses. Among other things that
provoked him to, and supported him in his hard labor and travail, was, the
Love he bare to the Gospel, and that he might have with others fellowship in
the propagation and declaration of the glorious message thereof. This is his
intendment v. 23. (...) etc. For the Gospells sake, or the love he bare to it,
he desired with others to be partaker of it; that is, of the excellent work of
preaching of it; for of the benefit of the Gospel he might have bin partaker
with other Believers, though he had never bin set a part to its promulgation.
In his whole Discourse he still speaks accommodately to his business in hand;
for the describing of his work of Apostleship, in preaching the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ; and as to the end of this work, he acquaints us that
there was proposed before him the incorruptible Crown of his Masters
approbation, (upon his lawful running and striving in the way of the ministry,
whereto he was called) the peculiar Glory of them, whom he is pleased to employ
in this service; and though the cause of his fighting at that rate, as he did,
was not wholly the fear of non approbation in that work, a necessity of duty
being incumbent on him, which he was to discharge, yet he that knows how to
value the crown of approbation from Christ, the holy Angels and the Church, of
having Faithfully discharged the office of a Steward in dispensing the things
of God, will think it sufficiently effectual to stir up any one to the
utmost expense of Love, pains and diligence that he may not come short of it;
And of Mr Goodwins proof this is the issue.

His next is from Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6, 7. with Chap. 10. 26, 27. which he brings in
attended with the ensuing Discourse,. 26.
Sect. 18.

The next passage we shall insist npon to evince the possibility of a final
defection in the Saints, opens it self in these words. For it is impossible
for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good Word of God,
and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them
again nnto repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the son of God
afresh, and put him to an open shame. For the earth, which drinks in the
rain, that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom
it is dressed, receives blessing from God. But that which bears thorns and
briers, is rejected and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.
Answerable hereunto is another in the same Epistle. For if we sin wilfully
after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaryes. He that despised Moses
Law dyed without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant where with he was
Sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace.
Evident it is, that in these two passages the Holy Ghost, after a serious
manner, and with a very pathetique and moving strain of Speech, and discourse
(scarce the like to be found in all the Scriptures) admonishes those who are
at present true Believers, to take heed of relapsing into the ways of their
former ignorance and impiety. This caveat or admonition he presses by an
argument of this import; that in case they shall thus relapse, there will be
very little or no hope at all, of their recovery or return to the Estate of
Faith and Grace, wherein now they stand. Before the faces of such sayings and
passages as these, rightly understood, and duly considered, there is no
standing for that Doctrine, which denies a possibility, either of a total, or
final defection of the Saints. But this light also is darkened in the Heavens,
by the interposition of the vailes of these two exceptions. 1. That the Apostle
in the said passages affirms nothing positively, concerning the falling away
of those he speaks of, but only conditionally and upon supposition. 2. That he
does not speak of true and sound Believers, but of Hypocrites, and such who
had Faith only in show, not in substance. The former of these exceptions has
been already nonsuited, and that by some of the ablest Patrons themselves of
the cause of Perseverance; where we were taught from a pen of that Learning,
that such conditional sayings, upon which Admonitions, Promises, or
Threatenings are built, do at least suppose something impossible, however by
virtue of their Tenor and form, they suppose nothing in being. But

2. As to the places in hand, there is not any Hypotheticall sign, or
conditional Particle to be found in either of them, as they come from the Holy
Ghost, and are carried in the Original. Those two, Iffs, appearing in the
English Translation, the one in the former place, the other in the latter, show
(it may be) the Translators inclination to the cause, but not their
faithfulness in their engagement; an infirmi^y whereunto they were very
subject, as we shall have occasion to take notice of the second time ere long,
in another instance of the like partiality. But the Tenor of both the passages
in hand, is so ordered by the Apostle, that he plainly declares, how great and
fearful the danger is, or will be, when Believers do, or shall, fall away,
not if, or in case, they shall fall away.

Ans. Of the two Answers, which, as himself signifies, are usually given to
the objections from these places of Scripture, that Mr Goodwin does not fairly
acquit his hands of either, will quickly appear.

1. To the first, that the form of speech used by the Apostle in both places
is conditional, whence there is no arguing to the event, without begging the
thing in question, or supposall, that the condition in all respects may be
fulfilled, where it requires only to the co^stitution of it as a condition in
the place of arguing, wherein it is used, that it be possible in some only, he
opposes.

That some of them, who have wrote for the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance,
have disclaimed the use of it, as to its application to the place in Ezechiel
formerly considered; but yet leaving them to the liberty of their judgment, who
are so minded, that the reason given by them, and here again repeated by Mr
Goodwin, does not in the least enforce any to let go this Answer to the
objection proposed, that shall be pleased to insist upon it, has been
manifested.

To this Mr Goodwin farther adds that weighty Observation that the word If, is
not in the Original, and thence takes occasion to fall foul upon the
Translators, as having corrupted the passages out of favor to the Doctrine
contended for. I wish they had never worse mistaken, nor showed more partiality
in any other place; For first, will Mr Goodwin deny that a proposition cannot
be Hypotheticall, nor an expression conditional, unless the word if, be
expressed; were it worth the labor, instances might abundantly be given him in
that language, whereof we speak, to the contrary. He that shall say to him as
he is journying, going the right hand way you will meet with thieves, may be
doubtless said to speak conditionally, no less than he that should expressly
tell him, If you go the way on the right hand you shall meet with thieves.
Secondly, what clear sense and significancy can be given the words, without
the supplement of the conditional conjunction, or some other term equipollent
thereunto, Mr Goodwin has not declared. For it is impossible for those who
were once enlightened etc. And they falling away: as the words ( verbum de
verbo) lie in the text, is scarce in english a congruous or significant
expression: Yea, (...) in the Syntaxe and coherence wherein it lies, is most
properly and directly rendered, if they fall away. As is also the force of the
expression, Chap. 10. 26. Yea thirdly the connection of the Translation
mentioned by Mr Goodwin, does not in the least relieve him, as to the delivery
of the words from a sense, Hypotheticall. When they fall away; (though, his
when, be no more in the text, than the Translators if) does either include a
supposition, that they shall and must fall away certainly, and so requiers the
event of the thing whereof it is spoken, or it is expressive only of the
condition, whereon the event is suspended; if it be taken in the first sense,
all Believers must fall away, if in the latter none may, notwithstanding any
thing in this Text, (so learnedly restored to its true significancy) the words
only pointing at the connection, that is between Apostasy and punishment.
Notwithstanding then any thing here offered to the contrarary, those who
affirm that nothing can certainly be concluded from these places for the
Apostasy of any, be they who they will that are intended in them, because they
are conditional Assertions, manifesting only the connection between the sin and
punishment expressed, need not be ashamed of, nor recoyle from their
Affirmation in the least.

For mine own part,. 27.
I confess, I do not in any measure think it needful to insist upon the
conditionalls of these assertions of the Holy Ghost, as to the removal of any,
or all the oppositions that from them of old, or of late have been raised, and
framed against the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, there being in neither
of the Texts insisted on, either name or thing enquired after: nor any one of
all the severalls enquired into, and constantly in the Scriptures used in the
description of the Saints, and Believers of whom we speak. This I shall
breifely in the first place demonstrate, and then proceed with the
eonsideration of what is offered by Mr Goodwin in opposition thereunto. Some
few observations will lead us through the first part of this work designed. I
say then,

1. There is an inferior common work of the Holy Ghost, in the dispensation
of the word, upon many, to whom it is preached, causing in them a great
alteration and change, as to Light, Knowledge, Abilityes, Guists, Affections,
Life, and Conversation, when the persons so wrought upon, are not quickened,
regenerate, nor made new creatures, nor united to Jesus Christ. I suppose there
will not be need for me to insist on the proof of this Proposition, the truth
of it being notoriously known, and confessed as I suppose amongst all that
profess the name of Christ.

2. That in persons thus wrought upon, there is, or may be, such an assent upon
light and conviction, to the truths proposed and Preached to them, as is true
in its kind, not counterfeit, giving and affording them, in whom it is wrought,
profession of the Faith, and that sometimes with constancy to the death, or the
giving of their bodies to be burned, with persuasions, (whence they are called
Believers) of a future enjoyment, of a glorious and blessed condition, filling
them with ravished affections and rejoycings in hope, which they profess,
suitable to the expectation they have, of such a state and condition. This also
might be easily evinced by innumerable instances and examples from the
Scripture, if need required.

3. That the persons in and upon whom this work is wrought, cannot be said to
be hypocrites in the most proper sense of that word: that is, such as
counterfeit and pretend themselves to be that, which they know they are not:
nor to have faith only in show, and not in substance, as though they made a
show and pretense only of an assent, to the things they professed; their high
gifts, knowledge, faith, change of affections and conversation, being in their
own kind true (as the Faith of Devils is) and yet notwithstanding all this
they are in bondage, and at best, seek for a righteousness, as it were by the
works of the Law, and in the issue, Christ proves to them of none effect.

4. That among these persons, many are oftentimes endued with excellent gifts,
lovely parts, qualifications and abilities, rendering them exceeding useful,
acceptable, and serviceable to the Church of God, becoming vessels in his
house, to hold and convey to others, the precious liquour of the Gospel,
though their nature in themselves be not changed, they remaining wood and stone
still.

5. That much of the work, wrought in and upon this sort of persons, by the
Spirit and word, lies in its own nature in a direct tendency to their
relinquishment of their sins, and selfe-righteousnesse, and to a closing with
God in Christ, having a mighty prevalency upon them, to cause them to amend
their ways, and to labor after life and salvation: from which to Apostatize
and fall off, upon the account of the tendency mentioned of these beginnings,
is dangerous and for the most part pernicious.

6. That persons under the convictions and works of the Spirit formerly
mentioned, partakers of the gifts, light and knowledge spoken of, with those
other endowments attending them, are capacitated for the sin against the Holy
Ghost, or the impardonable Apostasy from God.

These things being commonly known, and as far as I know, universally
granted, I affirm, that the persons mentioned and intended in these places,
are such as have been now described, and not the Believers or Saints,
concerning whom alone our contest is.

Mr Goodwin replies Sect. 19. Page 183.

To the latter exception, which pretends to find only Hypocrites, and not true
Believers, staged in both passages, we likewise answer, that it glosseth no
whit better, than the former, if not much worse, considering that the persons
presented in the said passages, are described by such characters, and signal
excellencies which the Scriptures are wont to appropriate unto Saints, and true
Believers, and that when they intend to show them iu the best and greatest of
their glory: what we say herein, will (I suppose) be made above all
gainesaying, by instancing particulars.

Ans That this is most remote from truth, and that there is not here any one
discriminating Character of true Believers, so far are the expressions from
setting them out in any signal eminency, will appear from these ensuing
considerations.

1. There is no mention of Faith or Believing either in express terms, or in
terms of an equivalent significancy in either of the places mentioned.
Therefore true Believers are not the persons intended to be described in these
places. Did the Holy Ghost intend to describe Believers, it is very strange
that he should not call them so, nor make mention of any one of those
principles in them, from whence, and whereby they are such. Wherefore I say,

2. There is not any thing ascribed here to the persons spoken of, which
belongs peculiarly to true Believers, as such, or that constitutes them to be
such, and which yet are things plainly and positively asserted and described
in innumerable other places of Scripture: that the Persons described are,
called according to the purpose of God, quickened, borne again or regenerated,
Justified, united to Christ, Sanctified by the Spirit, adopted, made sons of
God, and the like, which are the usual expressions of Believers pointing out
their discriminating form as such, is not in the least intimated in the Text,
Context or any concernement of it. That they are elected of God, Redeemed of
Christ, Sanctified by the Spirit, that they are made Holy, is not at all
affirmed.

3. The persons intended are v. 8. chapter 6. compared to the ground upon which the
rain falls, and bears thorns and briers. True Believers whilst they are so,
are not such as do bring forth nothing but thorns and briers; Faith it self
being an Herb meet for him by whom they are dressed.

4. Things that accompany Salvation, are better things, than any in the persons
mentioned were to be found. This the Apostle asserts v. 9. we are persuaded
better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation. Now neither of
these, either better things, or things that accompany Salvation were upon them
whose Apostasy the Apostle supposes. The exceptive particle at the entrance,
with the Apologeticall design of the whole verse, ascribes such things to the
Saints, to whom the Apostle speaks, as they were not partakers of, concerning
whom he had immediately before discoursed. The Faith of Gods Elect, whereby we
are Justified, is doubtless of the things that accompany Salvation.

5. The persons intended by the Apostle, were such, as had need to be taught
again the first principles of the Oracles of God, Chap. 5. v. 12. that were
unskillfull in a word of Righteousness v. 15. that had not their senses
exercised to discern good and evil v. 14. and are plainly distinguished from
them, to whom the Promise made to Abraham does properly belong Chap. 6. 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, etc.

6. True Believers are opposed in the Discourse of the Apostle (Chap. 6.) unto
these persons lying under a possibility of Apostasy, so far as they are cast
under it, by the conditional Discourse of it, upon sundry accounts.

As

1. Of their works and labor of Love showed to the name of God v. 10: of
their preservation, from the Righteousness or Faithfulness of God in his
Promises, v. 11. Of the mutability of the counsels of God, and his Oath for the
preservation of them, v 13, 17, 18. Of their sure and steedfast anchor of hope,
v. 19. etc. Upon all which Considerations it is abundantly evident, that they
are not Believers, the Children of God, Justified, Sanctified, Adopted Saints
of whom the Apostle treates in the passages insisted on.

Sect.. 29.
28. M. Goodwin urges sundry reasons to prove that they are not Hypocrites, or
outside professors only, but true Believers that are described. If by
Hypocrites and outside Professors he intends those who are grossly so,
pretending to be what they are not, and what they know themselves not to be, we
contend not about it: if by those expressions he compriseth also those whom we
characterized in the entrance of this Discourse, who unto their profession of
the Faith, have also added those gifts and endowments, with the like, which we
mentioned, notwithstanding all their Advancement in light, conviction, joy,
usefulness, conversation, do yet come short of union with Christ, I shall
join issue with him, in the consideration of his reasons offered to be
pregnant of proof for the confirmation of his Assertion. He tells you, Sect.
28. Page 288.

1. There is no Clause, Phrase, or Word in either of the places, any ways
characteristicall or Descriptive of Hypocrisy, or Hypocrites, there are none of
those colors to be seen, which are wont to be used in drawing or limning the
Portraitures, or shapes of those Beasts, as distinguished from creatures of a
better kind. All the lineaments of the Persons presented in these tables,
before the mention of their falling away, become the best and fairest faces of
the Saints, (as has been proved) and are not to be found in any other. Yea,
the greatest and most intelligent Believer under heaven, has no reason but to
desire part and fellowship with the Hypocrites here described, in all those
characters and properties which are attributed unto them before their falling
away, or sinning wilfully.

Ans. 1. The design of the Apostle is not to discover, or give any characters
of Hypocrites, to manifest them to be such, but to declare the excellencies
that are, or may be found in them, from the enjoyment of all which they may
decline, and sin against the mercy and grace of them, to the aggravation of
their condemnation: Neither had any lines used to particularise those beasts in
their shape, wherein they differ from Believers, been at all useful to the
Apostles purpose: his aim being only to draw those wherein they are like them,
and conformeable to them. Neither

2. Is it questioned whether these things here mentioned, may be found in true
Believers, and become them very well, rendering their faces beautiful, but
whether there be not something else, then what is here mentioned, that should
give them being, as such, and life, without which these things are little
better than painting. Nor

3. Is it at all to the purpose, that Believers may desire a participation in
these characters with the persons described, but whether they who have no other
characters or marks upon them of true Believers, then what are here mentioned,
must necessarily be so accounted, or will of God be so accepted. Many a
Believer may desire the gifts of those Hypocrites, who have not one dram of
the Grace, wherewith he is quickened. So that this first reason as pregnant as
it seems of proof, is only indeed swelled and puffed up, with wind and
vanity. He adds

2. True Believers, are in estate of honor, and are Lifted up on high toward
the Heavens, in which respect they have from whence to fall. But Hypocrites are
as near Hell already as lightly they can be, till they be actually fallen into
it. From whence then are they capable of fallings? men of estates may fail and
break, but beggars are in no such danger. If Hypocrites fall away, it must be
from their Hypocrisy, but this is rather a rising than a fall. A Beggar cannot
be said to break but only when he gets an estate. When he does this, the
beggar is broke.

Ans. All that here is added, arises merely from the ambiguity of the word
Hypocrites; the persons that fall, are on all hands supposed to have, and enjoy
all, that is made mention of in the Texts insisted on, so that they have so
much to fall from, as that thereupon Mr Goodwin thinks them true Believers.
They have all the heighths to tumble from, which we before mentioned, and very
many others, that it is no easy task to declare. They fall from the
excellencies they have, and not the Hypocrisy, with which they are vitiated.
From the profession of the Faith, with honesty of conversation, etc. not from
the want of Root, or being built on the Rock, so that this pretended pregnant
reason, is as barren as the former, to the production of the assertion laid
down to be proved by it. He adds

3. It is no punishment at all to Hypocrites to be under no possibility of
being renewed again by repentance. Nay in case they should fall away, it would
be a benefit and blessing unto them, to be under an impossibility of being
renewed again. For if this were their case it would be impossible for them to
be ever Hypocrites again, and (doubtless) it is no great judgment upon any man
to be incapable of such a preferment.

Ans. 1. Whether it be no punishment for them who have been in so good a way, a
way of such tendency unto Salvation, and such usefullnesse to the Gospel, as
these persons are supposed to be in; not to be renewed again to that state and
condition, but to be shut up, unrecoverably under the power of darkness, and
uubeliefe, unto eternal wrath, when before they were in a fair way for life
and Salvation, others will judge beside Mr Goodwin. Neither is there an
affirmation of their falling away from their Hypocrisy, and being renewed
again thereunto, in any thing we assert in the exposition of this place, but
their falling away from gifts and common Graces, with the impossibility of
what kind soever it be, of being renewed to an enjoyment of them any more. His
fourth and last attempt follows.

4. (And lastly) it stands off, forty foot at least, from all probability, that
the Apostle writing only unto those, whom he judged true and sound Believers
(as appears from several places in the Epistle, as cap. 3. 14. 6. 9. etc.)
should in the most serious, emphaticall and weighty passages hereof, admonish
them of such evils or dangers, which only concerned other men, and whereunto
themselves were not at all obnoxious, yea and whereunto if they had been
obnoxious, all the cautions, admonitions, warnings, threatenings in the world
would not according to their principles, with whom we have now to do) have
relieved or delivered the^. To say that such admonitions, are a means to
preserve those from Apostasy, who are by other means (as suppose the absolute
decree of God, or the interposall of his irresistible power, for their
Perseverance, or the like) in no possibility of Apostatizing, as to say that
washing is a means to make snow white, or the rearing up of a pillar in the
air a means to keep the Heavens from falling. But more of this in the chapter
following.

Ans. What exact measure soever Mr Goodwin seems to have taken of the
distance of our assertion from all probability (which he has accurately
performed, if we may take his word) yet upon due consideration it evidently
appears, that he is not able to disprove it, from coming close up to the
absolute truth, of the meaning and scope of the Holy Ghost in the places under
consideration. For besides what has been already argued, and proved, it is
evident.

1. That the Apostle wrote promiscuosly to all that profess the name of
Christ, and his Gospel, of whom he tells you Cap. 3. 14. (one of the places we
are directed to by Mr Goodwin) that those only are made partakers of Christ,
who hold the beginning of their confidence to the end; For the rest
notwithstanding all their glorious profession, gifts and seize, yet they
are not truly made partakers of Christ, (whereby he cuts the throat of Mr
Goodwins whole cause) and cap. 6. 9. that there were amongst them, who had
attained things accompanying Salvation, and better things than any of those had
done, who notwithstanding their profession, yet held it not fast without
wavering, but ever^ day fell away; so that though he judged no particulars
before their Apostasy, yet he partly intimates, that all Professors were not
true Believers, and therefore does teach them all to make sure work in closing
with Christ, least they turn Apostates and perish in so doing.

2. That conditional comminations and threatenings, discovering the connection
that is between the antecedent and consequent, that is in the proposition of
them, are and may be of use to the Saints of God, preserved from the end
threatened and the cause deserving it, upon the accounts, Reasons and Causes,
that have been plentifully insisted on, has more than once been declared; and
the objections to the contrary the same with those here insisted on, answered
and removed. This being all that Mr Goodwin has to offer, by the way of
reason, to exclude the persons formerly described, to be the only concernement
of the place of Scripture insisted on, there remains nothing but only the
consideration of the severalls of the passages, debated, wherein by the light
that has already broken forth, from the Circumstances, aims, ends and
connection of the places, we may so far receive direction, as not to be at all
stumbled in our progress.

With the consideration of the several expressions in the passages under
debate,. 30.
Mr Goodwin proceeds Sect. 19: and first infisteth on that of Cap. 6. where
it is said that they were (...) once enlightened; whence he thus argues.

Believers are said to be enlightened, and to be children of light in the Lord 2
Cor. 4. 6. Heb. 10. 32. Luke 16. 8. Ephesians. 5. 8. therefore they who here are said
to be enlightened were true Believerss

Ans. 1. I shall not insist upon the various interpretations of this place, and
reading of the word (...), very many, and that not improbably affirming that
their participation of the ordinance of Baptism is here only intended by it,
for which exposition much might be offered, were it needful, or much conducing
to our business in hand. Nor

2. Shall I labor to manifest that persons may be enlightened, and yet never
come to Christ savingly by faith, to attain union with him and justificatio^ by
him: a thing M.G. will not deny himself, or if he should, it were a very
facile thing to co^vince him of his mistake, by a sole entreaty (if he would be
pleased to give an account of his faith in this business at our entreaty) of
him to declare, what he intends by illumination, whence it would quickly
appear, how unsuitable it is to his own principles to deny, that it may be in
them, who yet never come to be, or at least by virtue thereof may not be said
to be true Believers: but this only I shall add,

3. That M.G. doubtless knowing that this Argument (which withal the Texts of
Scripture, whereby he illustrates it he borrows of the Remonstrants) has been
again and again excepted against, as illogicall and unconcluding, and
inconsistent with the principles of them that use it, ought not crudely again
have imposed it upon his Reader without some attempt at least, to free it from
the charge of impertinency, weakness and folly, wherewith it is burdened.
Illumination is ascribed to Believers, illumination is ascribed to these men,
therefore these persons are Believers: a little confideration will recover to
Mr Goodwins mind the force of this Argument, so far as that he will scarce
use it any more.

Sect. 20.. 31.
he takes up another expression from Chap. 10. v. 12. That they are said to
receive (...), the acknowledgement of the Truth, whence he argues in the same
manner and form, as he had newly done from the term of Illumination: (...) is
ascribed to Believers, therefore they are all so, to whom it is ascribed.

But he tells you in particular that (Sect. 20.) In the latter of the said
passages the persons spoken of, are said to have received (...) (i.e.) the
acknowledgement of the truth; which expression, does not signify the bare
notion of what the Gospel teaches, of which they are capable, who are the
most professed enemies thereof, but such a consenting and subjection thereunto,
which works effectually in men to a separating of themselves from sin and
sinners. This is the constant import of the phrase in the Scriptures.

Ans. All this may be granted, yet nothing hence concluded, to evince the
persons to whom it is ascribed to be true Believers; men may be so wrought
upon, and convinced by the Word and Spirit, sent forth to convince the world of
sin, Righteousness and Judgment, as to acknowledge the truth of the Gospel,
to profess subjection to the Gospel, and to yield to it so far as to
separate themselves from sin and sinners, in such a manner and to such a
degree (not disembling but answering their convictions) as to bless themselves
oftentimes in their own condition, and to obtain an esteem with the people of
God to be such indeed, as they profess themselves to be, and yet come short of
that union and communion with the Lord Christ, which all true Believers are
made partakers of. It is not of any use or importance to examine the particular
places mentioned by Mr Goodwin, wherein as he supposes the expression of the
knowledge or acknowledgment of the truth denotes that which is saving, and
comprehends true Faith, unless be attempted to prove from them, that the
word could signify nothing else, or that a man might not be brought to an
acknowledgment of the truth, but that he must of necessity be a true Believer:
neither of which he does, or if he did, could he possibly give any seeming
probability to. There may be a knowing of the things of the Gospel in men, and
yet they may come short of the happiness of them that doc them; there is a
knowledge of Christ, that yet is barren as to the fruit of holiness.

3. In the next place the persons queried about,. 32.
are said to be sanctified by the blood of the Covenant; of this Mr Goodwin
says (Sect. 21.) i.e. By their sprinkling herewith, to be sprinkled from such,
who refuse this sprinkling: as likewise from the pollutions and defilements of
the world, to be Sanctified when applied unto persons, is not sound in any
other sense throughout the new Testament, unless it be where Persons bear the
consideration of things. 1 Cor. 7. 14. But of this signification of the word
which we claim in this place, instances are so frequent and obvious, that we
shall not need to mention any.

Ans. If no more be intended in this expression, but what Mr Goodwin gives us,
in the exposition of it viz. that they are so sprinkled with it, as to be
separate from them that refuse this sprinkling (that is openly) as likewise
from the pollution and defilements of the world, we shall not need to contend
about it: for men may be so sprinkled, and have such an efficacy of conviction
come upon them by the preaching of the Cross, and blood shedding of Christ, as
to be separated from those who professedly despise it, and the open publication
of the Word, and yet be far from having consciences purged from dead works
to serve the living God.

And secondly that the term of sanctifying when applied to persons, is not
used in any other sense, than what is by Mr Goodwin here expressed, is an
Assertion that will be rendered useless until Mr Goodwin be pleased to give
it an edge by explayning in what sense he here intends to apply it. Of the
term Sanctifying there are, as has been declared, two more eminent and known
significations. First, to separate from common use, state or condition, to
dedicate, consecrate and set apart to God by profession of his will, in a
peculiar manner is frequently so expressed. Secondly realy to purify, cleanse
with Spiritual purity, opposed to the defilement of sin is denoted thereby;
In the exposition given of the place here used by Mr G. He mentions both:
Separation, and that chiefly, as the nature of the Sanctification whereof he
speaks, as also some kind of Spiritual clensing from sin: but in what sense
precisely he would have us to understand him he does not tell us.

I somewhat question, whether it be used in the Epistle to the Hebrews, in any
other sense than the former, which was the Temple sense the of word; the
Apostle using many terms of the old worship in their first signification.
however that it is used in that sense, in the new Testament appropriated to
persons, without any such respect as that mentioned by M.G. is sufficiently
convinced by that of our Savior John. 17. 19. (...), expressing his dedicating
and separating himself to his objection; and more instances may be had, if we
stood in any need of them.

Thirdly that many are said to be sanctified and holy in the latter sense, as
it signifies spiritual purity, in respect of their profession of themselves
so to be, and some men's esteem of them, who yet were never wholly, and truly
purged from their sin, nor ever had received the holy Spirit of Promise, who
alone is able to purge their hearts, does not now want its demonstration, that
work has been some whiles since performed. So that Mr G. makes not any
progress at all, in the proof of what he has undertaken viz. that they are
true Believers in the sense of that denomination which we assert, who in these
places are described. For a close, (...), is far more properly referred to
Christ, than to the persons spoken of, and that sense the Remonstrants
themselves do not oppose.

That they are said (Cap. 6. 4.). 33.
to have tasted the heavenly gift is urged in the next place (Sect. 22.) to
prove them true Believers; both the object and the act are here in question,
what is meant by the Heavenly gift, and what by tasting of it. I shall not
look into the Text beyond the peculiar concernement of the cause in hand:
somewhat might be offered for the farther clearing of the one and other. At
present it suffices that be the Heavenly gift what it will, the persons of
our contest, are said only to taste of it: which though absolutely, and in it
self, it is not an extenuating expression, but denotes a matter of high
aggravation of the sin of Apostasy, in that they were admitted to some taste
and relish of the excellency and sweetness of the Heavenly gift; yet
comparatively to their feeding on it, digesting it, growing thereby, it
clearly denotes their coming short of such a participation of it, who do but
taste of it. That to taste, does not in the first genuine signification in things
natural, signify to eat and digest meat, so as to grow by it, I suppose needs
no proof; that in that sense it is used in the Scriptures Ioh. 2. 9 Mat. 27.
34. is by Mr Goodwin confessed. This he tells you is only, when the taste or
relish of things is desired to be known: but that our Savior tasted of the
gall and vinegar out of a desire to know the relish of it, he will hardly
persuade those who are accustomed to give never so easy a belief to his
assertions. By the Heavenly gift M. G. in the first place intends Jesus
Christ: now if by tasting, eating and drinking of Christ be intended as is here
pleaded, Christ himself will determine this strife, telling us that whosoever
eats his flesh shall be saved John 6. 35, 49, 50, 51, 54, 55, 56, 57. So that
either to taste, is not to eat, or they that taste cannot perish.

Three things are urged by Mr Goodwin to give proof of his interpretation of
these words of the Holy Ghost: says he,

1. Whatsoever is meant by this Heavenly gift, certain is it that by tasting,
is not meant any light or superficial impression made upon the hearts or
souls of men, through the sense or apprehension of it, but an emphaticall,
inward and effectuous relish and sense of the excellent and Heavenly sweetness
and pleasantness of it, opposed to a bare speculation or naked apprehension
thereof. The reason hereof, is because the tasting of this Heavenly gift here
spoken of, is not mentioned by the Apostle in a way of easing or extenuating
the sin of those that should fall away from Christ, but by way of aggravation
and exaggeration of the beinousnesse and unreasonablenesse thereof, and withal
more fully to declare and assert the equitablenesse of that severity in God,
which is here denounced against those, that shall sin the great sin of
Apostasy here spoken of. It must needs be much more unworthy and provoking in
the sight of God, for a man to turn his back upon and renounce those ways,
that profession, wherein God has come home to him, and answered the joy of his
heart abundently, then it would be in case he had only heard of great matters,
and had his head filled, but had really found and felt nothing with his heart
and soul truly excellent and Glorious.

2. And bestdes the very word it self, to taste ordinarily in Scripture,
importes a real communion with or participation and enjoyment (if the thing be
good) of that which was said to be tasted. Oh taste and see (says David) that
the Lord is good Psalm. 34. 8.
His intent doubtless was not to invite men to a slight or superficial taste
of the goodness of God, but to a real cordial and thorough experiment and
satisfactory enjoyment of it. So when he that made the great invitation in the
parable, expressed himself thus to his servants; For I say unto you, that none
of those who were bidden shall taste of my Supper Luke 14. 24.
His meaning clearly was that they should not partake of the Sweetness, and
benefit thereof with those who should accept of his invitation, and come unto
it. In like manner when Peter speaks thus to his Christian Jews, If so be ye
have tasted that the Lord is gracius, 1 Pet. 2. 3.
his meaning (questionless) is not to press his exhortation directed unto
them in the former verse upon a consideration of any light or vanishing taste,
such as hypocrites and false-hearted Christians may have, of the graciousnesse
of the Lord, but of such a taste, wherein they had had a real, inward, and
sensible experiment thereof.

3. And besides according to the sense of our adversaries in the present
debate, if the taste of the heavenly gift we speak of should imply no more, but
only a faint or weak perception of the sweetness and glorious excellency of
it, yet even this may be sufficient to evince truth of grace and Faith in men.
For their opinion is, that a man may be a true Believer with a grain of
Mustard Seed only, i.e. with a very slender relish and taste of spiritual
things; yea their sense is, that in some cases of desertion, and under the
guilt of some enormous courses, they may have little or no taste of them at all.

Ans. 1. To the first discourse considering what has been already delivered, I
shall only add, that although it be no aggravation of the sin of Apostasy,
that they who fall into it, have but tasted of the Heavenly gift, yet it is
that they have tasted of it: that taste of its relish, preciousnes, and
sweetness, which they have obtained, whereby they are distinguished from the^
whose blindness and hardness keeps them up to a total disrelish and contempt of
it, is abundantly enough to render their sin heinous and abominable. When men
by the preaching of the Word, shall be startled in their sins, troubled in
their consciences, forced to seek out for a remedy, and shall come so far as
to have some (though but a light) taste of the excellency of the Gospel, and
the remedy provided for sinners in Jesus Christ, and then through the strength
of their lusts and corruptions, shall cast it off, reject it, and spit out of
their mouth as it were, all that of it, whereby they found the least savor in
it, no creature under Heaven, can be guilty of more abominable undervaluing of
the Lord Christ, and the Love of God in him, than such persons. What degree of
Love, Joy, Repentance, Peace, Faith, persons many times arrive unto, when with
Herod they have heard the Word gladly, and done many things willingly etc. has
been by others abundantly demonstrated. This suffices our present purpose,
that they do make such a progress in the ways of God, and find so much
excellency in the treasure of Grace and mercy, which he has provided in Jesus
Christ, and tenders in the Gospel, that he cannot but look upon their Apostasy
and renunciation of him, (whereby they proclaim to all the world as much as in
them lies, that there is not that real goodness, worth, and excellency to be
found in him, as some pretend) as the highest scorn and contempt of him, and
his Love in Christ, and revenges it accordingly.

2. To the second, which consists of instances collected by the Remonstrants to
manifest the use of the word tasting to be other than what we here confine it
to. I say 1. That the word as it is applied to Spiritualls, being borrowed and
metaphorical, not in its Analogy to be extended beyond making trial, for our
coming to some knowledge of a thing in its nature, the use of it in one place,
cannot prescribe to the sense of it in another, no more than any other
metaphorical expression whatever; but it must in the several places of its
residence, be interpreted according to the most peculiar restriction that the
matter treated of does require. If then M G. can prove that any thing in this
place under consideration enforces such a sense, all his other instances are
needless: if he cannot, they are useless.

It might easily be manifested, and has been done by others already, that in
all the places mentioned by Mr Goodwin, the word is not expressly significant
of any thorough, solid eating and participation of that which is said to be
tasted, as is pretended. But to manifest this, is not our concernment; there
being no reason in the world to enforce any such sense as is contended for in
the place under present consideration.

2. To the third wherein he argues with his predecessors from our opinion
concerning Faith, a brief reply will suffice: That a faint, weak perception
and relish of heavenly things, is sufficient to make a man a Believer, is so
far from being our opinion, that we utterly disclaim them from being
Believers to whom this is ascribed, if nothing else be added in their
description, from whence they may be so esteemed. It is true, Faith is
sometimes little, and weak in the exercise of it, yea a man may be so
overtaken with Temptations, or so clouded under desertions, as that it may not
deport it self with any such considerable vigor, as to be consolatory to him
in whom it is, or demonstrative of him unto others to be what he is: but we say
that the weakest, lowest, meanest measure and degree of this Faith, is yet
grounded and fixed in the heart, where though it be not always alike lively,
and active, yet it is always alive, and gives life. How far Believers may
fall into the guilt of enormous courses, has been already manifested. The
intendment of the expression, is to disadvantage the persuasion he opposes. We
do not grant that believers may fall into any enormityes, but only what God
himself affirms they may, and yet not utterly be cast out of his Love and
favor in Jesus Christ. Farther the weakest Faith, of which we affirm that it
may be true and saving, though it may have no great perception nor deep taste
of Heavenly things for the present, yet has it always that, of adherence to
God in Christ, which is exceedingly exalted above any such preception of
Heavenly things whatever, that may be had or obtained without it: so that from
the consideration of what has been spoken, we may safely conclude, that M.G.
has not been able to advance on step in his intendment, to prove, that the
persons here described are true Believers.

I know no sufficient ground or reason to induce me to any large consideration
of the other two or three expressions that remain,. 34.
and that are insisted on by M.G. seeing it is evident from their associats,
which have been already examined that there is none of them can speak one word
to the business in hand: I shall therefore discharge them from any farther
attendance, in the service they have been forced unto.

The next privilege insisted on which to these persons is ascribed, is, that
they are made partakers of the Holy Ghost. In men's participation of the Holy
Ghost, either the gifts or Graces of the Holy Ghost are intended. The Graces
of the Holy Ghost, are either more common and inchoative, or special and
completing of the work of conversion: that it is the peculiar regenerating
Grace of God, that is intended in this expression, of being made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and not the gifts of the Spirit, or those common graces of
illumination, unto which persons not truly converted, but only wrought upon by
an effectual conviction in the preaching of the word, may attain, M: G: is no
way able to prove: And there is also this consideration rising up with strength
and power, against that interpretation; viz. that those that are so made
partakers of the Spirit as to be regenerated, quickened, sealed, comforted
thereby, which are some of the peculiar acts of his Grace, in and toward the
souls of those that Believe, can never loose him, nor be deprived of him, as
was manifested before at large, being sealed and confirmed, not only in the
present enjoyment of the Love and favor of God, but also unto the full
fruition of the Glory, which is provided for them, and therefore cannot fall
away, as these are supposed to do. What there is in Mr Goodwins Discourse, on
this passage Sect. 23, 24. to weaken in the least what is usually answered, or
farther to enforce his exposition of the place; I am not able to apprehend, and
shall therefore proceed with what remains.

All that follows in the place of the Apostle under contest,. 35.
is regulated by the word, Taste: they have tasted of the good word of God, and
the powers of the World to come: what the sense and importance of that word is,
has been already declared: neither can it be proved, that the persons here
described, do so taste of the good word of God, as to mix the promises of it
with Faith, or of the powers of the world to come, as to receive them in power
in their hearts by believing so that farther contest about these words seems
to be altogether needless.

How far men may proceed in the ways of God,. 36.
what progress they may make in amendment of life, what gifts and common
graces they may receive, what light and knowledge they may be endued withal,
what kind of Faith, Joy, Repentance, Sorrow, Delight, Love, they may have, in
and about spiritual things; what desire of mercy and heaven, what useful
gifts for the Churches edification they may receive, how far they may
persuade their own souls, and upon what grounds, that their condition Godward
is good, and saving, and beget an opinion in others that they are true
Believers, and yet come short of union with Christ, building their houses on
the sand etc. is the daily task of the Preachers of the Gospel to manisest,
in their pressing that exhortation of the Apostle unto their hearers, to
examine and try themselves in the midst of their profession, whether Christ
be in them of a truth or no. I shall not now enter upon that labor; the Reader
knows where to find enough in the writings of holy and learned men of this
Nation to evince, that men may arrive at the utmost height of what is in this
place of the Apostle by the Holy Ghost ascribed to the persons of whom he
speaks, and yet come short of the state of true Believers. M.G. indeed tells
us Sect. 27.

The Premises relating to the two passages yet under debate, considered,. 37.
I am so far from questioning whether the Apostle speaks of true and sound
Believers in them, that I verily judge, that he purposely sought out several
of the most emphaticall and signal characters of Believers, yea such which are
hardly or rather not at all, to be found in the ordinary sort of true
Believers, but only in those that are most eminent amongst them, that so he and
such, who though sound, yet were weak in the Faith, might fall away and
perish, but that even such also, who were lifted up nearer unto Heaven than
their fellows, might through carelessness and carnallsecurity, dash themselves
in pieces against the same stone, and make shipwreck of their souls, as well
as they.

Ans. The House built on the sand, may oftentimes be built higher, have more
fair perapets and battlements, windows and ornaments than that which is built
upon the Rock: yet all gifts and privileges, equal not one Grace in respect
of light, knowledge, gifts, and many manifestations of the Spirit, such who
never come up to that Faith which gives real union and communion with Jesus
Christ, may far outgoe those that do.

2. That there is any thing mentioned, or any characters given of Believers,
much less such as are singular and not common to all: M.G has not in any
measure been able to evince: There is not the meanest Believer in the world but
he is a Child of God, and heir of the Promises, and brother of the LordChrist;
has union with him, has his living in him, is Quickened, Justified,
Sanctified, has Christ made to him Wisdom etc. has his Righteousness in
God, and his Life hid in him in Christ, is passed from death to Life, brings
forth fruit, and is dear to God as the apple of his eye, accepted with him,
approved of him, as his temple wherein he delights to dwell. That any thing
in this place mentioned and insisted on, any characters we have given of the
persons, whom we have considered, do excel, or equal, or denote any thing in
the same kind, with these and the like excellencyes of the meanest Believers,
will never be proved, if we may judge of future successes, from the issue of
all former attempts for that end and purpose.

And this is the issue of Mr Goodwin's third Testimony produced to confirm the
Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy but hypothetically, and under such a form of
expression as may not be argued from, nor of Saints and true Believers at all:
His 4. follows.

His fourth Testimony he produces,. 38.
and endeavors to manage for the Advantage of his cause, Sect. 31. in these
words.

The next Scripture Testimony we shall produce and briefly urge in the cause
now under maintenance, is in the same Epistle with the former and speaks
these words. Now the Just shall live by Faith, But if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him. Our English translators, out of good will
(doubtless) to a bad cause, have almost defaced this Testimony, by
substituting any man for the just man, for whereas they translate, but if any
man draw back, the Original reads, (...), i.e. and if [or but if] he [i.e.
the just man who should live by his Faith, viz. if he continues in it] shall
draw back. Beza himself likewise before the^, had stained the honor of his
faithfulness, with the same blot in his Translation. But the mind of the Holy
Ghost in the words is plain, and without Parable; viz. that if the just man
who lives [ i. e. who at present enjoyes the favor of God, and thereby is
supported in all his tryalls] and should live always by his Faith [if he
continues in it, as Pareus well glosseth] shall draw back, or shall be
withdrawn [ viz. through fear, or sloth, as the word properly signifies: See
Acts 20. 27.] from his believing, my soul shall have no pleasure in him i.e.
(according to the import of the Hebraisme) my soul shall hate, or abhor him
to death; as it is also expounded in the words immediately following: But we
are not of those who draw back to perdition, but, etc. From hence then evident
it is, that such a man who is a just, or Righteous man, and under promise of
living for ever by his Faith (and therefore also, a true and sound Believer)
may draw back, or be withdrawn, to the contracting of the hatred of God, and
to destruction in the end. The forlornehope of evading, because the sentence is
Hypotheticall, or conditional not positive, has been routed over and over,
yea and is abandoned by some of the great Masters themselves of that cause,
unto the defense whereof it pretends. And however, in this place, it would be
most preposterous. For if it should be supposed, that the just man, who is in a
way and under a Promise of living by his Faith, were in no danger or
possibility of drawing back, and that to the loss of the favor of God, and
ruin of his soul, God must be conceived to speak here at no better rate of
wisdom or understanding, than thus; The Just shall live by his Faith: but if
he shall do that, which is simply and utterly impossible for him to do, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him. What savor of wisdom, yea or of
commonsence, is there in admonishing, or cautioning men against such evils,
which there is no possibility for them to fall into, yea and this known unto
themselves? Therefore this testimony, for confirmation of the Doctrine we
maintain, is like a King upon his Throne, against whom there is no rising up.

Ans. What small cause Mr Goodwin has to quarrel with Beza,. 39.
or other Translatours, and with how little advantage to his cause this Text is
produced shall out of hand be made appear.

1. The words as they cry are, (...). In the foregoing part of the chapter, the
Apostle had treated of two sorts of persons. 1. Such as so forsake the
Assemblies of the Saints, withdrew from the Church, and Ordinances of Christ;
and so by degrees fell off with a total and everlasting backsliding: of these
the Apostle speaks, describing their ways and end, from v. 25. unto v. 32.
thence forward. 2. He speaks to them and of them, who abode in their
persecutions, and under all their afflictions, to hold fast their confidence;
which he also farther exhorts them to, that by patient abiding in well doing,
they might receive the reward; concerning these both, having told them of the
unshaken Kingdom of Christ, that should be brought in, notwithstanding the
Apostasy of many, of whose iniquity God would take vengeance on; he lays down
that eminent promise of the Gospel, the just by Faith shall live, words often
used, to express the state and condition of Believers, of those who are truly
and unfainedly so; the Lord being faithful in his promise, the justified
person shall live, or obtain life everlasting. It is the promise of eternal
life, that is here given them, as that which they had not as yet received, but
in patience they were to wait to receive, after they had done the whole will
of God: that any of these should so draw back, as that the Lords soul should
have no pleasure in them, is directly contrary to the promise here made of
their living. The particle ((...)) in the next words, is plainly adversative,
and exceptive, as it is very many times in the New Testament; and that as to
the Persons of whom he is speaking: at (...), the period is full, the
description of the state of the just by Faith is completed, and in the next
words, the state of backsliders is entered upon: (...), referring to them, whom
by their Apostasy, and subduction of themselves from Christian assemblies he
had before described: there is an elleipsis in the words to be supplied, but
some indefinite term, to give them the sense intended: this Beza and our
translators have done by that excepted against causelessely by M.G. for if a
Translator may make the Text speak ^ignificantly in the language whereunto he
translates it, the introduction of such supplements is allowed him.

2. The following expression puts it out of all question, that this was the
intendment of the Apostle; for he expressly makes mention, and that in
reference to what was spoken before, of two sorts of people, to whom his former
expressions are respectively to be accommodated, the words are (...), as above.
M. Goodwin to make us believe, that he took notice of these words, has this
passage of them, ( as it is also expounded, in the words immediately following,
but we are not of them who draw back to perdition; but etc.) but what I pray is
expounded in these words; that drawers back shall be destroyed? this is all he
takes notice of in them; Evidently the words are an application of the former
assertions unto several persons: there are says he some who are (...), and
some that are (...): those says he who are (...), they shall be destroyed,
those who are (...), they shall live; Evidently and beyond all contradiction,
assigning his former assertions of, the just shall live by Faith, and, if any
man shall draw back, to several persons, by a distribution of their lot and
portions to them: in v. 28. he lays down in These the state and condition of
believers and backsliders: in v:29. he makes application of the position he
laid down to himself and them, 1. negatively that they were not of the former
sort of them that draw back, etc. 2. Positively, that they were of the rest of
them that believed, and those expressions v. 29. (...), do undeniably affirm
two sorts of persons in both places to be spoken of and that (...) can by no
means be referred to our (...), which would entermixe them, whom the Apostle
as to their present state and future condition, held out in a contradistinction
one to the other, unto the end: All that ensues in M. Goodwins discourse, being
built upon this sandy foundation, that it is the Believer, of whom God affirms
that he shall live by Faith, who is supposed to be (...), contrary to the
express assertion of the Apostle, it needs no farther consideration, although
he is not able to manifest any strength in conclusion drawn from suppositions,
of events, which may be possible in one sense, and in another impossible.

But before we pass further,. 40.
may not this witness which Mr Goodwin has attempted in vain to suborne to
appear, and speak in his cause, be demanded what he can speak, or what he
knows of the truth, of that which he is produced to oppose. This then it
confesses and denies not, at first word, that of professors there are two
sorts: some are (...), of such as do or may draw back unto perdition; some
(...), which believe to the saving of the soul, and that in opposition to the
others: Also, that those who withdraw are not (...), not true Believers, nor
ever were, notwithstanding all their profession and what their gifts, and
seize, in and under their profession: So that the Testimony produced,
keeps still its place, and is as a King upon his Throne against whom there is
no rising up, but yet speaks quite contrary, clearly, evidently, distinctly to
what is pretended, both on the one hand and the other, is our thesis undeniably
confirmed, in this place of the Apostle. If all those who fall away to
perdition were never truly nor really of the Faith, then those who are of the
Faith cannot fall away; but they who fall away to perdition, were never truly
nor really of the Faith, or true Believers: Ergo. The reason of the consequent
of the first proposition is evident: for their not being of the Faith, is
plainly included as the Reason of their Apostasy, and their being of the Faith,
intimated as that which would have preserved them from such defection; the
Minor is the Apostles, we are not (...) of them that draw back, but of them
that believe, which plainly distinguishes them that draw back, from
Believers; Again if true Believers shall live, and continue to the saving of
their souls, in opposition to them that fall away to perdition, then they
shall certainly persevere in their Faith: for these two are but one and the
same: but that true Believers shall live, and believe, to the saving of their
souls, in opposition to them that draw back, or subduct themselves to
perdition, is the assertion of the Holy Ghost: Ergo: I presume by this time Mr
Goodwin is plainly convinced that indeed he had as good, yea and much better,
for the Advantage of his cause in hand, have let his witness have abode in
quietness, and not entreated him so severely to denounce judgment against that
Doctrine which he seeks by him to confirm.

Sect. 32.. 41.
the parable of the stony ground Mat. 13. 20, 21. comes next to consideration:
the words chosen to be insisted on are in the verses mentioned, but he that
received the seed into stony places, is he that hears the Word, and anon with
joy receives it, yet has be not root in himself, but dureth for a while etc.
That by the stony ground is meant true Believers, is that which Mr Goodwin
undertakes to prove: but how in his whole Discourse, I profess I perceive not:
I must take leave to profess that I cannot find any thing looking like a
pr^^fe or Argument to evince it, from the beginning to the end of this
Discourse, though something be offered to take off the arguments that are used
to prove it to be otherwise; does Mr Goodwin think that men will easily Believe
that Faith, which has neither root, fruit, nor continuance, to be true and
saving Faith; doubtless they might have very low apprehensions of saving
faith, union with Christ, justification, sanctification, adoption, etc.
wherewith it is attended, who can once entertain any such imagination: that
which is tendered to induce us to such a persuasion, may briefly be considered.

Says he Sect. 32.. 42.
Now those signified by the stony ground, he expressly calls (...), i.e.
Persons who continue for a time, or a season, i.e. (as Luke explaineth) (...),
who believe for a season, so that those, who only for a time believe, and
afterward make defection from Christ, and from the Gospel, are nevertheless
numbered and ranked by him amongst Believers. The words in Luke are very
particular. They on the Rock, are they which when they hear, receive the word
with joy; and those have no root, which for a while Believe, and in time of
temptation fall away. From whence it appears, that the hearers here described,
are not compared to the Rock or stony ground, for the hardness of their
hearts, for as much as they are said to receive the word with joy, which argues
an ingenuity and teachablenesse of spirit in them; and is elsewhere ( viz. Acts
2. 41.) taken knowledge of by the Holy Ghost, as an Index or sign of a true
Believer; but for such a Property, Disposition, or Temper as this; viz. not to
give or afford the word so received, a radication in their hearts and souls,
so intimous, serious, and solid, which should be sufficient to maintain their
belief of it, and good affections to it, against all such occurrences in the
World, which may oppose, or attempt either the one or the other.

Ans. 1. The first Reason intimated, is, that they are said to be (...), a
term given them plainly to distinguish them from true Believers; men that make
a profession for a season, expressly opposed to them, who receive the word in
good and honest hearts: if the word had denoted any excellency, any thing that
was good in them, then there had been some pretense to have insisted on it, to
prove them true Believers: But to demonstrate the truth of their Faith, from
their Hypocrisy, and their excellencies from that which expressly denotes
their unworthiness, is a strange way of arguing: They are persons, says our
Savior, that make profession for a little while, and then decay, not like them
who receive the Word in good and honest souls; therefore says M.G. they are
true believers; but,

2. In Luke they are said to Believe for a season: Mr Goodwin is not now to
learn, how often in the Scripture they are said to believe, who only profess
the Faith of the Gospel, though the root of the matter, be not in them: that
of John 2. 23, 24, 25. may suffice for undeniable instance: or John 6. 64. may
farther expound it: their believing for a season, is but the lifelesse,
worthless, fruitless profession for a season, as their destruction from the
good ground does manifest, But

3. They are said to receive the word with joy, which argues ingenuity and
tractablenesse of spirit in them: No more than in Herod, who heard the Word
gladly, or in the Jews, when the preaching of Ezechiel was pleasant, or
desirable to them; or those described Isai. 58. 2. %who sought God daily, and
delighted to know his ways, in the midst of the abominable practices. From
the similitude it self, He yet farther attempts this uncouth Assertion.

But as the blade which springs from one and the same kind of seed, as suppose
from Wheat or any other grain, though sown in different yea or contrary soyles
is yet of the same species or kind, the nature of the soil not changing the
specified nature of the seed that is sown in it, and God giving to every seed
its own body, of what temper so ever the ground is, where it is sown: in like
manner that Faith, which springs from the same seed of the Gospel must needs
be of one and the same nature and kind, though this seed be sown in the hearts
of never so differing a constitution and frame; the temper of the heart, be it
what it will be, not being able specifically to alter either the Gospel or the
natural fruit issuing from it: And as a blade or ear of Wheat, though it be
blasted before the Harvest, is not hereby proved not to have been a true blade
or ear of wheat before it was blasted, in like manner the withering or decay
of any man's faith, by what means or occasion soever, before his death, does
not prove it to have been a false, counterfeit, or Hypocritical Faith, or a
Faith of any other kind, than that which is true, real, and permanent unto the
end.

Ans. 1. It has been formerly observed, that s^militudes are not
argumentative, beyond the extent of that particular, wherein their nature, as
such, does consist. The intendment of Christ in this Parable, is to manifest
that many hear the word in vain, and bring forth no fruit of it at all: of
these one sort is compared to stony ground, that brings forth a blade, but no
fruit* no fruit, is no spirit, though there be a blade, or no blade, the
difference between the ones receiving of seed, and the others manifested by our
Savior in this Parable, is in this, that one brings forth fruit, and the other
does not: farther, the seed of wheat, or the like brings forth its fruit in a
natural way; and therefore whatever it brings forth, follows in some measure
the nature of the seed, but that seed of the Gospel, brings forth its fruit in
a moral way, and therefore may have effects of sundry natures; that which the
seed of Wheat brings forth is wheat, but that which the Gospel brings forth is
not Gospel, but Faith, besides what the wheat brings forth, if it come not,
nor ever will to be wheat in the ear, it is but grass, and not of the same
nature, and kind with that which is wheat actually, though virtually and
originally there be the nature of wheat in the root, yet actually wheat is
not in the blade, that has not, nor ever will have ear. If the seed of wheat
be so corrupted in the soil where it is sown, that it cannot bring forth
fruit, that which it does bring forth, what ever it be, is of a different
nature, from that which is brought forth to perfection, by the seed of wheat
in good ground. Again Faith is brought forth by the seed of the Gospel, when
the Promises and Exhortations of the Gospel being preached unto men, do
prevail on them: to give assent unto the truth of it: that every such effect
wrought, is true justifying Faith, giving union with Jesus Christ, Mr Goodwin
cannot prove, that effects specifically different, may be brought forth by the
same seed of the Gospel, seeing to some it is a savor of life unto life, and
to some a savor of death unto death, needs not much proving. Some receive the
Word, and turn it into wantonness, some are cast into the mould of it, and
are tanslated into the same image; if the temper of the heart, as is said, is
not able specifically to alter the Gospel: but that there may not fruit of
various kinds, be borne in the heart that assents to it, that receives it in
the upper crust and skin of it, is the question. Neither is it a blade
occasionally withering before the Harvest, but a slight receiving of the seed,
so as that it can never bring forth fruit that is intimated. In sum, this
whole Discourse is a great piece of Sophistry, in comparing natural and moral
causes in the producing of their effects, a thing not intended in the Parable,
and whereabout he that will busy himself, jungat vulpes, and mulgeat hircos;
this is that which our Savior teaches ^^in the similitude of seed sown in the
stony ground: The Word is preached unto some men, who are affected with it for
a season, assent unto it, but not coming (...) to a cordial close with it,
after a while wither away: and such as these we say were never true Believers:
a small matter will serve to make a man a true Believer, if these are such.
What tendency this Doctrine may have to lull men asleep in security, when
Christ is not in them of a truth, may easily appear, and be judged: if men who
are distinguished from other Believers, by such signal differences as these
here are, may yet pass for true Believers, Justified, Sanctified, Adopted
ones, solvi mortales curas, the way to Heaven is laid open to thousands, who I
fear will never come to the end of the journey.

What remains of M. G's Discourse on this text,. 44.
is spent in answering some objections which are made against his
interpretation of the place; it grows now late, and this task grows so heavy
on my hand, that I cannot satisfye my self in the repetition of any thing
spoken before, or delivered, which would necessarily enforce a particular
consideration of what M. G. here insists on, let him at his leisure Answer this
one Argument and I shall trouble him no farther in this matter.

That Faith which has neither root nor fruit, neither sound heart, nor good
life, that by and by, readily and easily yields upon Temptation to a total
defection, is not true saving, justifying Faith. The root of Faith taken
spiritually, is the habit of it in the heart; a spiritual living habit, which
if it reside not in the heart, all assent whatever, wants the nature of Faith,
true and saving; the fruits of Faith, are good Works, and new Obedience; that
Faith which has not Works, James tells you, is dead; dead and living Faith
doubtless differ specifically. Again Faith purisieth the heart, and when a
heart is wholly polluted, corrupted, naught and false, there dwelles no Faith
in that heart; it is impossible it should be in a heart, and not at least
radically and fundamentally purify it: farther Mr Goodwin has told us, that
true Believers are so fortified against Apostasy, that they are in only a
possibility, in nor probability, nor great danger of total Apostasy: and
therefore they who presently, and readily fall away, cannot be of those, who
are scarce in any danger of so doing, upon any account whatever: but that the
faith here mentioned, has neither root, nor fruit, good heart to dwell in, nor
good life attending it, but instantly upon trial and temptation, vanishes to
nothing, we are taught in the text it self* therefore the Faith here
mentioned, is not true no saving Faith. That it has no root is expressly
affirmed. v. 21. and all the rest of the qualityes mentioned are evidenced from
the opposition wherein they, who are these Believers, are set unto true
Believers, they receive the Word in good and honest hearts, they bring forth
fruit with patience, they endure in the time of trial; like the house built on
the Rock, when the house built on the Sand, falls to the ground.

One word more with this witness before we part: they who receive the Word in
good and honest hearts, and keep it, do bring forth fruit with patience, and
fall not away under temptation: so says the testimony: but all true Believers
recive the Word in good and honest hearts: Ergo Which is the voice of Mr
Goodwin's fourth Witness in this cause.

The 2 Pet. 4. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.. 45.
is forced to bring up the rear of the Testimonies by M. G. produced to
convince the world of the truth and Righteousness of his Doctrine of the
Saints Apostasy, ending his whole Discourse in the mire, Observatioas from the
Text or context, from the words themselves, or the coherence, to educe his
conclusion from, he insists not on. Many excellent words we have concerning the
clearenesse and evidence of this Testimony, and the impossibility of avoiding
what hence he concludes, we want not, but we have been too often inured to such
a way of proceeding, to be now moved at it, or troubled about it, were the
waters deep* they would not make such a noise. The state and condition of men
here described by the Apostle, is so justly delineated to the eye, by the
practice of men in the world, to whom the Gospel is preached, that I do not a
little wonder how any man excercised in the Ministry, should once surmise that
they are true Believers of whom he here treates; Taking the words in the sense
wherein they are commonly received, And in the utmost extent, who sees them not
daily exemplyfyed, in and upon them, who are yet far enough from the Faith of
Gods Elect. By the dispensation of the Word, especially when managed by a
skillful Master of assemblyes, men are every day so brought under the power, of
their convictions, and the light communicated to them, as to acknowledge the
truth and power of the Word, and in obedience thereunto, to leave off, avoid
and abhor the ways and courses wherein the men of the world, either not
hearing the Word at all, or not so wrought upon by it, do pollute themselves
and wallow with all manner of sensuality; and yet are not changed in their
natures, so as to become new creatures, but continue indeed, and in the sight
of God, dogs and swine, oftentimes returning to their vonit and mire, though
some of them hold out in the professions to the end; And these are they, whom
commonly our Divines have deciphered under the name of formalists, having a
form of Godliness but denying the power of it, who are here all at once by Mr
Goodwin interested in Christ, and the inheritance of the Saints in light; To
make good his enterprise he argues from the Remonstrants. Sect. 40. page 297.

1. If the said expressions import nothing,. 46.
but what Hypocrites, and that in sensu composito, i. e. whilst Hypocrites,
are capable of, then may those be Hypocrites, who are separated from men that
live in error, and from the pollutions of the World, and that through the
knowledge of Jesus Christ: and on the other hand those may be Saints, and sound
Believers, who wallow in all manner of filthiness, and defile themselves daily
with the pollutions of the World. This consequence according to the principles,
and known Tenets of our Adversaries, is legitimate and true, in as much as they
hold that true Believers may fall so foul, and so far, that the Church,
according to Christ's institution may be constrained to testify that they cannot
bear them in their outward communion, and that they shall have no part in the
kingdom of Christ, except they repent etc. But whether this be wholesome and
sound Divinity, or no, to teach that they who are separate from sinners, and
live holily, and blamelessly in this present world, and this by means of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, may be Hypocrites and children of perdition, and
they on the other hand who are companions with Thieves, Murderers, Adulterers
etc. Saints and sound Believers, I leave to men whose judgments are not turned
upside down with prejudice to determine.

1. Sundry things might be observed from the Text, to render this discourse
altogether useless, as to the end for which it is produced: as 1. That sundry
copies v. 13. instead of (...) read (...), who almost, or a little way, or
measure, so escaped as is said. 2. That it is not said, that those who are so
escaped, may Apostatize, it is said indeed, that the false Prophets and
teachers, (...) do lay baits for them, as the Fisher does for the fish that he
would take, by proposing unto them a liberty, as to all manner of impurity and
uncleanesse, but that in so doing, they prevail over them, is not affirmed. 3.
The conditional expression v. 20. may be used in reference to the false
Prophets, and not to them that are said to escape the pollutions of the World;
and if to them, that nothing can be argued from thence, has plentifully upon
several occasions been already demonstrated: but to suffer M. G. to leap over
all these blots in his entrance, and to take the words in his own sense and
connection, I say;

1. In what large and improper sense, such performs as we treat of, are termed
Hypocrites, has been declared. Those who pretend to be Godward, what they know
themselves not to be, making a pretense of Religion, to color and countenance
them in vice and vicious practices, or sensual courses, wherein they allow and
bless themselves, we intend not: But such as in some sincerity, under the
enjoyment and improvement of gifts and privileges, do, or may walk
conscientiously, as Paul before his conversion, and yet are not united to
Christ.

2. Of these we say, that they may so escape, etc. but that sound Believers,
may wallow in all manner of sinfulness, and defile themselves with all manner
of pollutions, we say not: nor will any instance given amount to the height and
intendment of those expressions, they being all alleviated by sundry
considerations, necessarily to be taken in with that of their sinning.

3. If we may compare the worst of a Saint, with the best of a formal
Professor, and make an estimate of the states and conditions of them both, we
may cast the balance on the wrong side.

4. We do say that Simon Peter was a believer when he denied Christ, and Simon
Magus an Hypocrite, and in the bond of iniquity, when it was said he believed.
We do say, that a man may be alive notwithstanding many wounds and much filth
upon him, and a man may be dead, without either the one or the other, in that
eminently visible manner. He adds.

2. The Persons here spoken of,. 41.
are said to have, (...), truly and really escaped from those, who live in
error. Doubtless an Hypocrite cannot be said, truly or really, but in show,
or appearance at most, to have made such an escape (I mean from men who live
in error) considering that for matter of reality and truth, remaining in
Hypocrisy, he lives in one of the greatest and foulest errors that is.

The whole force of this second exception, lies upon the ambiguity of the term
Hypocrite, though such as pretend Religion, and the worship of God, to be a
color and pretext, for the free and uncontrouled practicing of vile
abominations, may not be said so to escape it, yet such as these we have before
described, with their convictions, light, guiftes, duties, good conscience etc.
may truly and really escape from them, and their ways who pollute themselves
with the errors of Idolatry, false-worship, superstition, and the pollutions
of practices against the light of nature, and their own convictions: It is
added that

3. An Hypocrite, whose foot is already in the snare of Death, cannot upon any
tolerable account, either of reason or common sense, be said to be allured (
i.e. by allurements to be deceived) or overcome by the pollutions of the world,
no more than a fish that is already in the nett, or fast upon the hook, can be
said to be allured, by a bait held to her.

Ans. But he that has been so far prevailed upon by the preaching of the
Word, as to relinquish, and renounce the practices of uncleanenesse; wherein he
sometime wallowed, and rolled himself, may be prevailed upon and overcome by
temptations, to backslide into the same abominable practices, wherein he was
formerly engaged, deserting that way and course of attending to the Word, and
yiedling obedience thereunto, which he had entertained, that in its own nature
tended to a better end.

4. Says he, Hypocrites are no where said, neither can they with any congruity
to Scripture Phrase, be said to have escaped the pollutions of the world
through the acknowledgement (for so the word (...) should be translated) of
Jesus Christ the acknowledgement of the truth, and so of Christ, and of God,
constantly in the Scriptures, importing a sound and saving work of conversion:
as we l^tely obs^^^ved in this Chap. Sect. 20.

Ans. It suffices that the thing it self intimated, is sufficiently revealed
in the Scriptures, and confirmed by the examples of all those who have
acknowledged the truth of the word to the putting on a form of Godliness,
though they come not up to the power, or saving practice of it; and truly I
cannot but admit, that any one, who has had never so little experience in the
work of the Ministry, or made never so little observation of Religion, should
once suppose that all such persons, must needs be accounted true Believers
Regenerate etc.

Mr Goodwin shuts up this Chapter with a declaration concerning the
usefullnesse of cautions and admonitions given to believers, about backsliding,
upon a supposition of an infallible Promise of God for their Perseverance. I
presume the Reader ir weary as well as my self, and having in the last
Chapter, heard him out to the full, what he is able to say to this common place
of opposition to the Doctrine we have thus far asserted, and offered those
considerations of the ways of Gods dealing with Believers, to preserve them in
the course of their Obedience, and walking with him which I hope through the
mercy and goodness of God, may be satisfactory to them that shall weigh them,
I shall not burden him with the repetition of any thing already delivered, nor
do judge it needful for to add any thing more.

FINIS.
TYPOGRAPHUS LECTORI.
Courteous Reader.
SO it is, that (the Author being necessitated to be absent upon public
business) some Errata have escaped the Press, The most material are here
signified, and thy pardon desired. The request is not unusual, there scarce
being any Book or Pamphlet, from any Press, which is not guilty of such a
petition. In Peading (possibly) thou may find some more faults; and it is
desired and hoped, that the diligence and charity of thy hand, will heartily
correct those mistakes, which have escaped through the negligence of mine. Vale.

Errata in the Preface.
Page 1. lin. 18. lege (...). Math. 10. 22. %lin. 34. lib. 83. Quaest. Quaest.
31. lin 49. (...). page 2. lin. 5. Heresy. lin. 46. cap. 7. l. 47. preservata
perseverantia. l. 48. praeservare. l. 50. Justitiam. l. 58. preservation. l.
59. prevalency. page, 3. 1. 3. nolitionem. l. 4. volitionem. l. 7. Auxil. l. 15.
dele before him. l. 18. Corol. l. 22. distinguish. l. 24. dele (...) leg. viz.
104. l. 29. impeccability. p. 4. l. 50. Mons^e^t Duille l. 55. received. page
5. l. 23. (...). 1. 47. leg. 89. Epist. (...). 2. page 6. l. 2. nostra. l. 7.
quae pro vominum. l. 3^. Canonical. l. 52. (...). l. 43. Con page 17. l. 53.
us. p. 7. l. 3. Saturninus. l. 4. (...) l. 14. Adverseries. l. 18. evidently.
l: 23. (...). l: 24. (...) l: 28 (...) l: 29. (...). l: 38. iav. (...) 1. 2
dele that he wrote. l. 22. Agbarus. l. 31. process. ib. in Marg: Unicum. l:
39. And then he adds. l: 51. Grammati^^^^ p. 9. l: 10. Appar. 1.. 47. p: 19. l.
16. Genevatismum. l. 19. dele no. l: 33. I find. l: 34. Dissert: 2. c. 2.. 11.
l: 56. Quadrage. (...) editae. l: 27. (...). p. 10. l. 2. helped. l. 3. dele
them. p: 11. l. 25. (...). l. 2.(...). l. 3. (...). l. 14. Vienna and Lions.
(...) p. 12. l. 4. thoughts. l. 6. breaks. l: 10. (...) l: 11. (...). l. 13.
(...). l: 14. (...). l: 16. (...). l: 20. (...) (...) (...) (...) dele with. p:
13. l: 2. (...) l: 7. in one. l: 9 (...) (...) l. 24. Approbatione, is added,
as -- l: 25. Approbation. l: 29. recounteth l: 53. spiritu probantes. l: 27. is
(...) l: 9. Bishops Sea. l: 29. appointed. l: (...) the (...) Episcopal
superintendment. p. ^2. l: 38. Archiepiscopall. l: 46. Assertion. p. 24. l: 52.
(...) (...) And the, p. 39. l. 33. Perseve^^^^^ (...)

A Table of Seriptures Explained or Illustrated in this Book.
GENESIS.
Cap. Verse. Page II 24 196 III 10, 11 104 15 113 15 170 VI 5 344 VIII 2 220
XVII 1, 2 115 and 243 7 96 XX 16 30

EXODUS.
XXVIII 43 68

NUMBERS.
XXV 11, 12, 13 66

DEUTERONOMIE.
XVII 12, 13 110 XXXIII 12 30

JOSUAH.
l 5 12, and 129

1 SAMUEL.
XII 22 131 IV 2 and 22. 293

2 SAMUEL.
XXIII 5 97

2 KINGS.
XXII 19, 20 296

2 CRONICLES.
XXIX 19 344

JOB.
XXIII 13, 14 53

PSALMS.
Cap. Verse. Page XIX 6 30 XXIII 1, 2, 3 86 4, 6 135 XXX 6,7 21 XXXIII 9, 10, 11
51, 66 XL 8 38, 229 LI 11 190 22 201 LXXIII 26 135 LXXVIII 61 29 LXXXV 8 296
LXXXIX 30, 31, 37 131 XCII 10 204 CIII 5 204 CXV 3 49 CXXV the whole Psalm. 138.

PROVERBS.
XIX 21 51 XXIV 10 202

CANTICLES
IV 6 204

ISAIAH.
IV the whole Cap. 27etc. 2, 3, 4 131 XIII 3 10 XIV 24, 25, 26, 27 53 XXVII 3
133, 240 XL 27 ad 31 30etc. 11, 12 86 XLIII 22, 23, 24, 25 133 XLIV 1, 2, ad 8
38 XLVI 13 29 3, 4 33 9, 10, 11 50 4 135 XLIX 14.16 39 L 10 7 6 33 10 134 LIVE
8, 9 114 9, 10 120, 142 etc. LVII 17 133 LIX 20 172 2 174, 175 etc. LXI 10 28

JEREMIAH
Cap. verse. page XXX 1, 2 240 XXXI 3 ^6 ^ 119 31, 32, 33 98 34, 35 31 XXXII 38,
39, 40 31, 91

EZEKIEL.
X 10 29 XXXIV 4 86 XXXVI 27 189 32 133 XVIII 24, 25 403 etc.

DANIEL.
IX 24 161

HOSEA.
II 19, 20 24^ etc

JOEL
II 16 30

ZEPHANIAH.
III 17 133,134

ZECHARIAH.
III 3 35 XIII 3, 4 28

MALACHI.
III 6 32

MATTHEW.
V 6 209 VII 20 12 XI 25, 26, 27. 59, 86 XVIII 32, 33 416, 417 XIX 28 123, 157
XX 21 59 XXIV 11, 12 3 24 89 XXVI 42 52 XXVIII 8 89 XIII 20, 21 ^^^

LUKE.
I 74, 75 ^^ XI 13 ^^ XII 4, 5 ^^

JOHN.
I 13 33 III 16 113 6 ^27 5 358 IV 14 205 V 25 34 VI 37, 38, 39, 40 83 44, 45,
46 108 56 194 17, 18, 19 352 VII 38, 39 20^ VIII 28 104 X 25 212 27, 28, 29
154, 155 XIV 30 343 17 375 XV 5 25 4, 5 196, 204 26 173, 177, 178 1 237 XVII 16
84 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 297, 298 19 227 21, 22 195 19 431

ACTS.
II 23 57 IV 28 48 IX 15 287 XIII 48 76 XV 18 48 XX 16 92 XXV 26 34 XXVI 5 57
XXVII 22 123

ROM:
II 25, 26, 27 104 III 25, 26 2^ 23, 24 11^ IV 5 35 19, 20, 21 244 V 8 and 15,
16, 17 113 5 191 3 and 5 22 21 328 VI 6 172 5, 6 236 14 328 17, 18, 19 352 VII
17 and 20 21 21, 23 22 24 25 7, 8 326 19, 20 329 ^^ 330 ^ ^ ^ ^

1 CORINTHIANS
Cap. Verse. Page I 7, 9 198 9 125 30 116 II 11 52 15 213 28 113 III 6 193 16,
17 196 VI 9 7 16, 17 196 19 193 15 353 IX 27 256, 417 etc. X 12, 13 125, 289 XI
3 195 XII 12 195

2 CORINTHIANS
I 12 190 20 100, 114 22 183 III 17 214 18 198 IV 6 198 V 14 228, 237 17 329
VII 1 231

GALATIANS.
III 9 96 18,22 112, 114 28 113 IV 6 191 V 25, 26 204

EPHESIANS.
I 3, 4, 5 94 11 48 17* 18 198 II 12 35 12 115 14 116 21, 22 211 III 16, 17 205
16, 17, 18, 19 231 IV 12, 13 242 15, 16 196 18 34 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 228 31 334
V 18, 20 335 25, 26 28 31, 32 196

PHILIPPIANS
^ 7, ^ 83 (...) Cap. Verse. Page III 10 236

COLOSSIANS.
I 9 198 II 15 170 19 196, 350 III 3 35

HEBREWS.
I 10, 11, 12. 9. II 17 52 18 86 III 2 85 IV 15 86 2 244 VI 4 10 17, 18 52 4,
5, 6, 9 291 4, 5, 6, 7 421etc. VII 25 86 24 114 VIII 9, 10, 11, 12 99 6 115 X 5
29 9 83 9, 10 89 15 173 19, 20, 21, 22 230 and 233 26, 27 421 etc. XI 6 230 and
231 XIII 8 100 5 129

JAMES.
I 14, 15 325 16, 1, 18 33 II 11, 12 230

I. E^. PETER.
I 1^ 15 229 18, 19 172 20 57 II 11, 12 230

II. Ep. PETER.
I 4 145 194 II 1, 2 10, 11, 206 18, 19 172 IV 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 441

1 JOHN.
II 19 3 20, 27 199 19 388 III 7 7 8 171 9 4, 343 9 364 7 10 IV 4 332 18 298 V
7, 8 4 17, 18 366

REVELATIONS
I 6 116 II 24 213 ^^ 212 III ^^ 20^ (...)


