A BRIEF INSTRUCTION IN THE WORSHIP of GOD, AND DISCIPLINE OF THE CHURCHES OF
THE NEW TESTAMENT, BY WAY OF QUESTION AND ANSWER; With an EXPLICATION and
Confirmation of those Answers.

Printed, 1667.

A Short Catechism: with an Explication upon the same.
Q. 1. WHat does God require of us in our dependence on him, that he may be
glorified by us, and we accepted with him?

Answ. That we (a) Worship him (b) in and by the ways of his own appointment.
(a) Matthew. 4.10. Rev. 14.7. Deuteronomy. 6.13. chap. 10.20. ( b) Lev. 10.1, 2, 3.
Exodus 24.3. Genesis 18.19. Joshua 23.6, 8. Zach. 14.16.

Explication.
By the Worship of God inquired after, not that which is natural on moral,
which is required in the first Commandment is intended. Such is our faith and
confidence in him, our fear of him, our subjection of soul and conscience unto
him, as the great Sovereign Lord, first cause, last end, Judge and Rewarder of
all men; the Law whereof was originally written in the heart of Man, and has
been variously improved and directed by new Revelations and Institutions. And
this Worship is called natural, upon a double Account.

First, Because it depends on the nature of God, a due perception and
understanding whereof, makes all this Worship indispensibly necessary: for none
can know God, but it is his duty to glorify him as God, that is, to believe in
him, love him, trust him, and call upon him, which all are therefore cursed
that do not, Psalm 79.6. 2 These. 1.8.

And Secondly, Because it was in the principle of it concreated with the nature
of man, as that which suited, directed, and enabled him to answer the Law of
his Creation, requiring this obedience of him in his dependence on God. And
this Worship is invariable: but it concerns those outward ways and means
whereby God has appointed that faith, and love, and fear of him to be
exercised and expressed unto his glory. And this kind of Worship* though it
depend not upon the nature of God, but upon his free and arbitrary disposal,
and so was of old liable unto alterations; yet God did ever strictly require in
the several states and conditions that his Church has gone through in the
World. And this is that, which most commonly in the Scripture is called by the
name of the worship of God; as that whereby all the acceptable actings of the
souls of men toward him are expressed, and the only way of owning and
acknowledging him in the World, as also of entertaining a visible intercourse
with him. This therefore he calls for, and requires indispensibly of all that
draw nigh to him, and that because he is the Lord our God, Rev. 14.6, 7. Mat.
4.10. Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. For his observance hereof, does he so approve of
Abraham, Genesis 18.19. And sets it down as an everlasting Law unto all others,
that in a holy observation thereof, he will be sanctified in all that draw nigh
unto him, Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3. his commands also concerning it, are multiplied in
the Scripture, with the approbation of all those that attend unto them. We may
not think to find acceptance with God, or to inherit the promises, if supposing
our selves to adhere unto him in Worship internal and natural, we neglect
that which is external and of his free appointment: for besides, that we
renounce thereby our inward dependence on him also, in not observing his
commands, as Adam did in transgressing an Institution, we become wholly useless
unto all the ends of his Glory in the World, which is not the way to come to an
enjoyment of him. Neither, do we only express and profess our inward moral
natural worship of God hereby, by which means it becomes the principal way
and instrument of faith and trust exerting themselves in our obedience, but
also it is a most effectual help and assistance unto the principle of that
natural worship, strengthening the habit of it, and exciting it unto all
suitable actings, unto its increase and growth.

Qu. 2. By what means do we come to know that God will thus be worshipped?

Answ. That God is to be worshipped, and that according to his own will and
appointment, is a (a) principal branch of the Law of our creation, written in
our hearts; the (b) sense whereof is renewed in the second Commandment; but the
ways and means of that worship, depend merely on Gods (c) Sovereign pleasure
and Institution. (a) Romans 1.21. chap. 2.14, 15. Acts 15.16, 17. Acts 17.23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29. verses. (b) Exodus 20.4, 5, 6, ( c) Jer. 7.31. Exodus 25.40.
Heb. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. John 1.18.

Explication.
These two things all men see by nature.

First, That God, however they mistook in their apprehensions of him, would be
and was to be worshipped with some outward solemn worship. So that although
some are reported to have even cast off all knowledge and sense of a divine
being, yet never any were heard of, that came to an acknowledgement of any God,
true or false, but they all consented, that he was constantly and solemnly to
be worshipped. And that not only by individual Persons, but by Societies
together, that so they might own and honor him whom they took for their God.
And thus far outward worship is required in the first Commandment; namely, that
the inward be exercised and expressed. When we take God for our God, we take
him to worship him, Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. Other thoughts, namely of inward worship,
without outward expression at all, or any time, or in any way, are but a covert
unto Atheism. And,

Secondly, This also they are lead to an apprehension of, by the same light
whereby they are a Law unto themselves, Romans 2.14. that God would be worshipped
in the way, and by the means that he himself appointed and approved, whence
none among the Heathen themselves undertook to appoint ways and Ceromonies of
Worship, but still they pretended to derive the knowledge of them from the Gods
themselves, of whom they reckoned that every one would be worshipped in his own
way. And because notwitstanding this pretense, being left of God, and deluded
of Satan, they did invent false and foolish ways of worship, not only not
appointed of God, but such as were unsuited unto those inbred notions which
they had of his nature and excellencie^, the Apostle convinces and disproves
them, as men acting against the light of nature, and principles of reason, Romans
1.21. they might have seen, that, in their Idolatry they answered not their own
inbred conceptions of the Divine power and Godhead, so as to glorify him as
God. And in the like manner does he argue at large, Acts 17.23. but beyond
this, the inbred light of nature could not conduct any of the Sons of Men* This
alone is contained in the first Precept, that God was to be worshipped they
knew, and that he was to be worshipped by ways and means of his own
appointment they knew; but what those ways and means were, they knew not.
These always depended on Gods Sovereign will and pleasure, and he made them
known to whom he pleased, Psalm 147.19, 20. And although some of the ways
which he does appoint, may seem to have a great compliance in them unto the
light of nature, yet in his worship he accepts them not on that account; but
merely on that of his own institution; and this as he has declared his will
about in the second Commandment; so he has severely forbidden the addition of
our own inventions unto what he has appointed: sending us for instruction unto
him alone, whom he has endowed with Sovereign Authority to reveal his will,
and ordain his worship, John 1.18. Matthew. 17.5. 1 Chronicles. 16.13.

Qu. 3. How then are these ways and means of the worship of God made known
unto us?

Answ. In and by the written word only; which contains a full and perfect
Revelation of the will of God; as to his whole worship, and all the
concernments of it: John 5.39. Isa. 8.20. Luke 16.19. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. 1
Pet. 1.19. Deuteronomy. 4.2. chap. 12.32. Joshua 1.7. Prove. 30.6. Rev. 22.20. Isaiah
29.13.

Explication.
The End wherefore God granted his word unto the Church, was, that thereby it
might be instructed in his mind and will, as to what concerns the worship and
obedience that he requires of us, and which is accepted with him. This the
whole Scripture it self every where declares and speaks out unto all that do
receive it; as 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. with the residue of the testimonies above
recited do declare. It supposes, it declares, that of our selves we are
ignorant how God is, how he ought to be worshipped, Isa. 8.20. Moreover it
manifests him to be a jealous God, exercising that holy property of his nature
in an especial manner about his worship; rejecting and despising every thing
that is not according to his will, that is not of his Institution, Exodus 20.4,
5.

That we may know what is so, he has made a Revelation of his mind and will in
his written word, that is, the Scripture; and to the end that we might expect
instruction from thence alone in his worship, and act therein accordingly.

First, he sends us and directs us thereunto, expressly for that purpose, Isa.
8.28. Luke 16.19. John 5.39. and not once intimates in the least, any other way
or means of instruction unto the end.

Secondly, He frequently affirms, that it is sufficient, able, and perfect to
guide us therein, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. 1 Pet. 1.19. Psalm 19.7, 8, 9. and
whereas he has expressly given it unto us for that end, if there be any want or
defect therein, it must arise from hence, that either God would not, or could
not give unto us a perfect Revelation of his will; neither of which can be
imagined.

Thirdly, He has commanded us to observe all whatsoever he has appointed
therein, and not to make any addition thereunto, Joshua 1.7. Deuteronomy. 4.2. chap.
12.32. Prove. 30.6. Revel. 22.20. And,

Fourthly, Peculiarly interdicted us the use of any such things, as are of the
institution or appointment of Men, Isa. 29.13, 14. So that from the Scriptures
alone, are we to learn what is accepted with God in his worship.

Qu. 4. Have these ways and means been always the same from the beginning?

Answ. No! But God has altered and changed them at sundry reasons, according
to the counsel of his own will, so as he saw necessary for his own Glory, and
the Edification of his Church. See Genesis 2.16, 17. Genesis 17.10, 11. Exodus 12.3,
4, 5. Exodus 20. Chap. 25.9. Heb. 1.1. Heb. 9.10, 11, 12.

Explication.
The external worship whereof we speak, being as was showed before, not
natural or moral, arising necessarily from the dependence of the rational
creature on God, as its first Cause, chiefest Good, last End, and Sovereign
Lord, but proceeding from the mere will and pleasure of God, determining how he
will be honored and glorified in the world, was always alterable by him, by
whom it was appointed. And whereas ever since the entrance of sin into the
World, God had always respect unto the promise of the Lord Christ, and his
mediation, in whom alone he will be glorified, and faith in whom he aimed to
begin and increase in all his worship, he has suited his Institutions of the
means thereof, to that dispensation of Light and knowledge of him, which he was
pleased at any time to grant. Thus immediately after the giving of the promise,
he appointed sacrifices for the great means of his worship; as to glorify
himself expressly by Men's off ring unto him of the principal good things which
he had given them, so to instruct them in the faith, and confirm them in the
expectation of the great sacrifice for sin that was to be offered by the
promised seed, Genesis 4.3, 4. Heb. 11.4. These were the first instituted worship
of God in the World after the entrance of sin. Hereunto he nextly added
Circumcision, as an express sign of the Covenant, with the grace of it, which
he called Abraham and his seed unto by Jesus Christ, Genesis 17.10, 11. And to the
same general end and purpose, he afterward superadded the Passover with its
attendant institutions, Exodus 12.23, 24. And then the whole Law of institutions
contained in Ordinances, by the Ministry of Angels on Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. So
by sundry degrees, he built up that fabric of his outward worship, which was
suited in his infinite wisdom, unto his own glory, and the edification of his
Church, until the exhibition of the promised seed, or the coming of Christ in
the flesh, and the accomplishment of the work of his mediation, Heb. 1.1. for
unto that season were those Ordinances to serve, and no longer, Heb. 9.10, 11,
12. And then were they removed by the same authority whereby they were
instituted and appointed, Col. 2.14, 18, 19, 20. So that though God would never
allow, that Men, upon what pretense soever should make any alteration in the
worship appointed by him* by adding unto it, any thing of their own, or
omitting ought that he had commanded, either in matter or manner,
notwithstanding that he knew that it was to abide but for a season, but
commanded all men straightly to attend to the observation of it whilst it was by
him continued in force, Mal. 4.4. yet he always reserved unto himself the
Sovereign power of altering, changing, or utterly abolishing it at his own
pleasure: which authority he exerted in the Gospel as to all the mere
Institutions of the Old Testament. Whilst they continued, he enforced them
with moral reasons, as his own holiness and Authority; but those reasons prove
not any of those institutions to be moral, unless they ensue upon those
reasons alone, and are no where else commanded: for being once instituted and
commanded, they are to be enforced with moral considerations, taken from the
nature of God, and our Duty, in reference unto his Authority. So, says he,
Thou shall reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord, which no more proves that a
moral Duty, then that enjoined upon the same foundation, Levit. 11.44. I am
the Lord your God, ye shall therefore sanctify your selves, and ye shall be
holy, for I am holy, neither shall ye defile your selves with any manner of
creeping thing that creeps upon the earth. Not defiling our selves with the
touching, or eating of creeping things, is now no moral Duty, since the
institution is ceased, although it be enforced by many moral considerations.

Qu. 5. Is there any farther alteration to be expected in, or of those
institutions and ordinances of worship, which are revealed and appointed in the
Gospel?

Answ. No! The last complete Revelation of the will of God being made by the
Son, who is Lord of all, his Commands and Institutions are to be observed
inviolably unto the end of the World, without alteration, diminution, or
addition, Heb. 1.1. chap. 10.25, 26, 27. Matthew. 28.20. 1 Cor. 11.26. 1 Timothy 6
14.

Explication.
It was showed before, that all the Institutions of the Old Testament had
respect unto the coming of Christ in the flesh, who was the end of the Law,
Romans 10.4. and thereupon they were subject to alteration or abolition upon a
twofold account.

First, Because that which they were appointed principally to instruct the
Church in, and to direct it unto the expectation of, was upon his coming
accomplished and fulfilled, so that their end was absolutely taken away; and
they could no more truly teach the mind and will of God: for they would still
direct unto that which was to come, after it was past and accomplished. And
this is that which the Apostle Paul so variously proves, and fully confirms in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, especially in the 7, 8, 9. and 10. Chapters.

Secondly, The Lord Christ during their continuance, was to come as the Lord
over his whole house, with more full and ample authority, then any of those,
whom God had employed in the institution of his Ordinances of old, were
entrusted withal, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. He spoke in former days by the Prophets,
but now by the Son, whom he has appointed heir of all, Chap. 3.5, 6. Christ as
a Son over his own house, whose house are we. And therefore they are all to be
at his disposal, to confirm or remove, as he saw reason and occasion. And this
he did virtually in the sacrifice of himself, or the blood of his Cross,
fulfilling and finishing of them all, John 19.30. Breaking down the middle wall
of partition, abolishing in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances, blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances, he took
it out of the way, nayling it to his Cross, Ephesians. 2.15. Colos. 2.14.

Secondly, Authoritatively, by his Spirit in the Apostles, and the doctrine of
the Gospel preached by them, Acts 15.10, 11. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to
put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither our Fathers nor we
were able to bear, but we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ we shall be saved, even as they, Gal. 3.24, 25. Wherefore the Law was
our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith;
but after that faith is come, we are no longer render a Schoolmaster, Chap.
5.2, 3, 4. and eventually or providentially, when he caused sacrifice and
offering to cease, by the Prince of the people, that came with an Army making
desolate, to destroy both City and Sanctuary, Dan. 9.26, 27. according to his
prediction, Mat. 24.2. But now under the New Testament, the worship that is
appointed in the Gospel, is founded in, and built upon what is already past and
accomplished, namely the death and life of Jesus Christ with the sacrifice and
atonement for sin made thereby, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26. which can never be
again performed; neither is there any thing else to the same purpose, either
needful or possible, Heb. 10.26. So that there is not any ground left for any
new institution of worship, or any alteration in those that are already
instituted. Nor,

Secondly, Can any one be expected to come from God with a greater and more
full authority for the Revelation of his mind, than that wherewith his only Son
was accompanied; which yet must be, if any alterations were to be made in the
appointments of worship that he has instituted in the Gospel.

For no Inferior, nor an equal authority, can abolish or alter that which is
already appointed, so as to give satisfaction unto the consciences of men in
obedience unto such alterations. And therefore because there arose not a
Prophet like unto Moses under the Old Testament, there could be no alteration
made in his institutions, but the Church was bound severely to observe them all
until the coming of Christ, Mal. 4.4. Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant,
which I commanded unto him in Horeb, for all Israel with his Statutes and
Judgments; and that because there arose not a Prophet afterward in Israel
like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face, Deuteronomy. 34.10. And our Apostle
to prove the right of Christ to alter the Ordinances of the Law, lays his
foundation in manifesting that he was above the Angels, Heb. 1.4. being made so
much better than the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more
excellent name than they, and that because the Law was given by the Ministry
of Angels, chap. 2.2. and so also that he was greater than Moses, chap. 3.3.
For this man was accounted worthy of more glory than Moses, in as much as he
who has builded the house, has more honor than the house; Moses verily was
faithful in all his house, as a servant, but Christ as a Son over his own
house: Because Moses was the Lawgiver, and the Mediator between God and Man in
the giving of the Law. Now if this be the sole foundation and warrant of the
alteration made of Mosaical Ordinances by Christ, namely that he was greater
and exalted above all those whose Ministry was used in the dispensation of the
Law, unless some can be thought to be greater, and exalted in authority above
the Son of God, there can be no alteration expected in the Institutions of the
Gospel.

Qu. 6. May not such an Estate of faith and perfection in obedience be attained
in this life, as wherein Believers may be freed from all obligation unto the
observation of Gospel Institutions?

Answ. No! For the Ordinances and Institutions of the Gospel being inseparably
annexed unto the Evangelical administration of the Covenant of Grace, they may
not be left unobserved, disused, or omitted, whilst we are to walk before God
in that Covenant, without contempt of the Covenant it self, as also of the
Wisdom and Authority of Jesus Christ. Heb. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6.
Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Heb. 10.25. Rev. 2.5. chap. 3.3.

Explication.
All our faith, all our obedience in this life, what ever may be obtained, or
attained unto therein, it all belongs unto our walking with God in the Covenant
of Grace, wherein God dwells with Men, and they are his people, and God himself
is with them to be their God. Other ways of communion with him, of obedience
unto him, of enjoyment of him on this side Heaven and Glory, he has not
appointed nor revealed. Now this is the Covenant that God has made with his
people; That he will put his Laws into their mind, and write them in their
hearts, and will be to them a God, and they shall be to him a people, and he
will be merciful to their unrighteousness and their sins and their iniquities
will he remember no more, Heb. 8.9, 10, 11, 12. And what ever Men attain unto,
it is by virtue of the grace of that Covenant, nor is there any Grace promised
in the Covenant to lead men in this life, or to give them up unto a state of
perfection short of glory. Unto this Covenant, are the institutions of Gospel
Worship annexed, and unto that administration of it which is granted unto the
Church upon the coming and death of Christ. Without a renunciation and
relinquishment of that Covenant, and the grace of it, these institutions cannot
be omitted or deserted. If Men suppose that they have attained to an estate
wherein they need neither the grace of God, nor the mercy of God, nor the blood
of Christ, nor the Spirit of Christ, it is not much material^, what they think
of the Ordinances of worship. Their pride and folly, without that mercy which
is taught, promised and exhibited in those Ordinances, will speedily be their
ruin. Besides, the Lord Christ is the absolute Lord over his own house, Heb.
3.4, 5, 6. And he has given out the Laws whereby he will have it guided and
ruled whilst it is in this World. In and by these Laws, are his Ordinances of
Worship established: for any persons on what pretense soever, to plead an
exemption from the obligation of those Laws, it is nothing but to cast of the
Lordship and dominion of Christ himself. And yet farther, to secure our
obedience in this matter, he has expressly commanded the continuance of them
until his comeing unto Judgment, as in the places above quoted will appear.

Qu. 7. What are the chief things that we ought to aim at in our observation of
the institutions of Christ in the Gospel?

Answ. 1. To sanctify the name of God. 2. To own and avow our professed
subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ. 3. To build up our selves in our most holy
faith. And 4. To testify and confirm our mutual love, as we are Believers..
(1.) Levit. 10.3. Heb. 12.28, 29. (2.) Deuteronomy. 26.17. Josh. 24.22. 2 Cor. 8, 5.
(3.) Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Jude 20. (4.) 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.

Explication.
That we may profitably and comfortably, unto the glory of God, and our own
edification, be exercised in the observation of the Institutions and Worship of
God, we are always to consider what are the ends for which God has appointed
them, and commanded our attendance unto them, that so our observance of them
may be the obedience of faith. For what ends soever God has appointed them
unto, for that end are they useful and effectual, and to no other. If we come
to them for any other end, if we use them for any other purpose, or with any
other design, if we look for any thing in them or by them, but what God has
appointed them to communicate unto us, we dishonor God, and deceive our own
souls. This we ought diligently to enquire into, to know not only what God
requires of us, but wherefore also he requires it, and what he aims at therein.
Some of the principal things whereof are enumerated in this Answer. And it is
well known how horribly many of the institutions of the Gospel, have been by
some, especially the Papists, abused, by a neglect of the ends of God in them,
and imposing new ends of their own upon them unto Superstition and Idolatry.
Grace is ascribed unto the outward observance of them, whereas all Grace is of
the promise, and the promise in the Covenant is given only to the faith of the
right observers. The elements in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, are turned
into a God, first worshipped, and then devoured, with many the like
abominations.

Qu. 8. How many we sanctify the name of God in the use of Gospel
Institutions?

Answ. 1. By an holy reverence of his Sovereign Authority appointing of them.
2. An holy regard unto his special presence in them. 3. Faith in his promises
annexed to them. 4. Delight in his Will, Wisdom, Love and Grace manifested in
them. 5. Constancy and perseverance in obedience unto him in their due
Observation. (1.) Levit. 10.3. Mal. 1.6. Romans 4.11. Exodus 20.6, 7. James 4.12.
(2.) Mat. 28.20. Isaiah 59.21. Exodus 29.43, 44, 45. (3.) Genesis 15.6. Heb. 4.2.6.
Exodus 12.27, 28. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. chap. 7.1. (4.) Psalm. 88.1, 2, 4, 10.
Psalm. 65.4. Psalm. 36.7, 8. (5.) Psalm. 23.6. Psalm. 27.4. Rev. 2.3, 10. G^l.
6.9. Heb. 10.23, 24, 25. Heb. 12.3.

Explication.
This is the first thing that God requires us to attend unto, in the
celebration of the Ordinances of his worship; namely, that we therein sanctify
his name, the greatest duty that we are called unto in this world. This he
lays down as the general rule of all we do herein Levit. 10.3. I will, says
he, be sanctified in them that come nigh unto me, and before all the people I
will be glorified. Whatever we do in his worship, we must do it that he may be
sanctified, or whatever we do is an abomination to him. Now the principal
ways how we may herein sanctify the name of God are expressed. As,

First, When in every Ordinance, we consider his appointment of it, and submit
our souls and consciences unto his authority therein which if we observe any
thing in his worship but what he has appointed, we cannot do it. Not
formality, not custom, not the precepts of Men, not any thing but the
authority and command of God, is to be respected in this obedience. This is the
First thing that Faith regards in Divine Worship; it rests not in any thing,
closes nor with any thing, but what It discerns that God has commanded, and
therein it eyes his Authority as he requires it, Mal. 1.6. If I be a Father,
where is mine honor? if I be Master, where is my fear? Romans 14.11. As I live,
says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to
God. Reverence then unto the authority of God appointing his worship, is a
principal means of sanctifying the name of God therein. This was the solemn
sanction of all his institutions of old, Deuteronomy. 6.4* 5, 6, 7. Hear O Israel, the
Lord our God is one Lord, and thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might; and these words which I
command thee this Day, shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy children. And the observation of them he presses on this
account, that the people might fear that glorious and dreadful name, the Lord
thy God, Deuteronomy. 28.58. which name he had so often engaged in his commands,
saying thou shall do it, I am the Lord. And in the New Testament, our Lord
Jesus Christ proposes his authority as the foundation of his commanding, and
our observation of all the institutions of the Gospel, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
Jesus came and spoke unto them saying, all power is given me in heaven and
earth, go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you. And he is to be considered in all our
obedience, as the great and only Lawgiver of his Church, as the one Lawgiver
who is able to save and to destroy, James 4.12. the Sovereign Lord over his
house, Heb. 3.4, 5, 6. unto whom every knee is to bow, and every conscience to
be in subjection; and he who hears not his voice, is to be cut off from the
people of God, Acts 3.23. It shall come to pass, that every soul which will not
hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.

Secondly, God has frequently promised his special presence in and with his
instituted Ordinances. Of old both unto the things themselves, and the places
wherein they were according to his appointment to be celebrated; those of
places, being also of his special institution. Under the New Testament, all
difference of, and respect unto place is taken away, John 4.21. The hour
comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship
the Father, but the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeks such to
worship him. And we are commanded in all places equally to make our prayers and
supplications: but his presence is promised and continued with the due
celebration of the things themselves by him appointed for his service, Man.
28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and
lo I am with you even to the end of the world: In them is the Tabernacle of
God with men, and he dwells among them, and they are his people, Rev. 21.3. the
promise of Christ being, that where two or three are assembled in his name,
there he will be in midst of them, Mat. 8.18, 20. And this promised presence of
God, or Christ, consists, 1. In the power and efficacy which he by his Spirit
implants upon his Ordinances to communicate his Grace and mercy unto his
Church; it being his Covenant, that his Spirit shall accompany his word for
ever unto that purpose, Isa. 59.21. 2. In the special blessing which he gives
his people in those duties, both in the acceptance of them and testifying his
good will unto them. Exodus 29.42, 43, 45. At the Tabernacle of the Congregation
will I meet with the People, says the Lord, there will I meet with the
children of Israel. And the Tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory, and I
will dwell amongst the children of Israel, and will be their God, Zech. 2.10,
11. Ezekiel. 20.40, 41. I will accept you with your sweet savor, Ezekiel. 43.27. in
both giving them intimate communion with himself by Jesus Christ, John 1.3. By
all these, he gives that special presence which he requires an especial
reverence and regard of faith unto, whereby his name is yet farther sanctified.
3. God has given special promises, or promises of his special grace unto them
that attend upon him in his worship in a due manner, and hereunto also belongs
that sacred Relation, which by virtue of divine institution* is between the
sacramental elements, and the especial Graces of the Covenant which they
exhibit and confirm; and the mixing of these promises with faith, according as
they are appropriated unto any particular institution, belongs also to the
right sanctification of the name of God. So also, 4. does our delight in them:
now this delight in the worship of God so much commended in the Scripture* and
proposed unto our example, consists not in any carnal self-pleasing, or
satisfaction in the outward modes or manner of the performance of Divine
Worship, but it is an holy soul-refreshing contemplation on the will Wisdom,
Grace and Condescension of God; in that he is pleased of his own Sovereign mere
will and grace, so to manifest himself unto such poor sinful creatures as we
are; so to condescend unto out weakness, so to communicate himself unto us, so
to excite and draw forth our souls unto himself, and to give us such pledges of
his gracious intercourse with us by Jesus Christ: by the contemplation of these
things is the soul drawn forth to delight in God.

Lastly, Whereas great opposition lies oftentimes against the Churches
obedience unto God in this matter, and much persecution befalls it on that
account, great weariness also being apt from the remainders of unbelief,
carnal wisdom, indwelling sin, weakness of the flesh, in Believers themselves
to arise in the course thereof, and many temptations also beset them on every
hand, to turn them aside from the way of truth and holiness, constancy and
perseverance in the due and orderly celebration of all the Ordinances of the
Gospel belongs unto this duty. And this perseverance respects both the things
themselves, and the manner of their performance, both which are of the highest
concernment for us diligently to attend unto.

First, As to the things themselves; herein do we principally glorify God, and
give due honor unto Jesus Christ, when we abide in our professed subjection
unto him, and observance of his commands, against difficulties, oppositions and
persecutions. This he takes notice of, Rev. 2.13. Thou hold fast my name,
and have not denied my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my
faithful Martyr, who was slain among you where Satan dwells. And this he
requires of us indispensably if we will be his Disciples, or ever hope to
obtain the reward, Mat. 10.38, 39. He that takes not his Cross, and follows
after me, is not worthy of me; and it is he who endures unto the end, that
shall be saved, Matthew. 24.13. And unto them who are faithful unto the death,
and them alone does he give the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. giving us caution not
to lose those things which we have wrought, that we may receive a full reward,
2 John 8. And as to the manner of their performance, two things are to be
regarded in this duty of perseverance, and the sanctification of the name of
God therein.

First, The inward principle of our obedience, our faith and love which are to
be preserved from decay, Rev* 2. 4, 5. I have somewhat against thee, because
thou have left thy first love; remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent, and do thy first works, Chap. 3.3. Remember how thou have received,
and heard, and hold fast and repent.

Secondly, The outward manner of observance which is to be kept entire,
according to the primitive institution of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.23. I have received
of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto you, not admitting of any
corruptions in it to avoid the greatest trouble, Gal. 5.11. And I Brethren, if
I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer Persecution?

Qu. 9. How do we in our Observation, profess our subjection unto the Lord
Jesus Christ and his Gospel?

Answ. In that being all of them 1. Appointed by him as the head Lawgiver,
King of his Church. And 2. Made by him the ensigns and tokens of his Kingdom,
and Subjects, in their due observation principally consists that profession of
him, and his name, which be so often calls us unto, and so indispensably
requires at our hands, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.23. Heb. 3.6. Heb. 12.25.
John 8.31. Chap. 13.13. Chap. 14.15, 21, 23. Chap. 15. 14, 17. Chap. 13.35.
Chap. 15.14. Luke 9.26. Romans 10.10. 1 John 2.3, 4.

Explication.
The ground and reason of this Duty is evident. The Lord Jesus Christ
straightly enjoins all his Disciples the profession of his name, and lays it
on them as indispensable unto Salvation, Romans 10.10, With the heart man
believes unto righteousness, with the mouth confession, or profession, is made
unto salvation, John 12.42, 43, 44, 45. Now this profession of the name of
Christ, which is so much abused and mistaken in the World, consists in the
keeping of his commandments, John 15.14. ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever
I command you: So also Mat. 28.20. his Disciples are to be taught to do, and
observe, whatever he commands. Now whereas he is the head and King of the
Church, the next immediate and special Lawgiver of it appointing unto it all
his Ordinances, and its whole worship, as it becomes him who is Lord of the
house, the institutions of the Gospel worship are his most especial commands:
And in their observation, consists that profession of him which he requires of
us; Therein does he call them out of the world by profession, whom he has
redeemed out of it by his blood, 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17. Rev. 5.9. in these he
exercises his Kingly, or Lordly power over his Church. Heb. 3.6. and in the
willing obedience of his people, gathering themselves unto the Ensigns of his
Rule, he is glorified in the World.

Qu. 10. How do we in and by them build up our selves in our most holy faith?

Answ. By the exercise of that communion with God in Christ Jesus, which in
their due Observation he graciously invites and admits us unto, for the
increase of his grace in us, and the testification of his love and good will
toward us. Genesis 17.10. Levit. 26.11, 12. Prove. 9.5, 6. Ezekiel. 26.27, 28. Zach.
14.16, 17. Mat. 26.27, 28. Romans 6.3.

Explication.
The next and principal ends of all instituted worship in respect of
Believers, are the increase of the Grace of God in them, their edification in
their most holy faith, and the testification of the good will of God unto them,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ,
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ; that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive, but speaking the truth in love,
may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ, from whom
the whole body fitly joined together and compacted, by that which every joint
supplyeth according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love. Whence also
is that prayer of the Apostle for the blessing of God upon the Church, in the
use of them, Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18. That he will grant you according to the
riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inward
man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, the length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God:
For these ends, and with a design to have them accomplished, in and upon their
souls, ought they to attend unto them. James 1.21. Receive with meekness the
ingrafted word of God, which is able to save your souls, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new
born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby. Unto
the effecting of these ends, especially the increase and establishment of our
faith, are they sui^ed and appointed of God, whereon all their efficacy does
depend. In their due observation, does God give out that supply of Grace which
he has promised, Ephesians. 1.16, 17, 18, 19. and thus also is faith exercised, in
an especial manner, which i^ the only ordinary means of its growth and
increase. Habits both acquired, and infused, are increased and strengthened by
frequent acts on suitable objects, Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know, if we follow
on to know the Lord. In the celebration of Gospel Ordinances, God in Christ
proposes himself in an intimate manner to the believing soul, as his God, and
reward; and his love in Christ, in an especial manner in some Ordinances. So
does Christ also exhibit himself thereunto, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the
door, and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to
him, and will supp with him, and he with me. Faith therefore directed by the
word to rest in God, to receive the Lord Christ in the observation of his
Ordinances, is excited, increased, strengthened, and that in answer unto the
appointment and promises of God.

Qu. 11. How are mutual love and communion among Believers testified and
confirmed in their Observation?

Answ. In that they are appointed by the Lord Christ for that end, and in their
own nature as attended unto in their Assemblies, are in an especial manner
suited unto that purpose. John 13.35. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. 1 Cor. 11.18, 19.
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.

Explication.
The principles of mutual, spiritual love among Believers, arise from their
relation unto one Father, Matthew. 23.9. One is your Father which is in Heaven:
who gives unto all them that believe in Christ, Power to become the sons of
God, John 1.12. And their being all Children of the same Family; that family in
Heaven and Earth which is called after the name of God the Father of it, as the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.14, 15. and unto Christ Jesus as
their elder Brother, who is not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2.11. being
by him born of God; and from their participation of one and the self same
Spirit, which dwells in them, as they are the Temple of God, and the Spirit
of God dwells in them, 1 Cor. 3.16. as also in all the fruits of that one
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and in that one faith and hope whereunto they
are called; Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace, there is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. And that love which is
not built on these principles and foundations, is not Evangelical, whatever
other ground it may have, or occasion it may pretend unto. Communion of Saints
consists in their mutual love duly exercised according to rule; and all
communion is an effect of Union. In Union therefore must lie the springs of
love: and this consists in a joint incorporation of Believers into Christ; for
as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of that one body
being many are one body, so also is Christ; for by one Spirit we are all
baptized into one body; and this they have by the means before mentioned,
namely their adoption, faith, and inhabitation of the Spirit. Now in the joint
celebration of the Ordinances of Gods worship, they altogether make profession
of these principles, and act that one faith, hope, and love jointly, whereof
they are made partakers, and thereby grow up more and more into the head by
that which every joint supplieth, Ephesians. 4.16. and some of them are peculiarly
designed by the Lord Christ, for the testification of their love, and union
among themselves, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. the cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not
the communion of the body of Christ? as we being many are one bread, and one
body, for we are all partakers of that one bread.

Qu. 12. What is principally to be attended unto by us in the manner of the
celebration of the worship of God, and observation of the institutions and
Ordinances of the Gospel?

Answ. That we observe and do all whatsoever the Lord Christ has commanded us
to observe, in the way that he has prescribed; and that we add nothing unto,
or in the observation of them, that is of man's invention or appointment. Deuteronomy.
4.2. chap. 12.32. Jer. 7.27. Man. 15.9, 13. Mat. 17.5. Coloss. 2.3. Mat. 28.20.
Heb. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 11.23. Rev. 22.18. 1 Chronicles. 16.13. Isa. 29.13.

Explication.
This was in part spoken to before on the third Question, where it was showed
that the Scripture is the only way and means, whereby God has revealed what
that worship is, which he will accept in and of the Church. Here, moreover, as
to the duty of the Church in this matter, three things are asserted.

First, That we are to observe and do all whatsoever the Lord Christ has
commanded us to observe. This lies plain in the command, Mat. 28.20. Teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And we are directed
unto it in the injunction given us from Heaven, to hear, that is obey him in
all things, Mat. 17.5. he being the Prophet to whose teachings and
instructions, we owe obedience on pain of extermination from among the people
of God, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Act. 3.22, 23. Whatever he has appointed, commanded,
revealed as the will of God to be observed in or about the worship of God, that
is to be kept and observed by the Church inviolably. For if we are his Friends
and Disciples, we will keep his commandments. No disuse of what continuance
soever, can discharge us from the observation of institutions. After the Feast
of Tabernacles had been disused from the times of Joshua, unto the return from
the captivity, the restoration of it was required of God and accepted with him,
Neh. 8.17. No abuse of how high a nature soever can absolve us from obedience
unto an institution, 1 Cor. 18.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. After the great abuse of the
Lords Supper in that Church, the Apostle recalls them again unto the
observation of it, according to the institution of Christ. And after the
defilement of all the Ordinances of the Gospel, under the Antichristian
apostasy, yet the Temple and the Altar are to be measured again, Rev. 11.1. and
the Tabernacle of God was again to be raised amongst men. Rev. 21.3. No
opposition, no persecution, can give the Church a dispensation wholly to omit,
and lay aside the use of any thing that the Lord Christ has commanded to be
observed in the worship of God, whilst we are under the obligation of that
great rule, Acts 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto
you more than unto God, judge ye. It is true in the observation of positive
institutions, we may have regard unto rules and prescriptions of prudence, as
to times, places, and seasons; that by no inadvertency or miscarriage of ours,
or advantage taken by the adversaries of the truth, the edification of the
Church be hindered. So the Disciples met with the doors shut for fear of the
Jews, John 20.19. and Paul met with the Disciples in the night, in an upper
chamber, for the celebration of all the Ordinances of the Church, Acts 20.7, 8.
yet as to the obligation unto their observation, it indispensably binds us, and
that always, and that as to all the institutions of Christ whatever, Heb.
10.25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together as the manner of
some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as you see the day
approaching. To dispense with Christ's commands practically is unlawful; much
more doctrinally; most of all authoritatively as the Pope takes on himself to
do. This then is the Churches duty, to search out all the commands of Christ
recorded in the Gospel, and to yield obedience unto them. We are not in this
matter, to take up merely with what we find in practice amongst others, no,
though they be men good or holy. The duty of the Church, and consequently of
every member of it in his place and station, is to search the Scriptures, to
inquire into the mind of Christ, and to find out whatever is appointed by him,
or required of his Disciples; and that with hearts and minds prepared unto a
due observation of whatever shall be discovered to be his will.

Secondly, Whatever belongs unto the worship of God in the way or manner
whereby any of the Ordinances of Christ is to be performed, comes also under
the command of Christ which is duly to be attended unto, and observed. Indeed
whatever is of this nature appoin^ed by Christ, it does therefore belong to the
worship of God. And what is not so appointed, neither does, nor can be any part
thereof. Of this nature are the celebration of all other Ordinances with
prayer; for every thing is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, 1 Timothy
4.5. of some of them indispensably in the assemblies of the Church, 1 Cor.
10.16, 17. Chap. 11.20, 24, 25, 33. With care, in the observation of the
general rules of love, modesty, condescension and prudence, doing all things
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 11.33. Chap. 14.40. Gestures in some sacred
actions, Mat. 26.20, 26. John 13.23. All which the Church is diligently to
inquire into, as things that belong to the pattern of the house of God, the
goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, the forms thereof, and the
Ordinances thereof, with the Laws thereof, promised to be showed unto it, Ezekiel.
43.11. to attend carefully to their observation is its duty, being left at
liberty as to all other circumstances which no authority of man can give any
real relation to the worship of God unto. Therein lies the exercise of that
Spirit of wisdom, and revelation in the knowledge of the mystery of the
Gospel, which is given unto the Church, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. It was the wisdom of
the ancient Church to do and observe all that God appointed in the way and
manner that he had prescribed for their observance, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6. Behold I have
taught you statutes and judgments even as the Lord my God commanded me; keep
therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom and understanding. And herein is
the command of Christ kept inviolate and unblameable. The persuasion of some,
that the Lord has not prescribed all things wherein his worship is concerned,
seems to proceed from a negligence in inquiring after what he has so
prescribed: and when once that persuasion is entertained, all farther inquiry
is superseded, and despised. For to what end should any one seek after that
which he is satisfied cannot be found? as that which is not cannot be. But this
mistake will be elsewhere more fully discovered.

Thirdly, A principal part of the duty of the Church in this matter is, to take
care that nothing be admitted or practiced in the Worship of God, or as
belonging thereunto, which is not instituted and appointed by the Lord Christ.
In its care, faithfulness and watchfulness herein, consists the principal part
of its loyalty unto the Lord Jesus as the Head, King and Lawgiver of his
Church; and which to stir us up unto, he has left so many severe interdictions
and prohibitions in his word against all additions to his commands upon any
pretense whatever; of which afterward.

Qu. 13. Are not some Institutions of the New Testament ceased, as unto any
obligation unto their observation, and therefore now rightly disused?

Answ. (1.) Some Symbolical tokens of moral duties occasionally used, only for
present instruction in those duties, are mentioned in the Gospel, without any
intention to oblige Believers unto the formal constant use or repetition of
them. And (2.) Some temporary appointments relating unto gifts in the Church,
bestowed only for a season in the first plantation of the Gospel are ceased;
but (3.) No institution or command of Christ, given unto the whole Church,
relating unto the Evangelical administration of the New Covenant, for the use
and benefit of all Believers, does or shall cease to the end of the World, nor
can be wholly omitted without a violation of the authority of Jesus Christ
himself, John 13.12, 13, 14, 15. Romans 16.16. 1 Cor. 16.20. 1 Timothy 5.10. Mark
6.13. Jam. 5.14. Matthew. 28.20. 1 Timothy 6.14. 1 Cor. 11.16.

Explication.
Mention is made in the Scriptures of sundry things practiced by the Lord
Christ and his Apostles, which being then in common use amongst men, were
occasionally made by them Symbolical instructions in moral duties. Such were
washing of feet by one another, the holy kiss, and the like; but there being no
more in them, but a sanct^fied use directed unto the present civil customs and
usages, the commands given concerning them, respect not the outward action, nor
appointed any continuance of them, being peculiarly suited unto the state of
things and Persons in those Countries; as John 13.12, 13, 14, 15. After he had
washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said
unto them, know ye what I have done to ye, ye call me Master and Lord, and ye
say well, for so I am; if I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye
also ought to wash one another feet, for I have given you an example that ye
should do as I have done to you. It Is evident that it is the moral duty of
brotherly love, in condescension, and mutual helpfulness to be expressed in all
necessary offices as occasion does require, that is the thing which Jesus
Christ here enjoyneth his Disciples, and leads them to by his own example in an
office of love then in use in those parts. The same is to be said of the holy
kiss, Romans 16.16. which was a temporary occasional token of entire love; which
may in answer thereunto, be expressed by any sober usage of salutation amongst
men to the same purpose. But the things themselves were not instituted for any
continuance, nor do represent any special grace of the New Covenant, which is
inseparable from every institution of Gospel worship properly so called. Common
usages or practices therefore, directed to be used in a due manner, and unto a
proper end, where they are used, make them not institutions of worship. Neither
have they in them as so commanded or directed, any one thing that concurs to
the constitution of a Gospel-Ordinance: for neither had they their rise in the
authority of Christ, nor is any continuance of them enjoined, nor any promise
annexed unto them, nor any grace of the New Covenant represented or exhibited
in them.

Besides, there were in the first Churches continued for a while certain
extraordinary gifts, that had their effects visibly on the outward senses of
men, and tended not immediately unto the edification of the Church in their
faith, but unto the conviction of others, and vindication of the authority of
them by whom the Gospel was Preached and propagated. Such was that gift of
healing the sick, which being an especial effect of the Holy Ghost for the
advantage of the Church in those days, in some places it was accompanied by
anointing with Oil; but this being no universal practice, and used only in the
exercise of a gift extraordinary, whose use and being are long since ceased, it
never was appointed nor intended to be of continuance in the Church, which is
not tied by the Lord Christ to the empty signs and shadows of things whose
substance is not enjoyed: besides, no spiritual grace of the Covenant was ever
intimated, sealed, or exhibited by that usage of anointing with Oil. The first
mention of it is, Mark. 6.13. where its practice is reckoned among the effects
of that extraordinary power which the Lord Christ committed unto his twelve
Disciples on their first sending out, and is referred unto the same series of
miracles which they wrought in pursuit, and by virtue thereof, they cast out
many Devils, and anointed with Oil many that were sick, and healed them. And
by what is there recorded, the subsequent mention of it, James 5.14. is to be
regulated, but now unto a real evangelical institution of worship, it is
required (1.) That it be a command of Christ manifested by his Word, or Example
proposed unto our imitation, Matthew. 28.20. (2.) That it be given and enjoined
unto the whole Church with the limitation of its administration expressed in
the Word, 1 Cor. 11.25. (3.) That unto the due performance of it, Gospel grace
be required in them that attend unto it. (4.) That it teach, or represent, or
seal, or improve some grace of the Covenant, and have a promise of acceptance
annexed unto it, and whatever is thus appointed, the Church is indispensably to
continue in the observation of, unto the end of the World.

Quest. 14. May not the Church find out, and appoint to be observed, such
religious rites, as being adjoined unto the celebration of Gods instituted
worship, may farther the devotion of the Worshipers, and render the worship it
self in its performance more decent, beautiful and orderly, as the appointing
of Images, and the like?

Answ. All acceptable devotion in them that worship God, is the effect of
faith, which respects the precepts and promises of God alone. And the
comeliness and beauty of Gospel worship, consists in its relation unto God by
Jesus Christ, as the merciful High Priest over his house, with the glorious
administration of the spirit therein. The order also of it lies in the due and
regular observation of all that Christ has appointed; and therefore all such
inventions are in themselves needless, and useless, and because forbidden,
unlawful to be observed, Romans 1.21. Chap. 14.23. Heb. 4.2. Chap. 11.6. Deuteronomy.
13.4. Chap. 27.10. Chap. 30.2.8, 20. Chap. 11.27. Matthew. 27.5. Isa. 29.13. Heb.
11.4, 6. Ephesians. 2.18. 2 Cor. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. John 4.21,
23. 1 Cor. 14.20. Matthew. 28.20. Exodus 20.4. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Matthew. 15.13. Isa.
29.13. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Chap. 17.3.

Explication.
Three things are usually pleaded in the Justification of the observance of
such rites and ceremonies in the worship of God.

(1.) That they tend unto the furtherance of the devotion of the Worshipers.

(2.) That they render the Worship it self comely and beautiful.

(3.) That they are the great preservers of order in the celebration thereof.
And therefore on these accounts they may be instituted, or appointed by some,
and observed by all. But things are indeed quite otherwise, God is a spirit and
will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, John 4.24. And no devotion is
acceptable unto him, but what proceeds from, and is an effect of faith, for
without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. and faith in all
things respects the commands and authority of God; for, says he, in vain do
they worship me, who teach for doctrines the commandments of men, Matthew. 15.9.
and he rejects all that honor which is given him by those, whose fear
toward him, or worship of him, is taught by the precepts of men, Isa. 29.13.
These things therefore being utterly destitute of divine Authority, they can no
way farther or promote the devotion of the Worshipers. What natural, or carnal
affections may be excited by them, as men may inflame themselves with Idols,
Isa. 57.5. or what outward, outside devotion they may direct unto or excite, is
uncertain; but that they are no means of stirring up the grace of God in the
hearts of Believers, or of the increase or strengthening of their faith, which
things alone God accepts in Gospel Worship, seeing they are not appointed by
him for any such purpose, is most certain: for to say that any thing will
effectually stir up devotion, that is, excite, strengthen or increase grace in
the heart toward God, that is not of his own appointment, is on the one hand,
to reflect on his wisdom and care toward his Church, as if he had been
wanting toward it in things so necessary, which he declares against, Isa. 5.4.
what, says he, could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done
in it? so on the other, it extolls the wisdom of men above what is meet to
ascribe unto it. Shall men find out that, which God would not, or could not, in
matters of so great importance unto his glory, and the souls of them that obey
him? yea, and it cannot be but that attendance unto them, and their effects
must needs divert the mind from those proper spiritual actings of faith and
grace, which is its duty to attend unto. And this is evidently seen in them who
indulging to themselves in their observation in multiplied instances, as in the
Church of Rome, have changed the whole spiritual worship of the Church, into a
Theatrical pompeous show of carnal devotion.

Secondly, The comelyness and beauty of Gospel worship, does not in the least
depend upon them, nor their observation. The Apostle does in sundry places
expressly compare the spiritual worship of the Gosple, with that of the Law,
whilst the Church had a worldly Sanctuary and carnal Ordinances, Heb. 9.1. and
although it be most evident, that the worship of the Old Testament, did for the
glory and ornaments of outward ceremonies, and the splendor of their
observation, far exceed and excel that worship which God commands now, as
suitable unto the simplicity of the Gospel, yet does the Apostle prefer this
for glory, comelyness and beauty, unspeakably above the other; which manifests
that these things can have no respect unto outward Rites and Ceremonies,
wherein the chief admirers of them can no way vye for glory with the old
worship of the Temple. So the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. if the
ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that
the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the
glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away, how shall not the
ministration of the spirit be rather glorious; for if the ministration of
condemnation be glory, much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed
in glory: for even that which was made glorious had no glory, in this respect,
by reason of the glory that excels; for if that which was done away is
glorious, much more that which remains is glorious. He compares the two
ministrations, and the several worships of the Law and Gospel, preferring this
unspeakably above the other; sufficiently manifesting, that the glory of it
consists not in any pompeous observance of outward Ceremonies. And elsewhere
He declares, that indeed it does consist in its relation to God in Christ,
with the liberty and boldness of the worshipers to enter into the holy place,
unto the Throne of Grace under the Ministry of their merciful and faithful
High Priest, being enabled thereunto by the spirit of adoption, and
supplications; for therein, through Christ we have an access in one spirit unto
the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. as it is expressed, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21. having therefore
boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living
way, which he has consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his
flesh, and having an High Priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a
true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. This is the glory of
Gospel worship, and the beauty of it; whose consideration whilst the minds of
men are diverted from, to look for beauty in the outward preparation of
ceremonies, they lose the privilege purchased for Believers by the blood of
Christ. Instead then of farthering the beauty and comeliness of Gospel worship,
they are apt to lead men into a dangerous error and mistake, namely that the
beauty and excellency of it consists in such things, as upon a due
consideration will appear to be mean and carnal, and far beneath those
ceremonies and ordinances of the Old Testament which yet in comparison of the
Worship of the Gospel, are called Worldly, carnal, beggarly, and are said to
have no glory.

Thirdly, They do not in the least tend unto the preservation of due order in
the celebration of divine Worship. All order consists in the due observation of
rule. The rules of actions are either natural, or of his special appointment.
Both these take place in religious worship; the institutions or commands of
Christ, containing the substance thereof, in their observation principally
consists the order of it. Whatever is of circumstance in the manner of its
performance, not capable of especial determination, as emerging or arising only
occasionally upon the doing of that which is appointed, at this, or that time,
in this, or that place, and the like, is left unto the rule of moral prudence,
in whose observation their order does consist. But the super-addition of
ceremonies, necessarily belonging neither to the institutions of worship, nor
unto those circumstances whose disposal falls under the rule of moral prudence,
neither does nor can add any thing unto the due order of Gospel Worship. So
that they are altogether needless, and useless in the Worship of God. Neither
is this the whole of the inconvenience wherewith their observance is attended;
for although they are not in particular, and expressly in the Scripture
forbidden, for it was simply impossible that all instances wherein the wit of
man might exercise its invention in such things, should be reckoned up and
condemned, yet they fall directly under those severe prohibitions which God
has recorded to secure his worship from all such additions unto it, of what
sort soever. Yea the main design of the second precept is to forbid all making
unto our selves, any such things in the worship of God, to add unto what he
has appointed, whereof an instance is given in that of making and worshipping
Images, the most common way that the sons of men were then prone to trangess
by, against the institutions of God. And this sense and understanding of the
commandment is secured by those ensuing prohibitions against the adding any
thing at all unto the commands of God in his worship, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not
add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it,
that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God, Chap. 12.32. what
things soever I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor
diminish from it, Chap. 17.3. to the same purpose were the places before
mentioned, Matthew, 15.9. as also is that severe rule applied by our Savior unto
the additions of the Pharisees, Verse 13. Every plant, which my Heavenly Father
has not planted, shall be rooted up.

And there is yet farther evidence contributed unto this intention of the
command, from those places where such evils and corruptions, as were
particularly forbidden in the worship of God, are condemned, not on the special
account of their being so forbidden, but on that more general, of being
introduced without any warrant from Gods Institutions or commands, Jer. 7.31.
they have built the high places of Tophe^, which is in the valley of the Son of
Hinnom to burn their Sons and their Daughters in the fire, which I commanded
not, neither came it into my heart. Chap. 19.5. they have also built the high
pl^ces of Baal to burn their Sons with fire, for burnt-offerings unto Baal,
which I commanded not, nor spoke, neither came it into my mind. These things
were particularly forbidden; but yet God here condemns them as coming under the
general evil of making additions unto his commands, doing that which he
commanded not, nor did it ever enter into his heart.

The Papists say indeed, that all additions corrupting the worship of God are
forbidden; but such as farther, adorn, and preserve it, are not so; which
implies a contradict^on; for whereas every addition is principally a corruption
because it is an addition, under which notion it is forbidden, (and that in the
worship of God which is forbidden is a corruption of it) there can be no such
preserving, adorning addition, unless we will allow a preserving and adorning
corruption. Neither is it of more force which is pleaded by them, that the
additions which they make, belong not unto the substance of the worship of God,
but unto the circumstances of it; for every circumstance observed religiously,
or to be observed in the worship of God, is of the substance of it; as were all
those ceremonious observances of the Law which had the same respect in the
prohibitions of adding, with the most weighty things whatsoever.

Qu. 15. Whence may it appear that the right and due observation of Instituted
worship, is of great importance unto the glory of God, and of high concernment
unto the Souls of Men?

Answ. This is fully taught in the Scriptures; as (1) God would never accept in
any state of the Church, before or since the fall, moral Obedience without the
observation of some institutions as trials, tokens, and pledges of that
obedience. And (2) in their use and signification by his appointment they
nearly concern the principal mysteries of his will and grace. And (3) By their
celebration is he glorified in the World: And therefore, (4) As he has made
blessed promises to his people, to grant them his presence and to bless them in
their use: So (5) Being the tokens of the marriage relation that is between him
and them, with respect unto them alone he calls himself a jealous God; And (6)
has actually exercised signal severity toward the neglecters, corrupters or
abusers of them. (1) Genesis 2.16, 17. Genesis 4.3, 4. Genesis 17.9, 10, 11. Exodus
12.24. Exodus 20. Math. 28.19* 20. Math. 26.26, 27. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Rev. 1.13.
Rev. 21.3. (2) Genesis 17.10. Exodus 12.23, 24. Romans 6.3, 4* 5. Math. 26.27. 1 Cor.
11.25, 26, 27. (3) See question the eighth and ninth. (4) Exodus 29.42, 43, 45.
Deuteronomy. 14.23. Psalm. 133.3. Math. 18.20 Rev. 21.3. (5) Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 4.23,
24. Josh. 24.19. Ezekiel. 16. (6) Levit. 10.1, 2. Number. 16.3, 8, 9, 32, 35. 1 Samuel
2.28, 29. 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 19. 1 Cor. 11.30.

Explication.
For the most part, the instituted worship of God is neglected and despised in
the World. Some are utterly regardless of it, supposing that if they attend,
after their manner, unto moral obedience, that neither God nor themselves are
much concerned in this matter, of his worship. Others think the disposal and
ordering of it to be so left unto men, that as to the manner of its
performance, they may do with it as it seems right in their own eyes, And some
follow them therein as willingly walking after their commandments, without any
respect unto the will or authority of God. But the whole Scripture gives us
utterly another account of this matter. The honor of God in this world, the
trial of our faith and obedience, the order and beauty of the Church, the
exaltation of Christ in his professed subjection to him, and the saving of our
souls in the ways of his appointment, are therein laid upon the due and right
observance of instituted worship, and they who are negligent about these
things, what ever they pretend, have no real respect unto any thing that is
called Religion. First therefore, in every state and condition of the Church,
God has given his Ordinances of worship, as the touchstone and trial of its
faith and obedience, so that they by whom they are neglected, do openly refuse
to come unto Gods trial. In the state of innocence, the trial of Adams
obedience according to the law of nature, was in and by the institution of the
trees of life, and of the knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2.16, 17. And the
Lord God commanded the Man saying, of every tree of the garden thou may
freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not
eat of it for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou, shall surely die. This
was the first institution of God, and it was given unto the Church, in the
state of innocence and purity. And in our first Parents neglect of attending
thereunto, did they transgress the whole law of their creation, as failing in
their duty in that which was appointment for their trial in the whole; Chap.
3.11. Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should
not eat? etc. And the Church in his family after the fall, built upon the
promise, was tried also in the matter of instituted worship. Nor was there any
discovery of the wickedness of Cain, or approbation of the faith of Abel, until
they came to be proved in their sacrifices, a new part of Gods instituted
worship, the first in the state and condition of sin and the fall whereinto it
was brought. Genesis 4.3, 4, 5. In process of time, it came to pass Cain brought
of the fruit of the ground, an offering unto the Lord, and Abel he also brought
of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof; and the Lord had respect
unto Abel, and to his offering, but unto Cain, and his offering he had not
respect. The ground whereof the Apostle declares, Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel
offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained
witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts. In the observation
of that first institution given to the Church in the state of the fall, did
Abel receive a testimony of his being justified and accepted with God.
Afterward when Abraham was called, and peculiarly separated to bare forth the
name of God in the world, and to become the spring of the Church for future
ages, he had the institution of circumcision given him for the trial of his
obedience; the Law and condition whereof was, that he who observed it not
should be esteemed an alien from the covenant of God, and be cut off from his
People. Genesis 17.9, 10, 11. God said unto Abraham, thou shall keep my covenant,
thou and thy seed after thee in their generations. This is my covenant which ye
shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after thee, every man-child among
you shall be circumcised, Verse the (14) and the uncircumcised man-child whose
flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his
people, he has broken my covenant. And in like manner so soon as ever his
posterity were to be collected into a new Church state and order, God gave them
the Ordinance of the Passover, Exodus 12.24. Ye shall observe this thing for an
Ordinance to thee and to thy Sons for ever* and that upon the same penalty with
that of circumcision; to these he added many more on mount Sinai, Exodus 20. all
as the trials of their faith and obedience unto succeeding generations: How he
has dealt with his Church under the new Testament, we shall afterward
declare. In no state or condition then of the Church, did God ever accept of
moral Obedience without the observation of some instituted worship accommodated
in his wisdom unto its various states and conditions. And not only so, but as
we have seen, he has made the observation of them according unto his mind and
appointment, the means of the trial of Men's whole obedience, and the rule of
the acceptance or rejection of them. And so it continues at this day, what ever
be the thoughts of men about the worship which at present he requires.

Besides, God has appointed that his Ordinances of worship shall be as
effectual means as to instruct us in the mysteries of his will and mind, so of
communicating his love, mercy, and grace unto us; as also of that communion, or
intercourse with his holy Majesty, which he has graciously granted unto us by
Jesus Christ. And this as it is sufficiently manifested in the Scriptures
quoted in answer unto this question, so it is at large declared in the writings
of those holy and good men, who have explained the nature of gospel Ordinances,
and therefore in particular we need not here insist much in the farther proof
of it. Thus Abraham was instructed in the nature of the covenant of grace by
circumcision, Genesis 17.10. which is often explained in the old Testament, by
applying it in particular to the grace of conversion, called the circumcision
of the heart, Deuteronomy, 10.16. Chap. 30.6. Jer. 4.4. as also in the new Testament,
Coloss. 2.11. And by the Passover, where the people taught, not only the mercy
of their present deliverance, Exodus 12.23, 24. but also to look for the Lamb of
God who was to take away the sin of the world, John 1.29. the true Passover of
the people of God which was sacrificed for them, 1 Cor. 5.7. how our incision
or implanting into Christ, is represented and signified by our Baptism, the
Apostle declares, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. as also our communion with him in his death,
by the Supper of the Lord, Matthew. 26.27. 1 Cor. 11.25. and all these graces
which they teach, they also exhibit, and are the means of the communication of
them unto Beleivers. Moreover the experience of all Beleivers, who have
conscientiously waited upon God in their due observance, may be produced in the
confirmation of it. The instruction, edification, consolation, Spiritual
strength, courage, and resolution, which they have received in and by them,
has been witnessed unto in their lives, and ends; and they to whom these
things are not of the greatest importance, do but in vain pretend a regard unto
God in any thing whatever.

Farthermore, God has appointed our duty in the observation of his instituted
worship, to be the means of our glorifying him in the world. Nor can we
otherwise give glory to God, but as we own his authority over us, and yield
obedience to what he requires at our hands. And what we do herein, is
principally evident in those duties which lie under the eye and observation of
Men. Some duties of obedience there are, which the world neither does, nor can
discern in Believers. Such are their faith, inward holiness, purity of heart,
heavenly mindedness, sincere mortification of indwelling sin, some whose
performance ought to be hid from them, as personal prayer, and alms. Matthew.
6.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Some there are, which are very liable to misconstruction
amongst Men, as Zeal in many of the actings of it. But this conscientious
observation of instituted worship, and therein avowing our subjection unto the
authority of God in Christ, is that which the World may see, and take notice
of, and that, which unless in case of persecution* ought not to be hid from
them; and that which they can have no pretense of scandal at. And therefore
has God appointed that by this means and way, we shall honor and glorify him
in the World, which if we neglect, we do evidently cast off all regard unto his
concernments in this World. Herein it is, that we manifest our selves not to be
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, of him and his words, which he so
indispensably requires at our hands, Mark 8.38. For, says he, whosoever shall
be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of
him also shall the son of Man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his
Father, with the holy Angels. Hereby* do we keep the commandments of Christ, as
his friends* John 13.35. for these peculiarly are his commands, and if we
suffer for them, then we do most properly suffer as Christians, which is our
glory, that 1 Pet. 4.14, 15, 16. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ,
happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, on their
part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified, but let none of
you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busi^ body
in other Men's matters, but if any Man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed, but let him glorify God ^n this behalf. And a happy and a blessed
thing it is, to suffer for the observation of the special commands of Christ.

Farther, to encourage us in our duty, the holy faithful God has given us many
great and precious promises, that he will graciously afford unto us his
especial sanctifying blessing presence, in our attendance on his worship
according to his appointment. For as he promised of old that he would make
glorious the place of his feet, or abode amongst his people, Isa. 60.13. that
he would meet them in his sanctuary, the place of his worship, and there dwell
amongst them, and bless them, and be their God, Exodus 29.42, 43, 44, 45. Deuteronomy.
14.24. so the Lord Jesus Christ has promised his presence to the same ends and
purposes, unto all them that assemble together in his name, for the observation
of the worship which in the Gospel he has appointed, Matthew. 18.20. For where
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
And therein is the tabernacle of God, his gracious dwelling place, with Men.
Rev. 21.3. Now when God offers unto us his presence, his gracious blessing,
sanctifying, and saving presence, and that in and by promises which shall never
fail, what unspeakable guilt must we needs contract upon our own souls, if we
neglect or despise the tenders of such grace?

But because we are apt to be slothful, and are slow of heart in admiting a due
sense of spiritual things that fall not in with the light and principles of
nature, to stir us up unto a diligence in our attendance unto the will of God
in this matter, he has declared that he looks upon our obedience herein as our
whole loyalty unto him in that conjugal covenant which he is pleased in Christ
Jesus to take Beleivers into with himself, Jer. 3.14. turn O backsliding
children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you, and will take you one of a
City, and two of a family, and will bring ye unto Sion, and I will give you
Pastors according unto mine heart, which shall feed ye with knowledge and
understanding. Coming unto Sion, in the worship of God, under the leading and
conduct of Pastors according to the heart of God, is our answering the relation
wherein we stand unto him as he is married unto us, and thereupon he teaches
us that as an Husband, he is jealous of our discharge of our duty in this
matter, accounting our neglect of his worship, or profanation of it by
inventions and additions of our own, to be spiritual disloyalty, whoredom and
adultery, which his soul abhors, for which he will cast off any Church, or
people, and that for ever, See Exodus 20.5. Deuteronomy. 4.23, 24. Jos. 24.19. Ezekiel.
16. whatever he will bear withal in his Church, he will not bear with that
which his jealousy is exercised about. If it transgress therein, he will give
it a bill of divorce; which repudiated condition, is the state of many Churches
in the World, however they please, and boast themselves in their meritricious
ornaments and practices.

To give yet farther strength unto all these considerations, that we may not
only have rules and precepts, but examples also for our instruction, God has
given many signal instances of his severity against Persons who by ignorance,
neglect, or regardlesness, have miscarried in not observing exactly his will
and appointment in and about his worship. This was the case of Nadab and
Abi^^s, the sons of Aaron, Levit. 10.1, 2. of Corah, Dathan and Abirain, Numb.
16.3, 8, 9, 32, 35. of the sons of Ely, a sin not to be expiated with
sacrifices and burnt offerings forever, 1 Samuel 2.28, 29. of Vzza in putting the
Ark into a Cart, when he should have born it upon his shoulders, 1 Chronicles.
16.13. of Vzzia the King in offering incense contrary to Gods institution, that
duty being appropriated unto the Priests of the posterity of Aaron, 2 Chronicles.
26.16, 19. these are sufficient intimations of what care and diligence we ought
to use in attending unto what God has appointed in his worship, and although
now under the new Testament he does not ordinarily proceed to the inflicting of
temporal judgments in the like cases of neglect, y^^ he has not wholly left
us without instances of his putting forth tokens of his displeasure in temporal
visitations on such miscarriages in his Church, 1 Cor. 11.30. For this cause,
says the Apostle, many are weak, and sickly among you, and many sleep. From
all which it appears of what concernment it is unto the glory of God, and the
salvation of our own souls, to attend diligently unto our duty in the strict
and sincere observation of the worship of the Gospel; for he lets us know, that
now a more severe punishment is substituted against such transgressions in the
room of that which he so visibly inflicted under the old Testament, Heb. 10.25,
26, 27, 28, 29.

Qu. 16. Is there yet any other consideration that may stir up Beleivers to an
holy and religious care about the due observation of the institutions of the
Gospel?

Answ. Yea! namely that the great apostasy of the Church in the last days,
foretold in the Scripture, and which God threatens to punish and revenge,
consists principally in false worship, and a departure from the institutions of
Christ. Rev. 14.4, 5. Chap. 17.1, 2, 3, 5.

Explication.
That there is an Apostasy of the Church foretold in the book of the
Revelations* is acknowledged by all who with sincerity have inquired into the
mind of God therein. The state of things at this day, and for many ages past
in the World, sufficiently confirm that persuasion. And herein sundry things in
general, are obvious unto every sober consideration thereof.

First the horrible evils, troubles and confusions that are to be brought into,
and upon the World thereby.

Secondly, the high guilt and provocation of God, that is contained in it, and
does accompany it.

Thirdly, the dreadful vengeance that God in his appointed time will take upon
all the promoters and obstinate maintainers of it. These things are at large
all of them foretold in the Revelation, and therein also the Apostasy it self
is set forth as the cause of all the plagues and destructions that by the
righteous judgment of God, are to be brought upon the World in these latter
days. Now as God does earnestly call upon all that fear him, not to
intermeddle, nor partake in the sins of the Apostates, lest they should also
partake in their judgments, Chap. 18.4. (I heard a voice from Heaven, saying,
come out of her my people that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues.) So he does plainly declare* wherein the apostasy
and sin it self should principally consist, and that is in the corrupting and
contaminating of the Ordinances of his worship, or the introduction of false
worship joined with the persecution of them who refused to submit thereunto.
For this cause, is the sin it self, set out under the name of fornication, and
whoredom; and the Church that maintains it, is called the Mother of Harlots,
Chap. 17.5. That by fornication, and whoredom, in the Church, the adulterating
of the worship of God, and the admission of false self-invented worship in the
room thereof, whereof God is jealous, is intended, the Scripture every where
declares. It is easy then to gather of how great concernment unto us it is,
especially in these latter days wherein this so heinous and provoking sin is
prevalent in the World, carefully to attend unto the safe unerring rule of
Worship, and diligently to perform the duties that are required therein.

Quest. 17. Which are the principal institutions of the Gospel to be observed
in the worship of God?

Answ. (1.) The calling, gathering and settling of Churches with their Officers,
as the seat and subject of all other solemn instituted worship. (2.) Prayer
with thanksgiving. (3.) Singing of Psalms. (4.) Preaching the word. (5.)
Administration of the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. (6.)
Discipline and rule of the Church collected and settled; most of which have also
sundry particular duties relating unto them, and subservient unto their due
observation. (1.) Matthew. 28.19, 20. Acts 2.41, 42. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11,
12. Matthew. 18.17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 4.17. 1 Cor. 7.17. Acts 14.23. Titus 1.5. 1 Timothy 3.15. (2.) 1 Timothy 2.1* Acts 6.4. Acts 13.2, 3. (3.) Ephesians. 5.19. Colos.
3.16. (4.) 2 Timothy 4.2. Acts 2.42. 1 Cor. 14.3. Acts 6.2. Heb. 13.7. (5.) Matthew.
28.19. Matthew. 26.26, 27. 1 Cor. 11.23. (6.) Matthew. 18.17, 18, 19. Romans 12.6, 7,
8. Rev. 2.3.

Explication.
These things being all of them afterward to be spoken unto severally and
apart, need not here any particular Explication. They are the principal heads
wherein Gospel Worship consists, and whereunto the particular duties of it
may be reduced.

Qu. 18. Whereas sundry of these things are founded in the light and law of
nature, as requisite unto all solemn worship, and are moreover commanded in the
moral Law, and explications of it in the Old Testament; how do you look upon
them as Evangelical institutions to be observed principally on the authority of
Jesus Christ?

Answ. Neither their general suitableness unto the principles of right reason,
and the dictates of the light and law of nature, nor the practice of them in
the worship of God under the Old Testament, do at all hinder them from
depending on the mere institution of Jesus Christ, as to those especial ends of
the ^^^ry of God in and by himself, and the edification of his Church in the
faith which is in him, whereunto he has appointed them: Nor as unto that
especial manner of their performance, which he requires* in which respects
they are to be observed on ^he account of his authority and command only,
Matthew. 17.5. Matthew. 28.^0. John 16.23, 24. Heb. 3.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 1.22. Chap.
2.20, 21, 22. Heb. 12.25.

Explication.
The principal thing we are to aim at in the whole worship of God, is the
discharge of that duty which we owe to Jesus Christ the King and head of the
Church* Heb. 3.6. Christ as a Son over his own house* whose house are we, 1 Timothy 3.15. That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the
house of God, which is the Church of the living God. This we cannot do unless
we consider his authority as the formal reason and cause of our observance of
all that we do therein. If we perform any thing in the worship of God on any
other account, it is no part of our obedience unto him; and so we can neither
expect his grace to assist us, nor have we his promise to accept us therein;
for that he has annexed unto our doing and observing whatever he has
commanded, and that because he has commanded us, Matthew. 28 20. teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the World. This promised presence respects only
the observance of his commands. Some men are apt to look on this authority of
Christ as that which has the least influence into what they do. If in any of
his institutions they find any thing that is suited or agreeable unto the light
of nature, as Ecclesiastical societies, government of the Church, and the like
they say are, they suppose and contend, that that is the ground on which they
are to be attended unto, and so are to be regulated accordingly. The
interposition of his authority they will allow only in the Sacraments which
have no light in reason or nature; so desirous are some to have as little to do
with Christ as they can, even in the things that concern the worship of God.
But it would be somewhat strange, that if what the Lord Christ has appointed
in his Church to be observed in particular, in an especial manner, for especial
ends of his own, has in the general nature of it an agreement with what in
like cases the light of nature seems to direct unto, that therefore his
authority is not to be considered, as the sole immediate reason of our
performance of it; But it is evident,

First, That our Lord Jesus Christ being the King and Head of his Church, the
Lord over the house of God, nothing is to be done therein but with respect unto
his authority, Matthew. 17.5. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased,
hear ye him; Ephesians. 4.15. Speaking the truth in love, grow up into him in all
things, which is the head, even Christ, from whom the whole body fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body
unto the edifying of it self in love* Ephesians. 2.20, 21. Ye are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together grows unto an
holy Temple in the Lord; in whom you also are built together for an habitation
of God through the spirit.

Secondly, And that therefore, the suitableness of any thing to right reason or
the light of nature, is no ground for a Church observation of it, unless it be
also appointed and commanded in especial by Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, That being so appointed and commanded, it becomes an especial
institution of his, and as such, is to be observed* so that in all things that
are done, or to be done with respect unto the worship of God in the Church, the
authority of Christ is always principally to be considered; and every thing to
be observed as commanded by him, without which consideration it has no place
in the Worship of God.

Quest. 19. What is an instituted Church of the Gospel?

Answ. A society of Persons, called out of the World, or their natural worldly
state, by the administration of the Word and Spirit, unto the obedience of the
Faith, or the knowledge and Worship of God in Christ, ^oyned together in an
holy band, or by special agreement, for the exercise of the communion of Saints
in the due observation of all the Ordinances of the Gospel, Rom 1.5, 6. 1 Cor.
1.2. 1 Cor. 14.15. Heb. 3 1. James 1.18* Rev. 1.20. 1 Peter 2.5. Ephesians.
2.21.22, 23. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18.

Explication.
The Church, whose nature is here inquired after, is not the Catholic Church
of elect Believers of all ages and seasons from the beginning of the World unto
the end thereof, nor of any one age, nor the universality of professors of the
Gospel; but a particular Church wherein by the appointment of Christ, all the
Ordinances of the Worship of God are to be observed and attended unto according
to his Will. For although it be required of them, of whom a particular Church
is constituted, that they be true Believers, seeing that unless a man be born
again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, and so on that account they be
members of the Church Catholic; as also that they make visible profession of
faith and obedience unto Jesus Christ, yet moreover it is the will, command and
appointment of Christ, that they should be joined together in particular
societies, or Churches, for the due observation of the Ordinances of the
Gospel, which can alone be done in such Assemblies. For as the members of the
Catholic Church, are not known unto one another merely on the account of that
faith and union with Christ which makes them so, whence the whole society of
them is, as such, invisible to the World and themselves, visible only on the
account of their profession, and therefore cannot merely as such, observe the
Ordinances of the Gospel, which observation is their profession; so the visible
Professors that are in the World in any age, cannot at any time assemble
together, which from the nature of the thing it self, and the institution of
Christ, is indispensably necessary for the celebration of sundry parts of that
worship which he requires in his Church; and therefore particular Churches are
themselves an Ordinance of the New Testament, as the National Church of the
Jews, was of old. For when God of old erected his Worship, and enjoined the
solemn observation of it, he also appointed a Church as his institution for the
due celebration of it. That was, the people of Israel solemnly taken into a
Church relation with him by covenant, wherein they took upon themselves to
observe all the laws, and ordinances, and institutions of his worship, Exodus
20.19. Speak thou with us, and we will hear, Exodus 24.3. And Moses came, and
told the People all the words of the Lord, and all the judgments, and all the
people answered with one voice, and said, all the words which the Lord has
said, we will do, Deuteronomy. 5.27. All that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee,
we will hear it and do it. And God accordingly appointed them Ordinances to be
observed by the whole congregation of them together at the same time, in the
same place. Exodus 23.17. Three times in the year all thy Males shall appear
before the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 16.16. Three times in a year all thy Males shall
appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose.

Neither would God allow any stranger, any one not of the Church so instituted
by him, to celebrate any part of his instituted worship, until he was solemnly
admitted into that Church as a member thereof. Exodus 12.47* 48. All the
congregation of Israel shall keep it, and when a stranger shall sojourn with
thee and will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his Males be circumcised
and then let him come near and keep it, and he shall be as one that is born in
the Land for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.

To the same end and purpose, when the knowledge of God was to be diffused all
the World over by the preaching of the Gospel, and Believers of all nations
under Heaven were to be admitted unto the privilege of his worship, Ephesians. 2.15,
16, 17, 18. the national Church of the Jews with all the Ordinances of it
being removed and taken away, the Lord Christ has appointed particular
Churches, or united Assemblies of Believers* amongst and by whom he will have
all his holy Ordinances of worship celebrated. And this institution of his, at
the First preaching of the Gospel, was invariably and inviolably observed by
all that took on them to be his Disciples, without any one instance of
questioning it to the contrary in the whole World, or of the celebration of any
Ordinances of his worship amongst any Persons, but only in such societies or
particular Churches. And there is sufficient evidence and warranty of this
institution given us in the Scripture: For,

First they are appointed and approved by Christ. Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20. If thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone, if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established; and
if he shall neglect to hear, then tell it unto the Church, but if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican; verily
I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven,
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed also in Heaven; again I
say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing
that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven;
for where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them.

Such a Church he supposes and approves, as his Disciples had relation unto,
and as any one of them could have recourse unto as a Brother, in obedience to
his commands and directions. This could not be the Church of the Jews neither
in its whole body, nor in any of its Judicatories. For as at that time there
was a solemn decree of excommunication against all and every one that should
profess his Name; John 9.22. The Jews had already agreed that if any man did
confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue; which was
executed accordingly upon the man that was born blind, Verse the 34. which
utterly disabled them from making any use of this direction, command or
Institution of his for the present; So afterward the chief business of the
Rulers of those Assemblies from the highest court of their Sanhedrim, to the
meanest Judicatory in their Synagogues, was to persecute them, and bring them
unto death. Math. 10.17. They will deliver ye up to the Councills and they will
scourge you in their Synagogues. John 15.21. And it is not likely that the Lord
Christ would send his Disciples for direction and satisfaction in the weighty
matters of their obedience unto him, and mutual love toward one another, unto
them with whom they neither had, nor could, nor ought to have any thing to do
withal; and if they were intended, they were all already made as heathens and
Publicans, being cast out by them for refusing to hear them in their
blasphemies and persecutions of Christ himself. Such a society also is plainly
intended, as whereunto Christ promises his presence by his spirit, and whose
righteous sentences he takes upon himself to ratify and confirm in Heaven.

Moreover such a Church does he direct unto, as wi^h which his Disciples were
to have familiar Brotherly constant converse and communion, with whom they were
so to be joined in society, as to be owned or rejected by them according to
their judgment, as is apparent in the practice enjoined unto them; and without
relation, whereunto no duty here appointed could be performed. As therefore the
very name of the Church, and nature of the thing, bespeaks a society, so it is
evident that no society but that of a particular Church of the Gospel can be
here intended.

Secondly, these Churches he calls his Candlesticks* Rev. 1.20. In allusion
unto the Candlesticks of the Temple, which being an institution of the old
Testament, does directly declare these Churches to be so under the New. And
this he speaks in reference unto those seven principal Churches of Asia, every
one of which, was a Candlestick, or an institution of his own.

Thirdly, In pursuit of this appointment of Christ, and by his authority, the
Apostles so soon as any were converted unto the faith at Jerusalem, although
the old National Church state of the Jews was yet continued, gathered them
into a Church or society for celebration of the ordinances of the Gospel. Acts.
2.41, 42. they that gladly received the word, were baptized, and they continued
steadfastly together in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking
of bread and in prayers. verse (47) the Lord adding unto this Church daily such
as should be saved. And this company is expressly called the Church at
Jerusalem. Acts. 8.1. This Church thus called and collected out of the Church
of the Jews was the rule and pattern of the disposing of all the Disciples of
Christ into Church societyes in obedience unto his command throughout the
World. Acts 11.26. Acts 14.23, 27.

Fourthly, they took care for the forming, completing and establishing them in
order according to his will, under the rule of them, given* and granted unto
them by himself for that purpose, all in a st^ddy pursuit of the commands of
Christ. Acts 14.23. they ordained them Elders in every Church. Titus 1.5. For
this cause left I thee in Creet that thou should set in order the things that
are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. 1 Cor.
12.28. Ephe. 4.11, 12.

Fifthly, they do every where in the Name* and authority of Christ, give unto
these Churches rules, directions, and precepts for the due ordering of all
things relating to the worship of God, according to his mind as we shall see
afterward in particular* For

First, there is no charge given unto the Officers, Ministers, Guides, or
Overseers that he has appointed, but it is in reference unto the discharge of
their duty in such Churches. That Ministers or Officers are of Christ's
appointment, is expressly declared. Ephesians. 4.11.12. He gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edif^ing of the body of Christ.
1 Cor. 12.28. God has set in his Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets
thirdly Teachers. These are of Christ's institution; but to what end? why, as
they were ordained in every Church, Acts 14.23. Titus 1.5. So their whole
charge is limited to the Churches, Acts 20.17. He sent to Ephesus, and called
the Elders of the Church, and said to them; Verse the 28. take heed therefore
unto your selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own
blood, 1 Pet. 5.2. The Elders which are among you, I exhort, feed the flock of
God, which is among you taking the oversight thereof, 1 Timothy 3.15. Colos. 4.17.
And say to Archippus take heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the
Lord, that thou fulfill it. They were the Churches of Christ wherein they
ministered, which Christ appointing them to take care of, manifests to be his
own institution and appointment. And this is fully declared, Rev. chap. 2.3.
where all the dealings of Christ with his Angels, or Ministers, are about their
behavior and deportment among his Candlesticks, each of them, the Candlestick
whereunto he was related, or the particular Churches that they had care of, and
presided in; the Candlesticks being no less of the institution of Christ, than
the Angels. And they were distinct particular Churches, which had their
distinct particular Officers, whom he treats distinctly withal about his
institutions and worship; especially about that of the state of the Churches
themselves, and their constitution according to his mind.

Secondly, There is no instruction, exhortation or reproof given unto any of
the Disciples of Christ after his ascension, in any of the books of the New
Testament, but as they were collected into, and were members of such particular
Churches. This will be evidenced in the many instances of those duties that
shall afterward be insisted on. And the Lord Christ has not left that as a
matter of liberty, choice or convenience, which he has made the foundation of
the due manner of the performance of all those duties whereby his Disciples
yield obedience unto his commands, to his glory in the World.

Sixthly, The principal writings of the Apostles are expressly directed unto
such Churches, and all of them intentionally, 1 Cor. 1.1. 2 Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.2.
Phil. 1.1. Colos. 1.2. chap. 4.16. 1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1.
compared with Acts 20.17. 1 Pet. 5.2. or unto particular persons, giving
directions for their behavior and duty in such Churches, 1 Timothy 3.15. Tit.
1.5. So that the great care of the Apostles was about these Churches, as the
principal institution of Christ, and that whereon the due observance of all his
other commands does depend. Of what nature or sort these Churches were, shall
be afterward evinced; we here only manifest their institution by the authority
of Christ.

Seventhly, Much of the writings of the Apostles in those Epistles directed to
those Churches, consists in rules, precepts, instructions, and exhortations for
the guidance and preservation of them in purity, and order, with their
continuance in a condition of due obedience unto the Lord Christ. To this end
do they so fully and largely acquaint the Rulers and Members of them with their
mutual duty in that especial relation wherein they stand to each other, as also
of all persons in particular in what is required of them by virtue of their
Membership in any particular society; as may be seen at large in sundry of
Paul's Epistles. And to give more strength hereunto, our Lord Jesus Christ in
the revelation that he made of his mind and will personally after his ascension
into Heaven, insisted principally about the condition, order and preservation
of particular Churches; not taking notice of any of his Disciples not belonging
to them, or joined with them. These he warns, reproves, instructs, threatens,
commands, all in order unto their walking before him in the condition of
particular Churches, Rev. 2. and (3.) at large.

Besides, As he has appointed them to be the ^eat and subject of all his
Ordinances, having granted the right of them unto them alone, 1 Timothy 3.1^.
intrusting them with the exercise of that authority which he puts forth in the
rule of his Disciples in this World, he has also appointed the most holy
institution of his supper to denote and express th^^ union and communion which
the members of each of these Churches have by his Ordinance among themsevles, 1
Cor. 10.17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the
blood of Christ? the bread which we break is it not the communion of the body
of Christ? for we being many are one bread and one body, for we are all
partakers of that one bread. And also he gives out unto them the gifts and
graces of his spirit, to make every one of them meet for, and useful in that
place which he holds in such Churches as the Apostle discourses at large, 1
Cor. 12.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. verses. Colos. 2.19.
Ephesians. 4.16. It is manifest then that no Ordinance of Christ is appointed to be
observed by his Disciples, no communication of the gifts of the Holy Ghost is
promised to them, no especial duty is required of them, but with respect unto
these Churches of his Institution.

In the Answer to this Question, four things are declared tending to the
Explication of the nature of a particular Church or Churches.

(1.) The subject matter of them, or the persons whereof such a Church does or
ought to consist. (2.) The means whereby they are brought into a condition
capable of such an estate, or qualified for it. (3.) The general ends of their
calling. (4.) The especial means whereby they are constituted a Church; which
last will be spoken unto in the next Question.

For the first, All men are by nature the children of wrath, and do belong unto
the World, which is the Kingdom of Satan, and are under the power of darkness
as the Scripture every where declares. In this state, men are not subjects of
the Kingdom of Christ, nor meet to become members of his Church. Out of this
condition, they cannot deliver themselves. They have neither will unto it, nor
power for it, but they are called out of it: this calling is that which
effectually delivers them from the Kingdom of Satan, and translates them into
the Kingdom of Christ. And this work or effect the Scripture on several
accounts variously expresses. Sometimes by Regeneration, or a new birth,
sometimes by conversion or turning unto God; sometimes by vivification, or
quickening from the dead; sometimes by illumination or opening of the eyes of
the blind; all which are carried on by sanctification in holiness, and attended
with Justification and adoption; And as these are all distinct in themselves,
having several formal reasons of them, so they all concur to complete that
effectual vocation or calling that is required to constitute persons members
of the Church. For besides that this is signified by the typical holiness of
the Church of old, into the room whereof real holiness was to succeed under
the new Testament, Exodus 19.6. Psalm. 24, 3, 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 15.1, 2. Isa. 35.8,
9. Isa. 54.13. Chap. 60.21. 1 Pet. 2.9. our Lord Jesus Christ has laid it down
as an everlasting rule, that unless a man be born again, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. requiring regeneration as an indispensable
condition in a Member of his Church, a subject of his Kingdom. For his Temple,
is now to be built of living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. Men* spiritually and savingly
quickened from their death in sin and by the Holy Ghost, whereof they are
partakers, made a meet habitation for God, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor.
6.16. which receiving vital supplies from Christ its head, increases in faith
and holiness, edifying it self in love, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. And as the Apostles in
their writings, do ascribe unto all the Churches, and the Members of them a
participation in this effectual vocation, affirming that they are Saints*
called, sanctified, justified and accepted with God in Christ, Romans 1.5, 6. 1
Cor. 1.2. 1 Cor. 4.15. Heb. 3.1. Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 2.5. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. 1 Cor.
6.11. So, many of the duties that are required of them, in that relation and
condition, are such, as none can perform unto the glory of God, their own
benefit, and the edification of others, (the ends of all obedience) unless they
are partakers of this effectual calling, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. 1 Cor. 12.12. Ephesians.
4.16. Add hereunto that these Churches and the members of them, are not only
commanded to separate themselves as to their Worship of God, from the World,
that is men in their worldly state and condition, but are also required when
any amongst them trasgress against the rules and laws of this holy calling
above described, to cast them out of their society and communion, 1 Cor. 5.13.
from all which it appears, who are the subject matter of these Churches of
Christ; as also secondly, the means whereby they come to be so, namely the
administration of the spirit and word of Christ; and Thirdly, the general ends
of their calling, which are all spoken to in this answer.

Quest. 20. By what means do persons so called become a Church of Christ?

Answ. They are constituted a Church, and interested in the rights, power, and
privileges of a Gospel Church, by the will, promise, authority, and law of
Jesus Christ, upon their own voluntary consent and engagement to walk together
in the due subjection of their Souls and Consciences unto his authority, as
their King, Priest and Prophet, and in an holy observation of all his commands,
ordinances, and appointments, Matthew. 18.20. Chap. 28.18, 19. Acts 2.41, 42.
Exodus 24.3. Deuteronomy. 5.27. Psalm 110.3. Isa. 44.5. Chap. 59.21. Ephesians. 4.7, 8, 9,
10. 2. Cor. 8.5.

Explication.
That the Lord Christ has constituted such a Church State as that which we
enquire about, has been proved already. Unto a Church so constituted, he has
also by his word and promise annexed all those privileges and powers, which we
find a Church to be entrusted withal. This he has done by the standing and
unalterable Law of the Gospel, which is the Charter of their spiritual society
and incorporation. Neither are, nor can any persons be interested in the rights
of a Church any otherwise, but by virtue of this Law and constitution. This
therefore is first to be laid down, that the sole moral foundation of that
Church State which we enquire after, is laid in the Word, Law, and appointment
of Christ. He alone has authority to erect such a society, he is the builder
of this house, as well as the Lord over it, Heb. 3.3, 6. neither without it,
can all the authority of men in the World appoint such a state, or erect a
Church, and all acceptable actings of men herein, are no other but acts of pure
obedience unto Christ.

Farthermore, We have declared that the Lord Christ by the dispensation of his
word and spirit, does prepare and fit men to be subjects of his Kingdom,
Members of his Church; the work of sending forth the means of the conversion of
the souls of men, of translating them from the power of darkness into light, he
has taken upon himself, and does effectually accomplish it in every
generation. And by this means he builds his Church, Matthew. 18.20. For unto all
persons so called, he gives command that they shall do and observe whatever he
has appointed them to do, Mat. 28.20. in particular, that they profess their
subjection to him, and their obedience, in joining themselves in that state
wherein they may be enabled to observe all his other laws and institutions,
with the whole worship of God required therein. Being converted unto God by his
Word and Spirit, they are to consider, how they may now obey the Lord Christ in
all things. Amongst his commands, this of joining themselves in Church
societies wherein he has promised his presence with them, Matthew. 18.20. that
is to dwell amongst them by his word and spirit, Isa. 59.21. is the very first.
This by virtue of that command and promise of his they are warranted and
enabled to do, nor do they need any other warrant. The authority of Christ is
sufficient to bear men out in the discharge of their duty to him. Being then
made willing and ready in the day of his power, Psalm 110.3. they consent,
choose, and agree to walk together in the observation of all his commands. And
hereby do they become a Church. For their becoming a Church, is an act of their
willing obedience unto Christ. This obedience is an act of their wills, guided
by rule; for this also is necessary that they proceed herein according to the
rules of his appointment afterward to be unfolded. And herein, upon their
obedience unto the commands of Christ, and faith in his promises, do Believers
by virtue of his Law, and constitution, become a Gospel Church, and are really
and truly interested in all the power, rights and privileges, that are granted
unto any Church of Christ. For in this obedience they do these two things which
alone he requires in any persons for the obtaining of an interest in these
privileges. First, They confess him, his person, his authority, his law, his
grace Secondly, They take upon themselves the observance of all his commands.

Thus did God take the children of Israel into a Church State of old. He
proposed unto them the Church obedience that he required of them, and they
voluntarily and freely took upon themselves the performance of it, Exodus 24.3.
And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord, and all the
judgments, and all the people answered with one voice, and said, all the words
which the Lord has said, will we do. So Deuteronomy. 5.7. and hereby they had their
solemn admission into their Church State, and relation unto God. And the like
course they took when ever there was need of renewing their engagements, Josh.
24.18, 21, 22. And the people said we will serve the Lord, for he is our God;
and Joshua said unto the people ye are witnesses against your selves, that ye
have chosen the Lord to serve him, and they said we are witnesses. This was the
covenant, that was between God and that people which was solemnly renewed, so
often as the Church was eminently reformed. Now although the outward solemnity
and ceremonies of this covenant were peculiar unto that people, yet as to the
substance and nature of it in a sacred consent for the performance of all those
duties toward God and one another which the nature and edification of a Church
do require, it belongs to every Church as such even under the Gosple.

And this is the way whereby Beleivers or the Disciples of Christ, do enter
into this state, the formal constituting cause of any Church. This account does
the Apostle give of the Churches of the Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8.5. And this they
did, not as we hoped but first gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us
by the will of God. before the performance of other duties, and in order
thereunto, they first gave themselves to the Lord Jesus Christ, or took upon
themselves the observance of his commands and institutions, which is the
intendment of that expression. Among these commands one was that they should
give up themselves to the Apostles doctrine, Rule and government in the order
by Christ prescribed, that is in Church order. This therefore they did by the
will of God, according to his will, and appointment. This description does the
Apostle give of the way whereby the Believers of Macedonia were brought into
Churches. It was by their own obedience unto the will of God, consenting,
agreeing, and taking upon themselves the observation of all the commands and
institutions of Christ, according to the direction and guidance of the
Apostles. So did the Believers at Jerusalem, Acts 2.41, 42. Being converted by
the word, and making profession of that conversion in their Baptism, they gave
up themselves to a steadfast continuance in the observation of all other
Ordinances of the Gospel.

Besides the Church is an house, a Temple, the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. The
house of Christ, Heb. 3.6. The Temple of God; Ephe. 2.21, 22. Believers singly
considered are stones, living stones; 1 Peter 2.5. Now how shall these living
stones come to be an house, a Temple? can it be by occasional occurrences,
civil cohabitation in political precincts, usage or custom of assembling for
some parts of worship in any place? these things will never frame them into a
house or Temple. This can be no otherwise done but by-their own voluntary
consent and disposition. Ephe. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. Ye are fellow-Citizens with
the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone,
in whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy Temple, in
the Lord; in whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God
through the spirit. Chap. 4.16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together,
and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part makes increase of the body unto the
edifying of it self in love. From these and sundry other places, it is
manifest, that the way and means of Believers coalition into a Church State, is
their own obedience of faith, acting it self in a joint voluntary consent to
walk together in an holy observation of the commands of Christ, whence the
being and union of a particular Church is given unto any convenient number of
them by his Law and constitution.

Qu. 21. Seeing the Church is a society or spiritual incorporation of persons
under rule, government or Discipline, declare who or what are the rulers,
governors or Officers therein under Jesus Christ?

An. They have been of two sorts (1) extraordinary appointed for a season only,
and (2) ordinary to continue unto the end of the World.

Qu. 22. Who are the extraordinary Officers or Rulers or Ministers of the
Church appointed to serve the Lord Jesus Christ therein for a season only?

An. (1) The Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, with (2) the Evangelists and
Prophets endowed with extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, associated with
them, and employed by them in their work and Ministry. (1) Math. 10.2, 3. Acts
1.26. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephe. 4.11. (2) Luke 10.1. 2 Timothy 4.5. Titus. 1.5. Acts
11.27, 28. Acts 21.9, 10, 11. 2. Cor. 1.1.

Explication.
That the Church is a Spiritual corporation, attended with rule and government,
is evident from the nature of the thing it self and testimonies of Scripture.
Only as the Kingdom of Christ is not of this World, or Worldly, so this rule
and government of the Church is not mearly external, and secular, but
spiritual. Neither does this rule at all belong unto it, merely as materially
considered, in men yielding obedience unto the call which is the foundation of
the Church, nor absolutely as it is formally constituted a Church by the
consent and agreement described, but moreover it is required that it be
organically complete with Officers or rulers; now to the constitution of such a
society or corporation there is required.

First, that the persons whereof it is constituted do consent together into it
for the attaining of the ends which they design. Without this no society of any
kind can exist. This is the form of men's coalescencie into societyes. And that
there is in the Church such a consent and agreement has been showed.

Secondly, that there be Rules or Laws for the guidance and direction of all
the Members of the society, in order to their pursuit of the proper ends of it.
That such Rules or Laws are given and prescribed by the Lord Christ unto the
Church, will afterward appear in our consideration of them in particular; so
that the Church is a society of men walking according unto Rule or Law for the
attaining of the ends of the society.

Thirdly, that there be Authority instituted for to see to the due Observation
of these Rules and Laws of the society, which consists in this; (1) That some
be appointed to Rule and Govern in the Church. (2) Others, to Obey and be Ruled
or Governed; both according to the Laws of the society and not otherwise. And
both these are eminently found in this Church State as we shall see in the
ensuing Question with their Answers and Explications.

Now that these Officers, or Rulers, should be of two sorts, both the nature of
the thing it self required, and so has our Lord Jesus Christ appointed. For
when the Church was first to be called, gathered, and erected, it was necessary
that some Persons should (...) extraordinarily employed in that work* for
ordinary Officers, antecedent unto the calling and erection of the Church,
there could be none. And therefore these pesons were in an extraordinary manner
endowed with all that power which afterward was to reside in the Churches
themselves* and moreover with that, which was peculiarly needful unto the
discharge and performance of that special duty and work that they were
appointed unto. But when Churches were called, gathered* erected, and settled
for continuance* there was need of Officers suited to their state and
condition, called in an ordinary way; that is in a way appointed for
continuance unto the end of the World; and to be employed in the ordinary work
of the Church, that is the duties of it, which were constantly incumbent on it
by virtue of the command and appointment of Christ.

Quest. 23. Who are the ordinary Officers or Ministers of Christ in the Church
to be always continued therein?

Answ. Those whom the Scripture calls, Pastors and Teachers, Bishops, Elders,
and Guides, Acts 14.23. Acts 20.17, 18. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. Phil. 1.1.
1* Tim. 3.1, 2. chap. 5.17. Titus 1.5, 7. Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Pet. 5.1.

Explication.
Several names, are on several accounts, partly designing their authority,
partly their duty, and partly the manner of their discharge thereof, assigned
in the Scripture to the ordinary Ministers of the Churches. Sometimes they are
called Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. Sometimes Bishops or
Overseers, Phil. 1.1. Act. 20.28. Titus 1.5. Sometimes Elders, 1 Pet. 5.1. 1 Timothy 5.17. Act. 14.23. Act. 20.17. Sometimes Guides, Heb. 13.7, 17. By all
which names, and sundry others whereby they are expressed, the same sort,
order, and degree of persons is intended. Nor is any one of these names applied
or accommodated unto any, but all the rest are also in like manner; so that he
who is a Pastor or a Teacher, is also a Bishop or Overseer, a Presbyter or
Elder, a Guide or Ruler, a Minister, a servant of the Church for the Lords
sake. And of all other names assigned to the Ministers of the Church, that of
Bishop, can least of all be thought to have designed any special order or
degree of pre-eminence amongst them. For whereas it is but four times, or in
four places used in the New Testament as denoting any officers of the Church,
in each of them it is manifest, that those expressed by the other names of
Elders and Ministers are intended. So Act. 20.28. the Bishops are the Elders of
the particular Church of Ephesus verse the 17. Phil. 1.1. there were many
Bishops in that one particular Church, who had only Deacons joined with them;
that is they were the Elders of it. Tit. 1.8. the Bishops were the Elders to be
ordained verse. the 5. which persons are also directly intended, 1 Timothy 3.2. as
is evident from the coincidence of the directions given by the Apostle about
them, and the immediate adjoining of Deacons unto them verse. 8. So that no name
could be fixed on with less probability to assert from it a special supreme
order or degree of men in Ministry, than this of Bishops. Neither is there any
mention in any place of Scripture, of any such pre-eminence of one sort of
these Church Officers or Ministers over another; not in particular in those
places where the Officers of the Church are in an especial manner enumerated,
as 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. Romans 12.5, 6, 7, 8. Nor is there any mention of any
special office that should be peculiar unto such Officers, or of any gifts or
qualifications that should be required in them; or of any special way of
calling or setting apart to their office; nor of any kind of Church that they
should relate unto, different from the Churches that other Elders or Pastors do
Minister in; nor of any special rule or direction for their trial; nor any
command for obedience unto them, but what are common to all Ministers of the
Churches of Christ ^uly discharging their trust, and performing their duty; no
intimation is given unto either Elders or Ministers to obey them; or directions
how to respect them; nor unto them how to behave themselves toward them; but
all these things are spoken and delivered promiscuously and equally concerning
all Ministers of the Gospel. It is evident then that these appellations do not
belong unto one sort of Ministers, not one more than another* and for what is
pleaded by some, from the example of Timothy and Titus, it is said, that when
any persons can prove themselves to be Evangelists. 1 Timothy 4.5. to be called
unto their office upon antecedent prophecy, 1 Timothy 1.18. and to be sent by the
Apostles, and in an especial manner to be directed by them in some employment
for a season, which they are not ordinarily to attend unto, Titus 1.5 Chap.
3.12. It will be granted that they have another duty and office committed unto
them, than those who are only Bishops or Elders in the Scripture.

Quest. 24. What are the principal differences between these two sorts of
Officers or Rulers in the Church, extraordinary and ordinary?

Answ. (1.) The former were called to their office immediately by Jesus Christ
in his own Person, or revelation made by the Holy Ghost in his name to that
purpose; the latter by the suffrage, choice and appointment of the Church it
self. (2.) The former both in their Office and work, were independent on, and
antecedent unto all or any Churches, whose calling and gathering depended on
their office as its consequent and effect; the latter, in both consequent unto
the calling, gathering and constituting of the Churches themselves, as an
effect thereof, in their tendency unto compleatness and perfection. (3.) The
authority of the former being communicated unto them immediately by Jesus
Christ without any intervenient actings of any Church, extended it self equally
unto all Churches whatever: that of the latter being derived unto them from
Christ by the election and designation of the Church, is in the exercise of it,
confined unto that Church wherein and whereby it is so derived unto them. (4.)
They differ also in the gifts which were suited unto their several distinct
works and employments. (1) Matthew. 10.2. Luke 10.1. Gal. 1.1. Acts 1.26. Acts
6.3. Acts 14.23. (2) Joh. 20.21, 22, 23. Gal. 1.1. Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 21.14.
Acts 14.23. Titus 1.5, 7. (3) Matthew. 28, 18, 19, 20. 2 Cor. 11.28. Act. 20.28.
1 Pet. 1.2. Colos. 4.17. (4) 1 Cor. 12.28, 29, 30. The Answer hereunto is such
as needs no further Explication.

Quest. 25. What is required unto the due constitution of an Elder, Pastor or
Teacher of the Church?

Answ. (1) That he be furnished with the gifts of the Holy Spirit for the
edification of the Church, and the Evangelical discharge of the work of the
Ministry. (2) That he be unblameable, holy, and exemplary in his conversation.
(3) That he have a willing mind to give up himself unto the Lord in the work of
the Ministry. (4) That he be called and chosen by the suffrage and consent of
the Church. (5) That he be solemnly set apart by fasting and prayer and
imposition of hands unto his Work and Ministry. (1) Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12, 13. (2)
Titus 1.7, 8, 9. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. (3) 1. Pe^. 5.2, 3. (4) Acts 14.23.
(5) Acts 13.2. 1 Timothy 5.22. 1 Timothy 4.14.

Explication.
Five things are here said to be required unto the due and solemn constitution
of a Minister, Guide, Elder, Pastor, or Teacher of the Church* which as they do
not all equally belong unto the essence of the call, so they are all
indispensably necessary unto him that would be accounted to have taken that
office upon him according to the mind of Christ, and they are plainly expressed
in the Scripture.

The First is, that they be furnished with the gifts of the Holy Ghost, for the
discharge of the Ministry. The communication of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, is
the foundation of the Ministry, as the Apostle declares, Ephesians. 4.7, 8, 11, 12,
13. But unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the
gift of Christ, wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto Men, and he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man. And if this were not
continued, if the Lord Christ did not continue to give gifts unto men for that
end, the ministry must and would cease in the Church; and all Church order and
administrations thereon. The exercise also of the gifts, is required in all
them that are called unto sacred office, 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect nor the gift that
is in thee. Hence persons destitute of these gifts of the spirit, as they
cannot in a due manner discharge any one duty of the Ministry, so wanting an
interest in that which is the foundation of the Office, are not esteemed of God
as Ministers at all, whatever their outward call may be, Hosea 4.6. Because
thou have rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no
Priest to Me.

Secondly, Their unblameableness and holiness of conversation is previously
required in them that are to be set apart unto the Ministry. This the Apostle
expressly declares, and lays down many particular instances whereby it is to be
tried, Tit. 1.7, 8, 9. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God,
not self-willed, not soon angry, not given to Wine, no striker, not given to
filthy lucre, but a lover of hospitality, a lover of good men, sober, just,
holy, temperate, holding fast the faithful word as he has been taught, that he
may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and convince the gainsayers, 1 Timothy 3* 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one Wife,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach, not
given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not a
brawler, nor covetous, one that rules well his own house, having his Children
in subjection with all gravity; for if a man know not how to rule his own
house, how shall he take care of the Church of God? not a Novice, lest being
lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil; moreover he
must have a good report of them which are without, least he fall into reproach,
and the snare of the Devil. Not that the particulars here mentioned by the
Apostle are only to be considered in the conversation of the person to be
called to the Ministry, but that in an universal holy conversation these things
he requires that he should be eminent in amongst Believers, as those which have
an especial respect to his work and office. And a failure in any of them, is a
just cause or reason to debar any person from obtaining a part and lot in this
matter. For whereas the especial end of the Ministry, is to promote and farther
faith and holiness in the Church, by the edification of it, how unreasonable a
thing would it be, if men should be admitted unto the work of it, who in their
own Persons were strangers both unto faith and holiness. And herein are the
Elders of the Churches seriously to exercise themselves unto God, that they may
be an example unto the flock, in an universal laboring after conformity in
their lives unto the great Bishop and Pastor of the Church, our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Thirdly, It is required that such a Person have a willing mind to give up
himself unto God in this work, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. The Elders which are among you, I
exhort, feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof,
not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind;
neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being Ensamples to the flock.
Willingness and readiness of mind, are the things here required as a previous
qualification unto any man's susception of this Office; and two things does the
Apostle declare to be contrary hereunto.

First, The undertaking of it by constraint, which compriseth every antecedent
external impression upon the mind of the undertaker; such are personal outward
necessities, compulsions of Friends, and relations, want of other ways of
subsistence in the World; all which and the like are condemned by the Apostle
as bring some constraint on the mind, which on other accounts oughty to be free
and willing; as also all tergiversation and backwardness in persons duly
qualified and called, on the consideration of difficulties, temptations,
streights, persecutions, is here condemned.

Secondly, an eye and regard unto filthy lucre or profit in the World, is
proposed as opposite unto the readiness of mind which is required in them that
are called to this work. An aim in this employment for men by it to advantage
themselves in the outward things of this world, without which, it is evident
that the whole work and Office would lie neglected by the most of them who now
would be accounted partakers of it, is openly here condemned by the Apostle.

Fourthly, Election by the suffrage and consent of the Church is required unto
the calling of a Pastor or Teacher, so that without it formally, or virtually
given or obtained, the call however otherwise carried on or solemnized, is
irregular and defective. There are but two places in the New Testament where
there is mention of the manner whereby any are called in an ordinary way unto
any ministry in the Church; and in both of them there is mention of their
election by the community of the Church; and in both of them the Apostles
themselves presided with a fullness of Church power, and yet would not deprive
the Churches of that which was their liberty and privilege. The first of these
is Acts the 6. where all the Apostles together, to give a rule unto the future
proceeding of all Churches in the constitution of Officers amongst them, do
appoint the multitude of the Disciples or community of the Church, to look out
from among themselves, or to choose the persons that were to be set apart
thereon unto their office, which they did accordingly, Verses 2, 3, and 5. Then
the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, it is not
reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve Tables; wherefore
Brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the
Holy Ghost, and wisdom; and the saying pleased the whole multitude, and they
chose Stephen, etc. This was done when only Deacons were to be ordained, in
whom the interest and concernment of the Church is not to be compared with that
which it has in its Pastors, Teachers, and Elders. The same is mentioned
again, Acts 14.23. where Paul and Barnabas are said to ordain Elders in the
Churches by their election and suffrage, For the word there used, will admit of
no other sense, however it be ambiguously expressed in our translation. Neither
can any instance be given of the use of that word, applied unto the
communication of any office or power to any person or persons in an assembly
wherein it denotes any other action but the suffrage of the multitude; and
this it does constantly in all writers in the Greek tongue. And hence it was
that this right and privilege of the Church, in choosing of those who are to
be set over them in the work of the Lord, was a long time preserved inviolate
in the primitive Churches, as the ancients do abundantly testify. Yea the show
and appearance of it, could never be utterly thrust out of the World, but is
still retained in those Churches which yet reject the thing it self. And this
institution of our Lord Jesus Christ by his Apostles, is suited to the nature
of the Church, and of the authority that he has appointed to abide therein.
For as we have showed before, persons become a Church by their own voluntary
consent. Christ makes his subjects willing, not slaves: His rule over them is
by his grace in their own wills, and he will have them every way free in their
obedience. A Church State is an estate of absolute liberty under Christ, not
for men to do what they will, but for men to do their duty freely, without
compulsion. Now nothing is more contrary to this liberty, than to have their
Guides, Rulers, and Overseers impose on them without their consent. Besides,
the body of the Church is obliged to discharge its duty toward Christ in every
institution of his, which herein they cannot, if they have not their free
consent in the choice of their Pastors or Elders, but are considered as mute
persons, or brute creatures. Neither is there any other ordinary way of
communicating authority unto any in the Church, but by the voluntary submission
and subjection of the Church it self unto them. For as all other imaginable
ways may fail and have done so, where they have been trusted unto, so they are
irrational, and unscriptural, as to their being a means of the delegation of
any power whatever.

Fifthly, Unto this election succeeds the solemn setting apart of them that are
chosen by the Church unto this work and ministry, by fasting, prayer, and
imposition of the hands of the Presbitery, before constituted in the Church
wherein any person is so to be set apart.

Qu. 26. May a Person be called to, or be employed in a part only of the Office
or work of the Ministry, or may he hold the relation and exercise the duty of
an Elder or Minister unto more Churches than one at the same time?

Answ. Neither of these have either warrant or President in the Scripture, nor
is the first of them consistent with the authority of the Ministry, nor the
latter with the duty thereof, nor either of them with the nature of that
relation which is between the Elders and the Church, Acts 14.23. 1 Pet. 5.2.
Acts 20.28.

Explication.
There are two parts of this Question and Answer, to be spoken unto severally.
The First is concerning a person to be called or employed in any Church, in a
part only of the office or work of the Ministry. As suppose a Man should be
called or chosen by the Church to administer the Sacraments, but not to attend
to the work of Preaching; or unto the rule or guidance of the Church; or in
like manner unto any other part or parcel of the work of the Ministry, with an
exemption of other duties from his charge or care. If this be done by consent,
and agreement, for any time or season, it is unwarrantable and disorderly;
(what may be done occasionally upon an emergency, or in case of weakness or
disability befalling any Elder as to the discharge of any part of his duty, is
not here enquired after.) For,

First, If the Person so called or employed have received gifts fitting him for
the whole work of the Ministry, the exercise of them is not to be restrained by
any consent or agreement; Seeing they are given for the edification of the
Church to be traded withal, 1* Cor. 12*7. The manifestation of the spirit, is
given to every man to profit withal; and this he which has received such
gifts, is bound to attend unto, and pursue.

Secondly, If he have not received such gifts as completely to enable him unto
the discharge of the whole work of the Ministry in the Church wherein he is to
administer, it is not lawful for the Church to call him unto that work wherein
the Lord Christ has not gone before them in qualifying him for it. Yea to do
so, would be most irregular, for the whole power of the Church, consists in its
attendance unto the rule given unto it. And therefore the office and work of
the Ministry being constituted by the Law of Christ, it is not in the power of
the Church to enlarge or streighten the power or duty of any one that is called
unto the office thereof. Neither can or ought any person that is called unto
the work of the Ministry to give his consent to the restraint of the exercise
of that gift that he has received, in a due and orderly manner, nor to the
abridgement of the authority which the Lord Christ has committed unto the
Ministers of the Gospel.

As it is incumbent upon them to take care to preserve their whole authority,
and to discharge their whole duty, so that arbitrary constitutions of this
nature are irregular, and would bring in confusion into Churches.

The second part of the Question is, concerning the Relation of the same person
to more Churches than one at the same time, and his undertaking to discharge
the duty of his relation unto them, as an Elder or Minister. And this also is
irregular and unwarrantable. Now a man may hold the relation of an Elder,
Pastor, or Minister unto more Churches* than one two ways; First, formally and
directly, by all equal formal interest in them, undertaking the Pastoral charge
equally and alike of them, being called alike to them and accepting of such a
relation. (2) virtually; when by virtue of his relation unto one Church he puts
forth his power or authority in Ministerial acts in, or toward another. The
First way is unlawful, and destructive both of the Office and duty of a Pastor.
For as Elders are ordained in, and unto the Churches respectively that they are
to take care of; Acts 14.23. Tit. 1.5. And their office power consists in a
relation unto the Church that they are set over, so they are commanded to
attend unto the service of the Churches wherein, and whereunto, they are so
ordained. Act. 20.28. 1 Peter 1.2. And that with all diligence care and
watchfulness, as those that must give an account, Heb. 13.17. which no man is
able to do toward more Churches than one, the same duty being at all times to
be performed toward all. And because the whole authority of the Elders*
Pastors, or Bishops of Churches, is ministerial* ^ Cor. 4.1. consisting in a
power of acting upon the command of Christ, they are bound in their own persons
to the discharge of their duty and Office, without the least pretense of
authority to delegate another, or others, to act their part or to do their
duty, which would be an effect of autocratorical authority, and not of
obedience or Ministry. The latter way also of relation unto many Churches is
unwarrantable; For (1) It has no warrant in the Scripture; no Law, nor
constitution of Christ, or his Apostles, can be produced to give it
countenance; but Elders were ordained to their own Churches, and commanded to
attend unto them. (2) No rule is given unto any Elders how they should behave
themselves in reference unto more Churches than one, in the exercise of their
ministerial power, as there are rules given unto every one for the discharge of
that duty in the Church whereunto he is related. (3) There is no example to
give it countenance recorded in the Scripture. (4) The authority to be put
forth has no foundation. (1) Not in the gifts they have received* for the
ministerial power is not an absolute ability or faculty of doing what a man is
able, but a right, whereby a man has power to do that rightly and lawfully,
which before he could not do. This, gifts will not give to any; for if they
did, they would do it to all that have received them. (2) Not in their
election, for they are chosen in and by that Church whereunto they stand in
especial relation, whose choice cannot give ministerial power over any but
themselves. (3) Not in their setting apart by fasting, prayer, and imposition
of hands, for this is only unto that office, work, and power, whereunto they
are chosen. They are not chosen for one end, and set apart for another. (4) Not
from the Communion of Churches, for that gives no new power, but only a due
exercise of that which was before received.

Qu. 27. What are the principal duties of the Pastors or Teachers of the Church?

An. (1) To be examples unto the flock in faith, love, knowledge, meekness,
patience, readiness to suffer for the name and Gospel of Christ, with constancy
therein. (2) To watch for the souls, and take care of all the spiritual
concernments of the whole flock committed to them. (3) To preach the word
diligently, dividing it aright. (4) To preserve and contend for the truth. (5)
To administer all the Ordinances of the Gospel duly and orderly. (6) To stir up
and exercise the gifts they have received in the discharge of their whole work
and administration of all Ordinances. (7) To instruct, admonish, cherish, and
comfort, all the Members of the Church as their conditions, occasions and
necessities do require. (8) To attend with diligence, skill and wisdom unto
the discharge of that authority which in the rule of the Church is committed
unto them. (1) 1 Timothy 3.10, 11, 13. Chap. 4.12. 2 Timothy 2.3. Coloss. 1.24. Phil.
2.17. Chap. 3.17. (2) Heb. 13.17. Acts 20.28. (3) 2 Timothy 2.15. 2 Timothy 4.2. Romans
12.6* 7, 8. (4) 1 Timothy 6.20. Acts, 20.28. Jude 3. (5) 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. 1 Timothy
3.15. (6) 1 Timothy 4.14, 15, 16. (7) Acts 20.18, 19* 20, 25, 26. 1 These. 3.5. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. (8) Romans 12.8. 1 Timothy 5.17.

The answer is full and plain.

Qu. 28. Wherein principally does the authority of the Elders of the Church
consist?

An. (1) In that the Rule of the Church and the guidance thereof in things
appertaining unto the worship of God, is committed unto them. And therefore (2)
Whatever they do as Elders in the Church according unto rule, they do it not in
the name or authority of the Church by which their power is derived unto them,
nor as Members only of the Church by their own consent or covenant, but in the
name and authority of Jesus Christ, from whom by virtue of his Law and
Ordinance their ministerial office and power is received; so that (3) In the
exercise of any act of Church power, by and with the consent of the Church,
there is an obligation, thence proceeding, which arises immediately from that
authority which they have received of Jesus Christ, which is the spring of all
rule and authority in the Church. (1) Acts 20.28. Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Pet. 5.2. 1
Cor. 12.28. (2) 1 Timothy 3.5. Coloss. 4.17. 2 Cor. 10.4, 8. (3) 1 Timothy 4.11.
Titus 2.15. 1 Peter 1.2, 3, 4, 5.

Explication.
The answer unto this Question explains the power or authority of the Elders of
the Church, from whom they do receive it, and how it is exercised by them; the
right stating whereof is of great importance in the whole discipline of the
Church, and must therefore here be farther explained: to this end we may
consider,

First, that all Church power is originally vested in Jesus Christ the sole
head, and Monarch thereof. God the Father has committed it unto him, and
entrusted him with it for the accomplishment of his work of mediation, Matthew.
28.18.

Secondly, that he does communicate of this authority by way of trust, to be
exercised by them in his name, unto persons by him appointed, so much as is
needful for the ordering and disposing of all things in his Churches, unto the
blessed ends for which he has instituted and appointed them. For no man can
have any power in his Church for any end whatever, but by delegation from him.
What is not received from him, is mere usurpation. And whoever takes upon
himself the exercise of any Rule, or Authority, or power in the Church, not
granted unto them by him, or not rightly derived from him, is an oppressor, a
thief, and a Robber; this necessarily follows upon the absolute investiture of
all power in him alone. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephe. 4.11, 12.

Thirdly, the means whereby the Lord Christ communicates this power unto men,
is by his Law, and constitution, whereby he has granted, ordained, and
appointed, that such and such powers shall be exercised in his Church, and that
by such and such persons, to be derived unto them in such a way and manner; so
that the word of the Gospel, or the Laws and constitutions of the Lord Christ
therein, are the first recipient seat and subject morally of all Church power
whatever. Matthew. 16.19. Matthew. 18.18, 19, 20.

Fourthly, the way and means whereby any persons come to a participation of
this power regularly, according to the mind of Christ, is by the obedience
unto, and due observation of his laws and commands, in them unto whom they are
prescribed. As when an Office, with the power of it, is constituted and limited
by the law of the Land, there is no more required to invest any man in that
office, or to give him that power, than the due observance of the means and way
prescribed in the law to that end. The way then, whereby the Elders of the
Church do come to participate of the power and authority which Christ has
appointed to be exercised in his Church, is by their, and the Churches due
observance of the Rules and Laws given by him for their election, and setting
apart unto that office. Heb. 4.3. Acts 14.24.

Fifthly, on this account they receive their power from Christ himself alone,
and that immediately; for the means used for their participation of it, are not
recipient of the power it self formally, nor do authoritatively collate or
conferr it, only the laws of Christ are executed in a way of obedience. So that
though they are chosen and set apart to their office by the Church, yet they
are made Overseers by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20.28. Though they have their power
by the Church, yet they have it not from the Church; nor was that power whereof
they are made partakers (as was said) formally resident in the body of the
Church, before their participation of it; but really in Christ himself alone,
and morally in his word or law. And thence is the rule and guidance of the
Church committed unto them by Christ, Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Pet. 5.2. 1 Timothy 3.5.

Sixthly, this authority and power thus received from Christ, is that which
they exert and put forth in all their ministerial administrations, in all which
they do as ministers in the house of God, either in his worship, or in the rule
of the Church it self. They exercise that authority of Christ, which he has in
his law appointed to be exercised in his Church; and from that authority is due
order given unto the administration of all the ordinances of worship; and an
obligation unto obedience to acts of rule does thence also ensue; so that they
which despise them, despise the authority of Christ.

Seventhly, when as Elders they do, or declare any thing in the name of the
Church, they do not, as such, put forth any authority committed unto them from
and by the Church, but only declare the consent and determination of the Church
in the exercise of their own liberty and privilege; but the authority which
they act by, and which they put forth, is that which is committed to themselves
as such by Jesus Christ.

Eighthly, this authority is comprised in the Law and constitution of Christ
which themselves exert only ministerially; and therefore when ever they act any
thing authoritatively, which they are not enabled for, or warranted in by the
word of the Gospel, or do any thing without, or contrary unto rule, all such
actings as to any spiritual effect of the Gospel, or obligation on the
consciences of Men, are Ipso facto null, and are no way ratified in Heaven,
where all their orderly actings are made valid; that is, by Christ himself in
his Word.

Ninthly, The reason therefore why the consent of the Church is required unto
the authoritative acting of the Elders therein; is not because from thence any
authority does accrue unto them anew, which virtually and radically they had
not before; but because by the rule of the Gospel this is required to the
orderly acting of their power, which without it would be contrary to rule, and
therefore ineffectual; as also it must needs be from the nature of the thing it
self; for no act can take place in the Church without or against its own
consent, whilst its obedience is voluntary and of choice.

But if it be asked, what then shall the Elders do, in case the Church refuse
to consent unto such acts as are indeed according to rule, and warranted by the
institution of Christ? it is answered, that they are First diligently to
instruct them from the word in their duty, making known the mind of Christ unto
them in the matter under consideration. (2) To declare unto them the danger of
their dissent in obstructing the edification of the Body to the dishonor of
the Lord Christ, and their own spiritual disadvantage. (3) To wait patiently
for the concurrence of the grace of God with their Ministry, in giving light
and obedience unto the Church; and (4) In case of the Churches continuance in
any failure of duty, to seek for advice and counsel from the Elders and
Brethren of other Churches, all which particulars might be enlarged, would the
nature of our present design and work permit it.

Quest. 29. What is the duty of the Church toward their Elders, Pastors or
Teachers?

Answ. (1) To have them in reverence and honor for their office and works
sake. (2) To obey them conscientiously in all things wherein they speak unto
them in the name of the Lord. (2) To pray earnestly for them, that they may,
and to exhort them, if need require, to fulfill the work of the Ministry (4) To
communicate unto them of their temporals for their comfortable subsistence in
the World, and usefulness unto others. (5) Wisely to order things by their
direction, so as that they may be amongst them without fear. (6) To abide with,
and stand by them, in their sufferings for the Gospel, and service of Christ
among them. (1) 1 These.. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5.17. (2) Heb. 13.17. 1 Cor. 16.16. (3)
Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Colos. 4.3. 2 These. 3.1. Colos. 4.17. (4) Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor.
9.14. (5) 1 Cor. 16.10. (6) 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. 2 Timothy 4.16.

Quest. 30. Are there any differences in the Office, or Offices, of the Guides,
Rulers, Elders or Ministers of the Church?

Answ. The Office of them that are Teachers, is one and the same among them
all; but where there are many in the same Church, it is the will of Christ that
they should be peculiarly assigned unto such especial work in the discharge of
their office power, as their gifts received from him do peculiarly fit them
for, and the necessities of the Church require. Romans 12.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 1* Cor.
8.11. 1 Pet. 4.10. Chap. 5.2.

Explication.
The Office of them that are to instruct the Church in the name and authority
of Christ, is one and the same, as has been showed before. And there are many
names that are equally accommodated unto all that are partakers of it, as
Elders, Bishops, Guides; They are all alike Elders, alike Bishops, alike
Guides, have the one office in common amongst them, and every one the whole
entire unto himself. But there are names also given unto them, whereby they are
distinguished, not as to Office, but as to their work and employment in the
discharge of that office: such are Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. Which are
placed as distinct persons in their work, partakers of the same Office. Now the
foundation of this distinction and difference lies.

First, In the different gifts that they have received; For although it be
required in them all, that they have received all those gifts, abilities, and
qualifications which are necessary for the work of the Ministry, yet as to the
degrees of their participation of their gifts, some may more excel in one,
others in another, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. There are diversities of gifts, but the
same spirit, and there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord:
and there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which works
all in all. For to one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom, to another
the word of knowledge by the same spirit, etc. and all these gifts are bestowed
upon them to be exercised and laid out, for the profit and benefit of the
Church* Verse the 7. The manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to
profit withal. And therefore every one is in a^ especial manner to attend unto
the exercise and use of that gift wherein he does excel* or which tends most
to the edification of the Church; every man being to minister according as he
has received, 1 Pet. 4.10.

Secondly, It lies in the nature of the work of the Ministry in the Church,
which in general may be referred unto two heads or ends.

First, The instruction of it in the knowledge of God in Christ, and the
mysteries of the Gospel, that it might grow in grace, wisdom, saving light, and
knowledge.

Secondly, The exhortation of it to walk answerable unto light received in
holiness and universal obedience. Now though these several ends of the Ministry
cannot be divided or separated, yet they may be distinguished, and so carried
on distinctly, that in the one, knowledge or light may be firstly and
principally intended, so as to lead unto obedience; in the other, holiness may
be firstly designed, as springing from Gospel light or knowledge. Hence
therefore are the Elders of the Church, principally to attend unto that work or
that end of the Ministry, which by the Holy Ghost they (...) most suited unto.
And therefore the Church following the intimations of the Holy Ghost, in
communicating his gifts in variety as he pleases, and attending their own
edification, may and ought amongst those whom they choose to the Office of
Elders or Ministers, withal design them in Particular unto that especial work
which they are especially fitted and prepared for; and this upon their being
chosen, and set apart, they are accordingly to attend unto: He that teaches on
teaching, he that exhorts on exhortation* Romans 12.7, 8. Their Office then is
the same, but their teaching, work, and employment on the grounds mentioned,
distinct and different.

Quest. 31. Are there appointed any Elders in the Church, whose office and duty
consist in rule and government only?

Answ. Elders not called to teach ordinarily, or administer the Sacraments, but
to assist and help in the rule and government of the Church, are mentioned in
the Scripture. Romans 1^.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Timothy 5.17.

Explication.
This Office of ruling Elders in the Church, is much opposed by some, and in
especial by them who have least rea^son so to do* For First, They object
against them, that they are lay Elders* when those with whom they have to do,
deny that distinction of the Church into the Clergy and Layity. For although
they allow the distribution of (...), into Officers, and the multitude of the
Brethren, yet they maintain that the whole Church is Gods Clergy, his lot, and
portion, 1. Pet. 5.3. Again, they affirm them to be Elders, and therein not
merely of the members of the Church, but Officers set apart unto their Office
according to rule, or the appointment of Christ. And if by Layity, the people
distinct from the Officers of the Church are to be understood, the very term of
a lay Elder implies a contradiction, as designing one, who is, and is not, a
Church Officer. Besides, themselves do principally govern the Church by such
whom they esteem Laymen, as not in holy-Orders; to whom the principal part of
its rule, at least in the execution of it is committed, which renders their
objection to this sort of Church Officers unreasonable. Others also have given
advantage by making this Office annual, or biennial, in them that are chosen
unto it; which though they plead the necessity of their Churches for, as not
having Persons meet for this work and duty, who are willing to undertake in
constantly during their lives, without such a contribution for their
maintenance as they are not able to afford; yet the wisest of them do
acknowledge an irregularity in what they do, and wish it remedied. But this
hinders not, but that such Church Officers are indeed designed in the
Scripture, and of whom frequent mention is made in the ancient writers, and
footsteps also, yet remain in most Churches of their institution, though
woefully corrupted. For besides, that some light in this matter may be taken
from the Church of the Jews, wherein the Elders of the People, were joined in
Rule with the Priests, both in the Sanhedrim, and all lesser Assemblies; there
is in the Gospel express mention of persons that were assigned peculiarly for
Rule and Government in the Church, as 1 Cor. 12.28. And it is in vain pretended
that those words, helps, governments, do denote gifts only, seeing the Apostle
expressly enumerates the persons in Office, or Officers, which the Lord Christ
then used in the foundation, and Rule of the Churches as then planted. He that
rules, also is distinguished from him that teaches, and him that exhorts,
Romans 12.8. and is prescribed diligence, as his principal qualification in the
discharge of his duty. And the words of the Apostle to this purpose, are
express, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of
double honor, especially those who labor in the word and doctrine. For the
words expressly assign two sorts of Elders, whereof some, only attend unto rule;
others moreover labor in the word and doctrine. Neither does that word, as
some would have it, labor in the Word, intend any other labor but what is
incumbent on all the Pastors and Teachers of their Church as their constant
duty; see Romans 6.12. Acts 20.35. 1 These. 5.12. Now can we suppose that the
Apostle would affirm them to be worthy of double honor, whom comparing with
others, he notes as remiss and negligent in their work. For it seems that
others were more diligent in the discharge of that duty, which was no less
theirs, if only one sort of Elders be here intended. The Scripture is not wont
to commend such persons as worthy of double honor, but rather to propose them
as meet for double shame and punishment, Jer. 48.10. 1 Cor. 9.16. And they are
unmindful of their own interest, who would have Bishops that attend to the rule
of the Church, to be distinctly intended by the Elders that rule well; seeing
the Apostle expressly prefers before and above them, those that attend
constantly to the Word and Doctrine. And besides what is thus expressly spoken
concerning the appointment of this sort of Elders in the Church, their
usefulness in the necessity of their work, and employment, is evident. For
whereas a constant care in the Church, that the conversation of all the members
of it be such as becomes the Gospel, that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ be
not evil spoken of, is of great concernment and importance, and the Pastors and
Teachers, being to give up themselves continually unto prayer, and the ministry
of the word, cannot attend unto the constant and daily oversight thereof, the
usefulness of these Elders, whose proper and peculiar work it is to have regard
unto the holy walking of the Church, must needs be manifest unto all. But
whereas in most Churches, there is little or no regard unto the personal
holiness of the members of them, it is no wonder that no account should be had
of them who are ordained by the Lord Christ to look after it and promote it.

The qualifications of these Elders, with the way of their call and setting
apart unto their Office, being the same with those of the Teaching Elders
before insisted on, need not be here again repeated. Their authority also in
the whole rule of the Church, is every way the same with that of the other sort
of Elders, and they are to act in the execution of it with equal respect and
regard from the Church. Yea the business of rule, being peculiarly committed
unto them, and they required to attend thereunto with diligence in an especial
manner, the work thereof is principally theirs; as that of laboring in the
word and doctrine does especially belong unto the Pastors and Teachers of the
Churches. And this institution is abused, when either unmeet persons are called
to this Office, or those that are called, do not attend unto their duty with
diligence, or do act only in it by the guidance of the Teaching Officers,
without a sense of their own authority, or due respect from the Church.

Quest. 32. Is there no other ordinary Office in the Church, but only that of
Elders?

Answ. Yes of Deacons also.

Quest. 33. What are the Deacons of the Church?

Answ. Approved men chosen by the Church to take care for the necessities of
the poor belonging thereunto, and other outward occasions of the whole Church,
by the collection, keeping, and distribution of the Alms, and other supplies of
the Church, set apart and commended to the grace of God therein, by Prayer.
Acts 6.3, 5, 6. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Explication.
The Office of the Deacon, the nature, end, and use of it, the qualification of
the persons to be admitted unto it, the way and manner of their Election and
setting apart; are all of them plainly expressed in the Scripture, Acts 6.1, 2,
3. There arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because the
Widows were neglected in the daily ministration; then the twelve called the
multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said, it is not reason that we should
leave the word of God, and serve Tables; wherefore Brethren, look ye out among
you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and wisdom, whom we may
appoint over this business; and the saying pleased the whole multitude, and
they chose Stephen, etc. whom they set before the Apostles, and when they had
prayed, they laid their hands on them. 1 Timothy 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Likewise
must the Deacons be grave, not double tongued, not given to much Wine, not
given to filthy lucre, holding the mystery of the faith in a pure Conscience;
and let these also first be proved, then let them use the Office of a Deacon,
being found blameless; the Husbands of one Wife, ruling their Children, and
their own house well, for they that have used the Office of a Deacon well,
purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is
in Christ Jesus. These things are thus plain and express in the Scr^pture. But
whereas many have grown weary of the observation of the institutions of the
Gospel, this Office has for a long time been lost amongst the most of
Christians. By some the name is retained, but applied to another work, duty,
and employment than this to which it is peculiarly appropriated in the
Scripture. Their proper and original work of taking care for the poor, they
say, is provided for by others; and therefore that office being needless,
another, unto another purpose, under the same name, is erected. Such are
Deacons that may read Service, Preach and Baptize, when they have license
thereunto. But this choice, to rej^ct an Office of the appointment of Christ,
under pretense of provision made for the duties of it another way, and the
erecting of one not appointed by him, seems not equal. But whereas it is our
duty in all things to have regard to the authority of Christ and his
appointments in the Gospel, if we claim the privilege of being called after
his name, some think that if what he has appointed may be colourably performed
another way without respect unto his institutions, that is far the best. But
omitting the practice of other Men, the things that concern this Office in the
Church, are as was said, clear in the Scripture.

First, The persons called unto it are to be of honest report, furnished with
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, especially with wisdom, Acts 6.3. And those other
endowments useful in the discharge of their duty mentioned, 1 Timothy 3.8.

Secondly, The way whereby they come to be made partakers of this Office, is by
the choice or election of the Church, Acts 6.2, 3, 5. whereupon they are
solemnly to be set apart by prayer.

Thirdly, Their work or duty consists in a daily ministration unto the
necessities of the poor Saints, or Members of the Church, Verse. 1, 2.

Fourthly, To this end that they may be enabled so to do, it is ordained, that
every first day the Members of the Church do contribute according as God
enables them of their substance, for the supply of the wants of the poor, 1
Cor. 16.2. And also occasionally, as necessity shall require, or God move their
hearts by his grace.

Fifthly, Hereunto is to be added whatever by the providence of God may be
conferred upon the Church for its outward advantage, with reference unto the
end mentioned, Acts 4.34, 35.

Sixthly, These supplies of the Church being committed to the care and charge
of the Deacons, they are from (...) to minister with diligence and wisdom unto
the necessities of the poor; that so the needy may be supplied, that there may
be none that lack, the rich may contribute of their riches according to the
mind of Christ, and in obedience unto his command, that they which minister
well in this office, may purchase to themselves a good degree, and boldness in
the faith, and that in all, the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified
with praise and thanksgiving.

It belongs therefore unto Persons called unto this Office,

First, To acquaint themselves with the outward condition of those that appear
to be poor and needy in the Church, whether by the addresses of such poor ones,
who are bound to make known their wants, occasions, and necessities unto them,
or by the information of others, or their own observation.

Secondly, to acquaint the Elders and the Church as occasion requires with the
necessities of the poor under their care, that those who are able may be
stirred up by the Elders, to a free supply and contribution.

Thirdly, To dispose what they are entrusted with faithfully, cheerfully,
tenderly, with partiality or preferring one before another, for any outward
respect whatever.

Fourthly, To keep and give an account unto the Church when called for, of what
they have received, and how they have disposed of it, that so they may be known
to have well discharged their Office; that is with care, wisdom, and
tenderness, whereby they procure to themselves a good degree with boldness in
the faith, and the Church is encouraged to entrust them farther with this
sacrifice of their alms, which is so acceptable unto God.

Quest. 24. Wherein consists the general duty of the whole Church, and every
member thereof in their proper station and condition?

Answ. In performing, doing, and keeping inviolate all the commands and
institutions of Jesus Christ, walking unblameably and fruitfully in the World,
holding forth the Word of truth, and glorifying the Lord Christ in and by the
profession of his name, and keeping his testimony unto the end. Matthew. 28.20.
Acts 2.42. Phil 2.15, 16. Chap. 4.8, 9. 1 These. 3.8. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11, 12, 13,
14. 1 Timothy 3.15. Heb. 10.23.

Explication
Besides the general duties of Christianity incumbent on all Believers, or
Disciples of Christ as such, there are sundry especial duties required of them
as gathered into Church societies, upon the account of an especial trust
committed unto them in that state and condition; For,

First, the Church being appointed as the seat and subject of all the
institutions of Christ, and ordinances of Gospel worship, it is its duty, that
is, of the whole body and every member in his proper place, to use all care,
watchfulness and diligence, that all the commands of Christ be kept inviolate,
and all his institutions observed, according to his mind and will. Thus those
added to the Church, Acts 2.42. Together with the whole Church, continued
steadfastly (which argues care, circumspection and diligence) in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship and breaking of bread and prayers; Which principal
duties are enumerated, to express their respect toward all. This is their
standing fast in the Lord, which was a matter of such joy to the Apostle when
he found it in the Thessalonians; 1 Ephe. 3.8. For now we live if ye stand fast
in the Lord. That order and stedfastness which he rejoiced over in the
Colossians; Chap. 2.5. For though I am absent in the flesh, yet am I with you
in the spirit, joying and boholding your order and the stedfastness of your
faith in Christ. And where this duty is despised, men contenting themselves
with what is done by others, there is a great neglect of that faithfulness in
obedience which the Church owes unto Jesus Christ.

Secondly, the Glory of the Lord Christ, and the doctrine of the Gospel to be
manifested in, and by the power of an holy exemplary conversation, is committed
unto the Church and all the members of it. This is one end wherefore the Lord
Christ calls them out of the World, separates them to be a peculiar people unto
himself, brings them forth unto a visible profession, and puts his name upon
them, namely that in their walking, and conversation, he may show forth the
holiness of his doctrine, and power of his spirit, grace, and example to effect
in them all holiness; godlyness, righteousness and honesty in the World. Hence
are they earnestly exhorted unto these things. Phil. 4.8.9. Brethren whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report, if there be any virtue, if their be any praise, think on these
things; and that to this end, that the doctrine of the Gospel may be adorned
and Christ glorified in all things; Tit. 2.10. And those who fail herein are
said to be Enemies of the cross of Christ; Phil. 3.18; As hindering the progress
of the doctrine thereof, by representing it undesirable in their conversation.
This also therefore, even the duty of universal holiness, with an especial
regard unto the honor of Christ, and the Gospel which they are called and
designed to testify and express in the World, is incumbent on the Church, and
every member of it; namely as the Apostle speaks, that they be blameless, and
harmless, the sons of God, without rebukes in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation, among whom they are to shine as lights in the World, Phil.
2.15.

Thirdly, the care of declaring and manifesting the truth is also committed
unto them. Christ has made the Church to be the pillar and ground of truth. 1 Timothy 3.15. where the truth of the Gospel is so firmly seated, founded, fixed,
established, and then lifted up in the ways of Christ's appointment to be seen,
discerned, and known by others. And as this is done principally in the
preaching of the Gospel by the Elders of the Church, and in their contending
for the truth once delivered unto the saints, Jude 3. So it is also the duty of
the whole Church, to hold forth the word of life, Phill. 2.16. by ministering of
the gift that every man has received; 1 Peter, 4.10. In the way of Christ's
appointment. In these, and the like instances, does our Lord Jesus require of
his Church that they express in the World their subjection unto him, and his
authority; and that they abide therein unto the end, against all opposition
whatever.

The sinful neglect of Churches in the discharge of their duty herein, was one
great means of that Apostasy from the rule of the Gospel which they generally
of old fell into. When the members of them began to think that they had no
advantage by their state and condition, but only the outward participation of
some Ordinance of worship, and no duty incumbent on them, but only to attend
and follow the motions and actings of their Guides, the whole societies quickly
became corrupt, and fit to be disposed of according to the carnal interest of
those that had by their neglect and sin, gotten dominion over them. And at all
times, as the people were negligent in their duty, the Leaders of them were apt
to usurp undue authority. When the one sort will not do that which they ought,
the other are ready to take upon them what they ought not. It is a circumspect
performance of duty on all hands alone, that will keep all sorts of persons in
the Church within those bounds, and limits, and up to those rights, and
privileges, which Christ has allotted and granted unto them. And herein alone
does the order, honor, and beauty of the Church consist. Church members
therefore are to search and enquire after the particular duties, which as such,
are incumbent on them; as also to consider what influence their special state
and condition as they are Church members, ought to have into all the duties of
their obedience as they are Christians. For this privilege is granted unto
them for their edification, that is their fartherance in their whole course of
walking before God. And if this be neglected, if they content themselves with a
name to live in this or that Church, to partake of the Ordinances that are
stated and solemnly administered, only that which would have been to their
advantage, may prove to be a snare and temptation unto them. What these
especial duties are in the particular instances of them, is of too large a
consideration here to be insisted on. Besides it is the great duty of the
Guides of the Church, to be inculcating of them into the minds of those
committed to their charge. For the Churches due performance of its duty, is
their honor, Crown, and reward.

Qu. 35. Whence do you reckon prayer, which is a part of moral and natural
worship, among the institutions of Christ in his Church?

An. On many accounts; as (1) because the Lord Christ has commanded his Church
to attend unto the worship of God therein. (2) because he bestows on the
Ministers of the Church, gifts and ability of prayer for the benefit and
edification thereof. (3) he has appointed that all his other ordinances should
be administered with prayer, whereby it becomes a part of them. (4) because
himself ministers in the holy place, as the great High priest of his Church to
present their prayers unto God at the throne of grace. (5) because in all the
prayers of the Church, there is an especial regard had unto himself, and the
whole work of his mediation. (1) Luke 18.1. Chap. 21.36. Romans 12.5. 1 Timothy 2.1,
2. (2) Ephe. 4.8, 12, 13. Romans 8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6. (3) Acts 2.42. 1 Timothy 4.5.
(4) Rev. 8 3, 4. Heb. 4.14, 15, 16. Chap. 6.20. Chap. 10.20.21, 22. (5) John
14.13. Chap. 15.16, 22, 26. Ephe. 3.14, 15.

Qu. 36. May not the Church in the solemn warship of God, and celebration of
the Ordinances of the Gospel, make use of, and content it self in the use of
forms of prayer in an unknown tongue composed by others and prescribed unto
them.

An. So to do would be; (1) contrary to one principal end of prayer it self,
which is that Believers may therein apply themselves to the throne of grace for
spiritual supplies according to the present condition, wants, and exigencies of
their souls. (2) to the ma^n end that the Lord Jesus Christ aimed at in
supplying men with gifts for the discharge of the work of the mimistry, tending
to render the the promise of sending the holy Ghost, which is the immediate
cause of the Churches preservation and continuance, needless, and useless.
Moreover (3) It will render the discharge of the duty of Ministers unto several
precepts and exhortations of the Gospel, for the use, stirring up and exercise
of their gifts impossible, and (4) thereby hinder the edification of the
Church, the great end of all Ordinances and institutions. (1) Romans 8.26. Phil.
4.6. Heb. 4.16. 1 Pet. 4.7. (2) Ephesians. 4.8, 12, 13. (3) 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy
1.6, 7. Colos. 4.17. Matthew. 25.14, 15, 16. (4) 1 Cor. 12.7.

Quest. 37. Is the constant work of Preaching the Gospel by the Elders of the
Church, necessary?

Answ. It is so, both on the part of the Elders or Ministers themselves, of
whom that duty is strictly required, and who principally therein labor and
watch for the good of the flock; and on the part of the Church, for the
fartherance of their faith, and obedience, by instruction, reproof,
exhortation, and consolation. Matthew. 24.45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. Romans 12.7,
8. 1 Cor. 9. 17, 18. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. 1 Timothy 4 15, 16. Chap. 5.17. 2 Timothy 2.24,
25. Chap. 3.14, 15, 16, 17. Chapter 4.2.

Quest. 38. Who are the proper subjects of Baptism?

Answ. Professing Believers, if not Baptized in their infancy, and their Infant
seed. Matthew. 28.19. Acts 2.38, 39. Acts 16.33. 1 Cor. 1.16. 1 Cor. 7.14. Colos.
2.12, 13. With Genesis, 17.10, 11, 12.

Quest. 39. Where, and to whom, is the Ordinance of the Lords Supper to be
administered?

Answ. In the Church, or Assembly of the congregation, to all the Members of
it, rightly prepared, and duly assembled, or to such of them as are so
assembled. 1 Cor. 11.20, 21, 22, 28, 29, 33. Acts. 2.46.

Quest. 40. How often is that Ordinance to be administered?

Answ. Every First day of the week, or at least as often as opportunity, and
convenience may be obtained. 1 Cor. 11.26. Acts 20.7.

Quest. 41. What is the Discipline of the Church?

Answ. It consists in the due exereise of that authority and power which the
Lord Christ in and by his Word has granted unto the Church, for its
continuance, increase, and preservation, in purity, order, and holiness,
according to his appointment, Matthew. 16.19. Romans 12.8. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. Rev.
2.2, 20.

Explication.
Sundry things are to be considered about this discipline of the Church; as

First, The foundation of it, which is a grant of power and authority made unto
it by Jesus Christ, as Mediator, Head, King, and Lawgiver of his Church. For
all discipline being an act of power, and this being exercised in and about
things internal, and spiritual, no men can of themselves, or by grant of any
others, have any right or authority to, or in the exercise thereof. Whoever
has any interest herein, or right hereunto, it must be granted unto him from
above, by Jesus Christ, and that as Mediator and head of his Church. For as all
Church power, is in an especial manner by the authority and grant of the Father
vested in him alone, Matthew. 28.18. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. So the nature of it
which is spiritual, the object of it which are the Consciences and Gospel
privileges of Believers, with the ends of it, namely the glory of God in
Christ, with the spiritual and eternal good of the souls of men, do all
manifest that it can have no other right nor foundation. This in the first
place is to be fixed, that no authority can be exercised in the Church, but
what is derived from Jesus Christ, as was spoken before.

Secondly, The means whereby the Lord Christ does communicate this power and
authority unto his Church, is his word or his law and constitution concerning
it in the Gospel; so that it is exactly limited and bounded thereby. And no
power or authority can be exercised in the Church, but what is granted and
conveyed unto it by the word; seeing that Christ communicates no power or
authority any other ways. What ever of that nature is beside it, or beyond it,
is mere usurpation, and null in its exercise. Herein is the commission of the
Guides and Rules of the Church expressed, which they are not to exceed in any
thing. Herein are bounds and limits fixed to the actings of the whole Church,
and of every part and member of it.

Thirdly, This power or authority, thus granted, and conveyed by Jesus Christ,
is to be exercised as to the manner of the administration of discipline, with
skill and diligence, Romans 12.6. 1 Cor. 12. and the skill required hereunto, is
a gift, or an ability of mind bestowed by the Holy Ghost upon men to put in
execution the Laws of Christ, for the government of the Church, in the way and
order by him appointed; or a spiritual wisdom whereby men know how to behave
themselves in the house of God, in their several places, for its due
edification in faith and love, 1 Timothy 3.15. And this ability of mind to make a
due application of the Laws of the Gospel unto persons, times, and actions with
their circumstances, is such a gift of the Holy Ghost, as whereof there are
several degrees answering to the distinct duties that are incumbent on the
Rulers of the Church on the one hand, and Members on the other. And where this
skill and wisdom is wanting, there it is impossible that the Discipline of the
Church, should be preserved or carried on. Hereunto also diligence and
watchfulness are to be added, without which ability and power will never obtain
their proper end in a due manner, Romans 12.6, 7, 8.

Fourthly, The end of this discipline is continuance, increase, and
preservation of the Church, according to the rule of its first institution, 1
Cor. 5.7. This power, has Christ given his Church for its conservation,
without which it must necessarily decay, and come to nothing. Nor is it to be
imagined that where any Church is called and gathered according to the mind of
Christ, that he has left it destitute of power and authority to preserve it
self, in that state and order which he has appointed unto it. And that which
was one principal cause of the decays of the Asian Churches, was the neglect
of this Dicipline, the power and privilege whereof, the Lord had left unto
them and entrusted them withal, for their own preservation in order, purity
and holiness. And therefore for the neglect thereof they were greatly blamed by
him. Rev. 2.14, 15, 20. Chap. 3.2. as is also the Church of Corinth by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.2. as they are commended, who attended unto the diligent
exercise of it, Revel. 2.2. Chap. 3.9. The disuse also of it, has been the
occasion of all the defilements, abominations and confusions, that have spread
themselves over many Churches in the World.

Quest. 42. Unto whom is the power and administration of this Discipline
committed by Jesus Christ?

Answ. As to the authority to be exerted in it in the things wherein the whole
Church is concerned, unto the Elders; as unto trial, judgment and consent in,
and unto its exercise unto the whole Brotherhood; as unto love, care, and
watchfuless in private and particular cases, to every member of the Church.
Matthew. 24.45. Ephesians. 4.13, 14. Acts 20.28. 1 Timothy 3.5. Chap. 5.17. Heb. 13.17.
1 Pet. 2.3. 1 These. 5.12. Gal. 6.1, 2. 1 Cor. 4.14. 1 Cor. 5.2, 4, 5. 2 Cor.
2.6, 7, 8. 2 Timothy 4.2.

Explication.
It has been showed that this power is granted unto the Church by virtue of
the Law and constitution of Christ. Now this Law assigns the means and way
whereby any persons do obtain an interest therein; and makes the just
allotments to all concerned in it. What this Law, Constitution or Word of
Christ assigns unto any, as such, that they are the first seat and subject of,
by what way or means soever they come to be entrusted therein. Thus that power
or authority which is given unto the Elders of the Church, does not first
formally reside in the body of the Church unorganized or distinct from them,
though they are called unto their Office by their suffrage and choice; but they
are themselves as such, the first subject of Office power; For so is the Will
of the Lord Christ. Nor is the interest of the whole Church in this power of
discipline whatever it be, given unto it by the Elders, but is immediately
granted unto it, by the will and Law of the Lord Jesus.

First, In this way and manner the Authority above described, is given in the
first place, as such, unto the Elders of the Church. This Authority was before
explained, in answer unto the 28th. question, as also was the way whereby they
receive it. And it is that power of office whereby they are enabled for the
discharge of their whole duty, in the teaching, and ruling of the Church;
called the power of the keys, from Mat. 16.19. Which expression being
Metaphorical, and in general liable unto many interpretations, is to be
understood according to the declaration made of it in those particular
instances wherein it is expressed. Nor is it a twofold power or Authority that
the Elders* of the Church have committed unto them; one to teach and another to
rule, commonly called the power of order, and of jurisdiction; but it is one
power of Office, the duties whereof are of several kinds, referred unto the two
general heads, first of teaching by preaching the word and celebration of the
Sacraments, and (2) Of rule or government. By virtue hereof, are they made
Rulers over the house of God, Matthew. 24.45. Stewards in his house, 1 Cor. 4.1.
Overseers of the Church, Act. 20.28. 1 Peter 5.2. Guides unto the Church, Heb.
13.7, 17. Not that they have a supreme or autocratorical power committed unto
them, to enable them to do what seems right and good in their own eyes, seeing
they are expressly bound up unto the terms of their Commission, Matthew. 28.19,
20. To teach men to do and observe all, and only what Christ has commanded;
nor have they by virtue of it, any dominion in, or over the Church, that is,
the laws, rules or privileges of it, or the consciences of the Disciples of
Christ, to alter, change, add, diminish, or bind by their own authority, 1 Pet.
5.3. Mark 10.42, 43* 44. But it is a power merely ministerial, in whose
exercise they are unto the Lord Christ accountable servants, Heb. 13.17. Matthew.
24.45. And Servants of the Church for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5. This authority in
the Discipline of the Church they exert and put forth by virtue of their
Office; and not either as declaring of the power of the Church it self, or
acting what is delegated unto them thereby, but as ministerially exercising the
authority of Christ committed unto themselves.

Secondly, The body of the Church, or the multitude of the Brethren, (women
being excepted by especial prohibition, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.) Is
by the Law and constitution of Christ in the Gospel, interested in the
administration of this power of discipline in the Church, so far as,

First, To consider, try, and make a judgment, in and about all persons,
things, and causes, in reference whereunto it is to be exercised. Thus the
Brethren at Jerusalem joined in the consideration of the observation of
Mosaical ceremonies with the Apostles and Elders, Act. 15.23. And the multitude
of them to whom letters were sent about it, likewise did the same, Verse the
30, 31, 32. And this they thought it their duty and concernment to do, Chap.
21, 22. And they are blamed, who applied not themselves unto this duty, 1 Cor.
5.4, 5, 6. Thence are the Epistles of Paul to the Churches to instruct them in
their duties, and privileges in Christ, and how they ought to behave
themselves in the ordering of all things amongst them according to his mind.
And these are directed unto the Churches themselves, either jointly with their
Elders, or distinctly from them, Phil. 1.1. And the whole preservation of
Church Order, is on the account of this duty recommended unto them. Neither can
what they do in compliance with their Guides and Rulers, be any part of their
obedience unto the Lord Christ, unless they make previously thereunto a
rational consideration and judgment by the rule, of what is to be done.
Neither is the Church of Christ to be ruled without its knowledge, or against
its will; nor in any thing is blind obedience acceptable to God.

Secondly, The Brethren of the Church are entrusted with the privilege of
giving and testifying their consent unto all acts of Church power, which though
it belong not formally unto the authority of them, it is necessary unto their
validity and efficacy; and that so far forth, as that they are said to do and
act what is done and effected thereby, 1 Cor. 5.4, 13. 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. And
they who have this privilege of consent which has so great an influence into
the action and validity of it, have also the liberty of dissent; when any thing
is proposed to be done, the warrant whereof from the Word and the rule of its
performance, is not evident unto them.

Qu. 43. Wherein does the exercise of the authority for discipline committed
unto the Elders of the Church consist?

An. (1) In personal private admonition of any member or members of the Church,
in case of sin, error, or any miscarriage known unto themselves. (2) In
public admonition in case of offenses persisted in and brought orderly to the
knowledge and consideration of the Church. (3) In the ejection of obstinate
offenders from the society and communion of the Church. (4) In exhorting,
comforting, and restoring to the enjoyment and exercise of Church privileges
such as are recovered from the error of their ways; all according to the
laws, rules, and directions of the Gospel. (1) Matthew. 18.15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. 1
Cor. 4.14. Titus 1.13. Chap. 2.15. 2 Timothy 4.2. (2) 1 Timothy 5.19.20. Matthew.
18.16, 17. (3) Titus 3.10. 1 Timothy 1.20. Matthew. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.5. Gal. 5.12.
(4) 2 Cor. 2.7. Gal. 6.1. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.

Qu. 44. May the Church cast any Person out of its communion without previous
admonition?

An. It may in some cases, where the offense is notorious, and the scandal
grievous, so that nothing be done against other general rules. 1 Cor. 4.

Qu. 45. Wherein does the liberty and duty of the whole brotherhood in the
exercise of discipline in the Church in particular consist?

An. (1) In a meek consideration of the condition and temptations of offenders,
with the nature of their offenses, when orderly proposed unto the Church. (2)
In judging with the Elders according to rule, what in all cases of offense is
necessary to be done, for the good of the offenders themselves, and for the
edification and vindication of the whole Church. (3) In their consent unto, and
concurrence in the admonition, ejection, pardoning and restoring of offenders,
as the matter shall require. Gal. 6.1, 2. 1 Cor. 5.2, 4, 5, 12. 1 Cor. 6.2. 2
Cor. 2, 6, 7, 8.

Qu. 46. What is the duty of private Members in reference unto the discipline
appointed by Christ in his Church?

An. It is their duty in their mutual watch over one another, to exhort each
other unto holiness and perseverance; and if they observe any thing in the
ways and walkings of of any of their fellow Members not according unto the
rule, and the duty of their profession, which therefore gives them offense, to
admonish them thereof in private with love meekness and wisdom, and in case
they prevail not unto their amendment, to take the assistance of some other
Brethren in the same work; and if they fail in success therein also, to report
the matter by the Elders direction, unto the whole Church. Matthew. 18.16, 17,
18. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

Explication.
In these questions an inquiry is made after the exercise of discipline in the
Church, as to that part of it which belongs unto the reproof and correction of
miscarriages according to the distribution of right, power, and privilege,
before explained.

The first act hereof consists in private admonition; for so has our Lord
ordained, that in case any Brother, or member of the Church, do in any thing
w^lk disorderly, and not according to the rule of the Gospel, that he, or they,
unto whom it is observed, and who are thereby offended, may and ought to
admonish the person or persons so offending of their miscarriage and offense,
concerning which is to be observed.

First, what is previously required thereunto; and that is,

First, that in all the members of the Church there ought to be love without
dissimulation. They are to be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly
love, Romans 12.9, 10. which as they are taught of God, so they are greatly
exhorted thereunto; Heb. 13.1. This love is the bond of perfection the most
excellent way and means of preserving Church order, and farthering the
edification thereof. 1 Cor. 13. Without which, well seated, and confirmed in
the hearts and minds of Church members, no duty of their Relation can ever be
performed in a due manner.

Secondly, this love is to exert and put forth it self in tender care and
watchfulness for the good of each other; which are to work by mutual
exhortations, informations, instructions, according as opportunities do offer
themselves* or as the necessities of any do seem to require. Heb. 3.13. Chap.
10.24.

Secondly, this duty of admonishing offenders privately and personally, is
common to the Elders with all the members of the Church; neither does it belong
properly unto the Elders as such but as Brethren of the same society. And yet
by virtue of their office the Elders are enabled to do it with more Authority
morally, though office power properly be not exercised therein. By virtue also
of their constant general watch over the whole flock in the discharge of their
office, they are enabled to take notice of, and discern miscarriages in any of
the members, sooner than others. But as to the exercise of the discipline of
the Church in this matter, this duty is equally incumbent on every member of
it, according as the obligation on them to watch over one another, and to
exercise especial love toward each other is equal: Whence it is distinguished
from that private pastoral admonition, which is an act of the teaching office
and power, not directly belonging unto the rule or government enquired after.
But this admonition is an effect of love and where it proceeds not from
thence, it is irregular, Matthew. 18.16, 17, 18. Romans 15.14.

Thirdly, this duty is so incumbent on every member of the Church, that in case
of the neglect thereof, he both sins against the institution of Christ, and
makes himself partaker of the sin of the party offending, and is also guilty of
his danger, and ruin thereby, with all that disadvantage which will accrue to
the Church, by any of the members of it continuing in sin against the rule of
the Gospel. They have not only liberty thus to admonish one another, but it is
their express and indispensible duty so to do. The neglect whereof is
interpreted by God to be hatred of our Brother; such as wherewith the love of
God is inconsistent, Levit 19.17. 1 John 4.20. Chap. 3.15.

Fourthly, although this duty be personally incumbent on every individual
member of the Church, yet this hinders not but if the sin of an offender be
known to more than one at the same time, and they jointly take offense thereat,
they may together in the first instance admonish him, which yet still is but
the first, and private admonition; which is otherwise, when others are called
into assistance, who are not themselves acquainted with the offense but only by
information, and join in it, not upon the account of their own being offended,
but of being desired according unto rule to give assistance to them that are so.

Fifthly, the way and manner of the discharge of this duty is, that it be done
with prudence, tenderness, and due regard unto all circumstances; whence the
Apostle supposes a spiritual ability to be necessary for this work Romans
15.14. Ye also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, also able to
admonish one another; especially four things are to be diligently heeded.

First, that the whole duty be so managed, that the person offending may be
convinced, that it is done out of love to him and affectionate conscientious
care over him, that he may take no occasion thereby for the exasperation of his
own spirit.

Secondly, that the Persons admonishing others of their offense, do make it
appear that what they do is in obedience unto an institution of Christ, and
therein to preserve their own souls from sin, as well as to benefit the
offenders.

Thirdly, that the admonition be grounded on a rule, which alone gives it
authority and efficacy.

Fourthly, that there be a readiness manifested by them, to receive
satisfaction; either (1) In case that upon trial, it appears the information
they have had of the miscarriage whence the offense arose, was undue, or not
well grounded; or (2) of acknowledgement and repentance.

Sixthly, The ends of this Ordinance and institution of Christ, are,

(1.) To keep up Love without dissimulation among all the members of the
Church; for if offenses should abide unremoved, love which is the bond of
perfection, would not long continue in sincerity; which tends to the
dissolution of the whole society.

(2.) To gain the offender, by delivering him from the guilt of sin, that he
may not lie under it, and procure the wrath of God against himself, Levit.
19.17.

(3.) To preserve his person from dishonor and disreputation, and thereby to
keep up his usefulness in the Church. To this end has our Lord appointed the
discharge of this duty in private, that the failings of men may not be
unnecessarily divulged, and themselves thereby exposed unto temptation.

(4.) To preserve the Church from that scandal that might befall it, by the
hasty opening of all the real or supposed faylings of its members. And

(5.) To prevent its trouble in the public hearing of things that may be
otherwise healed and removed.

Seventhly, In case these ends are obtained, either by the supposed offending
persons clearing of themselves, and manifesting themselves innocent of the
crimes charged on them, as Joshua 22.22, 23, 24, 25. 2 Cor. 7.11. Or by their
acknowledgement, repentance, and amendment, then this part of the discipline of
the Church has, through the grace of Christ obtained its appointed effect.

Eighthly, In case the persons offending, be not humbled nor reformed, nor do
give satisfaction unto them by whom they are admonished, then has our Lord
ordained a second degree of this private exercise of discipline; that the
persons who being offended, have discharged the foregoing duty themselves
according unto rule, shall take unto them others, two or three, as the occasion
may seem to require, to join with them in the same work and duty, to be
performed in the same manner for the same ends, with that before described,
Matthew. 18, 15, 16, 17. And it is the duty of these persons so called in for
assistance;

First, To judge of the crime, fault, or offense reported to them; and not to
proceed unless they find it to consist in something expressly contrary to the
rule of the Gospel, and attested in such manner, and with such evidence, as
their mutual love does require in them, with respect unto their Brethren. And
they are to judge of the testimony that is given concerning the truth of the
offense communicated unto them, that they may not seem either lightly to take
up a report against their Brother, or to discredit the testimony of others.

Secondly, In case they find the offense pretended not to be a real offense
indeed contrary to the rule of the Gospel, or that it is not aright grounded,
as to the evidence of it, but taken up upon prejudice, or an over-easie
credulity, contrary to the law of that love which is required amongst
Church Members, described 1 Cor. 13. and commanded as the great means of the
edification of the Church and preservation of its union, then to convince the
brother offended of his mistake, and with him to satisfy the person pretended
to be the offender, that no breach or schism may happen among the members of
the same body.

Thirdly, Being satisfied of the crime and testimony, they are to associate
themselves with the offended Brother in the same work and duty, that he himself
had before discharged toward the offender.

Ninthly, Because there is no determination how often these private admonitions
are to be used in case of offense, it is evident from the nature of the thing
it self, that they are to be reiterated; first the one, and then the other,
whilst there is any ground of hope, that the ends of them may be obtained
through the blessing of Christ, the Brother gained, and the offense taken away.
Neither of these then is to be deserted, or laid aside, on the first, or second
attempt, as though it were performed only to make way for somewhat farther; but
it is to be waited on with prayer and patience, as an ordinance of Christ
appointed for attaining the end aimed at.

Tenthly, In case there be not the success aimed at obtained in these several
degrees of private admonition, it is then the will of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that the matter be reported unto the Church, that the offender may be publicly
admonished thereby, and brought to repentance; wherein is to be observed,

First, That the persons who have endeavored in vain to reclaim their
offending Brother by private admonition, are to acquaint the Elders of the
Church with the case and crime: as also what they have done according to rule,
for the rectifying of it; who upon that information, are obliged to communicate
the knowledge of the whole matter to the Church. This is to be done by the
Elders, as to whom the preservation of order in the Church, and the rule of its
proceeding do belong, as we have showed before.

Secondly, The report made to the Church by the Elders is to be, (1.) Of the
crime, guilt, or offense (2.) Of the Testimony given unto the truth of it (3.)
Of the means used to bring the offender to acknowledgement and repentance (4.)
Of his deportment under the private previous admonitions either as to his
rejecting of them, or as to any satisfaction tendered; all in order, love,
meekness, and tenderness.

Thirdly, Things being proposed unto the Church, and the offender heard upon
the whole of the offense, and former proceeding, the whole Church, or multitude
of the Brethren, are with the Elders to consider the nature of the offense,
with the condition and temptations of the offenders, with such a spirit of
meekness as our Lord Jesus Christ in his own person set them an example of, in
his dealing with sinners, and which is required in them as his Disciples, Gal.
6.1, 2. 2 Cor. 2.8.

Fourthly, The Elders and Brethren are to judge of the offense, and the
carriage of the offender according to rule, and if the offense be evident, and
persisted in, then

Fifthly, The offender is to be publicly admonished by the Elders, with the
consent and concurrence of the Church, 1 These. 5.14. 1 Timothy 5.20. Matthew. 18.16,
17. And this admonition consists of Five parts;

(1.) A declaration of the crime or offense, as it is evidenced unto the Church.

(2.) A conviction of the evil of it, from the rule or rules transgressed
against.

(3.) A declaration of the authority and duty of the Church in such cases.

(4.) A rebuke of the offender in the name of Christ, answering the nature and
circumstances of the offense.

(5.) An Exhortation unto humiliation and repentance and acknowledgement.

Eleventhly, In case the offender despise this admonition of the Church, and
come not upon it unto repentance, it is the will and appointment of our Lord
Jesus Christ that he be cut off from all the privileges of the Church, and
cast out from the society thereof, or be excommunicated wherein consists the
last act of the discipline of the Church for the correction of offenders; and
herein may be considered,

First, The nature of it, that it is an authoritative act and so principally
belongs unto the Elders of the Church, who therein exert the power that they
have received from the Lord Christ, by and with the consent of the Church
according to his appointment, Matthew. 16.19. John 20.23. Matthew. 18.18. 1 Cor.
5.4. Titus 3.10. 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 Cor. 2.6. And both these the Authority of the
Eldership and the consent of the Brethren, are necessary to the validity of the
sentence, and that according to the appointment of Christ, and the practice of
the first Churches.

Secondly, The effect of it, which is the cutting off, or casting out of the
person offending from the communion of the Church, in the privileges of the
Gospel, as consequently from that of all the visible Churches of Christ in the
earth by virtue of their communion one with another, whereby he is left unto
the visible kingdom of Satan in the World, Matthew. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.2, 5, 13. 1 Timothy 1.20. Titus 3.10. Gal. 5.12.

Thirdly, The ends of it which are,

(1.) The gaining of the party offending, by bringing him to repentance,
humiliation, and acknowledgement of his offense, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7. 2 Cor. 13.10.

(2.) The warning of others not to do so presumptuously.

(3.) The preserving of the Church in its purity and order, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. all
to the glory of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, The causes of it or the grounds and reasons on which the Church may
proceed unto sentence against any offending persons. Now these are no other but
such as they judge according to the Gospel, that the Lord Christ will proceed
upon in his final judgment at the last day. For the Church judges in the
name and authority of Christ, and are to exclude none from its communion, but
those whom they find by the rule, that he himself excludes from his Kingdom;
and so that which they bind on earth, is bound by him in Heaven, Matthew. 18.18.
And their sentence herein is to be declared, as the declaration of the sentence
which the Head of the Church, and Judge of all, will pronounce at the last day;
only with this difference, that it is also made known, that this sentence of
theirs, is not final or decretory, but in order to the prevention of that which
will be so, unless the evil be repented of. Now although the particular evils,
sins, or offenses, that may render a person obnoxious unto this censure and
sentence, are not to be enumerated, by reason of the variety of circumstances
which change the nature of actions, yet they may in general be referred unto
these heads.

First, Moral evils, contrary to the light of nature, and express commands or
prohibitions of the moral law, direct rules of the Gospel, or of evil report in
the world amongst men walking according to the rule and light of reason. And in
cases of this nature, the Church may proceed unto the sentence whereof we
speak, without previous admonition, in case the matter of fact be notorious,
publicly and unquestionably known to be true, and no general rule (which is
not to be impeached by particular instances) lie against their proceedure, 1
Cor. 5.3, 4. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5.

Secondly, Offenses against that mutual love which is the bond of perfection in
the Church if pertinaciously persisted in, Matthew. 18.16, 17.

Thirdly, false doctrines against the fundamentals in faith or worship,
especially if maintained with contention, to the trouble and disturbance of the
peace of the Church, Gal. 5.12. Titus 3.9, 10, 11. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. Revel.
2.14, 15.

Fourthly, Blasphemy, or evil speaking of the ways and worship of God in the
Church, especially if joined with an intention to hinder the prosperity of the
Church, or to expose it to persecution, 1 Timothy 1.20.

Fifthly, Desertion, or total causeless relinquishment of the society and
communion of the Church; for such are self-condemned, having broken and
renounced the covenant of God, that they made at their entrance into the
Church, Heb. 10.25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

Sixthly, The time or season of the putting forth the authority of Christ in
the Church for this censure, is to be considered; and that is ordinarily after
the admonition before described, and that with due waiting, to be regulated by
a consideration of times, persons, temptations, and other circumstances. For,

(1.) The Church in proceeding to this sentence, is to express the patience and
long suffering of Christ toward offenders, and not to put it forth without
conviction of a present resolved impenitency.

(2.) The event and effect of the preceding Ordinance of admonition is to be
expected; which though not at present evident, yet like the word it self in the
preaching of it, may be blessed to a good issue after many days.

Sixthly, The person offending, thus cut off, or cast out from the present
actual communion of the Church, is still to be looked on and accounted as a
Brother, because of the nature of the Ordinance which is intended for his
amendment and recovery, 2 These. 3.15. Count him not as an enemy, but admonish
him as a Brother; unless he manifest his final impenitency, by blasphemy and
persecution, 1 Timothy 1.20. Whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn
not to blaspheme.

Seventhly, The Church is therefore still to perform the duties of love, and
care, toward such persons.

(1.) In praying for them, that they may be converted from the error of their
way, James 5.19, 20. 1 John 5.16. If any man see his Brother sin a sin, which
is not unto death, he shall ask and he shall give him life; for them that sin
not unto death.

(2.) In withdrawing from them even as to ordinary converse for their
conviction of their state and condition, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 These. 3.14. With such a
one no not to eat.

(3.) In admonishing of him, 2 Cor. 3.15. admonish him as a Brother, which may
be done (1) Occasionally, by any Member of the Church (2) On set purpose by the
consent and appointment of the whole Church; which admonition is to contain,

(1.) A pr^ssing of his sin from the rule on the Conscience of the offender.

(2.) A declaration of the nature of the censure, and punishment which he lies
under.

(3.) A manifestation of the danger of his impenitency, in his being either
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, or exposed unto new temptations of Satan.

Eighthly, In case the Lord Jesus be pleased to give a blessed effect unto this
ordinance, in the repentance of the person cut of, and cast out off the Church;
he is,

First, To be forgiven both by those who in an especial manner were offended at
him, and by him, and by the whole Church, Matthew. 18.18. 2 Cor. 2.7.

Secondly, To be comforted under his sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7. And that by (1) The
application of the promises of the Gospel unto his Conscience, (2) A
declaration of the readiness of the Church to receive him again into their love
and communion.

Fourthly, Restored (1) By a confirmation or testification of the love of the
Church unto him, 2 Cor. 2.8. (2) A readmission unto the exercise and enjoyment
of his former privileges in the fellowship of the Church; all with a spirit of
meekness, Gal. 6.1.

Quest. 47. The preservation of the Church in purity, order, and holiness being
provided for, by what way is it to be continued and increased?

Answ. The way appointed thereunto, is by adding such as being effectually
called unto the obedience of faith shall voluntarily offer themselves unto the
society and fellowship thereof, Acts 2.41. 2 Cor. 8.5.

Explication.
The means appointed by our Lord Jesus Christ for the continuance and increase
of the Church, are either preparitory unto it, or instrumentally efficient of
it. The principal means subservient or preparitory unto the continuance and
increase of the Church, is the preaching of the Word to the conviction,
illumination and conversion of sinners, whereby they may be made meet to become
living stones in this spiritual building, and members of the mystical body of
Christ. And this is done either ordinarily in the Assemblies of the Church,
toward such as come in unto them and attend to the Word dispensed according to
the appointment of Christ amongst them, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. If there come in one
that believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he he is judged
of all, and thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling
down on his face, he will worship God; or occasionally amongst the Men of the
World, Acts 8.4.

Secondly, the instrumentally efficient cause is that which is expressed in the
answer, namely the adding in due order unto it, such as being effectually
called unto the obedience of the faith and profession of the Gospel, do
voluntarily out of conviction of their duty, and resolution to walk in
subjection to all the ordinances and commands of Christ, offer themselves to
the society and fellowship thereof, whereby they may be laid in this spiritual
building as the stones were in the Temple of old, which were hewed and fitted
elsewhere.

Qu. 48 What is required of them who desire to join themselves unto the Church?

An. (1) That they be free from blame and offense in the World. (2) That they
be instructed in the saving truths and mysteries of the Gospel. (3) Sound in
the faith (4) That the Lord having called them unto faith, repentance, and
newness of life by Jesus Christ, they give up themselves to be saved by him,
and to obey him in all things; and therefore (5) Are willing and ready through
his grace, to walk in subjection to all his commands, and in the observation
of all his laws and institutions, notwithstanding any difficulties,
oppositions, or persecutions which they meet withal. (1) 1 Phil. 10. Chap.
2.15. 1 Cor. 10.32. 1 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. Tit. 2.10. (2) John 6.15. Acts 26.18. 1
Pet. 2.9. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4, 6. (3) 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. Ti^. 1.13. Jude
3. (4) Ephe. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. (5) 2 Cor. 8.5.

Qu. 49. What is the duty of the Elders of the Church, toward persons desiring
to be admitted unto the fellowship of the Church?

An. (1) To discern and judge by the rule of truth applied in love, between
sincere professors and hypocritical pretenders. (2) To instruct, direct,
comfort, and encourage in the way, such as they judge to love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity. (3) to propose and recommend them unto the whole Church, with
prayers and supplications to God for them. (4) To admit them being approved
into the order and fellowship of the Gospel in the Church. Acts 8.20, 23. Tit.
1.10. Rev. 2.2. Jer. 15.19. Acts. 18.26. 1 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8, 11. Acts. 9.29, 27.
Romans 14.1.

Qu. 50 What is the duty of the whole Church in reference unto such persons?

An. To consider them in love and meekness, according as their condition is
known, reported, or testified unto them, to approve of, and rejoice in the
grace of God in them, and to receive them in love without dissimulaton. 1 Cor.
13.

Explication.
What in general is required unto the fitting of any persons to be members of a
visible Church of Christ, was before declared, and that is, that, which the
Lord Jesus has made the indispensible condition of entering into his Kingdom,
namely of being born again. John 3.33. This work being secret, hidden, and
invisible, the Church cannot judge of directly and in its own form or nature,
but in the means, effects, and consequents of it, which are to be testified
unto it concerning them who are to be admitted unto its fellowship and
communion; it is required therefore of them,

First, that they be of a conversation free from blame in the world; for
whereas one end of the gathering of Churches is to hold forth, and express the
holiness of the doctrine of Christ, and the power of his grace in turning Men
from all ungodliness unto sobriety, righteousness and honesty, it is required
of them that are admitted into them, that they answer this end. And this the
principle of grace which is communicated unto them that believe, will effect
and produce. For although it does not follow that every one who has attained
an unblameable honesty in this World, is inwardly quickened with a true
principle of saving grace, yet it does, that they who are endowed with that
principle, will be so unblameable. And although they may on other accounts be
evil spoken of, yet their good conversation in Christ will justify it self.

Secondly, competent knowledge in the mysteries of the Gospel, is another means
whereby the great qualification inquired after is testified unto the Church.
For as without this no privilege of the Gospel can be profitably made use of,
nor any duty of it be rightly performed, so saving light is of the essence of
conversion and does inseparably accompany it, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. Where this is
wanting, it is impossible for any person to evidence that he is delivered from
that blindness, darkness, and ignorance, which all men are under the power of
in the state of nature. Such a measure then of light and knowledge, as whereby
men are enabled to apprehend aright of the person and offices of Christ, of the
nature of his mediation, the benefits thereof, and the obedience that he
requires at the hands of his Disciples, is expected in them who desire to be
admitted into the fellowship of the Church.

Thirdly, hereunto is to be added, soundness in the faith. For the unity of
faith is the foundation of Love and all the duties thereof, which in an
especial manner are to be performed toward the Church, called therefore the
household of faith. There is among the members of the Church one faith; Ephesians.
4.5. The common faith, the faith once delivered unto the saints, Jude 3. Which
is the sound doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.10. Which those that will not endure, must be
turned from; 2 Timothy 4.3. the faithful word that is to be held fast. Tit. 1.9. 1 Timothy 1.19. And which we are to be sound in; Tit. 1.13. Contained in a form of
sound words, as to the profession of it, 2 Timothy 1.13. And this soundness in the
unity of the faith, as it should be improved unto oneness of mind, and oneness
of accord, in all the things of God, Phil. 2.2. Though it may admit of some
different apprehensions in some things, wherein some may have more clear and
distinct discoveries of the mind and will of God than others, which hinders
not, but that all may walk according to the same rule, Phil. 3.15, 16. So it is
principally to be regarded in the fundamental truths of the Gospel, in and by
the faith whereof the Church holds on the head Jesus Christ; Coloss. 2.19.
And in the fundamental principles of Gospel worship, the joint celebration,
whereof is the next end of the gathering the Church, for without a consent of
mind and accord herein, no duty can be performed unto edification, nor the
peace of the Church be preserved; and these principles are those which we have
explained.

Fourthly, it is required that these things be testified by them unto the
Church, with the acknowledgement of the work of Gods grace toward them, and
their resolution through the power of the same grace to cleave unto the Lord
Christ with full purpose of heart, and to live in all holy obedience unto him.
They come to the Church, as Disciples of Christ professing that they have
learnt the truth as it is in Jesus, which what it infers the Apostle teaches
at large; Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. See also Acts 11.23. Acts 8.21, 22, 23.
And this by themselves to be testified unto the Church.

First, that they may be received in love without dissimulation, as real
partakers in the same faith, hope and salvation with themselves, as living
members of the mystical body of Christ.

Secondly, That on all ensuing occasions, they may be minded of their own
profession and engagements, to stir them up thereby unto faithfulness,
stedfastness, and perseverance. Hereupon are the Elders of the Church to judge
by the rule of truth in Love and meekness concerning their condition, and
meetness to be laid as living stones in the house of God; so as that they may,

(1.) Reject false hypocritical pretenders if in or by any means their
hypocrisy be discovered unto them. Acts 8.20, 23. Titus 1.10. Jer. 15.19.

(2.) That they may direct, and encourage in the way, such as appear to be
sincere, instructing them principally in the nature of the way whereinto they
are engaging, the duties, dangers, and benefits of it. Acts 18.26. Act. 14.22.
1 Cor. 3.22, 23.

(3.) To propose them, their conditions, their desires, their resolutions, unto
the Church after their own expressions of them, to be considered of in love and
meekness, Acts 9.26, 27. Whereupon those that are approved, do give up
themselves unto the Lord, to walk in the observation of all his commands and
ordinances, and to the Church for the Lords sake, 2 Cor. 8.5. abiding in the
fellowship thereof, whereunto they are admitted, Acts 2.41, 42.

Quest. 51. Wherein does the especial form of a particular Church whereby it
becomes such, and is distinguished as such from all others, consist?

Answ. In the special consent and agreement of all the members of it, to walk
together in the observation of the same Ordinances numerically; hence its
constitution and distinction from other Churches does proceed. Exodus 19.5, 8.
Chap. 24.3, 7. Deuteronomy. 26.17. 2 Cor. 8.5. Acts 14.23. Acts 20.28. Heb. 13.17.

Explication.
It has been before declared, what especial agreement or covenant there ought
to be among all the members of the same Church, to walk together in a due
subjection unto, and observance of all the institutions of the Lord Christ. And
this is that which gives it its special form and distinction from all other
Churches. In the general nature of a Church, all Churches do agree, and equally
partake. There is the same law of the constitution of them all; they have all
the same rule of obedience; all the same Head, the same end; all carry it on by
the observation of the same Ordinances in kind. Now besides these things which
belong unto the nature of a Church in general, and wherein they all equally
participate, they must also have each one its proper difference, that which
does distinguish it from all other Churches; and this gives it its special
form as such. Now this cannot consist in any thing that is accidental,
occasional, or extrinsical unto it, such as is cohabitation, (which yet the
Church may have respect unto, for convenience, and farthering of its
edification) nor in any civil or political disposal of its members into civil
societies for civil ends, which is extrinsecal to all its concernments as a
Church; nor does it consist in the relation of the Church to its present
Officers, which may be removed or taken away without the dissolution of the
form or being of the Church, but it consists as was said in the agreement or
covenant before mentioned; For

First, This is that which constitutes (...) a distinct body, different from
others; for thereby and no otherwise do they coalesce into a society, according
to the law of their constitution and appointment.

Secondly, this gives them their especial relation unto their own Elders,
Rulers, or Guides who watch over them as so associated by their own consent,
according unto the command of Christ. And

Thirdly, From hence they have their mutual especial relation unto one another
which is the ground of the especial exercise of all Church duties whatsoever.

Quest. 52. Wherein consists the duty of any Church of Christ toward other
Churches?

Answ. (1) In walking circumspectly, so as to give them no offense. (2) In
prayer for their peace and prosperity. (3) In communicating supplies to their
wants according to ability. (4) In receiving with love and readiness the
members of them into fellowship, in the celebration of the Ordinances of the
Gospel, as occasion shall be. (5) In desiring and making use of their counsel
and advice in such cases of doubt, and difficulty, as may arise among them. (6)
In joining with them to express their communion in the same doctrine of faith.
(1) 1 Cor. 10.32. (2) Psalm. 122.6. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Timothy 2.1. (3) 2 Cor. 8.4, 6.
Acts 11.29, 30. Romans 15.26, 27. (4) Romans 16.1, 2.3 Ep. Joh. 8, 9. (5) Acts
15.2. (6) 1 Timothy 3.15.

Explication.
Churches being gathered and settled according to the mind of Christ, ought to
preserve a mutual holy communion among themselves, and to exercise it, in the
discharge of those duties whereby their mutual good and edification may be
promoted. For whereas they are all united under one Head the Lord Christ,
Ephesians. 1.22, 23. in the same faith and order, Ephesians. 4.5. And do walk by the
same rule, they stand in such a relation one to another, as is the ground of
the communion spoken of. Now the principal ways, whereby they exercise this
communion, are the acts and duties enumerated in the answer unto this Question;
as,

First, Careful walking so as to give no offense unto one another; which
although it be a moral duty in reference unto all, yet therein especial regard
is to be had unto other Churches of Christ, that they be not in any thing
grieved or tempted, 1 Cor. 10.32. Give none offense; neither to the Jews nor to
the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.

Secondly, In constant prayer for the peace, welfare, edification and
prosperity one of another, Romans 1.9. Colos. 1.9. Ephesians. 6.18. And this because
of the special concernment of the name and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
their welfare.

Thirdly, In communicating of supplies for their relief according unto their
ability, in case of the outward wants, straits, dangers, or necessities of any
of them, Acts 11.29, 30. Romans 15.26, 27. 2 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 14.

Fourthly, The receiving of the members of other Churches to communion, in the
celebration of Church Ordinances, is another way whereby this communion of
Churches is exercised, Romans 16.1, 2.3 Ep. Joh. 8.9. For whereas the personal
right of such persons unto the Ordinances of the Church, and their orderly
walking in the observation of the commands of Christ, are known by the
testimony of the Church whereof they are members, they may without farther
enquiry or satisfaction given, be looked on pro tempore as members of the
Church wherein they desire fellowship, and participation of the Ordinances of
Christ.

Fifthly, In desiring or making use of the counsel and advice of one another,
in such cases of doubt and difficulty, whether doctrinal, or practical, as may
arise in any of them, Act. 15.2, 6. And from hence it follows, that in case any
Church either by error in doctrine, or precipitation, or mistake in other
administrations, do give offense unto other Churches, those other Churches may
require an account from them, admonish them of their faults, and withhold
communion from them, in case they persist in the error of their way; and that
because in their difficulties, and before their miscarriages, they were bound
to have desired the advice, counsel and assistance of those other Churches,
which being neglected by them, the other are to recover the end of it unto
their utmost ability, Gal. 2.6.11. And hence also it follows, that those that
are rightly and justly censured in any Church, ought to be rejected by all
Churches whatever; both because of their mutual communion, and because it is,
and ought to be presumed, until the contrary be made to appear, that in case
there had been any difficulty, or doubt in the proceedure of the Church, they
would have taken the advice of those Churches, with whom they were obliged to
consult.

Lastly, Whereas the Churches have all of them one common faith, and are all
obliged to hold forth and declare it to all men as they have opportunity, 1 Timothy 3.15. to testify this their mutual communion, their interest in the same
faith and hope, for the more open declaration and proposition of the truths of
the Gospel which they profess, and for the vindication both of the truth, and
themselves, from false charges and imputations, they may, and if God give
opportunity, ought to join together in declaring and testifying their joint
consent and fellowship in the same doctrine of faith, expressed in a form of
sound words.

Quest. 53. What are the ends of all this dispensation and order of things in
the Church?

Answ. The glory of God, the honor of Jesus Christ the Mediator, the
fartherance of the Gospel, the edification and consolation of Believers here;
with their eternal salvation hereafter. Rev. 4.9, 10, 11. Chap. 5.12, 13. 1
Cor. 3 22.23. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

Finis.

