THE THREE BOOKS OF Publius Ovidius Naso, DE Art Amandi. Translated, with
Historical, Poetical, and Topographical Annotations.

By Francis Wolferston, of the Inner Temple, Gent.

Et prodesse volet, and delectare. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Cranford, at the
Castle and Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

TO THE Valiant and truly Noble Major General Randolphus Egerton, Lieutenant to
His Majesty's Lifeguard.
SIR,
HAd my Endeavors born a Symmetry to my desires, this which casts it self at
your feet, had been worth your eye; but such is my misfortune, that what I
designed to be responsible for the interest of that service I am bound to pay
you, being privileged with your protection, renders me much more a debtor to
you, and Meanders me into such a labyrinth of Obligations, that they only
leave me capable to evince to the world how great my gratitude would appear,
were your merit less. (Generous Sir) having afforded me your protection, I
shall boast a fame next to that of your Loyalty, which is so well known, and in
the most dangerous attempts has been proportioned with a courage no less true
than the oppugners designs were traitorous. Your Sovereign has acknowledged,
and your Country owes you for actions beyond the amplest Characters of Art to
express. Take this (Sir) as the preface to that respect I owe you, and grace
the front of my labors with your acceptance, an honor that transcends my
desert, and shall ever be acknowledged Superlative by

Sir, Your obedient servant, FR. WOLFERSTON.

TO The Entertaining Reader.
HAving lately fabricated some Poems o, my own, I feared it might argue too
great a presumption for me, altogether a stranger to the Pross, at first to
publish things that had never swallowed the pills of censure; which timidity,
(generous Reader) was the first Motive to this Translation, and induced me to
present you with a Roman Muse, yet habited i. an English dress, which, if (out
of your accustome^ civility to strangers) you shall please to grace with a
candid reception, I shall labor to gratify with an English Thalia: And though
it is as far from my expectation, as ambition to please all (for I know there
are such as would reject Apollo himself, should be happen into their profane
hands; whose Elogies and detractions are, in the opinion of judicious persons,
equally prejudicial to any that merit an Io Paean) yet I hope to meet with some
both learned and ingenuous, that will at least allow my pains in a succinct
Transtation; which (to escape the Charybdis of over curious and critical
censures) I have rendered throughout l^ne for line. If I have any where mistaken
the Author, I doubt not but you will favorably acquit or correct it, when you
shall know I have had nothing more, to instruct me in his meaning, than his
own words: Notwithstanding which, I hope you will find I have forced no
construction dis-intelligible to the Latin. And although this Poem of Ovids is
by some (mistaking it for his Amorum) accused of too much levity and
wantonness, I have englished it in so modest a sense, that (if their judgment
be responsible to my expectation) it will be inoffensive to the chastest ear.
For the Annotations, they are such as I thought convenient, for the amplifiing
the Readers intelligence, to introduce to each book, which to some perhaps may
seem too large, to others not large enough; either of which I might have
humoured, but that I was confident the ingenious would be better satisfied with
mediocrity, to whose auspicious and favorable censures, these first endeavors
are humbly presented by

FRANCIS WOLFERSTON.

The first Book of Publius Ovidius Naso De Art Amandi:
The Argument.
Ovid shows where you may choice Beauties see,
The Theater and Forum's places be
Well stored with all sorts: how you may begin
To entertain them with discourse, and win
Your self acquaintance: in the stories, he,
Of Byblis, Myrrha, and Pasiphae,
Unlawful lust condemns; next a way shows
To gain access: does confidence impose.
Fine Courtship teaches men, and in the end
Forbids to trust a Mistress with a friend.
IF any here be ignorant in Love,
Let him read these, he shall a Lover prove.
Swift Ships with flying Sails by Art are led,
Chariots by Art, by Art Love's governed.
Well could [1] Automedon in Chariots ride,
And [2] Typhis the AEmonian ship did guide;
Venus has me her Deputy proclaimed:
Love's Typhis and Automedon I Am named.
Love raging is, he often repugneth me,
But he is a Boy, and must directed be.
(3) Phillyrides to harp A^hille^ taught,
And furious minds by Art to mildness brought.
Both friends and soes he terrified, it is said,
That the full-yeard-old-man was much afraid.
Those hands must Hector feel, which censured fit
By's Master, be does to the Rod submit.
Chiron, Achiller, I love's Master am,
Both cruel Boys, both from a (4) Goddess came.
But necks o^ S^eers with Plows still loaded are,
And in their mouths fierce horses bridles wear.
So I can love incline, my heart though he
Wound with his bow, and dart his flames at me;
Though Love torment, on me impression make
In this a nobler Revenge I Will take.
Phoebus, I feign not Arts inspit'd by thee,
Nor that the Aerie Bird premonisht me.
(5) Clio nor Clio's Sisters have I seen
A keeping Sheep on the Ascrean (6) Green.
Use causes this, to a skilled Poet bow,
Truths sing I: Love grace my beginnings now.
Be gone ye (7) Vittae badge of modesty,
And borders which down to the feet do lie.
Venus secure, and granted pleasures we
Sing: in my verses there no fault shall be.
Thou who a Soldier in this war would prove,
Must labor first to find out whom to love,
And next of all the pleasing Girl to gain,
Last, that her love may 2 long time remain.
This way, this manner, to our course assign,
Nor must our Chariot-wheel this Goal decline.
With outcast lures, go still about, choose one,
To whom say thus, Thou please me alone.
Heaven will not drop one down, then look about
Until you find a pleasing Beauty out.
The Hunts-man knows well where his toils to lay,
And in what dale the foaming Boar does stay.
Fruit Trees the Fowler knows, Fishers can choose
The place, to swim where shoals of fishes use.
So you that would a Lover be, inquire
To what place most your Mistress does retire.
To find her out, I Will not command that thou
Should travel far, nor the vast Ocean plow.
(8) Perseus (8) Andromade from (9) India brought.
A Girl in Grecia, Trojan Paris sought.
So many beauties (10) Rome affords to thee,
That in the world there can none greater be.
As Corn on (11) Ida, Grapes in (12) Lesbos found,
As Sea's with Fish, as Trees with Birds abound;
As Heaven of Stars, of Maids so full is Rome,
Venus appears in the City of her (13) Son.
If that a tender growing age you prize,
Unstained Virgins are before your eyes.
If one mature you seek, here thousands are,
You cannot choose one, than the rest, more fair.
If a grave Matron do delight you much,
Here uses often to be a band of such.
You may but gently walk in Pompes Grove.
When Sol does on the back of (14) Lee move.
Or, where the Mother did to her Sons gifts add
A costly work, the outside with Marble clad.
You must not pass by (15) Livies Porch, where are
Old Stories, which their Authors name do bear.
Where (16) Belides their Husbands have not spared,
But barb'rously slaughters for them prepared.
Bewailed (17) Adonis, pass not by, nor that
Which is to the man of Juda consecrate.
Unto the Temple of Nile's (18) heifer go,
She many makes, 'cause she to Jove was so.
Who'd think (19) the Forum's should cause love, yet there
The flames of Venus many times appear.
Where (20) Appias placed in Venus Marble fane,
Yields a soft sound, waters powered down again.
Often he that love consults here, love affects,
Whilst others he cares for, himself neglects.
Often in this place the Eloquent are mute,
New things fall out, they must plead their own suit.
Venus laughs at that man, who coming too
Plead for another, for himself must woo.
Chiefly the (21) curved Theaters frequent,
Choice beauty's hither come, will you content,
Here you shall find what is lovely, what you could
Sport gladly with, if touch, for ever hold.
As busy Ants in Troops march to and fro,
And mouths full-stor'd with wonted food do go.
Or as the Be through groves to pastures hies,
There from one flower to another flies.
So thick the Ladies to the Stage repair,
Ost I have wondered at their numbers fair;
Hither they come to see, and to be seen,
Here modesty has often neglected been.
Such plays thou (22) Romnius devisedst, when
The Sabine women pleased thy widowed men.
Over th Marble Theater, then no sale did wave,
Nor could the Tragic Stage red colors have.
Green leaves, the trees excrescents, then were thrown
About the Stage, Artless the Scene was known;
On gradual seats of sods and turfs, made fit
With leavie boughs, then did the people sit;
Each man sits round, and does his Mistress see,
And in their still breasts many motions be.
Whilst Thuscus rudely pipes upon his flute,
Lydius st^mps three times on the ground with his foot:
I the midst of all their sport (which Art did want)
The King as wished signs to his men did grant.
Shouts show their joy, each man leaps from his place,
And does in's eager arms a Maid embrace.
As fearful Doves do from the Eagle fly,
Or tender Lambs, when they a Wolf espy;
So the poor Maids afraid of the Soldiers fled,
A total paleness all their checks o're-spread;
One fear had all of them, but not one face,
These tear their hair, and those swound in the place;
These silent grieve, those mother call in vain,
This mourns, that is 'maz'd, this runs, that does remain,
Thus were the shame-fac'd Maids ravished and led
A genial prey unto each Romans bed.
If one refused, her servant did embrace,
And her straight on his wanton knees would place,
Then say, Why weeps my Dear? I Will be no other
To thee, than was thy Father to thy Mother.
Romulus to pay thy men, well did thou know,
So pay me, and I Will be thy Soldier too.
From that first time the Stage has yearly bin
A place for to entrap the fairest in.
The Capacious (23) Circus, of a large extent,
Where right-bred horses run, you must frequent;
Point not at all with fingers any way,
Nor with a nodd do you your thoughts betray.
Accost your Mistress, whilst by none denied,
And gently join your self unto her side;
If she refuse that you should sit so near,
The custom of the place allows it there;
Here you must ask (for it is the readiest way
To gain discourse) things in the present play:
Whose horse is this comes up, and then must you
Whatever she commends, commend it too.
Or when a stately show the contenders raise,
As you see her, so you must Venus praise.
Or if the dust raised high fall on her then
You with your hand must brush it off again.
If none light on her, yet brush off that none,
Action in such a case becomes one.
If her loose Mantle fall unto the ground,
To take it up, you must be officious found:
Whilst you stoop low, observe with nimble eye,
If that you can a dainty leg espy.
Take care lest they that sit behind her push,
Or with their kuees her tender back should crush.
'T is profitable slight things please her often,
As with your hand to make her cushion soft.
Some, fanning cool air, do their Mistress move,
Or with a foot eased give a birth to love.
The Circus yields such opportunities,
Or the Sand which all about the Forum flies.
Ost amorous youths, that on the (24) Arena fought,
Beholding others wounds, worse wounds have caught.
Or whilst they look for, and a book require,
And to have the Victors prize put down desire,
Wounded cry out, feeling loves cruel dart,
And ere they do begin, are struck to the heart.
When Caesar from a naval fight did come,
The Persian and Athenian ships brought home,
How many foreiners did then appear?
A world of people in the City were.
Who at that time could not a Mistress gain,
How many did on foreign Loves complain?
Caesar for's conquered Nations does prepare,
And ours the (25) utmost bounds of the Orient are.
(26) Crassus rejoice, Parthians our spoils return,
And Roman Ensigns by the Barbarous born.
We Have one though young t'revenge us has attained
And conquests, by such years not got, has gained.
To count the birthday of the Gods forbear,
Before that day the Caesar's valiant were.
Wisdom Divine his youthful years adorn,
And he to lose through Idleness does scorn.
(27) Tyrinthius did, when he was but a Boy,
Worthy so great a birth, two Snakes destroy.
Now young man (such thou Bacchus did appear,
When conquered India did thy (28) Thyrsis fear)
Thou at thy Fathers years his arms shall wear,
And every where his prosperous Trophies bear.
Let thy great narne thus much declare to thee,
Thou Art chief of the young men, and of the old shall be.
The young thy Brothers are, revenge their cause
The old thy Fathers be, protect their Laws.
Thy (29) Countries Fathers arms for thee prepare:
The foe thy Fathers Kingdoms peece-meale tear;
Thou pious arms do bear, so does not he,
Justice and Virtue will thy Ensigns be.
May 'st thou in arms the Parthians overcome,
And add Eoan wealth to Latium.
Caesar and Mars smile both when he does go;
Each of you is a God, and shall be so.
I prophecy you will vanquish, and will raise
In lofty verses a deserving praise.
Thou with my words thy troops shall animate,
Let not thy memory these dissipate.
Roman pursuits, and Parthian flights I Will sing,
How the enemies their shafts do backward (30) fling.
The Parthian flying, does his foe assail,
And with an Omen so malign prevail.
The time shall come when thou a Victor known,
Brave man shall be by four white horses drawn.
Before thee Chieftains going, with Gives so chained,
That liberty by wonted flight's not gained.
Young Men and Maids will come for to behold,
And that day many will their minds unfold.
Then if your Mistress ask a Princes name,
Or what in's Country is of chiefest fame,
All things declare, yea though she ask of none:
And talk of things unheard of, as if known.
(31) Euphrates this with Reeds edged on each side,
That (31) Tygris which with bluish streams does glide
Call these Armenians, those of Persia:
Say it is a City in Achaemenia;
These were Commanders, them by right names call
If that you can, if not, feign names for all:
Banquets preparativcs are, and Tables spread,
But something besides Wine is to be had.
Often Bacchus Grapes of all those sweets the best,
Has Purple Cupid in his soft hands pressed,
Until with Wine his spreading wings made wet,
He sits him down, and sleeps where he is set.
Anon the wet from's dabled wings does shake,
But cannot love from's heart so easily take.
Wine does prepare and heat, our griefs allay,
Cares in full cups of wine are washed away;
It laughter brings, and does the poor man cheer,
Sorrow expels, and clouded looks does clear.
It oft-times does our private thoughts declare,
And by its means with Arts we furnished are,
Oft-times young men with Love it does inspire,
Love joined with Wine, is putting fire to fire.
Choose not in Wine, neither when it is night,
That injureth your judgment, this your sight.
(32) Paris the Goddesses in the day did see
When Venus he the fairest judged to be.
Night imperfection hides, no faults does show;
Makes them that are not fair, seem to be so.
Rich Gemms and Purple in the day peruse,
By the light of the Sun a good complexion choose.
Why should I mention those that with intent
To hunt, in numbers do the woods srequent?
Why any thing of shoars should I relate,
Or baths which do sulphurious smoaks create?
Where some being wounded to the heart thus speak,
This water's not so good as some would make,
Lo in the Suburbs Delia's Temple stands,
And Kingdoms won by sword-supporting bands.
'Cause she is a Maid, and scorns at Cupids bow,
He will his shafts amongst her creatures throw.
The several places where choice beauties be,
Hereto has my Thalia sung to thee.
That fair one, which thou most do fancy, now
TO obtain (the top of Art) I'se teach thee how.
Whoere you be, your easy minds incline,
And every one observe my discipline.
Assume a courage first, think any may
Be won, and fearless your devices lay.
First Birds and Locusts shall to sing forbear,
And the (33) Menalian Hound run from the Hare,
E're Virgins courted will young men deny,
The most unwilling yield most willingly.
Stolen pleasure's grateful to a young man's fire,
Ladies as much do privately desire.
It Is fit a Lovesick Maid her mind should show,
Lest he she loves should to another go.
Heifers do low after a Bull in the Mead,
After ston'd-horses too young Mares have ney'd.
But lust's represt in us, it rages not,
We lawful bounds unto our flames allot.
Of (34) Byblis, who incestuous love did make,
And therefore hanged her self, why should I speak?
Or (35) Myrrha who did for her Father burn,
How into bark her tender skin did turn?
Her tears do us perfume, which odours are,
And Myrrah's name those prccious drops still bear.
On Ida's leavie plains under the shade,
A Bull the glory of the herd was laid.
A hide as white as milk, this beast adorns,
Except a black spot just betwixt his horns
(36) Gnossos and Cydon heifers him would gain,
And gladly on their backs this Bull sustain.
Lustful (37) Pasiphae makes him her Mate,
And therefore does the lovely heifers hate.
Known truths I sing, which Creet though used to be,
Nor all her (38) hundred Cities can deny.
She with an untaught hand is said to pull
Green leaves, and mow the Meadows for her Bull.
Amongst the droves is in the pastures born,
Her Husband leaves, a Bull does Minos horn.
Pasiphae why do go in clothes that are
So rich? thy Bull does not for such things care.
Why in a glass do feign the herd to see,
Or that a hairy skin does cover thee?
But yet believe thy glass, for it will show
No horns, though wished for, on thy forehead grow.
Does Minos please? no other take, at least
Deceive him with a man, not with a beast.
The Queen, her bed being left, through woods and groves
Like an enraged Priest of Bacchus roves.
How has she frowned, when she did Heifer^ see,
And said, why should my Lord so pleased be?
See how she leaps before him, thinking to
Please him, imagines he is delighted so.
Then she commands her from that place be brought,
To draw the undeserved yoke be taught,
Or her a Sacrifice oth' Altar makes,
And in her hands the harlots entrails takes.
How often she did with such the Gods appease;
Say thus to the slain go, you my Bull could please.
(39) Now Io (40) then Europa would she turn,
A Heifer that, this on a Bull was born.
The Bull deceived by her, cloz'd in a frame,
The Author of a monstrous birth became.
(41) Had Cressa to Thyestes bed not gone,
(How hard it is to be content with one)
Sol in the Meridian had not staid, nor then
Back to Aurora had returned again.
King (42) Nisus daughter stole his Purple Hair.
And now a Birds form is supposed to bear.
(43) One Scylla, Circes made, a monster foul,
Under whose belly furious Sea-dogs howl.
(44) Atrides from all dangers saved his life,
Yet fell, a Victim to his lustful wife.
(45) The bloody Mother wept not for the breath
Of her slain Sons, neither Creusa's death.
(46) Phoenix Amintors Son no tears does spare.
(47) Hippolitus mad horses piecemeal tear.
(48) Doting Phineus works his childrens ends,
And the same fate upon himself attends.
All these sad mischiefs women's lusts have made.
More raging they are than ours, and more unstaid.
Doubt not to gain what beauty ere you choose,
Among many you will not find one to refuse.
What they grant or deny, they love to be
Entreated, let repulse not trouble thee.
Be not deceived in change most pleasure find,
And a new Love will alienate your mind.
The Corn is riper in adjacent fields:
Your neighbors Cow a larger Elder yields.
First let it be your care her Maid to gain,
For she an easy entrance can obtain.
Be sure it is her that all her secrets knows,
To whom she does her private thoughts disclose.
With gifts and promises corrupt her, she
Can easily with thy wishes furnish thee.
She Will choose a time, and so Physicians use,
When her you love is least apt to refuse.
She Is fit'st for such impressions when she smiles,
So standing Corn thrives best in fatting soils;
When mirth she entertains, no griefs molest,
Venus is soon'st admitted to her breast.
(49) Ilion when sad, with arms defended sits,
When glad, the foe containing horse admits.
Try when some foe has crossed her, for then she
T'revenge her self on him, will pleasure thee.
The Maid employed in dressing of her head,
May move this, and to you assistance add.
With a low murmuring noise, thus whisper, sure
You cannot his unworthy change endure;
Then sh^e may name you, urge your praises high,
Swear, for her love you are resolved to dye;
Make haste then and go to her, lest she may
Be angry and grow cold, through your delay.
I^ ^ou should think the best way's to begin
And kiss her Maid, much danger is therein.
The Maid is coming, but the Mistress coy,
That would have what this only should enjoy.
It Is hazardous, though sweet, hard to refrain,
Yet my advice is, that you should abstain.
Headlong over Precipeeces I Will not tread,
Nor following me, shall young men be misled,
Receiving Letters by her, though you find
Some pretty postures pleasing to your mind,
Yet the Mistress then she is yours, to Venus see
That your first offering no Handmaid be.
This I advise, if you will credit Art,
Let not my words like hollow winds depart.
Never attempt, or else a conquest make,
You Are safe, if ever she your crimes partake.
Neither can Birds from their lim'd feathers fly,
Nor can the Boar the Windowy Net untye.
The Fish is easily caught, when struct by Art,
Do not unsatisfi'd from her depart.
The fault being mutual, she will not accuse,
Or to declare her Mistress mind refuse.
If you keep Counsel, do her not discover,
She Will be to you a mind-informing Lover.
He Is out that thinks he may at pleasure plow,
Or Pilots any time for Sea allow.
Always the Husbandman does not prevail,
Neither do ships in every season sail.
Always to be a courting's not secure,
You only at convenient times must woo her;
If it her birthday be, or when the Queen
Of Love, with Mars is in conjunction seen;
Or when sh'has on a cloth of Silver-gown,
And in the Circus a rich prize put down,
Desist: when winter comes, and (50) Pleiade^*
For that the (51) Goat is swallowed in the (...),
It Is best leave off: then they which trust the deep,
Scarce any part of their torn sails can keep.
Begin such time as (52) Allia before
Began to look red, and blush with Roman gore.
Or on that (53) Feast begin to court again
Which the (54) man of Palestina did ordain.
Be sure her birthday solemnly be spent,
You something, though close-fisted, must present.
Ladies do many pretty motions make,
And any thing that is that servants take.
The M^lliner first will to your Mistress go,
You standing by, to her his wares will show;
She Will your opinion ask, and something try,
Then with a kiss entice you for to buy.
She Will say her use it a long time may fit,
It Is very cheap, and she has need of it;
Then if you say you cannot so much expend,
Shee'^ bid you write for it unto some friend.
Give her upon her birthday what you will,
When ere she wants, that is her birthday still;
Or from her ear a Jewels dropped she will feign,
And then you must buy one for her again.
She Will borrow many things, yet none restore,
Nor shall your loss of them gain favor more.
Ten mouths, as many tongues too little are
For me the Arts of Harlots to declare.
First let a Letter sealed an entrance find,
Let your wax bear the impress of your mind:
And let your Letter love expressions bear,
To which you must add an imploring prayer.
At the (55) Kings request Achilles did refend
Hector: and Heaven will to prayers bend.
Promises hurt not you, then promise much,
'T makes those that are not rich, seem to be such.
Your Letter wins her, if she credit it,
Hope's a false Goddess, yet for you most fit.
Give her not much, for fear that you should part*
She only gains then, thou the loser art.
Be always giving, yet let nothing go,
Swains are with barren soil deluded so:
The ground will get, and he besows in vain,
Until that l^ss his greedy hands detain.
Her favor you may without gifts procure,
If she love gratis, it will long'st endure.
With handsome lines you must prepare her mind,
First try if those will entertainment find.
A Letter wonn Cydippe, which was brought,
And the poor Maid was with her own words caught.
I Would have young men the liberal Arts to gain,
They better may a Clients cause maintain.
The Maids in 's favor pleasing looks will send,
Whom the grave Judge and Senate do commend.
To get applause, in learning strive t'excel:
Let not your lips on tedious stories dwell.
Who to his Mistress uses to declame?
Ladies will oft-times long Epistles blame.
Yet smoothe and taking words, a handsome style,
That she may at your pleasing language smile.
Does she your Letter back unread resend,
Proceed and hope she will read it in the end.
In time the sullen Steer will draw the Plow:
The reigns in time the stubborn horse will bow:
The Iron Clivies daily use will fret,
And the passive earth the crooked share does whet;
The softest drops by constant falling on,
Will make impression on the hardest stone.
Persist, were she Penelope, you would gain,
(57) Pergamus late, but yet at last was taken.
Urge her not back again to write a line;
It Is grace enough if she but look on thine.
If once she read, she will write back, but these
Great favors she bestows by degrees.
Perhaps her first Letter no pleasure brings,
Bids you not trouble her with such fond things;
But yet she prays that you may fixed remain;
Pursue, and fear not but you will obtain.
If you your Mistress on her bed espy,
Thrown on her back, accost her privately,
Be sure that none o're-hear, lest they defame,
And add a scandal to your Mistress name.
If in the porch you chance to spy her stay,
Walk at a distance till she go away.
Sometimes before, sometimes behind her go,
Now you may walk apace, and then walk slow;
When you shall overtake her, do n't diffide,
But go as close as may be to her side;
If she to the Curved Theater be gone,
There follow her, observe what she has on;
There you may boldly look on her attire,
Commend her eyes, and every part admire;
Applaud the fool that to a Wench does start,
And favor him that acts a Lovers part;
When she stands, stand, when she sits, do not stire
And gladly spend the time in serving her;
Do not use instruments to curle your hair,
Neither your legs with the rough Pumice wear.
Those things provide, (58) which Cybil did devise
Lamented, Sung to in the Phrygian guise:
Neglected Modes become best, Theseus brought
Away Minois not by Courtiers taught.
Phaedra, Hippolitus, though rude, loved well:
Adonis, Venus care, in the woods did dwell.
Neatness delights, the fields will tan too much,
Be sure your clothes be handsome, without smutch;
Keep your tongue smooth, and let your teeth be fair,
Nor on your feet shoes that are too big wear;
And then your hair in order neatly put,
Let your beard by a skilful hand be cut;
Look that your nails be clean, and keep them low,
Nor let your hairs within your nostrils grow;
Your breath if it corrupted be, persume,
Let not a Goatish lust your nose consume.
Leave such like things for shameless Maids to use,
And men that basely their own fex abuse.
(59) Liber styles me his Poet, he does aid
Lovers, and flames within himself has made.
(60) Poor Ariadne on the shore complains
of Dia, which the watery Sea contains.
Starting from sleep, bare-leg'd, unlac'd her clothes,
She with neglected golden tresses goes.
She cruel Theseus calls, him often repeats,
Whilst a fierce storm her tender body beats;
She weeps and sighs, but yet she is handsome still,
Nor do incessant tears make her look ill.
Now striking on her tender breast, quoth she,
False man, he is gone, what will becomeof me?
When toward the shore she hears a Cymbal, and
A Timbrel struck by a commanding hand;
Amazed she falls, is of all sense berest,
No blood is in her liveless body left.
Lo (61) Mimalonides with carelss hair,
And Satyrs do before a God appear.
Lo (62) old Silenus drunk, upon his Ass,
Scarce sits, yet holding by the mane, does pass.
And whilst he follows flying Menades,
He on his dull beast with a cudgel lays;
And tumbling down, beating his ears he lies,
Whilst the young Satyrs cry, Rise Father, rise.
Next (63) comes the God himself up, who was born
By Tigers, in a Grape-carv'd Chariot drawn.
Speech, color, Theseus left the heartless Maid,
Thrice she would a fled, thrice by her fear was staid,
As a strong wind the weakest stem does stir,
Or Reeds in madid fens, so fear shakes her.
To whom the God: Lo here is one that will be
More (...), fear not, thou shall marry me.
In Heaven I will seat thee amongst the Stars,
Th^^ Maid of Cree^, shall guide the Mariners.
Thus said: lest that his beasts should her molest,
The God leaps down, his feet the sand comprest;
Then her, unable to resist, does bring
Folded in's arms, Gods may do any thing.
Some Hymen sing, (64) others Evohe sed,
So the God and's Bride join issue in their bed.
When you to Bacchus plenteous pots shall come,
Having a Lady in your bed at home,
(65) Nyctelius your Father beg to lend
His aid, that Wine may not your head offend.
You in a latent way may speak things so,
That she, it is only her you mean, may know.
Let sweet discourse wait on your Wine, that she
May Mistress of your Table choose to bec;
And that your flame may be acknowledged, you
Must teach your looks as well as lips to woo.
First take the Cup, and kiss the very place,
Which with her lips she did in drinking grace;
The meat her fair hand carves desire, and
As you receive it, gently touch her hand.
Let your care be to please her Father, such
A friend will properate your business much;
When you drink, first to him your cup direct,
In keeping your head bare show him respect;
Whether he be your equal, or below,
Yet still a like respect unto him show.
Through friendship to deceive is saf'st of all,
Yet he that so deceives is criminal.
Many will too much liquor quaff, and think
Others, 'cause they have done't, must as much drink^
Observe to keep a mean in drinking so,
Your tongue and feet their office best will know;
Chiefly beware of quarrelling in Wine,
For then your hands too much to blows incline.
Through too much Wine Eurition fell to the earth:
Wine and a Banquet are most fit for mirth;
Have you a voice, then sing, if nimble, dance;
What pleasing part soever you have, advance.
Really drunk does hurt, but so to feign,
I think is good, if you cannot speak plain,
Then if you speak, or do what is unfit,
The Wine is judged to be the cause of it.
Say th'man she will sleep by shall most happy be
But pray not for him if she means not thee.
When Dinner's ended, and the Table's gone,
An opportunity waits you upon.
Step through the throng, your Mistress come close to
And foot by foot with her from th'Table go.
Now is the time to speak, then fears prevent
Venus and Fortune aid the confident.
Our Art cannot Eloquence on you bestow,
Only endeavour't, and you shall be so.
You love must act, you feeling wounds must feign,
By all means try a promise to obtain.
Think no pains great, and say all lovely are,
Though never so foul, some do esteem them fair.
Often a dissembler I have seen in love,
What first he feigned, at length did real prove.
Then Ladies use men kindly in the end,
Their love proves true, which they at first pretend*
With praises you may captivate her mind,
So banks are with soft water undermined.
Her face admire, her lovely hair commend,
Her little slender foot, her dainty hand.
The chastest Maids with praise delighted are,
A Virgins beauty is her love and care.
The two Goddesses on Ida will not appear,
Because they were not judged the fairest there.
(66) Juno's bird if commended spreads his train,
Silent look on him, and he will cloze't again.
Race-horses for to have their manes lie straight,
And to be clapped upon their necks delight.
Fear not to promise, promises will move,
And call the Gods as witness to your love.
Jove from above laughs at Loves perjuries,
Bidding Aeolus blow away such toys;
For he himself did falsely use to swear
By Styx to Juno, his examples are.
It Is fit there should be Gods, that we should know,
And unto them accustomed honors do.
To careless sleep themselves they do not give:
The Godhead sees thee, therefore harmless live.
Restore what thou have borrowed, none delude,
Nor have thy hands in humane blood imbrued.
Falsehood to Maids only unpunisht goes,
Faith's least ashamed to be broke with those.
Cheat those deceivers most of falsehood made,
They often fall into th'nets themselves have laid.
Egypt is said nine years to have wanted Rain,
And so long under parching drought had lain.
When Thrasius to Busiris coming, said,
Jove's wrath must be with strangers blood allayed:
To whom Busiris: then shall thou be slain
A Sacrifice to Jove for Aegypts Rain.
Perillus in a red-hot Bull was laid,
Which he a torment had for others made;
Both these were just, let death-inventers dye,
And first those torments made for others, try.
So let perfidiousness falseness prevent,
And women wronged, as they wrong us, lament.
Tears drop, for those a stony-heart will move,
By madid eyes let her perceive your love.
If tears (for at all times men cannot cry)
You want, with a wet finger rub your eye.
Wise men mix kisses with the words they speak,
If they will not give, such things ungiven take.
But she will perhaps refuse, an anger feign,
Yet wishes her resistance be in vain.
Take heed that when upon her lips you seize,
To press them not too hard, lest it displease.
Who gains a kiss, and other sweets gets nor,
Deserves to lose that kiss which he has got.
If after kisses pleasures wanting were,
It was thy clownishness, not bashful fear;
Forcing they term it, yet that force is sweet,
With it, against their wills, they gladly meet;
She that is of Venus will no rape forsake,
But let her wantonness full pleasure take;
And she that may, yet does untoucht depart,
Though she seem glad, at it is sad at heart.
Both (67) Phaebe and her sister ravished were,
Yet they were grateful to their ravisher.
Here is a story that deserves my pen,
How the (68) Aemonian did the Scyrian win,
When Venus worthy such a prize to have,
On Ida, her unlucky (69) promise gave,
Which now a daughter does to Priam fly,
And is received with welcomes into Troy.
All, to revenge the injured husband, swear
And each a part do in his sufferings bear.
Achilles at his Mothers base request,
Conceals his Sex, in women's clothes is dressed.
What do Aeacides? don't wool desire,
Titles of honor otherways acquire.
Why does thy target-arm those baskets wear?
Why yarn, in the hand must Hector kill, do bear?
Never into that hand a spindle take,
Which only should the Spear of Peleus shake.
By chance in the same bed a Royal Maid,
Who quickly found he was a man, was laid:
She by his force was overcome we know,
Yet she was willing to be forced so.
Often when Achilles in the morn would rise,
To set his distaff spear betwixt his thighs:
Now where is that forcing, thou Deidamia,
With flattering words thy ravisher would stay?
They Are bashful till the have first received it, then
Having once tried, they must try't ore again.
Alas too much he to his form does trust,
That does expect his Mistress should speak first.
First let the man approach her, and beseech,
Ladies will hearken to a handsome speech.
Speak if you would obtain, she would be asked,
With words let your desires be unmaskt.
Jove suppliant went unto the Maids of old,
Deny his sure no Virgin ever could.
If you perceive her scorn at, and disdain
Your prayers, forbear, from her a while abslain.
They love what is not, at what is theirs they scoff,
Take their disdain away by keeping off.
Always by courting her she will never bend,
Sometimes go wait upon her as a friend;
By such an action to obtain, I one
To come neglected, go beloved, have known.
Merchants should not have feminine looks, but be
Made swarthy by the Sun, and storms at Sea.
It ill-becomes a Plowman to look fair,
That turns Joves earth up with a crooked share.
You should not have a Ladies smooth-skind face,
That on your head would Pallas Chaplet place.
In Lovers, pining looks do most excel,
Though some say not, yet it becomes them well.
Pale-face't Orion in the woods did rove,
So (70) Daphnis looked for gentle Nais Love.
Thin looks a Lover argue, sometimes wear
A sickly cap upon thy well cut hair.
Sorrows and griefs immense with watchings late,
The effects of Love young men attenuate;
That you may win, seem miserable, so
That all may say, there one in Love does go.
Should I advise, complain, right, wrong allow,
Friendship and truth are dis-esteemed now.
Praise her not to a friend, lest he should prove
With her, believing your report, in Love.
Yet Patroclus never stained Achilles bed,
And (71) Pirithous from base Phedra fled.
As Phoebus, Pallas, (72) Hermion, Pylades,
Or as the two Twins loved Tyndarides:
Who hopes the like, may look for Plumbs to grow
On Tam'rix, or that streams with honey flow.
Baseness delights now, pleasure's all their care,
And those, to others griefs, obtained are.
O wicked! Lovers fear no open so,
Shun whom you trust, and you may safely go,
Nor Brother, nor a friend confide in, just
Occasion they will give you to mistrust.
I Have almost done what thoughts the Ladies raise,
Their several humors court their several ways.
No places for all grain convenient are,
That Vines, this Olives, others Corn will bear.
As many minds on earth as features known,
And a wise man prepares for every one.
As nimble (73) Proteus used transformed to be,
A Lion, now a Boar, and then a Tree.
Some fish with darts are caught, others with the hook,
And some within a hollow net are took.
One way will not with any age agtee,
Far off old women your devices see.
If learned to the rude you seem, or wanton to
The chaste, no more she will trust her self with you.
Hence it is they fearful, honest men forsake,
And often the embrace of an inferior take.
Some of my work's performed, some's to be made,
And here my ship is by her Anchor stayed.
The End of the first Book.
Annotations on the first Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso De Art Amandi.
(1) Automedon in) an expert Charioteer, the Son of Diora and servant to
Achilles. Virg. Aeneid. 2.

-- equorum agitator Achillis
armiger Automedon --
(2) Typhis the Aemonian-ship) Typhis was Pilot to the first ship framed in
Greece, called Argo, which transported the Princes Jason, Hercules, Theseus,
Castor, Pollux, and the rest of the Miny's to Colchos to fetch the golden
Fleece, called Aemonian, from Mount Haemus, which divides Thessaly from
Thrace, from which Mountain Thessaly is often called Aemonia.

(3) Phillyrides to) Chiren the Centaur so called from his Mother Phillyra, he
(to omit the fable of his procreation) being grown up, retiring himself to the
woods, to inquire into the nature of Herbs, became an excellent Physician; he
taught Aesculapius Physic, Hercules Astrology, and Achilles, besides many
other things, to play on the Harp.

(4) Gods came) both Cupid and Achilles; Cupid from his Mother Venus, and
Achilles from the Goddess Thetis.

(5) Clio nor) The Muses nine in number, begotten by Jupiter upon Mnemosyne,
whence they are called Mnemosynides, we find them mentioned by many other
names, as Heliconides, Parnassides, Aonides, Citherides, Corycides, Pierides,
Pegasides, Aganippides, Hippocrenides, I lissiades, Libethrides, Pimpleides,
Castalides, Pateides, Ardalides, Maonides, and Sicelides, all which names are
attributed to them, either from their habitations, or from the places
consecrate unto them. Their particular names are Calliope, a ravishing singer;
Erato the Lovers Muse; Thalia from her flourishing Poetry; Melpomene from her
delicate warbling, a Tragic Muse; Terpsicore from her delight in dancing; Clio
the celebrater of famous actions; Euterpe the inventress of the Mathematics;
Polyhymnia from her vast memory, the Muse of History; Urania a heavenly singer,
the Muse of Astronomy. Hesiod. degenerat. Deorum.

(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
Which I english

Jove had nine Girls, Euterpe, Thalia,
Clio, Melpomene, Polymnia,
Erato; Urania, Terpsicore,
And 'bove the rest famous Calliope.
(6) Ascrean Green) a Plain in Boeotia, near Helicon: such an expression has
Propertius in lib. 2. ad Musam.

Nondum etiam Ascreos norint mea carmina fontes.

(7) Vittae badge of modesty; and borders) a Linen Band or Fillet which the
Vestal Nuns tie up their hair with: Ovid speaking of Daphne's chastity. Met. 2.
says,

-- innuptaeque aemula Phoebes,
Vitta coercebat positos sine lege capillos.
-- and aemulous of Phoebe chaste
The Vitta her neglected hair embraced.
For the borders. I take them to be the nether end of the gown, which Sigonius
calls Stola Cinctura astrictior, denoting a modest woman.

(8) Perseus Andromade) Andromade was Daughter to Cepheus, and Cassiope, who
for her Mothers pride, comparing her beauty with the Sea-Nymphs Nereides, was
by the Nymphs taken, bound to a Rock, and exposed to a merciless Sea Monster,
yet notwithstanding was delivered by Perseus, who slew the Monster, and
afterward married her by the consent of her Parents. Metam. 4.

-- generumque salutant
Auxiliamque domus, servatoremque fatentur
Cassiope, Cepheusque pater --
-- Cepheus and Cassiope with joy
Salute him for their Son, whom now they call
The Savior of their house, and of them all.
Perseus was begot by Jupiter upon Danae Daughter to Acrisius King of the
Argives, who being premonisht that his Grandchilde should kill him, shut his
Daughter Danae in a strong Tower, intending with her body to mure her womb up,
and consequently avert his foredoomed fate, but when Jupiter in the form of a
golden shower, had begotten Perseus upon her, she with her Infant being in a
small boat, committed to the Sea in expectation of inevitable destruction, were
miraculously preserved; Perseus grown up, returned, and unfortunately slew his
Grandfather.

(9) From India brought) India tot a serme spectat Orientem, minus in
latitudinem, etc. India (says Curtius, lib. 8.) lies toward the East,
containing more in longitude, than latitude; the North parts be mountainous
and hilly, but all the rest of the Land campain: It has many famous Rivers,
which descending down from Mount Caucasus, make a delightful progress through
the Countries. Indus is more cold than any other of the Rivers, whose water
resembles the color of the Sea. Ganges is the greatest of all, which running
through the Southern Country, until meeting with the opposition of many Rocks
and Precipeeces, his course is turned Eastwards, where it is swallowed up of
the Red Sea. When other Countries be burned with the Sun, India is covered over
with Snow; and when other places be frozen, the heat is there intolerable: for
which appears no natural reason. The Elephants in this Country be bigger and
stronger than those of Africa: The Rivers carry down Gold, and run smoothly
along, and the Sea does cast upon the shore both pearls and precious stones.
Stephanus says, the Trees are always green, that the ground bears corn twice
a year, that from hence comes Pepper, Calamus Aromaticus, and Cynamon. Aelian
lib. 1. Vari. says, their Pigeons are of a yellow color.

(10) Rome affords) Rome the Metropolis of Italy, and most celebrated City of
the whole world, of which Virgil in his first Egloge makes Tytyrus speak thus,
Urbem quam dicunt Romam Melibaee putavi
Stultus ego huic nostrae simtlem, etc.
Englished by Mr. Ogleby.
That City they call Rome, I did account
Fondly like this of ours, where Swains are wont
Yearly with care to wean their tender Lambs;
So I conceived Whelps equal to their Dams,
And judged that Kids were as their Mothers tall,
So used I great things to compare with small:
But she 'bove other Cities lifts her head,
As over the Shrubs the lofty Cedars spread.


It was called Rome from its founder Romulus, who built it on Mount Palatine,
in a quadrangular form, which Mount has ever since been the Seat of the Roman
Emperors. It is called Urbs Septi-collis, from the seven hills on which it
stands, their names are these, the Mount Palatine, the Capitolian Mount,
Quirinus Mount, the Caelian Mount, the Mount Esquilinus, the Mount Viminalis,
and the Mount Aventine. Ovid. Trist. lib. 1.

Sed quae de septem tot um circumspicit orbem
Montibus imperii Roma Deumque locus.
Rome, which from seven hills does overlook
The world, the Gods have for their Empire took.
See Romulus infra.
(11) On Ida) a high Mountain that looks toward Troy, the North-side of it
reaching from the Straits of Abidos, to the Cyzycene Fields in the Propontis,
the Weft-side looks over the Hellespont, the South makes a Promontory, and the
Eastern parts decline toward Missia. Hom. lib. 8. Iliad. says, that the top
of it is called Gargarus, where there is a Temple consecrate to Jupiter, and
that it has many Springs, and multitudes of wilde-beasts.

(12) Lesbos found) in Methimna a Town of Lesbos, so called from Methymna, the
daughter of Macharis, are abundance of Vines; in this place the famous Harper
Orion was born.

(13) Of her Son) of her Son Aeneas, who with some Sea-beaten Trojans arrived
in Italy, where he van quished Turnus, and married Lavinia,

(14) Leo move) the Sun does annually move, through the twelve signs of the
Zodiac, whereof Leo is the fifth sign: in the celestial Globe represented by a
Lion, into the first degree of which, the Sun enters on or about the twelfth of
July, which then bears twenty degrees eleven minutes North declination from the
Aequinexial line. It is never seen of us here in England, but is fixed in that
part of the Ecliptic; which extends it self over the Islands Cuba, Jamaica and
Hispaniola in America. It is often called the Nemean and Herculean Lion,
because Hercules slew a Lion in the Nemean Forest of an immense and prodigious
greatness, which the Poets feign to be translated into the sign Leo.

(15) Livies Porch) the Romans had certain walks on the side of their Delubrum
which they called Porticus, and in these places it was lawful to trade and
confer of worldly occasions, amongst which was Livia Porticus, or Livies Porch,
so called from Titus Livius, the most famous of all the Roman Historiographers.

(16) Where Belides) the fifty daughters of Danaus so called from their
Grandfather Belus: with whom Aegistus the Brother to Danaus, desired to marry
his fifty Sons, but Danaus understanding by Oracle that he should be slain by
his Son-in-law, refused, yet in the end being compelled thereto by Aegistus,
he consummates their marriages, but privately plots with his daughters to
murder their fifty husbands well steept with Wine in their marriage-beds: all
which too too obedient to paternal authority, cruelly butchered their wretched
busbands, except Hypermnestra, who out of compassion spared her Husband
Lynceus, who seeing his Brothers miserable destinies, slew Danaus, and invaded
the Kingdom of the Argives.

(17) Bewais'd Adonis) the Son of Cynira, King of Crprus, and his daughter
Myrrha, the darling of Venus, who whilst he was hunting in the Idalian Forest,
was slain by a Boar, Bion. Idylium 1.

(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
Which I English,

Adonis fair does on the Mountains lie,
A white tush having pierced his white thigh,
Venus laments whilst he expires, black gore
Flows from his wound.
And a little after.

(...),
(...).
The loving Hounds do howl about the Boy,
The Mountain-Nymphs lament with Venus cry.
Whom Venus is said ( Metam. 10.) to have turned into the flower called an
Emony.

(18) Niles Heifer) Jupiter being in love with Io the daughter of Anachus,
ravished her, but being surprised by Juno to conceal his theft, turned Io into a
white Cow, which Juno begged and committed to the custody of Argus, who being
slain by Jove's command, poor Io by Juno frighted, ran to the banks of the
River Nole, where Jove commiserating her mis-hap, importuning Juno, returned
her to her former shape. Metam. lib. 1.

De Bove nil superest, formae nisi candor in illa:
-- nothing now
But that pure white retains she of the Cow.
She after changed her name to Isis, and married Osiris in Egypt, where she
was honored for a Goddess, and after that was deified at Rome. Lucan. lib. 8.

Nos in Templa tuam Romana recipimus I sim.

Into Romes Temples we thy Isis took.

Where she had a Temple built her in Campo Martio, the cause of whose ruin
was this. A young Gentleman called Mundus, when he could by no means entice
the chaste Paulina to satisfy his lust, persuaded the Priests of Isis to say
that they were warned by Oracle, that Anubius the God of Egypt desired the
company of the said Paulina, she thinking the Priests would not lie, and it
being accounted an honor to have to do with a God, was stuprated by Mundus in
the Temple of Isis, under the name of Anubius, which he after confessing, the
Priests were put to death, the Temple beaten down, and the Image of Isis thrown
into Tyber. Lang. Chron. page 250.

(19) The Forums) there were many Forums in Rome, of which chiefly three, Forum
Romanum, Forum Julium, and Forum Augustum, which first was chief of all, and by
way of excellency called the Forum, as if there were no other Forum: Round
about this Forum Romanum were built Trades-mens shops, here was the Comitium,
or Hall of Justice, the Orators Pulpit, the Sanctuary, and several other
stately Edifices.

(20) Appias placed) here Pallas is meant by Appias, but Venus and Pallas are
both called Appiades, they had a Temple erected to them upon the Appian waters,
near to Forum Caesaris.

(21) Curved Theaters) places where Plays and other Shows were publicly
acted, in form of a half Moon or Semicircle. Martial. Spect.

Quiequid in Orpheo Rodope Spectasse Theatro dicitur, exhibuit, Caesar, Arena
tibi.
What Orpheus's said on Rodope to see,
Caesar the stage exhibits unto thee.
There were also places called Amphitheatres, which were in form of two
Theaters joined together in a full circle; upon this Amphitheatre did Fencers
play their prizes, wilde-beasts were baited, and the Gladiators to exhilerate
the Citizens, were miserably forced to butcher one another.

(22) Romulus devisedst) Numitor King of the Albanes in Italy, was expelled his
Kingdom by his younger Brother Amulius, his Son Lausus slain, and his Daughter
Sylvia to prevent all hopes of offspring to Numitor, consecrate by Amulius a
Priest of Vesta, but being comprest by Mars, she brought forth Romulus and
Remus, which were by Amulius command, together with their Mother thrown into
^yber, but being found by the Shepherd Faustulus, were preserved, and nursed by
his wife Laurentia; being grown up, they slew Amulius, and restored their
Grandfather Numitor to his government; after whose death the brothers
disagreeing, fell to arms, by which Renaus was slain, and Romulus alone
obtained the Kingdom. Plut. in Romans

OTI (...). Rome (says Aelian lib. 7. var.) was built by Remus and Romulus:
but Florus lib. 1. cap. 1. calls Romulus only the builder of it, he marked
the foundation of the City wall with a plough, drawn by four white horses,
according to Propert. lib. 4. de Urbe Romans

Quatuor hinc albos Romulus egit equos,
Here Romulus did four white horses drive.
The City being built, Senatus centum seniorum, qui patres dicti sunt,
constituitur, says Just. lib. 43. He constituted a Senate, being a hundred of
the Elder Citizens, which were called Fathers. Having thus stated his
Government, he desired that his soldiers might marry with the Sabines,
bordering upon them, but was by the Sabines resused, whereupon, says Florus,
lib. 1. Simulatis equestribus, virgins, quae ad spectaculum venerant, praeda
fuere; he devised certain shows, which when the Virgins came to behold, they
were made a prey, and seized upon by the soldiers.

(23) Circus of a large) the Romans had many places where they exhibited their
plays unto the people, the most remarkable was a great Circus, or Shew-place,
called Circus Maximus, it was a large piece of ground lying near that part of
the Aventine Mount, where Diana's Temple stood. It was built by Tarquinius
Priscus, with diverse Galleries called Fori round about it, from whence the
Senators and Gentlemen of the City did behold the running with great horses at
the lists, the fireworks, tumbling, baiting, and chasing of wilde-beasts. The
seats about this Circus were able to contain one hundred and fifty thousand
persons. There was also another Circus upon the Hill called Collis Hortulorum,
and this was the Circus or Shew-place of the Strumpet Flora, who made the
people of Rome heir to those goods she had gotten by prostituting her body to
young Gentlemen. God. lib. 1. Romans Hist.

(24) Arena sought) the Amphitheatre, called Arena, from its being scattered
over with Sand ^o Gravel, that the blood of such as were slain in the place,
might not make it too slippery for the combatants. Martial. Spec.

Praeceps Sanguinea dum se rotat ursus arena. (25) Utmost Bounds) the Eastern
Countries subjected to the Romans. Propert. lib. 3. to Augustus.

-- parat ultima terra Triumph^s
Tigris and Euphrates sub tua jure fluent.
-- Remote Lands Trophies show,
Tigris, Euphrates in thy Empire flow.
(26) Crassus rejoice) Marcus Crassus a wealthy Roman, who being sent with an
Army against the Parthians, himself, his Son, with eleven Roman Legions, were
cut off and slain, and all their ensigns taken by Surena General of the
Parthian Army, whose deaths were fully revenged by Ventidius, of whom Corn.
Gall.

Qui nunc Crassorum manes, direptaque signa
vindicat Augusti Caesaris auspitiis.
Who now for Ensigns lost, and Crassus slain,
With Caesar's fortune, full revenge has taken.
(27) Tyrinthius did) Hercules so called from the City Tyrinthia, where he was
brought up, he was the Son of Jupiter, begotten on Al^mena, whilst he was in
his Cradle, Juno sent two Snakes to destroy him, both which he slew: he was
famous for performing many dangerous and Heroic enterprises; amongst whose
many labors I shall only mention this, that he as yet but a youth, comprest
the fifty Daughters of Th^spius in one night, of whom he got filty Sons called
Thespiades.

(28) Thyrsis fear) a Spear or Javelin bound about with Ivy, which was carried
by the Manades or Priests of Bacchus at their Sacrifices which were performed
every third year, in remembrance of his triennial expedition into India.

(29) Countries Fathers) the Senators which were called Patres or Fathers,
Cicero calls them Patres conscripti, quia Romulus, qui Senatores centum, quos
ab honor patres appellavit, conscripsit.

(30) Backward fling) the Parthians who were most excellent at the use of
darts, with which they would seem to fly back on purpose to prejudice their
enemies.

(31) Euphrates, Tygris) Inter Tygrim and Euphratem tam uber and pinguis soli,
etc. betwixt Tygris and Euphrates (says Curtius lib. 5.) the Land is so fat
and fertile, that the Inhabitants are fain to drive their cattle from pasture
for fear they should surfeit. Salust says, they both uno font manare in
Armenia, flow from one fountain in Armenia: but Curtius going on, says, These
two Rivers have their beginnings in the Armenian Mountains, where they be
distant two thousand five hundred furlongs, and so run forwards, keeping their
distance till they approach the confines of Media and Gordia, where they come
more near together, they compass round the Country called Mesopotamia, and so
run through the confines of Babylon, into the Red Sea.

(32) Paris the Goddesses) the three Goddesses Juno, Pallas and Venus,
contending for priority of beauty (occasioned by a golden Apple, with this
inscription upon it, This for the fairest) meeting with Paris upon Mount Ida,
chose him for the decider of their controversy, who gave his vote for Venus.

(33) Menalian Hound) Arcadian Hound, Menalus being a very high Hill in that
Country.

(34) Biblis who) she fell in love with her own brother Caunus, whom she so
much importuned, that to avoid her, he fled his Country, whom she pursuing,
was by the wood Nymphs turned into a fountain. Met. lib. 9.

Sic lachrymis consumpta suis Phoebeia Byblis
Vertitur in fontem --
Phebean Byblis by her tears consumed,
Into a fountain turned. --
(35) Myrrha) the Daughter of Cyniras King of Cyprus, who being enamoured on
her Father, and by the assistance of her Nurse, obtaining the satisfaction of
her lust, conceived and brought forth Adonis, for which she was turned into a
Tree, from whence distills a gum called Myrrh. Metam. lib. 10.

Flet tamen and tepidae manant ex arbore guttae:
Est honor and lachrymis, stillataque cortice Myrrha
Nomen herile tenet. --
Yet she does weep, the Tree warm drops does spill,
Honor in tears, Myrrh from the rinds distill,
Which bears her name --
(36) Gnossos and Cydon) the two most famous Cities in Creet.

(37) Pasiphae'^ was the Daughter to Sol, and Wife to Minos King of Creet, who
falling in love with a Bull, was by the art of Daedalus enclosed in a wooden
Cow, covered with a Cow's skin, by which means she enjoyed her Bull, betwixt
whom was begotten that monster called the Minotaure, which Daedalus enclosed in
the Labyrinth where he was slain by Theseus.

(38) Hundred Cities) Creet is said to have a hundred Cities in it, whence it
had the Epithet of Hecatompolis.

(39) Now Io) the daughter of Inachus whom Jupiter turned into a Heifer. Vide
supra.

(40) Then Europa) she was the daughter of Agenor; with whom Jove being in
love, transformed himself into the shape of a Bull, and carried her on his back
through the Sea to Creet, where resuming his former shape, he ravished her.

(41) Had Cressa to) Aerope called Cressa from Creet, who committing adultery
with Thyestes her Husband Atrens brother, the children which were born to her
by Thyestes, were slain by Atreus, and given to their Father to eat, at which
horrid wickedness the Sun is said to have gone back to the morning. lib. 2. de
Trist.

Si non Aeropen frater sceleratus amasset,
Conversos solis, non legeremus equos.
Had not Thyestes for Aerope burned,
We had not read how Phoebus Carr returned.
(42) Nisus daughter) Scylla, who stole her Fathers purple hair, upon which the
fate both of himself and Kingdom did depend, and carried it to his enemy
Minos, who besieged him, and after whom she lusted, but being by him
contemned, she at his departure hung on the keel of his ship, where she was
turned into a Lark, her Father Nisus was also turned into a Hobby betwixt whom
has ever since continued enmity.

(43) One Scylla Circes) the daughter of Phorcus, whose nether parts the Witch
Circe changed into grinning dogs, which she not knowing how to restore,
casting her self from a precipeece, was turned into a Rock in the
Mamertine-Sea, betwixt Scicily and Italy, destructive to Mariners.

(44) Atrides from all) Agamemnon, so called from his Father Atreus, who having
by Land avoided a thousand dangers in that long and desperate Siege at Troy;
and afterward escaping a threatening Shipwreck, the Sea being perturbed by an
angry Neptune, returning safe home was slain at a Banquet by his wife
Clitemnestra, and her Adulterer Aegistus.

(45) The bloody Mother) Medea, who by her charms furnishing Jason with the
golden Fleece, was by him afterward married, to whom she bore two Sons: but
he forsaking her, and marrying Creusa, daughter to Creon King of Corinth, the
enraged Medea consumed Creusa in her Palace with enchanted fire, of which fact
Jason coming to take vengeance, she before his face strangled her two Sons,
her self flying to Athens.

(46) Phaenix Amintors Son) who by his Mothers advice having to do with his
Fathers Concubine, was haunted by the Furies, and flying from his Fathers
presence, and coming into Thessalie, was made Achilles Tutor.

(47) Hippolitus mad horses) the Son of Theseus and Hippolita the Amazon, who
constantly resolving to live a single life, in his Fathers absence, was
solicited by his Mother-in-law Phaedra, whose lust he repudiating, was by her
accused to his Father, from whose anger flying, he was torn to pieces by the
horses that drew his Chariot, and was buried in Diana's grove. Fast. lib. 3.

Hic latet Hippolitus loris discerptus equorum,
Unde nemus nullis illud aditursequis.
Here lies Hippolitus by horses slain:
Whence no horse ere came in that grove again.
(48) Doting Phineus) the Father of Orythus, and Crambus, whose eyes he put
out; persuaded thereto by his second wife Idaea, for which his own eyes were
after plucked out by the Furies.

(49) ^ion when sad) Troy so called from Ilus the soin of Iros, which being
begirt with Grecian soldiers, and by them reduced to extremities, did render
them more sorrowful, and consequently much more watchful and vigilant; but the
Greeks feigning a departure, left a wooden-horse, of an immense and prodigious
greatness, whose belly was lined with soldiers: the Trojans joyful of their
departure, and believing this to be the gift of Minerva, with Ropes drew the
vast bulk into the City. Virg. Aeneid. 2.

-- circum pueri iunuptaeque puellae
Sacra canunt, funemque manus contingere gaudent.
-- Boys, Virgins, round about
Glad touch the Ropes, and sacred hymns chant out.
In the night the soldiers coming out of the horse, opened the gates to their
confederates, which were then returned, slew the Trojans, and set the City on
fire.

(50) And Pleiades) the seven stars feigned to be the seven daughters of Atlas,
their names are, Electra, Alcione, Celaeno, Maia, Asterope, Taygete, and
Merope, which last is hardly to be discerned, the reason is, because six of
them married each one a God, but Merope married a Mortal, for which she has
ever since absconded her self; they are placed betwixt the mouth of Taurus, and
the tail of Aries, and cause Snow in Winter, according to Lucan. l. 5.

-- jam spars^rat Aemo
Bruma nives, gelidoq, cadens Atlantis Oly mpo.
-- Now with Winters Snow
The Pleiades did Aemus top bestrow.
(51) Goat is swallowed) Capricornus or the Goat is one of the twelve sings,
and the watery Tropic, being the farthest limit of the Sun's course Southward,
the Equator; which entering makes the Winter quarter, and turns his course
again to the Aequinoxial.

(52) Allia before) a River flowing from the Cructumentan Mountains in
Hetruria, where the Romans were overthrown and slain by Brennus, Captain of the
Gauls: hence they used to call an unlucky day dies alliensis.

(53) Feast begin) the Feast of the Passcover which the Jews kept on the
fourteenth of the month Nisan, which month contains part of March, and part
of April, by us now called Easter.

(54) Man of Palestina) Moses, by whose mouth the Lord commanded the Feast of
Passover should be kept in remembrance of his passing over the houses of
Israel, and destroying the firstborn of Egypt; Ovid calls him the man of
Palestina, because he died on Mount Abarim, which is a Hill, (says Josephus.
lib. 4. cap. 8. Antiq.) near Jericho, Palestina contains Judea, Samaria, and
Gali^ea.

(55) Kings request) Achilles at the humble request of King Priam, did restore
the dead body of Hector whom he had slain, and dragged his coarse in Triumph.
Hom. Iliad. 24.

(56) A Letter won) Cydippe, a noble young Lady of transcendent beauty, whom
young Acontius being in love with, and fearing a repulse, because he both in
birth and fortune was inferior to her, devised this means to obtain her; as
she sat in Diana's Temple, he threw an Apple with this Inscription.
Aristaen. lib. 1.

(...),
By Diana I will marry Acontius.
Which she taking up and reading, at unawares promised her self to him, after
which time whenever she went about to marry another, she was cast into a
dangerous disease by the offended Goddess Diana, which her friends at last
understanding, married her to Acontius.

(57) Pergamus late) a high Tower in Troy from which the whole City is called
Pergamus, which City (says Dares de excidio Tro.) after ten years, eight
months, and twelve days siege was taken by the Grecians.

(58) Which Cybil did) There were (says Aelian. lib. 12. Nar.) ten Cybils, one
of which was Phrygian Cybil, she first invented the Tabor and Pipe, the Cymbal
and Timbrel: she was called Matter Deorum, or the Mother of the Gods, and was
worshipped at Berecynthia, a Town in Phrygia, of which Catul. 64.

-- Sequimini
Phrygiam ad domum: Cybelles Phrygia ad nemora deae,
Ubi Cymbalum sonat vox, ubi Tympanareboant.
-- Follow
To the Phrygian Grotto, Goddess Cybils shade,
Where Cymbals sound, and where the Timbrels played.
Her Priests were enjoined to geld themselves with a Fish-shell, whose manner
of worship was thus: A Phrygian man and woman apparrelled in parti-colored
garments after the manner of their Country, carried their Goddess Picture
about, beating their breasts, and miserably howling, after whom followed others
playing on Tabors, Pipes, and Cymbals.

(59) Liber styles me) Bacchus so called, either because (as Plutarch says)
pro Boeotiae liberate pugnavit, he fought for the liberty of Boeotia, or
because with Wine he exhilerates men, and frees them from solicitous cares.

(60) Poor Ariadne) the daughter of Minos and Pasiphae whom Theseus taking out
of Creet forsook: leaving her disconsolate on the shore of Dia, an Island in
the Aegean-Sea, one of the Cyclades, upon whom being gone, she thus complains
in Catullus; Siccine me patriis abvectam, perfide, ab oris,
Perfide deserto liquisti in littore Theseu?
Siccine discedens, etc. Which I translate.
Flase Thesens, was I from my Country took
Thus on a foreign shore to be forsook?
Thus, all the Gods neglected, dar 'st thou go,
Thy perjuries attending on thee so?
Alas! could naught avert thy cruel mind,
My sorrow in thee no compassion find?
Thy cruel breast not pity my estate?
Ah! thou before never mentioned such a fate.
Thou bid'st me never look for such a thing,
But joyful wedlock, and wished Hymen sing.
Which of no force slight winds away do bear:
Let women never believe men when they swear.


(61) Lo Mimalonides) the Menades, or furious Priests of Bacchus.

(62) Old Silenns) the Foster Father to Bacchus, who was always wont to ride
upon an Ass.

(63) The God) Bacchus, the inventer of Wine, who by the Thracians was
worshipped for a God, it being the custom of old amongst the Heathens to
deifie the inventers of things.

(64) Others Evohe sed) an exclamatory noise which the Menades were wont to use
in praise of Bacchus.

(65) Nyctelius) Bacchus, so called from his seasts, which were performed in
the night. Aeneid. 4.

-- Nocturnusque vocat clamore Cytheron. (66) Juno's Bird) the Peacock, whose
train she beautified with her heardsman Argus his hundred eyes. Metam. lib. 1.

Excipit hos, volucrisque sua Saturnia pennis
Collocat, and gemmis caudam stellantibus implet.
Yet that those starry Jewels might remain,
Saturnia fixed them in her Peacocks train.
(67) Phoebe and her) Phoebe and her sister Elaira the daughters of Leucippus,
ravished by Castor and Pollux.

(68) The Aemonian) Achilles so called from his Country of Thessaly: the
Scyrian is meant by Deidamia daughter to Lycomedes King of Scyros, an Isle in
the Aegean-Sea, on whom Achilles habited in women's apparel, begot Pyrrhus.

(69) Promise gave) Hellen the fairest of all Greece, whom Venus promised to
Paris, which being given, was the ruin of not only himself, but all Troy.

(70) Daphnis looked) a youth of Sicily, the inventer of Bucolick verse, in love
with the Nymph Nais.

(71) Pirithous from) the son of Ixiox joined in a firm league of friendship
with Theseus, whose wife Phaedra soliciting him to lust, he refused out of
respect to his friend.

(72) Hermione Pylades) Pylades was so faithful a friend to Orestes, that when
Theas King of Taurica had designed to sacrifice Orestes, he affirmed himself
to be Orestes, that he might dye for his friend: whose wife Hermione he
entirely loved, because she so nearly related to his friend.

(73) Proteus used) a Sea-deity, the Son of Oceanus and Thetis, the Poets feign
that he could transform himself into what shape he pleased. Metam. 8.

Nam modo te Juvenem, modo te videre Leonem,
Nunc violentus aper, nunc quem tetigisse timerent
Anguis eras, modo te faciebant cornuatanrum,
Sepe lapis poteras, arbor quoque saepe videri.
Which I english,

One while a youth, a Lion then appear,
Now a fierce Boar, a Snake now, which they fear
To touch, now horns show thee a Bull to be:
A Stone the art often, and oft-times turned a tree.
The second Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso De Art Amandi.
The Argument.
Daedalus flight from Creet, Icarus fate,
No love can Philtra 's, or fond charms create.
Rude language fits not love. Lady's must find
Subsequient servants, neither storms nor wind
A Lover must retard, how to commend
A Lady's imperfections, and pretend
Her faults are handsome: make her think them so.
All hazards for her sake to undergo.
Loves secrets must be kept so, Ovid says,
Ending this second Book with his self-praise.
SIng (1) Io Paean, twice Io Paean sing,
My wisht-for prey caught in my nets I bring.
Bays to my Verse the Jovial Lover deems,
And me before (2) the Meonian man esteems.
Such was the (3) Priameian that prevailed,
And with his fair prize from Amyclae sailed.
Such was the man that in his Chariot run,
And with the course fair (4) Hippodamia won.
Whither so fast young man? thy ship does steer
In The midst of the Sea, no wisht-for Haven near.
It Is not enough to find thy Mistress, she
Py Art is got, must so continued be.
It is as much to keep, as to acquire,
In that is danger, this must Art inspire.
Venus and Cupid smile, if ever now,
And thou Erato to whom Lovers bow.
Great things I Will sing, how love may constant prove,
And the Boy which all about the world does rove,
He Is light, has wings wherewith the Air to cut
And bounds to them, it is very hard to put.
Though (5) Minos do all means of escape deny
A desperate way Daedalus found in the Sky.
When he included had within his frame
The Semiox and Man, the Mothers shame.
He said just Minos my exile prefer
Let my own Country these my bones inter,
Driven from thence by a sad fate, where I
Could never live, O suffer me to dye.
O let this Boy return, though I Have no grace,
If not the Boy, pity my aged face.
Such words he spoke, such might he speak and more,
But no return could from the King procure.
Which when he sees, now Daedalns, says he,
The have matter for thy ingenuity.
Both Sea and Land Minos possesses so,
There is no way by Sea-or Land to go.
Let Us fly through Air that only open lies,
Jove pardon my presumptuous enterprise.
I don't affect to touch the Starry Seat,
For me to fly there is no way but that.
Let me pass Styx, through Styx my journey take,
For that my nature will immortal make.
Distress exiles our wills, who'd think men might
Through the Aerial passages take flight.
He does the wings of Birds in order place,
He does his work with packthread enterlace.
The quills in fire-softened wax were wrought:
Thus this new work was to perfection brought.
The Boy did touch the wax, at th'feathers smile,
Ignorant they were made for's shoulder, while
His Father says, we with these sayls must try,
To gain our Country, and from Minos fly.
Minos all passages but the Air has shut,
By my invention we that Air must cur.
Neither (6) Bootis, nor Orion bold,
Or the Tegean Maid, do thou behold.
Follow me with thy wings, before thee I
Will go, keep close and thou shall safely fly.
If we too near unto the Sun shall soar,
Our wings will melt, and not the heat endure.
Or if too low, and near the Sea we toil,
The humid vapors will our feathers spoil.
Keep in the midst O Son, the winds beware,
Strike prosperous sails which way so'ere they bear.
Whilst he does fit them, he instructs the Boy,
Just as old Birds do teach the young to fly.
Then his own plumes he on his shoulder ties,
And trembling does for the flight his body poize.
Ready to soar, just now he kissed his Boy,
And let a Fathers tear steal from his eye.
There was a little hill did overlook
The Plain, from which a desperate flight both took.
Daedalus flies, yet evermore looks back,
And flaggs, that Icarus may overtake.
Now the new Journey pleases, fear's put by,
And daring Icarus does boldly fly.
These were espied by Anglers, who forsook
Their Rods, themselves to speedy flight betook.
(7) Samos and Naxos did with Paros stand,
Delos the (8) Clarians love on their left hand.
At the right (9) Lebinthus and Calydna's wood,
With Ponds well stored Astipalia stood.
When the rash Boy another way will choose,
Soars up, and quickly does his father loose.
Wax melts, and threeds grow slack, a God too nigh:
Nor longer with the wind his arms can fly.
Amazed, from high into the deep looks where
Black night was risen to augment his fear.
The wax consumed, he his bare arms does shake,
Trembling, has nothing whereon hold to take.
He fell, crying Father, Father, as he went,
And there the water did his speech prevent.
The unhappy Father Icarus does cry,
Icarus, where ar't, says he, where do thou fly?
Icarus? and then in the waves his wings he spies,
His name in the Sea, in the earth his body lies.
Minos could not a Mortals flight restrain,
Yet I will make a flying God remain.
He that does use (10) Aemonian Arts is gulled,
Or gives what he from a Colts forehead pulled.
Medea's herbs will not make love keep warm,
Nor poisons mixed drunk with a Magic charm.
Jason with Phasias, Ulysses should remain
With (11) Circe, if that spells could love obtain.
Philtra's to Maids it is in vain to give,
It wrongs their sense, does them to madness drive.
Such wickedness abhor, indearing be
More than thy beauty, 'twill advantage thee.
Though lovely Nireus do old Homer please,
And (12) Hylas ravished by the Naides.
To keep your Mistress, don't your self admire,
The gifts of Nature those of Art require.
Beauty is frail, in time it will decay,
And with our youthful age it flies away.
Nor Violets, nor Lillies ever grow:
Nor do plucked Roses always lovely show.
Fair youth, gray hairs are coming on thee now,
And wrinckles will thy face with furrows plow.
Frame a good mind, the form of that maintain,
Which will unto thy utmost day remain.
To deck your neck with Jewels, don't desire:
Two languages at least you must acquire.
Not fair, but eloquent Ulysses was,
And yet the Sea-Nymphs would his love embrace,
At his return how did (13) Calypso wail?
And ever made the Sea unfit for sail.
She oft-times would entreat him to relate,
Because he spoke so well, the Trojan fate.
Of The shore they stood, where fair Calypso would
have the Odrysians bloody acts retold.
He had a slender Rod in his right hand,
And what she asks, he draws upon the Sand.
This's Troy, says he, which mighty walls enclose,
This is (14) Simois, these my tents suppose.
This is the field where (15) Dolons death was wrought
Whilst th'watch expects the Aemonian horses brought.
There stood Sithonian Rhesus tents, that night
I came with the captive horses from the fight.
More he would have drawn out when suddenly
A wave does wash away both tents and Troy.
Then the Goddess says, what hope for thee is found?
Do see what mighty names the Sea has drowned?
Therefore, whoever you be, do not begin
To trust to shapes, have Substances within.
A mild behavior very much will take,
When boisterousness, hate and dissontion make,
We loathe the Kite, that does sharp talons keep,
And Wolves, that use to fright the fearful sheep.
The gentle Swallow no man strives to take,
But in what place she will, her nest may make.
Hence all contentions, hence a bitter tongue,
Soft and sweet language does to love belong.
The wives their husbands, husbands wives forsake
Through strife, things ill at one another take.
Wives have a gift to chide, they will not forbear:
None but sweet language let your Mistress hear.
Law has not you unto one bed confined,
But does allow your love reward to find.
Court her with praises, such do please her ear:
Then she will be always glad when you appear.
To rich men I need not my skill impart,
They have no need of me, nor of my Art.
He Is witty that says take it, that same man
Will do much more than my invention can.
Poor Lovers I instruct, my self loved poor,
When gifts I could not, words I gave her store.
Let such love wisely, how to speak take care,
Such things as rich men will not, they must bear.
I angry, once my Mistress locks did move,
How many days that anger lost her love!
I don't beleeve't, but yet she said that I
Did tear her Gown, made me a new one buy.
If you be wise, example take by me,
Avoid offenses that so costly be.
Peace with your Mistress, war with Parthians make,
Sport or speak any thing you think will take.
If you your Mistress strange, uneasy find,
Persevere still, in time she will prove kind.
Crook'd bows will bend, if leisurely you try,
But if too rash, they will in pieces fly.
With easy strokes a River may be crossed,
But if you strike too fast, in the stream you are lost.
Lions and Tigers are made tame by wit,
Steers by degrees will to the yoke submit.
Who love did more than (16) Atalanta shun?
Yet by the merits of a man was won.
It Is said (17) Melanion 'cause his Wench detained
Her promised love under a tree complained.
Often on his shoulders he his Nets would bear,
Often in the Cruel Boar would fix his Spear.
Wounded he sees Hylaeus Bow well strung,
Better known whilst it did to him belong.
I do not bid haunt the Menalian grove,
Nor with your Nets upon your shoulders rove.
Nor do I bid you with your breast a Dart
Oppose, it is easy to perform my Art.
To overcome, you must not her withstand:
Be sure to act what parts she shall command.
What she rejects, reject, if she, allow;
What she says, say, what she denies, do thou;
If she laugh, laugh; but if she weep, weep too:
As she her looks disposes, so must you.
If any time she play with you at (18) Dice,
You must throw ill, let here is be her own choice.
Play for no more than you would gladly lose,
And then let yours be always losing throws.
Or if at chess your man might safely pass,
Let him be taken by his (19) foe of glass.
Carry her fan in one hand all along,
And with the other lead her through the throng.
Be not ashamed to hand her to (20) her bed,
Set by, or reach her shoes, as she has need.
Oft-times you may, then do not fearful stand,
But in your Mistress bosom warm your hand.
Think it not base (for though it be 'twill please)
By holding of her glass, her arms to ease.
He that in pieces did the Serpents tear,
That Heaven deserved, which he (21) before did bear,
A basket amongst the Ionian Maids did use,
And for to card their wool, would not refuse.
These for his Mistress did the Horoe do,
And will you scorn such things to undergo?
If she say come to the Forum, her obey,
Go sooner than she bids, and longer stay.
If she say to you, go, meet such a one,
Haste, other things deser, be stayed by none.
If in the night she from a banquet come
And call you, you must wait upon her home.
If she in the Country call, love hates the slow,
On foct, if thou have no Coach nor horses, go.
Neither let Summers heat your journey stay,
Nor Winters Snow driven along the way.
Love is a kind of war, cowards away,
Loves Ensigns are not born by such as they.
Night, winter, long ways, dolorous events,
All labor's undergone in these soft tents.
Often storms from high pitched clouds on you shall fly,
Often you must cold upon the bare ground lie.
Cynthius is said Admetus beasts to keep,
That he each night in a poor Coat did sleep.
What Phoebus taught who will not; leave disdain
Whoever you be that would have love remain.
If to approach her, thou no safe way have,
With an opposing lock the door made fast.
Your self down to her from the wide roof let,
Or else a passage through some window get.
She will rejoice to see you undertake,
(Sure marks of love) all dangers for her sake.
Leander often without his Wench could be,
Yet he did swimm for her his Love to see.
Let not the servants shame their place to know,
Nor be ashamed great with those Maids to grow.
Each by her name (no loss to you) salute,
And humbly beg them to assist your suit.
You must, as your estate allows, to all
Her servants at some times be liberal.
Reward that Maid to whom she does confess,
Whose hand does her in the French garment dress.
Trust me, make all of them your own, but more
Especially gainhim that keeps the door.
I do not bid you costly gifts present,
But slight ones, yet such as will her content.
When Corn is ripe, and Orchards ponderous are,
Then let a Boy fruit in a Basket bear.
Say those unto you out of the Country came,
Although by the way for her you bought the same.
Carry her Grapes in clusters, that do swell,
Or Nuts which Amarillis loved so well.
A Throssel sent, or a green Chaplet will
Show, that to her your love is lasting still.
Rich Gifts consume men, which old age will rue,
They that are too profuse themselves undo.
To write her verses I would teach you how,
But they (alas) are dis-esteemed now.
Verse they commend, but Riches they respect,
Rich men they will, though never such clowns, accept.
Now is the golden age, honors are gained,
And Ladies loves, by heeps of gold obtained.
If Homer should, attended by his Muse,
Come hither without Gold, they would him resuse.
Some Ladies learned are, although but few,
And others that are not, would seem so too.
Let your verse both extol, then also will
The Reader with kind words commend your skill.
Each of those Ladies will your verse esteem,
And it to such may a slight present seem.
You may contrive for your advantage so,
That what you would do, she enjoin you to.
If you are bound to set a servant free,
Let him from her request his liberty.
If you release him, she is obliged to you,
For granting that which you were bound to do.
She has the praise, you the advantage, use,
Contrive that she may have, and you not lose.
Whoever would have his Mistress love remain,
That he is ravished at her looks must feign.
If she wear Tyrian, Tyrian wear commend,
If Coan, that becomes her best pretend.
If cloth of Gold, say you that wear best love,
If she have courser on, courser approve.
If bare-neckt, say she sets your heart on fire:
But that she take no cold thereby desire.
Is her hair parted, praise the parted hair,
And say, the locks that she has curled are fair.
Her dancing praise, her singing voice admire:
Complain when her Air-sweetning notes expire.
Honor that company, and that thing commend
Which she loves, let your words on hers depend.
If she more cruel than Medusa were,
Such praises will to love incline her ear.
Yet do not counterfeit apparently,
Nor let your countenance your words deny.
Hid Art will profit, shamed if seen it makes,
And future credit from your language takes.
In Autumn when the year is fairest found,
And the full Grape does with red Wine abound:
When th'seasons sometimes hot, and sometimes cold,
Bodies do not in constant temper hold.
May she be well; but if upon her bed,
She lie by the unkind Air distempered,
Then manifest your love to her, then sow
What you may after with your sickle mow.
No loathe in you of her disease be found,
What she would have with your own hands compound.
Before her weep, to kiss conceive no fears,
And let her dry lips drink your dropping tears;
Promise her any thing in that estate,
To make her merry pretty dreams relate.
Make the old woman that does dress the rooms,
Burn in her trembling hand, some choice persumes.
And let your grateful care in all things go,
Many their Mistress beds have come to so.
Hate for such offices you will not gain,
Then with sedulity 'bout her remain.
No meats or broths give her that bitter are,
But may your rival for her such prepare;
Those sails with which you from the shore do put,
Must be taken down when deeper Seas you cut.
By exercise love strengthens when it is young,
And if it is cherisht, will in time grow strong.
You fear the Bull with which a Calf you have played,
You under the tree which was a sprig are laid.
A River small at first, and bigger grows,
Receiving water that into it flows.
Inure your self to any thing that will
Obtain your Mistress, be it never so ill.
Incline her ear, be always in her sight,
Present your self before her day and night.
But when your language finds belief in her,
Your frequent visits for some time defer.
A field made fallow, will afford more grain,
So ground long parcht drinks up descending Rain.
Phyllis indifferently did Demophoon love,
Until in the Sea she saw his sails to move.
Penelope laments Ulysses stay,
So for (22) Phyllacides, Laodamia.
Absent not long, lest time should cure her pain,
Make her old Loves forget, new entertain.
Hellen (her husband absent) could not rest
Alone, but lodged in a warm strangers breast.
What madness Menalaus was it to leave
Sparta, whilst strangers did thy wife receive.
Who trusts a Dove unto a Hauk to keep,
Or to a Mountain Woolf a flock of Sheep?
Hellen no crime, no crime did Paris know,
He did what thou or any else would do.
Thou by occasion did thy self abuse,
For whose advice but thine did Hellen use?
A (23) well-bred stranger's come, her husband's gone,
What should she do? she durst not lie alone.
See Menelaus, Hellen I acquit,
She did but make use of a benefit.
Neither's the sandy Boar more cruel found,
When with his tusks he at the Dogs turns round.
Nor the Lioness which to her whelps gives suck,
Nor the small Viper by some rash foot struck:
Then the wife that in her husbands bed does find
A pretty Wench: her looks express her mind.
To fire and sword she flies, shame does not know:
Born like an Arrow from the (26) Aonian Bow.
This will the firm, the best knit-love divide,
Such crimes as these, to wise men are denied.
(25) Phasias most barbarously her own sons destroies,
For to revenge their Fathers perjuries.
Such a Dire Mother has (26) you Swallow been,
And still her blood may on her breast be seen,
I bid not Ladies only one bed know,
Young wives can hardly be contented so.
Use (27) stolen delights, but let them be concealed,
No credit's got by such a crime revealed.
Give no reward, lest any should it see:
Nor let your pleasures at a set time be.
Suspiciously let none espy you set,
Nor must you often in one place be met.
And when you write, peruse that writing well:
Some understand more than the Letters tell.
Wronged love sharp darts will send, just wars maintain
She that erewhile did grieve, makes you complain.
Whilst one Atrides loved, that one was true,
When he was criminal, she was so too.
She hears how Laurels were in garlands born,
And how to (28) Chrysis she was made a scorn.
She heard the troubles 'bout (29) Lyrnesis made,
And how the war was a long time delayed.
She heard of these, but did the Trojan see:
How the Victor would his captives captive be.
So she Aegistus does her Lover make,
Such a revenge did fair Tyndaris take.
If any should your privacies make known,
Though manifest, you may the fact disown.
Be not too much dejected, nor exceed
Too much in mitth, it will suspicion breed.
Spare not to speak, favor by that is gained,
And Love by often meeting is obtained.
There are that teach the effects of herbs to prove,
But in my judgment those things poison love.
Pepper with (30) biting Nettle-seed they bruise,
With (31) yellow Pellitory Wine infuse.
The Goddess with no such things love compels
That under the shady hill of (32) Eryx dwells.
Eat the white Skalion from (33) Pelasgis sent,
Or garden herbs, which will not love prevent.
Or Eggs, or Honey which on Hymettus flows,
Or the Apple Which upon the Pine Tree grows.
Erato, why do thou to Magic turn?
A nearer way my Chariot wheel will run.
You that by my advice your own conceal,
By the same advice may others thefts reveal.
Blame not my levity, always with one wind,
The bending Keel does not a passage find.
Sometimes the North, sometimes the Eastern gales,
Often South, often West-winds swell the linen sails.
The Charioteer does now let slack his rein,
Anon he curbs his horses in again.
There Is some that will indulgencies abuse,
Though they no rival have, their Mistress loose:
Hearts in prosperity more lofty are,
Blessings it is hard, with equal minds to bear.
So strength does by degrees the fire forsake,
On which the Ashes do a covering make.
But yet the heap turned over new fire burns:
Extinguished flames, and former light returns.
So Love grown dull, must be stirred up, and when
It falls asleep, it must be roused again.
Keep her mind warm, let fear her heart assail,
At the detection of thy crime look pale.
How much, how often, not which my verse contains,
He Is blessed on whom an injured Maid complains.
She swounds soon as his guilt does reach her ears,
Bereft of speech, liveless, the wretch appears.
I Am he whose hair she furiously would tear,
To whose soft eyes she would her sharp nails bear,
Whom, weeping she may see, angry looks give,
Without whom fain she would, but cannot live.
Ask not how long? she grieves but a short space:
Let not her anger strengthen by delays.
Now both your arms about her white neck cast,
And weeping let her be by you embraced.
Kiss her lamenting, court the weeping Maid,
Ratify peace, so passion is allayed.
When she is enraged, and does with anger swell,
Request but Marriage-Rites, and all is well;
That anger dissipates, there peace resides,
And in that place (believe me) grace abides.
The Doves that newly fought, will bill and sport,
And one another with soft murmures court.
Chaos confused first without order was:
The Earth, the Heaven, and Sea, had all one face.
Heaven's put from earth, vast Seas embrace the land,
And Chaos does in parts digested stand.
Wild Beasts in Woods, Birds in the Air abide,
And Fishes in the watery streams do gli de
Then man in the solitary field did rove,
And with mere strength his untaught body move.
The wood his house, herbs meat, green leaves his bed,
He with no other a long time was fed.
Sweet pleasure softened his fierce mind, they say,
Together man and wife in one bed lay.
No skilful Master taught them what to do,
How to perform Loves Act, no Art can show.
Birds had what they could love, and Fish did meet
In The midst of the stream, to taste this untoucht sweet.
The Do the Buck pursues, small worms their kind,
And the Salt-Bitch unto the Dog is lined.
The glad Ew skips, a Bull the Heifer gains,
And the Shee-Goat the unclean he sustains.
Keen Mares unto the Horse will find a way,
Nor them can interposed Rivers stay.
Prescribe strong remedies, that will assuage,
And only give a Requiem to her rage.
These, than Machaons druggs, are far more sure;
If you offend, these pardon will procure.
Whilst these I sing, Apollo does inspire,
And with his finger strikes his golden lyre.
In's hand a Laurel, Laurel does enclose
His sacred brow, which him a Poet shows.
Thou Teacher of soft Love (to me thus spoke)
Unto my Temple all thy Scholars take.
There is a Motto, which through the world does go,
That every one should learn himself to know.
Who knows himself alone shall wisely love,
He to the utmost his design will move.
He that a sweet face has, let it be seen,
He that looks red, often on her shoulder lean.
He that speaks well, let not his tongue be slow,
Or sing, or drink, what he can best, that do.
Let not the learned in his speech declaim,
Nor the mad Poet boast his excellent strain.
So Phoebus warns, Phoebus advice obey,
Credit what ere his sacred mouth shall say.
He that does wisely love (to come more near)
Shall by my Art win, and his wished prize wear.
Always the earth affords not her increase,
To help the ship sometimes the winds do cease.
Small things advantage, great things love oppose,
And much a Lovers courage undergoes.
As Hares in Athos, or on Hybla Bees,
As many fruits as grow on Pallas Trees,
As the shore of shells, so full is Love of pain,
Which we endure, and which we must sustain.
They Will say she is walked out, though you her did spy,
Imagine it is so, do not trust your eye.
Is the gate shut? she promised should stand wide,
Suffer't, and lay your self down on your side:
Perhaps her counterfeiting Maid may cry,
What man is that which at the door does lie?
Embrace the posts, the cruel wench speak fair,
In your head Roses from the wall plucked, wear.
If she calls, come, if not, go from the gate,
It ill becomes ingenious men to wait.
Your Mistress bids, but would not have you go,
Those be her words, her meaning is not so.
Take nothing ill, her blows imagine sweet,
Neither disdain to kiss her dainty feet.
But these are toys, my Muse speaks greater things,
Be present all, hear what my fancy sings.
Hard things we set on, virtue's always so,
The Art of Love must all endeavors know.
Suffer a rival, conquest is with thee,
And thou a Victor in Joves Tower shall be.
Think it no man, but some Arcadian Oak,
(No more I Will speak of that) that such things spoke.
If she but beek, forbear, if write, sit still,
And let her go and come whither she will.
Such things must married men with wives endure,
When they would have sweet sleep, their parts secure.
Here I confess my Art imperfect is,
What shall I do? I Am ignorant in this?
Shall I endure my Mistress to be courted
Before my face, with rage not be transported?
One kissed my Mistress, at which I complained,
Our love's with so much barbarousness are stained.
This vice not once has hurt, he excells me,
That with all her pretenders can agree.
Better let thefts unknown obscured lie,
Lest she forget her feigned modesty.
Young men don't strive your failing loves to take,
Lest they should vows in their offenses make.
D^tected loves increase, both being espied
In the same fault, their loves are faster tied.
There is a fable through the whole world taught,
How Mars and Venus were by Vulcan caught.
Great Mars submitting unto Venus love
Of a blunt soldier did an Amourist prove.
Venus (than whom no Goddess is more kind)
Did condescend to satisfy his mind.
How often the wanton jeered her husbands foot,
And's hardened hands, so often in the fire put?
She with Mars imitating Vulcans pace,
Unto her form adds a becoming grace.
At first they met and acted privately,
The fault it self was full of modesty,
The Sun disclosed (who can deceive the Sun?)
And Vulcan knew that which his wife had done.
Sol thou did ills create, let something be
Asked for thy silence, she will grant it thee.
Mulciber pitched a net about his bed
On every side, by which their sight's misled,
A journey feigns to (34) Lemnos, the Lovers (...)
Both naked lie entangled in his net.
He calls the Gods, they caught in the net show all
Venus could scarce abstain from tears let fall.
They cannot frame their looks, they are so ty'^,
Nor their obscene parts with their hands can hi^
One smiling, said, unconquered Mars to me
Transfer those bonds, if they a barthen be.
Scarce Neptune at thy prayers he them unties,
Mars unto Crete, Venus to Paphos hies.
It profits not, before they covered it.
Which shameless now they openly commit.
It Is said, thou did confess thy foolery,
And of thy passion have repented thee.
This I forbid, and so does Venus too,
She felt it first, and she fore-warns it you.
Unseen nets do not for your rival lay,
Nor intercept his letters by the way.
Let those men take such things, if any must,
That are by fire and water rendered just.
Lo I acknowledge naught but Love is here,
Nor do these lines any chaste Matron jeer.
What profane man dares (35) Ceres rites that knows,
Or Samothracian sacred things disclose?
It is a virtue secrets to conceal,
As great a vice things sacred to reveal.
For babbling Tantalus did want his food,
And thirsty in the middle waters stood.
Venus would have her sacred rites be hidden,
And all divulgers are from hence forbidden.
Though Venus Myst'ries are not closed found
In Chest that will not with fierce blows resound,
Yet chiefly we this observation keep,
That they for ever do in silence sleep.
If Venus any where discloathed stand,
Her secrets she concealeth with her hand.
Cattle will generate in the open day,
But seen by Maids, they turn their eyes away.
Strong doors and beds unto our thefts agree,
In modesty most part must covered be.
Opacous clouds we wish for, and the night:
We would have less of the disclosing light.
When from the Sun and Rain no roof did shield,
But the Oak both food and covering did yield;
In Groves and Caves people their pleasures try,
So great a care they had to modesty.
Now for our night-work we have titles sought,
Nothing unless well praised for much is bought.
Be constant unto none, that so you may,
This I might once have had, of many say.
You may such Ladies with your finger show,
But it is rudeness if you touch them so.
That which if true they would deny, some feign;
Saying that they have with such Ladies lain.
Though they their bodies cannot, yet their name
They will, although not criminal, defame.
Go then thou hateful pander, shut the door,
And add to it a hundred locks or more.
What matter? when her shame about is spread,
And what she is not, she would be credited.
We sparingly talk of our constant Lover,
And her mysterious thefts our Faiths do cover.
Let not your love her imperfections know,
It avails many to dissemble so.
He did not Andromeda's color scorn,
That swiftly on a flying-horse was born.
Andromache to others seemed tall,
Yet Hector her his little one did call.
Acquaintance makes that handsome which is worst,
For Love will many faults espy at first.
When a young slip begins its root to take,
Each blast of wind the tender plant will shake.
But being grown, it will resist all gales,
And bearing fruit against the wind prevails.
So imperfections vanish in a day,
What is not handsome, seems so by delay.
Young tender Kids will not endure the Goat
At first, but he in time inclines them to it.
With fit terms mend her faults, call her brown which
Has a look darker than Illyrian pitch.
Call a squint, Venus; Pallas, a yellow skin,
And call her slender that looks lank and thin.
A low one, active call; one gross, full face't;
So let each fault in some near grace be place't.
Where she was born, her age do not desire,
Nor what she to the (36) Censor gave inquire.
If she want youth, and be of riper years,
Or if she plate her gray-inclining hairs,
Oh youths these ages both are fruitful known;
These fields will bear good Corn, they must be sown.
Pains must in youth and strength be undergone,
Age with a silent foot comes stealing on.
Either go to the Sea's, or plow the Land,
Or to the wars with weapons in your hand.
Or else incline your self to court a Maid,
This is a war too, this has rich men made.
Add prudence to your work, which all prefers,
And custom which makes all Artificers.
Their loss of youth with neatness they will supply,
And all means to defer old age will try.
In diverse manners they act Venus plays,
No Tables can describe more several ways.
Husbands and wives both so indifferent seem.
We cannot think they, stirred up delights esteem.
I hate the bed which yields not mutual joys,
And that makes me contemn the love of boys.
I hate her that gives of necessity
Being barren, of her wool does dreaming lie.
Pleasure which duty grants I count not so,
No Maid to me shall such a duty owe.
I love to hear her wearied voice desire,
That I would longer stay, bid me respire.
May I my Mistress conquered eyes look on,
Languish with love, bidding her griefs be gone.
Nature to youth gives not these gifts, to some,
They do not until past (37) seven Lustra's come.
Wine drunk too new is sour, give me a cup
Of year-old Wine unto the brim filled up.
Fierce blasts the tender Plane tree will destroy,
And Meads new cut will the bare feet annoy.
To Hellen could Hermione compare;
Is Gorge like unto her Mother fair?
Who ere does vow's to an old Venus raise,
If he remain, merits condign praise.
Lo the concealing bed two Lovers hides
My Muse before their chamber door abides.
There what to say they need not learn, nor will
Their wanton hands within the bed lie still.
Their fingers will learn how to act their parts.
And in what private place love sticks his darts.
Thus Hector did Andromache assayl,
He did not only in field-wars prevail.
Achilles with Lyrnesis did no less,
When wearied he would a soft bed compress:
Briseis closed fast in those arms remained,
Which he before with Phrygian gore had stained.
What wanton, did it please thee that he should
In his victorious arms thy body fold?
Trust me, too soon such pleasure must not be
Acted, but by degrees and leisurely.
If you perceive where she would have your hand,
Then let not bashfulness your joys withstand.
You shall behold her eyes dart radiant beams,
Like the refulgent Sun in liquid streams.
Perhaps she will shrieke, or gentle whispers make,
Sweetly complain, such yielding language speak.
What once you do attempt, leave not undone,
Nor let her in that course before you run.
Keep both together, pleasure is more sweet,
In full consent, when both the Sexes meet.
This way observe, when leisure will allow,
When fear will not to act love's part show how.
When as delay's not safe, then ply the Oar,
Make use of time, spur a free horse the more.
I Have done, give me the palm young gallants now,
And place a Myrtle Garland on my brow.
Of Surgeons Podalyrius was the best
For strength Achilles, wisdom (38) Nestors breast.
Sage (39) Calchas; Ajax stout: skilful they named
Automedon: and I for love am famed.
Celebrate me your Poet, give me praise,
My name an Echo through the world shall raise.
Vulcan (40) to Achilles, I give arms to you,
Vanquish with yours, as he was wont to do.
Who with my steel makes the Amazon bow,
Must write, to conquer, Naso taught me ^ow.
The soft-skin'd Maids desire my precepts too,
Lo, my next care shall be t'accomplish you.
The end of the second Book.
Annotations on the second Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso, De Art Amandi.
(1) IO Paean) Io is an exclamation expressing joy and satisfaction at any
thing: the Romans used it in their solemn Triumphs, where the soldiers
following, cried out, Io Triumph. Hor. Car. 4. Ode. 2.

Tuque dum procedis, Io Triumphi,
Non semel dicemus, Io Triumph.
And Io triumph whilst thou passest by,
We many times will, Io triumph cry.
Quae vox exultantium prae gandio est (says Ascensius upon the place) whence
to sing Io Paean, is to praise or sing hymns to Apollo.

(2) Maeonian man) Homer, called also Maeonides from his Father Maeon.

(3) The Priameian) Paris, so called from his Father Priam, who sailed from
Amyclae, a City in Peloponnesus, with his fair prize Hellen, that exquisite
piece of beauty, of whom Dares Phr. describing Castor and Pollux, fuerunt alter
alteri similis, capillo flavo, etc. Castor and Pollux were like each other,
having yellow hair, great eyes, clear complexions, slender, and extremely
handsome: Hellen was like them, beautiful, of a winning nature, courteous, etc.

(4) Hippodamia) the daughter of Oenomaus King of Elis, who proposing her a
prize to him that could overcome him in a Chariot-race, was at last, by Pelops
(who bribed his Charioteer Myrtylus) outrun, who together with his course won
the fair Hippodamia for his Bride.

(5) Minos does all means of) a King of Crete by whom Daedalus was imprisoned
in the Labyrinth which himself had built, for assisting his Queen Pasiphae in
the satisfaction of her lust. Vide supra.

(6) Boots nor Orion) Boots, Orion, and the Tegean Maid are three of the
celestial constellations, the first of which is placed near ursa Minor, the
second under the head of Taurus; the laft is the sign Virgo, by the Poets
feigned to be Erigone, who was born in Tegea, a City of Arcadia, a Country in
Peloponnesus, whereof her Grandfather Oebalus was King, after her death
translated into the sign Virgo, placed in the Zodiac between Leo and Libra.

(7) Samos and Naxos) Samos (for its near site to Thracia, called Samothrace)
Naxos, Paros, and Delos are Islands in the Aegean Sea.

(8) The Clarians love) Apollo called Clarius from Clarus a City in Ionia,
where he had a Temple.

(9) Lebinthus and) Lebinthus, Calydna, and Astipalaea, are three Islands of
the Sporades in the Mediterranean, near Crete.

(10) Aemonian Arts) Witchcrafts from the many Witches that in ancient time
practiced in Aemonia, here dwelt the dire Witch Erictho, and here grew all
sorts of herbs that were advantageous to their hellish incantations. Lucan.
lib. 6.

Thessala quinetiam tellus herbasque nocenteis
Rupibus ingenuit, sensuraque saxa canentes
Arcanum serale Magos, ibi plurima surgunt, etc.
Englished by Mr. May.

Besides Thessalia's Fields, and Rocks do bear
Strange killing herbs, and plants, and stones that hear
The charming Witches murmures: there arise
Plants, that have power to force the Deities.
Medea there a stranger, in those fields
Gathered worse herbs than any Cholcos yields.
(11) With Circe) an Inchantresse living at Circeum, a Promontory in Italy,
whither Ulysses companions being driven by a storm at Sea, were by the Witch
transformed into Swine; whom Ulysses by his policy persuaded to restore to
their pristine forms, which she no sooner had done, but with them he came away,
leaving the loathsome habitation of that accursed Inchantresse. Hom. Odys. 10.
Meta. 14.

(12) Hylas ravished) the Son of Theodamas King of Scythia, who going with
Hercules out of the Ship Argo, to get an Oar in the Woods of Mysia, and lying
down to drink on the bank of the River Askanius, he was by the Water-Nymphs
called Naides plucked in and ravished.

(13) Calypso wail) Daughter to Oceanus and Thetys, she governed the Isle
Ogygia, betwixt the Seas Phoenicium and Syriacum, whither the Seabeaten Ulysses
by a storm being driven, was by her entertained, whom she falling in love
with, admitted to her bed, and detained the space of seven years, till he was
by the destinies commanded thence. Hom. Odys. 1.

(14) Simois) a River in Asia rising out of the Mount Ida, and running all
along by Troy, after which meeting with the River Xanthus, they together make a
great Fen or Marish, whence they expatiate themselves into the Hellespont near
the Promontory Sygaeum. So in Epist. 1. ad Ulyssem.

Hac ibat Simois, hic est Segeia tellus:
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa Senis.
Here flowed Simois, this is Segeian Land,
And here did Priams stately Palace stand.
(15) Dolon's Death) a Trojan of admirable celerity, who being sent a spy into
the Grecian Camp, was taken by Ulysses, to whom in hope of pardon he revealed
the Trojan Counsels, and betrayed Rhesus King of Thrace, who was then
journeying to Troy, with the white horses, whereon depended the Trojan fate,
after all which he was slain by Ulysses. Hom. Iliad. 40.

(16) Atalanta shun) a Lady of superlative beauty, averse to Venus, but being
daily solicited with the many importunities of diverse Lovers, she promised her
self to him that could overrun her in a footrace; which Hippomanes (after the
vain assaies of many) undertaking, by casting in her way three golden Apples
which she staid to take up, overcame and married her. Metam. lib. 10.

O quoties, cum jam posset transire, morata est
Spectatosque diu vultus invita reliquit!
How often she staid, when she could have out-gone;
Unwillingly his face left looking on!
(17) Melanion cause) Hippomanes, so called (...), from his throwing Apples out
of his hand.

(18) Dice) Players at Dice both by the Elibertine and Constantinopolitan
Council under Justinian were punished with Excommunication, and Horatius (lib.
3. Carm. Ode. 24.) says it was by Law then forbidden.

Sou mavis vetita legibus aleae
Quum perjura patris fides
Consortem socium fallat and hospitem,
Indignoque pecuniam
haeredi properet.
Or at the Dice by Laws denied
His Father's perjured Faith does play,
And cheats his friend, so that he may
Wealth for his worthless heir provide.
But yet Xenophon (lib. 3. de dictis Socratis) advises to play at Tables or
Dice, to divert from idleness.

(19) Foe of Glass) this game of Chess invented (say some) by Pyrrhus, or, as
others, by Palamedes at the siege of Troy, was much practiced amongst the
Romans; their men they made sometimes of Wax, but most commonly of Glass.
Martial. lib. 7. Epig. 71.

Sic vincas Noviumque Publiumque
Mandris, and vitreo latrone clausos.
You may of Novius and Publius win,
With Knights, and with your man of glass shut in.
(20) Her bed) The Romans chief time of entertainment was at supper, their
Tables were round, about which were placed three beds, whereon the guests did
not sit, but lie along, three usually on a bed, each of their feet behind the
others back, where they put off their shoes because they would not foul the
beds, for the most part richly covered. Terrent. Heautont.

Accurrunt servi, so^e^s detrahunt
Video alios fe^^ n^re lect^, sternere, coenam parare,
Some servants run, away their shoes do bear,
Some hasting beds do spread, supper prepare.
(21) He before did) Hercules whom the Poets feign to sustain Heaven upon his
shoulder, it being too ponderous for Atlas, he being enamoured on Omphale,
Queen of Lydia, casting away his Club, and Lions skin, to obtain her love, did
not refuse to take a basket of wool, and a distaff into his hand, which made
his wife Deianira cry out. Epist. 9.

Quem non mill ferae, quem non Stheneleius host is,
Non potuit Juno vincere, vicit amor.
Whom not a thousand monsters, Grecian arms,
Whom Juno near could conquer, beauty charms.
(22) Phyllacides Laodamia) Protesilaus, called Phyllacides from Phyllace a
Town in Thessaly, he was the first of the Grecians slain by Hector; his wife
Laodamia so firmly loved him, that requesting the Gods but to see the shadow of
her slain husband, and obtaining, expires in the embracing of it.

(23) A well-bred stranger) Paris, on whom Das Phry. gives this character,
Paridem candidum, longum, fortem, oculis pulcherrimis, capillo molli and flavo,
ore venusto, voce suavi. Paris was courteous, tall, valiant, he had fair eyes,
soft yellow hair, a pleasing countenance, and an enticing voice.

(24) Aonian Bow) Apollo's Bow with which he slew the Monster Python. Metam.
lib. 1.

(25) Phasias most barbarously) Medea, who slew her two Sons that she bore to
Jason before his face, because he forsook her, and married Creusa. Vide supra.

(26) Yon Swallow) Progne, who slew her Son Itys, to revenge the rape committed
by her husband Tereus, upon her Sister Philomela, for which bloody murder she
was turned into a Swallow, whose breast is still stained with her Sons blood.
Metam. lib. 6.

-- Neque adhuc de pectore caedis
Excessere notae, signataque sanguine pluma est.
-- the murdering marks remain
Upon her breast, the blood her feathers stain.
(27) Stolen delights) the strict Reader may, censuring this place, as judging
it too light and wanton to be inserted by a Christian, detract from the whole;
but I hope he will acquiesce with satisfaction, when I shall tell him I
intended to have slipped this and some other excrescents from the body of the
tree; but considering without declining my resolutions of rendering it an exact
translation, without prejudice to the Author, and censure to my self, I could
not do it, I offer them to modest eyes to be looked upon, as indeed they are,
the documents of a Heathen.

(28) Chrysis) the Daughter of Apollo's Priest, and Agamemnon's Mistress, who
being forced to restore her to her Father, did in her room ravish Briseis from
Achilles.

(29) Lyrnesis) Briscis, called Lyrnesis from the place where she was born,
whom A^rides after the departure of Chrysis, seiz^d or, which (...) great
contentions betwixt him and Achiller. (...). lib. 1. Iliad.

(30) Biting Nettle-seed) the (...) of the (...): Romant, which has of all
other the^^ (...) stinging quality, and stirs up (...).

(31) Yellow Pellitory) not that the (...) or flower^ be yellow, but he calls
it (...) the yellow bunch, or knob in the mid^^ (...) the frow^^^ like that of
a Daisie.

(32) Of Eryx dwell.) E^yx is a M^^ (...) cily, (...) (says Aelian lik. 1.
(...) (...), where stands a Temple dedicate to Venus.

(33) Pelasgis) Arcadia, so called from Pelasgus, sometimes King thereof, who
planted many herbs, and made food of the roots of them.

(34) To Lemnos) an Isle in the Aegean Sea, famous for the reception of Vulcan,
who for his deformity, being ejected Heaven by the gods, fell upon this Isle,
where, being lamed by the fall, he forged Thunderbolts for Jupiter.

(35) Ceres rites) Ceres Daughter to Saturn and Ops (the first that devised the
manner of sowing Wheat and Barley, for which she was deified) had her rites,
which (says Cicero) long maximis and occultissimis Ceremoniis continentur,
were contained in great and hidden mysteries, which it was death for any of her
Priests to disclose.

(36) Censor gave) the Censors were officers in Rome, to whom every one gave in
their names, with the full value of their estates: these took notice of all
such as were ill husbands, neglected their Farms, or left their Vines untilled.

(37) Seven Lustras) a Lustrum is the space of five years, every fifth year the
Censors purging the Roman Army with Sacrifice; so that seven Lustras is the
space of thirty five years.

(38) Nestors breast) the Son of Neleus and Cloris, he excelled for wisdom
and cloquence, by which he so much advantaged the Grecians, that Agamemnon
said he doubted not, if he had but ten Nestors, suddenly to vanquish and
overcome the Trojans.

(39) Chalcas) a Greeian Augure, the Son of Thestor: he accompanied the
Grecians in the Trojan expedition, where because he much excelled in the Art
of divining, many great things were swayed by his Counsel.

(40) TO Achilles) Vulcan at the request of Thetys, forged a suit of Arms for
Achilles, the shield was beautified with most excellent workmanship; for in it
he presented the Earth, the Sea, and Heaven, with the Sun, Moon, Planets, and
other Constellations, two exquisite Cities, a field of Corn, a golden Vine, and
several other admirable curiosities. Hom. Iliad. 18. lib.

(...),
(...).
She with these glittering arms from Vulcan hies,
And like a Hauk down to Olympus flies.
The third Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso, De Art Amandi.
The Argument.
Venus commands, the Poet does obey,
Affords her Sex his skill: how Ladies may
By Art the faults of Nature rectify:
What Books to read: what ways for love to try:
What places to frequent; how to ensnare
The Amourist: what persons to beware:
How to revive dead flames, and to beguile
Their wary Guardians: at what times to smile
Upon their servants; last of all to fly
By Procris story, baleful jealousy.
THe Greeks I first have harnessed; now remain
Arms for (1) Penthisilea and her train.
Go both alike prepared; they upon whom
Venus and Cupid smile will overcome.
For the naked to resist the armed it is vain,
Men by such victories no honor gain.
But Snakes why doft thou poison; some will say,
Or make whole folds unto the Wolf a prey?
Repreach not all, for some's offenses done,
Let each be as she merits looked upon.
Though Menelaus Hellen can accuse,
And Hellen's Sister Aga^emnon rues:
Though by Eriphiles crime (2) Oeclides fell
Alive, on his 'live horses, down to Hell:
Yet virtuous did Penelope remain
Four Lustra's, till her Lord came back again.
Behold Phylacides, whose (3) wife they say
TO follow her husband died before her day.
Pheretiada's redeemed by his wife,
Who for his safety offered her own life.
Receive me Capaneus (4) Iphias cries,
We Will mingle Ashes so in the (5) Rogus dies.
Ladies are really all virtue, then
No wonder if so much they please us men.
But yet our Art requires not such minds,
With lighter sails my Pinnace passage finds.
Nothing but amorous loves by me are moved,
And I instruct how women must be loved.
Women, love's bow and flames will easily shake,
But not so soon on men impression make.
Men often prove faithless, Maids not often untrue,
Such crimes (if thou inquirest) they have few.
Unconstant Jason Phasias forsakes,
Another Bride into his bosom takes.
(6) Thesius Ariadne left alone
A prey to Sea-fowls in a place unknown.
Enquire so many ways why (7) Phyllis went,
And did with careless hair in the Woods lament?
Elisa's (8) Guest did unto her afford,
Though she religious was, a death, a sword.
I^e teach what loft you, ignorant in love,
You wanted Art, and Art does love improve.
They Would never know, but Cythera commands
That I should teach, whilst she before me stands,
What have the wretched Girls discerned, says she,
That men are a^m'd, and they unarmed be?
Two books have made them Artists, here is a part,
Remain to be instructed by thy Art.
Who to's (9) Therapuean Bride reproach did raise
Since on a happy Lyre has sung her praise.
If you be wise, don't handsome Maids disdain,
But whilst you live labor their grace to gain.
This said, her head being bound with Myrtle, she
Did pluck a leaf, and gave some grains to me.
We feel the sacred gift, Heaven brighter shines,
And at this time all care my breast declines.
Ladies whilst wits be ripe, my Arts require,
What modesty, her law, and rites inspire.
Remember that old age will come, and so
You'^ let no time from you neglected go:
Whi^'st youthful age permits it, you must play,
Years like to current waters steal away.
For to recall past streams, it is in vain,
Nor shall an hour once past return again.
Lay hold on time, which goes, and comes no more;
So pleafing follows not as went before.
These withered stems I Violets have seen,
From this bare Thorn I Have got a Garland green.
The time will come, thou that do love deny,
Grown old, forsaken in thy bed shall lie.
In The night thy door shall not with blows be pressed,
Nor the entrance in the morn with Roses dressed.
Alas how soon the face lets furrows in,
And color fades, though set in purest skin.
Your tresses will grow thin, and you will say,
That from a child they ever have been gray.
Snakes with their skins do cast their age off too,
And Hearts their horns being cast, their strength renew.
Helpless your time does post to get, don't stay,
The flower which ungot does soon decay.
Childbirth makes youth to age the sooner yield,
Continual harvests make a barren field.
Luna at her (10) Endimion did not blush,
Nor is Aurora 'sham'd of (11) Cephalus.
Venus, to pass by Adon', how, tell me,
Had thou Aeneas and Hermione?
To follow goddess ways ye mortals try,
Nor to desiring men your sweets deny.
Though they unconstant prove, what do you lose?
No loss at all, though thousand times they use.
Iron will wear, and Flint by use grows less,
No fear of that parts loss does ere oppress.
To light at others Torches who will disdain;
Or who the vast Sea labors to restrain?
Some women do not profit, thus they will speak,
What? is all water lost but what you take?
My Art none prostitutes, but does reprove
Your idle fears, no loss proceeds from love.
Soft Gales serve whilst in the Haven we do ride,
But stronger winds, when in deep floods we glide.
I with their dress begin, trimmed Vines abound
With Wine, and rank Corn grows in well tilled ground.
Form is Gods gift, and all thereof are glad,
Although the greater part that gilt never had.
Care will give beauty, which neglect decaies,
Were it like to the Idalian goddesses.
Though Maids of old did not take so much care,
Nor men such curious apparel wear.
What if Andromache's clothes did not surpass,
No mar'l, her husband a blunt soldier was.
What should the wife of Ajax, unto whom
A sevenfold shield was made, adorned come?
Formerly they were rude, now Rome does rise,
And the wealth of all the conquered world injoyes.
The (12) Capitol with all that it has see,
And you will say, it might Jove's Palace be.
The (13) Curia, worthy such a Council gained,
Was covered with straw when Tatius reigned.
These Palaces that glitter against the Sun
Were places once for beasts to graze upon.
I Am b^^n in the last age, I Am glad of it;
Old (...) please some, these do my humors fit.
Not (...) gold is found in the earths womb,
Nor 'cause that Pear^s from diverse shoars do come;
Not because Marble from the Hills we dig,
Nor 'cause we Vessels to the green Sea rig.
But 'cause we are civilized, neatness maintain,
Nor ancient rudeness to our times remain.
Your cars with stones too costly do not store,
Which the tanned Indian gathers on the shore.
In cloth of gold, grave women, do not joy:
That wealth by which you seek us, often lay by.
Neatness will take, your hairs in order place,
It is the hand that makes or marrs a face.
There Is more than one dress, that which is most cult
M^ke choice of, but first with your glass consult.
Long vi^ag'd with a parted hair shows well,
S^ ^aodamin's tresses did excel,
Th^^^ that round visag'd are disclose their ears,
And in their for^head a small peak appears.
Here one does with her hair neglected stand,
Such thou art Phoebus with thy Lyre in hand.
Another like Diana is attired,
When sheet' oretake a frighted beast desired.
It becom^s this to waft her hair in the wind,
And that it does impede her looks to bind.
This bedeckt with Cyllenian shells is brave,
And that an Apron wears like to a wave.
You cannot count leaves on well branching trees,
Nor number Alpine Beasts, or Hybla's Bees:
Nor can I every dressing represent,
Each day does several new Modes invent.
Neglected hair does many grace, you will say,
What Is newly combed was not since yesterday.
Art covers much, Iole Alcides spies,
No sooner seen, but I Am in love, he cries.
Bacchus for thee (14) forsaken Gnossis, cares,
Satyrs rejoicing into's Chariot bears.
O how indulgent nature is to you,
How many ways you may things lost renew!
If bald, or hair through age fall off as fast
As leaves from trees blown with a Northern blast:
Or gray, it may with German herbs died ore
Receive a better tincture than before.
Some women will, that have their hair well grown,
Wear others, and for gain cut off their own.
Shame not to buy't in public; I Have seen some
Openly amongst a throng of Virgins come:
Why stay I upon clothes, ruffs do not buy,
Nor Wool that is twice dipped in a Tyrian dye,
When enough colors are at cheaper rates:
They Are mad that on their backs wear their estates.
Behold the color of the sky, when clear,
And in the warm South no dark clouds appear.
Or (15) Phryxus color choose, which he, it is said,
And Hell got by Ino's craft betrayed.
This's like a wave, and thence a name it had,
With this I do believe Sea-Nymphs are clad.
That yellow imitates, the Goddess shines
In yellow, that the (16) light-bringing horses joins.
This Purple Amethist, this Paphian green,
As the Thracian Crane, or as white Roses seen.
Acorns and Almonds Amarillis pull:
Some kind of wax does give a name to wool.
As many Flowers as in the Spring earth bears,
When Vines put forth, and the cold winter wears:
So many Dies wool takes, what does become
Choose: any color suits not well with some.
For brown light colors, fair Briseis sad:
And she that is ravished is in mourning clad.
White becomes black, it pleased Cepheus, who
In such Attire did to Seriphos go.
How often I Have warned that lust do not prevail,
Nor that long hairs do your rough legs assail.
I do not teach the Girls of Caucasus,
That drink the streams of Mysian Caicus.
What? must I teach your teeth, how to keep fair,
Or to wash your mouth each morn in water clear?
You, how with wax to make them whiter know:
What is not red by Nature, Art makes so.
By Art the wrinckle of the brow's unspyde,
A little leather hollow cheeks will hide.
Be not ashamed flames in your eyes to show
With Saffron, which does nigh to Cydnus grow.
I Have writ one little book, yet great for care,
In which I teach lost beauties to repair.
Ye blemished Maids from hence your helps obtain:
My Art has always for your goods took pain.
Let not your Lovers find your Boxes laid
Upon the Table, Art concealed will aid.
Whom will not painting of the face offend,
Which laid too thick does to the bosom tend?
How Oesipum does smell, though sent from Greece,
Being dry, it is taken from a dirty fleece.
My advice is, not openly to take
Dee^'s marrow, or your foul teeth whiter make.
They grace a face, but odious be to sight,
Many things doing loathe, though done delight.
The Statue which does for the work of Myron pass,
Sometimes a shapeless and hard substance was.
To make a Ring, the Gold is beaten full:
The clothes you wear sometime were baltered wool.
The stone was rough should shadow nobleness,
And Venus naked in a shower express.
Adorn your selves, when fast asleep we deem:
Dressed by a curious hand you will fairer seem.
Why should I know the cause you look so fair;
Be private when you do your looks prepare.
Men should not all things know, they hate the sight
Of things, that don't if unconceal'd, delight.
The gilded streamers ore the stage, behold,
Waving, and the wood ore-laid with thin leaf-gold.
No people there, before it is framed, must sit,
And whilst it is making, it will none admit.
I don't forbid in public to dress your head;
Nor that your locks your dainty neck ore-spread.
But that you be not peevish then beware,
Nor do too often untie your loosened hair.
I hate those Ladies that their Maids will bite,
Scratch them in the face, and with their Bodkins fight.
Being blooded it will make her curse and swear,
And crying, lug her Mistress hateful hair.
She that is ill-hair'd, to lock her door had best,
Or always be in some close Cloister dressed.
I suddenly my Mistress came upon,
Surpised her hair she wrong side out clapped on.
Let such disgraces happen to my foe,
And the like shame to Parthian women go.
Lame may their cattle be, their pasture bare,
May their trees have no leaves, their heads no hair.
Nor Semele, nor Leda need be taught,
Nor (17) she, whom a feigned Ox to Sidon brought.
Nor Hellen, whom Atrides would regain,
And whom thou Trojan Paris do detain.
Both fair and foul come to learn from my Art,
But still the fairer are the lesser part.
The fair to learn my Precepts have less need,
Their Beauty is a gift does Art exceed.
The Sea composed Seamen at ease may lie,
But when it swells, must all their skill imply.
Most faces have some faults, which hide and do
As much as may be, mend your body too.
If low, sit down, lest standing you should show
As though you sat; or to a bed couch, go,
Where being thrown, that none your stature spy,
Upon your feet let some loose mantle lie.
She that is too small, may have a vail, which cast
About her shoulders, hangs beneath her waste.
She that is too pale, with Purple dye her cheek,
She that is black, the Pharian fish must seek.
An ill-shap't foot hide in a dainty shoe,
Nor from your measled legs your strings undo.
Her that is crook-shoulder'd, stuffings will prefer,
A breast too flat's railed with a stomacher.
What ere she says, be sure she point at none,
Whose hands are fat, or nails be dirty grown.
She must, whose breath's unsweet, not fasting speak,
Neither a seat too near her servant take,
If your teeth black, or out of order grow,
Take heed lest you should them by laughing show.
Who'd think that Ladies should be taught to laugh;
Yet that done handsomely will set them off.
Let not much mirth your hollow cheeks reveal,
And ever with your lips your teeth conceal.
Your bodies with much laughter do not strain,
You Are loud at any thing that is light and vain.
Some will in laughing draw their mouth awry,
Others do frame a face as they would cry.
And such a ditty make with their rude voice,
(18) As when an Ass at th'Mill does make a noise.
Whither will not Art extend? women are taught,
And how to weep in handsome manner brought.
In some it is handsome not to speak so plain,
But to lisp out, their tongue some words constrain.
It is a handsome fault, and pleases more,
To learn to speak less than they could before.
When these do profit you, approve my care;
And with a stately step your body bear.
There is a state in going, which does take,
Carriage does Lovers, or Neglecters make.
This moves by Art, the wind her garment swells,
And being proud, she in her gate excels.
That looking ruddy like an Umbrian Bride,
Does in her walking take a spacious stride.
But there a rustic mode in this may be,
One rudely walks, another leisurely.
Let both your shoulders and your neck be bare
For them to see, which your admirers are.
But this white skins must do at th'sight of this
I use, as far as it is nak't, to kiss.
Sirens (Sea Monsters) with their notes could stay
A floating ship, if it came that away.
Ulysses hearing these, did near relax
His body, his (19) friends ears close stopped with wax.
All (20) learn to sing, for singing is a grace,
The voice is often a pander to the face.
Now repeat what you from the stage did bring,
And then a verse in wandering measures sing.
Ladies in (20) Music also should have skill,
Their left hands hold a harp, their right a quill.
Wild beasts and stones at (21) Orpheus harp did stir,
The lake of hell, and the three-headed Cur.
Thou just revenger of thy Mothers fall,
The stones themselves at thy voice made a wall.
The Fish are thought the Music to desire,
In the known fable of Arions Lyre.
Learn with your hand the Psaltery to strike,
To that, for music sweet, no musick's like.
Callimachus, and Coan Poets scan,
Or the Tejan wanton muse of the old man.
The wanton Sappho read, you also may
Read Geta's Father, who so well could play.
And thou Tibullus read Propertius verse,
Or some of Gallus, or thine own rehearse.
Phryxus thy Sisters golden fleece so famed
By Varro must amongst the rest be named.
Aeneas flight, The Original of Rome,
No extant work more famed in Latium.
My name perhaps amongst the rest is found,
My writings shall not be in Lethe drowned.
Read over, some shall say, our Masters charms
So excellent, where he both Sexes arms.
Or the three books which styled Amorum be,
Must with an active eye be searched by thee.
With a clear voice sing his Epistles ore,
Which he did make, unknown to all before.
Phoebus grant this, ye Deities divine,
Bacchus renowned, grant this ye Muses nine.
I also (21) dancing in young Ladies love,
As you are taught, your active fingers move.
Motion upon the stage does chiefly take,
Their very action them a grace does speak.
Small things I shame to teach, as how to name
A cast at Dice, or how to throw the same.
Sometimes she casts three Dice, well skilled what throws
Should lie at bottom, what to call for knows.
At Chess she must play heedfully, be wise
Her man is taken with two enemies.
A man by odds surpised may move, but then
Returning, often renews the game again.
Light (22) balls must also be with rackets struck,
And you must stir no balls, but what you took.
Play such a trick at Cards, by which appear
How many months are in the moving year.
How on a board three stones on each side lie,
Which she keeps last, that gets the victory.
Use many sports, to sport young Beauties know;
For oftentimes love takes deep rooting so.
It is an easy thing to use your throws,
But harder far your carriage to compose.
They are unwise that play with too much care,
Then oftentimes their breasts too open are.
They Will rage unhandsomely, contend and brawl,
And for their winnings will at variance fall.
To make a clamorous noise it does displease,
Or to call the offended gods for witnesses.
There is no faith at Tables found: how I
Have seen some at their games to fret and cry:
Jove grant that none may so themselves discover
That any care would take to please a Lover.
These idle sports nature to women gave,
But men must far more active pleasures have.
To toss a ball, or shoot in bows well tried,
To learn to fence, or a proud horse to ride.
Maids must not in the fields, or cold air go,
Or upon Seas, that do unpleasing flow.
But they may gently walk in Pompey's shade,
When hot by Phoebus, Virgo's head is made.
Or walk in Laureat Peans Palaces
That Paretonian ships sunk in the Seas.
Which things his Sister and his Wife had found,
Whilst his head was with naval honors crowned.
The Altars of the Memphian heifer see,
Or the three Theaters that famous be.
See the (23) Arena sprinkled with warm gore,
Or the Goal by the hot Chariot wheel run ore.
What is unseen's unknown, no love professed,
It Is pity a good face should want a test.
If Orpheus or Thamyras you surpass
In singing, yet unknown, you get no grace.
Had Venus not been drawn b' Apelles skill,
She in the waves had layn forgotten still.
What do the sacred Poets seek but fame,
The cusp of which is only all our aim.
Formerly Poets were by Kings maintained.
And rich gifts have the ancient Chori gained.
Their names were celebrated with regard,
Then they did Poets with stored gold reward.
Callabrian Ennius deserved to be
Great Scipio contiguous to thee.
The Ivy without honor lies, a name
Of Idleness usurps the Muses fame.
Fame must awake it self, had Homer slept,
Eternal fame his Iliads had not kept.
Had Danae all company refrained
Till old, she might have in her Tower remained.
Fair creatures, it will much advantage you,
Often to walk out into public view.
The Wolf for one prey to the whole flock hies:
At a whole team of fowl Joves Eagles flies:
Let a fair Maid in public place be found,
One she perchance may amongst amany wound.
Be studious to please in every place,
To get a fame, act all things with a grace:
It Is accidental: still hold out a hook,
Where you least think sometimes a fish is took.
The hills in vain sometimes by Hounds are sought,
Whilst that a Heart unforc't in the Net is caught.
What could Andromede less hope than that
Her tears should any Lover penetrate?
Often at a Husbands grave a new one's gained,
Her careless head and tears will grace though feigned.
Avoid those men that overcurious are,
That do their locks in mode and figure wear.
What to a thousand they to you will say,
And in no place their wandering loves will stay.
What will not a woman, when a man's more light;
Though to have other men perchance she might.
You Will scarce believe, yet trust, Troy had not fell
If Priams Council they had observed well.
There be under pretense of love that cheat,
And only gain basely desire to get.
Let not the hair deceive with Jessamy,
Nor the small Bracelets which unfolded lie.
Be not deceived with clothes that do adorn,
Nor all the Rings upon his fingers worn.
Perhaps this spruce youth may a cheater be,
And more in love with thy fine clothes, than thee.
Give me my own, often Maids despoiled of all,
Restore my clothes, will through the Forum call.
Appiades and Venus did behold
These strifes from Temples bright with burnisht gold.
There are some Ladies (...) dishonest fame,
From many faithless learn to be the same.
By others, fear lest you should once complain,
No man accounted faithless, entertain.
Athenians trust not Thesius though he swear,
Whom he invokes, gods of his making are.
Right heir of Theseus crime Demophoon thou
Phyllis deceived'st: no faith remains now.
Make vows to them, if they make vows to you
If they perform, perform your promise too.
She may as well extinguish (24) Vesta's fire,
And from the Temple sacred things desire,
For men Aconitum with Hemlock bruise,
As Venus, once reward received, refuse,
Hold in the reign my Muse, I Will come to thee,
Nor with the moving wheel disturbed be.
Let letters try the foord first, written fair,
And a fit messenger those letters bear.
Observe his language as you read it ore,
Whether he feign, or from his heart implore.
After some time write back to him, delay
Does love increase if not too long you stay.
Give not your self away too easily,
Nor stiffly, what he shall request, deny.
Make him both fear and hope as often as you
Remit his faults, make him less fearful too.
Write handsome words in an accustomed phrase,
And a smoothe style, neat form of speech gets praise.
Lovers at dubious words are oft-times wild,
Without good language a fair face is spoiled.
Though you the (25) honored Vittae do not wear
Your servants often by you deceived are.
By Boys or Maids you may your Letters send,
But to no Lover any gifts commend.
How I have seen Maids at such loss look pale,
And sorrow ever after, them assail.
He Is faithless truly that such gifts detains,
But his breast burning Aetna-like remains.
To repel fraud, let fraud be used now,
Arms against Arms to take, the Laws allow.
T'write many hands you may your selves inure,
They Are lost that would such things from me procure.
Unless his seal you break, write not again;
Nor let one Letter several hands contain.
Ladies the Writers loves, subscribed must be:
Think often on her, that often thinks on thee.
If we from small to great our minds may lead,
And our full sails in curved Havens spread.
It concerns beauty anger to assuage,
Peace becomes men, it is fit for beasts to rage.
Rage swells the cheek, black blood in the veins does start,
Makes eyes look like to angry Gorgons dart.
Hence rage, a pipe's not so much worth to me,
Said Pallas, who her self in the brook did see.
In The height of rage, if to a Glass you go,
Your face to be the same you will hardly know.
A proud and stately look no Lover brooks,
Love is increased most with gentle looks.
Too much disdain we hate (trust one that knows)
The countenance the seed of hate often sows.
If he looks, look; and if he smile, smile too:
Make signs to him, if he makes signs to you.
Thus whilst he toys, the Boy his wand forsakes
Sharp (26) pointed Arrows from his quiver takes.
We love none sad, Ajax Tegmessa loved,
With sprightful Ladies cheerful men are moved.
Andromache, Tegmessa unto me,
Neither of you two should a Mistress be.
I scarce believe (but that a birth does show)
You to your husbands ere in bed you go.
But Ajax melancholy wife has said,
Light of my soul, which a glad husband made.
Who will examples from great things refuse,
Or any great Commanders name not use?
That this a Troop gives to be disciplined,
Horsemen to this, ensigns to that assigned.
Look so on us for what use each one shows
To fit the best, in his sure place dispose.
Let rich men give, and he that reads the Laws,
Being eloquent, defend a Clients cause.
We that are Poets only verses send,
Who before others do to love pretend.
We spread abroad the praise of a sweet face,
We honor Nemesis, we Cynthia grace.
Orient and Occident knew Lycoris,
Many inquire who my Corinna is.
Dece it is not by sacred Poets used,
But by our Arts good manners are infused.
Nor pride does us induce, nor love of gain,
We for a bed or grove all sports refrain.
We Are easily caught, we burn with fervent heat,
And our affections are as firm as great.
Nature by curious Art is gentler made,
By exercise behavior will be had.
Ladies kind to Aonian Poets prove,
All power they have, and them the Moses love.
A God is in us, we with Heaven commerce,
He does his rays from airery Seats disperse.
It Is sin, with Poets riches to expect,
Ah but alas! Maids do this sin neglect.
Yet at first sight do not your selves disclose,
New Lovers will, the nets espied, oppose.
Naggs that are newly mouthed Grooms do not ride,
With the same bits they well-way'd horses gu^de.
To catch one stayed in years, and a young man,
Neither the manner or same course is taken.
He Is rude, in Loves Tents never had a place,
That as a new spoil would your bed embrace.
He knows none else, to you alone is bound,
Great hedges must such grain as this surround.
Competitors removed, your love you will gain,
For love and rule no sharers entertain.
Old men do by degrees affection take,
They will accept what young men will forsake.
They Will force no doors, nor burn with boundless rage,
Nor on their Mistress face commit a strage.
Neither their own, or Mistress clothes they will tear,
Nor shall they have cause to wail their plucked off hair.
Such things those act, with youthful flames enclosed,
But these Loves Darts receive with breasts composed.
Old men like Torches into water put,
Burn with a lingering fire, like wood new cut.
These Loves are sure, those short, yet full of May,
Then crop the fruit that will so soon decay.
Open to the foe, let all delivered be,
That faith may be found in dissoyalty.
Love easily granted will not long remain,
Then some denials in sweet language feign.
Let him attend the gate, cry cruel door,
Now threaten much, and then as much implore.
We love not things too sweet, sharper are found
To cure us: ships with too much wind are drowned.
This is the cause men do their wives neglect,
They show them at the first too much respect.
Let the Porter their access sometimes deny,
For love neglected burns more ardently.
Dull swords reject, now fight with active steel,
I Am sure the force of my own shafts to feel.
When the young Amourist falls in your snare,
Hoping that none with him your love shall share,
Seeing a rival to participate,
But for these Arts his love would soon rebate.
The horse, the (27) Barriers left runs well, if more
Follow him close at heels, or run before.
Scorn will revive flames quite extinct, lo I
Cannot love those that cannot me deny.
Yet not to make him grieve much, or suppose
Being troubled, there is more in it than he knows.
Your Porter may console and let him know
He troubles more than he has cause to do.
Pleasure with safety purchased, less we prize
To be more free with Thais, fears devise.
Though you might let him in at th'door, yet through
The window take him, and seem frighted too.
Instruct your subtle Maid to come in post,
Cry hide the Gentleman, or w' are all lost.
Yet you must mix his fear with love, lest he
Should think a night cannot worth so much be.
I Would like to have omitted how you may
Your Guardian and watchful Nurse betray.
Let wives their husbands fear, guard their own fame,
Law, Duty, Modesty command the same.
Thee whom revenge has ransomed who will endure
To be restrained, aid from my Art procure.
Though Argus many eyes attend, you shall
By giving fair words oculate them all.
If by your Guardian you should be denied
To write, then (28) waters at fit time provide.
What if your will-obeying Maid complies,
And in her bosom does a way devise
To carry Letters, bring back in her shoe
Delightful papers, what can Guardians do?
The Maid being of your Council may give leave
To write upon her back, which will receive
Your characters, if them in (29) Milk you write,
Rubbed with a Coal are manifest to sight.
On Paper made of humid line well dressed,
Your characters may be unseen expressed.
Acrisius of his Daughter care did take,
Yet she a Grandfather of him did make.
What can a Guardian, whilst that Stages be
In The City, whilst you may horse-courses see?
Or whilst you may to (30) Pharian Isis go,
Busied in sacrifice, the rest not so.
Or whilst the goddess from men's eyes if they
Approach her uncommanded, turns away:
Ladies the (31) Baths do many pleasures hide,
Then let your Guardian at the door abide
Watching your Gown; or else feign a disease,
So to your Chamber admit whom you please.
Whilst a false key may reach you what to do,
Or a Postern a way desired show.
A Guardian also is deceived with Wine,
Or with the Grap^s plucked from the Spanish Vine.
And there are soporiferous cups will keep,
And drowned their eyes in a Lethean sleep.
So him despised your complice does not stay
With lingering pleasures, or a slow delay.
But what need I so many ways prescribe,
Since with rewards you may your Keeper bribe:
Gifts, trust me, will both men and gods beguile,
And Jove himself will at an offering smile.
What do the wise since fools do presents love,
He that reward receives, will secret prove.
Your Keeper purchased once, he is ever so,
He Will never refuse that aid he once did show.
Of your companions I am to complain,
That hurt, to men does not alone pertain.
Believe me, they will of your pleasures share,
And others Hounds pursue your wanton Hare.
The Maids that does about the beds attend,
Trust me, more times than one, has been my friend.
Keep not too fair a Maid, for oft-times she
Has better than her Mistress pleased me.
Fond man what do I; make my self a prey,
Open my breast to foes; my self betray?
Birds teach not Powlers how to be undone,
Nor do the Deer instruct the Dogs to run.
I Will publish this, which help to Maids affords,
And arm them to my loss with Lemnian swords.
You may with ease make us believe you are kind,
The Amourists, with forward faiths, you will find.
Look on your servant, sigh and ask why he
Has been from you so long; then let him see
Some tears let fall, for him deep sorrow feign,
And in your countenance your fingers stain.
Credulous and compassionate he will be,
And say, she does this for the love of me.
If he be spruce, and loves to look in's glass,
He Will think the goddesses dote on his face.
Grieve not though wrong do never so great appear,
Neither be jealous though strange things you hear.
Trust not to tales too soon, they injure love:
Procris example may no light thing prove.
There is near to (32) Hymertus Flowery head
A sacred spring, the earth with soft grass spread:
Low Groves, where Arbutes with the grass do meet,
Rosemary, Laurel, shady Myrtle sweet:
There thick-leav'd Box, and Tamarix also,
There the low Shrubs, and lofty Pine-trees grow.
So many sorts of leaves, grass tops so fair
Were shook by Zephirus, a wholesome Air.
Cephalus grateful rest, his Hounds forsook,
The young man in this place his ease often took.
Come gentle moving Air, he used to say,
Come to my breast and fan this heat away.
Some that by chance his words did over-hear,
Bore back the sound to his wives trembling ear.
Air for a Harlots name, poor Procris guest,
Swounding she falls, with jealousy possessed.
Looking as pale as Grapes late gathered,
Or leaves with winters frost enveloped.
Pale as full Quinces which depress the Tree,
Or Corn before it is fully ripe, can be.
Her sense returned, she tears her clothes, and now
Her dainty cheeks, with her sharp nails, does plow.
Baging, away she hies, dispersed her hair,
Like Bacchus Priest that does the Thirsis bear.
When she approacht the place, she would take none,
But silently enters the Wood alone.
What wretched Procris had thy mind possessed,
To lurk, what ardour beat within thy breast?
Thou thoughtst that Air would come, whatever she,
And that her virtues should discovered be.
Thy coming grieves now 'cause thou would not take
Now't pleases, these unstedfast love does make.
The place, name, guide command belief from thee,
And what the mind fears, it concludes to be.
Thus when she saw the grass with feet deprest,
Her trembling heart did beat against her breast.
Now Middaies Sun gave shadows less extent
Ortus and Vesper equal in assent.
Lo Cephalus Cyllene's stock to the place
Returns, and with spring water cools his face:
Sad Procris is concealed; oth' grass being laid
Come Zephyrus, come gentle Air, he said.
Now when she saw the error of the name
Into her face a lively color came.
T'imbrace her husband she in have does rise,
And'mongst the bushes makes a rustling noise.
He (the sound heard) did for a wild beast look,
And bravely up his Bow and Arrows took.
Wretch, it is no beast, what do? hold fast thy dart;
Ah me! the have struck a woman to the heart.
Ah thou have hit a faithful breast, said she,
This place has ever had a wound by thee.
Before my day I dye, in jur'd by none,
This place made me suspect thee faithless grown.
From me my breath, to Air suspected, flies,
I dye; with thy loved hand close up my eyes.
So said, her breath her careless breast did leave,
Which her unhappy husband did receive.
He does her dying in his arms embrace,
And with sad tears washes the wound apace.
But we will return, and in these things be plain,
That her wished Port my wearied Keel may gain.
You look to Banquets, I should you conduct,
And with fit postures for that place instruct.
Come late, and in a handsome dress appear
Not to be forward, speaks most welcome there.
If you be black, yet there you will seem most fair,
I the night all imperfections covered are.
The manner must be learnt to carve and eat,
Don't with your fingers oil your face at meat.
Feed not too much on dainties, but forbear,
And rather let your stomach want i^s share.
Had Hellen greedy seemed to Pari^ ^ves,
He would have loathed, and disesteem'd his prize.
To drink is far more handsome, Maids, for you,
Bacchus with Cupid joined no hurt will do.
Yet do not drink your heads to discompose,
Nor till in your eyes, each thing double shows.
Women will, madifi'd, with too much Wine,
In any sordid copulation join.
Nor after meat lie down to ease your eyes,
Many disgraceful things from sleep arise.
I shame to teach you more, but Venus she,
Affirms our subject chiefly shame to be.
Each one must actions from her body take,
And postures all alike, you must not make.
You that are fair, lie upwards with your face,
Show you your back to whom your back's a grace.
Melanion Attalanta's legs between
His shoulders bore, if neat they must be seen.
Low women ride (33) Thebais being tall,
Married, never sat on Hector's horse at all.
She that would have her curious waste espyde,
Must sit upon the seat, her neck aside.
She whose sweet form presents no fault to the eye,
Carelessly stretched upon the Couch may lie.
Shame no^, like Phillis Mother, to untie,
And 'bout your shoulders let your loose hair fly.
You on whose breasts Lucina's wrinkles light,
Like the swift Parthian, keep your back in sight.
Love has a thousand ways performed with ease,
To lie half Supine oth' right side, may please.
Not Phoebus Tripos, nor horned Ammon shows
More Truth to you, than does my Muse disclose.
If there be truth in Art by long use gained,
Beleeve't our verses have that truth obtained.
Women arrived at full maturity
May these perceive, two sharing equal joy.
Nor pleasing voices, nor sweet tunes refuse,
And you sometimes must amourous language use.
You to whom nature Venus sense denies,
With a mendacious tongue pretend sweet joys.
Unhappy Maid is she whom sense does leave,
Where man and woman equal sweets receive.
Yet let not them perceive that you do feign,
And active motions will belief obtain.
To mention what does please us best, forbear
Modesty bids, yet secret signs declare.
She that reward, Venus performed, requires,
Not that her prayers should ere be herard desires.
Let not the light your marriage-beds come near,
Many things should be undiscovered there.
The Play is done, it is time they should return
That have our yoke upon their shoulders born.
As youths before, my crowd of Maids write thus
Upon your spoils, Ovid instructed us.
Annotations upon the third Book OF Publius Ovidius Naso, De Art Amandi.
(1) PEnthisilia and) a Queen of the Amazones, Post Orythiam Penthisilea regno
potita est, cujus Trojano bello inter fortissimos viros, etc. (says Justin.
lib. 2.) After Orythia Penthisilia obtained the governTrojano bello inter
fortissimos viros, etc. (says Justin. lib. 2.) After Orythia Penthisilia
obtained the government, who amongst the most courageous Captains in the Trojan
war, made large proof of her valor against the Grecians. She was slain before
Troy, but by whom it is uncertain. Dyctis Cretensis lib. 4. says, Achilles
inter equitum turmas Penthisiliam nactus, have a petit, etc. Achilles amongst
the troops of horse finding Penthisilia wounded her with his spear; and
dragging her miserably by the hair, slew her. But Dares Phrygius says,
Penthisilia Neoptolemum sauciat, ille dolor accepto, amazonum ductricem
Penthisiliam obtruncat.

Now such as shall desire to know what these Amazons were, I shall endeavor to
satisfy out of Justin. lib. 2. Ulinos and Scolopitus per factionem Optimatum,
dome pulsi, etc. The two young Princes, Ulinos and Scolopitus being by the
Primates of Scythia, expelled their Country, drew along with them a
considerable company of young men, who seating themselves in Capadocia near the
River Thermodon, occupied the fields of the Themiscyrians, whom they had
subjected, and for many years accustoming themselves to rob and spoil their
neighboring confines, were at last set upon and slain by the people. The wives
of these men perceiving all hopes of posterity were in their husbands cut off,
fall to arms; first defending themselves at home, afterward transmitting the
war to their neighbors: with whom they disdained to marry, calling it slavery,
not matrimony, have dared, a singular example of all ages, to enlarge without
the assistance of husbands, the bounds of their republic. Now encouraging
themselves in the contempt of husbands, that some might not seem more happy
than others, they slew those men that remained amongst them, and with the daily
slaughter of their neighbors, they prosecute the revenge of their murdered
husbands, At length by war obtaining peace to preserve the state of their
Government, they prostitute their bodies to men of neighboring Countries:
their malechildren they destroyed; but the Girls they carefully brought up,
instructing them in the exercise of fencing, riding, hunting, and the like:
They were called Amazons ab (...) and (...), from the burning of their breast,
that it might not impede their shooting.

(2) Oiclides fell) Amphiaraus, called Oiclides from his Father Oicleus; a
Grecian Prophet, the husband of Eriphiles, whom King Adrastus would take with
him to the war of Thebes, but he foreseeing he should never return,
concealing himself, was at last discovered by his wife Eriphiles to Adrastus
for a chain of gold: with whom going to Thebes, an Eagle at feast stooping,
snatched Amphiaraus dart, and soaring up with it, let it fall; which fixing in
the ground, became a Laurel: Amphiaraus going to cut it down, was by a sudden
rupture of the earth swallowed up together with his Chariot and horses; which
Themis foretold in Metam. 9.

Subductaque suos manes tellure videbit
Vivus adhuc vates --
A living Prophet shall his own Ghost see
Swallowed ith'earth --
(3) Wife they say) Laodamia, who died embracing the shadow of her slain
husband. vide supra.

(4) Iphias cries) called also Evadne, the wife of Capaneus, whom she loved so
entirely, that when he was slain by a Thunderbolt at Thebes, and his Funeral
solemnized, she cast her self into the fire to be consumed with him.

(5) Rogus dies) It was anciently a custom not to bury the dead bodies in the
ground, but to burn them with fire, to prevent the Tyrannous abuse of their
enemies, who were wont to take up, after their conquests, the dead corpse, and
execute their malice upon them. This fire being made in a dead pile, was called
Pyra, when burning, it was called Rogus. When the dead body was laid upon the
Pyra, his eyes were again opened, to show him Heaven if it were possible, and a
halfpenny put in his mouth, which they supposed to be the wages of Charon, for
ferrying him over the Stygian Lake.

(6) Theseus Ariadne) Vide supra, in Not. ad lib. 1.

(7) Phyl^is went) the Daughter to Licurgus King of Thrace, who prostituted her
body to Demophoon, upon promise of marriage, after the composing of those
differences that his absence had incurred at home: but he by the weight of his
Country affairs, being detained after the limit of his promised time, gave her
leisure to suspect her self despised, and despairing of the performance of his
promise, hanging her self, was turned into an Almond-tree without leaves, after
which Demophoon returning and embracing the naked trunk, it presently budded
and put forth.

(8) Guest did) Aeneas, who (says Virg. lib. 4.) by the commands of the gods
leaving Carthage; Dido, who was passionately in love with him, after his
departure, slew her self with the Trojans sword which he had forgot behind
him; yet in truth Dido lived (according to the best Chronologers) eighty odd
years after the Trojan, though the Poet in his Romantic Poem take the liberty
to make them contemporaries.

(9) Therapnean Bride) Laeda the wife of Tyndarus, who at Therapnae, a Village
of Laconia, brought forth the Tyndarides.

(10) Endimion does not) a Shepherd whom Jove received into Heaven, but
ambitioning the love of Juno, was first deceived with a cloud, and after for
his pride ejected the caelestial habitations, and doomed to perpetual sleep,
whom Luna falling in love with, concealed in a Grott on Latmus a Mountain of
Caria.

(11) Cephalus) a young man, the husband of Procris, with whom Aurora falling
in love, when she could by no means make him decline his chastity, ravished
him by force.

(12) Capitol) a famous Tower in Rome, built by Tarquinius Superbus, on the
Tarpeian Mount, after called Mons Saturnius, or Saturns Mount, where the
glorious spoils of the Roman Conquerers were hung up. It was called the
Capitol, because when the foundation was laid, a man's head was dug up fresh
and lively, as if it had been newly buried, it being supposed the head of one
Tolus long before deceased, whence from Caput and Tolus it was called
Capitolium.

(13) Curia worthy) There were in Rome several Curia's, of which chiefly one
built by Tullus Hostilius, thence called Curia Hostilia, which was the chief
Councel-house, whither the Roman Senators assembled themselves for the
determining of statematters.

(14) Forsaken Gnossis) Ariadne, whom Theseus forsaking, Bacchus found and took
to wife, bestowing on her the Cnossian Crown, beautified with seven stars,
which he before received of Venus.

(15) Phryxus color) Phryxus the Son of Athamas, King of Thebes, who with his
Sister Hell, to escape the cruelty of their Stepmother Ino, mounted on the
back of a golden Ramm, crossing over the Pontick Streights, Hell fell off and
was drowned in the Sea, which from her name was called Hellespont. But Phryxus
arriving in safety at Colchos, sacrificed his Ramm to Jupiter, hanging up his
golden fleece in the Temple, whence it was afterward taken by Jason, and the
rest of the Argonantes. The Ramm in his pristine form was placed among the
Stars, and is known by the Vernal Equinoxial Sign Aries.

Impositamque sibi qui non been pertulit Hellen
Tempora nocturnis aequa durna facit.
He that in safety did not Hell bear,
Gives day and night of length an equal share.
(16) The light bringing horses) the four horses of the Sun brought out by
Aurora, the goddess of the morning, their names are Pyrois, Eous, Aethon and
Phlegon, according to Metam. lib. 2.

-- Volucres Pyroeis, Eous and Aethon
Solis Equi, quart usque Phlegon. --
(17) She whom a feigned) Europa whom Jove carried in the shape of a Bull.

(18) As when at the Mill) I may well expect some Ladies frowns at the
translation of this rude Simile, but I hope they will vanish into smiles, when
they shall know I acknowledge it to be so.

(19) Friends ears) Ulysses premonisht by Circe of the enchanting melody of the
Sirens; with soft wax closed up the ears of all his companions, and cansed
himself to be fast bound to the Mast, that he might hear them, but though
never so much attracted, not be able to get loose, by which means he escaped
their allurements, though at the air of their bewitching voices be called upon
his friends to unbinde him, endeavoring to unloose himself. Hom. Odyss. lib.
12.

(20) Learn to sing) music) dancing) here gentle Reader, give me leave out of
Lucian. de saltatione to answer those censorious and Eschilean pated (for I
cannot term them hairbrain'd) men, that go about to vilify those princely
recreations, Scio vos illecebris hisce, etc. I know if you did but hear them
play, you would be so ravished with the sense of them, that you would (let me
add, if your corporeal delapidations have not rendered you incapable of such
exercises) dance for company your selves. Yea Scaliger himself so famed by all
the Critics, says, in musicis supra omnem fidem capior and oblector, etc. I
am extraordinarily taken and delighted with music; I am hugely detained with
the grace and beauty of women; I do gladly behold them dance, and am pleased to
be idle amongst them. And Epicurus used these as means to recover his sick
patients; he laid them on a down-bed, ^rowned with a Garland of sweet smelling
flowers, in a perfumed closet, delicately set out, and after a potion or two of
cordial drink, he brought in a beautiful young Maid to play on a Lute, sing
and dance.

(21) Orpheus) an excellent Poet and Musician of Thrace, who made the barbarous
people, yea the very trees and stones to dance after his Harp. Met. lib. 11.

Carmina dum tali Sylvas animosque ferarum,
Threicius vates and saxa sequentia traxit.
Having lost his wife Euridice, he descended to Hell to seek her, where with
his Harp he so charmed Cerberus, Pluto, and Proserpine, that he had his wife
restored to him, but looking back before he was got out (the thing only
excepted in the restoration) she was again taken away. martial. lib. 14.
Epig. 165.

Reddidit Euridicen vati, sed perdidit ipse
dum sibi non credit, nec patienter amat.
The Poet got Euridice, but she
Was with distrust lost, and impatiency.
(22) Balls must) Ludum parvae pilae is commended by Gallen, whether with the
hand or racket; it was of great request amongst the ancient Greeks, mentioned
by Homer, and was first invented by Aganella, a Maid of Corcyra, who presented
the first Ball ever made to Alcinous his Daughter, and taught her the use of it.

(23) Arena sprinkled) the Amphitheater, a shewplace in Rome, where the
Gladiatours were wont to fight, all sorts of wild beasts were brought to tear
one another in pieces. Aulus Gellius in his fifth book de Atticis Noct. affirms
that a certain slave being brought hither to be an Actor in these beastly
Tragedies, a Lion of immense greatness came from amongst the rest, and fawned
upon him, not suffering any other of the wild beasts to injure or molest him;
at which the Citizens wondering, inquired the cause, to whom the wretch told,
that flying from his Master into a certain desert, he concealed himself in a
great cave, where he had not long abode before a mighty Lion came halting in,
with a leg bloody, and deeply wounded; the Lion instead of devouring (which
he only expected) came forward, looking pitifully, as though he would
complain to him of his pain, at which, taking courage, he applied some herbs
to the sore, binding it up as well as he could, which he had no sooner done,
but the Lion made out for his prey, and brought in certain pieces of raw flesh,
which he made his daily food of. At length, wearied with this savage life,
left the desert, and betaking him to his travels, was caught by his old Master,
and brought from Egypt hither to be a Gladiator; since whose departure it
seemed the Lion was also taken and brought to Rome. At which the people gave
him the Lion to lead through the streets, as a Miracle. de Arena, vide supra.

(24) Vestas fire) the Nunnery of Vesta stood near to Castors Temple, to which
belonged six Virgins or Votaries, whose office was chiefly to keep the sacred
fire, for the extinction of which, they were had into a dark corner, stripped
naked, and scourged by the chief Pontifex.

(25) Vittae do not) a filler with which the Vestals bound their hair. Vide
supra.

(26) Sharp pointed Arrows) If any shall wonder at this adjective to Arrows,
concluding them all to be sharp pointed, I shall satisfy him out of Metam.
lib. 1. that Cupid had of two sorts.

Deque Sagittifera prompsit duo tela Pharetra,
Diverforum operum: fugat hoc, facit illud amorem.
Quod facit auratum est, and cuspide fulget acuta:
Quod f^gat obtusum est, and habet sub arundine plumbum.
Englished by the admired Sir George Sandis.
Two different Arrows from his quiver draws,
One hate of love, the other love does cause:
What caused was sharp, and had a golden head,
But what repulst was blunt, and tipped with Lead.
(27) Barriers left) the Romans had at the end of their Circus, certain
Barriers called Carceres, that is places railed in, from which the horses began
their Races.

(28) Waters at fit time) waters to write with, as the water of Chalchantum,
Alum, or Sal Armoniacum, with the two first, what ever you shall write on Paper
cannot be read, till held in water, the last, betwixt you and the fire.

(29) Milk you write) the Milk of a Fig Tree, with which you may write upon
any part of your body, being dry, it will not be read till rubbed over with a
Charcoal.

(30) Pharian Isis) Egyptian Isis, to whom there was consecrate a Temple in
Rome.

(31) Hymettus) a Mountain of Athens abounding with Bees, and plenty of honey.

(32) Thebais being tall) Audromache, the wife of Hector, and daughter to
Aetion King of Thebes, whence she is called Thebais. Dares Phrygins gives us
this character of her, Andromacham oculis claris, candidam, longam, etc.
Andromache was fair eyed, courteous, tall, lovely, modest, affable and
discreet; which virtues may be truly asserted inherent to the Major part of her
glorious sex, which gives me occasion to conclude with that of my Author. lib.
3.

Ipsa quoque and cultu est and nomine faemina virtus:
Nec mirum populo si placet ipsa suo.
Ladies are really all virtue, then
No wonder if so much they please us men.
FINIS.

