Church-Pageantry DISPLAYED: OR, Organ-Worship, Arraigned and Condemned, As
inconsistent with the Revelation and Worship of the Gospel, the Sentiments of
the Ancient Fathers, the Church of England, and several Eminent Divines, both
Protestants and Papists.

That it may please Thee to bring into the Way of Truth all such as have Erred,
and are Deceived.

We beseech Thee to hear us good Lord. Amen!

The best Musical Instrument for God's Praise is an upright Heart. Bishop
Cowper's Works Printed at London, 1621. Page 371. By Eugenius Junior -- In
ANSWER to a Letter about ORGANS.

Nitimur in vetitum semper cupimusque negata.
Is any Merry? Let him sing Psalms.
LONDON: Printed for A. Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1700.

CHAP. I.
The Introduction. The Patriarchal and Old Testament-Church about Three
Thousand Years without Organ-Worship. An Account of other Instrumental Music
used in Divine Praises. Organs and other Musical Instruments under the Legal
Dispensation, Parts of the Ceremonial Law, instituted by Divine Authority; are
not obligatory under the Gospel, no more than other Branches of the Ceremonial
Law, which by the Confession of Organical Advocates are abrogated.

SIR,
There Is no Request of yours, but is equivolent to a Command with me: Whereas
in your Letter to the 20th. Current you earnestly craved my Sentiments about
the use of Church-Musick; because a Friend of yours was going to erect a Pair
of Organs in his Parochial-Church: I have complied with your Desires, and in
the following Observations have delivered my own Thoughts, and the Judgment of
many oothers, touching it is unlawfulness under the Evangelical Economy.

Before I go on, I must beg the favor of you, as to give Place to calm and
sober Thoughts, and impartially to weigh the force of my Evidence: And (in
order to that) I hope you will be so just as to read over the whole Essay, before
you proceed to a judicial definitive Censure. I am persuaded you are of a
candid Temper, and therefore I can the more freely communicate my Sentiments to
you; and that I may the more effectually set the Affair in debate in it is true
Light, I Will begin with the first Rise and Use of Music and Musical Devotions.

1. 'Twas about Three Thousand Years after the Creation, before any Organs were
used in Divine Worship, That they were invented in the Infancy of the World, we
readily grant. Genesis 4.21. Jubal, he was the Father of all such as handle Harp
and Organ; but if one of the Posterity of Bloody Cain was the Contriver of
these paltry sidling Pipes, will it therefore follow that their use in Sacred
Services was equally Ancient, with their first Invention? But it is doubtful,
whether the Organs mentioned in this Scripture be the same with ours, for the
Hebrew Word (...) for Organs which comes from (...) lusit, adamavit, signifies
quodvis instrumentum Musicum, quasi amabile dictum. Schindl. The Chaldee
renders it, he was Master of all that Play on the Psaltery, and knew Music:
And the Greek Version reads it, this was he that showed the Psaltry and the
Harp,

We have no Account of 'm as used in the Devotions of the Antediluvian
Patriarchs, and 'twas about Seven Hundred Years after the Deluge, before any
sort of Instrumental Music was used in Divine Worship. The first remarkable
Instance that occurs, we have in Exodus 15.20, 21. Where it is said, that Miriam
the Prophetess took a Timbrel in her Hand, and all the Women went after her
with Timbrels and with Dances. There are Three Things that show the invalidity
of this Instance, in reference to the Point in debate (1.) You must Note, that
this Woman was a Prophetess, and what she did was by an extraordinary impulse;
now Sir, when any of our Organical Friends are actuated by a Prophetic Spirit,
even let 'm use all the Cymbals, Timbrels, Tabrets, and Harps, upon the
Terrestrial Globe, and spare not, and I do assure you I Will never interrupt
their Musical Mirth; only let 'm stay till then. (2.) You must observe, that
these were Women who played -- and sung -- but Paul has been so kind to the
Female Sex in our Days as to tie their Tongues at Church; though now and then
notwithstanding his Apostolical Injunction many of 'm will have their full
share in iouncing and racketting David 's Psalms, and be as clamorous in their
Responses as any of their Masculine Neighbors; and therefore, if you're
inclined to follow the Miriamite Pattern, you may soon find a parcel of brisk
singing Girls for the Purpose without going as far as Billingsgate for 'm. (3.)
These Musical-Women danced at the same time, so that Sir, you may see without
the help of a pair of Canonical Spectacles, that Dancing in Divine Worship is
of the same Age with Instrumental Music: A cap'ring Devotion can pretend to as
great Antiquity in the Church as any sort of Instrumental Music. And
therefore, I know no Reason why you should graciously receive the Musical Part
of the Old Service into the Church, and utterly reject the Dancing part.

2. It Is acknowledged that Organs and other Instruments of Music were Parts of
the Ceremonial Law, or things peculiar to the Jewish Pedagogy, as Circumcision,
Passover, Sacrifices, Trumpets, Cymbals, were, Now if these and other Parts of
the Legal Ceremonies are perfectly abolisht, how comes it to pass that Organs
are continued? Why should not the same Arguments conclude against the
Ecclesiastical Use of Organs, as conclude against the Church-use of other
Jewish Musical Instruments? Why should the worshipful Organs (forsooth) be
readmitted into the Bosom of the Church, when other famous Instruments of
Music are totally excluded? What warrant have you to restore and retain one
Part of the Ceremonial Law more than another Part? Why a pair of Organs and not
a brace of Timbrels? I believe neither you nor the Parson would Consent to have
the Jewish Harps, Dances, Tabrets, Trumpets, Cymbals, and Psalteries, used in
the Divine Service, and yet all these may be warrantably introduced into our
Church, if your Arguments for Organs hold Water. Pray good Sir, even let us have
a parcel of Ecclesiastical-Trumpeters, Church-Dancers, Canonical-Harpers and
Tinkling-Cymbalists, as well as a cumbersome Herd of expenceful jovial
Organists. The Greek Churches Vid. Monsieur Lortie de Coen. ^om. p. 1. Cap. 6.
have upbraided the Papists for using a Roasted Lamb in the Lord's Supper,
because 'twas Part of the Ceremonial-Law: But I Will not insist upon the
monstrous Effects of Superstitious Love and Testy Zeal, because both of 'm are
Blind; which (if you will believe Scarron) made Eneas once when he went to
Sacrifice, mistake a black curled Spaniel for a black Ram.

3. But under the Law the Musical Instruments in the Church were appoined by
the Infallible Directions of Heaven, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. He set the Levites in the
House of the Lord, with Cymbals, with Psalteries, and with Harps, according to
the Command of David, and of Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, for so
was the Command of the Lord by his Prophets. But pray Sir, where is your
Command for Organical Worship under the Gospel? You Have neither the Command of
God, nor of the King, nor of the Parliament, nor of any Convocation, nor of any
Canon, or Rubric, and yet maugre all these awful Powers, you will be meddling
with your Pipes and hank'ring after the forbidden Fruit. Tho. Aquinas, Nihil
debemus assumere in Divinum cultum Praeter ea quae nobis autoritate traduntur.
Aquin. Sum. Qu. 91. Art. 1. Typ. Mand. Ven. MDLXXXVI
that grand Master of Church-Ceremonies; even he could say, That nothing ought
to be introduced into the Divine Service, but what may be warranted by
Scripture-Command. But lest you should take it as an Affront to be corrected by
a Catholic Friend, while you have a Mother alive; I Will therefore bring you
under the righteous Sentence of her Maternal Censure. Says She, Homilies Sermon.
of good Works. Part 3. p. 38.
Such has been the corrupt Inclination of Man ever superstitiously given, to
make new honoring: of God, of his own Head, and then to have more Affection
and Devotion to keep that, than to search out God's Commandments and do 'm. The
Jews used 'm by Divine Order, and therefore, they were blessed for the great End
they were designed for, but that therefore God will bless 'm now to the same
Ends, when they are not commanded, is such a Consequence that all the Espousers
of the Organical Cause can never make good. What they did was the matter of a
Divine Command, but being Ceremonial, 'twas abrogated by the Death of Christ,
and therefore cannot bind us under the Gospel. Upon which account you must
produce some new Proof, Order, or Commission, or be Content to own your selves
guilty of adding the Traditions of sinful Men to the Sacred Canon. Because the
stiff-necked Jews of Old used Organs, Psalteries, Trumpets and Cymbals,
pursuant to the Heavenly Command, may you therefore do it now without a Command?
This is most wonderful Logic, and it may be, may pass for good arguing among a
profane Crew of singing Boys and their passionate Admirers.

We are not under the Law, but under the Gospel. So the Church of England
speaks. Her Discourse about the Abolition of Ceremonies.
Christ's Gospel is not a Ceremonial Law, but it is a Religion to serve God, not
in Bondage of the Figure or Shadow, but in the Freedom of the Spirit. That is,
God is to be worshipped now under the Gospel in Spirit and in Truth, and not
with the antiquated Ceremonies of the Law, such as Cymbals, Organs, Sacrifices,
Trumpets, Psalteries -- Now will any Man of common Sense plead for the use of a
Thing as lawful under the Gospel, because 'twas made of Old a part of the Legal
Service?

4. And it is certain, the New Testament makes no mention of any Instrumental
Music used in Divine Worship, and had it been really profitable, would the
Holy Jesus and his faithful Apostles pass it by in such profound Silence? Now
Mr. Chorister, I challenge you, or any of your Musical Tribe to prove that ever
Christ or his Apostles used, recommended, or encouraged the Practice of
Instrumental Music in the Sacred Assemblies of Christians. It Is remarkable in
Matthew. 9.23, 24, 25. that Christ does no Miracle till he turns out the Pipers
and Fiddlers.

But suppose, for once we humor your Fancy about Organs, will you then tell
me, when and where you will stop? If this be allowed, may you not by Parity of
Reason introduce the whole Body of Romish, Paganish, Judaical and Mohammedan
Ceremonies into the Church? If you are empowered to bring in so considerable a
thing as a pair of Devotional Organs, why may not you (...) the same Power fill
the Church with a great many more new fangl'd Ce^^^^nious Superstitions? And at
this rate, why may not we expect a (...) of Articles, and new Schemes of
Religion every new Year? (...) spawning of Novel Creeds and equipping out of
Organical Confessio^^ every Spring.

CHAP. II.
No Organs in the Primitive Church. They were first introduced into the New
Testament Church by Pope Vitalian about Six Hundred Years after Christ, their
use in Divine Service a Popish Practice in the Opinion of some Churchmen. Many
of Opinion, they were not Churchify'd as soon as Vitalian's Time. For there
were no Organs in France, and Germany in Aquinas's Time, which was about Five
Hundred Years ago. The Fathers, as Clemens Alexandrinus, St. Chrysostom,
Isidore, P. Theodoret, Ambrose, Austiu -- against the use of Organs in the
Church.

SIR,
1. IF what is wanting in the Sacred Text could be made good by Authentic
Primitive Records, I should not have attended this Musical Business. I must
needs say, that I owe the Fathers of the Church the Debt of an Honorable
Memory; and therefore, if you had fled for Refuge into the abstruse receptacles
of venerable Antiquity, I would not have presumed to haunt you out of your
Buroughs; but upon a little search into the Ancient Ecclesiastical Registers,
you will soon find that the Primo-Primitive-Christians never made use of Organs
in their Applications to the Heavenly Throne.

The Ancient Fathers in their Writings are wholly silent; they give us not the
least hint that they approved of or had Organical Worship in the Church; but we
have a new Generation of Pipers that are wiser than their Forefathers, and
able to fathom the Indian Gulf, and if need be, reach the twinkling Stars with
a Jacob's Staff. These are the evaporating Wits of the Age with whom alone (if
you will believe 'm) the Crystal Springs of Knowledge dwell. No doubt, but these
Musical Gentlemen drew their first breath in Tempe or Parnassus, and had
Appollo himself for their Progenitor, and the Harmonious Spheres for Nurses;
for their first and last Notes are nothing else, but Lispt Meeter and Castalian
Lays. But see how this sidling humor draws me out of the way.

2. Say some, 'twas about Six Hundred Years after Christ before Organs were
introduced into the Christian Church. The Tandem Anno 666. pleno numero
Bestiae, Apoc. 13. Cantum Latinum cum Organis Ecclesiae a Vitalino Pontifice
susceperunt missamq deinde. Magdeb. Centur. Cent. 7. Cap. 6.
Centuriators tells us, That at last in the Year Six Hundred Sixty Six, in the
full number of the Beast in Revel. 13th. the Churches received Latin singing
with Organs from Pope Vitalian, and from thence began to say Latin Mass, and to
set up Altars with Idolatrous Images. -- And of this Opinion are Balaeus,
Platina Plat. in Vital.
and others. You may Note hence, that this Theatrical pompous sort of Worship
was first hatched at Rome, where a great many other Ecclesiastical Gewgaws and
Gibble-Gabbles have been invented; and had no meaner Person for it is Original,
than a Sovereign Pontiff, and he none of the best of the Purple Order, for by
M. Prideaux he is ranked in the Class of usurping Nimrods. And besides we must
observe, that these Organs were introduced into Church in the Time of Popish
Darkness, and were accompanied with Latin Service and Idolatrous Images --.

And, that this sort of Organical Devotion looks like that of Rome, I Appeal to
the Reverend Vid. Ceremony Monger, Chap. 1. page 11. 17.
Mr. H. the present Rector of All Saints -- in Colchester in Essex, who
expresses himself thus -- His Cope, his Hood, his Surplice, his Rochet, his
cringing Worship, his Altars with Candles on 'm, his Bag-pipes or Organs, and
in some Places Viols and Violins, and singing Boys are so very like Popery,
that (says he) I protest when I came in 1660. from beyond Sea to Paul's and
White Hall, I could scarce think my self to be in England, but in Spain or
Portugal again, I saw so little difference but that their Service was in Latin
and ours in English, but less intelligible and edifying by Reason of the
inarticulate Boatus and braying, the alternate Jabberings and Mouthings of the
People, whilst all of 'm read half the Psalms with a noise as confused as the
rumbling Thunder; that any Man in the World that had seen High Mass beyond Sea,
must say, that the Contrivance of both was to keep People in Ignorance,
Bellarmines Mother of Devotion.

3. Some others are of Opinion, that the use of Organs in the Christian Church
was not so early as this Popes Time: For, long after that; Organs were unknown
in France and Germany. Marianus Scotus tells us, they were first sent of a
Token to King Pepin in France; Aventinus gives the same Account, but adds, that
they came not into any Church in France till the Year 828. when by the Industry
of a Venetian Priest they were there set up. Church-Musick was not introduced
into the Western Churches before the Time of Ludovicus Pius about the Year 840.
One Georgius a Greek Priest, who was recommended to the Emperor by Count
Baldric persuaded him to admit into the Church Aimon. Monach. de Gestis. Franc.
lib. 4. Cap. 114.
inusitatam adhuc in regno Francorum melodiam. But Aquinas says, there were no
Organs used in the Church, in his Time, which was about the Twelfth Century.
Thus you see, though the Learned vary in the Account they give of their Original,
yet they all agree they were not used in Christian Assemblies for several
hundred Years after Christ.

4. As to the Fathers, it is plain, that they accounted Organs and other Musical
Instruments in Divine Worship, as Parts of the Old Ceremonial Law, and suited
only to the Infant State of the Church, and therefore no way Congruous to the
spirituality of Gospel-Services; this will more plainly appear, by considering
the subsequent Passages collected out of 'm.

(1.) We'll begin with Justin Martyr (...) -- Just. Martyr. ad Orth. Quest. 107.
, who Died about the Year 164. He says to this Purpose, That in his Time there
was only plain simple singing with the Voice used in the Church: And he calls
the use of Church Music under the Old Testament, a puerile carnal Service, or
a Childish serving of God.

(2.) Clemens Alexandrinus, (...) -- Paedag. Lib. 2. Cap. 4.
who Lived about the Year 196. says, we are commanded to Praise God on the
Psaltery, that is on the Tongue, because the Tongue is the Psaltery of the
Lord. Praise him with the Harp, that is, with the Mouth; Praise him with the
loud tinkling Cymbal, that is, the Tongue. And a little further he says, That
then they made use only of one Instrument, the peaceful Word with which they
honored God. Note hence, (1.) That he looked upon the Jewish Church-Musick to
be Typical, i. e. a resemblance, to emblematize or shadow out that inward
Melody -- which should be in Gospel Times, so says Junius, Of those Things
commanded by the Law, some were significative of some future Thing: Others were
peculiar to that Church; now (says he) to make use of things which were
significative of some thing Future after the coming of Christ, is Wicked; and
now to use those things which were peculiar to that Church is ridiculous. So
that according to his Judgment the use of Church-Musick under the Gospel is
either impious or ridiculous. (2.) Clemens in some of's Writings, complains
much of the decay of Zeal and of the Power of Godliness among Professors in his
Time, and yet I believe it never entered into the Brains of the good Man, that a
pair of Organs would have been a Remedy for that growing Evil.

(3.) St. Chrysostom, (...) -- in Ps. 144. Edit. etc.
who Di'd about the Year 407. says, That under the Old Testament, there were
Organs by which Songs of Praise were offered up to God, but now in the stead of
Organs we make use of the Body, the Members of which become a Psaltery and a
Harp --. And in another Place (...).
speaking of Musical Instruments in Gods Service, he says, Let no Man deceive
you, these appertain not to Christians: These are Alien to the Christian
Church; all these the Nations of the World seek after. Note hence, (1.) He
asserts that Organs -- did not belong to Christian Worship. Either he was
erroneous in's Judgment, or the Patrons of our melodious Organs are guilty of
an unchristian Practice. But (2.) He makes those to be deceivers of the People
that introduce Organs, or any other sort of Instrumental Music into
Church-Worship: Here Is a heavy Charge, and some Body must be Guilty; either the
Father of the Church, or the Ecclesiastical Organeer. You must either brand the
good old Man for a lying Scribbler, or own Organical Worship to be a mere
Cheat, and a Church Delusion -- Vtrum horum mavis accipe -- (3.) He makes
Organ-Worship to be a Heathenish Practice. This puts me in mind of what the
Learned Dr. Stillingfleet Orig. Sacr.
late Bishop of W. tells us out of Strabo, that the Corybantes of old in their
Worship danced about with their Cymbals, Pipes, Drums, and Arms, as if Bedlam
had been broke loose among 'm.

(4.) Isidore Pelusiota, Isid. Pel. lib. 1. Ep. 457. in Ps. 150. (...).
who Lived about the beginning of the Fourth Century, says, If ye seek an
Explication of that Music mentioned in Scripture, understand after this
manner; viz. They praised God with the sound of a Trumpet in Memory of the
Resurrection; which will be with a Trumpet. Praise him with the Psaltery and
Harp, that is, with the Tongue and Mouth. Praise him with Strings and Organs,
that is, with the Body and all the inward Parts.

(5.) Theodoret, (...). -- Theod. (...). Sermon. 7.
who flourished about the Year 430. after Christ, says, God indulged 'm (the
Jews) the use of Musical Instruments, not that he was delighted with their
Harmony, but so by little and little he put a stop to the deceit of Idols. And
in another Place, he says to this Effect, (...) -- Comment. in Ps. 32.2, 3.
that those Musical Instruments spoken of in the Old Testament agree to us, if
they are understood spiritually -- And we must render our selves an Harmonious
Organ to God, and Praise him by the Instruments of all the Senses.

(6.) Ambrose, who Di'd Anno 397. Aug. Confess. IX. 7.
introduced the Eastern Way of Singing at Milan, to divert the good People that
watched with him in the Church, to prevent Justina, Valentinian's Mother, from
delivering it to the Arians, whose Heresy she favored: And from Milan that
more artificial way of singing spread through the Western. Churches.

(7.) This melodious Singing did so tickle St. Austin's Ears, and cause in him
such a degree of carnal Delight, that the wishes 'twere laid aside in the
Church, -- Ab auribus meis remcveri velim atque ipsius Ecclesiae. Conf. X. 33.
and reckons it much safer to imitate the Alexandrian Way of singing in
Athanasius's Time, who made his Reader to sound the Psalm with so small a turn
of his Voice, ut pronuncianti vicinor esset quam canenti. Ibid.
If the more artificial Way of Vocal Singing seemed ensnaring to this devout
Father, what would he have said to our Modern Organical Consorts?

(8.) Add to all these the Account we have of the Primitive Worship, viz. When
the Congregation was assembled they first read the Scriptures, and sometimes
other Writings, then Prayed, and then Preached, and concluded with Prayer. In
our Public Assemblies says Scripturae leguntur, Psalmi canuntur, ad
locutiones proferuntur, and petitiones delegantur. Tertull. de Anima Cap. 3.
Tertullian, (who Lived about the Year 202. after Christ) The Scriptures are
Read, Psalms are Sung, Sermons Preached, and Prayers presented. Not a Word of
Common Prayer, nor of the Vitalian and Gregorian Organical Cant; which things
were not known in the Primitive Church.

Thus you see the Venerable Fathers unanimously declare against the
Ecclesiastical use of Organs; and therefore, you must either Rebel against
their Paternal Authority, or be content to Knock under, as we say. The Church
of Old looked like it Self, a Pure, Holy Virgin; and had no Superstitious
Ornamental Appendages to enhance it is Native Simplicity.

But Alas! How is her beautiful Face now mangled? As some of our modish Ladies,
who (though Nature has accommodated 'm with comely Features, yet) ridiculously
paint 'mselves: So some of our Prelatical Tantivies have so miserably daubed
the Face of the Church with Organical and Spanish Dies, and other Ceremonious
Untemper'd Mortar, that if the Primitive Fathers were now alive again, they
could not know their own Daughter.

-- Hinc illae Lachrymae -- We'll conclude this Chapter with that excellent
Prayer of our Church, viz. God grant all us, the Kings Highness, faithful and
true Subjects, to feed of the sweet and savoury Bread of Gods own Word: And (as
Christ commanded) eschew all our Pharisaical and Papistical leven of Man's
fained Religion -- Homily of good Works, Part III. Page 38.

CHAP. III.
Many of the Reformed Churches without Organs. Animadversions on those that
have 'm. Several Modern Divines, Churchmen, Papists, and others, and the
Church of England it self, against the use of Organs in Divine Worship.

IN the next Place, we'll consider the extent of this Organical Worship, and in
doing that, it may not be amiss to lay before you an Account of those Places,
where (1.) Organs are not used in their Spiritual Worship. And (2.) Where they
are used.

(1.) There are many of the Reformed Churches, and some of 'm, the best in the
World, that never used Organs, or any other Musical Instruments in their Sacred
Assemblies and Worship. As the Reformed Churches in Germany, the Helvetian and
French Protestant Churches: Many of the Protestant Churches in Poland,
Sweedland, Denmark, and many of those in the Belgic Provinces. The Hungarian,
and Transilvanian Churches, and those of Piedmont. The Scotch Churches. All the
Protestant Dissenting Churches, and indeed the greatest Number of Parish
Churches in England and Ireland. Observe here, (1.) That the greatest Number,
and some of the purest Protestant Churches in the World, have always been
without Organs. And (2.) That the defect thereof, has been no hindrance to the
flourishing State of those Churches; nay (3.) If we may judge of the Tree by
it is Fruit, some of the Anti-Organical Churches have been the most eminently
Pious, and have most remarkably signalized their Courage and Constancy, in the
persecuted Cause of Christ, and Defense of Gospel-Simplicity, which is the main
Thing pleaded for in this Essay, in Opposition to pompous and carnal Devotion.

(2.) On the other Hand, Organs are used in some of the Dutch Churches, in some
of the Lutheran Churches, in Germany and Poland, and the Greek Churches; In our
Cathedral Churches in England, and in some few Parochial Churches, and in the
Popish Churches. But then,

[1.] As to the Dutch Churches; it must be remembered that Organs were forced
upon 'm by some Civil Magistrate against the Consent of the Dutch Ministers;
for at the National Synod held at Middleb. Anno 1581. and in the Synod of
Holland and Zealand in the Year, 1594. 'twas decreed, That they would endeavor
to prevail with the Magistrates to banish Organs -- out of their Churches.
Nothing less than Banishment, it seems, would serve their turn. Such clamorous,
noisie, bawling Creatures were not fit to dwell within the Calm, and orderly
Territories of the Church.

[2.] As to the Lutheran Churches; they ought not to be admitted as Patterns,
for they approve of, and use many other Popish Novelties, which all other
Protestants justly abhor and condemn, as, Auricular Confession, the Pictures of
the Trinity, singing Psalms in Latin, Crucifixes in their Devotion -- Cum
multis aliis -- But what if a Parcel of Consubstantiating Lutherans are
inclined to divert 'mselves by the inarticulate sound of a few Musical Pipes,
must it therefore follow that English Protestants should Dance after 'm? As to
the Greek Churches their Errors in material Things are equally obvious --

But (1.) Zepperus observes, that the Organs used in the Transmarine Reformed
Churches are to Delight People at ordinary Times, when the Worship of God is
not performed. But some of our high-flown Cassandrian English Love a little
innocent Auricular Diversion in their Ecclesiastical Retirements, and will not
as much as open their Eyes toward the Heavens, till they are awakened and
roused up by the sound of an Organical Machin. But that which makes me smile
is, to see poor little diminutive Parishes so eager for Organs, when some of
the Richest Parsonages in England are content to go to Heaven without 'm. But
oh what a cursed Misery is it to be Poor and Proud!

And (2.) He that Writes the late History of Denmark, An Account of Denmark, as
'twas in the Year 1692. Edit. 3. Chap. XVI. page 233.
tells us in Particular of the Danes, That they are all great Lovers of Organs,
and have many very good ones, with skilful Organists, who entertain the
Congregation with Music during half an Hour, either before or after Service.

Nay (3.) It seems in Dr. Rivet's Time, only Vocal Music was used in our
English Service, and says he, -- Si in Anglia vel alibi iis utuntur, id aliis
fit horis quam iis quae praeipuo Divino cultui sunt destinatae. -- A. Rivet.
Cathol. Orthod. Qu. 36. p. 564.
If Organs were used, 'twas not in the Hours of Divine Worship, but at other
Times, and that to divert and recreate the People and not to edify 'm.

[3.] And as to the English Churches; there are Three Things I would observe
concerning 'm.

1. That the Churches that have Organs are very few, compared with those that
have no Organs at all. If they are so eminently useful in Devotion, as a
mouthing Cathedralist Swears they are, there is no doubt but the Patrons and
Rectors of our Rich Parochial Synagogues that are without 'm, would soon make
their Ecclesiastical Arches echo, with the sound of Melodious and Charming
Organists.

2. Several eminent Churchmen, and other Reformed Divines have expressly showed
their dislike of Organs in our Divine Worship. We'll begin with;

The Learned Dr. Taylor's Opinion about this sort of Ecclesiastical Music. He
delivers himself to this Purpose, The Use of Singing Psalms -- is very apt for
the Edification of Churches, but as for Musical Instruments, they are more apt
to change Religion into Fancies, Duct. Dubit. lib. 3. about the 329. p.
and take off some of it is simplicity, and are not so fitted for Edification.
He seems plainly to assert, that this sort of Musical Service is really
repugnant to spiritual Worship, which is particularly enjoined in the Gospel.
And I Have heard many Devout Kirk-men complain, that instead of elevating their
Affections, it distracts their Thoughts, and diverts the mind from being
seriously intent on the Matter Sung. But alas Sir, you're mistane in our
Organists, for they never intended to be Religious among their Pipes.

Mr. Maxwell, a Divine of the true Prelatical and Tory stamp, In his Book
entitled, The Excellency of the Church of England above that of Geneva.
says, We agree with Reformed Divines, that Instrumental Music is neither a
Part of nor a help to Divine or Ecclesiastical Worship. Bravely said Maxwell!
The high-flown Scot is in the right on it; and the Confession is the more
considerable, because it is voluntary, and not forced by the pressure of a
Scotch Boot.

Cowper, His Works in Folio Printed at London, 1621. p. 371.
Bishop of Galloway, says, That the best Musical Instrument for God's Praise,
is an upright Heart: And in's Comment on the Revelations, says, The Heart is
the Harp, the Strings of the Heart are the Affections.

The famous Dr. Lightfoot, His Works, Vol. 11. p. 1060.
has a very pertinent Passage to the Purpose, says he, Christ abolisht the use
of the Temple, as purely Ceremonious, but he perpetuated the Use of the
Synagogue, such as Reading the Scriptures, Preaching, Praying and Singing of
Psalms, and transplanted it into the Christian Church as purely Moral. Now
observe, that Instrumental Music was part of the Temple-Service, and
peculiarly so, for 'twas never used in the Jewish Synagogues, or in their
Parochial Worship. And therefore we have no more warrant to recall it into the
Christian Church, than we have to introduce Lamps, Dances, Frankincense, Silver
Trumpets -- or the like.

Peter Martyr, Pet. Mart. in Judge. c. 5.
(who dyed about Year 1562) speaking about this sort of Church Music says, It
cannot be lawfully retained, because the Auditors are so taken with it, that
they cannot apprehend and perceive the Words if they would. And therefore, I
think it is almost as good, for a Man to pay his Religious Devoirs to Heaven at
B -- in the midst of Rosemary-Lane S -- where nothing is heard but the confused
Rumblings of sonorous and clat'ring Tongues. Or, for ought I know, his
Advantage may be as great, if he spends two or three Hours at a Quakers Dumb
and Silent Conventicle. The Truth on it is Sir, I Love Music dearly well in
it is proper Time and Place; and Scruple not to divert my Self now and then, by
a pair of Domestical Organs, but really I had almost as good hear the
Mysterious Humms of a Parcel of Leaden Hall Quakers, as the loud inarticulate
confused Noise of Ecclesiastical Pipes. The one is as intelligible and edifying
as the other: But I must not attend my demure Enthusiastical Quaker too long,
lest my Clothes be singed, for he smells strong of Italian Smoke which makes me
presume there are some Roman Cinders in his Chimney.

To proceed. Wendeline Syst. Theol. Edit. Post. p. 1643.
says of the same Music, That the Devil by a Canorous Music tempts the Ears
of Christians, that it may emasculate and weaken their spiritual Vigor by a
sweeter sound. So that you may conclude hence, when the Organist Plays on's
Pipes there is an invisible Dancer.

Zanchy, on Ephesians. 5.19. says, read St. Jerome on this Place -- What he Writes
against this Theatrical Gaudy sort of Music, by which Men are drawn to be more
attent to the Melody of the Sound than the Words.

Calvin says, that the Jewish Altars and Frankincense, are every whit as
lawful as Musical Instruments in God's Worship: But I Will not insist upon a
Geneva Cut, when triangl'd Instances are so much in Fashion.

Zuinglius (the first Reformer of the Helvetian Church) is very warm against
this sort of Worship. Zuinglii Act. Disp. 2. p. 106.
It Is evident (says he) that Ecclesiastical Chanting -- is a most foolish vain
abuse, and a most pernicious hindrance to Piety.

Pezelius, Pez. in Sleid. de Quatuor Imperiis.
who was Professor of Divinity at Bremen in the lower Circle of Saxony, in his
Notes upon Sleidan, calls the Musical Instruments of Pope Vitalian, the Thieves
of Prayer, and the Word Preached.

Many more might be added, but I Will conclude this Head with the Judgment of
the Thirty Two Protestant Commissioners, who were in the Reign of Henry VIII.
and Edward VI. appointed by Act of Parliament to examine and purge all Canons,
Constitutions, and Ordinances, Provincial and Synodal, do declare, that they
would have all Instrumental Music as Organs -- quite taken away out of the
Church. Reformatio legum Anglicarum de Divinis Officiis. Imperf. Tract.
The same Commission was revived in Queen Elizabeth 's Reign, but quickly
dropped, and to the great Prejudice of the Church has slept ever since, as the
Learned and Reverend Bishop Burnet says.

The Persons Deputed to this Purpose were, Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury,
Ridley Bishop of London, Ponet Bishop of Winchester, Goodrick Bishop of Ely,
Coverdale Bishop of Exeter, Hooper Bishop of Gloucester, Knight Bishop of Bath,
Scory Bishop of Rochester, Mr. Tailor of Lincoln, Mr. Cox the King's Almoner,
Parker of Cambridge, Latimer, Cook, Pet. Martyr, Sir John Cheek, John a Lasco,
Mr. Peter, Mr. Cecyl, Sir Tho. Smith, Mr. Tailor of Hadley, Dr. May, Mr.
Traheron, Dr. Lyel, Mr. Skiner, Justice Hales, Justice Bromley, Goodrick,
Gosnal, Stamford, Carel, Lucas and Brook Recorder of London.

These were the Flowers of the English Reformation, and Men eminent for Sacred
and Polite Literature. And I think the Judgment of such a valuable Set of Men
deserves a Particular Regard. And therefore wonder with what Confidence some
can pretend to have such a mighty Veneration for our first Reformers, when yet
they so zealously defend, and are so eager for retaining; what the Old
Reformers thought better abolisht and quite removed.

Thus you have the express Opinion of many great and good Men against your
erecting a pair of Devotional Organs in the Christian Church. But if you think,
that you cannot attain the Supremacy of Bliss without Converting the Church into
an Organical Quire, even go on, and let your well-instructed Organist begin his
Anthem of O be joyful -- while the rest of the Parish are devoutly Praying,
like 'mselves, From all blindness of Heart, from Pride, Vainglory, and from
all the Deceits of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil -- and Contempt of thy
Word and Commandment. Good Lord deliver us. And for once I Will suppose my self
in the AMEN-Officer's Desk, and presume to say A -- m -- e -- n --. But before
you begin, you would do well to take Advice from those that are able to give it,
and who more fit to Counsel you in this Grand Affair than,

3. The Church of England it self, whose Judgment comes next to be considered,
and if you will not be advised by her, for my Part I shall give you over as a
pack of obstinate Sons of the Church. But what says the Church of England?
Why, to be brief, She utterly Condemns the Use of Organs in Divine Worship, as
unlawful, and Thanks God She was rid of 'm in the Infancy of the Reformation;
as appears by the following Passage out of her Homilies -- Alas Gossip (said a
Woman to her Neighbor) What shall we do at Church? Since all the Saints (or
Images) are taken away; since all the goodly sights we were wont to have are
gone; Book of Homilies of the Time and Place of Prayer. Part II. p. 131. Land.
Prinsed 1621.
since we cannot hear the like Piping, Singing, Chanting, and playing upon the
Organs that we could hear before -- To this the Church very gravely Replies,
But dearly Beloved, we ought greatly to rejoice and give God thanks, that our
Churches are delivered out of all those things which displeased God so sore and
filthily defiled his Holy House --.

Take Notice here, (1.) That 'twas the Opinion of the Church of England in
Queen Elizabeth's days, that Organs -- in Churches did greatly displease God.
And are they more acceptable in God's account now? Or are our Ecclesiastical
Engineers grown more wise than their famous Ancestors? (2.) That Organs -- did
filthily defile God's House; and therefore she thanks God for the removal of
this Organical defilement among other Superstitions. But least you should
Question the Authenticalness of the good Old Homilies, and to look upon the
Evidence as weak and impertinent; I Will add, (3.) That the Thirty Fifth Article
of the Church of England, confirms the Doctrine of the Homilies, as good,
sound, and wholesome. Whoever therefore asserts this New, or rather Old Romish
mode of Worship by Organs, directly contradicts the Judgment of the Renowned
Church of England, And yet these Organical Hot-spurs would be thought her only
true Sons, though at the same time they publicly and cotumaciously Rebel against
her Maternal Authority. The Church of England in another place says, -- Of
Ceremonies why some be abolisht, and some retained in the Preface part of the
Common Prayer.
That some Ceremonies entered into the Church by indiscreet Devotion, and such
a Zeal as was without Knowledge. And for because they were winked at in the
beginning, they grew daily to more and more abuses, which not only for their
unprofitableness, but also because they have much blinded the people, and
obscured the Glory of God, are worthy to be cut away and clean rejected: --
Injenuous Confession Monstrum horrendum -- The Mother and Children so very
unlike! What pity is it that so Excellent a Mother should have such a
degenerate Brood -- but corruption optimi, pessima.

[4.] As to the Popish Churches, I shall only declare the Sentiments of some of
their learned Men touching the concern in debate. We'll begin,

1. With Thomas Aquinas, Instrumenta Musica sicut Cytharas -- non assu^it
Ecclesia in Divinas lauds ne videatur judaizare -- Aquin. Sum. 2a. 2ae. Qu.
91. Art. 2. Obj. 4 ta.
who lived about the Year 1270, he tells us that Organs were not received into
the Church, in his time. The Church (says he) does not take Musical
Instruments into the Divine Praises, least it should seem to judaize. And it is
observable that Cardinal Cajetan Notandum tempore Thomae -- Cajet. in eund. loc
sum Tho. Aquin.
upon Aquinas says, Take notice that in the times of St. Thomas the Church
made no use of Organs. And Gregory de Valentia is of the same Opinion. It Is
manifest from hence that the Gallican Churches which boast so much of
Antiquity, had no Organs in their Churches about 500 Years ago.

2. Others of the Romish Stamp look upon Organs to be really prejudicial to the
Devotion of the Holy Church though they may accidentally excite the Mind.

Cornelius Agrippa (who was Counselor to Charles the V. and a Papist as
appears by his Reflections on Luther) vehemently De Vanitate Scient. Cap. 6.
and 17.
declaims against Organs as abused ad fornicariam pruriginem, and filling the
Church with such a loud noise that the Worshippers can neither hear nor attend
to what is spoken: He looks upon Church-Musick to be a Lecherous licentious
sort of Devotion, and resents it ill that the Holy Mysteries should be chanted
out by a Company of wanton Musicians who are hired with a great Sum of Money --
Ibid.
. And Aquinas in the above quoted Question, Aquin. Sum 2a. 2ae. Qu. 91. Art. 2.
Resp. 4ta. ad 4t. Objectionem.
says out of Aristotle, That those sort of Musical Instruments, do rather
Create in the Mind a sensual Delectation, than Form in the Mind a good
Disposition.

Another Learned Papist, who resolved not t'approve all he saw and heard in the
Romish Synagogue, says in these Words. Let a Man be a greater Worldling than
Crassus, a greater Reviler than Zoilus, yet is he accouned a Devout Man,
because he Sings Service well, though he understands nothing of it -- Nor are
they Content with this, but we have also brought into Churches, a Laborious and
Theatrical Music, a tumultuous prattling of diverse Voices, such a one as I
think was never heard upon any Stage among the Romans or Graecians -- All Places
roar with Pipes, Eras. in 1 Corinthians. Cap. 14.
Trumpets, Cornets, Dulcimers, and with these Men's Voices are mixed; Love-Songs,
and Filthy Songs (to which Whores and Mimicks Dance) are heard. People run to
Church as to a Stage to tickle their Ears, and for this use are bred Organists
and maintained at great Charge -- A Rabble of sordid and light Persons is bred,
and the Church is loaded with their maintenance, and that too for a pestilent
Employment. How many poor People that are ready to famish might be maintained
with the Salaries of these singing Men?

It Is remarkable how our Author says, that People came to Church as to a
Stage Play, and Hospinian says, they went away ordinarily as soon as the
Music (for which alone they came) was over. And it is well if the Organical
Part of Mankind be reformed in our Days. Now Sir, shall Protestants declare so
vehemently for the use of these Ecclesiastical Whistles, when even Roman
Catholics 'mselves condemn 'm as Enemies to spiritual Devotion? And those of
'm that Dance after these Pipes, how do they laugh at us for being their filly
Apes. It Is to me unaccountable, that there should be any English Protestants,
who in spite of Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, and the Church it self, I say, in
spite of all these, will yet be the Pope's Baboons and expose the English
Reformation to the Jears of Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, who deride us sadly
for this notorious Piece of Religious Mimickry.

CHAP. IV.
Organ Worship an improper Method to correspond with the End of Religion. The
Grand Organical Objection, considered and answered. The ill Consequence and the
pretended good Effects of Religious Organs examined. The Erecting Organs in a
Parochial Church -- against the Act of Uniformity, and an unnecessary Charge to
a Parish. Organs rob the Poor. Conclusion.

PRay Sir make your Conscience Chancellor in the Cause, and tell me whether you
really think the Heart-searching God is pleased with such Theatrical Pomp, and
noisie Ostentation in his Worship? Or whether your Organical Chanting will
recommend your Devotion any whit the more unto a Holy God? Will that which
tickles our itching Ears, be delightful Melody in the Ears of the Eternal
Being? Will he be affected with that which pleases our distempered Fancies?
What, has the Almighty greater respect to the artificial sound of an
Organ-pipe, than to the dolorous Cries of a penitent Sinner? To affirm any such
thing, would be wickedly to represent Almighty God, as if he were tinctured
with the Vanity of degenerate Mortals.

It may be there are some Superstitious Fops, and empty Noddies, that may
admire and applaud a Worship dressed up Ala^node de Rome, de Spain, de Portugal,
(I had almost forgot St. Germans En lay) with the glittering Ornaments of gaudy
Ribbons, and towering Top-knots, but I Am sure wise and devout Protestants that
know better things, will Pity their Childish Simplicity, and Laugh at their
Ridiculous Fooleries.

Lactantius Reprimands the Heathens severely, for believing that their Gods did
love what they affected, Lactant. Instit. Lib. 2. Cap. 7.
and for believing that their Temples had so much the more Majesty, by how much
they were gay and adorned. So the Church of England speaking of Church Images,
Precious Vestures, Hom. against the Peril of Idol. and Superstitious decking of
Churches. Part I. p. 12.
and other Glittering Ornaments of the Church; says, they have nothing at all
profited such as were Wise and of Understanding, but have greatly hurt the
simple and unwise, occasioning 'm thereby to commit most horrible Idolatry.

Objection, But Organs are helps to Devotion. You must know Sir that generally
we are a Parcel of dull Souls, especially at Church, and the Senses of too many
of us are extremely stupify'd by Banly Opiats, that the most charming Magic in
our Rubric cannot possibly revive us; and therefore have Thought of this
Organical Expedient to New-vamp our Devotion. For, the Truth on it is, we are
even tired (and I believe the most laborious Plowman or Ditcher in the Parish,
would not like it as hard as the Times are) to be served with Coleworts all the
Year round, and therefore we are fully resolved to get a few Ecclesiastical
Dainties to revive our drooping Spirits.

To which I Answer in these following Particulars.

(1.) The Learned Bishop Burnet says, Bishop B's. Abridg. of the Hist. of the
Church of England, Edit. 2. Preface p. 7.
All the helps to Devotion, that the Gospel offers are in every one's Hands.
But Organs are not in every Bodies Hands, and therefore according to his
Judgment are no helps to Devotion. (2.) I must needs say, that is even a sad
lame Devotion, that stands in need of a few tweedling Organ-pipes to make it
more brisk and lively. Methinks by the Air of this Objection your Organical
Friends want a little Bottl'd Ale, or a Dram of the Cask, but because the
Kirk-Wardens will not allow the Temple to be turned into a Tipling-House,
therefore you must have something else for that Time, to elevate your depressed
Minds; and nothing like to a pair of rousing melodious Organs.
Surely Sir, we have a great many Phlegmatich Sinners among us, and I wish there
be no Saulites in the Hierarchy, when there is such violent Application made to
Musical Diversions and Organical Plays. The Learned Parous says, that, to
Advocate for Organs is impertinent, for adds he, In the Church the Mind is not
to be raised to God, and spiritual Joy, by Pipes, Trumpets, and Timbrels (which
God of old indulged his People who were of a stiff neck and dull stupid Mind)
but by sacred Sermons, Hinc vero Organorum usum templis velle defendere ineptum
est -- In Ecclesia excitandus est animus ad Deum and loetitiam non tibiis,
tubis tympanis (quod veteri durae cervicis and stupidae mentis populo Deus olim
indulsit) sed sacris concionibus, Psalmodiis and Hymnis. Com. in 1 Cor. 14.7.
p. 599. Edit. 2de.
Psalms and Hymns -- Observe here, (1.) He calls the Votaries of Organs a
foolish impertinent sort of People. And it is no wonder, he brands 'm with so
black a Character, when they leave the Substance and run after the Shadow. When
an Heir is impleaded for an Idiot, the Judge commands an Apple -- or a Counter
-- with a Piece of Gold -- to be set before him, to try which he will take; and
if he takes the Apple, or the Counter, and leave the Gold; he is then cast for a
Fool: For he knows not the value of things, or how to make a true Election. And
are not our Organical Sinners thus foolish? For when Bugels, and Diamonds,
Brass Counters, and Gold are set before 'm; they leave the Diamonds and Gold of
the Gospel, and please 'mselves with the Ceremonious Toys, and Baubles of an
abrogated Law. And (2.) He Asserts, that spiritual Joy is not raised by Musical
Instruments; and if so, then the Church-use of Organs is notoriously
impertinent. (3) He adds, that the Jews were indulged in the use of 'm, because
they were a stiff-necked stupid People. Now, methinks, our Organical Neighbors
look as like a parcel of Stubborn Jews, as one Egg to another; and some of 'm
are as stiff-necked Bigots, as ever the Jerusalem Jews were when besieged by
Vespasian; and as an evidence of their more than Jewish Bigotry, they make
Idols of Ceremonies, and had rather see the Kingdom run down with Protestant
Blood than Part with the least Hemm of a Consecrated Frock; but they (forward
Souls) will step more than half way over the Hedge to meet his Holiness of Rome.

But lest you should think I Am a little too uncharitable, give me leave to tell
you, I deliver not my own Judgment, but that of the Church of England her self,
for she in her Discourse of Ceremonies -- has this remarkable Passage -- And
whereas in this our Time, the Minds of Men are so diverse, that some think it a
great Matter of Conscience to depart from a piece of the least of their
Ceremonies, they be so addicted to their Old Customs --

And that you have a Pack of dull Animals in the Prelatical Constitution, you
acknowledged to me in your Fourth Letter, wherein you added, That these were
the Poor Creatures that stood in need of a little Organical Assistance, and
'twas an Act of Charity to relieve 'm; and you may remember that in my Answer,
I resolved this, and a great many other Parochial Irregularities into the
Ignorance, ill Morals, and ill Conduct of some dignified Drones among us, who
labor more for the Fleece than for the Flock. But then Sir, I made a
Distinction, and in particular assured you, that the Parson of my own Parish,
was a Man of good Morals, good Learning and of great Pains; and therefore was
justly excluded from those Censures. If all that wear his Coat had but his
Learning, and exemplary Life; I Am sure our Critical Adversaries would have no
grounded occasion to hit us in the Teeth with the Scandals of Clergymen.

(3.) If Organs may be used in Church-Worship, to elevate our Affections? Why
may not other Inventions be added, that may as effectually Answer the same End?
I Will grant you as much as you desire, that Music may accidentally elevate a
drousie Mind; but so do a great many other things, as a Skeleton, a Bloody
Lamb, Devotional Images and Pictures, and the Crucisix, if you're in the Humor
to believe Lutherans and Romans; but must they therefore be brought into
Church, and made a Part of the Ceremonial Service? Risum teneatis --

(4.) Are Organs helps to Devotion? The Papists say the same of their Images,
Crucifixes, Lighted Candles, and all the stupendous Relics mentioned in their
Celebrated Legends.

Bellarmine makes a hideous Clamor about's Altars, Crosses, Images, Apud nos
Altaria, Cruces, Imagines --
Relics and pictured Walls, those are they, says he, that stir up Persons to
Piety. This is the very Language of our Organical Votaries: By which we may
Conjecture, that there is a Snake in the Grass, for they cannot plead for an
Organ, or Chant out an Ecclesiastical Ode, but the Old Cardinals Cant must be
the Burden of the Song, and then off it go's with a Bongrace.

The Papists say, they don't adore the Image, but only use it as a visible
medium as they do Organs, Ne Imagini quidem Christi in quantum est lignum
Sculptum ulla datur reverentia. Aquinas.
by which they Worship the Invisible God; and yet we count that Idolatry in 'm,
and Pray Sir, are not our Organical Worshippers equally Guilty? Or is that a
Virtue in our Members of the English Reformed Church, which is a Vice in the
Panders of the painted Jezabel of Rome? And upon the same pretense as Organs
are introduced into Divine Service, the Walls of our Church may be filled with
devotional Pictures to inflame the. Affections; in fine what is there that an
English Protestant can say for an Organ, which an Italian Papist will not say
for a Crucifix and Carved Images, the darling Instruments of Romish Devotion:
The Truth on it is, for you to assert that by the use of Organical Melody your
Affections are raised to the Supreme Being, is in Effect the same, as if a
Woman should say, that she keeps Company with another Man to raise her
Affections to her absent Husband.

(5.) By this Objection, you acknowledge not only the grievous lameness of your
Church-Devotion, but the ineffectualness of the Common Prayer to Cure it;
otherwise, what need of consulting the Vitalian Oracle? This puts me in mind of
Serenus Cressy, Vid. his Letter to Mr. B. about Baker's Book.
who forsook the Church of England, because (as be says) he found no spiritual
Devotion in it. And Hutchinson, alias, "Berry the Priest Writes, B. Cain and
Abel, p. 134, 135.
That the most of serious Godliness among English Protestants is found among
those called Puritans. But I Am sure, the Modern Puritans have more Charity for
their Friends and Neighbors, than the Objector's Catholic Friend has.

Here Is then a very considerable defect acknowledged; that the Prayers and
Preachments of the Church are liveless and dull, for the Affections of these
Organical Gentlemen are not excited by them, but that we may not always be dull
and drousy; here is a Muisical expedient thought upon, and the Church-Worship
shall be turned into a Stage-diversion, and an Artificial contrivance: and
which (I think) should it universally prevail, will transform all Religion into
mere Mechanism. However, I am glad to hear your languishing Devotion is of the
mending Hand; and that you are resolved to shake off that Ecclesiastical Rust,
which your Affections have contracted for the want of rousing and powerful
Pulpiteers. But oh the strange Effects of Organ-Pipes! What charming influence
have they on dull and Melancholy Souls! And now therefore, who more happy than
the Inhabitants of Organical Parishes? By consecrated Bells, they can drive
away the Infernal Hobgoblins, (if they have but Faith enough to Believe what a
Spanish Jesuit will Swear to be true) and by the help of a pair of Melodious
Organs, they may Conjure not only the lazy and Ess-hole, but all the
Calvinistical Parishioners to Church, and so their Pews shall be as throng as
three in a Bed.

This puts me in Mind of a certain Philosopher, who complained that when he
spoke Soberly to the People, they gave him no Audience but playing on's Pipes
Multitudes floct after him.

Oh rare Melody! What pity it is all our Parlors are not Converted into so many
pompous Theatrical Quires; and that all our Bairnes and Servants are not
trained up in this Organical way. What more revicing than a Canonical Consort
of Music! What strange and wonderful feats have been performed by the
Melodious charms of Musical Pipes.

These were the sweet Sirens that charmed the famous Ulysses and's Companions.
And Theophrastus tells us, that by the Art of Music the pain of the Hip-Gout
has been cured. Here Is good news to our Gouty-Parishioners; if they can but
make shift to creep to Church and lay their left Ear to the leading Organ-Pipe,
the Cure is Effected, only they must be sure to pay the Piper, for Money is all
-- Nay Zenocrates cured Madmen by the means of Music. Well then, if you will be
advised by a Friend; send your Organical Music to New-Bedlam, and first try
the experiment there, for I Am sure there are many in that dismal Place that
want help: Particularly two forlorn Church Parsons, Mr. Pr -- d. Who you will find
'ith Tenth Figure. And Mr. Perkins, who was put in but few Months ago by my
Lord Mayor upon the Request of his Grace of Canterbury, as the public News
told us. I Would have you make trial of skill on 'm, for a good pair of Organs are
an admirable Catholicon; and therefore don't despair of success. And when
you have turned Bedlam into a College of Wisdom, I do assure you, I Will heartily
join Hand and Heart with you, and be the most forward in the Crowd to Cry, Oh
happy Cathedralists! And what mighty Advantage have those that dwell near a
Cathedral or an Organical Church! Where a Man Ears shall be constantly regail'd
with Harmonious Melody, and the Health of the Body secured by the secret Charms
of Canonical chanting: And what is more (for we have reserved the best Wine till
last) the sweet and Melodious sound of the Pipes (especially if they be
consecrated) will Effectually dispel all gloomy Thoughts out of your Minds, and
you shall be as Merry as forty Beggars in a Barn, and never fall any more into
the Quagmire of Melancholy and madness. But after all the Patriarchs of St.
David's, and St. Asaph, must confess that the charming Melody of Organs has not
been able to preserve the Sacred Quire from the great Plague of Simony. But
both Church and State have honorably Acquitted 'emselves from this Guilt, by
exposing the Criminals to the Righteous and public Censure of the Law.

But pray Sir, to be serious, upon what bottom do your Friends and you go? I Have
been told you cannot regularly Erect a pair of Organs in your Parish Church,
unless you be Authorized by some just Power; either by the King, Parliament,
Convocation, Canons, or Rubric. And if you're not authorized by these or some
or one of 'm, I humbly conceive you're accountable to Authority for a breach of
the Law of Uniformity. But I Am sure you have no power from His Majesty, no
warrant from any Statute Enacted by Parliament, nor from any Canon, or any
Convocation, nor from any Rubric in our English-Common-Prayer-Book, for the
setting up Organ-Worship in your Parochial Church. And many of the Learned are
of Opinion, that according to the Act of Uniformity, and the Constitution of
the Church of England, no particular Pastor of a Parish Church is allowed to
introduce new Rites and Modes of Worship into his Parish Church over and above
what are Appointed by the Act of Uniformity, without a warrant either from a
Parliament, or Convocation.

The Church of England her self speaks expressly to this very purpose in her
Discourse, about the Abolition of Ceremonies, Her Words are, That no Man ought
to take in Hand, or presume to appoint -- any public or common Order in
Christ's Church, except he be lawfully called, and authorized thereunto. Pray
then Sir, have not your Organical Friends by their appointing this new Model of
Worship, outrun Canons, Convocations, Rubricks, and Homilies, and traveled as
far as Rome it self before some of their Brethren have crept as far as
Canterbury? And pray Sir, may not overdoing the Rule, as well as underdoing?
May Not excesses as well as defects in reference to the same Canon be a real
Schism in the Church? How comes it to pass that only defects in Dissenters are
Sins, and yet excesses in Conformists are such Virtues? Why is it that a Man may
advance toward Rome and be no Schismatic, but yet one glance of the Eye
toward Geneva makes him a damnable one: What is it no Crime in a Churchman to
out run the Constable? In a word, may not the Statute of Uniformity be violated
by a Supra-Conformity, as well as by Subter-Conformity? And if so, your
Organ-Adorers ought to be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored until
they Repent and publicly revoke this wicked Error, As to Mr. Baxter's
Arguguments for Organs, I Am ready to account for 'm if called upon --

And as to the Parish it self, where these Organs are to be Erected: It Is
reported to be generally poor, and not without just reasons, complains bitterly
of some late unreasonable Impositions laid upon it by Lay-kirk-Officers. And
Sir, shall we encourage 'm to add to the Burden? For you know that the
purchase of a pair of Organs will be very chargeable. And must the Purses of
the poor Parishioners be squeezed again to gratify the Musical fancy of a few
Persons, that are a little more Merrily given than their mortified Neighbors.

Besides, will any of our Friends be so unnatural to Posterity, as to entail
perpetual Italian Gabels, as an Inheritance upon 'm? For you and they cannot but
know, that a pair of Organs will be a constant Charge to the Parish; and you have
already more Poor than you're well able to maintain.

Therefore in the Name of the Poor of the Parish, what do you mean? Will you
bring in the Babylonian Bell and Dragon among 'm, to devour 'm a live? I Have
read that Pharoah's Lean Kine eat up the Fat Ones; but for the Fat Ones to eat
up the Lean, is most horridly unconscionably. But thus it is in some Towns and
Parishes, as in some Fish Ponds, Five or Ten great Jacks devour all the small
Fry; and so if things go on at this rate; in a short time we must all join in
Consort with the Jovial Beggar and sing, A begging we willgo --

The poor Parishioners must throw away their Money upon Organs; when ('tmay be)
their Family want Bread at home. Nay, and these poor Sheep must not bleat
neither, though severely clipped; they must be dumb, and if any of them be so mad
as plead Poverty, or complain of Oppression, then a parcel of sinful Scoundrels
are immediately sent to rifle the House, and these (forsooth) are authorized to
turn Auctioneers, and to sell the Poor man's Goods by an inch of Candle; and
his Neighbor for's impertinence is consigned over to the Ecclesiastical
Purgatory, (the most intolerable Grievance that the English Nation this Day
groans under Notes in usum Sarum p.
) where he is worri'd out of's Life, by a mercyless Crew of Infernal Locusts,
that feed upon the Sins of the People.

Now Sir, it is hoped you're in some measure convinced how you and your
Organical Companions, have Erred and strayed from your Ways like lost Sheep,
and have followed too much the Devices and desires of your own Hearts -- for,
from the whole, it is evident that Organ-Worship, was part of the Ceremonial
Law, which is now abrogated; that the Apostolical and Primitive Fathers, have
not as much as a favorable Sentence to befriend the Cause of your admired
Organs, that Organ-Worship is a Popish Neoterical practice, foisted into the
Church, when Churchmen had prostituted 'mselves to the Babylonian Whore; and
ever since this and such like Meritorious Pomp has been accounted the greatest
Splendour of the Romish Hierarchy.

The Church of England her self has born a very ample Testimony against you,
and what will the true Sons of the Church, as they call 'mselves, have no
Umbrage of regard to her grave Dictates? To own her as a Mother, and yet to
slight her Advice, shows that you mind your beloved Organs more than your Fifth
Commandment. In a forequoted place, the Church complains bitterly of the excess
and Multitude of Ceremonies, that the burden of 'm was intolerable -- These
are her own Words. And what will you add more, when your good Ancient Mother
complains there are too many already? One would think that they that cry up the
Church, the Church, should show greater degrees of Reverence to her Maternal
Authority, and not prefer sensitive Contentments before their Mothers Blessing.

But I perceive that those who Proclaim themselves the Sons of the Church (and
pray make Room for them, for they be bulky ones, God bless 'm) after all, are
but a parcel of overgrown Children, that are past Correction: And Children
will be Children still, and therefore no wonder, that there are so many taken
up with Childish Toys and Bartholomew trifles, but one would think you and your
Musical Acquaintance big enough to be ashamed to ride upon a Penny Colt, or a
two Penny Gelding; tho the famous Alcibiades did once (to please a Child)
Condescend

Ludere par impar equitare arundine longa. To play the Fool at Even or Old
And for a Hobbyhorse ride a Rod.
But if Organs are so eminently useful, pray shall I ask you a few Innocent
Questions before we part.

1. Why have you been so long without 'm? No doubt but ye are the Men, and
Wisdom shall dye with you. But how then comes it to pass that you did not think
sooner of this Ecclesiastical Artillery to mend your crazy Devotion? Or were
our Organical Friends born under a Midsummer-Moon? Whether they were or not, I
dare not pretend to so much Astrology as to determine it. But sure I am, the
Lord of their First-House was wonderfully culminant, or else it is impossible it
should ever enter into their Pericrany's to advance Folly and Vanity, Pride and
Pomp into the Ecclesiastical Throne in so notorious a manner.

2. If Music in Divine Worship be so good; why don't you add more Musical
Instruments? For good added to good, makes the greater good; and you know two
good things are better than one, and the more the Merryer. Ay but nothing
compared to a pair of Organs: Oh Organs! dainty brave Organs! they are all in
all, the very Cream of the jest and Prim'st Jannock 'ith oon. In a word, we have
luckily hit upon a Soverain Remedy that'l never fail to rouse up the most
Phlegmatic Endymion in the Paroch.

3. If there be such Excellency in Organs, why are there so many Parishes that
were never yet honored with a Choir of Musical Levites? If they are ignorant,
and don't know the worth of this sort of Musical Devotion: Then the Beams of
the Ecclesiastical Light are not so diffusive and penetrating as is usually
pretended, and our Parochial Guides are accountable for this our damnable Sin
of Ignorance. But and if they be poor, and cannot purchase and maintain a pair
of Expenceful Organs without selling their Patrimony; then in the Name of the
poor Parishes of England, I humbly beg and beseech all Parsons (by what Names
or Titles soever dignified or distinguished) who have their hundreds and their
thousands per Annnm, to contribute toward the purchasing of Religious Organs
for 'm, and toward the Annual charge that attend them; But mum, not a Penny
I Will secure you.

But it is time to think of parting, for it is late: And besides, you know it is
excessive Cold; and that our Consort of vocal and Instrumental Music has
lasted long; longer than any that has been known in Salisbury-Court for these
Seven Years last past.

(...) pray Sir, Excuse my freedom, and attribute the Exorbitancy of my Pen, to
that pleasant motion which the very thoughts of Melodious Music put upon my
juvenile Blood. And as to this trouble, I question not, but you will be so just as
to place it to your own Account, because your excess of Reverence for
Ecclesiastical Music, and your earnest Request to me for my Sentiments about
it, drew it upon your self; and I hope you will Love me never the less, because I
part abruptly, and conclude without Ceremony,

SIR, Yours Affectionately to serve you without the Accent of Organs.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Letter to a Friend in the Country, concerning the Use of Instrumental Music
in the Worship of God: In Answer to Mr. Newte's Sermon Preached at Tiverton in
Devon, on the Occasion of an Organ being Erected in that Parish Church. Printed
for A. Baldwin, at the Oxfard-Arms in Warwick Lane, School.


