Francis Douee.


A VOYAGE TO SURATT.

A VOYAGE TO SURATT, In the Year, 1689.

Giving a large Account of that City, and its Inhabitants, and of the English
Factory there.

Likewise a Description of Madeira, St. Jago, Annobon, Cabenda and Malemba
(upon the Coast of Africa) St. Helena, Johanna, Bombay, the City of Muscatt,
and its Inhabitants in Arabia Felix, Mocha, and other Maritine Towns upon the
Red Sea, the Cape of good Hope, and the Island Ascension.

To which is addded an Appendix, containing I. The History of a late Revolution
in the Kingdom of Golconda. II. A description of the Kingdoms of Arracan and
Pegu. III. An Account of the Coins of the Kingdoms of India, Persia, Golconda,
etc. IV. Observations concerning the Silk worms.

By J. Ovington, M. A. Chaplain to his Majesty.

Qui mores Hominum multorum vidit and urbes. Horat.

-- Orbesque novos trans aequora pandit. Grot.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges Head in Fleet Street, near the
Inner-Temple-Gate. 1696.

To his EXCELLENCY, CHARLES Earl of Dorset and Middlesex: Lord Chamberlain of
his Majesty's Household; Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, etc. And
one of the Lords Justices of England.
May it please your Excellency,
AS the Eastern Princes, upon the News of any Foreigner's Arrival, are wont to
expect some Curiosities of the Place from whence he came, to prepare the way
for his Reception, and Introduce the Stranger into their Presence; so, in
imitation of this respectful Custom, this Foreign Voyage hopes for admittance
to your Favor and Acceptance, upon that Stock of Novelty which it presumes
upon; and which it brings with it as well from Africa, as several remoter Parts
and Kingdoms of the East: For in those Places, there are several Things here
taken notice of, which have escaped the Observations of other Travelers. I
need not mention, my Lord, with what facility you can employ your Judgment, to
penetrate into all that is any where useful, whilst your vigorous Fancy can as
readily present to you all that is divertive in its Entertainment. And though I
confess I have very great Reason to dread the strictness of your Censure, upon
the strength of your admirable Endowments; yet methinks I find a relief to this
Fear, in that Native Candor, which so easily tempers the Accuracy of your
Thoughts with favorable Constructions.

But I will not transgress those Measures of Civility, of which your EXCELLENCY
is so absolute a Master, by being too tedious in this Address; nor there-
violate those Decencies and Respects, which your Practice recommends so fully
to the World, and of which none have had more sensible Demonstration than my
self: Especially considering how much is due to you from the Sacred Order,
which you treat with that constant uncommon Civility, as if you designed to
balance that Contempt, which is too apt to be cast upon it: Imitating, as in
other Perfections, so in this too, the Ancient Poets, who instructed Men in
Reverencing not only the Gods, but in a due Regard to such as were their
immediate Servants; and in all things maintaining still that Greatness by your
Munificence, which you freely part with in your Condescensions. I need not
determine, with how much Reason the Eastern Subjects ascribe this Character to
their Emperors, That their Royal Condition is owing to their Merits, and that
they as far transcend other Mortals in those, as they do in Power; but I am
satisfied, it is the unquestionable Loyalty, Prudence, Greatness of Mind, and
other Virtues, which have justly raised you to that Sphere, wherein you move,
kindly influencing the Affairs of this great Kingdom; and from whence you look
down, like the Heavenly Bodies, from the highest Orb, with a kind and obliging
Aspect. And that their other Opinion of their Princes, That they are the
Adopted Sons of Heaven, may be your happy Portion too, is not more unfeignedly
desired by any, than

Your EXCELLENCY's Most Obedient, Most Obliged, and Devoted Servant. J.
Ovington.

TO Mr. J. OVINGTON, ON HIS VOYAGE TO SURATT.
HArd is our Task to Read with fruitless Pain,
The Dreams of every Cloistered Writers Brain:
Who yet presume that Truth's firm Paths they tread,
When all the while through wild Utopia's led,
With Faiery-Feasts, instead of Science fed.
As dreaming Wizzards Midnight Journeys take,
And weary with imagined Labor wake,
So vain is Speculation's fancied Flight:
But search of Nature gives sincere Delight.
Through her vast Book the World, a curious Eye
May Wonders in each pregnant Page descry,
Make new Remarks, which Reason may reduce
To Humane Benefit, and Public Use.
Then Happy they who quit their private Home,
And gen'rously through Foreign Climates roam;
Who, like Ulysses, can despise the Toil,
And make each Land they meet their Native Soil.
See Men and Manners scarce by Rumor known:
Visit all Countries to improve their own.
But ah! how few, my Friend, with your Design,
On such Discov'ries bound, have crossed the Line!
For sordid Gain, new Worlds they will descry,
Seize Nature's Wealth, but pass her Wonders by.
Their Fleet returns oppressed with Trafficks Weight,
But Knowledge makes no part of all the Freight.
Yet this, of Old, was Jason's Noble Prize;
'Twas this that placed his Argo in the Skies:
Experience was the far-fetcht Golden Fleece,
The Prize so much admired by Ancient Greece,
From whence may be inferred what Thanks are due
From Britain's Sons, Industrious Friend, to you.
Fame shall in State, your useful Book Install
In Bodley's Pile, the Muses Capitol.
You have so lively your Discoveries Writ,
We Read and Voyage with you as we sit,
With you hoise Sail and reach the Indian shore;
The real Scene could scarce delight us more.
As when some Prophet from a Trance awakes,
And to Attentive Crowds Description makes
Of Wonders, which he did in Rapture view,
The Listners think they see the Vision too.
Thus, Entertained with Nature and with Art,
We hear your Travels told, and well-pleased Guests depart.
N. TATE.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Principal Places and Things.
THE Island of Madeira. p. 4 The Island of St. Jago. 38 The Island of Annobon.
54 The Coast of Africa. 59 Malemba on the Coast of Africa. 73 The Island of St.
Helena. 89 The Island of Johanna. 108 The Island of Bombay. 129 The Island of
Elephanta. 158 Of the Great Mogul. 165 The City of Suratt. 214 The Moor
Inhabitants of Suratt. 235 The Bannians at Suratt. 275 The Faquires near
Suratt. 359 The Persies at Suratt. 371 The Halalchors at Suratt. 382 The
English Factory at Suratt. 385 The Confinement of the English at Suratt, in the
Year, 1691, 1692. 410 Muscatt in Arabia Felix. 420 Mocha and other Places on
the Red Sea. 447 The Cape of Good Hope. 479 The Island of Ascension. 512 The
late Revolution in the Kingdom of Golconda. 525 The Kingdom of Arracan. 553 The
Kingdom of Pegu. 583 The several Coyns in India, Persia, etc. Observations
concerning the Nature of the Silkworms. 599
The Reader is desired to Correct these Errata following, viz.
PAge 182. line 25. after the Throne, read, the Titles of the King of Bisnagar,
p. 109. l. 9. for gralis r. gratis, p. 171. l 8. r. pursue for pursue, p. 393.
l. 11. for place r. plate, p. 397. l. 10. for added r. clodded, p. 493. l. ult.
dele of before all.

A VOYAGE TO SURATT, etc.
ON April the 11th, The Ship's departure from England.
1689. the Memorable Day, whereon their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary
were Crowned, did the Ship Benjamin break ground from Gravesend, toward her
intended Voyage to Suratt in the East Indies. Whither she was sent as an
Advice-Ship of that wonderful Revolution, whereby their Sacred Majesty's were
peaceably settled in the Throne, and had been received with the Universal Joy of
all the Nation. In all places where we came, we were welcomed with loud and
cheerful Acclamations, and were entertained with unusual Congratulations and
Respect, as happy Messengers of as grateful News, as ever arrived in those
Parts. They were every where truly sensible of their unexpected Deliverance
from that Misery and Thraldom which even there threatened them, and likewise of
the invaluable Blessing of living under a Peaceable Government, free from their
former Apprehensions, either of violence upon their Temporal Enjoyments, or
disturbance to the Tranquillity of their Minds.

We had not long left the Lands-End of England, before we espied a great Fleet
of Ships, which appeared to us at a distance like a floating Forest, and seized
us with no little Consternation. Their lying off not far from Breast, made us
for some time conjecture them to be French, till we were happily undeceived by
the approach of an English Frigot, which discovered them to be Friends.
However, one of our Company, who had faithfully engaged to stand by us, and on
whose Assistance we depended, without any Ceremony, being apprehensive of the
danger, clapped upon a wind, and so left us.

After this, we kept on our course with a favorable Wind, till we arrived at
Madeira, a small Island appertaining to the Crown of Portugal, situated about
the Two and Thirtieth Degree of Latitude; it is in length, about Twenty Five
Miles, about Eight or Ten broad, and Sixty in its Circumference.

THE ISLAND OF MADEIRA.
The Island of Madeira.
THis Island, as we are informed by good Historians, was first discovered by
John Gonsalvo and Tristan, under the Patronage of Henry Infanto of Portugal.
But the present Inhabitants give us a different Account of its Discovery, viz.
That in the Year 1344. an English Gentleman, The discovery of this Island by
the English.
having Married a Lady of a considerable Fortune, and setting out with her for
France from the Port of Bristol, was by gusty weather, and opposite winds,
driven into this Island: Where, upon his Landing, finding it a forlorn Place,
both Uncultivated and Unpeopled, he fell into an extreme fit of Melancholy, and
yielding too much to that black Distemper, contributed by his own Death to make
it still the more desolate. The Mariners however, who were not so readily
dejected at this Misadventure, set Sail with their Vessel, and landed safely on
the Coast of Barbary; where, after some Refreshment and Respite upon the place,
they fortunately fell into the Company of some Ingenious Portuguese; to whom,
after a little Conference, they Related the Hardships of the Voyage, the
Situation and Native Pleasantness of the uninhabited, but most habitable Island
they had left, and the just hopes and prospect they had of regaining a sight of
it, were they but provided with Ships and Men. This excited the Attention of
the Portuguese, and likewise, without much reluctance, procured their Promise
of endeavoring with their Prince to incline him to hearken to these Proposals,
and likewise to equip them with Necessaries and Conveniences for a second
Undertaking: And succeeding with him according to their wishes, they set
forward, found the Island, landed their Men, and in a short time converted the
Wilderness into a Garden of Pleasure.

The discovery of this Island by the Portuguese.
Some say Madeira was discovered by the Portuguese, in Anno 1429. and derived
its Name from the abundance of Wood that grew there. It was overspread with
Wildernesses and plenty of Trees, (which gave it this Name,) as with one entire
Wood; the tedious thoughts of cutting down which, persuaded them to a more
speedy Method of destroying it by fire. After it was kindled, the Flames grew
to such a head, raged so violently, and by degrees became so furious, that the
People were forced for their Ease and Preservation, to betake themselves to the
water, to avoid the violence of the heat.

The reason of the fruitfulness of the Island.
The remaining Ashes contributed so much to the Fertility of the Ground, that it
at first produced sixty for one, the fruitful Vines brought forth more Grapes
than Leaves, Clusters of two or three spans length; and in all its Products,
their Beauty and Fertility were so remarkable, that it gained the Title of the
Queen of Islands.

Its good Air.
The Air here, to which the Pleasure as well, as Health of Humane Life is so
much owing, is generally very Temperate and undisturbed, and the Heavens
smiling and serene. For those Climates which are placed between the Thirtieth
and Fortieth Degrees of Latitude, enjoy a Temperature, generally very equal and
convenient, infested neither with the excess of Heat, nor rigid Coldness, but
moderately participating of those troublesome Extremes. They seem indisputably
to be most suited to the Pleasantness of Humane Life, and accommodated to our
Constitutions; affording that delight to the Body, which Virtue imparts to the
Mind, in avoiding all excesses, as dangerous and ungrateful, and opposite to
the Ease, as well of the Sensitive, as Intellectual Part.

The principal Town is Tunchal or Tonzal, some of them term it Funchal, The
Metropolis.
from the abundance of Fennel which they say grew there. It Is the sole place of
Trade, from whence they Export all their Wine and their Sugar, which is
esteemed superior to any in the world.

The adjacent Rural Places are very Mountainous; but however, they Rival the
Valleys in Fruftfulness and Delight; tho both are much fallen from their
Primitive Fertility, and instead of sixty for one, which was the Original
Increase, The present decay of the Island's Fertility.
have gradually descended to twenty five. Seven or eight Rivers with variety of
Rivulets refresh the place, which fall down from the Mountains, which,
notwithstanding their height and steepness, are Planted and Improved, as well
as the most Champaign ground in England. At the utmost top of the high Hills,
the Corn thrives well, but the abundance of Clouds that breed there, are
prejudicial to the Grapes.

Four sorts of Grapes that make the Wine.
The main product of the Island is Grapes, brought hither first from Candy, of
which there are three or four kinds, whereof they make their Wine. One is
colored like Champaign, of little esteem; another is more strong and pale as
White Wine; the third sort is rich and delicious, called Malmsey; the fourth is
Tento, equalling Tent in color, but far inferior in Taste; it is never drunk
unless in other Wines, with which it is mixed to give them a Tincture, and to
preserve them. And for fermenting and feeding them, they bruise and bake a
certain Stone, called Jess, of which nine or ten pounds are thrown into each
Pipe. The singular Virtue of the Madeira Wine.
The Madeira Wine has in it this peculiar Excellence, of being meliorated by
the heat of the Sun when it is pricked, if the Bunghole being opened it is
exposed to the Air.

The Product of the Vine is equally divided between the Proprietor and him that
gathers and presses the Grapes; and yet for the most part the Merchant is
Thriving and Rich, whilst the Grape-gatherer, employed by him, is but Poor.
Among the Merchants, the Jesuits are ^one of the meanest, who every where
contend for precedence in Fortune, as well as in place; and have here secured
the Monopoly of Malmsey, The Jesuits Monopoly of Malmsey.
of which there is but one good Vineyard in the whole Island, which is entirely
in their possession. Twenty Thousand Pipes of Wine, The quantity of Wine which
the Island produces.
by a modest Computation, may be reckoned the Annual Increase of the Grapes,
which number is thus exhausted and spent. Eight Thousand are thought to be
drunk upon the Island, three or four are wasted in Leekage, and the remainder
is Transported, most of it to the West Indies, especially to Barbados, where
it is drunk more liberally than other European Wines.

Sucket a choice Sweetmeat.
Plenty of Citrons grow here, of which the Natives make a delicate Sweetmeat,
called Sucket; and load with it yearly two or three small Ships for France. The
Excellence of the Sugar.
The Sugar which in candying them they make use of, and is often effectually
prescribed against Consumptions, is but rarely transported, because of its
scarcity, which hardly supplies the Necessities of the Island.

The scarcity of Corn.
They are some years under great want of Corn, because the Grain that grows here
produces no great Plenty; so that sometimes they are threatened with Famine: For
prevention of which, while I was there, they used their Authority in Pressing
Ships which anchored in the Road, and commanded them, before they would allow
them any Commerce, to the Azores Islands, to Import a quantity for their
subsistence.

The several Fruits.
This Island affords store of Peeches, Apricocks, Plumbs, Cherries, Figgs, and
Walnuts; and the English Merchants, allowed to Reside and Traffic here, have
transplanted from England Currants, Gooseberries, Philberts, etc. which are more
kindly entertained in this Soil, than many of their Fruits are with ours, whose
coldness and moisture are not so proper for the pregnancy of the Fruits of a
hot Climate. The Bonanoe is with them in singular esteem, Their fanciful Notion
concerning the Bonanoe.
and even veneration, affecting the Palate with that sensible sweetness, that it
gains with them the credit of being the Forbidden Fruit. And for confirmation
of this Surmise, they produce the extent of their Leaves, which being of a
large size, they infer from thence, their fitness to make Aprons for Adam and
Eve, to veil their Nakedness. It Is almost a Crime inexpiable to cut this Fruit
with a Knife, which after dissection gives a faint similitude of our Savior
Crucified; and this they say is to wound his Sacred Image. Oranges and Lemons
abound here in that Plenty, that I have seen them drop into our Dishes, as we
sat at Dinner under their delightful Boughs, and opportunely prevented the
trouble of rising up to pluck them, by freely offering themselves to our wants.
And these, tho they are in my Opinion as inviting as their Celebrated Fruit,
and yield as useful and kind Refreshment to the Stomach, must yet not be
suffered to vie delicacie, with their Venerable Admired Bonanoe, which by the
awful Impressions of a powerful Priest upon the Thoughts of the Vulgar,
commences Sacred, and must not be violated by the bold Attempt of any Weapon
upon it.

The English Merchants here, which are not reckoned above a dozen, imitate the
English way of Living in their City and Country Houses; and, wearied with the
Town, divert themselves in their Rural Plantations, to which they gave us
English that were Strangers a Solemn Invitation; A description of a pleasant
Entertainment.
and placed us under the spreading boughs of Oranges and Lemons, with living
Springs under their refreshing shade. Nature here displayed to us a Scene of
Joy and Love, and waited on us in all her Pomp, in all the Delights and
Beauties of the Field. The Hills were all covered with Vines, and the Valleys
with ripe Grapes, which yielded us a fragrant smell from the fruitful
Vineyards. The Groves and Woods were all sprightly and gay, nothing seemed to
us drooping or languid, but all things smiled round about the place of our
Entertainment. The Air was clear, and made Melodious by the Voices of Birds.
The Ships and Ocean were at a convenient distance, whereon we looked, and still
new Charms sprung from that admirable variety of Objects, whither soever we
turned our Eyes, and all things conspired to yield together a ravishing
satisfaction to our Senses. Thus we spent the day in abundance of delight,
happy and retired from Melancholy and all disturbance.

The ordinary Food of the poorer sort, The Food of the poor People.
is little else in the time of the Vintage, but Bread and ripe Grapes; which
simple Nourishment affords sufficient pleasure and delight, when it meets with
true Hunger, which never fails of Cooking the Meat with a gusto for the Palate.
For Pulses and Leguminous Food, as it was a great part of the Diet of our
Forefathers and Antediluvian Patriarchs, and very Congenial to the Nature of
Man; so is this spare Food, with a very moderate mixture of Flesh, the frequent
Repast even of those here of better Note, who find it easily elaborated and
transmitted in such manner as is proper for Digestion; who thereby preserve
their Bodies in Health and Strength, and keep the Crases of the Parts pure,
which are otherwise perverted by Intemperance. The Temperance of the People.
And were it not for this great abstinence in Eating, the danger of Fevers in
the hot Season would be rarely avoided, and the Venereal Excesses to which they
are strangely addicted, with the immoderate heat of the place, would be apt to
put Nature under various disorders. Therefore Men of the greatest Consequence
and Fortune, (whether it be that Sobriety might render them more Spruce and
Amorous for the Exercise of Love, or that they are bred up in an Antipathy to
that gross and scandalous Vice of Drunkenness,) seldom exceed the allowable
bounds of Drinking, and accustom themselves to a very spare Diet. Nor are they
apt to impose their Wine upon others in their ordinary compotations; but the
Servant attending holds the Bottle in his hand, and delivers the Glass to him
that Drinks, to receive from the Servant's hand, who pours out leisurely what
the Guest pleases, either a larger or a less quantity; by which means he that
is intent upon Drinking, may take his Liberty, and he that is willing to
refrain, is not forced. When the Company breaks up, the Porches and Entries of
the Houses, The odd conveniences for Urine.
and particularly the private place behind the door, are allowed for the
convenience of Urine; because that action in the Streets is reputed Indecent,
and liable to the Censure of Drunkenness.

The People very much affect a gravity in their Garb, Their Clothes.
and are clothed all in Black, in complaisance (as I imagine) to the Sacerdotal
Function, and the better to ingratiate with that Profession, which challenges
so much Authority among them. But they cannot live without the gallantry of
wearing the Spado and the Dagger; those inseparable Adjuncts, even of Servants
attending their Masters at the Table, who proudly strut with the Dishes in
their Hands, in that Solemn Garb, with a Basket Hilt to a Sword at least a yard
long, even in the midst of Summer.

Their Houses.
Their Houses too, as well as Clothes, are made without much Expense or
Splendor; neither Curious by the Embellishments of Art without, nor Rich in
Trappings and Furniture within; some of them shoot up a little in height,
without any other Characters of greatness: The generality of them are
flat-roofed, and all of them give admittance to the open Air through the Windows,
which, being without the use of Glass, are kept open all the day, and closed by
Wooden shutters at night.

No venomous Creature upon this Island.
The Soil allows no venomous Inhabitant, nor Creature of Infectious Malignity,
which whether it is peculiar to the Earth or Air, or derivable from some other
cause, I know not; who found nothing in this place different from the
disposition of others of the same Climate.

The Qualities of all Poisons are affirmed by some to be either hot and
inflaming, as Euphorbium; or cold, as Opium; or dry, as Vitriol; all which
qualities may be found in the Elements here, as well as in other Regions, and
therefore apt enough to supply Matter for all Venomous Animals, which for this
reason might be presumed to be found here; and much rather than in the Kingdom
of Ireland, which is a Country of noted Humidity; and no Poisons, they say, are
simply Humid, because Humidity is a quality purely Passive, and of it self
incapable of causing pain.

Lizards, A great number of Lizards.
of which they have here an infinite number, are very destructive to their
Fruits and Grapes, and mighty devourers of whatever they light upon. But Snakes
and Toads, of which in the Indies are such innumerable Multitudes, find here no
Entertainment; there they haunt the Chambers and private Apartments of the
Inhabitants, lurk frequently in the roofs of their Houses, as well as in the
Grass; sometimes they espy them in their Chambers and about their Beds, in the
Walls and Seelings of their Lodgings, and in the dark corners of their Vaults
and Cellars.

The present barrenness of the Island.
The Fertility of this Island is much abated from what it was in the time of its
first Plantation, and the constant breaking up the ground has made it in many
places feeble in its Productions, so that it wholly discourages their Labors,
till it has lain fallow for three or four years; after which time, if there
springs up no Broom, as a token of its following Fruitfulness, they desist from
all their hopes of its Fertility, and conclude it quite Barren. The present
barrenness of much of their Land, reminds them of the growth of their Vices,
The Ingenuous acknowledgment of their sins.
to which they ingenuously ascribe it. Among which, their Effeminate Lewdness
may very well stand in the front of their Accusations, which prevails not a
little, even among those whose double Obligations, of Christians and Married
Persons, should mightily deter them from that sin; Their Lewdness.
especially considering how they may satisfy all their Desires at home, and
double their Pleasure by their Innocence. But vagrant Lusts, like other Fires,
when they once get head, are not easily tamed and stifled, till they consume
those Materials that feed them. This Inconstancy in the Husband encourages (tho
it cannot Legitimate,) the same Levity in the Wife, the weakness of whose Sex
is not so much proof against the Charms of alluring Temptations. Therefore are
the Women here as apt to defraud their Husbands, as the Husbands are to defraud
their Wives, and both equally kind to Strangers, especially the Women, whose
proneness that way, is more excited by their being cloistered and kept in, and
restrained from all Company. Their Appetites are augmented by difficulties, and
increased by being opposed: Quod licet, ingratum est, quod non licet acrius
urit. This made Lycurgus Enact a Decree for keeping up Matrimonial Affection,
That Married Persons should be as cautious as Celibates, to enjoy one another,
and never do it but by stealth.

No Interview before Marriage.
Another reason that offers for their mutual Infidelity, is the Ignorance they
have of each others personal Humors, and unacquaintance with their
dispositions before Marriage, which sometimes is Celebrated before a mutual
Interview has preceeded the Engagement. Whereas a competent time of Courtship
and frequent Visits gives them some Inspection into each others Genius and
Inclinations, engages their mutual Passions and good Liking, by their constant
endearing Presents and Conversation, which by degrees unites their Hearts, and
ripens their Affections for a happy Marriage. For which purpose it is practiced
in some parts of the World, in the very Minority of their Children, who are
engaged by Contract at the years of five or six, as in the Indies.

During our stay upon the Island, a young Gentleman of an advanced Fortune,
which was valued at 60000 Dollars, was engaged in the Courtship of a Lady of
8000, and proceeded to Marriage, without the opportunity of one sight of her
before the Solemnity, besides what was allowed him the day before. He was then,
as it happened, in the Company of her Brother, and espied through a Lattice two
young Ladies, and imagining one of them to be his Mistress, was curious to
enquire, whether of them it was? To which he received no more satisfaction,
than, Tomorrow, Sir, is time enough for that.

In Treating about Marriage, No Marriages with Jews or Moors.
their principal Enquiries are into the Family and Descent of the Courtier, for
prevention of all occasions of the detestable Affinity with Moors and Jews,
which among them are very numerous. To join in Matrimony with any of them, is
esteemed a debasement of her Lineage and Extraction, especially in a Woman that
pretends to Family and Education. But the English Merchant is on the other side
as Reputable, The English Merchants esteemed by them.
and stands as fair in their Accounts; his very Name makes way for his
admittance, and Incorporating into the best Families, especially if any
equality appears in his Fortune; for their subtle Casuists make sometimes an
inequality of Fortune a just Plea for dissolving a Contract. But then, alas!
the English Merchant, if he Marries, must first renounce his Religion, and
abandon the care of his Soul, for the Enjoyment of her in whom he delights. But
that which much surpised me, was the prohibition of an Old Gentlewoman, to the
Proceedings of a Young Pretender to her Daughter, A strange conception against
Marriage.
upon this Account; because she was informed of the Health and Soundness of his
Constitution, of the Moderation and Chastity of his Manners, so that he was
never known to labor under any Venereal Disease; which she concluded to arise
only from the weakness of his Constitution, for it seems she presumed there was
no need of the restraints of Conscience for so Venial an Offense, the
committing of which, in her Opinion, was Meritorious.

Murder common and unpunished.
The Execrable Sin of Murder has gained too not only an Impunity but Reputation
among them, and it is made the Characteristick of any Gentleman of Rank or
Fashion, to have dipped his Hands in Blood. To this they frequently are
obnoxious, and readily incline, by reason of the easy recourse they have to
their Churches, which shelter them from any Process, and are met with at every
turn. For in the Metropolis, Tunchal, which exceeds not a good Country Town,
are almost twenty Churches and Chapels, besides abundance in their Country
Plantations. These Christians are as Licentious in commiting this Crime, as
remiss in inflicting due Penalties for it, and indulge the guilt of it, even
beyond what the Almighty did the Jews, though it is voluntary, by sparing the
Criminal if he can lay hold on the Horns of the Altar; and make Banishment or
Confinement his utmost Penalty, both which by a large Present are bought off.

The Numbers of their Clergy increase here, Many Clergymen.
as well as in other Popish Countries, even to the oppression of the Laity,
with whom they seem to vie for Multitude. It Is scarce imaginable, how so many
Rich Ecclesiastics can be supported by the Labors of so few People. But to
abate this wonder, they tell us, that none of their Nation is admitted to the
Priesthood, who is not possessed of some Patrimony, to avoid a burden to the
Church. They are totally averse here from admitting any into Sacred Orders, No
Jews or Moors Clergymen.
whose Originals are either Jews or Moors, and yet this Caution is not observed
by them at St. Jaques, where Native Africans Officiate as Priests.

The prevailing Authority of the Jesuits.
The Jesuits, among all the rest of their Orders, are the only Men in Supreme
Repute, which they aspire to by the easy Absolutions of their Penitents, and
pretentions to stricter Sanctity, and a more unblemisht Character, than the
rest of the Orders. For this end, they closely conceal from public notice all
the Enormities and Irregularities of their Order, and all their Failures, but
what are legible in their Ignorance, Their Ignorance.
which was so remarkable, that scarce one in three of those I conversed with
understood Latin. If any Delinquent is expelled the Convent, his Faults are
stifled and kept as secret as Confession, lest the noise of them among vulgar
Ears, should scandalously reflect upon their Society, and diminish that
Veneration they so zealously affect. And the only Answer which is vouchsafed to
any Querist, A prudent Maxim in use among them.
for the reason of their Expulsion, is, He was unworthy of our Society. This is
a Maxim worth the Wisdom of that Order, and the imitation of all others, and
highly justifies the prudent concealment of such Men's Faults, whose Examples
might eminently scandalize any kind of Profession.

The Jesuits Chapel is far the most splendid of all their Churches, The
Jesuits Chapel.
which we chanced to view in the greatest Luster, at St. Ignatius his Eve, (as
they are pleased to term him) a time observable for the Magnificence of the
Ceremony and Pomp: Variety of the choicest Anthems were sung, with the sweetest
Instrumental and Vocal Music, sufficient, had their Doctrine been answerable
to it, to have charmed us into a Conversion. The Vigils of all their Saints, as
well as that of St. John Baptist, are Celebrated with abundance of shining
Lights, placed conspicuously upon the tops of their Steeples, after the
Sunset. But the bright Illuminations this Night about the Steeple of the
Jesuits Oratory, far out-did the rest of the Apostles Eves, and dazzled the Eyes
of the Spectators at a distance. Some of the Chapels, as well as Houses, are
built upon such steep declining Hills, that they seem to endanger the
precipitation of such as come out of them; and questionless the protection of
the Saint is extolled for the deliverance from those Perils.

An Hospital for such as have been Lewd.
Near the Jesuits Chapel is a certain Hospital, much frequented by the Natives,
Erected for the Entertainment and Cure of such as have smarted for their
Feminine Pleasures; whose miserable Spectacles are so ghastly and frightful,
that were there nothing of future Punishment, that only might very well curb
Men in their highest Career to those foul Sins. Among the rest of the Female
Penitents, we espied one near the Altar, weeping bitterly, with a sorrowful
dejected Countenance, and in deep anguish of Heart. This sight produced
something of the same Melancholy Effects upon us, till I recovered my self at
the hopes I had of her happy Condition, which such floods of Tears seemed to
promise. Had all the rest evidenced the like Sorrow and Concern she did, this
Infamous Society (for ought I know) had been the most Honorable upon the
Island. But their Measures herein are very unequal, for a modest Salute is an
Offense insufferable, whilst this abominable Vice many of them scarce stand to
Parley with.

Their Churches are most commonly made use of for Repositories of their Dead,
Their burying places.
in the Interment of whom they mix store of Lime with the Earth, to hasten the
consumption of the Corpse, by whose sudden mouldring away, upon this account,
there is room made within a fortnight for a fresh Funeral. To signalize their
Respect for the Deceased, the Corpse is curiously trimmed and adorned, as a
faint Emblem of its glorious and triumphant Resurrection, in imitation of the
Wise King, who buried with his Royal Father an invaluable Treasure.

But as their Church allows no Charitable Thoughts to the Souls of Heretics,
No burying place allowed to the English.
so does it forbid all kindness to their dead Bodies, and prosecutes the
English that die there, with more inexorable hatred, than what they show to the
Carcasses of Beasts and Birds, which may find a resting place on shore, and
quietly remain upon common ground; both which are strictly forbid the English,
who are cast into the Sea, and committed to the waves. And accordingly an
English Merchant falling sick of a sudden Distemper at Madeira, was
unfortunately carried off by it; which moved the rest of our Nation that were
there, to contrive for his decent Interment. And therefore, lest a public
Burial might expose him to the Rage of the People, or the Clergy's Indignation,
they concluded to deposit him among the Rocks, in order to his better
concealment. But the Rocks were unable to shelter him from their Tyranny, which
was exercised upon him in this barbarous manner, they dragged him from the
place where he lay, up and down the Island, and exposed him to the contempt of
the Inhabitants, till they threw him into the Ocean. This Inhumanity, which is
carried even beyond the Grave, is propagated as far as their Plantations in the
East; where if any Protestant chance to die among the Nation of the Portuguese,
no place is allowed for his Reception, nor vile enough for his Sepulcher, but
the very Corpse of a rank Heretic annoys the Dominions of a Catholic Country,
though it were buried under ground. A dead Child Baptized and Buried for a Sum
of Money.
And yet a powerful Sum of Money, which is said to blind the world, prevailed
to open the Eyes of the Priests Intellectuals in this very case; for thus they
stated the difficulty concerning an English Child, which had been clandestinely
Interred there, that if it were immediately taken up, and then Baptized after
their manner, and so made a Member of their Church, it might be admitted among
their Dead. This Conclusion was approved of as Canonical, for the Child was
Baptized, Buried after their manner, and deposited where it was taken up.

The Canons of the Cathedral Church, The laziness of some of the Clergy.
which stands about the midst of the City, are as exquisite in their
contrivance for their Ease, as the others were for burying-mony. The
Constitutions of their Church oblige their Attendance at Prayers by Four a
Clock in the Morning. But because such early Rising is very troublesome,
especially to Corpulent Men, therefore they agree, that the Clock shall never
in the Morning strike Four, till it really be Five; and order its motions by
this Method, always an Hour or so slower than the Sun, that they may punctually
indulge their own Repose, by this mock obedience to the Orders of their Church.

Some English Seamen kept on shore.
Yet how negligent soever they may appear in this Instance, they all pretend a
mighty Zeal for their Faith, especially in the Meritorious Conversion of any
Stranger, upon which we suspected they had been too intent, by the loss we had
of some few of our Men, whom no search could discover to us. The Jesuits we
conjectured must be concerned in it, because their Love for the Cause is
generally more flaming than that of the other Orders among them; and therefore
we resolved upon addressing to the Governor for demanding an enquiry after
them in the College of the Jesuits; but we found his power could not reach it.
The time grew on that we must depart, and were much concerned to leave our Men,
when we were engaged to set Sail, because the want of them on Board might be
very prejudicial in a tedious Voyage. Our Commander therefore having got
without Gunshot of their Citadels, Manned out his Pinnace with twelve or
fourteen Hands, well provided with Swords and Firearms, and appointed them to
Row along the Shore, to apprehend, if possible, some few of their Fishers, to
supply the places of our Sailers. As they cruised along, they met by chance
with another Prize, viz. a Comely Abbot and a Vicar, coming up to Tunchal from
the Country in a Boat. An Abbot and a Vicar seized in the room of our Seamen.
They were strangely surpised, to find themselves unexpectedly taken, and
Pirated by a Boat's Crew; but much more concerned, when we told them they must
bid farewell to all their Friends and Festivities at Madeira, and Imbarque with
us in an Indian Voyage, or at least remain our Prisoners on Board, till the
Jesuits restored our Men on Shore. The thought of this amazed and struck them
with confusion, and forced from their Breasts many a groan and sigh, for their
Sorrow seemed to surpass its expression by any Tears. And yet they were not so
far lost in this Consternation of Mind, but that they kept within limits of
Reflection, and recollecting a Method for their Release. Therefore they speeded
an Express to the Governor, and passionately implored him for the sake of God,
and the Virgin Mary, to bethink himself of some Project for their Liberty, for
which their Prayers should continually ascend for his deliverance from such
Disasters. And our Commander valuing his Sailers above the Priests, directed a
Letter to the English Consul on Shore, to this effect.

The Captain's Letter to the Consul on shore.
SIR,
THE Honor and Duty we owe our King and Employers, obliged us to make this
Restitution to our selves, since your Governor would not. To deprive Princes
of their Subjects, and Masters of their Servants, under a pretense of making
them better Christians, is in my Opinion to make them worse. And if the
Religion of your Jesuits admit of such Immoral Actions, neither our Laws nor
Religion require our taking it at your Hands. If your Governor has little
Command over them, he has less over us, and he therefore may take the keeping
of some of your Subjects as patiently from us, as he does their detaining some
of our Sailers (as we presume) from them. In the mean time, endeavor to see
they be restored, or rest satisfied with the loss of those we here detain. If
your Governor would not give us satisfaction if he could, he cannot then
excuse himself in this matter. If he would, and could not, we shall be so kind,
as to do it for him, which may thereupon prove an Obligation, as well to him, as

Yours, etc.


These Epistles were no sooner received and read, but the whole place was in an
uproar about their Priests, either their Priests must be returned, or all the
English must suffer for it. This startled the English Merchants on shore, and
awakened their Care of contriving some means for their Safety; for they
perceived the enraged Multitude, who stood upon the Strand, would not be
pacified without them. And therefore lest our Commander should prove
inexorable, and seriously resolved upon what he writ, the English Merchants
brought along with them Money for a Voyage, after they had prevailed to get on
Board. For they durst not return without their Priests; and they knew not where
the Voyage would end. After their difficult Passage on Board, they related the
Confusion the Place was in, and how tumultuous the People had suddenly grown,
upon the account of the Detention of their Priests; and how they were upon the
Bank of the Sea, repeating their Exclamations, Our Padres! Our Padres! A sudden
Joy sprung up in the Faces of the Priests upon the sight of our English
Merchants, from whom they assured themselves of some Relief, and Release from
the Confinement they were under; and with sorrowful Accents represented to them
the unhappy Minute they set forward for Tunchal; but withal, the Hopes they had
that their coming on Board would prove favorable to their Misfortune. The
Commander, who heard all this, and reflecting upon the extreme Inconvenience
attending the English upon this occasion, resolved to send them all on Shore,
to remove that Disturbance which he saw was otherwise unavoidable; for he
thought the Priests would be as useless to him at Sea, as they commonly are at
Land, and a Burden to either Element; The Priests dismissed.
and so dismissed them all to their great Satisfaction.

After this we stood off from Shore, filled our Sails, and without any
Ceremonious Adieu, either to the Governor or the Fort, we left the Island. For
it is easier to depart, than to be admitted into the Harbor. All Ships examined
that come to the Harbor.
Because when any Ship arrives there, two or three of the Inquisitors, who wear
the Sacred Garb, are sent to examine it about any Sickness, or other Objection,
which might hinder the Liberty of Traffic; and not suffering any Sailer's
setting his Foot on Shore till they pronounce the Ship healthful.

By a kind Providence our speedy sailing that Day did occasion a greater
Deliverance to us from the French, Our escaping two French Men of War.
than what the Abbot and Vicar had from us. Within Forty Hours after our
Departure, two French Men of War of good Force arrived in the same Port, who no
sooner dropped their Anchor, but they weighed again in Chase of our Ship, and
shaped their Course directly toward the Canaries, where some gave out we were
designed. But leaving the Island Palmo on the East, we steered directly to St.
Jago, a Capital Island of Cape Verde, whereby we happily defeated their pursuit.

Our Departure from Madeira.
So the Cerne Atlantica, as the Ancients called it, being in a fortunate Minute
left by us, we arrived with Safety at this Port. In our way we were entertained
with an unusual prospect, which to fresh Navigators was very divertive, Flying
Fish.
which was several winged Fish, which took Flight in the Air, while their Finns
were moist, but dropped into the Ocean as soon as they grew dry, and thereby
unactive. Their Wings are always spread while they move in the Air, where they
sometimes sustain themselves the space of a Furlong. When they drop into the
Ocean, the watchful Dolphins are generally ready to devour them, whose
Swiftness in the Water equals almost the Flight of the others in the Air. And
as timorous Animals at Land seek for Shelter from Men, when they find
themselves in apparent Danger from a merciless Persecutor; so the Flying Fish
will betake themselves to our Ships, and fall upon our Decks and Shrouds, upon
a hot pursuit of the destructive Dolphin. Here likewise we were affrighted with
a Turnado, which, A Turnado.
without Care and speedy handing of our Sails, might have endangered our Ship.
It came suddenly, without any previous signs of its approach, till a quarter of
an hour before it came. It Is a violent surprising Storm of Rain and Wind; and
that which adds to render it more formidable, is its unexpected Rise, at such
times as the Weather is sedate and temperate; but its precipitant Motion
renders it less tedious, being as soon a dying, as it is short in it is Growth
and Increase.

THE ISLAND OF St. JAGO.
THE Islands of Cape Verde are distant from the Main of Africa 150 Leagues;
they extend themselves in a Body from 13, unto the 19th in Latitude. Ten of
these Islands are considerable, though not inhabited, and are ranged in Form of a
Crescent; of which the Unequal Part regards the Continent, and the Two points
the Ocean.

St. Jago.
The Night before we came to an Anchor we espied this Island of St. Jago, which
is the greatest and principal of all the Isles of Cape Verde, and is dignified
with a Bishop's Seat in a City of the same Name. They borrow their Appellation
of Cape Verde from the Cape or Prominence of Land in Africa, which is the
nearest Main Land to them, from whence several Africans come here to inhabit.
These by the Ancients were called Gorgades and Hesperides, who feigned the
Orchards with Golden Apples, which were kept by a Dragon, were placed here.

In this Island are various Ports, Its Chief Port.
the most noted of which we anchored in, named Praya, where, by the Blessing of
Heaven, we escaped an eminent Danger, The Danger which we escaped.
which arose from a violent Storm in the Nightime; and was so outrageous,
that the Ship dragged her Anchor; and our Ruin had been inevitable, had it
been much fiercer; because we rid so near St. Jago, which was on one side; and
Hay Island, which lay on the other.

The Island at our approaching it looked very desolate and naked, Its Barrenness.
without any apparent Verdure either of Grass or Leaves. And the reason for
this, upon our Examination, was very plain, because in Three Years space before
that Day we came thither, they had not been refreshed with one Shower of Rain,
which occasioned an extreme Drought and Stelitity, and gave it the Face rather
of the Deserts of Arabia, than of a plentiful Country.

A Comparison of it with Madeira.
The Air is neither so healthful, nor the Place so pleasant, as Madeira, which
has so many Houses and delightful Enclosures, that it seems to be a Garden of
Pleasure. Neither is it so mountainous as that Island, which makes it apt
enough for Plantations; and yet here are but very few Vines, and those
incompetent for affording any Wine; most of which that is drunk is imported to
them from Madeira.

Its Products.
In the Valleys are Grains, Vines, Fruits, Sugarcanes, Mellons, Bononoes,
better than those at Madeira, Dates, Coco-Nuts. They abounded not with Cattle,
but of Fowl they had plenty; for which, or for any other of their Commodities,
we traded with them for old Clothes, and cast Garments, a staple sort of
Merchandise with these Portuguese, whose Humor, which generally is vain and
haughty, will make them vaunt themselves like Fidolgoes, when they are only
thus apparelled. But that which is meaner in them much, than strutting in the
over-worn Garments of Sailers and other Men, Many Natives poor and thievish.
they are strangely addicted to pilfering and stealth; and one or two of them
will entertain you in Discourse, whilst the third takes off your Hat, or
snatches away the Sword from your side. And if they meet any Stranger at a
Distance from any Town, they seldem fail of stripping him naked.

They are ignorant here in the Huswifery of making either Butter or Cheese,
which are therefore valuable, because rare. And accordingly, a couple of
Cheese, twelve Stock Fish, A Present to the Governor.
and two Dozen of Poor Jack were kindly received by the Governor of the Town,
who was at this time unable to supply us with a Loaf of Bread; which made a
Sea-Bisket as acceptable to them, as fresh Provisions, after a long Voyage,
would be to us.

A Romish Prelate governed the Island, The Governor of the Island.
and presided in their Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Affairs; and, without
that Niceness which is practiced at Madeira, admitted the Native Africans to
officiate in their Oratories and Convents.

Most of the People are Negroes, The Inhabitants.
transported from Africa to settle here, converted to the Roman Faith. Their
Clothing is a kind of Indian-like Stuff, turned about their middle carelessly;
the rest of the Body is all bare, save their Breasts and Shoulders, which are
covered with some thin Stuff.

Notwithstanding the Penance they were under by the Scarcity of Bread and Wine,
the Women were very loose in their Behavior, and easily led away by the
Sailers, whose Immoral Extravagancies have occasioned this Proverbial Speech in
India, An English Proverb in India.
That in Sailing from hence thither, they leave their Consciences on this side
of the Cape; and in returning from thence to Europe, they leave their
Consciences on the other side the Cape. So that except it be in doubling the
Cape, they will scarce allow an East-India-man any Conscience at all.

The Island Fogo.
Near this Island is another called Fogo, remarkable for its Sulphurous
Vapors, which like Aetna and Vesuvius, it continually emits; which sally forth
in such Eruptions, that it annoys all the adjacent parts, by continual vomiting
of Flames and Smoke; from this burning Mountain such quantities of
Pumice-stones are ejected, Pumice-stones.
that they swim upon the Main Ocean, and are variously dispersed by the
Currents of the Water to distant places; some floated as far as St. Jago, and
spread themselves by our Ship's side. The Height of this Volcano is
considerable, The height of the Island Fogo.
and its aspiring Top is raised above two Stories in the Clouds, which are
ranged each below the other upon its declining sides. The Head of the Mountain
advanced in height in a double Proportion to the highest of the Clouds; which
were not very long in ripening, but presently put on their Aerie Body. The same
thing I observed upon the Table-Land of the Cape of Good Hope, where the
Vapors fashioned themselves into Clouds immediately upon their Exhalation from
the Mountains, and ranged themselves, as they rise, in due Order and Progress
through the Air.

Before we had sailed many Leagues from this Shore, Trade-Winds.
we were under the Influence of the Trade-Winds, which blow on both sides of
the Lines to many Degrees distance; and with such constant gentle Gales, that
except it be upon occasion of a sudden, violent, Pleasant sailing between the
Tropicks.
and stormy Gust of Weather, the Sailers make all that passage Holiday, and are
not forced to hand a Sail in the space of many Days. The Days here are regular,
and almost of an equal length, not apt to be infested with Storms, or darkened
with Clouds, or overcast with Showers, except it be upon the nearer Approaches
of the Sun, who usually skreens his direct scorching Beams by the Interposition
of watery Vapors; and now neither boisterous Winds nor swelling Seas do raise
any Fear or Disturbance in the Mariners Breast. It Is this kind indulgent
Weather that mainly animates Men to the undertaking of this tedious Voyage. For
otherwise the length of it would be insupportable, were it all along incommoded
by the Storms and Dangers of our Northern Seas; the Thoughts of which wear off
by degrees, as we recede from them, and fall insensibly into milder Climates;
where the calm Face of the Heavens smooths the rugged Aspect of the Men, makes
them forget their former rough and troublesome Weather, and solace and enjoy
themselves in this sweet welcome change of Air.

Great store of Sharks swum now about our Ship, The Shark, Pilot-fish, and
Sucking-fish.
with their Attendants and Adherents the Pilot-fish and the Sucking-fish, which
are about four or five Inches long. The Pilot-fish are the same to the Shark,
as the Jackalls are to the Lion, direct him in his Course, and find out his
Prey, and give him notice of any Danger. The Sucking-fish stick close to the
Shark, as some small Fish do upon Lobsters, and suck their Nourishment out of
him. This Fish forsakes not the Shark in the greatest Dangers, is his faithful
Adherent in his utmost Extremities; he cleaves to him even when he is forced
out of his Element, and brought on Board the Ship, attends him to his Funeral,
and dies with him. The Under Jaw of the Shark is so much lower than the Upper,
that he cannot take his Bait, but by turning upon his Back to receive it with
more Facility. They are eagerly voracious, and are furnished with Instruments
accordingly; with a Set of Teeth as keen as their Stomachs, which easily lop
off the Leg or Arm of a Man, and afford no more than one Morsel to that
ravenous Animal. Yet are they peculiarly tender and indulgent to their Spawn, A
Conjecture how the Sharks spawn their young ones.
and shelter them in the place that gave them Birth: For when ever the Young
Ones are in Danger, they immediately hasten to the Mouth of the Old One, and
retire to its inward Parts for Safety. By this I was apt to think, that they
spawned their Young Ones at their Mouth, because we have seen them come out and
go in at the Sharks Mouth, and found one Six Foot long in a Sharks Belly.
Several Dolphins followed our Ship, Dolphins described.
which surpass all the Creatures of the Watery Element in Beauty and a quick
Finn, and is therefore called the Arrow of the Sea. They shine the brightest,
and swim the swiftest, of any Fish in the Ocean; and their lively Colors
represent in the Water the shining Wings of some bright Flies. But as they
leave their Element, their Beauty fades; and as their Life, so does their
Splendor decay; the lightsom Colors begin to fade and mourn at Death's
Approaches, and turn quite dark and dusky at their Expiration. It is neither
the Number, nor the Largeness of the Finns, that contribute toward their
extraordinary Swiftness; for they are but few, and very small; two only near
the Jowl, and two small ones under the Belly, and a narrow long one upon the
Back. The Head is fashioned sharp above, and downwards descends broader, almost
like the Head of a Hatchet with the Edge upwards. Upon the top of his Tongue he
has many little Teeth. It is a lovely, neat, and clean Fish, and as like to the
Dolphin on the Sign-Posts as a Mackrel is to a Flounder. The Flesh of it is
white and delicate, which when larded and roasted fresh, no Roman Dainties or
Eastern Luxury can outvie the grateful Food.

After these an infinite number of Porpoises played about our Vessel, Abundance
of Porpoises
and spread themselves near half a League round our Ship. One of them was
caught by the Tail with a running Knot made by the Sailers, whose Liver and
Entrails nearly resembled those of an Hog; and the Blood that issued from it
was thick and red, like that of a Bullock: It strangely detained its Blood,
after a deep Wound in the Throat, and stopped the Effusion of it for a very
considerable time, before it gave it any vent.

Albicores and Bonettoes.
We met likewise with Shoals of Albicores (so called from a piece of white Flesh
that sticks to their Heart) and with multitudes of Bonettoes, which are named
from their Goodness and Excellence for eating; so that sometimes for more than
twenty Days the whole Ship's Company have feasted on these curious Fish.
Sailers Lives preserved by Seafish.
Several Vessels in tedious Voyages, which by contrary Winds have been retarded
in their Sailing, have owned the Preservation of their Lives to this kind
Providence, which has often supplied them with this sort of Food in the time of
their Extremity.

Whether Fish sleep?
As we sailed along there happened an Accident, which made me conclude, that
either the Fish do not sleep, or that they subsist much longer without it than
other Animals. We struck an Albicore upon the Tail with a Fish-spear, which
afterward made its Escape by dropping off the Hock. This very Fish, as we all
observed, followed our Ship daily above a Week, when we sailed at least two
Degrees, that is, an Hundred and Twenty Miles a Day, and never left us all the
while. We saw it early in the Mornings, by that time we were able to discern
any such thing at that Distance; and till the Darkness of the Evening
intercepted our Sight, we never missed it. The peculiar Mark we distinguished it
by, was the large Wound in the Tail, which was lacerated by the Fish-spear,
when it fell off, and in constant swimming near our Vessel discovered it very
plainly to us; all which time it kept Pace with us, and rested no more than we.

We had not the luck of seeing a Cramp-fish, for an Experiment, An Account of
the Cramp-fish.
all the Voyage; but Dr. Kempfer, in his Passage through the Persian Gulf,
relates how he caught one, and that it struck the Person with a frightful
Tremor, whoever touched it with Hand or Foot; but the benumming Quality would
not reach to the length of a Line or a Pole, according to the vulgar Opinion,
and operated only when it was sensibly struck or handled. But the way of
preventing this Trembling and Stupidity of him that felt it, was most worthy
Observation, because unknown, and scarce mentioned by any Writer. For a certain
Person on Board, to the Amazement of all that saw him, could touch the Torpedo
as often as any, and was never affected by any Insensibility upon it. He was shy
of divulging his Receipt, but by Importunities was at length won to declare the
Secret, which consisted only in holding in his Breath very hard when he touched
it. The rest upon Trial found it true. And the Reason for this (as it is
supposed) is, that stifling the Breath, and detaining the Spirits, repels the
Force of that Narcotick or stupifying Quality which issues from the Body of the
Cramp-fish.

At our approaching the Equator the Winds grew calm, the Sails flapt to the
Mast, and the Face of the Ocean was as smooth as that of a Crystal Mirror. The
way of trying the Current of the Water at Sea.
This gave an Opportunity to our Commander of sending out his Boat to try the
Current of the Water. For even in the Main Sea are sometimes such Streams and
strong Tides, and imperceptible Currents, as carry a Ship many Degrees in
Longitude beyond the Observation of the expertest Navigator, before ever he
knows where he is, if he be not helped by his Azimuth Compass. An Instance of
this Nature happened while I was in India. An East India Ship bound for Bombay,
was supposed by the Master of her to be near that Haven, upon his first sight
of Land; but making better Observation, he found himself driven many Degrees to
the Westward, very near Mussat in Arabia Foelix, which lies upon the Persian
Gulf. For this no Reason can be alleged, besides the undiscernible Currents
of the Water, which carry the Ships so wide from that place, which by their
Course they steered toward: For in one Hours time the Water runs above a
League, sometimes in the very midst of the Ocean. And another Ship bound for
the same Port, was upon the first Discovery of Land very near the Coast of
Persia. Therefore the wary Pilots, when the Winds are silent, and the Sea calm,
use this Expedient for trying the Motion of the Water, which way, and how fast
the Currents set. At Seven Minutes Distance from the Line, our Commander manned
out the Boat, with the chief Mate in it, and ordered it to be rowed about half
a League from the Ship. They took with them in the Boat a Basket, into which
they put Forty or Fifty Pound Weight of Iron or Lead, which tied to a Line of
eighty, or an hundred Fathom length, they dropped into the Sea; by whose Weight
the Boat was fixed as immovably and steady, as if it were at an Anchor. After
this they cast out the Log-board, which discovers the Tide-way of the Water,
and by the Half Minute Glass which they set a running, they know how fast the
Stream runs. For at certain Distances of the Line, to which the Log-board is
fastened, are certain Knots, for every one of which that the Board drew off,
while the Glass runs, they reckon a Mile. The Tide set here Northward, but not
very fast. This Experiment of finding out the Swiftness of the Current, and to
what Points it runs, is never attempted but in a perfect Calm, when both the
Winds and the Sea are peaceable and still; which is the reason that Mariners,
by not meeting with such an opportunity, are sometimes driven very distant from
their designed Port. The Experiment of an empty Bottle let down into the Ocean.
The Sailers at this time let down an empty Bottle into the Water tied to the
Basket, with a Cork in the Mouth of it, so very large, that a Mallet could not
drive it in further; and yet the Cork was forced into the Bottle in its
Descent, and the Bottle was drawn up full of Salt Water. Under the Line there
is such a constant brooding Heat, Two remarkable effects of the Heat under the
Line.
that the Rain Water which has been received in Casks, has been full of small
Worms in less than four Hours time. Nor can any Care prevent the rusting of the
best polished Steel or Iron, nor hinder the best tempered Blade in England from
being apt to stand bent, by reason of the warm insinuating Ether, which
softens its Spring and Elastick Spirit.

THE ISLAND OF ANNOBON.
Annobon described.
THE first Land we made after our crossing the Aequinoctial, was Annobon, which
lies in the Latitude of one and an half, and is reckoned about Ten Leagues in
its Circumference. We were driven unhappily to the Leeward of it, and luffed up
to it for the space of two days, but were hindered from fetching it, by its
lying directly in the Eye of the Wind. It had the name of Annobon given it,
because it was first discovered upon the first Day of the Year.

Its great Plenty.
The scarcity of our fresh Provisions, which by this time were almost spent,
made us beat up to Windward more vigorously, especially when we heard that they
were to be purchased at such easy rates, that a roasting Pig might be bought
for a Sheet of Paper.

But though we judged our selves unfortunate in not being able to reach this
plentiful Island, yet we were pleased with the Prospect which we had of it,
because we had been long Strangers to such a Sight. And it gratified us with
the fragrant Smells which were wafted from the Shore, from whence at three
Leagues distance we scented the Odours of Flowers and fresh Herbs. Land smelled
by the Sailers at a great distance.
And what is very observable, when after a tedious Stretch at Sea, we have
deemed our selves to be near Land by our Observation and Course, our Smell in
dark and misty Weather has outdone the Acuteness of our Sight; and we have
discovered Land by the fresh Smells, before we discerned it with our Eyes.

The Inhabitants observing our Toil and Industry to stretch into the Harbor,
made Fires on Shore to give us Light in the Night time, and sent off to us with
some Oranges and Fowls a Canoo or two, that is, a long sharp Boat fashioned out
of one piece of Timber, which was rowed with Six Oars. The Islanders that came
in it were formerly known to some on Board us, whom we conferred with
concerning their Belief, and the Religion which they professed. They confessed
themselves of the Roman Faith, The Ignorance of the People.
and were eminent Believers of that Church by the profound Ignorance which they
professed, in scarce knowing what Mass meant, or the Pope from the great Mogul.
They were born in Africa, and, bating the Name of Catholics, were as
Heathenish, as if they had never come from thence, which they ascribed to their
want of Priests among them. No Priests! This amazed me, and put me to a stand,
to consider how those who travel Sea and Land to make Proselytes, to whom
neither Siam, China, nor Japan are esteemed too remote a Pilgrimage for making
Converts, should yet neglect a place so nigh as Annobon, overlook a Care so
much nearer. Surely some fatal Disease, some Infectious Air must ravage and lay
waste the place, that affrighted those zealous Fathers from inhabiting among
them. No, the Air was healthful and serene, the Island fruitful, but very poor;
they know of no reigning Distempers among them, unless we would account Poverty
one. They were stored with plenty of Provisions, and indigent in nothing but
Gold and Silver, of which they had none. Or if they were Masters of a little of
that at some chance time, the first Priest that happened to come upon the
Island, was certain of draining it by Confessions, whose stay was never longer
among them, than the Money lasted, but his Minutes were always spent as soon as
their Mites. Now I imagined that a place, where was such scarcity of Wealth,
should have best suited with those whose Profession is Poverty; because they
seem then to be in their proper Element, and freed from the Temptations of
Riches, which they voluntarily renounce. And that the Eastern Nations, which
abound in Wealth and Luxury, should be less frequented by Men that pretend to
be dead to the World.

Upon this Island, The great Convenience of some Harbors.
as well as upon many others, the Road for Ships lies conveniently on the
Leeside, as at St. Thomas, which is under the Line, Ascension, St. Helena, St.
Jago, Mauritius, and many more, as well in the East as West Indies, which are
by an All-wise Providence made this way serviceable for avoiding the danger of
Shipwreck, which would be inevitable on the Weather-side, when the Winds blew
fresh, and the Seas were high. For in these places the Winds generally hang
toward one Quarter, which renders the opposite part of the Island calm and
safe. And though some few Islands are observed destitute of this Convenience in
their Harbors, and are not so well accommodated with Ports for the securing of
Ships, yet are these very rare, and for the most part not very necessary for
Navigators to come near them. With such an Infinite Wisdom are all things
contrived for the peculiar Ends and Designs to which they serve!

THE COAST OF AFRICA.
NOT long after this we espied the Coast of Africa, Part of Africa.
a Degree Northward of the River Congo, and coming near the Shore were becalmed
and driven backward in one Night's time five Leagues toward the North. But
that Misfortune was drowned by the Pleasure we received in the refreshment of
abundance of Rain which fell that Night, a Drop of which we had not seen for at
least two Months before. The richest Wine could not please our Palates with
half that Delight, Scarcity of Water on Board.
as this Blessing which descended from Heaven in Showers upon us. For being all
this while under the hot Influence of the Sunbeams confined to the Torrid
Region, the Provisions, being salt Beef, and the Water in the Cask so unsavory
and corrupt, that to quench our Thirst we must stifle our smelling, and shut
our Nostrils when we opened our Mouths; and of this poor stinking Liquor, in
all this Feverish Weather, the Allowance being only a Quart a Day, this made a
Glass of this fresh Liquor drink most pleasant, and cheered our Hearts, as if
they had been refreshed with the noblest Wine. For impatient of letting it fall
into the Tubs, which were placed upon the Decks on purpose to receive the
falling Water, no Wine was more greedily caught at by the Vulgar out of public
Conduits on a solemn Day, than the Rain was by the Sailers in their Bowls and
Hats. Such a Relish does a starved Appetite find even in course Fare! To such
Inconveniences are Men sometimes driven by tedious Voyages!

The pleasant Shore.
Stretching along this Shore, a Strand extended in the Semicircle of more than
twenty Leagues, presented us with a most delightful Prospect, which received in
its Bosom Neptune's rolling Waves upon an even and plain Surface. Above this
extended Plain were several gently rising Hills, The fruitfulness of the place.
clothed with Grass and variety of Trees, all in their Summer Livery. This
unexpected Verdure of the Fields tempted us to fancy our selves rather in
Europe again, than upon the Confines of scorcht Africa. Such was the Beauty of
the pleasant Fields and fruitful Valleys, the Gayety of the Woods, and
diversity of Enclosures, cut out by Nature, rather than cultivated by Art, that
it would almost foil the Pencil of a Painter to outdo the Original, but surely
it would afford him Ground for an admirable Landscape. The Fertility of this
populous Climate, which lies within the Torrid Zone, has quite confuted the
Opinion of blind Antiquity, which could not discern the Life of either Man, or
Vegitable there. I could not behold any great Plenty of Corn or Grain; but this
proceeded rather from the Native Laziness, than from the Penury of the Soil,
whose Native Turf seemed well prepared for Fertility and Production; but it
abounds with store of Fruits, particularly Coco-Nuts, and the most fragrant
Pineapple, which carries the Precedence from all the rest, whose Excellencies
are centered there, and exert themselves in its incomparable Taste and Smell.
Abundance of well-grown Deer are ranging in the Fields and Pastures, whose
Fatness is very apt to make them almost a Prey to a nimble Footman, without the
Assistance of any Hound. But Horses and black Cattle are not many.

We were not yet come to an Anchor, which continued the scarcity of our Water,
notwithstanding the former shower; and made us prize it almost equal with our
Wine, with which we were well stockt from the fruitful Island of Madeira; but
on a sudden we were more concerned and affrighted at the sight we had of that
Element, than we were refreshed by it. A Spout at Sea.
For we espied very near us a mighty Mass of Water drawn up into the Air from
the Surface of the Ocean, in fashion of a large round Pipe, incircled with a
hoary Mist, or gray Cloud; it rose gradually, and for some time hovered there,
till at length it fell in such a Cataract, such a Torrent and mighty Flood,
that no Ship was able to sustain its fall, but would sink and founder by its
Weight. This Spout, which is a kind of Aqueduct between the Clouds and the
Ocean, put us in a great Fear of its ruinous Descent upon us, had we not
industriously steered from it, and kept to Windward. But if there is no
avoiding the likelihood of being driven under it, there are two ways prescribed
for breaking its pendulous resting in the Air before a Ship comes too near it.
The first, which is seldom used by any Protestant, prevents its Danger by a
kind of Charm. When they espy a Spout at Sea at some distance from them, the
Master of the Ship, or any one else a-board, kneels down by the Mast with a
Knife in his Hand, which has a black Handle; and reading in St. John the Verse
of our Saviors Incarnation, Et verbum Caro facta est, and habitavit in nobis,
he turns toward the Spout, and with the Enchanted Knife makes a Motion in the
Air, as if he would cut it in two, which, he says, breaks in the middle, and
lets the enclosed Water fall with a Noise into the Sea. The way of breaking a
Spout.
Another Method for preventing all Peril that might arise from this Mass of
Water sucked up from the Ocean, is to fire a Cannon or two when they are near
it, which immediately shakes and dissolves its threatening Suspension aloft, and
this softer Thunder and Lightning scatters and dissolves it from its unnatural
Position. What the Quality of this Water is, which is thus powerfully exhaled,
whether fresh, or mixed with Saline Particles, those that had the Fate to try,
had scarce the Happiness to discover; but sure the Phenomenon is very
stupendous and unaccountable, that such a vast Body of Water should by a
forcible extraction out of the Sea bubble and mount upwards, like a small
Rivulet springing up into the Air. And indeed, the Works of the Almighty are
inscrutable, and these may be some of his Wonders in the Deep, which the Royal
Prophet extolled and was amazed at.

Having arrived within four Leagues of the Shore, Eight Negroes came toward us
in a Canoo, who stood upright as they rowed, and looked forward, contrary to
our Proverbial Observation. The Shaft of their Oars was framed out of a long
piece of Timber, and a thin broad square board resembbling a wooden Trencher,
served for the Blade. They had caught in their Boat a Shark, A Shark called a
Shovel-Mouth.
of a different shape from the common Fish of that Name, and of a different
appellation; for on each side of his Mouth grew a large piece of Fish, six
Inches broad, in form of a Shovel, which gave it the Name of Shovel-mouth; and
at the extremity of those parts were the Eyes placed, as Sentinels at the
Out-Guards to preserve the Body. With these came two of the Principal Men of
the place, one of them appertaining to the King, the other a Retainer to the
Mafoucko or General. Upon their Heads they wore Caps very Curious and Costly,
Curious Caps made in Africa.
the Work of the Natives, wrought with so much Ingenuity and Art of the Needle,
that they are not only valued there, but admired in all the parts whither the
Europeans carry them. Their Expense in Clothing is otherwise small, The
Clothes of the Natives.
as the Garb is that they put on, which only consists in a Clout about the
middle, to hide their Nakedness; and the Furs of an Hare or some such Animal,
which hangs down before them between their Legs, which they value as the
richest Ermin or Sables. Their frizled Hair was tied up in a Bunch upon the
Crown of the Heads of some of them, others wore it neatly braided behind. Some
cut their Hair in the figure of a Cross, others were shaved all bare, excepting
a small Tuft above, like a Mohammedan Lock, as each Man's Humor or Fancy led
him.

Their Ornaments.
On each side of their Temples, and on their Foreheads, the Skin was raised, as
if it were with the pricking of a Pin, in Figures of a Diamond cut; which with
them is not only a Badge of Honor and Character of Greatness, but is esteemed
a sort of Cosmetick to the Face, and admired as Fucus and Black Patches are
with us.

Coral Beads, Coories, or Indian-shels, and Black Jet Beads are wore as
Ornaments about their Necks; and about their Wrists, ten or twelve Wreaths of
Brass, Iron, or Copper.

Ill Language not allowed of.
These Africans are by Nature apprehensive of the least Affront, though it
proceeds no farther than Ignominious Expressions. Scurrility and reproachful
Words are so detestable, that a Penalty is imposed on all foul and abusive
Language, according to the quality of the Offender, and the Person abused. The
Scandalum Magnatum is in force among these Heathens. For since Urbanity and
good Words are things so pleasant in themselves, and so easily attainable, and
a pleasant Look and Expression may as soon be given, as what are Sour and
Offensive, they pity no Man that either loses his Friend, or Fortune by course
Behavior and rude Expressions; since Courtesy and a debonaire Air are like
Letters Commendatory, which a person may at all times carry about him, to
render him grateful unto others, and others acceptable to him.

They Travel no where without their Fateish about them, The Fateish its Virtue.
one of which looked like the small end of a Stag's Horn, with a Bell tied to
it, about the bigness of a Man's Thumb. But each of them has his own made of
such Materials, as the Priests, or Mafouko think fit to bestow upon them. To
these Fateishes they ascribe their Security from Peril and Mischief, and
believe themselves safe from danger, while they carry them about them. They
appear to be to them instead of Talismans, whose Figures are supposed to act
upon Natural Things, so as to drive away from any place, Rain, Hail, or Wild
and Venomous Beasts, by occult and Sympathetick Virtues, which the Ignorant
People incongruously ascribe to Magic, or Sorcilege; such were Virgil's Brazen
Fly, and Golden Horseleach, with which he hindered Flies from entering Naples,
and killed all the Horse-Leaches in a Ditch: And the Figure of a Stork placed
by Apollonius at Constantinople, to drive those Birds thence, in the Year 1660.
And that at Florence made against the Gout by a Carmelite, named, Julianus
Ristonius a Prato. Unless you will rather imagine that the Ignorance of these
People in these great Secrets of Nature, and their too great Familiarity with
the Devil, may make us think their Characters Magical and Diabolical; whose
Virtues for the most part depend rather upon a tacit, or express Compact with
the Evil Spirit. For I believe in this, as well as other Nations, there are
some who have entered into Leagues and Diabolical Associations with Infernal
Spirits, by whom they have been enabled to effect things above the common reach
of Human Nature. Upon several occasions the Natives make use of these
Enchantments or Images, but particularly in the preservation of their Trees
laden with Fruit, upon which while they fix one of these Figures, no Native
dare approach to take it. The ancient Romans were much addicted to these
superstitious Vanities, and ascribed the safety of their City and Empire to the
Palladium which fell down from Jupiter.

A floating Island washed from the Shore, sailed by our Ship, A Floating Island.
extended about an hundred Foot in length and breadth, overspread with Grass of
three Foot height, though it grew so near the Line. We judged it was bore down by
the River Zaire into the Sea; The River Zaire.
for this River has 400 Leagues course, and is very rapid, by reason of the
many Cataracts, or great Falls which it has from the Mountains. At its entrance
into the Estates of Congo (upon which account it sometimes borrows this Name)
it inlarges it self much, embraces quantity of Islands, and at its Mouth
expatiates into Eight or Ten Leagues in breadth; yet throws its Water near
thirty Leagues farther into the Sea, with so great a violence, that it retains
its natural Color, Its not mixing with salt Water.
(if not Sweetness) as we observed, without being any more than dashed with the
Salt Waters of the Sea. But it forces its Waters along the Shore with more
ease, and therefore presses them much farther, as far almost as Cape Lopus,
which is about two Degrees Southward from the Aequinoctial. The Saltness of
some freshsprings near the Sea.
But the Saltness of the Springs on Shore is not less remarkable, than the
freshness of the River in the Ocean, and carrying its Waters uncorrupted at
that distance into the Sea; for when in the Sea it is Tide of Ebb, there is a
sensible Saltness in the fresh Springs that are near it, but according as the
Waters of the Ocean rise and swell in the Tide of Flood, the sweetness and
freshness of the Springs increase and return again.

The Fruits and Commodities.
The places situate near this River, such as Loango and Cabenda, are indifferent
Fertile in Grains, afford excellent Fruits, Wine of Palms; breed many Cattle,
and all things necessary for Life are found here: They are well stored with
Elephants, in which they abound more than any adjacent Countries, by which they
have quantities of Ivory, but nothing of Gold or Silver. Those Metals are of no
esteem with them. Their contempt of our Money.
They value all Metals according to their Bulk; for a Pewter Basin is preferred
with them to one of Silver of less quantity and size, and a large Brass Ring to
a small one of Gold. We offered them a Dollar for a Dunghill Fowl, which they
rejected, and exchanged at the same time for half a dozen Needles. For these
they thought they might have use for, but our Money was an useless, dead
Commodity. The Money current among themselves, is small Matts of Grass, Their
Money current among them.
very thin, about sixteen Inches square; for one of which they buy three
Kankies, or small farthing Cakes, when Corn is dear, and five when it is cheap.
They use these Matts in adorning their Bodies, and covering their Private Parts.

The Air is very hot and sulphurous, The nature of the Climate.
as must be expected from a place in this Climate, but the Natives endure it
with ease, are healthful and vigorous, are as well proportioned, and in their
shapes of as exact Symetry, as any in the World; and the Inhabitants are
numerous.

Hard Wool upon their Sheep.
Instead of that soft Wool which Cloatheth Sheep, a harsh kind of hair, not
unlike that which grows upon Dogs, is the usual excressence; the supple Oily
Particles are wasted and dried up by the intense Heat of the Weather, which
gives it that roughness and stubborn quality. The like I observed in the Sheep
that are in the Indies.

MALEMBA.
AT Malemba our Commander sent to the Mafouko, as a Present, The Present to the
Mafouko.
a large Cheese with two Bottles of Brandy; which he returned with a Kidd, a
small Calebash of Palm Wine, a Cock, and a little Vessel of Lime-juice;
delivered to us by those who brought them, in the English Dialect, a Language
to which many of them have in some manner attained, by the frequent Traffic
and stay of the English in those parts. Among those who were pleased to give us
a Visit on board, was the little Mafouko, or Deputy General, who while he
diverted himself with us, espied among the Negroes, a Native of that Country,
who was formerly sold from thence, and falling into the Hands of our Commander,
was brought thither again to attend him in the Voyage. The Deputy General
disguised his knowledge of him a while, and cast only a negligent Eye toward
him, 'till the Negro observing it, approached him with Ceremony, and gave him
the Regards of the Country. Their mutual Salutation.
Their mutual Salutations were after this manner, the Cafree at some distance
bowed his Head, and fell upon his Knees, and rising up a little after, clapped
his Hands together four or five times, the Mafouko then clapped his Hands
together likewise four or five times; upon this the Black addressed nearer him,
so that they mutually joined their Palms together first, and then joined their
own Hands four or five times; this ended the particular Ceremony with the
Mafouko; which was repeated by the Negro to every principal Man on board; and
then in conclusion, as a token of public Mirth and universal Joy for the happy
meeting, they loudly clapped all of them their Hands together, and the Salutation
ended. Their Civility and Condescension.
The inequality of their Condition made them not forget the Complement of a
condescending carriage to this Inferior Slave, who were no way Barbarous in
their Behavior, whatever they were in their Opinions, but as the access to
their Persons was very easy, so was their Humor smoothed with a complaisance,
void of all supercilious stiffness and Morosity.

Not only the Prince, The Respect given to great men.
but all others of the highest Figure and Quality are served upon the Knee, by
the Attendants that Minister to them. This is the usual manner too of
suplicating an Alms, or asking any considerable Favor; and in this posture one
of those on board requested a Bottle of Brandy, a Liquor highly esteemed by the
Noblest among them.

The more Eminent and Noted wore a sort of Nightrale of Network about their
Shoulders, Aparrel or Garb.
very close wrought, either White or Black, made of one entire piece, with a
Hole in the middle, of that convenient size that they thrust their Heads through
it, when they put it on; but some of them delight themselves with an English
Dress, if they can purchase it from any of our Nation, but then it is never wore
but at great Solemnities, and on stated Days. I wish they had used our Language
as innocently, as they did our Garments, and that they had been less accustomed
to the execrable sin of Swearing by the Name of God, Swearing used among them.
and the habitual venting of horrid Oaths. This custom they impiously Imbibed
by their Conversation with our Sailors, whose frequent Oaths made them believe
them an Elegance of our Speech, and the most laudable Expressions they could
use; and this deadly sin they now digest with as much ease, as the young Maid,
whom Albertus reports, brought her Stomach to live upon Spiders.

Their Faces painted
The second Person of Eminence who came to visit us, had all his Face besmeared
with Red Paint, a thing customary among the Nobler Rank; as in India this
Color is put upon their Cattle, especially their Horses, and is the usual
Paint of their Fruit Trees. This Epiphanius reports of the Egyptians; that though
they had forgotten the History of the Work of God, yet they rubbed over their
Cattle with a Red sort of Keil, to save them that no Evil should befall them
that Year; ignorantly Counterfeiting that Blood Sprinkled upon the Lintels of
their Doors, which saved the Israelites once in Egypt. But how this Custom
should be derived to these Nations from the Israelites and Egyptians, or
whether they practice it upon that Superstitious account which the Egiptians
did, to secure them from Misfortune, I could not learn, I rather believe that
they use it as an Ornament, because it looks lively and Gay.

The Diet of the common People is very ordinary, The ordinary Food of the Poor
People.
and seldom reaches the Flesh of any Animal, which is not prohibited them by
any Law, but their Inability to purchase it. Corn, and Herbs, and Spring Water
are their common Food. Sometimes they Feast with a little Fish, and that with a
few Pindars is esteemed a splendid Banquet. These Pindars are sown under
ground, and grow there without sprouting above the surface, the Cod in which
they are Enclosed is an Inch long, like that of our Pease and Beans, and they
are eat with Beef or Pork instead of our Beans or Pease. Some of these I
brought for England, which were sown in the Bishop of London's Garden, but
whether they will thrive in this Climate is yet uncertain. The Flesh which they
eat, they never account Palatable, till it grows unsavory; they expose it upon
the Roofs of their Houses till the moisture is exhausted, and it looks like
dried Fish; and sometimes bury it under ground, till it proves tender by being
tainted. Their Temperance.
They Indulge not their Appetites with Excesses, nor force upon themselves
Diseases by over-loading of their Stomachs, but Eat according to the Rules of
Nature, for Health, and not for Luxury, and live according to Nature's Periods,
to Seventy, or Eighty Years of Age, Healthful and Sound. They are wiser than to
cut short the thread of Life, by that Meat which should prolong it.

The extent of Dominions, and Love of Wealth, are as prevalent with those that
are placed in the highest Orbs of Fortune here, as they are with other Monarchs
of the Earth. A Native Ambition renders those that are Powerful, as well as men
of lower Stations, restless and troublesome, The occasion of a War.
and sets them upon soaring higher and higher, insomuch that a hot War is now
on foot between the two Kings of Malemba and Cabinde, commenced upon the
departure of a Beautiful Woman from the Country of Malemba to the King of
Cabinde. But the truer Original of this War, is the desire of Conquest for the
sake of Subjects, who as soon as they are Captives are made Slaves, and in the
multitude of them the Strength and Wealth of their Kingdoms consist. Arms and
Ammunition are the undeniable Commodities, Their Arms
for which they exchange their Slaves, and in the use of which they grow
expert; but Bows and Arrows are their own proper Instruments of War, and the
Weapons commonly, and very dexterously used: Their Bowstrings are made of the
Rhine or outside of a Cane.

To preserve the Line of their Kings untainted, The Succession of the Crown.
they make choice of the King's Sister's Son, to be always Hereditary in the
Sovereignty, imagining that the Female Offspring secures the Succession more
than the Male, and in this she is under no Confinement to any single Person,
The liberty given the Queen.
but is allowed her Choice out of the whole Kingdom, to satisfy her Desires,
and gratify her Fancy with whom she thinks fit; and thus without any Censure
or Blemish to her Character, she takes her liberty with Subject or Foreigner,
African or European at her will; imitating in this the Lacedaemonians, a Wise
and Grave People, who permitted their Wives, for the Procreation of a generous
Progeny, to be familiar with any Stranger, whose company they hoped might
Improve the Offspring. And thus likewise upon the Malabar Coast, the first
Nights lodging is allowed the Bramin, when the King Marries any person; and
therefore the Sister's Sons, as in Africa, and not the King's, are Heirs to the
Crown, because the Blood Royal runs certainly in their Veins. And the King's
Sisters are also indulged here the freedom of bestowing their Virginity on whom
they please.

Circumcision used here.
The Natives of Malemba retain among them the use of Circumcision, and of
admitting Children into their Religion by that Ceremony, which one among them,
dedicated to that Office, performs upon them. Neither are they unmindful of a
due Veneration to the great Creator of all things, nor so far lost to all
Sacred Thoughts, as to neglect a constant Homage to him, and a stated Exercise
of solemn Worship; Every fifth Day appointed to be kept holy.
and in this they exceed what Christianity prescribes, and for our Seventh,
appoint every Fifth Day Sacred for Religious Duties; on which Day they convene
their People, who unanimously assemble in a Public Congregation. On this Day
some Person of Years and Discretion, of Repute for Sobriety and Civil Converse,
entertain the Youth and those of greener Years with strong Disswasives from the
customary Vices of Stealth, Impurity, Adultery, and Murder; and with all the
Rhetoric which Nature taught him, and Zeal inspires him with, disclaims
against those Criminal Practices, and raises his Invectives against Vice and
Folly, and whatever is odious and prohibited among them. For all the heinous
Vices are under a Proscription with them, as well as us, and are only committed
by daring Profligates. The Terror of immediate Punishment is not the only
Restraint from these Commissions, but the sage Admonisher affrights their
Consciences with a future miserable state, in the dreadful Society of Benimbe,
that is, the Devil, if they obstinately persist in Wickedness; and encourages
them with the Promise of being hereafter happy with Zammampoango, which
signifies God, if they carefully advert to, Their Notion of God, and the Souls
Immortality.
and practice his Instructions. These Ignorant Heathens have not yet lost the
Notices of the Soul's Immortality, and the Impressions of future Rewards and
Punishments are fresh and undefaced among them. I enquired of them what their
Sentiments and Notions were of their Zammampoango? They told me that he
inhabited above. Then I further asked, whether they meant by that, the glorious
Lights above, the Sun, the Moon, or the Heavens? They answered, No, but he who
had Dominion over them, who made them by his Power, and this visible World we
stand upon.

The Devil's Cruelty to some of the People.
They generally affirmed that Benimbe is frequently in the Fields covered with
Mists and thick Darkness, where he sometimes exercises his Infernal Authority
over infamous and lewd Persons, in the milder Chastisements of some, and
severer Treatment, even as far as the loss of Life, of others. Therefore they
are terrified from walking abroad in dark and gloomy Weather, because they
expect nothing but Horror and Misery from that Spirit of Darkness. This
Infernal Spirit in all his wild Insults and Frolicks over them, is careful to
preserve his Appearance as dark as the place he chooses to revel in, scarce
assumes any lasting Form, and is known by nothing so much as the plentiful
effects of his Stripes and severer Strokes upon their Bodies. He conceals the
Deformity which he usually makes of his Figure, whilst he exercises the
Malignity of his Temper. Some die of the Bruises they have received from him,
and others have been confined to their Beds, as they assured me several times,
and therefore they avoid the Fields in rainy dull Weather, that they may escape
the force of his Malice, who is ashamed to appear abroad by Light, but chooses
these melancholy Seasons for inflicting his Vengeance, to which he seems to
have most right, as he is a Spirit of Darkness.

Walking along the Shore, A Negroe impaled for committing several murders.
we were arrested by a very deplorable Spectacle, a lusty Negro stretched Dead
upon the Sand, who, after the manner of Impaling, had a long Stake thrust up
his Fundament, which by a sharp Passage through his Bowels forced its way
upwards toward his Head. The dreadful sight at first moved us to condole the
sad Object, till we were informed of the execrable Villainies which brought him
to this lamentable and painful end, and made us applaud the Justice of those
who were the Executioners of this Vengeance upon him. For no Severity was able
to match those Crimes wherein he had been a long and skilful Practitioner; even
this Destiny, though so horrid and severe, will yet be thought Indulgence, and an
Act of Clemency. This Miscreant being possessed with a Spirit of Cruelty, and
actuacted by Malice, had successfully contrived the Death of near twenty
Persons about this place, by mixing a deadly Poison with the Palm Wine, which
he seasonably offered for the refreshment of their parched Palates. This deadly
Liquor was not subject to any suspicion of being mortal, because the Juice of
the Palm, with which it was intermixed, was a Liquor so common and inoffensive,
and their best and most pleasing Drink. The King therefore, upon the
Information of this Fellow's treacherous dispatching of his Subjects by such
poisonous Draughts, immediately decreed a Punishment, and sentenced the
Criminal to this torturing Death, peculiar only to such barbarous Villans. The
News of which made him seek a Refuge among the Deserts and the most inhabitable
parts of the Country; but the pursuit after him was so vigorous, that no
Thickets could shelter or secure him, the whole Country hotly pursued him, and
chased him as a common Enemy, till at length he fell a Victim to their just
Rage upon this Shore; where his noisome Carcass, being under an Interdict of
being Interred (the ordinary manner of burying among them) became as loathsome
and offensive as his Life had been, and was left a Prey to the Savages of the
Wilderness, and the wild Beasts of the Field. The unusual manner of tormenting
this Malefactor, by exposing his Body to the Inclemency of the Weather, and the
Beasts of Prey, was wisely designed by the King as a Terror to such abominable
flagitious Practices, and to retain the People in their Duty.

The Art of Poisoning is what these Africans do very commonly exceed in, The
Africans given to Poisoning
and to which they are generally propense upon any occasional Quarrel or Abuse.
They seldom discover a generous Resentment by an open Challenge, or disputing
it in the Field by the Dint of the Sword, or the force of a Bullet; their dark
Complexion inclines them rather to vent their Anger by clandestine Courses, to
destroy by the swift effects of Poison, and mortal Infusions of the Juices of
Herbs, in which they industriously acquire a Skill, that in their Designs
against a Man's Life, they may be ready and prepared to put their Revenge in
Execution that way. Their sly and crafty Natures keep them from endeavoring to
right themselves at the hazard of a public Vindication; but that inhumane Rage
and Animosity which is excited in them by a preceding Provocation, being
commonly accompanied with Cowardice and sordid Fear, puts them upon avoiding
all Dangers incident to themselves, and contriving the Ruin of those they hate,
by some covert Method, and after an obscure way. Doing herein what Asinius
Pollio did to Plancus, against whom he writ a Libel, but deferred to publish
it, till after his Death, because he was then secure from all sharp Replies.

They practice this Diabolical Art with as much Secrecy as Skill; so that it
is neither easily discerned when they are about it, nor is it always discovered
by any visible immediate Effects. They qualify the violent poisonous Qualities
with some mitigating Ingredients, and the lurking Operation will by that means
sometimes not discover it self in a Month's or a Year's space, as some of our
English have affirmed. Which cautions the more wary Europeans, who traffic
with these People, from treating them with any Indecency or Offense, and keeps
them always very circumspect and abstemious in eating and drinking with them,
lest some unknown Miscarriage might expose their Lives to their Hatred and
Discontents. For they know that all Degrees of Anger are least dangerous, when
most seen, and then most pernicious when they lurk under a Disguise and
dissembled Temper.

This inhuman Practice is not less customary among the Indians, How the Indian
Women poison some, and save others that drink together.
who by this detestable Vice have been very fatal to the free Conversation of
Christians among them. For in India, where Punch of Arak is the ordinary
cheerful Entertainment, it too often happens, that the Black Wench, whose
constant Employment is the making this Beloved Mixture, will, upon a Disgust,
or slight Affront, contrive the Bowl fatal to him that abused her, with Safety
to all the rest of his Companions. For having infused the Poison into the Bowl
prepared for the Person that offended her, after presenting it to him, she has
been often known, when the next was taking it, to dash it all upon the Ground,
by a designed, but pretended Inadvertance. And it rarely fails, but that all
that taste it for ever quench their Thirst, and seldom long survive the mortal
Draught. This is frequently the effect of the rudeness of unpolished Sailers,
who showing a Freedom peculiar to our Northern Nations, but unagreeable to the
Niceness of those Eastern Dames, have lavisht away their Lives by a frank
innocent Kiss, or railing Expression, and inevitably perished before they were
aware.

THE ISLAND OF St. HELENA.
WIthin less than a Month after that we loosed from the Coast of Africa, St.
Helena described.
we with much Difficulty weathered the Island of St. Helena; which was taken
formerly from the Dutch, belonging to the East India Company, by a Grant from
the Crown of England, situate in about the Sixteenth South Parallel, and as
distant from any main Land, as any Island in the World. Several French
Protestants entertained kindly here
Hither we brought with us several Refugees from the Tyranny and Persecutions
of France, who found a competent Subsistence and Relief from the Bounty of the
Company upon this Island; some of whom were placed in the more eminent
Stations, and advanced to Posts of Dignity and Trust.

They were highly sensible of the comfortable abode they enjoyed in this
distant Region, which was made their Sanctuary in their Miseries; and how much
the Misfortunes of their Lives were sweetened by the Kindness they received from
their new Masters. But could not without melancholy Resentments, and hearty
Sorrow, recount the various Hardships and Difficulties they strugled with, in
making their Escapes from the Rage of their Natural Prince, by whose Commands
so many Massacres and Butcheries were acted upon their Fellow Christians, and
such frequent bloody Tragedies were lately visible in France, fomented by those
whose Sanguinary Principles ventilated all those public Calamities; and who
stimulated their Prince by suspicious Chimera's of a possible Conspiracy, to
punish his Innocent Subjects by Anticipation, for Crimes of which perhaps they
never might be guilty. By which State-Artifices they pursued a Self-interested
Revenge, under the barbarous Disguise of curing untimely Jealousies, and
preventing unthought of Insurrections, from which the Protestant Subjects were
as free in their Principles, as they had evidenced themselves to be in their
Practices; and hoped in God that these unnatural Mischiefs may at length be
curbed, these severe Cruelties, which have kept no stand, be at length
restrained, to their Comfort.

Among those who fled to this Island from the outrageous Insults of their
Superiors, was one Captain Porier, The height of the Island.
stripped of all but the Freedom of his Thoughts and the Serenity of his Mind;
who by the Favor of his Patrons was seated in the richest part of the Island,
and allowed there a Maintenance for Three Sons and Five Daughters which escaped
the Persecution.

The Land here is very mountainous, and raised to that Height above the
Valleys, that we had a sight of it at 25 Leagues distance at Sea. I question
whether Tenerif will afford a more distant Prospect.

It enjoys an Air temperate and serene, to that degree, The nature of the
Climate.
that the Sky is seldom clouded or overcast, which produces a general Clearness
in the Natives. And tho it lies so near the Aequinoctial, and the Sun was then
in the Zenith, yet was the Heat so tempered and allayed by the gentle Winds
that flew along the Land, that the Northermost parts of the Island, especially
after the Sun's Descent, made an artificial Warmth very convenient, when the
natural was withdrawn. Whereas both Moscat in Arabia, and Gombroon in Persia,
which are at a much remoter Distance from the Equator, are at some Seasons of
the Year so intensely hot, that the Lungs being destitute of that due Frigidity
which is necessary for Respiration, are suffocated by the excessive Ferment of
the Air, by which both Man and Beast expire. Mr. Cook has often reported, that
in the time of his abode in Persia, a certain Person approaching his Apartment,
met with such a hot Breath of Wind at the entrance into his Chamber, that he
staggered upon the Floor, and fell down upon it just expiring.

The Healthfulness of the Inhabitants.
But the Inhabitants of St. Helena are not liable to such Casualties, the
Clemency of the Weather they are under subjects them not to the most common
Diseases, even that of the Smallpox, but gives them a Complexion fresh and
beautiful, equal to that of celebrated England. The Poverty of the Place may be
likewise thought another Ingredient of its Health; since Physicians tell us,
that most Diseases arise rather from Repletion than Emptiness; from too
Luxuriant, than too spare a Diet. And here they are not too much cloyed with
Varieties. For were the Plenty of the Island equal to its Health, did the other
Conveniences of Life match the Pleasantness of the Air, it might fairly invite
the Wealthiest, as well as the most Indigent, to inhabit it. The Poverty of the
place.
But the People are confined to Poverty by a solemn Restraint they are under to
the Traffic of all Foreign Countries, by being permitted no single Vessel of
Burden, or what is fit for Trade; and are destitute of all Clothes, but what
are transported from Europe, or brought by accident; which makes the Island (to
speak the Truth) abate much of the Pleasure of its Habitation, and much more to
those who want Opportunities of leaving it when they please.

A pleasant Account how the Island was peopled.
Yet at our Arrival it was well stockt with Inhabitants of both Sexes, whose
numerous Progeny showed little of Sterility among them, how barren soever the
Island was otherwise. This put me upon the Curiosity of enquiring from the
Women, how such Plenty of them came there? The Decoy, they told me, was worth
my Attendance to hearken to it; and it would not appear strange to see such a
number of them there, when they discovered the Means that brought them thither.
For at their first setting out from England, a Colony for this Island, the
current Report that then prevailed was, that all the single Persons upon the
Island were either Commanders, or Lords Sons, of whom they might have Choice
upon their Arrival. This made them eager for imbarking for the Voyage, and was
Charm enough to make them set forward with full Sail for the remote Island,
though the Distance had been farther. No Curse was like a contrary Wind, to check
the speedy sight of those gallant Gentlemen that awaited their coming; the
ravishing Thoughts of whose Embraces kept them in Life and Alacrity all the
way, and enriched their Fancies with the Hopes of being immediate Mistresses of
great Fortunes, and raised so far above their Native Birth, that nothing now
but Pleasures and Respect should succeed in the room of their former servile
state. The longed-for Island was at length espied, and now fresh Springs of
Love and Delight appear in every Eye and Countenance. The joyful Maids begin to
ransack all their Stores for an Ornamental Dress, in which though they cannot
much exceed, however they fancied themselves Trim and Gay; and she that could
not outvie the other in point of Attire, endeavors to outdo her in Nature's
Ornaments, in Cheerfulness and Mirth, in a Nuptial Look and taking Air. Thus
they stepped on Shore, full of the Thoughts of a stately Reception, and of the
sight of those Gentlemen they had heard so much of. When, alas! all these
Blandishments of Fancy, which were so sweet in the Voyage, carried a Sting in
the end of them, which embittered all their Joys. For instead of that Heroic
Address which they expected from Men of Wealth and Honor, they were saluted
only in the plain Courtship of Men employed in Agrieulture, and ordinary
Mechanic Arts. However, the pleasing Expectation they had, gave them this
Advantage over the tedious Passage, that whereas the boisterous Waves and
impetuous Winds, the Fury of the Sea, and the Dangers of Rocks and Sands, are
apt to render so long a Voyage very dreadful, their aerie Hopes made them take
Courage, and defy the Power of Storms, and gladly encounter all the Perils
that attend such a forlorn Passage.

The fruitful Soil is capable of producing the Increase of many Hundreds for
one Grain of Indian Corn injected in the Ground, but then it requires several
Inches of Ground for its Growth. Yet were it never so prolifick, The Land
infested with Vermin.
the Rats and Vermin so infest the Land, that all their Hopes are quite
devoured by them before they arrive to any maturity; which reduces them to
their last Refuge, to Yams and Potatoes, the only staple Increase for Meat and
Drink which the Island produces.

The East India Company are upon a Project for Planting Vines, A Project for
Planting Vines.
and thereby rendering the Product of them serviceable, both to the refreshment
of the Sailers, and of the Inhabitants; and will be a very seasonable relief to
the abject Condition of such as are willing to forget their Poverty, and
remember their Miseries no more. The Richness of the Soil.
The Soil is qualified for their Expectation, could they guard it from the
destructive Vermin, which do every where make great waste of all things tender
and delicate; and is therefore made fitter for nourishing Fruit Trees, whose
stubborn and well fortified Bulk defies the onset of those small rapacious
Animals, and is not a proper Food for them. I have observed among some of those
Trees that bear Fruit, especially upon an English Apple Tree, transplanted
thither from hence, at the same time Apples that were Ripe, others Green, and
others in the Blossom. For the genial Heat of the Sunbeams, to which the
Island is happily exposed, hastens the maturity of the Fruit, by a constant
quick attraction of the seminal Juyces from the Root to the upper Branches
continually.

Mint and Purslin grow wild in the Fields.
Instead of the common Grass of the Fields, those here are covered with Mint and
Purslain, and are the ordinary Food of the Beasts of the Field, whereon they
Feed deliciously themselves, and are made themselves more Luxurious morsels to
such as eat them. The whole Island is in this respect, as it were a spacious
Garden of Herbs.

The Government of the Island.
The management of Affairs is in the Hands of a Governor, a Deputy Governor,
and Store-house-keeper, all maintained by competent standing Salaries from the
Company; besides the allowance of a public Table, spread with plenty of
Provisions, to which all Commanders, and Mates of Ships, and Passengers of note
are freely received. These Govern the Concerns of the Island, and are steered
in their Councils by the directions they receive from their Masters in England.
The Results of their Consultations are sometimes called Impositions by the
Natives, and their Determinations are branded with infamous Characters of
severity, especially when they appear less favorable to the Ease and Interest
of the Public; and from which, if there be any Relief from the Company, yet
the unavoidable delays in returning a Redress to that distance, puts sometimes
a tedious hardship upon the Adressors. And I believe were not the convenience
of its Situation so very serviceable to the furtherance of the East India
Voyages, particularly to the Ships homeward bound, the constant trouble and
Expense which do seem to balance all the Advantages, would tempt the Company
to quit all Claim and Propriety in the place, and abandon it to the Power of
the first Designer. The Island not very Profitable to the East India Company.
For though it is furnished with conveniences for Life, yet with no Commodities as
yet proper for the profitable Negotiations of a Merchant. And therefore as the
Kings of Portugal did formerly Enact, that none should remain to Inhabit the
Place, except some sick persons for the restoration of their Health, that the
Fleets might be plentifully furnished with great variety of Grains, of fresh
Victuals, Fowls and Water; so would the Company, I imagine, be willing to remit
their Right to those Original Proprietors, did not they rather consult the
Convenience of their Ships, than any other private Interest in keeping it.

The first Discoverer of this Island, was Juan da Nova, a Portuguese, on St.
Helen's Day, The first discovery of the Island.
being the 21st of May, An. 1502. whose Countrymen in a short time stockt it
plentifully with Hogs, a thriving Cattle at Land, and the most hardy for
enduring a long Voyage at Sea; and likewise brought hither Geese, and Hens,
Partridges, Feasants and Guiney Cocks from Europe; and of late, the Increase of
Turkies has been so numerous, that the smallness of their Rates will scarce
encourage their Care to look after them.

Its former fruitfulness.
In the Woods grew formerly Ebony and Cedar, and infinite store of Oranges,
Lemons, Limes, and other sorts of Fruit; and now in the Governor's Garden, and
some others of the Island are quantities of Plantins, Bonanoes, and other
delightful Fruits brought from the East.

The nature of the Soil.
The Soil is of a Red Color, and in some places is friable, and resembles
Ashes, and in very many places lies uncultivated and bare.

And the minds of the Inhabitants are generally as Uncultivated as the
neglected Soil, The lewd lives of the Inhabitants
their Intellects as ordinary as their Qualities, but what is infinitely worse,
the pravity of their Manners compares them with the rankest Soil, productive of
nothing but noxious Herbs, untractable to all the Arts of Husbandry or
Improvement. For though the Company have not spared the Encouragement of a
Minister, by the stated Sallary of an Annual Allowance of an Hundred Pounds,
besides Gratuities from the Inhabitants; yet are the Sacred Administrations but
ineffectually, for the most part, used toward the reclaiming their Enormities,
and reduceing the Lives of the Inhabitants to Sobriety and a Religious
Behavior. A Reason of their Immorality.
The looseness of which may in a great measure be derived from the Poverty of
the place, which affords but slender Encouragements to live there. And where
there are no Rewards for Piety, but present inward Tranquillity, and the lively
Hopes of a Happy Futurity, where nothing is visibly attainable but barely Peace
of Conscience, attended with the expectation of a better State hereafter; these
to a Man, the dependence of whose Life is upon his daily Pains, and who is
continually solicited with anxious Thoughts for his secular Concerns, appear
too thin and airy Diet to his gross Mind, which is unaccustomed and unprepared,
and not at leisure to relish it. For sensible Allurements do soonest gain upon
Vulgar Spirits, and Temporal Motives do most easily strike the Fancy of less
Spiritual and refined Minds, therefore has the Wisdom of Providence designedly
annexed the Promise of many Worldly Felicities to our Duty, and made our present
Enjoyments a powerful Bait to entice us to the security of the Future. And for
this cause Modesty and Temperance are as much Strangers here, as Wealth and
Honor.

While we Anchored here, there came into Harbor, An Account of three Pirates.
a Ship Laden with Negroes from Madagascar, belonging to New York: who
acquainted us with three Pirates which she left Rendezvouzing in St. Augustin's
Bay, a Port belonging to that Island. Two of the Ships were English, and the
other Dutch, and were all richly Laden with store of Silks, which they had
taken in the Red Sea, from the Asian Merchants that traded from Mecha to
Suratt, and other Coasts of Indostan. Their Rigging was much worn and
Weather-beaten, and for want of a New suit of Sails, they were forced to employ
double Silk instead of Canvas, and proffered that Exchange to this Commander.
They had spent so much time in the Naval surprises of the Moors, and loading
themselves with the Rich Booties which were easily taken in the Red Sea, that
their Ships became almost useless and unfit for Navigation, which brought them
thither for Recruits. They were Prodigal in the Expenses of their unjust Gain,
and quenched their Thirst with Europe Liquor at any rate this Commander would
put upon it; and were so frank both in distributing their Goods, and guzling
down the noble Wine, as if they were both wearied with the possession of their
Rapine, and willing to stifle all the Melancholy Reflections concerning it.

This St. Augstuin's Bay is the Harbor generally frequented by the European
Pirates, St Augustin's Bay.
when the approach of the Mussouns souns threatens their Navigations any longer
in the Eastern Seas, where Fifteen or Twenty English or Dutch will, without
peril of either Ship, or Men, attack and board the largest Moor Ships that
commonly Sail in those Seas. Madagascar.
Madagascar is a very large Island, and affords plenty of Provisions for the
Ships that put in there. It is governed by several Kings, Independent, and
Hostile to one another, designing continually upon each others Territories,
being possessed with that restless Spirit of Ambition, which allows as little
Ease to a Man's self, as it does security to his Innocent Neighbor. And here
too, as well as in Africa, where we landed; they compute their Wealth by the
Numbers of their Slaves, and wage their Wars upon their accounts. The value of
Gold is yet unknown to them, Gold not valued upon Madagascar.
that Sun of the Earth, as an Ancient called it, amazes them not with its
Luster, nor fires their Hearts with an ardent desire of it; Steel and Iron are
their darling Metals, whereby they perform their generous Exploits by open
Violence, and not by the treacherous Persuasions of Gold. Therefore this
Commander purchased here a Ball of Gold of 80 Ounces weight for a Trifle of no
value, only it pleased the Spectators Eyes.

And because these Pirates have been a public Scandal, as well as Damage to
our Nation, and both the English, French and Dutch at Suratt, have suffered in
their Fortunes as well as Reputation from the Moors by the Violence and Rapine
of these Men; therefore I might here insert a Relation of their Sufferings, did
it not fall in more properly with the succeeding Account of the English Factory
at Suratt, and of the hardships the English underwent there.

Within three Weeks after we loosed from St. Helena, A mighty Storm at our
doubling the Cape.
we reached Cape bone Esperanse, in the doubling of which it blew so violent a
Fret of Wind, and the high-wrought Seas were so tempestuous, that unless that
extraordinary Providence which sets Bounds to its proud Waves, had not likewise
restrained their outrageous Swellings, we had all perished in the merciless
Surges. The Commander who was a stout and expert Mariner, and who had past nine
times to the Indies, confessed a severity in this Tempest beyond whatever he was
engaged in before. The Fiery Meteors which arise from the impetuous clashing of
the Elements, fixed themselves upon our Masts and Shrouds, and with ominous
appearance showed us the eminence of our Danger; and though they gave us Light,
'twas less desirable than the thickest Darkness; and the Thunder and Lightning
which were very frightful and amazing, added yet a deeper Accent to the common
Calamity. But what was most lamentable, the immediate Hazard of their Lives
made little Impression upon the Sailers, nor did the apparent Apprehensions of
Death, and of another World, make them either bewail their unhappy Fate, or
summon them to a review of their past Actions; but as if they seemed to vie
with the Noise of the Waves, the more boisterous they grew, the louder were
their Oaths and Execrations. Till the miraculous Divine Goodness, uncalled
upon, and thus provoked, freed them by a wonderful Deliverance from the
imminent Danger.

We were just recovered from the Thoughts of this, A narrow escape from
Shipwreck
when there arose another as inevitable a Danger, by which we had suffered an
inavoidable dismal Fate, had it escaped our Notice a little longer. For sailing
between the Main of Africa and St. Lawrence, we were carried unexpectedly by a
Current nearer this Coast, than consisted either with our Designs or Safety,
and had thereby been driven directly upon a Shelf of Rocks that lay off from
the Shore, had not the watchful Sailers upon the Decks espied Breakers, and all
amazed cried out at the immediate Hazard of our Lives that we all were in. It
was about Four in the Morning, and the faint Glimmerings of the Moon shed an
imperfect Light, just enough to give us a sight of our Danger, and of avoiding
it before we were upon it. We lost no time in turning about our Ship, and
steering off some other way, and within a few days gained the sight of that
Land we looked for, the Island of Johanna.

THE ISLAND OF JOHANNA.
THE Island of Johanna is one of the Four Isles of Comora, Johanna described.
their Names are Comora, Monilla, Johanna, and Mayotta. Johanna lies near the
Foot of St. Lawrence, between that and the Main Land of Africa, in about 12 of
South Latitude, by our Observations we made no more than 12 and 6 Minutes. It Is
guessed to be stretched in Length about Thirty Miles, and in Latitude half the
number. Its Fertility invites all the Europe Ships tending toward Suratt, Its
fruitfulness.
and the Northern parts of India, to refresh themselves there. Here are Plenty
of Black Cattle at very low Rates, and Goats so well flesht, and of so large a
Size, that they are valued one third above the others. A Bullock may be bought
for two Dollars, when three are expected for a well-fed Goat.

The Island abounds with Fowls and Rice, with Pepper, Yams, Plantins, Bonanoes,
Potatoes, Oranges, Lemons, Limes, Pine-apples, etc. most of which sort of
Fruits grow wild, and are allowed any Sailer to gather Grain at his pleasure.
They have store likewise of Honey and Sugarcanes; and the Climate and Soil are
well prepared for other Productions, as Grapes, Tobacco, Cotton. The Island is
free for any Native to make his Election of any Plantation, he likes best, and
all the Fruit is common, except that of the Coconut-Trees, Many Fruits here
common.
in which they challenge particular Properties, and debar the common Liberty of
plucking them at Pleasure.

The Women are in some measure servile, The Servility of Women in the East.
and chiefly employed in laborious toiling, and in planting the Ground, whilst
the Men indulge their Ease, and enjoy the Fruits of it. For the Orientals
generally keep their Women under a severe Discipline, and bind them more
absolutely to the Laws of Obedience and Subjection, than is practiced among
those of Europe. They require an Attendance from them, and expect the
Preparation of the Victuals they eat from their Hands, and forbidding them the
Privilege of their Company at Table, think it sufficient for the Wife to begin
her Entertainment when the Husband leaves off. Which Servility comports very
ill with that Tenderness and Regard, which Marriage should be presumed to
create in their joint Interests and Affections.

The Native Turf here is rich, and the Productions so very numerous, that the
Island affords a most pleasant and plentiful Habitation to the Natives. Yet
have they formerly tendered it to the English to build upon it, The Island
offered to the English.
to Plant, and to accept of as a place of their uninterrupted Abode and fixed
Residence; where some, I am sure, may enjoy more Ease and Plenty than they do
at home.

The Succession of the Government.
At our Landing we met with the late King's Brother of the Island, who after his
Decease acts in some measure with Royal Authority, though the Supreme Power is
really lodged in the Queen Dowager, upon whom the Sovereignty devolves after
her Husband's Death. He was seated upon the Ground under the shady Boughs of a
large Tree, near a small Rivolet, The King's Brother's mean Appearance.
attended by half a Dozen of his Nobles, all round him in that familiar humble
Posture. We were told of his Knowledge in the English Tongue, which invited us
to address to him in our own Dialect, in which likewise he replied and
entertained us. His Equipage was very slender, and unsuitable to the Greatness
of his Person; for here were no Arms to defend him, his Innocence was his only
Guard, and a Tuft of Grass his Chair of State. The Leaves of the Trees were his
only Canopy, and the Herbage of the Field was all the Carpet that was spread
under him. We had a very free Access to his Presence, without the usual
Formalities of Address, or Punctilio's of approaching, His Entertainment of us.
which prevented all need of a Master of Ceremonies to introduce us. And he was
as frank and open in his Kindness, as he was easy of Access, allowing us the
same Liberty which he took himself, by inviting us to sit down near him. Now
though the Accommodation was not extraordinary, 'twas recompensed however by the
Favor of a Royal Invitation. The Freedom he had taken with himself, and given
to us, made us at first amazed, not expecting to meet with a Person of that
Eminence and high Character, much less with such Civilities from him; but they
emboldened and led us on to a little more Assurance, than we could have
otherwise taken in a Prince's Presence. We were doubtful of finding any fit
Food, Our Entertainment of him.
or ready Accommodations for Strangers among the Natives, and therefore brought
with us a little homely Diet of Bread and Cheese, which we humbly offered to
his Princely Condescentions to taste, and partake of: For we found that
Ceremonies were not much in Fashion, by his plain and unaffected Appearance, by
his familiar Admission of us to seat our selves near him upon the Ground, which
we thought encouragement enough for our offering this ordinary Refection. The
making Cheese or Butter is an Art, Little Houswifery in this place.
which his People have not yet attained to, which made the Novelty by good luck
recommend it self more gratefully to their Palates; and both the Prince and his
Court thought themselves highly regaled by that, which an English Peasant so
little esteems of.

While we were thus banqueting our selves upon this course Fare, The Prince
enquires of our Affairs.
the Prince was pleased to enquire kindly of our Affairs at home, and of the
Welfare of his Brother the King of England? An Account of the K. of England.
Under whose auspicious Government, I told him, we were not only entitled to a
Blessing, but he was visibly such to the Nations that were round about him.
That he was raised up by the Arm of the Almighty, as a public Defense of his
own Territories, and to put a stop to the Tyrannical Encroachments upon the
Dominions of the Neighboring States; and was caressed by his loving Subjects
as their true Patriot, whom he protected not only by a mild and peaceable
Government at Home, but by a frequent exposing his Royal Person to the utmost
Perils for their Safety abroad, so that his Brave and Generous Mind shunned no
Dangers to preserve them; as if he thought it a glorious Martyrdom to die in
the Defense of his Kingdoms. But we hoped the Almighty, who had all along
protected his Sacred Person, would favor him with a long Life and Series of
Years, blessed with continual Health and Victory over all his Enemies. This
Relation he hearkened to with Attention and Delight, which I endeavored to
heighten by a grateful Present, very suitable to the Discourse, which was, the
Picture of our Gracious Sovereign K. William. He received it with a Smile, and
a Countenance full of Satisfaction, and was resolved to lay it by in Safety in
remembrance of its great Original.

The Satisfaction which the Prince received at this Relation.
When he had a while considered the Strength and Power of the English Arms, and
the Native Valor of our Puissant Prince, he heartily wished he had been happy
in a nearer Neighborhood to his Dominions, that by securing an Alliance with
him, he might engage his Arms in crushing a troublesome offensive Enemy, The
Prince his Enemy.
who had sometimes made Incursions upon his Island, and slaughtered some few
numbers of his Subjects, that is, the King of the adjacent Island, Moheila.
Stones their only Weapons.
Multitudes indeed could not well be mowed down by their Martial Weapons, which
were neither Sword nor Spear, only Hand-stones taken up in the Streets, and
thrown at their Enemies, as they had skill to aim them. Iron, and such like
hostile Instruments of Terror they were unacquainted with. The King's Armory
was furnished with another kind of Weapon much as harmless as these, viz. The
Prince his Armory
Two Guns with broken Locks, and one Pistol, whose Touchhole was near half as
large as its Bore. These in skilful Hands might have done some Execution by the
force of their Barrels.

The peaceable Inhostile Temper of this Prince, The peaceable manner of Life
which the Prince enjoys.
and the quiet submission of his Subjects, who pay him a profound Veneration,
makes his Happiness equal to that of the greatest Monarchs, and infinitely
superior to those, whose Foreign or Domestic Enemies create perpetual Feuds
and Tumults. Were no more Arms necessary for the Defense of Princes, than what
he possesses, we might enjoy a Golden Age again, and triumph more in the
Blessings of an Universal Peace, than in all the Laurels and Acclamations that
wait upon victorious War. And as the Resignation of the Dominions of Charles V.
showed a greatness of Mind much superior to all his other Conquests, that
sought for Quiet in a private Cell, which it had long in vain searched after in
Palaces and Camps; so the contented Obscurity of this Prince raises his
Felicity to the rivalling that glorious Hero in the nobler Instances of his
Life, by affording his Mind as ample a Satisfaction in his narrow Territories,
as that potent Prince enjoyed either in his exalted or inferior State.

The Queen seldom seen
The Queen here, as the Queen at Achen, is never exposed to the view of
Strangers, but is kept from their Sight by a thin piece of Silk, when she
condescends to speak with them; and very rarely vouchsafes to put forth her
Head. When she is Chamber-sick, or by urgent occasions invited abroad, she is
then kept private and unseen by a Set of Curtains hung about her.

This present Prince is blessed with several Daughters, one of which was matched
to an Arabian Master of a Junk, The Portion of the Prince's Daughter.
and was Portion'd with Five Hundred Dollars by her Father, which was thought
the third part of the Money he was computed to be worth; to this was made some
Addition of Slaves and Cattle to increase the Dowry; and in these the greatest
part of their Wealth did consist, before the Europeans brought in of late the
use of Dollars among them. They maintain a small Commerce from hence to Patta,
whither they export Rice in a sort of Vessels called Junks, Vessels made
without Iron.
which are framed all of Wood, without one Ounce of Iron in them.

The first coming hither has been very fatal to such as sleep upon the Ground,
Sleeping upon the Grass fatal for Europeans.
and carelessly expose their Bodies to the cool nocturnal Mists, which by Damps
that arise from the Earth, and a disuse to those moist Vapors, are frequently
as pernicious to their Health, as lying abroad in the Fields in the Northern
Climates would be. But those English who had fortunately made their Escape
hither after a Shipwreck, were by a due Care and Regimen vigorous in their
Constitutions. The Natives, after the loss of their Ship at Sea, received them
all very kindly, condoled their Misfortune, and supplied their Exigencies with
a Generosity extraordinary. One of the English was honored with a piece of
Silk from the Bounty of the Queen, and was offered by her Directions Diet and
Lodging while he pleased. Their Cordial Affection to the English readily
kindled their Liberality, that was expressed without Reluctance, or any signs
of a repining Humor, and is increased into so dear and intimate a Kindness,
that it is a common Proverb now among them, Johanna-man, Englishman, A Proverb
at Johanna.
all one.

Neither the French, nor other Nations, The English kindly entertained here.
meet with half that Welcome from them which the English receive; because of the
exact Justice that we maintain with them in our Traffic, which very much
surpasses the Equity of the Commerce in others; and all Men, even such as
rudely treat others, desire their Society most of all who are kindest and most
just to their Affairs. But above all Nations they have the least Friendship for
the Danes: For a large Danish Ship touching here at such a time, as they were
sore infested by a War with their Neighboring Island Moheila, was hired in
their Defense, An instance of Villainy in the Danes.
and prevailed with to take on Board several of their Men to assist in the
Conquest of their Enemies; and some hundreds of Dollars were raised by a
Contribution, and given as an Encouragement and Reward to the Undertaking. But
the Danes vanquished their Expectations, instead of conquering their Enemies;
and instead of putting them to flight, fled themselves with both their Men and
Money, so that to this Day they were never heard of. These Cheats and gross
Impostures fix that Infamy upon Christianity, A Reason why Christianity
prevails not.
which it rigidly disclaims, and make it look like a very formidable Profession
to the Native Simplicity of these People, whose pliable Tempers would readily
prompt them to its Entertainment, were they not debarred by an Invincible
Antipathy to such Injurious Transactions.

The Buildings of their Country Villages are slight and without Ornament, The
Towns and Buildings.
but Kings Town and Queens Town, which are the Capital upon the Island, have
some Structures more polisht, and made strong by Stone-Walls and Timber Roofs.
The former is the usual Residence of their Kings, where they keep their Court,
at 25 Miles distance from the Harbor. The Inhabitants of this place enjoy some
peculiar Privileges above the rest of the Natives of the Island, because of
their being seated so near the Royal Palace, which defends them from those
Injuries to which those that dwell at a Distance are sometimes exposed.

The King Arbitrary.
They are all of them industrious in concealing their Wealth from the notice of
their Prince, whose Avarice and Injustice cause all their Goods and Estates to
be seized to his own proper Use, when they die; whereby many times the Widow
and Children are reduced to the lowest state of Misery, when once the Natural
Death of the Husband has made the King Heir to his Wealth and Fortune. Which is
an Oppression very unjustifiable even among the Mohammedan Princes, and those
Arbitrary Governors of the East; but could never be bore with any Patience, by
a People secured in their Estates by the same Laws with those which confirm
that of their Prince, and who like us are freed from all Royal Violences, by a
tame Resignation of our Possessions.

In Queens Town, which is a Maritime Village, many of their finest Houses stand
uninhabited, almost half of them, because some of the People were formerly
killed in them by the Islanders of Moheila, The Causes that many Houses stand
uninhabited.
and their Bloodshed polluted the Habitation. The Death of the Master and
Mistress, and one or two more of the Family, does the same; as if they
mistrusted, that upon the Destruction of the Root, the Natural Branches would,
without a Transplantation, wither and decay. And the Death of any Person
whatsoever so far defiles the Purity of the Dwelling, that it hinders the
Dressing of any Meat there for the next Month or two succeeding.

The Coco-nut, The great usefulness of the Coco-Tree.
upon which the generality feed, supplies them not only with Meat, but Drink,
and serves instead of a Cup to drink out of; and, with the Tree upon which it
grows, is so variously serviceable to Navigation, that a Ship may both be
built, and rigged, and victuall'd, and freighted by them. A little Rice and
this Nut together, without any other Food, do generally allay the Hunger of the
Common People.

Large Entertainments.
The Entertainments prepared by the King, and those of the best Note, are very
large and hospitable, at which a whole Town will be at one time treated, and
all the Inhabitants invited as Guests. At these Feasts the Increase of the
Island is served up in Plenty, but eat with Moderation, and without much
studied Niceness in the Preparation; boiled Meat and Rice do generally cover
all their Tables.

Strong Drink forbidden.
Strong Drink is not so much their Aversion, as Restraint, being kept from it by
their Obedience to the Mohammedan Law, contrary to their eager Desires. Yet
here, as in places more Oriental, they warm their Spirits by the smoking of
Tobacco; and Beetlenut and Chinam are very rarely out of their Mouths.
Beetle-nut.
Beetle-nut fortifies the Stomach, and comforts the Brain; it preserves the
Teeth, and cures or prevents a tainted Breath. The Beetle-nut resembles a
Nutmeg, and is shaved into thin pieces. Chinam.
Chinam is Lime made of Cockle-shells, or Limestone; and Pawn is the Leaf of a
Tree, Pawn.
wherein the other two are wrapped up. These they take and chaw between their
Teeth, till they squeeze out their Moisture, which is spit upon the Ground.
Upon this two effects follow. First, It leaves a red Tincture upon the Teeth
and Lips, which is esteemed with them very Ornamental; and then it chears and
heats their Spirits, even almost to the Intoxication of such as are
unaccustomed to it. Thus they commute for the use of our prohibited Wines. The
Rheum which is hereby raised in the Mouth, is spit generally into a Hole in the
Room, designed for that purpose, which serves instead of a Pigdan, or
Spitting-pot. The Floor where the Prince entertained us was so uneven and full
of these Holes, as if the whole Room had been contrived for that purpose.

In the middle of Queens-Town is a Mosque daily frequented by the People, The
Mosque.
into which we were admitted with this necessary Respect of putting off our
Shoes upon the entrance into it.

But this was an Instance of Civility rarely allowed us Infidels by the
Mahometans. Near the Porch of the Mosque is a Draw-well for the washing the
Hands, Face, and Feet, of all that enter, or come out of it. They take Care to
preserve it neat and clean, with Mats spread upon the Floor for the Convenience
of such Men as pray, for the Women are not much concerned to frequent it. In
repeating their private Prayers they make use of Beads, as the Romanists do,
and commonly with the same neglect, intermixing their Secular Conference with
the handling of them.

The Women married young.
The Women are Courted sometimes at Seven or Eight Years old, and married when
they come to Maturity, which is about Eleven or Twelve in these warmer
Countries; at which time they prepare a public Feast for the space of Seven
Days, as they do at their Funerals, and entertain all that are pleased to come.

The Condition of married Women.
The Woman contributes to the Maintenance and Support of her Husband, and upon
some Occasions can leave him. They are kept secluded from the Society of
Strangers, and that freedom of gadding abroad; which they so eagerly desire,
which they sometimes unlawfully venture upon, to the hazard of their Lives upon
Discovery. The Orientals are all of them generally jealous, and very
circumspect about their Wives; and seldom fail of punishing their Infidelity,
if it come to light. And particularly, the Laws of Tunquin are very severe
against Adulteresses, A severe Law against Adulteresses at Tunquin, and at
Japan.
who upon Conviction are cast to an Elephant bred up for that purpose, who
tosseth them in the Air with his Trunk as long as he finds any Life in them.
And thus in Japan Adultery is punished in the Women only; though Deflowring of
Virgins, Coinage of false Money, and some other Vices, are punished as well in
their Relations, as in the Persons of the Criminals.

They make great Lamentations at the Death of their Friends, The Burial and
mourning Apparel.
for whose Sepulture they have no particular places set apart, but lay them
often any where in the Fields. Their Mourning Apparel is plain and simple, and
of inconsiderable Expense, made up of a few Leaves of Trees, tied about the
middle, in fashion of a Hanging Fringe. Which is as strange in its kind, as the
Color is to us at Tunquin, where the new King and all the Princes of the Blood
mourn in Robes of White Satin, instead of the Dark Colors used in Europe.

The time of naming their Children.
Seven Months after the Birth they name their Children, at which time is a
public Feast celebrated for their Friends. If the Child chance to die before
that time, they are persuaded of the Efficacy of their Prayers in contributing
to its future Felicity.

The Devil's frequent appearing.
Their Idea's of Religion are very dark and superstitious, increased in them by
the constant Apprehensions of the Devil's frequent appearance among them. They
give him here the Name of Gregory, and affirm, that they often meet him in the
Highways, and in the Streets, and in the Evenings especially, by the
Waterside. The Dread of him confines them to their Houses when it thunders,
for then they say Gregory is abroad, and no Mortal dare stir out of his
Dwelling. As the City of London had a Custom of burning the Pope every Year,
The burning of the Devil.
so here they commonly burn the Devil. At an appointed time of the Year all the
Dirt of the Country thereabouts is laid in an Heap upon a Black Rock, lying
between Queens-Town and the Harbor, which by the Neighborhood is put into a
Flame till all be consumed. A particular Act of Malice in the Devil.
But the malicious Spirit returns this Affront in a very spightful manner; and
for the imaginary Injury done to him, inflicts a real and grievous Punishment
on them, by the private Stealth of one of their Children every Year, which is
yearly wanting upon the Island, against all their Vigilance and Care, which
with melancholy Countenances they often confirmed to us.

Many of the Natives affect a Familiarity with this Evil Spirit, Negromancy
practiced
are addicted to the Invocation of him, by their Skill in Negromancy; and have
often recourse to him upon any Emergencies of Consequence; the obsequious Devil
never failing of being their Oracle, when once the Ceremony of Invocation is
over. By Advice from him they assured us of some English and French Ships which
would soon be in the Harbor, and accordingly happened. For the Herbert, an
English Merchant-man belonging to the East India Company, was in a short time
after our Departure set upon in this Road by three or four French Ships, and
after a vigorous Resistance of their united Force, was unfortunately blown up,
when she was almost ready to give them Chase. However we, by a careful
Providence that preserved us, left this Island before this Danger, and on May
the 29th, 1690. fortunately arrived at the Island of Bombay, which is
unquestionably one of the most convenient Harbors in the Indies.

THE ISLAND OF BOMBAY.
THIS Island has its Denomination from the Harbor, The occasion of the Name of
this Island.
which allows the safest Rideing for Ships of any in these parts, and was
originally called Boon Bay, i. e. in the Portuguese Language, a Good Bay or
Harbor. By Ptolomy it was described under the Name of Milizigeris. And before
it fell into the Hands of the English, was under the Dominion of Portugal, It
belongs to the Crown of England; and is now possessed by the East India Company.
from whence it was translated to the Crown of England, upon the Marriage of
the Infanta of Portugal to King Charles the Second, An. 1662. And is now put
into the Possession of the East India Company, for the convenience of their
Ships and Traffic.

Before we espied the Main of India, several Snakes of different sizes came
swimming round our Ship near the surface of the Water, Snakes seen at Sea, a
token of the nearness of Land.
by which we knew we were not far from Land, because they are never seen at any
great distance from the shore; they were washed from it, I presume, by the
violence of the Rains in the times of the Mussouns, which I shall afterward
describe. This was seconded by another sign of our approaching the Land, viz.
by a multitude of Locusts, Locusts lighting upon our Ship at Sea.
which came flying upon our Masts and Yards, when we were distant from it
Thirty Leagues, as we found by our Computation afterward. They were above two
Inches in length, and their reaching us at that distance from the Shore, argued
their great strength of Wing to fly to us so very far; by which they mounted
aloft, after they had rested themselves a while, and took their Flight directly
upwards. While I was at Suratt, the President and some more of us observed for
several succeeding Nights, an Infinite number of these Creatures Flying over
our Heads for several hours together, in such numerous Armies and vast Bodies,
that they cast a Cloud over the Moon, though it then was at the Full. They
directed their Course toward the South, but some of them called by the way,
and lighted upon a Field of Corn near the City of Suratt, A Field of Corn
devoured by a multitude of Locusts.
and in one Nights time devoured it all. The Poor Husbandman bewailed his Loss
to the Governor of the City, who was invited forth as a Spectator of the
sudden devastation, that he might be more sensibly moved to repair the Damage,
and relieve the Man.

It was just the Season of the Mussouns when we fell upon the Coast of India,
which generally is extreme dangerous, because they break out for the most part
in such Thunder and Rains, and impetuous Winds, that if the Ships are not laid
up and in Harbor before that time, they incur the hazad of being lost. This
made our Commander wish himself an hundred Leagues from Land, though we were then
in sight of it; The Ship endangered by the Mussouns.
because that all his Care and Skill had scarce secured him from being driven
by the Violence of the Storm upon a Lee-Shoar, by which he saw he must
inevitably perish. But in 24 Hours space the Danger was well spent, and the joy
of our Safety commenced about the same time that the fear of our Ship wrack did
begin, according to the Maxim and Observation among Mariners, An Observation of
Seamen.
That a Tempest ceases about the same time generally that it does arise. And
because I am fallen upon this Subject, I shall, before I enter any farther upon
Bombay, give a brief Account of the Nature of these Mussouns in India.

A Description of the Mussouns.
This is the only proper Season of the Year for Rain, which falls here with such
violence, and on all the Coasts of Malabar, that it hinders all Navigation, and
puts a general stop to all Journeys by Land: For during this time, all the Land
Carriages cease, and all the Ships both European and Indian are laid up in
Harbor: It continues in these parts for the space of three or four Months, The
time of its Continuance.
from the latter end of May, 'till the middle of September; but in June and
July do fall the most plentiful Showers, and that sometimes without
intermission, for ten or fifteen days together, Its Violence.
intercepting the appearance of either Sun or Star all that while. The whole
Hemisphere then is most sullenly Dark, and the Sky over-cast with the thickest
weighty Clouds, so that the Earth seems rather enclosed within a huge Ocean of
Water, than only a few watery Clouds, whose black and lowering Aspect is so very
melancholy, that it gives the fairest representation imaginable of the terrors
of a second universal Deluge. Sometimes in Three or Four Hours time, such
Showers fall from these full Clouds, that the Currents run along the Streets,
swelled to that height, that they are scare fordable on Horseback. After this
Excess in July the Showers gradually decrease, the Horizon clears up like the
first dawning of the Day, 'till at length the Heavens are all over Bright, and
the benighted Sun displays his vigor and banished Rays again. The Bannians
Offerings to the Ocean to appease it.
Then do the Bannians endeavor to appease the incensed Ocean by Offerings to
its enraged Waves, and in great plenty throw their gilded Coco-nuts into the
Sea to pacify its storms and Fury, and render it peaceable and calm. And after
these Ceremonious Oblations are past, the Oraculous Bramins declare safety to
the Ships that will venture upon the Ocean, before which not one of them will
offer to weigh an Anchor. The Young Boys are much delighted with this Custom,
for whatever Coco-nuts are thrown into the Water, they immediately swim in and
fetch them out.

Rains fall only at these times.
The Mussouns are the only Season for watering of their Fields, their Meadows,
and Arable Land. And for the preservation of this Element, wherever they sow
their Rice, they endeavor to reduce the Ground to a Level, that nothing of
this Heavenly Moisture may be lost.

The foulest Weather when the Sun is nearest.
The Sun's approach to the Natives of Europe promises them the fairest Weather,
and here the fowlest. The reason of which is his Vertical Exaltation, which
with great violence Exhales the Vapors of the Earth, and returns them as
plentifully again. Therefore both under the Equator and the Tropic, when the
Sun has been in the Zenith, I have perceived the Air has been more temperate,
and the Weather cooler, than at ten or twelve Degrees distance from it: And
that abundant moisture which is always powerfully drawn up, near the Equator,
from which the Sun is never very far distant, abates that scorching Heat of his
Influence, which otherwise would be scarce tolerable to either Animal or Plant.
And therefore in the middle of May, before the Southerly Winds set in, which
bring the Rains along with them, Ink dried up in the Pen by the Heat.
the Air at Surat is so very dry, that it licks up the Moisture in the Pen,
before we are able to write it out; and so intensly Hot, especially about 3 in
the Afternoon, that we cannot well endure the standing for any long time upon
the Grass, where the Sun's Beams have their full force. This causes our
sprinkling the Floors of our Chambers frequently with Water, The Floors
commonly sprinkled with Water.
to create a kind of Fresco in them, during this Season, and makes us Employ
our Peons in Fanning of us with Murchals made of Peacocks Feathers, Murchals.
four or five Foot long, in the time of our Entertainments, and when we take
our Repose.

Now, as in other Countries, the periods of the variety of Weather are
uncertain, the Fair and Foul succeeding one another with great variety and
alteration; and as in India they have stated and fixed times without any
doubtful vicissitudes; so likewise even there they do not observe throughout
all places the same Months. The time of the Mussouns different in some places.
For upon the East side of Cape Comorin, on the Coast of Coromondel, from April
to September the Weather is Fair, and in the other Months is the Winter-like
Weather; whereas on the Coast of Malabar, which lies to the West, the Fair
Weather begins in September and ends in May. So that in passing over-land from
one Coast to the other, the Travelers, who are unacquainted with it, are at a
stand to find two different Seasons of Winter and Summer in 20 or 30 Leagues
distance. The Rains likewise come from different Quarters in these different
Regions; The Mussouns arise from several quarters.
some from the South, some from the West, and some from the East. And at the
Maldive Islands, which are reckoned 12 Thousand, the Rains follow the Course of
the Waters from the West, which are carried by an impetuous Current for six
Months together toward the East, that is, from April to September; the other
six Months are Hot and Calm, with the Winds settled from the East.

The Mussouns are rude and Boisterous in their departure, The Stormy Seasons of
the Mussouns.
as well as at their coming in, which two Seasons are called the Elephant in
India, and just before their breaking up, take their farewell for the most part
in very ruggid huffing weather. As if they were constrained to force their
Entrance, and Combat the fair Seasons, before they could make way for their
admittance; and were likewise resolved to try their utmost effort, sooner than
tamely resign their Empire, and quit the Coast. For Nature must needs be under
great Conflicts and disorder, by such a sudden Change from an uninterrupted
Sunshine to such constant Rains.

When once the Mussouns are past, India wants Rain for 8 or 9 Months.
the other Months are under the serenest influence of the Heavens, without one
Fertile Cloud for several succeeding Months visible in the whole Firmament, but
the cheerful Sun, from six to six, is never veiled with gloomy Meteors, or
Eclipsed with dark and Melancholy Exhalations from the Earth: But all the
Animal Generations bask themselves in his warm Rays, without any fear of Rain,
or Tempests, or chilly nipping Weather. And now the Vegetable Race below, Trees
and Corn, Flowers and Herbs grace the World with infinite variety of delightful
Forms, and pleasant Colors, being refreshed by Nature's Seminal Juice, the
plentiful Showers that descended in the time of the Mussouns: Wherein several
Trees, by quenching their Thirst with such a large Draught at that Season,
maintain a flourishing Verdure all the Year round. Green Trees all the Year
round, and full of Moisture.
And what is more remarkable, some of those Trees will yield each Night a Quart
of Tarry or Toddy, tho it be at eight Months distance from the falling of the
Rains; the greedy Soil imbibed at that time such a quantity of this pure Liquor
when it fell upon the Earth. This gives India the lovely Aspect of those
Blessed Seats, which are sweetly described by the Poet, Quas neque concutiunt
venti, neque nubila nimbis
Aspergunt, neque nix acri concreta Pruina
Cana cadens violat, semperque innubilus Ether
Contegit, and late diffuso lumine ridet.


But at Bombay, September and October, September and October unhealthful Months
at Bombay.
those two Months which immediately follow the Rains, are very pernicious to
the Health of the Europeans; in which two Moons more of them die, than
generally in all the Year besides. For the excess of earthy Vapors after the
Rains ferment the Air, and raise therein such a sultry Heat, that scarce any is
able to withstand that Feverish Effect it has upon their Spirits, nor recover
themselves from those Fevers and Fluxes into which it casts them. And this the
Indians remark concerning the excessive Heats at this time, An Observation of
the Indians.
that they say, It Is September 's Sun which causes the black List upon the
Antilope 's Back.

Thus I leave this Description of the Season and Nature of the Mussouns, and
return to Bombay, which is only a small Island, situate in about Nineteen
Degrees of North Latitude, not eminent for any thing so much as its Fort and
Harbor.

Plenty of Coco-nuts, but not of Cattle.
They have here abundance of Coco-nuts, which bring some Advantage to the
Owners, but very little either of Corn or Cattle, but what is imported from the
adjacent Country; and these not in great Plenty, nor of very good Growth. A
Sheep or two from Suratt is an acceptable Present to the best Man upon the
Island. And the Unhealthfulness of the Water bears a just Proportion to the
Scarcity and Meanness of the Diet, and both of them together with a bad Air,
make a sudden end of many a poor Sailer and Soldier, An unhealthful Air.
who pay their Lives for hopes of a Livelihood. Indeed, whether it be that the
Air stagnates, for the Land toward the Fort lies very low, or the stinking of
the Fish which was used to be applied to the Roots of the Trees, instead of
Dung; or whatever other Cause it is which renders it so very unhealthful, it is
certainly a mortal Enemy to the Lives of the Europeans. And as the Ancients
gave the Epithet of Fortunate to some Islands in the West, because of their
Delightfulness and Health; so the Modern may, in opposition to them, denominate
this the Unfortunate one in the East, because of the Antipathy it bears to
those two Qualities.

We arrived here (as I hinted before) at the beginning of the Rains, Above 35
buried out of the Ship in less than 4 months.
and buried of the Twenty Four Passengers which we brought with us, above
Twenty, before they were ended; and of our own Ship's Company above Fifteen:
And had we stayed till the end of the next Month, October, the rest would have
undergone a very hazardous Fate, which by a kind Providence ordering our Ship
for Suratt's River-mouth, was comfortably avoided. A fortunate Escape indeed!
because neither the Commander, nor my self, were in any Hopes of surviving many
Days: neither Temperance, the most Sovereign Medicine, nor the safest
Prescriptions in the Physical Art, could restore the Weakness of our
languishing decayed Natures. And that which thoroughly confirmed to us the
unhealthfulness of the place we had lately loosed from, was the sudden
Desertion of our Diseases, and return of Health, The healthfulness of a good
Air.
before half the Voyage to Suratt was finished: In the middle of which Passage
we manifestly perceived in our Bodies as evident an alteration and change of
Air for the best, as our Palates could distinguish betwixt the Taste of Wine,
and that of Water.

An Invitation for the Author to stay here.
The Deputy Governor, Mr. George Cook, a pleasant and obliging Gentleman,
solicited me upon the account of my Function to reside with him upon Bombay,
and invited me with all the Proposals of a frank and generous Civility, to wave
my Voyage, and continue with him there, because they were then destitute of a
Minister. And indeed the Deference I bore to such kind Expressions, and to the
Duty of my Calling, were invincible Arguments for my Stay, had I not been
satisfied of the immediate infallible sad Fate I was under, like that of my
Predecessors; one of whom was interred a Fortnight before this time, and three
or four more had been buried the preceding Years: Which common Fatality has
created a Proverb among the English there, An English Proverb at Bombay.
that Two Mussouns are the Age of a Man. This is much lamented by the
East India Company, and puts them upon great Expenses for supplying the Island
with fresh Men, in the room of those that are taken away, and providing able
Surgeons, furnished with Drugs and Chests from Europe, to take care of the
Infirmaries, and all that are sick.

But there seldom happens any great Defect in the Natural World, The great
wickedness that reigned upon the Island.
without some preceding in the Moral; and the Springs of our Miseries and
Misfortunes rise higher than merely from Second Causes. For I cannot without
Horror mention to what a Pitch all vicious Enormities were grown in this place,
when the Infection was most outrageous; nor can I but think that the Divine
Justice interposed, and forwarded these fatal Infelicities, which are not wholly
imputable to an impure Contagion of the Air, or the gross Infection of the
Elements. These were made use of as Fatal Instruments of the direful Excision,
but the true Cause of the Malady lay deeper. Their Principles of Action, and
the consequent evil Practices of the English forwarded their Miseries, and
contributed to fill the Air with those pestilential Vapors that seized their
Vitals, and speeded their hasty passage to the other World. Luxury, Immodesty,
and a prostitute Dissolution of Manners, found still new Matter to work upon.
Wickedness was still upon the Improvement, and grew to such a Perfection, that
no Vice was so detestable as not to be extremely vicious; whereby Satan
obtained a more Despotick Authorty in the Hearts of the Christians, than he did
among the Gentiles in the Pageantry of Heathen Worship. And when the Seeds of
Avarice and Profaneness, of Envy and Injustice, and a thousand other black
Infernal Vices grew up and flourished, and were made the Ambition of every
Individual; we need not then admire, if the pure Luminaries of Heaven should
set themselves against their Impieties, and dart their mortal Poisons on the
Earth; if the Planets should wisely shed their venomous Aspects upon profligate
Men, and thereby in Vengeance produce the mortal Fruits of Death.

Vermin and Venomous Creatures very large.
The Prodigious growth of Vermin, and of venomous Creatures, at the time of the
Mussouns, do abundantly likewise demonstrate the malignant Corruption of the
Air, and the natural Cause of its direful Effects upon the Europeans. For
Spiders here increase their Bulk ot the largeness of a Man's Thumb, and Toads
are not of a much less size than a small Duck; whereby it is easily seen by
these venomous Creatures, what encouragement these infectious and pestilential
Qualities meet with in this place, and under what a contagious Influence all
the Inhabitants must consequently be seated. This induced a Gentleman one time
in the Governors and my Company, and some other Persons of Note, to affirm,
that he believed it rained Frogs; because he espied upon his Hat small Frogs,
about the bigness of the end of one's Finger, when he was at a great distance
from any House or Covering, from whence they might drop.

All Wounds and Contusions in the Flesh are likewise very rarely healed here;
and if they are, Wounds hardly cured.
it is with Difficulty and extraordinary Care; they happen generally to be very
dangerous, and the Cure admits of more Delays and Hazards in the healing, than
what is usual in other parts. But the Corruption of the Air has a more visible
and immediate Effect upon young English Infants, Infants seldom live here.
whose tender Spirits are less able to resist its Impressions; so that not one
of twenty of them live to any Maturity, or even beyond their Infant days. Were
it otherwise, the Island might in time be peopled with the Europeans
transmitted thither, as the Western Islands are, which belong to the Crown of
England: For the Company allow Marriage to their Factors, The Factors in India
are permitted to marry English Women sent thither.
and Liberty to young Women to pass thither to gain Husbands, and raise their
Fortunes. But so very few of their Children live, and of those that do, so many
of them are sent for England, that fresh Colonies from thence are very
necessary for supporting the Government and Affairs of the Island. A Modish
Garb and Mien is all that is expected from any Women that pass thither, who are
many times matched to the chief Merchants upon the place, and advance thereby
their Conditions to a very happy pitch. And considering what trouble attends
the Passage, especially of Women* considering the Hazard, as well as length of
the Voyage, with some other Casualties that sometimes happen on Board, a modest
Woman may very well expect, without any great Stock of Honor or Wealth, a
Husband of Repute and Riches there, after she has run all this Danger and
Trouble for him. The English Husbands in India very kind.
And indeed the fond Indulgence of the Husbands, as well their Wealth, is
another valuable Recompense to Women for the Toil and Trouble of the Voyage.

The Island lies in about Nineteen Degrees North, in which is a Fort, The Fort.
which is the Defense of it, flanked and Lined according to the Rules of Art,
and secured with many Pieces of Ordinance, which command the Harbor and the
parts adjoining. In this one of the Companies Factors always resides, The
Governor.
who is appointed Governor to inspect and manage the Affairs of the Island;
and who is vested with an Authority in Civil as well as Military Matters, to
see that the several Companies of Soldiers which are here, as well as Factors
and Merchants, attend their various Stations, and their respective Charge.

The Island is likewise beautified with several elegant Dwellings of the
English, and neat Apartments of the Portuguese, to whom is permitted the free
Exercise of their Religion, Liberty of Religion.
and the Liberty of erecting public Chapels of Devotion; which as yet the
English have not attained to, because the War with the Mogul interrupts the
finishing of a stately Structure which was going on for their public Church.
For want of this a particular Room is set apart in the Fort for Public Service
twice a day, Public Prayers twice a day.
at which all are enjoined to be present; and for performance of which, and
other Sacred Offices, a Salary of an 100 l. annually, besides the convenience
of Diet and Lodging, is allowed to the Minister by the Company.

The Gentiles too, as well as Christians, are permitted the Freedom of their
Religion, and connived at in their Heathen Worship. I accidentally once entered
into one of the Gentiles Chapels, but durst not stay for fear of disturbing
the Bramin with the Visit. A small Pagod^.
The smallness of it would scarce admit of above Nine or Ten to enter into it.
At the remotest part of it was placed the Pagod upon the ground, which was only
a Face formed of Tin, with a broad flat Nose, and Eyes larger than a Crown
Piece. On the right side of this Image hung a small Purse for the Peoples
Oblations; on the left, very near it, lay some burnt Rice, which the Bramin had
sacrificed; and at the entrance of the Door stood a Trumpet, which sounded all
the while he was a sacrificing.

The Island by the War with the Mogul was much Depopulated and Impoverished,
The War with the Mogul.
both by destroying the English Inhabitants, and wasting the Fruit of the
ground, especially of the Coco-Trees, whose Nuts are the staple Income upon it.
And whatever the Original of this unhappy War was in other places, or upon what
other Grounds soever it was commenced here, the English had some just Cause of
murmuring and Complaint, The Severity of the Mogul's Officers to the English at
Suratt.
from the Treatment they had from the Mogul's Officers at Suratt, very
differnet from what they might in Reason and Equity expect. For at the first
settling a Factory there, it was agreed upon between the great Mogul and our
President, to have a permission of free Trade for Two and an half per Cent. for
all Goods Imported or Exported; which were without any Reason arbitrarily
advanced to Four per Cent. beyond the Bounds of the first Agreement. And upon
this very occasion the late Honorable President Bartholomew Harris has urged
to me often this Case, that he thought it no Injustice to evade the payment of
as much Customs for the English Goods, as they were injured in them above two
and an half per Cent. by the Mogul. But this was not the only Severity the
English were, Another instance of their Severity.
and still are treated with; but before the Eruption of this last War, the very
Plate Gold Buttons which the chief Factors wore upon their Clothes, were
demanded to be paid Custom for, as often as they crossed the River of Suratt.
This, to the Purser Marine particularly, was insufferable, whose Employment
engages him frequently at Sualy, to which he must always pass the River;
inasmuch as in a short time the very Intrinsic Value of his Gold Buttons would
be spent in Custom. And we are all sensible how hard these violent Despotick
Proceedings bear upon English Spirits, totally unaccustomed to such Servility,
and blessed with such Paternal Constitutions, as appoint the meanest Subject
Absolute Monarch of his petty Freehold, exempt from all Impositions, but what
are voted by the Assembly of the whole Kingdom, in its Representatives.

These, with other things, The Siddy landing upon Bombay.
made a Rupture; and after some small Disputes at Sea, at which the Indians are
never vigorous, the Mogul attempts the sending a Land-Army upon Bombay, whose
Siddy or General having received Intelligence of Sir John Wyburn's Death, who
was Governor of Bombay, and a Man bred to War, immediately prepares to land
his Men upon the Island, and storm the Fort, and totally rout the English upon
it. For now the Siddy expected great Success in his Attempts, because he
challenged our General at that Weapon, in which he knew he was not skilled. Sir
John Child, who was bred a Merchant, Sir John Child unfit for a General.
and created Baronet-by the King, and appointed General of the English Forces
in India by the Company, was, he knew, a General, but no Soldier; and better
skilled at his Pen, than his Sword; and more expert at casting an Account, than
in martialling and conducting an Army. His neglecting to fortify the Island.
And accordingly, his neglect of fortifying the Island till the Siddy was upon
it, tho the Company had frequently required it from him, and his vain
Expressions, That he would bring the Mogul to consent to his Proposals of
Peace, and blow the Siddy off the Island, if he ever came upon it; were all
inconsistent Frailties with his station, whose Province and Employment would
have looked with a better Character, had he foreseen the Danger to which the
Island was exposed, and timely applied his Prevention. But the Merchant was
unfit for that great Post, and grew unweildy with too much Honor. The Siddy
therefore in the Year 1688. landed with an Army of Twenty Five Thousand Men,
The Siddy was Ten to One.
to encounter which the General commanded only Twenty Five Hundred; so that the
Enemy was just Ten to One. Notwithstanding which Odds the English kept them
warmly in Play, The English Valor.
and for all that Disadvantage, repulsed them with such Vigor, that for some
Months they were unable to approach the Fort, though they landed not very far
from it. The English were bouyed up with a strong Opinion of their own Valor,
and of the Indians Pufillanimity, which carried them on to such bold
Adventures, that they promised themselves Victory in the most dubious
Engagements; and had they not been betrayed by Renegades, who discovered their
Weakness, and smallness of their Numbers, might have hoped to have repelled
that numerous Host, with that weak Force they had to resist them. But the Enemy
being taught the Art of mineing, and sheltering themselves in their Trenches
and Basket-works, (which they learnt from the Deserters) came at length so
near, that they Bombarded our Fort with massy Stones instead of Iron Bullets,
Large stones instead of Bullets.
whilst our Shot from thence was scarce able to annoy them, they were so
defended by the Moulds they had cast up. Our Fort was well flanked with
Bastions, having the Sea on one side, and encompassed on the other with a broad
and deep Ditch, and had mounted on all sides very large Guns: But the Decay of
Powder and Ammunition, which the constant Firing had produced, and the Mogul's
Army close investing of the Fort, A Peace concluded.
made it advisable in our General to think on a Peace, which was in a little
time concluded upon; upon which the Siddy left the Island.

The General's Death
The General, before the Terms of Accommodation were agreed upon, dies; by a too
deep Concern, as its presumed, for suffering the Siddy to invade the Island;
and for fear that such Proposals in a Firmaun as might suit with the Honor of
his Masters the East India Company, might not be hearkened to by the Mogul. His
Skill in Merchandise.
He was a quick and expert Merchant, and totally devoted to his Masters
Service: Though the Factors in India charge him with Partiality to his Relations,
in advancing them to Stations above their standing, to the Prejudice of those
who were their Seniors, and better qualified for such Promotions. Exclaimed
against by the Factors
They accuse him likewise of a penurious Temper, and injuriously depriving them
of the Comfort of Europe Liquors, which the Company's Bounty yearly bestowed,
that he might the better ingratiate with his Masters for sparing their
Expenses, though it were a Diminution both to their Credit and their Factors
Health.

He amassed abundance of Wealth during his stay, The General's Wealth.
which was more than Twenty Years in India; the least Conjecture which is made
of it is 100000 l. His Lady, whom he left behind him, who is famed for Piety,
Charity, and an agreeable Behavior, is since married to Mr. George Weldon, The
General's Lady married to Mr. Weldon.
fit to succeed him in his Fortune and his Bed. He is a Gentleman well
descended, of easy and obliging Converse, extreme temperate and circumspect,
and manages the Affairs of the Island, wherein he now as Deputy Governor
presides, with the universal Esteem and Approbation of all upon it. The Wealth
which the General's Lady and Children do possess, demonstrates to what height
of Fortune the Companies Servants may advance, when their Diligence and
Fidelity engage the Bounty and Countenance of their Masters to encourage them.

I shall remark but one thing to entertain the Reader, and conclude this part
of my Discourse. As he whose Title is most Christian, encouraged him who is its
principal Adversary to invade the Rights of Christendom, The treacherous
dealings of a Jesuit with the English
so did Senior Padre de Pandara, the principal Jesuit in an adjacent Island to
Bombay, invite the Siddy to exterminate all the Protestants there. To
facilitate which pious Design, he allowed the Siddy's Army all the Revenues
belonging to himself to aid and support the Work that was to be carried on. But
with this Proviso, that when the English were beaten off, their Possessions,
and of all the Churches belonging to the Portuguese, should be restored to him,
for his own Benefit and Use. This Padre likewise, when the Siddy had invaded
the Island, plentifully supplied his want of Provisions, and with great
Liberality took Care to have them seasonably conveyed to him and his Army. But
the Siddy being beaten off, these and such other perfidious Actions have
forfeited all the Right of the Portuguese to those Lands and Estates, which the
Favor and Civility of the English allowed them to enjoy upon the Island; and
therefore this Padre and his Associates are more likely to suffer a disseizing
of what they had, than the English, as they designed. This breeds no small Heat
and Fury in the Breasts of the turbulent Jesuits, who upon this have raised
some strong Commotions; it has excited their Revenge, and makes them sometimes
threaten in a passionate Rage the retaking of their Lands by Force. Few Men can
enjoy very peaceable Lives, The Jesuits growing Power in India.
who have any fair Possessions near the Convents of these men: For even in the
Indies they have gained that Ascendant over the Tempers and Estates of the
People, that a pleasant Seat, and a fruitful Plantation, can hardly escape
their gaining: Which renders that Society a Burden insupportable to all the
rest of that Religion, who are seated there. The Incomes of that Church,
whereof this Padre is chief, shows in some measure their growing Wealth; for
they are said to amount to the value of a Pound of Gold a Day.

THE ISLAND OF ELEPHANTA.
AT three Leagues distance from Bombay is a small Island called Elephanta, The
reason of the Name.
from the Statue of an Elephant cut in Stone, in equal proportions to one of
those Creatures in his full Growth. This Figure is placed in the middle of a
Field, An Elephant and Horse well Cut here.
conspicuous to any Passenger that enters upon that part of the Island. Here
likewise are the just dimensions of an Horse Carved in Stone, so lively, with
such a Color and Carriage, and the shape finished with that Exactness, that
many have rather Fancyed it, at a distance, a living Animal, The Design of the
Figures.
than only a bare Representation. These Figures have been Erected not barely
for displaying the Statuary's Skill, or gratifying the Curiosity of the Sight,
but by their admirable Workmanship were more likely designed to win upon the
Admiration, and thereby gain a kind of Religious Respect from such Heathens as
came near them.

But that which adds the most Remarkable Character to this Island, A Famous
Pagode described.
is the famed Pagode at the top of it; so much spoke of by the Portuguese, and
at present admired by the present Queen Dowager, that she cannot think any one
has seen this part of India, who comes not Freighted home with some Account of
it. The Derivation of Pagode.
A Pagode is the Heathens Temple, or a place Dedicated to the Worship of their
False Gods, and borrows its Name from the Persian Word Pout, which signifies
Idol; thence Pout Gheda, a Temple of False Gods, and from thence, Pagode.

At the Ascent of an High Hill upon this Island Elephanta, is therefore a very
large Indian Pagode, cut out of the very Heart of a hard Rock, whose Dimensions
are about an Hundred and Twenty Foot Square, and in Height about Eighteen;
besides several Out-Rooms appertaining and adjoining to it. At sixteen Foot
distance from one another are sixteen Pillars of Stone, Cut out with much Art
and Ingenuity, whose Diameters are three Foot and an half, designed as it were
for the Support of this weighty Building, whose Roof is a lofty Broad Rock. Out
of the sides of this Pagode, thus Beautified with these lovely Columns and
curious Arches, are Figures of Forty or Fifty Men, Variety of strange Figures.
each of them Twelve or Fifteen Foot High, in just and exact Symetry, according
to the Dimensions of their various Statures. Of these Gigantick Figures, some
had six Arms, and others three Heads, and others of such vast Monstrosity, that
their very Fingers were larger than an ordinary Man's Leg. Upon some of their
Heads were Ornamental Crowns, neat and Artificially wrought, whilst others near
them held Scepters in their Hands, and above the Heads of others are multitudes
of little People represented in a posture of Devotion; some I observed leaning
upon Women, and others upon the Head of a Cow, an Animal most venerable in
India. Here are some taking an Amiable Charming Lady by the Chin, and there the
horrid Prospect of others hewing in pieces little Children; and generally above
the Heads of all, are abundance of diminutive Folk hovering in the Air,
represented with cheerful Aspects, and in lively Figures. This variety of
pleasant and monstrous Images, I looked upon as no other than the several
Objects of the Gentiles Worship, as each Adorer's Fancy led him to his several
God, either of Terror or Delight.

There is nothing of Beauty in the Frontispiece of this Pagode, The Heathens
Fancy concerning Giants.
or of Ornament at the Entrance into it. The Figures of these Gigantick Men, to
which the Heathen have paid a profound Veneration, and Reverenced as Heroes or
Demigods formerly, (for this Island is at present in the Possession of the
Potuguese) are the representation of the first Race of Mortals, which,
according to the Account of their Chronicles, were all Giants, but dwindled by
degrees into lesser proportions, and at length, through the degeneracy of
Manners, which caused an Universal decay of Humane Nature, they shrunk into
these small proportions in which they appear now in the World. So that the
present smallness of our Stature, according to them, derives its declension and
Decay from the Excess of Vice, and the small remains of Virtue that are left.
And because the Forming of a Temple out of such hard Matter, required
Incredible endless Pains, therefore they would Insinuate that these Giants here
expressed, were only capable of such Performances, which seem now to exceed
that ordinary strength we have now to go through with such a Work.

The breaking up of the Mussouns.
About the middle of September 1690. when the Mussouns were broken up, we were
ordered for Suratt, which was very agreeable to all on Board. In our Passage we
met with a puny sort of Pirates called Sanganians, who finding us a Ship of
Force, durst not attempt upon us. But a Fortnight before this time, The Fight
of an English Ship with the Sanganians.
a small English Ship of no Countenance, was encountered by two of these
Sanganians, and Boarded by them. This the English Master scarce resisted,
because he had fitted his Ship for a close Fight, and therefore withdrawing his
Men from the Decks, prepared them with small Firearms, and put the Powder
Chests in order, on purpose to receive them. The Sanganians, who fancied all
their own easy Purchase, were so warmly entertained, that as soon as they
entered, they were repulsed, and speedily withdrew, betaking themselves to the
Water, to evade the fury of the Fire on Board.

In a little time we happily arrived at Sualy-bar, and the Tide serving, Sualy.
came to an Anchor very near the Shore. Here the Europe Ships are permitted to
ride, but no Indian Vessel is allowed that freedom, they are either all of them
to enter the River of Suratt, or to Anchor at the Mouth of it; which is distant
from Sualy two Leagues, as Sualy is from Suratt four. Here the Ships load and
unload their Goods, which are kept in Yards and Warehouses, to be ready to be
shipped off upon occasion. When the Benjamin had Unloaded her Cargo here, after
a long Voyage at Sea, the Commander Ordered her to be cleaned; and thereupon he
found a multitude of large, well-tasted Oysters, which grew upon the bottom of
the Ship, with which he feasted his Seamen, and all the English at Suratt.

Within less than half a Mile from the Sea are three Choultries, or Convenient
Lodgings made of Timber, for the English, French, and Dutch Factors, at a
Bow-shoot distance each from other; and made fit for their Reception by variety
of Apartments; at such times as they are called down to look after the Ships
Cargoes, or to recreate themselves in the Country Air, and with fresh Breezes
from the Sea. Here therefore we came on Shore, and met with an agreeable
Reception and kind Entertainment from the English Factors: And the Sualy Marine
being the first Land we set Foot upon belonging to the Great Mogul, I shall in
the first place speak something particularly concerning that Mighty Monarch,
and then proceed to a larger Account of the City and Inhabitants of Suratt.

OF THE Great MOGUL.
ASIA we know was the first Stage of Mortals, A general Account of Asia.
which both for Riches and Extent, is the most considerable part of our
Tripartite Continent, and enjoys a temperature of Air, by its convenient
position, equally superior to both. And as it was the first Original of
Mankind, by a peculiar Favor from the Supreme Author of the World; so was it
likewise of Nations and Kingdoms, of Monarchies and Empires, whose Laws as well
Sacred as Civil, were formed here; and those Diviner Mysteries of the Jewish,
as well as Christian Religion were first explained. But what adds the greatest
Glory to the place, is, that the Sacred Author of our Faith here drew his
Breath, and Restored lost Mankind by his Death.

Magasthenes Reports, that 122 several Nations were the Old Inhabitants of
Asia, Its Excellence above other parts of the World.
which was first Invaded by Semiramis, afterward by Bacchus, accompanied with
Hercules, who taught them the use of Wine, (which now they have unlearnt,) of
Oil, and Architecture. And indeed all Humane Arts and Sciences, as well as
Architecture had their Rise, and were first taught here, which gives it a just
cause of Challenging a precedence to all other parts of the World. India, which
is one of its Chief Kingdoms, in latter Days was Discovered by the Portuguese,
in the Year 1587, by doubling the Cape of Good Hope; and since by the English
and the Dutch, The passage to India how discovered.
who make a greater Figure now than those more Early Discoverers, are possessed
of some of their principal Forts and Factories, and daily outdo them in
carrying on a vigorous Beneficial Negotiation in all parts.

And as the Riches and extent of Asia surpass the other Quarters of the World;
so has it raised its Monarchs to a point of Grandeur equally glorious and
Renowned. And that spacious Body which is awed by the Indian Scepter, The
Riches of India.
is reputed to to be one of the most Famous and Greatest, not only of all Asia,
but of all this Globe of Earth besides. And if we consider the Diamonds and
other Stones of value, the Gold and other Metals, the Spices and Druggs, the
Silks and Cottons, and the vast prodigious quantities of all those rich
Commodities and precious Stones, with which India abounds, we cannot deny it
that Transcendency which its Monarch pretends to, of being Superior to other
Nations of the Earth, and that it yields the Palm to none besides.

The Indian Emperor, commonly styled the Mogul, Moguls, from whence.
deduces that Title from the last Conquerors of India, who were White of
Complexion; which is the name of a Potent People inhabiting a vast Country in
the Confines of Tartary, from whom they derive their Name and Descent; and though
the Native Indians are all of an Olive Tawny Color, yet these are all White
and Fair, and of the same Belief with their Emperor, Their Religion.
which is the Mohammedan: Because Emmaupaxda, the seventh Descendant from
Tamerlane, being once much distressed by the Parthians or Tartars, was driven
to sue for Relief from his Neighboring Potentate the Emperor of Persia, which
was harken'd to upon these Terms, that he should Convert to the Persian Faith,
and submit himself and Followers to that Religion.

Tamerlane (that is Lame, because one of his Legs was shorter than the other)
was the first of the Kings of India, Tamerlane the first of the Indian Emperors
from whom his Successors boast their Original. He was Born in Samerchandia, a
place in Tartary, and lived about the Year 1398, in the Reign of Richard the
2d. And that we may not defraud this Mighty Hero of his Valor and Renown, the
glory of his Conquests has certainly far outdone the noblest Exploits of any
of the Roman Caesar's, His Exploits.
and the Fortune of his Arms has gone beyond the Successes of Alexander the
Great. So that all the Registers and Archieves of Ancient Heroes, and all the
Annals of Grecian or Roman Achievements, cannot furnish us with Memoirs of
this nature. For he extended his Conquests from East to West, and carried his
Triumphant Banners from China to Poland, whereby he made all Asia tremble;
which was a Victory exceeding the actions of the Bravest and most Fortunate
Captains of former Ages. From him Aureng-Zebe is the Eleventh, who possesses
the Crown of India; Aureng-zebe the 11th. from Tamerlane.
and well may this great Emperor exalt his Pedigree, and value his Descent
from so famed and Glorious an Ancestor, when that Wise and Powerful Nation of
the Romans built so much of their Honor and Renown upon two such Ancestors as
Romulus and Remus. The mighty Deeds and renowned Exploits of Schah Abbas, the
Persian Emperor, Schah-Abbas, a mighty Emperor of Persia.
have likewise imprinted Eternal Characters of Fame and Honor upon his Name,
which is now by vulgar use made the signification of any thing extraordinary or
Miraculous; so that when any thing surpassing Excellent, or wonderful, is
either done or spoken, the Indians presently say of it, Schah-Abbas!

But had Aureng-Zebe been more Industrious in imitating the Virtues of his
Progenitors, The Cruelty of Aureng-Zebe
than in raising himself to a long and proud series of their Titles, and less
Cruel in his Bloody Accession to the Crown; this would have added more
Splendor to his Throne, than all that matchless Grandeur with which it is
adorned by Diamonds, Emeralds, Topazes and Pearls, and would have given a truer
and more lasting Nobility to his Name, than to have gained it with Infamy and
repeated Murder. The Roman Histories inform us, that while that People was
Just and Temperate, and Religious Observers of their Laws, their Empire was
established in its Glory, and Success attended their Arms and Designs. And
concerning the Chinese History, it is affirmed to us, that Virtue alone formed
that great Empire, and that nothing concurred to its Confirmation more than the
Virtuous Lives of their Emperors; in so much that Forty four Kings enamored
with the Virtue of Venvam, submitted to his Laws. But few of the Eastern
Kingdoms besides, are qualified for such a boast as this. The Cruelty of the
Eastern Emperors.
Their Emperors generally sheath their Swords in the Blood of all that stand
Competitors for the Sovereignty, though they be the Sons of the same Parent, and
obliged by a natural Tenderness and Compassion to the mutual Offices of
Humanity and Love. For divesting themselves of these Principles, and being
whetted with an innate Ambition for Empire and Command, and led by the inbred
Laws of Self-preservation, they pursue their Claims to the Royal Dignity,
either by open Violence, or secret Machinations, by private Treachery, or
public Hostility; not sparing the slaughter of their Brethren, or whomever
else they find Candidates, or Pretenders to the Crown. This is the Inhumane
method pursued not only by the Ottaman, but Indian Kings, from which
Aureng-Zebe did not decline, in his Cruel and Treacherous Ascent to the Throne
For his Father Cha-Jehan he Imprisoned, till he died: The Head of his Eldest
Brother, Daracha, he commanded to be cut off; his second Brother, Sultan Sujah,
he put to Flight, who was slain in his Retirement; and his youngest Brother,
Morad-Bache had the same ill Fate with the Eldest, was Beheaded too. Nor was
this enough to satiate his Cruelty, or stop his Revenge, but though he saved
Rauehenara-Begum, his Favorite Sister for assisting his Designs; yet the
other, Begum-saheb, fell a Victim to his Fury, and was presumed to be taken off
by Poison, A Father and four Brethren destroyed by Aureng-Zebe.
for her Fidelity to her Father in his Distress. Thus a Father and four
Children were sacrificed to the Jealousy and Malice of a Victorious Brother,
who by Policy and profound Dissimulation gained the Crown, and pursuing his
good Fortune with Success, was seated and Established in the Throne of his
Fathers; and notwithstanding all those execrable Villainies, he lived a long
time full of Years, a standing Monument of the Divine Infinite Clemency and
Forbearance.

The Succession of the Crown.
The Crown of India is not Entailed by Primogeniture on the Sons, but is ravished
by Force, or carried by Craft of such as do stand in competition for it, who to
facilitate the access to it, ingratiate with the Omrahs and Grandees at Court,
with the Governors of Provinces, and Principal Ministers of State, to fortify
their Pretensions, and secure Parties to themselves both in the Cities and the
Camp, against the time they begin to skirmish for the Royal Inheritance, and
try their Wit and Valor for the Indian Diadem in the Field. And as the
Japanners, in laying the Foundation of a Palace, rip up their Bowels with a
Cric, or Dagger, and so sacrifice themselves, imagining that such voluntary
Victims are necessary to render both the Owners of the Building and the
Habitation Fortunate; so is it the Misfortune of the Eastern Courts, that they
think not the Throne, to which they are advanced, secure, or settled, without
laying the Foundation of their Reign in the Destruction of all Rivals to the
Crown, and in the Blood of their nearest Relatives, that can pretend to the
Imperial Dignity; and make such barbarous Sacrifices necessary, for repairing
and securing their own undisturbed Tranquillity and Ease.

'Till he was possessed of the Arms and* Treasure of his Brother Morad-Bacche,
Aureng-Zebe's Subtilty:
whom he betrayed by fair Pretenses of Friendship, the kindest Caresses and
Expressions of Endearment; Aureng-Zebe pretended himself devoted to Austerity,
and that he would rank himself among the Religious Faquires, or Derviches of
the Kingdom, to spend his days in Poverty and Abstinence, and a private retired
Life; by which new strain of Policy, and the Mask of extraordinary sanctity, he
gained upon the Credulity of the People, as an holy undesigning Prince; 'till
by this pious Design he craftily undermined the Opposers of his Honor and
Empire, and making use of Religious Intrigues, and the help of the Planet
Mercury, he soon became Victorious, and got Mars the Ascendant of his better
Fortunes: And by these pretensions to uncommon Holiness, he made way for the
perpetration of such execrable Crimes, as are not very commonly heard of. But
if we may measure our Opinions by his, His state-Maxim.
and the Maxims he has laid down for Empire, his proceedings will not appear so
very black and criminal, since he has persuaded himself that Princes are exempt
from several of those Laws which bind their Subjects, and that Sovereign Heads
are not so severely Accountable for the Justice of their Actions, as the
inferior rank of Men. As if the despotick Sovereignty he exercised on Earth,
gave him a Privilege and Charter for the same Arbitrary Proceedings with
Heaven, and that he might in some measure act as absolutely with the Supreme
Lord of the Creation, as he does incontroulably with his own Subjects.

The unnatural methods he pursued in wresting the Crown from the Head of his
Father, cautions him from giving the least opportunity for such Rebellious
practices in his Sons, and to prevent all occasions for such bold and bloody
Enterprises. The Rebellion of Cha-Egber against his Father.
Only Cha-Egber his fourth Son, who was born of a Resbout, whose Sect among all
the rest of the Indian Inhabitants are justly reputed the most valiant, was
encouraged by them to attempt the Crown, and depose his Father from the
Sovereignty. These Resbouts were engaged in an universal Revolt, formed a
formidable Army, and placed Cha-Egber, who was descended from them by his
Mother, at the head of it, that they might raise him betimes to the Monarchy of
India, lest his eldest Brother should get the start of him, and succeed in the
Government of that vast Empire, after his Father's Death. Aureng-Zebe not
dreaming of such an Attempt, lay very open to surprisal by this Barbarous
Design, for want of Forces at that time to guard and secure him. And therefore
upon his Son's advancement to the Capital City, Aureng-Zebe's contrivance to
defeat his Son.
betook himself to Stratagem instead of Arms, and penned a Letter in his Son's
Name, directed to himself, to this effect, That he was too sensible of his
Duty, to dare to proceed in that disturbance, which the Resbouts had raised
against his Person and his Kingdom, and therefore he led the Ringleaders and
the rest of the Offenders toward the Capital City, to be seized on by the
Guards within, that they might be delivered up to Justice, and condign
Punishment, according to their demerits, which would prove an unquestionable
Argument to satisfy his Father of his Fidelity. This Letter was sent by a
faithful Servant of Aureng-Zebe's into his Sons Camp, who pretended to come
from him to his Father, but was there stopped, and the Letter opened and read;
and the Resbouts upon it were so enraged, that all the Protestations Cha-Egber
could make were impossible to appease them, or persuade their Engagement of
themselves any longer in his Service. Some therefore left him, and others
refused to advance a step forwards, 'till Aureng-Zebe had time given him to
unite his strength, and muster his Forces; whereby he vanquished the Enemy, and
forced his Son to a speedy flight. In this disgrace and haste he fled to
Persia, where he was honorably entertained by that Emperor, Cha-Egber's
flight to Persia.
with all those Lords that attended his Flight; and is since married at that
Court to the Emperor's Daughter. He daily waits for some favorable Revolution
when he may return to India again, whither he hopes to be recalled by his
Father's death; and with the powerful Alliance and Aid of Persia, and the
united Interest of his Friends in India, he expects to gain the Crown he
unfortunately lost, and establish his glory in that Kingdom, to which he is now
forced to continue on Exile.

Whenever the Indian Emperor is proclaimed, it is with Public Jubilee, Great
Rejoicing at the Proclaiming of the Emperor.
with Songs and Music, Mirth and Revellings, with Fireworks and gaudy Shows in
all parts of the Kingdom; on this day their Ships hang out their Flags and
Ensigns, and expose their Pendants not only at the Top-masthead, but deck the
Shrowds with ten or twenty more. The Crown he wears is of invaluable price, and
the Throne he ascends is reckoned at 300 Lack of Roupies. Each Lack is one
hundred thousand Roupies, which with us is 11250 l. Sterling, reckoning a
Roupie at 2 s. 3 d. Neither are these Solemnities observed upon an Anniversary
day only, according to European Customs, but in Cities, Garrisons, and places
of note, it obtains a weekly Celebration, not with extraordinary Illuminations,
and public joyful Feasts, but with something of Mirth and Music more than
usual. Sunday is the day of the Inauguration of the present Mogul, and
solemnized with the Music of the Trumpets at Suratt in the Castle there; I
wished when first I saw it, that they had converted the Civil into a Religious
observation of that day.

There is another day in India, as well as England, The 5th of November,
remarkable in India.
which is eminently remarkable, the 5th of November. This day the great Mogul
is weighed, and if it is found that he has increased in bulk, above what he
weighed the preceding Year, The Weighing of the Mogul,
this adds excess of Mirth and Joy to the Solemnity; but if he prove lighter in
the Scales, this diminishes their Triumphs, and damps their cheerful
Entertainments. The Grandees and Officers of State prepare for this Feast, two
Months before its approach, what costly Jewels and curious Rarities they can
any where meet with, which they present to the Emperor at this Ceremony;
either to secure his Favor, or to ingratiate with him for a more exalted
station, or Honorable Employ. The Moguls are sometimes weighed against Silver,
which has been distributed to the Poor.

When any Indian Subject stands so fair in the Eye of his Prince, New names
given by the Mogul to his Subjects.
as to be raised to some advanced degree of Trust or Honor, he acquires at the
same time a new Name, according to the Prince's Fancy; according to what we
read in Dan. 1.7. Thus the preceding Governor of Suratt was named Muck Teer
Chan, i. e. Lord after my own Heart; the present is styled Anamat Chan, or,
Conscientious Lord, because of his Fidelity and Integrity. For all the Lands of
Indoston belonging entirely to the Mogul, the Omrahs there cannot derive their
Titles from their Earldoms, Lordships, or Mansion-Houses (as with us) because
they are none of their Propriety, only Tenants at will, during the Mogul's
pleasure; and therefore the Mogul confers upon them such Names of Dignity, as
by their personal Conduct or Accomplishment he thinks they merit. And as he
bestows Titles proper to his Generals, of Invincible, or Victorious; so to his
Nabobs, or Governors, he bethinks himself of Names suitable to their Stations,
or his Opinion of their Excellencies and Endowments. This is a common thing
practiced likewise in other Kingdoms of the East, The King of Siam's Name
concealed.
as at Siam; the King there gives Names not only to his Domestics and
Mandarins, or Nobles, but to his very Elephants. Tho his own Name is
industriously concealed, lest his Enemies by some Enchantment might work upon
it. Thus Pharaoh called Joseph's Name Zaphnath-Paaneah, Genesis 41.45. and Job
called his Eldest Daughter Jemimah, i. e. clear as the Day: The 2d. Keziah, i.
e. Pleasant as Cassia, or sweet Spice: The 3d. Keren-happuck, that is Horn, or
strength of Beauty.

The dependence upon the Prince's Favor makes Obsequiousness fashionable, The
flattery of the Eastern Subjects.
and Flattery practiced in all the Courts of the East: So that though they
require an account of their Affairs, and expect to be informed; yet they think
it a diminution to their Grandeur, to be acquainted with any thing that may
disgust, or told any thing that looks displeasing. Except among the Chinese,
with whom the liberty of Admonishing their Emperor was established by a Law,
The freedom used by the K. of China's Subjects with him.
which empowered them to use importunate Applications to him upon any failure,
and caused them instantly to remind him of taking care of his Life and Actions,
and that the virtuous Pattern of his Royal Behavior, was the best and only
method for deriving Justice, Integrity, and Loyalty upon his Magistrates and
People. They likewise admonished him, that if he deviated from the transcendant
Virtues of his Ancestors, his Subjects would inevitably digress from their
Duties of Allegiance and Fidelity to him. For it is a received Maxim among
those People, That the Subjects are like Ears of Corn, wherewith a Field is
covered, and the Morals of their Emperor are like a Wind, which inclines them
which way it pleases.

But the Indian Emperors are incontroulable in what they say, as well as in
their Actions; so far, that it is an allowed Maxim in this Court, Court
Flattery.
That if they say at Noonday it is Night, you are to answer, Behold the Moon
and the Stars! This flattery of their Subjects has made them fancy themselves
more than Demigods, and vaunt themselves in the most exorbitant swelling
Titles. Thus the Emperor of Japan calls himself Son of the Sun; Proud Titles
of the Eastern Kings.
and for this Reason, when the Imperial Diadem is upon his Head, will never
after appear in the sight of the Moon, for fear of debasing his Gratness, and
because he thinks it would Eclipse his Glory. Thus the present Mogul's Father
styled himself Cha-Jehan, i. e. King of the World: and the Name of Aureng-Zebe
imports the Ornament of the Throne; are no less Extravagant than the rest, they
are these, The Titles of the K. of Bisnagar.
The Husband of good Fortune, the God of great Provinces, King of the greatest
Kings, the Lord of Horsemen, the Master of them which cannot speak, Emperor of
three Emperors, Conqueror of all he sees, and Keeper of all he Conquers,
Dreadful to the Eight Coasts of the World, Vanquisher of the Mahumetans, and
Lord of the East, West, North, South, and of the Sea, which now Rules and
Governs this World.

Thus they exalt their Pomp and Vanity by these proud and Swelling Titles, and
expect there an Obeisance little less than of Adoration from their Subjects and
Adressors. The Tailim, The Indian Salutations
or deep Salem, which is the usual Salutation to the Mogul, is, First to kiss
the Ground with the Hand, then to touch the Breast with it, and afterward
raise it to the Head; and all this thrice repeated, when any person approaches
his Imperial Presence. The ordinary Indian Salute, is only the lifting up of
the Hand to the Forehead, and if it be to a Person of Eminence or Superiority,
to bend the Head too when it is touched. The Salem of the Religious Bramins, is
to join their Hands together, and spreading them first, make a motion toward
their Head, and then stretch them out; and the Salem of greatest Respect, is to
take hold of the Feet, and touch them with their Head; and if this is
occasioned by the committing of some Offense, laying the Hands upon the
Supplicant's Back is a sign of Pardon; and the Offender generally holds fast
the Feet, till he feels it upon his Back. The Chinese give their Prince nine
Prostrations, accounting that Number sacred and lucky. And the King of Sciam
requires not only a flection of the Body, but a profound Prostration before
him. The surliness of an English Sailer.
This Respect a surly English Sailer being unacquainted with, neglected to give
him when he came before him, and when he was threatened by the Attendants for
not yielding to this submissive Obeisance, he boldly replied, That he esteemed
his own Prince as Great and Powerful as any, and to him he never gave more
observance, than bowing his Body, and uncovering his Head, and he was resolved
never to show a greater Civility to any Prince in the World than to his own.

Diverse Opinions of the number of Kingdoms in India.
There are different Opinions concerning the number of Kingdoms which are
reduced to the Indian Scepter, some reckon Thirty Nine, or Forty. Boterus
affirms there are Forty Seven, a later Author affirms the number of Provinces
in Indoston to be only Twenty; who tells us likewise, that the Annual Revenues
amount to above three hundred and thirty French Millions, which does more than
double the Incomes of any the most Potent Monarchs on Earth.

The vast Tract of Land to which this large Empire is extended, The extent of
India.
reaches near 2000 Miles in length, some say more; which makes it necessary for
the Mogul, whose Territories are so large, to employ a numerous Army to awe his
Infinite multitude of People, and keep them in an absolute Subjection. Several
hundred thousand Soldiers are the least that are maintained in Pay; some affirm
he allows Pay for one Million of Horses, See the Embassy of Sir Tho. Roe.
and for every Horse and Man about eighteen pounds, whose Wages seldom run on
beyond a Month or two, because by them they have their only Subsistence. And
did he not constantly clear their Arrears, and keep on foot continually such a
Potent Army, he could never be able to command the turbulent Rajahs, nor
prevent their Plotts and Insurrections; who notwithstanding frequently molest
his Government, pretend a right to their Conquered Dominions, and raise Armies
against him with that Tribute which they refuse to pay. But sure it were
better, instead of all those needless repeated Conquests, he could assure
himself of fixing an Empire in the Hearts of Loyal, though less numerous Subjects.

The frequent Revolts in India render those parts very miserable, Frequent
Revolts in India.
and reduce the Inhabitants to a very distressed State. For hoping to retrieve
their Liberty, and regain the Kingdoms they have lost, they often declare for a
Rajah, which is a Native Indian Prince, and stand by him till the Mogul
over-powers their Forces, defeats their Rebellion, stints their Progress, and
reduces them to a tame Obedience again. So that one while the Mogul comes upon
a City, The miserable lives of the Indians in some parts.
and demands the Contribution of so many Thousand Gold Moors, or else he
threatens the Raseing its Foundations, Pillaging the Houses, and converting
them into Smoke and Flames. When he is retreated, the Rajah's Army flies upon
them with Fury and Hunger, and storms their Towns, and threatens them with Fire
and Sword as their inevitable Fate, if they offer to delay the payment of so
many thousand Gold Roupies more. Or if these formidable Threats are not listened
to, they take that by Rapine, which was civilly demanded, ravage the Country,
and load themselves with Plunder and Spoil. Which makes Fear and Distress,
Poverty and Famine the universal Air and Genius of those unquiet Abodes. This
was the unhappy condition of Suratt, An. 1664. when Rajah Sivagy plundered it
for Forty Days together, carried off in Gold, Silver, and Jewels an Infinite
Sum, without sparing any part of it, but the Habitations of the English and
French, and the Castle, who defended themselves with their Canon.

Sometimes the Conquest of one part of the Kingdom is the loss of another, for
that Rajah who without reluctance submitted to the Mogul's Power, while his
Camp was near, immediately disclaims it, when he knows it at a distance; which
Commotions bring on the Mogul endless Troubles and Expense.

A mighty Rajah is now abroad, in his Expedition to the Coast of Choromandel, A
particular Rajah's Revolt.
where he expects Recruits of Men and Money; he has secured a strong Party upon
the Coast of Malabar, The great length of a Rajah's Arms.
and it is believed will in a short time appear in the Field with very Potent
Forces. If his Martial Arms be proportionably as extensive as his Natural, they
will certainly reach very far, and stretch his Authority farther than any
Potentates in the East; for they are so long, that as he stands, his Hands
reach down below his Knees. And may be the Indians, who upon this account are
apt to harbor Superstitious Thoughts concerning him, may be the easier won to
his Alliance and Designs; if this be not a feigned Report.

The Mogul's Army are pursuing their Conquests with all vigor toward Cape
Comeron, The Mogul's Ambition.
the Southermost Promontory of India, where are several Inferior Princes not
yet attempted upon, the Conquering of whom take up the thoughts, and is the
main Object of Aureng-Zebe's Ambition. The Mogul's Forces:


Besides the vast Army which is always Encamped, and ready for any Expedition
and onset, the several Nabobs and Viceroys are obliged to keep continually in
Pay considerable Forces, for maintaining their own Port, and the Peace of the
Provinces where they preside. Sovereign Princes do not exceed some of these in
point of State and Income. The Nabob or Governor of Bengal was reputed to have
left behind him at his Death, Lacks, Courous, Padans, Nils, what they are.
twenty Courous of Roupies: A Courou is an hundred thousand Lacks, a Lack is an
hundred thousand Roupies, a Padan is an hundred thousand Courous, a Nil is an
hundred thousand Padans; Lacks, Courous, Padans, and Nils, rise by a gradual
advancement of an hundred thousand higher one than another.

Aureng-Zebe seldom leaves the Camp, Aureng-Zebe's living in his Camp.
but both he and his Haram keep their Tents Winter and Summer in the Field. His
numerous Army has a daily supply of all Provisions and Necessaries from all
parts of the Empire, The Camp well provided with Necessaries
in as great plenty and order as any of its Cities can afford them; and
whatever the Kingdom yields, may be with as much ease purchased here, as in any
public Fair. So that there is always in the Camp a multitude of People brought
thither, as large almost as the Army, who come thither, some out of Curiosity,
others out of Friendship and Relation, but the most for Sale of their Goods,
which the Soldiers take off, by whom they live, and from whom they have their
Subsistence.

The Order in the Camp.
Wherever the Mogul removes his Camp, the Generals and Officers, as well as
private Sentinels, still pitch their Tents in the same Position and Place in
respect to his, and one another, as they formerly were posted in; so that he
who once knows where such a Captain had his standing, may readily be directed
to it, though he has decamped from the place he left an Hundred Miles. For all
are obliged to the same distance, and to the same Station and Quarter in
relation to one another, and the Emperor's Tent, in whatever Ground they pitch
their Tents.

Before the Mogul begins to move his Camp, to set out upon a Progress,
Measuring the Way, a thing customary in the Indies.
or undertake any small Journey; and before any Omrah, or Person of Note sets
forward to Travel, the way they must pass is measured out by Line, by a Servant
appointed for that Trouble; and a just account both of the distance and number
of Miles is brought to them, before the Journey is begun: And so exact are they
in maintaining this piece of Indian State, of measuring the Road, that though
they have traveled that way often, and are sufficiently knowing in all its
Paths, yet without this Ceremony they are loath to stir.

Besides the Army, The Mogul's Elephants.
and the several Nabobs and Governors of Provinces and Cities, of Towns and
Castles, which drain his Treasure, and put him upon immense Expenses, the
Indian Emperor maintains daily at least Four or Five Hundred Elephants, with
Camels, Mules, and other Beasts of Burden; some for the War, and others for
his Women and Attendants, his Carriage and Provisions in the Field. The
principal of all his stately Campaign Elephants has a stated extraordinary
Allowance of Sugar mixed with his Provender, and Jaggary Rack, which is a kind
of Aqua Vitae, with his Water; which consume the Mogul Five Hundred Roupies
every Month, that is, near Sixty Pounds Sterling.

These mighty Animals are in high esteem in all the Oriental Kingdoms,
especially at Siam, The White Elephant respected at Siam.
whose Sovereign is renowned for his Respect to the White Elephant, upon the
Persuasion he has of its being inspired with the Soul of some supreme Prince.
And from the Bulk and Strength, the Sensibleness and Docility of that Creature,
they infer commonly, that nothing less than the Soul of some Illustrious
Prince, or mighty Hero, can animate it, and be received into a Body so stately
and large. The Achen Elephants are most looked upon for their Teeth, The Achen
Ivory best.
because that Ivory they say, maintains its Whiteness, and turns not Yellow, as
other does. They say that it is thirty Years before the Elephants come to their
full growth.

Two ways of catching Elephants.
The wild Elephants, which the Mogul and other Princes keep tame, are taken
different ways. Sometimes by digging Pits in the Ground, and covering them with
false Earth, in the Paths frequented by the Elephants, which walking upon it
deceives their Weight, and suddenly they drop down. But if the unweildy Animal
chances to evade this Covert Contrivance, he grows very vigilant ever after,
and warily with his Trunk examines all suspected Ground he is likely to tread
upon. Sometimes they decoy the Male with a Female Elephant bred up for that
purpose, which leads him into a narrow Passage, hedged in so strongly on both
sides with Trunks of Trees, and many pieces of Timber, that he can neither turn
about his monstrous Body to step backwards, nor remove with all his mighty
Strength the Obstacles that enclose and barracade him, till he is chafed and
spent, and thoroughly entangled. After this he is taken and led home between
two others that are tame, and his Wildness presently wears off, and in less
than a Fortnight's time he quietly submits to Discipline, bethinks himself, and
grows familiar. The Female Elephant receives the Male lying upon her Back, The
way that the Elephants engender*
contrary to the Custom of other Animals; and the Male is said to carry his
Testicles between his Ears. After they are taken they seldom Engender, though
sometimes they burn with a lustful Heat, which is not extinguished but by Fire
brought near them, or the Blood of the Riders, if they chance at that time to
be upon them.

The Respect paid to the Indian Emperor, and Men of Note.
The Princes of Indoston who attend the Court, and all the Omrahs and Principal
Officers of the Crown, observe always a due Respect, and keep a convenient
Distance to the awful Person of the Emperor. So that whenever he thinks fit to
ascend an Elephant, and mount himself on that lofty Creature to take the Air,
the Omrahs, in a lower Order, ride only upon Horses. When he seats himself in
his Palanquin, then do they walk in a lowly Posture on Foot after him; showing
in all things a submissive Deference to his Greatness, and profound Respect to
his eminently August Majesty: And till he gives the Word, no Man dares mount
before him. And as if the Words of his Mouth were Oracular, no Sentence of
moment proceeds from the Emperor, but the Ormahs greedily catch it, and cry
out, Karamat! Karamat! Wonder! Wonder! And if any Person of Note in India is
seen by an inferior at a distance, both on Horseback, the meaner Person lights
from his Horse, and there stands till his Superior passes by him.

The Mohammedan Religion, of which the Mogul is a zealous Professor, is that
which is spread very far, and is chiefly countenanced in India; The Mogul's
Piety.
the Mogul never neglecting the Hours of Devotion, nor any thing, which in his
Sense may denominate him a sincere Believer; insomuch that there spread a
Report, a little before I left Suratt, that his ardent Zeal had carried him to
design a long Pilgrimage for Meccha, to visit the Venerable Shrine of their
False Prophet. His eldest Son Sultan Mozum was to be left Inheritor of the
Throne, to secure his peaceable Possession; yet would not this defend the
Claims from the Royal Brothers, who are ready to dispute it with their Wit and
Courage, with all the Force and Art of War. And it is not unlikely, The
likelihood of Cha-Egber's succeeding his Father.
whenever the Crown becomes vacant, and is under a Contest, but that Cha-Egber,
Son-in-law to the Persian Emperor, will in that Martial Lottery gain the
Prize, and defeat the other Pretenders. Which if it should happen, What
Advantage the English may receive by his Succession.
and the English should be assisting to his Designs at that time, either by
accommodating him with Ships from Gombrone, or befriending him at Suratt, they
might expect very considerable Advantages in their Trade and Customs, both in
India and the Persian Gulf.

The Mogul delights much in Proselyting all the Rajahs he conquers, The Mogul's
Zeal.
and bringing them to the Mohammedan Faith, which has much exasperated those
Grandees, and the Gentile Sects of his Kingdom. And he was so sensibly taken
with a Horse presented to him by an English Merchant, His kindness for a Horse.
that he commanded him to be fed near his own Apartment, and to be frequently
brought forth before him, to delight his Eyes with the daily pleasant
Spectacle; for no other Reason, but because he observed him match a Horse which
Mahomet was wont to ride, and nearly resembled in Shapes and Color, as he
somewhere read, a stately Steed of the Grand Prophet's.

The whole Kingdom of Indoston is entirely the Possession of the Mogul's, All
the Land in India is the Mogul's.
who appoints himself Heir to all his Subjects; so that neither the Widow, nor
Children of a General, can peremptorily challenge one Piece after his Decease,
without the Emperor's bounteous Indulgence. He that tills the Ground, and
spends his time in Agriculture, is allowed half the Product for his Pains, and
the other Moiety is reserved for the King, which is collected by
Underofficers, who give in their Accounts to the Superiors in the Provinces,
and they discount to the Public Exchequer. Only for the Encouragement of Trade
in Cities and Maritime Towns, he dispenses with the Merchants building their
Houses, and the Propriety of them descending in their Families; very few are
allowed Paternal Inheritances; but even all this is the extraordinary Grace and
Favor of the Prince, and revocable at his Pleasure. His Will likewise is the
Law, The Mogul absolute.
and his Word incontestably decides all Controversies among them. So that he is
the main Ocean of Justice and Equity, and from him all the smaller Rivulets of
Wealth flow, His Justice
and to him they all pay Tribute, and return again. He generally determines
with exact Justice and Equity; for there is no pleading of Peeridge or
Privilege before the Emperor, but the meanest Man is as soon heard by
Aureng-Zebe as the chief Omrah. Which makes the Omrahs very circumspect of
their Actions, and punctual in their Payments; because all Complaints against
them are readily adjusted, and they never want jealous Rivals at Court who are
willing to bring them into Disgrace with their King for any Fault.

Since the Conquest of Viziapour, the Diamond Mines are claimed and possessed
by the Indian Emperor, who for some time since thought fit to shut them up.
The Rate of digging for Diamonds.
They formerly paid to the King of Golconda so much hourly for the liberty of
digging, whether they were fortunate in finding any Diamond or no; a Pagod,
which is a piece of Gold valued there at Nine Shillings, was the stated Price
for an Hours time. We have an Account, that he reserved another Diamond Ground
in his Country for his own Use, which yielded him daily several Ounces,
whenever he employed his Laborers to work, which were reckoned to be near Six
Thousand, whose very Wages consumed a great part of the Gains.

Those that dig the Ground are narrowly looked to, All Diamonds of such a size
belong to the Mogul.
and examined at their Departure, that nothing be privately conveyed or stole
away; and yet they sometimes escape all Discovery, by slipping a Stone into
their Mouths, or thrusting it upwards in their lower Parts, or by bribing of
the Overseers. By this means we sometimes meet with large Stones very valuable.
Two I saw at Suratt, the smaller was a sort of Table-Diamond, rated at Twelve
Thousand Pounds; the other was larger, and exceeded the Price of the other
almost Eight Thousand Pounds. All Stones of such a Size are Royalties, and
Sacred to the Crown; and whoever finds them, or wheresoever they are heard of,
they are presently seized, and taken for the use of the Mogul. Therefore the
Owner of these Noble Diamonds solemnly engaged our Secrecy, and bound us to
Silence, before we were permitted a sight of them. The Stones of India are not
so rich, or of equal Repute with those of the Island Borneo, Diamonds from
Borneo most famed.
whose Sparkling and Brightness gives a glorious and surpassing Splendor. The
Diamonds are found rough, covered with a Coat or Shell, which is taken off, and
then the Diamond is polished, and cut in such Figures, as the natural Shape of
the Stone, or the Design of the Lapidary inclines to. The way to know true
Diamonds.
The Art of discerning the excellence of Diamonds by the Eye, is very curious;
because there is such an Affinity between the Brightness of Stones, that some
eminent Indian Jewellers have been imposed upon by false ones brought from
Europe; because they shot such Rays, and the Luster with which they shined was
so extraordinary. But the Hammer and Scales discovered that Fallacy, which the
Eyes could not; they were softer than a genuine Diamond, and lighter than one
of the same size: For no Stone comes near a Diamond in hardness; nor, of the
same magnitude, in Weight. Diamonds take their Estimate from their Magnitude,
The valuable Qualities in Diamonds.
Splendor, Figure, and Water; for some Persons value a Diamond of such a Water
much more than of another; and some are pleased with such a sort of Cut, beyond
any else. Thus a fair Rose-Diamond of Black Water and Diamond Cut was of
general Esteem with some Europeans at Suratt, whilst a White Water gained a
Repute with the Dutch, and Table-Diamonds were with them of best Esteem. The
Moors exalt the Rate of such a Diamond, whose Surface is cut in very minute
Figures, much less than what the Europeans affect, though in all things else
the Diamond was equally good and valuable. For as the use of a Diamond, and all
other Stones, is very inconsiderable, in respect of that high Value which the
Fancy of Man and common Custom has put upon them; so are their Rates too very
variable and uncertain, as this Instance of a Rubie will make out. A Rubie, The
Excellence of a Rubie above a Diamond.
which in Perfection is a Stone superior to a Diamond, made this gradual
Exaltation of its Rates in India. It was sold at first at the rate of 400
Roupies, Several prices paid for the same Rubie.
afterward at 600, then at 800, then at 1200; from this it rose to 1600,
thence to 2000, after this it mounted to 2400, then to 2800, from which it was
sold for 3000, and lately for 3200. Thus the Fancy of the Purchaser advanced it
at length Seven Hundred per Cent. beyond the Original Price it was first
reckoned at. There perfect Rubies are scarce attainable, those of a deep clear
Color are rarely seen, which put Men upon a hot Chase after them when they are
heard of, and inhaunces their Value and Esteem.

The Mogul's Avarice.
Notwithstanding all these Diamonds and immense Treasure, of which the Mogul is
Absolute Master, yet is not his Mind satisfied, nor his Desires abated by his
Accessions, they rather stretch and swell the more, and push him on to aspire
to that real Character, which his Father assumed, of being King of the World.
So little has either Increase of Wealth, or Extent of Power, healed his
restless Faculties, or composed the unruly Turbulence of his Spirit. However,
had Aureng-Zebe laid his Schemes of Victory only toward the Indian Princes,
and those potent Neighbors, from whose Conquest he might expect to reap some
Glory; this methinks would have carried with it a greater Air of Majesty and
Grandeur, than that meaner Action which is recorded of him in India, of
stripping the Faquires of their Wealth and Jewels.

It seems this Prince was minded to compass a little Treasure somewhere, and
the only Method he pitched upon for it, was to make a Booty of the Faquires.
Aureng-zebe's robbing the Faquires.
These Faquires nearly resemble the Romish Mendicants in some things, their
Character I shall expatiate upon hereafter. The Emperor therefore causes
Proclamation to be made through all the Provinces of his Kingdom, That all
Faquires should make ready to repair to a splendid Entertainment, which he
designed to prepare for them. The News of this Royal Banquet was esteemed so
honorable an Instance of Condescension in the Emperor to these poor Men, that
without any further Summons or Invitation they instantly prepared and flockt
from all the remotest parts to come and receive it. When they were come, and
had satisfied themselves with the sumptuous Feast, and overjoyed at the
Thoughts of being Guests to such a Noble Banquet, to which they had been called
by the Person of their Emperor, they now address themselves to him with
grateful Acknowledgments for his Bounty in those Royal undeserved Favors, so
far beyond what the Meanness and Poverty of their Condition would suffer them
so much as to think of. And withal wishing him, that Glory and Success might be
the distinguishing Characters of his prosperous Reign for many Years, they
humbly craved Liberty of departing to their proper Dwellings. To which the
Emperor replied to this Effect, I would not have you think that I have yet
forgot the Kindness I had for you and your Profession, in my former Years. It Is
not the being seated upon the Throne of India, that can make me overlook the
Consideration of your Poverty, or the Relation I had to you, ever Fortune and
your Good Wishes raised me to the Glory of my Ancestors, and the Sovereignty I
now enjoy. And therefore as you have thought fit to taste of my Banquet, and
express your selves pleased with the Entertainment; so I expect from you
likewise the acceptance of some Raiments I have provided for your Use, to
prevent your Return in that ragged Dress; and that the World may see after your
Departure hence, what Kindness I had for you, in conferring these more lasting
Favors upon you. At this they unanimously voted for their old Clothes, as more
agreeable to their Condition, and that he had sufficiently honored them by his
splendid Repast. But the Servants, who stood by, immediately unstript the
Faquirs, and brought forth fresh Garments for their old, in which were found
abundance of Jewels, Gold, and Precious Stones, enough by far to overpay the
Expense; as Aureng-Zebe by his former Acquaintance and ancient Intimacy with
them could well discover. This Relation which I had from a Gentleman at Suratt
agrees very well with Auren-Zebe's Policy; but methinks it suits not well with
his Honesty and Greatness.

The Insolence of the Portuguese, The Insolence of the Portuguese in India.
as well as Rajahs, gives likewise some Disturbance to this Prince, and has
drawn down his Arms against their Forces, which has driven several of them from
the adjacent Islands to repair for shelter to our Island of Bombay. The Mogul's
Army has made several Inroads into their Country, plundered some small Towns,
and threatens Basseen. For the Portuguese Governor of that Town enticed from a
Rajah that lived near him a very beautiful Woman of the Bramin Cast, which was
after a while sent for by the Rajah, and remanded back again by twenty or
thirty Soldiers. But the Lady's Charms blinded his Reason, and biassed both his
Justice and Civility, made him refuse to dismiss her, and treat the Messengers
with such Violence, that the Mogul in Vindication of the Rajah, encouraged his
storming of the Town.

Three Reasons of the Mogul's Enmity to the Portuguese.
Other Reasons are used for the Mogul's present infesting the Country of the
Portuguese, and for sending three several Parties of Men, pillaging, burning
and destroying all before them. One is, 1. Their burning a Cogee.

2. Their Conversion of the Indians.


that the Portuguese burnt formerly a Cogee at Goa, who is a Person skilled in
their Law. Another Reason is, because the Portuguese proselyte the Children of
all Persons deceased among them, whether their Parents are Moors or Pagans, and
seize their Estates into the Church; which raises a loud Clamor against them,
and grievous Complaints to the Mogul. Some ascribe the Hatred and Hostility of
the Moors at this time to these two insufferable Actions of the Portuguese.
Besides all this, the Religion of the Portuguese is very offensive to this
Emperor, 3. Their Idolatry.
who carries such an invincible Antipathy to Idolatry, and all sort of
Adoration of Images, that he has now suppressed the greatest part of all the
Pagodes of his Dominions, where his Pagan Subjects incensed and invoked the
Idols. Nay, this is such an Abomination to the Mohammedan Belief, that the
Moguls allow not the Representation of any Creature that has Life, even upon
their Tea-Cups and China Ware, nor admit the Figure of any Animal upon their
Atlasses or other Silks. Therefore the Portuguese Religion being grossly tainted
with this manner of False Worship, has rendered them very detestable to this
sort of Men, as well as other things have made them odious to the Arabians at
Muscat. They that were formerly the Glory and Terror of the Eastern Seas, who
flowed with Wealth, The low condition of the Portuguese in India.
and all the Riches of the Indian and the Persian Gulf, are now as low and
declining, as they formerly were powerful and in a splendid state. The
Muscatters daily increase their Naval Forces, and prevail against them
incontestably at Sea, by fitting out against them Ships both of Burden and
Strength, and manning them with skilful, bold, and adventurous Sailers. Only
two years since they built in the River of Suratt a very comely stout Ship of
above a Thousand Tun, which carried at least an Hundred Guns.

The Mogul's Age.
The Mogul is now past Eighty Years of Age, but yet administers the weighty
Affairs of his vast Kingdom, and retains a Vigor in his Discerning Faculties.
His care of what he eats.
Whatever he eats is first tasted by his Daughter, and passes under the Chops
or Seals of three or four principal Omrahs; His Drink.
and his Drink is the Water of the River Ganges, which is reputed Sacred
throughout all his Kingdom, and is said to sanctify the Natives, whether they
drink, or bath in it. I fancy the Native Purity of the Water may give it this
Credit and Reputation, because they say it has that singular Quality of our
River Thames, that it never remains corrupt long; and a Quart of it is lighter
by much than any other Water. This Water is dearer to him, than if he had drunk
Europe Wine; for it is brought to him over Land in Copper Jarrs, tinned within,
upon Men's Shoulders, or upon Beasts of Burden, several Hundred Miles. Thus the
ancient Kings of Persia drank no other Water, than that of the River Elaeus or
Chospes, because of the Esteem they had of its Excellence.

Whenever his Health requires Physic, His Care in taking Physic.
he expects the Physician should lead the way, take Pill for Pill, Dose for
Dose, of the same which is administered to him; that he may see the Operation
upon the Body of the Physician, before he will venture upon it himself. His
Abstinence.
He never violates his Obligations to Abstinence, by tasting the Juice of the
Grape, which the Omrahs dispense with, and are fond of, and buy it up at any
rate, if they can by any private Method be accommodated with it in the Camp.

He formerly admired the Fair Sex; but Old Age, and the Decay of Nature, keep
him at a farther Distance at present from his Haram. His Women are all closely
guarded, not visible to any, but himself and his Eunuchs, whose Virile Parts
are cut off smooth, The Eunuchs cut smooth.
to prevent the least Temptation from the Sex; so that whenever there is need,
they are forced to the use of a Quill in making Urine. And all the Women of
Fashion in India are close penned in by their jealous Husbands, who forbid them
the very sight of all Strangers. However the Watch is neither so careful, nor
their Modesty so blameless, but that they sometimes will look abroad for
Variety, as well as their roving Husbands do. A Passage of which I shall here
insert. A pleasant Story of an ingenious lewd Woman.
A Gentlewoman, viciously inclined, contrives one Day to get abroad, with a
trusty Familiar of her Acquaintance, though totally a Stranger to her new
Husband. She freely imparts her lewd Intentions, earnestly requests her
Fidelity, and withal desires she would vouchsafe to take the Message upon her
self, and walk into the Bazar, and there espy what comely Person she could meet
with, proper, lovely, young, and handsome, and conduct him privately to such
Apartments as she had provided. The Friend, thus instructed, goes abroad,
views, and culls out from the rest in the Bazar the most amiable Person she
could meet with, and entreating him to step aside, discovers the Intriegue, and
then conducts him to the place appointed. The Gallant it seems was Husband to
the Gentlewoman that expected him, who seeing him come near the Gate, was all
in Confusion, and quite confounded at the sight of his unfortunate Approach.
But she found it was no time to dally, or delay her Resolutions, and therefore
instantly summoned all her Thoughts, and after a little Pause, threw her self
directly upon the Cot or Bed that was by, and put the Covering over her Face.
Her Husband, ignorant whom she was, and knowing for what Intent he was sent
for, begins immediately to disturb her, and by and by endeavors to uncover her
Face. At which she rose up in a seeming Rage, and told him, For shame, Sir, I
have often heard of your Pranks and loose Intriegues abroad, but my Charity
made me willing to unbelieve it, till this Minute has given me an invincible
Argument, for assuring me of the Truth of what was spoken. I sent on purpose to
find you out, and placed my self as a Stranger here to entertain you; and
hither you came, I find, with dishonest Resolutions, and treacherous Designs to
our Nuptial Bed. Can you pretend to so much Tenderness and Affection for me,
and yet listen to the least Temptation that courts or calls you from me? Was I
ever unfaithful, or cool in my Affection, that might thereby drive you from my
Embraces, to follow Strangers you never heard of? At this rate she turned the
Argument upon himself, made him the only Person guilty of these wanton Amors,
and with a gargled Mouth endeavored to wipe off all the Defilements of her
Thoughts, and to render her Innocence as clear as her Excuse. She knew that a
Conjugal Affection is very apt to grow jealous upon any apparent suspicion of
mutual Fidelity, and that nothing sooner excites and ferments the Rage of a
Man, than the apprehension of a Partner in his Bed. But yet this Jealousy is
much extinct among the Inhabitants upon the Coast of Malabar, Women offered to
Strangers.
where the Husbands, even the prime Nobility, to complete the Welcome of their
Entertainments, offer the Familiarity of their Wives; and esteem the rejecting
this Civility as an Affront. Two English Merchants some time before I came to
India, were invited abroad, and after Dinner were tempted with this kind of
Treat; but the Piety of one of them kept him from it, whilst the immodest
Frolicks of the other enticed him on to the use of an unlawful Pleasure. And
many of their Women by their usual Custom in these cases, quite contrary to
that of other Nations, have gained the Name of Malabar Quills.

THE CITY OF SURATT, AND ITS INHABITANTS.
The Latitude of Suratt.
THE City of Suratt lies in 21 Degrees, and some odd Minutes of North Latitude.
It Is by Ptolomy called Muziris, Its Situation.
and is situated upon a River Ten or Twelve Miles distant from the Sea. The
Name of the River is Tappy, or Tindy, which rises from the Mountain of Decan,
and from thence falls down through Brampore, and by Meanders from Suratt glides
down gently into the Ocean. The Circumference of it, with the Suburbs, is
between two and three English Miles, tending somewhat in its Position to the
Form of a Semicircle or Half Moon, because of the winding of the River, to
which half of it adjoyns. It is fortified with a Wall, which is flankt at
certain Distances with Towers and Battlements, occasioned by the frequent
Incursions of the Enemies; but its greatest Strength is in the Castle, which
commands not only the Ships and Boats in the River, but likewise guards the
City by Land.

The Castle is built toward the South West part of the City, The Castle.
having a River to defend it on one side, and a Ditch on the other. It is built
square, and fortified at each Corner with a large Tower, containing various
Lodgings, and furnished with all Conveniences fit for accommodating the
Governor, and has several Canons mounted upon the Walls.

The Entrance into the City is by six or seven Gates, The Gates of the City.
where are Sentinels fixed continually, requiring an Account, upon the least
Suspicion, of all that enter in, or pass out of the City.

The Buildings.
The Houses are many of them fair and stately, though unproportionable to the
Wealth of the Inhabitants, who are always concerned to conceal their Riches,
and therefore never exceed in any Luxurious Furniture, lest it should prove too
powerful a Temptation to the Avarice of the Mogul. They are flat roof'd, or
rather made a little shelving, after the manner of the Buildings in Spain and
Portugal, covered with Tiles, and the Walls are made of Brick or Stone. The
Windows are without Glass, and kept open for the Convenience of the fresh Air;
and the Floors both of the lower and upper Stories are all Terrass'd to make
them cool. But the poorer sort, and such as inhabit the Skirts of the City,
live much meaner, in Houses, whose Walls are only Bambous at a Foot distance,
with Reeds wove through them; and their Covering is only Cajan, or Palm-leaves
of Trees, which gives them the common Name of Cajan-Houses.

The Streets
The Streets are some too narrow, but in many places of a convenient breadth;
and in an Evening, especially near the Bazar, or Marketplace, are more
populous than any part of London; and so much thronged, that it is not very
easy to pass through the multitude of Bannians and other Merchants that expose
their Goods. For here they stand with their Silks and Stuffs in their Hands, or
upon their Heads, to invite such as pass by to come and buy them.

In the midst of the City is a spacious vacant place, called Castle-Green,
Castle-Green.
because of its nearness to the Castle, on which are laid all sorts of Goods in
the open Air, both Day and Night, excepting the Mussoun time. And here the
English, French, and Dutch, with the Natives, place their Bales, and prepare
them as Loadings for their Ships.

The Governor of the Castle is appointed by the Mogul; The Governor of the
Castle always confined to it.
and his Authority seldom stretches beyond the space of three Years, in all
which time he is a real Prisoner under the appearance of a high Commander, and
under a severe and strict Engagement never to pass without the Walls of his
Castle; but to be continually upon his Guard, in a constant readiness for any
Emergence or Surprise, all the time he is in the Government.

Suratt a chief Town of Trade.
Suratt is reckoned the most famed Emporium of the Indian Empire, where all
Commodities are vendible, though they never were there seen before. The very
Curiosity of them will engage the Expectation of the Purchaser to sell them
again with some Advantage, and will be apt to invite some other by their
Novelty, as they did him, to venture upon them. And the River is very
commodious for the Importation of Foreign Goods, which are brought up to the
City in Hoys and Yachts, and Country Boats, with great Convenience and
Expedition. And not only from Europe, but from China, Persia, Arabia, and other
remote parts of India, Ships unload abundance of all kinds of Goods, for the
Ornament of the City, as well as enriching of the Port.

It is renowned for Traffic through all Asia, Its Commodities.
both for rich Silks, such as Atlasses, Cuttanees, Sooseys, Culgars, Allajars,
Velvets, Taffaties, and Sattins; and for Zarbatfs from Persia; and the
abundance of Pearls that are brought hither from the Persian Gulf; but
likewise for Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, Topazes, and other Stones of Splendour
and Esteem, which are vendible here in great quantities: And for Aggats,
Cornelians, Nigganees, Desks, Scrutores, and Boxes neatly polisht and
embellisht, which may be purchased here at very reasonable Rates.

The Gold of Suratt is so very fine, The fineness of Indian Gold and Silver.
that 12 or 14 per Cent. may be often gained by bringing it to Europe. And the
Silver, which is the same all over India, out-does even the Mexico and Sevil
Dollars, and has less Allay than any other in the World. No clipped or bad Money.
I never saw any Clipped Money there, and it is rare if either the Gold or Silver
Coin is falsified. The Gold Moor, or Gold Roupie, Gold and Silver Roupies how
valued.
is valued generally at 14 of Silver; and the Silver Roupie at Two Shillings
Three Pence. Besides these they have Foreign Coyns, but not in that Plenty; and
Pice, A Pice how much.
which are made of Copper, Sixty of which, sometimes two or three more or less,
are valued at a Roupie. Lower than these, bitter Almonds here pass for Money,
Bitter Almonds pass for Money.
about Sixty of which make a Pice.

The Custom paid by all strange Coins.
All strange Coin, whether Imported or Exported, pays to the Mogul's Officers.
Two and an half per Cent. and other Goods pay more. In some other Nations of
the East, as in China, Customs paid in China according to the largeness of the
Ship.
they take other Measures in their Customs, not according to the Value or
Quantity of the Goods, but according to the Burden of the Ship, which is
measured and examined upon her first Arrival; and upon this such a Custom is
charged upon her, without any Consideration of her Cargo. When this is paid,
there is Liberty granted of fraighting upon the Ship what Goods Men please,
those of the richest as well as the meanest Value. An English Ship there of 400
Tuns, paid for its Custom 1000 Dollars.

All strange Coins melted down (...) Suratt.
Whatever strange Coin comes into the Hands of the Mogul's Officers, it is ^^lted
down, and converted into Roupies, which are stamped with the particular
Characters of the Emperor then Reigning. After the Emperor's Death the value
of it abates, The Reason that Old Coin is of less value than New.
may be a Pice or two in a Roupie, because of its Antiquity, whereby, they say,
so much of its Worth is wore off; and only the new Coin passes current without
any Diminution.

The Silks and Callicoes vendible here, Silks sold by the Cobit.
are either sold by the Piece, or by Cobits, which is a Measure containing 27
Inches. A Cobit what it is.


Their Rice and Corn, Corn sold by weight.
and other Commodities which are sold with us by Concave Measures, are with
them sold by Weight. The common Weight is a Sear, which weighs 13 Ounces
Avoirdupoise; and also the Maund, which contains forty Sear. No hollow Measures
in India.
Pecks and Bushels I never heard of. For as their Kingdoms, so are their
Customs in these Kingdoms quite opposite in many things to ours. Some Indian
Customs contrary to ours.
The Teeth of their Saws, for Instance, are made quite contrary to ours; their
Locks are fashioned and open quite different ways; and the very Dispositions of
some Irrational Creatures vary from the Genius they retain with us; as at
Tunquin the vigilant Dogs watch all Night to devour the Rats and Mice, Dogs
catch Mice.
which are there very large and troublesome; as our Cats do with us.

Goods are brought to Suratt from Agra, Goods from whence brought to Suratt.
their Capital City, from Dehli, Baroch, Amadavad, and other Cities noted for
particular Commodities, which are sold off in great quantities to the
Europeans, Turks, Arabians, Persians, and Armenians, who above any of the rest
Travel the farthest, spread themselves in all parts of Asia, Armenians great
Merchants.
as well as Europe, and are as universal Merchants as any in the World. The
Armenians are Civil and Industrious, their Language is one of the most general
in all Asia, and they have spread themselves in vast Colonies very far, in
Anatolia, Persia, the Holy Land, Egypt, Russia, and Polonia, and range by
private Persons and Families, like Jews into all parts, and like them are as
subtle and diligent in their Traffic. For they have always had a celebrated
name for Merchandise; and near them in ancient times, that is, at Phasis in
Georgia, was kept the Golden Fleece, which was likely nothing else but a Rich
and Profitable Trade of Wool, Skins, and Furs, which the Northern People
brought thither, and to which they now drive a Trade of some resemblance in
their costly Tapestries, Gro-grains, watered Chamlets, etc. And Jason, and the
Greeks being the first Discoverers of the Fleece, above all the rest of Europe,
and encountering many Hazards and Dangers in the first Navigation; it was said
to be guarded by Furies, Bulls, and an horrible Dragon, that is by men bold and
well Armed.

For the Carriage of their Goods, the Indians seldom make use of Horses, they
are generally employed in the Mogul's service in War; but bring them to Suratt
in Wagons, The Carriage of their Goods in India.
upon Dromedaries, Asses, and Camels: The strength and hardiness of the Camels
qualify them extremely for the weight of Burdens, and the length of the
Roads. A joint extraordinary in the Leg of a Camel.
They dispatch their Journeys with some quickness, and have this advantage in
making short the way, in that they are observed to have a Joint extraordinary
in their hind Leg, which hastens and assists their Motion, by the large reach
which it gives them in their walking. They cannot walk upon slippery places,
and are therefore best fitted by Nature for Sandy Earth.

At the time that the Camels Couple, the Female takes the burden in her Womb
in the same posture she receives the Load upon her back, The manner of the
Camels Copulation.
for they both lie down upon their Bellies and generate backwards, because the
Genitals of the Male are placed behind. When they are in case for Copulation,
the Keepers are constrained to muzle them, and keep a severe hand over them,
they are so rampant, furious, and unlucky; and at these seasons the lustful
inflamed Animal will subsist, they say, Forty Days together without Food. A
Camel when heated with Lust, will live 40 days without Food.
The Heat and vigor of their Spirits keep them sprightly and alive without any
Aliment. Some of the Camels go with their young above a Year. The time they go
with Young.


The Spice-Trade in the Hands of the Dutch.
The Dutch supply Suratt with all kind of Spices, saving Pepper, in which the
English share with them. The Cinnamon is brought hither from Ceylon, Ceylon the
chief place for Cinnamon. The Cinnamon-Tree.
and is cut off from a Tree clothed with three Barks, two whereof are stripped
off, which are the Cinnamon, the third and most inward, which incloses the body
of the Tree, is never touched, because an Incision in it kills the Tree. After
three Years time the two extreme Barks are renewed, and cover the body of the
Tree again, and are fit to be pulled off. If the Dutch are under any
apprehension of glutting the Trade of Europe with this fragrant Spice, and of
abating its value by sending home too great an abundance, Much Cinnamon burnt
by the Dutch.
they lay it on an heap and burn as much of it as they imagine useless for their
service, which Spicy Mountain sends out its fragrant Exhalations for many
Leagues into the Sea.

The Cloves and Nutmegs are conveyed hither from some Islands toward Malacca,
Islands of Malacca. afford Cloves and Nutmegs.
whither the Dutch send their Exiled Criminals to perpetual Slavery. Upon the
Outside of the Nutmeg is the Mace, The Nutmeg.
which is covered again with a very thick Coat, like a green Wall-Nut; this
Covering preserved is taken as a high Cordial, and eaten as a Restorative with
pleasure. A Report concerning the Nutmeg-Tree.
They relate a passage somewhat strange and surprising concerning the nature of
the Nutmeg-Tree, that it is never Planted, and if it be it never thrives; but
such of them as Fructify and arrive at perfection, arise from a ripe Nutmeg
swallowed whole by a certain Bird in those Islands, which disgorges it again
without digesting it, and this falling to the ground with that slimy matter it
brought along with it, takes root and grows an useful Tree: But this may be a
subtle contrived story of the Dutch, to keep Men from endeavoring to
transplant them.

Cloves.
The Cloves grow upon a Tree, and before they come to maturity, are of a very
delightful Color. Before they are cleans'd, they are of such a spungy
attractive quality, that they drain any Liquids that stand near them, Their
Spungy quality.
and except the Master of the Ship, in his conveyance of them from the Islands,
takes care to keep them at a convenient distance from his Liquors, a quantity
of them will in two days time extract and dry up a Hogs-head of Wine or Water.

Those that Sell the Spices are not always very fair and honest in disposing of
them. How the Dutch draw the Spirits from the Spices, and then sell them.
For sometimes they extract a quantity of Oil, or Essence, or of Spirits from
the Cloves, Cinnamon and other Spices; and after this, confidently expose them
for choice untainted Commoditits, and raise their Rates to that pitch, as if
they were fresh, and never robbed of their Spirits: Some in Batavia, their
Capital City in the East, whither the greatest quantity of Spice are brought,
have large Yards filled with them, and kept there on purpose for this Design,
first to drain them of their Essences and purer qualities, and afterward sell
them for sound Goods. For which reason we sometimes meet with several sorts of
Spice that are very dry and insipid, of little Smell or Taste, pillaged of all
their Oil and Substance.

Besides their Governor of the Castle of Suratt, The Governor of the City.
who is always confined a Prisoner within its Walls, there is another of the
City, to whose management and Care is committed the Trust of all Civil Affairs.
He receives Addresses from the Principal Merchants and Men of Note, and all
Applications of moment from the Inhabitants are made to him. He generally keeps
at home for dispatching the business of his Master, or the People under his
Care; and if he goes abroad, he sometimes takes the Air upon an Elephant,
seated in a Chair of State upon his back; and besides the Keeper of the Beast,
carries along with him a Peon, or Servant to Fan him, and drive away the busy
Flies and troublesome Musketoes: This is done with the Hair of a Horse's Tail
fastened to the end of a small stick of a Foot length, A Horse-tail Fan.
a very homely Fan, but yet the only one in esteem with the Grandees, and even
the Emperor himself. To maintain the dignity of his Post and Station, he
maintains several large Elephants, and keeps in constant pay and readiness many
Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, to guard his person at home and abroad, and to
be ready for his dispatches.

He does not peremptorily Arbitrate in Cases of moment, but when any matter of
consequence is brought before him, he seldom determines it without the
Consultation and Concurrence of other Officers of the City, the Cogy, the
Vacanavish, and Catoual. Officers in the City.


The Cogy.
The Cogy is a Person skilled in the Municipal Laws, acts as Judge, and is
consulted in matters relating to the Civil Customs of the Empire.

The Vacanavish.
The Vacanavish is the Mogul's public Intelligencer, and is employed in giving
a Weekly Account from Suratt to the Court of India, of all occurrences here of
Truth and moment*

Next to him, The Harcarrah.
and somewhat like him, is another Officer called the Harcarrah, who harkens to
all kind of News, whether true or false, listens to every thing that happens,
whether of moment or of no account and reports to the great Mogul whatever is
done or spoke of; but with so soft a Pen, that nothing may offend, considering
the profound veneration due to such a powerful Prince, whose Frowns are mortal.

The Catoual is another Officer in the City, The Catoual.
somewhat resembling a Justice of the Peace, in endeavoring the suppression of
all Enormities in the City. For which reason he is obliged to ride the streets
for prevention of Disorder, thrice in the Night, at 9, 12, and 3 a Clock, 'till
5 in the Morning, at which Hours the Drums beat, and a large long Copper
Trumpet sounds aloud. The Catoual is always attended with several Peons and
Soldiers armed with Swords, Lances, Bows and Arrows, and some with a very
dreadful Weapon, A dangerous Indian weapon.
a Rod of Iron about a Cubit's length, with a large Ball of Iron at the end,
which is able with ease to dash out the Brains, or break and shatter the Bones
at once. When he meets with a Person guilty of petty Irregularities, or some
trivial Offense, he Confines him for some time; but if his Misdemeanour be more
notorious, he must smart for it by a Chawbuck, or Bastinado.

Tho this City is frequented by a conflux of several Nations, and Peopled by
abundance of Foreigners as well as Natives, whose mixed Concourse and mutual
Conversations might be apt to raise Tumults and Disputes, yet they very rarely
happen, so much as to cause even a slight Punishment. And for Capital
Inflictions, there are seldom Criminals so daring as to merit or incur the
Guilt of them. Capital Crimes rare in India.
The In-offensive Conversation of the Gentile Indians, who are very apt to
receive, but seldom to give an abuse; keeps them Innocent, and at a distance
from all heinous Crimes, and timorous in approaching the commission of any such
gross Offense, as Murder, Robbery, and such like; and for petty Failures, a
drubbing is a sufficient Atonement to public Justice.

Few put to Death at Suratt.
I believe there has not been a Criminal for this 20 Years that has suffered a
Capital Punishment at Suratt. There were, I confess, some Pirates, but all of
them Europeans, who were guarded through Suratt in their Journey to the Mogul,
for a Trial of their Lives, while I stayed there.

The Power of Life and Death is the Emperor's Prerogative, The power of Life
and Death in the hands of the Emperor.
which he hardly vouchsafes to communicate to any Civil Judge, except they be
at a distance, but reserves that Authority entirely to himself, of pronouncing
the Sentence of Execution; and if the Offender is at a distance, his Crime is
many times transmitted by a Messenger to the Mogul, who determins sometimes
without sending for the Offender, according to the Account of the matter that
is sent him.

In Controversies and Decisions of Right, Oaths administered in India.
Oaths are administered and made use of here, as well as in Christendom. Though
the timorous Bannian will be apt rather to venture the loss of his Cause, than
the taking an Oath, because of the Infamy which swearing obtains among them. As
we lay our Hands in swearing upon the Holy Bible, so he puts his hand upon the
venerable Cow, with this Imprecation, The Bannian Oath.
That he may eat of the Flesh of that Blessed Animal, if what he says be not
true. For as the Chinese endeavor a perpetuation of their Laws, and the
preserving their People in Obedience, by the dread and awful Respect which they
Harbor toward their Dead Parents, whom they pretend are Inspectors of their
Childrens Actions, and highly incensed at their Posterity, whenever they
transgress, or would contrive an alteration of those Laws which they have left
them; so does the Opinion of the Trasmigration awe the Bannian into a singular
respect for all Kinds of Beasts, especially the Cow, which for their Lives they
would not touch, lest they might thereby Eat the Flesh of that Animal, wherein
they hope their Father's Soul has been.

The Foursdar.
If any Thefts or Robberies are committed in the Country, the Foursdar* another
Officer, is obliged to answer for them; who is allowed Soldiers and Servants
under him to traverse the Country, and look after the Highways, to hunt out
the Robbers, and keep all suspected Places quiet and safe for Passengers.

Having given this Account of the situation and Extent of Suratt, of its
Strength and Buildings, and of its Riches and Commerce, (which are the strength
of a Nation) and likewise of its Governor and Principal Officers: I shall now
proceed to a Relation of its Inhabitants, especially its Natives, of their
Customs and manner of living; of their Religion, their Festivals and Fasts;
their Marriages and Burials; of their Language, their Learning and Recreations.

I shall distinguish the Natives here into three sorts. Frst, the Moors, The
Moors at Suratt.
or Moguls. Secondly, the Bannians or Ancient Gentiles. Thirdly, The Parsies or
Gaures. And first, To treat briefly of the Moors, who are allowed a precedence
to all the rest, because of their Religion, which is the same with that of
their Prince, Respected above the Gentiles of their Religion.
and for this reason they are advanced to the most Eminent Stations of Honor
and Trust; are appointed Governors of Provinces, and are entrusted with the
Principal Military, as well as Civil Employments. Very few of the Gentiles
being called to any considerable Trust, or encouraged any more, than just to
follow their several Manual Occupations, or Merchandise. For Religion, which
puts a Biass upon the Mind, Intitles them to the Court Favors, when it carries
a conformity to that of their Prince. Therefore the Gentiles are little
esteemed of by the Mogul, and contemned by the Moors, and often treated with
Inhumanity and neglect, because of their adhesion to the Principles of a
Religion, which is differenr from that of the State. And yet their peaceable
submissive Deportment wins mightily upon the Moors, and takes off much of that
scornful Antipathy which they harbor against them.

The Moors forbid to taste Wine, but allowed Concubines.
As the Mohammedan Principles indulge an extraordinary Liberty for Women, so are
they nice in the innocent allowance of Wine, and strictly prohibit the tasting
of strong Liquor. The Moors therefore here, as in other Kingdoms, practice the
Use of Concubines, according as their Fortunes and Abilities can reach toward
their Maintenance; by which means they fancy not only an impunity to
themselves, but something of Merit, by propagating the number and increase of
the Faithful.

Yet though they are under a severe restraint from the Juice of the Grape, Their
Food.
they are not debarred the Eating of Rich and delicate Food, nor from dressing
it with such store of Spice and high Cordial Ingredients, as mightily
invigorate their Spirits, warm their Stomachs, and inflame the Vital Heat.
Cloves and Amber-Grese, Cinnamon and other fragrant Oriental Spices, do often
help to compound their Dishes of Palau, and other Meats that are in use among
them, in the Families of Men of Fortune and Estates. Some of whom,
notwithstanding their Prophet, through whose Prohibition they are restrained from
Wine, will yet privately be as Licentious therein, as other Persons who are
allowed to drink it with moderation. Dutra intoxicateing Herb.
And many of them take the liberty of mixing Dutra and Water together to drink,
without any privacy or fear, which will intoxicate almost to Madness, when they
are in the humor of gulping it freely; and this sometimes puts them beyond
their Native tender Deportment, and forces them upon sudden Bold Attempts.
It Is commonly observed concerning this Herb Dutra, that whatever Humor
prevails in any person at the time of his drinking it to Excess, that Temper
continues with him in the highest pitch, 'till the inebriating quality abates.
If he is Melancholy, he is then raised to the utmost degree of Sadness; If
Amorous, he is all Love and Flame; if he is Merry, he is then a perfect Antic.
And pouring cold Water upon the Legs, removes these excessive Humors, and
restores them to their Senses and Sobriety again. The English and other
Europeans sometimes in their pleasant Frolicks, are pleased to divert
themselves with these gay Humors and strange Actions, by taking a cheerful
Draught or two of this Liquor.

Running a Muck.
When any grievous Disaster happens to a Man, which he finds himself unable to
sustain through disquietness of Mind and anguish of Spirit, it is very customary
upon the Coast of Malabar, for such an unfortunate person to make his
Application to a large Dose of this Herb for his Relief; which chafes and
ferments him to such a pitch; that with a Catarry or Bagonet in his hand he
first falls upon those that are near him, whether Parents, Wife or Child,
killing and stabbing as he goes; and then in the same mad Frenzy runs along the
Streets and Highways, and blindly Executes the same Fate upon all he meets
with, 'till at length by some Martial Hand he falls himself, and ends his Life
in that bitter Fit. These that run thus are called Amouki, and the doing of it
Running a Muck. And for this reason, to prevent all Misdemeanors of Persons
heated with Arak, or any strong Liquor, does the King of Siam forbid any one to
enter into his Palace; Drunkard not to enter the K. of Siam's Palace.
and all that do, or are suspected, must allow the Porter to smell their Breath
before they pass the Gates. Arak, from whence it is derived.
Those that pretend to the understanding of the derivation of this word Arak,
deduce it from the Arabic, wherein they say it signifies Sweat, and
metaphorically Essence, and by way of Excellence Aqua Vitae. Of this sort of
Liquor there are two kinds most famed in India, Two sorts of it.
the Goa and Bengal Arak, besides that which is made at Batavia. Bengal is a
much stronger Spirit than that of Goa, though both are made use of by the
Europeans in making Punch, and are bought at both places at very low rates.
Arak is distilled from Rice, Its Virtue.
and sometimes from Toddy the juice of a Tree, and is prescribed in healing the
Griping of the Gutts. Stronger than this is another Compound-Liquor made in
India, which is distilled from Black Sugar mixed with Water, with the bark of
the Tree Baboul, this is called Jagre Arak; Jagre Arak
it is as hot as Brandy, and is drunk in Drams by the Europeans.

But the Coco and the Palm Tree afford a pleasant Juice from their Head and
upper Branches, Pleasant Liquors.
which the Moors as well as Europeans drink of plentifully. A Quart of it may
be got for a Pice or two, and is so strong that it turns the Brain as soon as
English Beer; for want of which the Sailers take up with this Juice to refresh
themselves, when the Ships Anchor near the Shore; for no Malt drink is made in
India. It distills from the Tree into Earthen Jars, which are fixed to the
Branches of the Coco-Tree, when they are cut off to a Foot length; and are put
to the Hole in the Palm Tree, which by incision is made one Inch deep, and
three wide; and in one Nights time a Jar containing above a Quart will be
filled with the Juice of one Tree. When it distills into a Jar that has been
formerly used, it suddenly taints and grows harsh, and turns sower in less
than the space of 24 Hours: In the Morning it is laxative, and costive in the
Evening. The name of this liquor is Toddy; Toddy, Neri.
but the Neri which is drawn from the Arequier Tree in a fresh Earthen Vessel,
is as sweet and pleasant as Milk, but more lively, without any mixture of a
hard or sharp Taste. Several Europeans pay their Lives for their immoderate
Draughts, and too frankly Carousing these cheerful Liquors, with which when
once they are inflamed, it renders them so restless and unruly, especially with
the additional heat of the Weather, that they fancy no place can prove too
cool, and so throw themselves upon the ground, where they sleep all Night in
the open Fields, and this commonly produces a Flux, of which a multitude in
India die. A Receipt for prevention of Fevers being Mortal.
The securest way here for preserving Health after an excess in drinking, and
an intemperate draught of any strong liquor, is to keep close after it under
some convenient Covering, and to digest it by keeping warm, and sleeping out
the Fermentation.

The Moguls feed freely on Beef or Mutton, or the Flesh of any other Creature
which is not accounted unclean among them; Swinesflesh forbid the Moors.
but Swines-flesh is under a dis-repute, and held among them an Abomination.
Yet the Grandees will taste of this, as well as Wine, and will not stick at the
Eating it at a private Collation. For an English Agent, A Story of some Moors
eating a Pig instead of a Kid:
by a frequent Interview with the Governor of a City, arrived at length to
that familiarity with him, that he took the liberty of Inviting him and some
Intimates more, to a friendly Entertainment of Persian and European Wines. The
Governor coming to it, was so Charmed with the welcome which he received,
because the Wine had that influence on his Humor and Palate, that upon his
departure he stepped to the Agent and told him, he designed him suddenly another
Visit, and withal desired from him a couple of young Kidds of the Agent's
preparing, and whispering to him privately, he told him he meant young Piggs.
The Agent expressed his humble Sense of the Honor they had vouchsafed him, and
his satisfaction at the freedom they had taken; and withal assured them, that
such an Evening the Kids should be provided for their coming. He instantly sent
abroad his Servant, for procuring him two of the fattest Pigs that could be met
with, and ordered them to be roasted against the time appointed; and pulling
off their Skin, and cutting off their Heads and Feet, had them brought before
the invited Guests. They rejoiced at the sight of them, and when they had
tasted, applauded the delicacy of the Meat, eat it with abundance of delight,
and boasted that they had never seen any such plump Kids, whose relish out-did
any thing they had ever tasted; and heartily wished for the opportunity of such
another Repast, and the liberty of Banqueting frequently upon such Dainties.
They admired the Christians Indulgence in such noble Liquor, and such exquisite
Fare, and believed that the unconfined Luxury in Eating was equal to the
pleasure of their desirable variety of Women; and that the Carnal Excesses
approved by Mahomet do not outvie the unconstrained Liberty which the
Christians take in sumptuous Repasts, and such kind of Luxurious Sensuality.

The Moors are only bound to abstain from Unclean Beasts, and load their Tables
with Fish and Fowl, and other Fare. And it is only among them that the Butchers
kill the Meat, Bannians. no Butchers
and sell it to strangers; for the Indians will scarce look upon a mangled
Carcass. A Butcher with them is little less than a Murderer, but of all
Vocations that is the most odious with them.

The Fast Ramezan.
The Moors with a very rigid and avowed Abstinence, observe every Year one
Month, a Fast, which they term the Ramezan; during which time they are so
severely abstemious, that they stretch not their Hands to either Bread or
Water, 'till the Sun be set, and the Stars appear; no, not the Youths of 12 or
13 Years of Age. Which makes the Penance so much the more rigorous and
troublesome, in that a draught of Water in those warm parching Climates is so
very necessary, and so refreshing to such as are ready to faint with Thirst.
This Fast is not kept always at the same Season of the Year, but begins its
date Annually more early by Eleven Days. When I was at Suratt, this mortifying
Custom was about the Month of September, at which time the Moors would begin to
refresh themselves about the close of the Evening, and Eat then freely; and by
an Early Collation in the Morning, before the dawning of the Light, prepare
themselves for the drought and heat of the following Day. The Almighty, they
told us, required from Mahomet, A story concerning Mahomet.
that his followers should be obliged to this Austerity, the whole Circuit of
the Year; but that the Holy Prophet, in compassion to the Faithful, obtained
from God the confinement of it only to a Month, which would therefore highly
aggravate their Crime, if they neglected the Dedication of so small a Portion
of the Year to this Religious Abstinence, though the observance of it had been
enjoined after a more rigorous manner than it is. And to add to the Sanctity of
this Celebrated and solemn Fast, their Mullahs, The Mullahs Devotions.
acted with a sacred Zeal, and lively concern for the Souls of the People, will
at this time spend whole Nights in the Musseets, in chanting aloud alternately
their Divine Hymns, 'till the approach of day breaks up their Devotions: And so
they complete their Fast, according to the strictest Rules of the most rigid
Asceticks, by mixing Prayers and Watchings with their Abstinence; in which, as
well as in their Public Prayers and Religious Worship, they tie themselves up
to a very nice and devout strictness, and behave themselves with all those
decencies of Respect, with that astonishing Reverence in the Musseets, as not
to defile them with either their Eyes or Lips; not daring so much as to turn
their Heads to gaze about, or utter the least word to one another. Which
profound Respect casts an obloquy and deserved Reproach upon some Professors of
a much purer Religion, Their decent Religious Behavior.
and more Holy Faith, whose careless Deportment and familiar Address
discountenance all the Religious decorum of Prayers, and might tempt those
Heathens to conclude, that our Devotions were rather some light Diversion, than
the effects of serious and sacred Thoughts.

The Moguls are very profuse in their Funeral Expenses; The Funerals costly.
as well at the time of their Friend's decease, as at several others within the
compass of a Month, when they think themselves engaged at their public
Invitations to lavish away immoderate Cost to their Friend's Memory, enough
almost to sink a rich Fortune. Besides the solemn yearly Celebration of an
Expensive Feast for all the Friends and Relatives, in Honor of the Departed;
that they may revive the kindness they entertained for the Virtues and
Affection of him they lament, and that they may keep up the Idea of his Person
and Endowments. At this time too the Tomb is decked with Lamps, and beset with
bright Illuminations, as Emblems of his shining Excellencies and Perfections.

The dead Corpse is carried after our manner on a Bier upon Men's shoulders, The
Moors manner of Burying.
decently dressed and beautifyed with Flowers, and attended with the company of
Friends and Relations to the place of Burial The Grave is Arched under Ground
so high, that a Man may sit under its Roof; to this Intent, that when the Angel
at the Day of Judgment shall come and ask them, Whether they are Mussulmen?
They may sit up in their Graves, and answer, Yea. Some of them are reported to
be skilled in preserving a Corpse from Putrefaction a considerable time, A Charm
to preserve a Corpse.
only with the Repetition of some few Words, and without the Art or Expense of
Egyptian Embalming, to keep it from Corruption, only with a Verbal Charm.

Their Tombs placed contrary to ours.
And as their Minds are wrought into an Aversion against ours, by the
Contrariety of their Faith, when they were alive; so they would seem to
continue that Antipathy even beyond the stroke of Death, to the very
Confinement of the Grave, by placing their Corpse in a quite contrary Position
to ours, which are laid from East to West, as theirs are athwart from North to
South.

The Moors Language wants Characters.
The Language of the Moors is different from that of the ancient Original
Inhabitants of India, but is obliged to these Gentiles for its Characters. For
though the Moors Dialect is peculiar to themselves, yet is it destitute of
Letters to express it; and therefore in all their Writings in their Mother
Tongue, they borrow their Letters from the Heathens, or from the Persians, The
Court Language Persian.
or other Nations. The Court Language is Persian, which obtains with all the
Honorable Omrahs, and with all Persons of Ingenuity and polite Conversation
through the Empire, which creates an Ambition of dressing their Speech as well
as Writing in that favorite Style. For Foreign Languages in Asia, as well as
Europe, invade the use of the Mother Tongue with Princes, and their Ministers
of State; as here the Persian prevails; in Persia the Ottoman Language; and at
the August Port the Arabian Tongue.

It Is observable that the Introduction of a Language concurs toward
completing the Conquest of a Nation; which yet the Moguls have not been able
to effect in India, neither totally to reduce the old Natives to a cheerful
undisturbed compliance with the Government: But a potent Rajah is tempted to
raise new Factions now and then to disturb the Affairs of the Mogul, Factions
now and then in India.
and give Diversion to his Army. And zealous of the Tradition of their
Ancestors, maintain not only their own Tongue, but as much as possible their
ancient Customs and Opinions, and start new Objections against their present
State, the better to assert their Primitive Liberty again; and the ancient
Possession of those Kingdoms, which their Progenitors for so many Ages by
immemorial Custom had formerly retained.

The Bramin Language.
Indeed the Bramins, who are derived from Bramon, who (they say) was one of the
first Men that inhabited the World, have a Language used among them, but very
difficult to be attained, which several of themselves therefore understand not.
It is the Learned Language among them, called the Sanscreet, and is the same
with them as Latin is with us. In this the Records of their Nation, the
Mysteries of their Theology, the Books of their Religion and Philosophy, and
the Fables of their Priests, are writ; wherein are several weak and loose
Opinions, discovering their Ignorance both of the Duration of this World, and
the State and Condition of the next. I wanted that opportunity I wished for, of
enquiring more particularly into the several Mysteries of their Religion.
Besides, few of the learned Bramins live near Suratt.

The Paper-Books, The Paper-Books in India.
in vulgar use among the Inhabitants of India, on which they write, are long
Schrowls of Paper, sometimes Ten Foot in length, and a Foot broad, sowed
together at the upper end as many long Sheets as the occasion of the Writing
requires. The Pen they write with is the ancient Calamus, Their Pens.
or Reed, about the thickness of a large Goose Quill. And some of their
Standishes are made long and square, and above an Inch broad, Their Standishes.
and of sufficient length to contain both Pens, and a place for Ink.

Their manner of Writing is neither directly forwards nor backwards, Their way
of writing.
nor in a straight Line downwards, like the Chinese from the upper to the lower
part of the Paper; but it is a Medium between both, from the uppermost Corner
of the left to the lowermost Corner of the right, slanting gradually downwards;
especially when they write any Notes or Epistles to one another.

Their Paper by its Slickness and Smoothness appears shining, The Paper.
which is of ordinary use; but that which they write upon, either to the
Emperor, or Persons of Consequence, is gilt all on the Surface, as ours is
only on the edges, with some small Flowers interspersed here and there for
Ornament.

The Covering for Letters.
For the Security of Letters sent abroad to the principal Ministers, or the
Emperor, they are enclosed in a large hollow Bambou of a Foot length, at one
end of which is a Head or Cover two Inches long, which after the Letter is put
in, is joined close to the Bambou, and upon that joining the Seal is fixed, to
prevent taking out the Letter without breaking the Seal. This preserves the
Letter neat and clean, unsullied by Rain or Dust, or being carried from Hand to
Hand; so that let the Journey be never so tedious, this Respect always
accompanies the Letter to him it was sent to, that in opening of it, he finds
it as neat and fair as it was when it was first sealed up. The Covers of Paper
which are put upon our Letters in Europe, bear some resemblance to the Civility
of the Indian Bambou.

Upon their Chops, as they call them in India, or Seals engraven, are only
Characters, generally those of their Name, upon Gold, or Silver, or Cornelian
Stones. Coats of Arms in India are not heard of; No Coats of Arms in India.
for no Man is hereditary there, either to Estate or Honors, those all depend
upon the Breath and Pleasure of the Mogul, who is the sole Fountain of Honor
and Riches, who blasts the Fortune of his Subjects, or raises them by his
Favor, as he thinks fit. There every Man's Title and Estate are as mortal as
himself, die with him, and return to the Disposal of the Sovereign.

The Indians in sending their Letters abroad have not learnt the convenience of
the quick Dispatches of our Posts: No Posts here.
A Pattamar, i. e. a Foot Messenger, is generally employed to carry them to the
remotest Bounds of the Empire. So that whenever the English are under a
necessity of writing to Bengal, Maderas, or any other part of Indostan, a
Person is sent on purpose upon the Errand.

Neither have they endeavored to transcribe our Art of Printing; No Printing
here.
that would diminish the Repute and Livelihood of their Scrivans, who maintain
numerous Families by the Pen. But they can imitate a little the English manner
of Binding Books.

No Improvement of the Language.
They have not many Learned among them, to remove any Defects that might be
found in their common Style, or to improve their Language, so venerable for
Antiquity, and preservation of its self for so many Ages without any known
Alteration. It is otherwise in Europe, where Foreign Words are naturalized for
embellishing the Elegancy of Speech, which has been more particularly designed
in Germany; and for completing which the Emperor founded the Swan-Society, as
Censors of the Language, to correct and refine, to alter and amend whatever
they found unpolished or amiss. But Dr. Kempfire, an ingenious Traveller, and
German Physician, who told me this, told me likewise, that they exterminate all
exotic Words, however proper or specific, by a Confinement to those of their
Mother Tongue, though loaded with Circumlocutions. This Method, methinks, cannot
so much refine, as debase the Speech; which being an Instrument of conveying
the Ideas of things to the Mind, must needs increase its Excellence, by how
much the more particular and distinguishing Characters it represents them by;
and this Excellence depends upon the Idiom of Words.

In Journeying, or in taking the Air, the Moors are not only accommodated with
delicate Horses bred in India, Fine Horses.
but have conveyed hither from Persia and Arabia Horses so well turned, and of
such admirable Shapes, that a Thousand Roupies is easily sunk in the Price of
one of the more ordinary that are brought hither. Some of them are trained up,
and excel in Management as well as Shape; but their Care of them is equal to
neither of these Excellencies; for in the shooing of them, it is commonly done
so inartificially, that they easily batter their Hoofs, and expose them to
surbating with a very moderate Journey.

The Vulgar are not mounted on these stately Steeds, Oxen rid upon commonly
instead of Horses.
but they are pleased with getting upon a small Ox, as their Pad, to carry them
in the Town, or round the Country. They ascend them as we do our Horses,
equipped with a soft Cushion instead of a Saddle, and a long Rope thrust
through the Cartilage, which separates the Nostrils, knotted on each side,
which supplies the use of a Bridle. And thus at a good round easy rate they
travel upon the ambling horned Beast, either longer Journeys, or shorter
Stages, as they please.

Hackeries drawn by Oxen.
Their Hackeries likewise, which are a kind of Coach with two Wheels, are all
drawn by Oxen, which though they are naturally heavy Beasts, and slow in their
Motions, yet by constant and long Exercise they acquire a great Facility and
Speed of Foot in drawing the Hackeries, so as to vie with one another in
Swiftness for Wagers in running Races. Some of their Oxen are very large and
tall; A large Bump between the Shoulders of the black Cattle.
and all their black Cattle, both of this kind, and the Buffoloes, are
remarkable for a big piece of Flesh that rises above Six Inches high between
their Shoulders, which is the choicest and delicatest piece of Meat upon them,
especially put into a Dish of Palau. The Buffolo is generally larger than an
Ox, Buffoloes.
but a very sour untractable Animal, by which means he is useless to the
Natives in the convenience of Riding, or of Hackeries, and is generally
employed in carrying large Bags of Fresh Water on each side, from the Tanques
to the Houses. They affect no gaiety of Trappings or of Harnass upon their
draught Oxen, The Horns of the Oxen set off with Silver
but delight to see their Horns set off with Brass or Silver made hollow, of
three or four Inches length, fixed to the tip of them, with a long Chain of
Silver reaching from the end of each Horn to the middle of the Head, and there
fastened.

The Hackeries are made of a square Figure, The Description of a Hackery.
as our Coaches, but the Seat is flat, not raised with Cushions to lean upon.
They can carry three or four persons, and are all open on the sides, but
supported at each Corner, and in the middle by Pillasters. Some of better
fashion are hung round, with an Imperial over Head to fence off the scorching
Rays of the Sun, and with a Carpet spread under to sit upon.

Those whose Wealth is able to support it, are pompously carried upon Men's
shoulders in Palanquins, Palanquins
whose carriage is as easy and pleasant as that of our Chairs in the Streets
of London, but far surpasses them in point of State and quick dispatches of a
Journey. Four or Six Servants support the Palanquins, with others that attend
and relieve them by turns, who will with ease carry it twenty or thirty Miles a
Day. It hangs like a Cradle upon a Bambou five or six Inches in the Diameter,
and near four and twenty Foot long* Arched in the middle for the convenience of
him that sits in it, and sustaining the Hangings with which it is covered; but
it is straight above five Foot at each end, where the Servants carry it upon
their shoulders. Ballisters of four or five Inches thickness support it; the
sides of it are curiously wrought, and richly plated with Gold or Silver; the
Covering is made of fine Silk; the Cushions within are generally of rich
Zarbaft, Zarbaft is a kind of Silver or Gold Brokade.
with the choicest Carpets spread under them. Here the great Men stretch
themselves at ease, as it were upon a Couch, and hereby they avoid that Heat
and ruffling of their Spirits, which either the motions of a Horse or a Hackery
might cause, and which in these Kingdoms is so very troublesome. The Ancient
Romans used something like a Palanquin, as Juvenal in his first Satyr, tells
us, Causidici nova, cum veniat lectuca Mathonis Plena ipso.

When they take the Air, either in Palanquins or otherwise, they usually
frequent the coolest Groves, and the pleasant Gardens adjacent to the City,
refresht either by the River Tappy, or by Water conveyed into their Tanques, or
Ponds. And here the Dancing Wenches, Dancing Wenches.
or Quenchenies, entertain you, if you please, with their sprightly Motions,
and soft charming Aspects, with such amorous Glances, and so taking
irresistible a Mien, that as they cannot but gain an Admiration from all, so
they frequently Captivate a zealous Rich Spectator, and make their Fortunes and
Booty of the Enchanted Admirer. -- ut Gaditana canoro
Incipiat prurire choro, Juv. Sat. 11.
plausuque probatae
Ad terram tremulo descendant clune puellae.
One of the principal Persons about Suratt, was thus surpised and ensnared
while I was there, and lost both himself, his Fortune, and his Friends, in
their eager Admiration. For they are Educated in the Improvement of all that is
gay and entertaining, they set themselves off with such advantage, by a
Rhetorical Look and taking Air, wherein they show an unparalleled Masterpiece
of Art, that a grave European will scarce adventure himself in the sight of
their insinuating Temptations, and charming deportment.

Strange Shows.
Among the Men, whose Employment it is to divert Spectators with amazing Shows
and Sights, some, they say, will take in their Hands a Clew of Thread, and
throw it upwards in the Air till it all unravels, and then climbing up
themselves by this tender Thread to the top of it, presently fall down
piecemeal upon the Ground* and when all is dropped, unite again the parted
Members. Others are said to raise a Mango-Tree, with ripe Fruit upon its
Branches, in the space of one or two Hours. To confirm which Relation, it was
affirmed confidently to me, that a Gentleman who had plucked one of these
Mangoes, fell sick upon it, and was never well as long as he kept it, 'till he
consulted a Bramin for his Health, who prescribed his only Remedy would be the
restoring of the Mango, by which he was restored to his Health again.

Dancing Snakes kept tame in Baskets are every where common* Dancing Snakes.
their Keepers use them as familiarly as we do Puppies, take them in their
Hands, and sometimes force them to bite their Flesh without any consequent
harm. He that carries them about, plays upon a Pipe when he exposes them, at
the noise of which the Snake will hiss, spread his Head and throw it about.

We had brought into our Factory once a tame Snake, A large Fowl swallowed by a
Snake.
of that bigness and length, that one of the Fowls of the largest size was
swallowed whole by it, with all the Feathers on, in my sight, it first began
with the Head of the Fowl, and then twisting its Body about the Body of the
Fowl, squeezed it close, to facilitate the Passage. The Fowl Screeched once at
the first seizing, and afterward lay dead: The Snake strugled sometime with
the Bulky part of the Body before it could get it down; but as soon as it was
once swallowed, it found a speedy passage to the middle of the Snake, which lay
there stretched and swelled, 'till the natural Heat, in less than 24 Hours, had
digested both the Bones and Feathers. This was an extraordinary Morsel, and far
surpassing that ordinary Food upon which the Snakes do commonly feed. But there
is much more danger than diversion from these Serpents in India, where they are
so numerous, that the unwary Traveller is often exposed to the fatal effects of
their sudden Venom. For a Peon of mine, named Gemal, walking abroad in the
Grass after the Rains, was unfortunately bit on a sudden by one of them. The
latent Snake twisted unawares about his Leg, and in a short time brought him to
the Ground, by causing in him an immediate deliquium of Spirit, almost even to
Expiration. The Servants who were standing by, amazed at the accident, called
immediately upon an English Merchant, who hastened toward him with a special
Medicine for his Recovery. The thing which he carried about him, and which
instantly applied, is a Specific against the Poison of Snakes, cured him, and
therefore obtains the Name of Snake-stone. The Snake Stone.
It is a small artificial Stone, almost flat, only with a little protuberance
in the middle, and of a gray Color. The Composition of it is Ashes of burnt
Roots, mixed with a kind of Earth, which is found at Diu, belonging to the
Portuguese; and those are burnt together again, out of which Paste the Stones
are formed. They are not all alike Colored, but those that have received more
of the Fire, are thereby inclined to a lighter Gray, the others are a little
more dark. Its Virtues.
This Stone Cures by the application of it to the part envenomed, to which it
immediately sticks fast, and by its powerful Attraction sucks back the infused
Venom, 'till its Pores are full. Then like a glutted Horse-Leach it falls off,
and disgorges the replenisht Pores in Milk (the properest liquor for this
purpose) which by discoloring, it renders livid. Upon this it recovers new
strength, and its Alexipharmick quality again, and is speedily prepared for a
fresh Draught of Poison, if any remains in the affected part, 'till it quite
extracts whatever the venomous Serpent had immited; which makes those
Counter-poisons in great esteem against all external Attacks upon the Body; as
the Cordial Antidotes are most valuable for expelling or subduing any Poison
inwardly received. The double Excellence of this Stone recommends its worth
very highly, in that a little of it scraped off, and mixed with Wine, or some
other proper vehicle, and inwardly taken, is reputed one of the most powerful
Medicines against any Malignant Fevers or Infectious Diseases, that is known;
and much excess the deservedly famed Gasper Antoni, or Goa Stone. The trial of
these Stones is made by fixing them to the Roof of the Mouth, How to try the
Snake Stone.
to which if they stick fast, it is a sign they are genuine, if they easily fall
off, fictitious. Another method for knowing the true Stones from the
Counterfeit, is to immerse them in a Glass of Water, where, after a while, if
some light Ebullitions rise from them, and ascend through the Body of the
Water, this likewise is an approved Sign that the Stone is not spurious. The
Europeans, for the Security of themselves against the Danger of these Serpents,
which are every where so common in India, carry always about them one of these
Stones enclosed in a Heart of Gold, fixed to a Golden Chain, which hangs about
their Necks.

A burning Coal is boasted to be able to effect the same Cure, The Virtue of a
burning Coal.
as the Snake-Stone does; and to heal the Venom of Serpents, or stinging of
Scorpions, by gradually drawing out all the Poison, when it is applied very
near the Wound; which is not easily vexed or incommoded by the Fire, by reason
that the acuteness of the Venom abates the sensibleness of the Heat of the
Fire, and keeps it off.

As the Kingdom of Indostan is very much annoyed by the multitude of these
venomous Creatures, which lurk in all Coverts and secret places, so is it
stockt with Medicines extraordinary against their Harm. The wise Designation of
Heaven providing all things for the Convenience, as well as Necessity, both of
Nations and particular Creatures, by suiting Remedies peculiar to each ones
Exigence, and appropriating agreeable Circumstances to the particular Natures
of all. Therefore as inward Poisons prevail in these parts, as well as outward;
so do Medicines likewise, which are available for abating and expelling both of
them. For besides several Poisonous Herbs which grow in India, the old Natives
of Bengal affirm, that if Sugar be kept for Thirty Years, Sugar long kept is
poisonous.
it is as dangerous, as quick, and effectual Poison as any. One of the
Antidotes, above all the rest, is the celebrated Maldive Coco-nut, The Maldive
Coco-Nut.
of which this Encomium is given by Piso, in his Mantissa Aromatica, at the
latter end of Bontius, Vera cum Gloria praedicare non dubito, Antistitem
Alexipharmacorum Coccum nostrum esse, experimentis indubitatis non fallacem.
That is, He can truly boast by many infallible Experiments, that there is no
Alexipharmick goes beyond the Maldive Coco-nut. He prescribes four Scruples, or
from half a Dram to a whole, to be taken in proper Liquor, which he affirms
prevails miraculously to the Cure not only of Internal Poisons, Its Virtues.
but mightily helps forward Women in Labor, as he would prove by an Induction
of many Particulars. It cures the Bloody Flux, the Pestilence, and Malignant
Fevers, Poisons, Falling Sickness, Palsy, Convulsions, and frightful Tremors
of the Spirits: So great are its Virtues, that the use of it, as he elsewhere
tells us, is consecrated by a certain Privilege of Nature to the support of
Life, p. 207. Which made Rudolphus, a certain Roman Emperor, understanding its
Excellence, purchase it at the price of Four Thousand Florens.

The Name of this Nut with the Maldives is Tavarcare; This Nut found in several
parts of India.
and though it has appropriated the Name of Maldive, ^et is it found in other
parts of India besides, though probably the first, or most of them, are met
with there. It is conjectured to be the same with the Land Coco-Nut, and that
when the Ocean invading the Main Land of Asia made a Breach of the Maldives
from it, these Nuts were covered under the Water, which now and then are taken
up in it floating, or washed upon the Shore.

The Indians are very fond of it, and strongly maintain its Medicinal Virtues
against Poison; in Confirmation whereof, an old English Master of a Grab, A
strange Cure performed by the Maldive Coco-Nut.
or small Vessel, George Toach, has frequently repeated this Story to me, That
in his Voyage to Patta, which lies near the Red Sea, upon the Coast of Africa,
in the time of the Sale of his Cargo there, the King's Son of the Place was
poisoned to that degree, that his Skin was bloated and swollen upon him like a
Bladder: He presently betakes himself for a Remedy to the Maldive Coco-nut,
several or which are found there. This he rubbed upon a hollow Stone,
containing five or six spoonfuls of Water, till the Water was well tinctured by
it* and in the same manner rubbed a piece of a Rhinoceros Horn, and then drank
the Water off. And repeating this Medicine for three or four Days, the Humors
sensibly assuaged, and in that time were all drawn off by so powerful a
Purgation, that though it had racked and examined every part of his Body, yet
he recovered in that short space of time; the Swelling abated, and his Skin
fell, and hung loose about him like a Garment. I brought one of these Coco-nuts
with me from Suratt, which was graciously accepted of by the late Queen, of
Glorious and Immortal Memory.

They ascribe very much likewise to the Rhinoceros Horn in India, The Virtue of
the Rhinoceros Horn.
as it is an Antidote against all poisonous Draughts, and hugely extol in it
that Medicinal Excellence and singular Quality. The Character of this Horn
prevailed so far with a former President of ours at Suratt, that he exchanged
for a Cup made of this Horn a large capacious Silver Bowl of the same bigness.

The Heat of the Country about Suratt, will scarce permit that eager
Prosecution of Sports or Recreations, which a cooler Climate does encourage;
but a Game at Chess in their Houses, The Indians play at Chess.
or in the Shades of the Streets, will invite them to spend some Hours at it: I
did not hear of their Expenses otherwise, I mean of their Goods or Money. For
they seldom are heated into Passion, or ruinous Adventures, by the Polemick
Traverses of that intricate puzling Game. Their Frolicks reach not to that
pitch of Folly, as to exchange their Pastimes into Punishments, or to make them
hazard the loss of their comfortable Subsistence for ever, for diverting
themselves for some Hours or Minutes. Gaming for Money capital at Siam.
And to me it seems more rational, the Penalty of the Japanners upon Gaming,
who have decreed it a Capital Crime to play for Money; than the Liberty taken
by the Siamese, in playing away not only their Estates, but Families, and
sometimes themselves too. How many fair Estates have been squandred away in one
Night's time, by the Votaries of Fortune, who have both ruined themselves and
their Families, by the Effects of this Vanity, and the bewitching Love of
Gaming? And by running their Estates upon unhappy Destinies, by a cross turn of
Fortune, or an unlucky Chance, have made themselves Suppliants for part of
those Possessions, of which they were entire Masters before.

Hunting of wild Beasts
The variety of Wild Beasts afford the stouter Indians abundance of other Game,
and divert them with more manly Pastimes. Insomuch that in some of our English
Factories, particularly Carwar upon the Coast of Malabar, Deer, Antilopes,
Peacocks, wild Bulls and Cows, are almost the daily Furniture of their Table,
brought home by the Peons, without any further Expense than that of Powder and
Shot. Suratt abounds not with that Plenty; however, Hares and Peacocks, Deer
and Antilopes, are sold here at easy Rates; though Provisions are not quite so
cheap as at Bengal, where Forty Fowls, or Fifteen Ducks, may be bought for a
Roupie.

A considerable Value is set upon any of our European Dogs, English Dogs
valuable there.
either Spaniels, Greyhounds, or Mastiffs. A Water-Spaniel, in the River of
Tappy after a Duck, will call forth the whole City to the Pastime; and it is
with them upon this score so very amazing and delightful, because they have
none of that Breed among them; nor indeed any other, that I ever saw, but
Currs; into which our fiercest and most lively Dogs degenerate, after a Litter
or two, by the constant unallay'd heat of the Country. The Grayhounds and
Hounds are likewise equally valuable and divertive, and live for some time, if
they run them not in the Heat of the Day; but if they chance to hunt with them
about Noon, the ambient Air mixing with the natural, when it is fermented and
chafed, commonly proves too strong for their Constitutions; so that they
frequently expire upon the spot, and rarely live out any number of Years or
Months.

The Irish Wolf-Dogs much esteemed of.
A couple of Irish Wolf-Dogs were so prized in Persia, that they were taken as a
welcome and admired Present by the Emperor himself. Two more of which (which
were given to me by the Earl of Inchequin, when we put into Kingsale, after the
Voyage) I disposed of to the East India Company, who dispatched them in their
Ships immediately to the Indies, to be there bestowed in some of the Eastern
Courts.

A Quarrel about an English Mastiff.
A large English Mastiff, given by a Merchant, was looked upon as such a Rarity
and Favor by a Noble Omrah, that he engaged himself and Six Hundred of his
Followers, in a hot Dispute concerning his Property in the Dog, with another as
potent a Grandee who claimed a Right in him. For the Decision of this
Controversy, they each led forth a like number of Men, to determine their Right
by a bloody Contest. Till one, a little wiser and more cool than the other two,
entreated their respite, and bespoke their Audience, and told them the case
might be easily remitted to the English President, who was able to give a just
determination in it. This by their joint consent and application kindly
prevented the Designed Quarrel, and the English President Arbitrated fairly in
justice to him to whom the Dog was given.

And because the Moors have invented peculiar Arts and methods in their
Recreations, from what obtain among us; I shall instance in some of their
diversions, which will not be ungrateful to the Reader, especially if he be a
Man of Sports.

In hunting their Antilopes and Deer, The Hunting of Deer with Leopards.
as they are destitute of Dogs, so they endeavor to supply their want by tame
Leopards, trained and brought up for that purpose, which warily leap upon they
Prey, and having once caught it, hold it fast.

In Persia, in the room of Dogs and Leopards, they bring up Faulcons to hunt
their Antilopes and Bucks, Deer Hunted by Hawks.
which are brought to India from thence, and are trained to it after this
manner. Whenever the Hawk they breed up to it is hungry, they fix its meat upon
the Nose of a Counterfeit Antilope, and from thence only feed it, without
allowing it any Meat but what it Eats there. After this they carry one or two
of these Falcons into the Fields, and flying one of them at an Antilope, it
fastens just upon his Nose, which so blinds and stops the Antilope, by the
force and fluttering of its Wings, that he can neither well espy his way, nor
find his Feet as nimbly as he would; and this gives a very easy admittance to
the Men or Dogs to come in and catch him. If this Hawk is beaten off, which is
sometimes done with much ado, another aloft stoops and lights upon the same
place, and strikes him backwards with his Talons, 'till at length he is made a
Prey: For one of the Hawks always mounts as the other stoops.

Another way of Hunting the Game.
Sometimes a great company of Men range the Fields, and walk together into the
Enclosures, to look after their Game; when once they have espied the place
where they fancy the Game lies, they enclose the Ground, and stand in a Ring,
with Clubs or Weapons in their Hands, whilst they employ others to beat up the
Ground, and raise it for them.

Nor are they destitute of ingenious Inventions, when they recreate themselves
with Fowling, any less than they are in their Hunting Sports. For in the room
of our stalking Horses, they make use of stalking Oxen, Stalking Oxen.
which are managed and bred up to the purpose, even to admiration. I have seen
a Moor Indian shoot at once five or six Ducks under one of their Bellies,
without the least starting, or surprisal to the Ox; and the quiet temper of
this laborious Animal renders it, I believe, as easily brought up to it, and as
proper for this Game as any Horse. Some of the Indians maintain themselves very
well by this Art.

But they use another ingenious method for catching Wild Fowl, which is very
pretty. The Fowler when he is in quest of his Game, espying at length his sport
at a distance, An Ingenious way to catch Wild-Fowl.
prepares a Man to go before him toward the place where he sees his Game, and
carry in his Hand the boughs of Trees, so artificially wrought and joined
together, that they perfectly resemble a small Bush or Hedge, which is a
shelter both to the Fowler and him that carries it. By this contrivance, the
Fowler passes altogether undiscovered toward his sport, and gains the
convenience not only of shooting at what distance he pleases, but sometimes
approaches his Game so near, that he takes it almost in his Hand. If the Wild
Fowl be at a distance upon the Water, he then contrives another method for
coming near them, Another ingenious contrivance to catch Wild-Fowl.
and surprising them with his Hands. He takes a Pitcher or Earthen Jarr, so
large that he fits it to his Head, which he covers all over, and decks it with
the Feathers of what Waterfowl he thinks convenient; and making holes in it
for him to breath and look through, he then fastens it upon his Head, and being
expert in swimming, ventures into the Pond where he sees the Fowl, and moves
toward them, without any thing visible but the Pitcher above the Water; when
he comes near them where they swim about, he catches them one by one by their
Legs, and silently pulls them under Water, and there fastens them to his
Girdle. They all this while fancy the moving Feathered Jarr a living Fowl, and
those that were plucked under the Water to have been Diving, 'till sometimes the
Fowler catches the whole Flock.

Next to the Moors the Bannians are the most noted Inhabitants at Suratt, The
Bannians.
who are Merchants all by Profession, and very numerous in all parts of India.
They are most innocent and obsequious, Their Temper and obsequious deportment.
humble and patient to a Miracle; sometimes they are heated into harsh
Expressions to one another, which is seldom; and this Tongue-Tempest is termed
there a Bannian Fight, for it never rises to Blows or Bloodshed. The very
killing of a Fly with them, is at Crime almost inexpiable. They cannot so much
as endure hot Words, as they call them, from the Europeans; but if they see
them exasperated, and in a Rage, retreat for a day or two, 'till they give them
time to cool; and when they find the Passion asswag'd, form their Addresses in
the most affable manner, and obliging Respect.

The Orientals are generally much more tender and insinuating in their
Language, and more prompt and easy in their Deportment, than those that are
bred in the Tempestuous Regions, and Northerly Air of Europe, The Tempers of
Men alter by the Climate they live in.
which has a certain Influence upon their Spirits, to render them boisterous
and irregular, in respect of that submissive temper and affable Carriage of the
Eastern Nations. He that has conversed for any time among these, can hardly
bear the roughness, or be brought to digest the rudeness of the others. For the
sudden Changes, and uncertainty of the Weather in all Seasons of the Year,
affect both the Heads and Hearts of such as are Conversant in these uneven
Climates; it makes them suddenly heated into Passions, and as hardly brought to
an warmth of Affection; it makes them both unlike other Nations, and
inconsistent with themselves, by raising unequal Humors, and unconstancy in
the Passions, unfixt Desires, and uncertain Ends. And were the Bannians to be
transported hither, who hold a Transmigration, they would be apt immediately
upon their Arrival to conclude, that many of the Men had really invaded the
Natures of some of the most savage Brutes, were animated with no other Souls
than those of Tigers and Bears; and that the Irish and French Opinion of the
Lougaroos, or Men turned into Wolves, was as true and authentic a Notion, as
any that prevailed among them.

But that Opinion of the Bannians, The Reasons of the soft Temper of the
Bannians.
which possesses them with an Horror of Blood, does quite discourage them from
all Hostile Attacks and thoughts of War; and their Despotick Government breaks
their Spirits, and the feeble phlegmatic Aliments, with the consumptive Heat
of the Sun, all contribute to weaken and effeminate their Constitutions, to the
producing a tractable Disposition, and smooth regular Deportment.

They are mainly addicted to prosecute their Temporal Interest, Much given to
Riches.
and the amassing of Treasure; and therefore will fly at the securing of a
Pice, though they can command whole Lacks of Roupies. I know those among them
computed to be worth an Hundred Thousand Pounds, whose Service the Prospect of
Sixpence Advantage will command to traverse the whole City of Suratt. For they
are always upon the Thoughts of increasing their Wealth, and plodding for Gain,
which they lay hold on upon the least occasion, though by never so minute and
inconsiderable Advantages. By which Diligence they generally secure a
comfortable Subsistence; and some of them amass a prodigious Treasure.

The Bannians are by much the most numerous, and by far the wealthiest of all
the Pagans of India, whose Distinction in Religion argues a difference of their
various Vocations; Each Trade of a different Opinion in Religion.
and each single Trade is diversified by some particular Opinions; the
Goldsmith, and Scrivan, the Joyner, Barber, and Merchant, etc. as they have
different Employments, so are they of diverse Sentiments, and distinguished in
the Ceremonies of their Worship; and mix no more in their Sacred Sentiments of
Religion, than in their Civil Arts. Therefore all their Arts are Hereditary,
and their Employments confined to their own Families. The Son is engaged in the
Father's Trade, and to maintain the Profession of it in his Posterity, it is
transmitted always to the succeeding Generation, which is obliged to preserve
it in a lineal Descent, uncommunicated to any Stranger. Upon this account all
Marriages are restrained to one Sect, No Persons whose Parents are of contrary
Trades, marry together.
and contracted only between Persons of the same Persuasion and Profession. The
Merchant is debarred from entering into any League of Love with the Daughter of
a Goldsmith, Shoemaker, or of any other different Employment; and all Persons
are under a strict Confinement, in their Matrimonial Ties and Addresses to
direct their Passions and Affections to those only of their own Opinion and
Trade. Which Custom has formerly prevailed even in the most Western Island of
this Hemisphere; and several Great Men in the Septs of Ireland, had heretofore
their Physicians, Poets, Smiths, and such like, who always continued in the
same Races.

The Indians are in many things of matchless Ingenuity in their several
Employments, The Indians Ingenuity.
and admirable Mimicks of whatever they affect to copy after. The Bannian, by
the Strength of his Brain only, will sum up his Accounts with equal exactness,
and quicker Dispatch, than the readiest Arithmetician can with his Pen. The
Weavers of Silk will exactly imitate the nicest and most beautiful Patterns
that are brought from Europe. And the very Ship-Carpenters at Suratt will take
the Model of any English Vessel, in all the Curiosity of its Building, and the
most artificial Instances of Workmanship about it, whether they are proper for
the Convenience of Burden, or of quick Sailing, as exactly as if they had been
the first Contrivers. The Wood with which they build their Ships would be very
proper for our Men of War in Europe; A sort of Wood that never splinters.
for it has this Excellence, that it never splinters by the Force of a Bullet,
nor is injured by those violent Impressions, beyond the just Bore of the Shot.
The Tailers here fashion the Clothes for the Europeans, The Indian Tailers.
either Men or Women, according to every Mode that prevails; and fit up the
Commodes, and towering Head-Dresses for the Women, with as much Skill, as if
they had been an Indian Fashion, or themselves had been Apprentices at the
Royal Exchange. But they are tainted with a superstitious Fancy, that mending
old Clothes in a Morning, is of very ill abode; and therefore they rather are
willing to employ that time in fashioning of New, and reserve the Afternoon as
most proper for the other.

The Indians have not yet attempted an Imitation of our Clock-work in Watches;
and may be it is, because they seldom continue their just Motions for any long
time, by reason of the Dust that flies continually in the Air, which is apt to
clog and stop the Wheels. But the Chinese have undertaken to take our Clocks
and Watches in pieces, to form new ones themselves, The Chinese imitate our
Clock-work.
and may be in some time produce some fresh Improvements in those Mechanical
Operations. The Siamese measure their time by a sort of Water-Clock, The Water
Clock at Siam.
not like the Clepsydra of old, wherein the Water descended from above, but by
forcing it upwards through a small Hole in the bottom of a Copper Cup, placed
in a Tub of Water. When the Water has sprung up so long that the Cup is full,
it sinks down, and those that stand by it forthwith make a noise with Basins,
signifying that the Hour is expired.

The extraordinary Ingenuity of the Indians in some things
In some things the Artists of India outdo all the Ingenuity of Europe, viz. in
the painting of Chites or Callicoes, which in Europe cannot be paralleled,
either in the brightness and life of the Colors, or in their continuance upon
the Cloth. The Gold Stripes likewise in their Sooseys, and the Gold Flowers in
their Atlasses, are imitated with us, but not to Perfection. And the Cornelian
Rings with double Chains of Gold about them, meeting at several Distances,
where small sparks of Diamonds, Rubies, or Saphires are inlaid to beautify the
Ring, surpass the Skill of any other Nation to arrive to. I cannot boast of the
Lack upon Scrutores and Tables at Suratt, which is but ordinary in respect of
that at Japan. They make it, as I was told by Mr. Prescot, A Report concerning
the Lack at Japan.
one of the Council at Bombay, invulnerable to all Impressions, so hard and
thoroughly firm, that if you will but rise to the price of it, they will venture
it with a Bagonet, and forfeit it entirely, if the sharpest Point shall pierce
it very deep. But yet all the Wood among them which is Lackt, is not of this
impenitrable Hardness; and yet all of it is laid on both deeper, and made much
firmer, than the Lack of Tunquin, which sometimes yields to the Force of the
Nail of ones Finger pressed upon it; A way of trying Lack
and is one way of trying its Excellence. This Varnish grows upon Trees very
common in the Woods of Siam, The Lack grows at Siam.
which distills from them like a Gum, and is transported to China, Japan, and
other Kingdoms.

Among the Bannians are reckoned 24 Casts, or Sects, 24 Casts of Bannians.
who both refrain from an indiscriminate mixture in Marriages, and from eating
together in common. They all maintain a Transmigration of Souls, They hold the
Transmigration. Eat no living Creature.
and Abstinence from the Food of any Living Creature, according to the Doctrine
of Pythagoras, who is presumed by some Learned Men to have borrowed his Opinion
from them. This Philostratus relates of Jarchas, a Principal of the Bramins,
how he told Apollonius Tyanaeus, that he himself had formerly been Ganges,
Apollonius had been an Egyptian Mariner, and an Attendant that waited upon them
had been Palamedes, and in new Bodies had represented themselves to the World.
Which Opinion spread it self as far formerly as our Nation, among the Druids,
The Druids hold a Transmigration.
who for this reason taught and preserib'd an Abstinence from Flesh. They fancy
that every Man, according to his Demerits in his Lifetime, shall animate a
noble, or more infamous Animal after Death. Their great Esteem for the Cow.
And him they pronounce completely happy, whose Soul, after its departure out
of the Body, can fortunately escape into that of a Cow, and inform the Body of
that blessed Creature, which above all the rest of the Animal Generations, is of
singular Esteem and greatest Respect, even almost to Adoration: A solemn
Address is paid to this Creature every Morning; and he that is destitute of one
at home, makes his Visit to that of his Neighbors. They admire it for the
Excellence of its Nature, for which it is conspicuous in those extraordinary
Benefits which Mankind receive from it in the support of their Lives; and for
the Convenience of it after Death, in conducting them over a broad deep River,
which they are engaged to pass, which would be impassable, were it not for the
Cow's Tail, which the Bramins tell them, they are to take hold of in getting
over.

Besides these, there are other Reasons for the profound Respect they have for
the Cows; for they believe, with the Mahometans, that the Foundations of the
Earth are supported on the Horns of these Creatures; and that the Cows
extraordinary fast Motion causes Earthquakes. They tell us likewise, that
Mahaden, being greatly provoked by the Crimes of the People, and resolving upon
it to destroy the World, he was appeased by a Cow, who reconciled him, and
saved the Earth from utter Ruin. Therefore did the former Kings of Malabar,
whenever they created a Nairo or Knight, after their embracing him, enjoined
his Kindness to those two especially, the Bramins and the Kine. Bramins and
Cows most respected.
And whatever Opinion some present Philosophers have of Brutes, who deny them
not only the use of Reason, which others have ascribed to them, but likewise
that of Sense, by degrading of them into mere Machines; the Ancients had better
Thoughts of them; and the Egyptians and Persians, as well as Indians, had them
in universal Esteem. The Egyptians formed the Images of their Gods in the
Similitude of Beasts, The Egyptian's kindness to living Creatures.
or Birds, or Fishes; as that of an Ox, a Crocodile, or other Creature, to
affright the Vulgar by these Sacred Symbols from hurting the dumb Animals; and
that struck with a Sacred Reverence, they might abstain from the Death of any
living Creature. And the Persians.
And thus the Disciples of the Persian Magi received an Alteration of their
Names into those of Beasts, or Birds; and were called Lions, Panthers, Hawks,
or something else, to form in them a likeing to those Creatures; and by
resembling them in the various Figures with which their Garments were painted,
to bring them to entertain a certain Friendship and Affection to them; thereby
insinuating this Indian Persuasion of the Transmigration of Souls, and that the
Spirit of Man is liable successively to animate all kinds of Bodies.

The Bannians are of so firm a Belief in this matter, and so far gone in this
Assertion, that if either Bird or Beast be seen to frequent their Habitation,
it must consequently be the Spirit of some lately departed Friend. Moradash a
Bannian, The Respect which a certain Bannian paid to a Snake.
and Scrivan or Secretary to the English Brokers, was some few Years past
sorely afflicted for the Death of his Father, and in deep melancholy Sighs had
long bewailed his Misery and Loss. Till at length a large Snake appearing in
the House some time after, where his Father died, became a Refuge to his
sorrowful Thoughts, and relieved the Troubles of his Mind. Moradash fixing his
Eyes upon the crawling Snake, and attentively considering its Windings and
Motions for a while, revolved in his Mind how it found out its way thither,
having never seen't before. And therefore strengthening his Opinion by his
Affection, concludes that this could be nothing else but the Soul of his
ancient Father, who in this Shape applied himself to his Son for Relief and
Nourishment. Upon which his Superstition wrought so powerfully, that nothing
now could alter this new Opinion, but he must carefully nourish this Snake, and
so religiously continues a filial Respect to it, appointing it daily a certain
Allowance of Rice and Milk. The Snake lodges in a Hole of the Wall, and after
taking his Repast and Liberty in the Room, retires into his Apartment, till
Hunger calls him forth to a fresh Meal; and is now both by the Scrivan and his
Family as carefully attended, as if his Father were alive. This fond indulgent
Indian is as profuse in his Favors to some Rats, The same Bannian's kindness
to Rats.
which lodge in his House, and are grown as familiar as Cats; for to these he
allows some daily Food, because he is certain they harbor the Souls of some
departed Relations.

An Opinion concerning the Transmigration.
Some Men think that this Opinion of the Metempsycosis takes its Original from
the Transformation of Nebuchadnezzar into a Beast, which is mentioned in the
Book of Daniel; and that when his Soul passed into that of a Brute, when he was
under a corporal Transformation, the Souls of other Men might undergo the same
Fate after Death, as a Punishment for their Crimes, as his was. For the ancient
Gauls maintained the Immortality of the Soul, and its shifting continually from
one Body to another; and that according to its Deportment here, such and such
Bodies were appointed it by God, more or less painful, and suitable to its
Condition. Claud. in Ruff. Lib. 2.

Muta ferarum
Cogit vincla pati, truculentos in gerit Vrsis,
Pradonesque Lupis, fallaces vulpibus addit,
Atque ubi per varios Annos per mill figuras
Egit, Lethaeo purgatos flumine tandem
Rursus ad humanae revocat primordia formae.
He made them wear the silent Yoke of Brutes, some that were Cruel, he lodged
in the Bodies of Bears and Wolves; those that were Crafty, in Foxes, and others
in other Animals, 'till after the succession of a thousand Years and Shapes, at
length they are re-plac'd into Human Shapes, when they had been well purged in
Lethe's Flood.

But to strengthen this Consideration the more concerning Nebuchadnezzar, they
observe, that this wonderful Transformation of that great Monarch, happened at
or about the very same time that Pythagoras was at Babylon, whither he
traveled to gain the Eastern Learning; but this may be a small mistake in
time. Hence he brought the Report fresh with him, and being of a fanciful
Genius, thought the best way to solve that strange occurrence, was to assert a
Metempsychosis. But though there is no mention of the Soul's Transmigration more
ancient among the Greeks than Pythagoras; yet among the Chinese, ^e ancint
Opinion of the Chinese, of the Transmigration.
whose Antiquities are said to be stretched backwards above four thousand Years,
there is this Opinion yet current among their Learned Men, as well as among the
Indians, and is agreed to be of ancient Date: That the Souls after Death are
Subject to a Transmigration. And it is not improbable that much of the
Phaenician, as well as Grecian and Egyptian Institutions, were derived from the
ancient and remote Fountains of Learning, the Indies and China: Especially, if
we consider not only the Opinion of the Soul's Transmigration, but of the
Eternity of Matter; the four Cardinal Virtues, the Indolence of Body, and
Tranquillity of Mind, Abstinence from living Creatures, and several others,
which seem to be entirely Oriental, and brought from thence by Pythagoras,
Democritus, Lycurgus, and others, who traveled into those distant parts.

The Days set apart for the public Devotion of the Bannians, The Bannians Days
of Devotion.
are only two in a Month, about our ninth and twenty fourth; in which, by a
very strict Discipline, they abstain from all things eatable 'till the Evening
most Religiously. And inculcate this severity upon their younger Children, in
their Infant Growth, to induce the observance of it with facility upon them,
Their Abstinence.
and to render the Abstinence tolerable and less troublesome in their riper Age.

The Pagans, who are bred to labor and Manual Occupations, consecrate each Day
in the Week, Holy Ballads Sung all the day long.
and every thing they take in Hand thus far; that they fill their Mouths with a
pious Song at the first dawning of the Morning, as soon as ever they engage in
their several Employments and Manual Occupations, and never cease their Secular
Vocation without concluding with the mixture of a Holy Rhyme. When a Company of
Laborers are employed together about the same Work, this sacred Ballad is
repeated by them sometimes alternately, sometimes by single persons, the rest
answering in a Chorus, all the Day long, without the intermission of one
quarter of an Hour. The Lascars or Seamen upon the Water, all the while they
handle the Oar, divert themselves by turns with this tuneful Melody. This piece
of Religion they are so solemnly and constantly inured to, that if they
designed the undertaking any work in secrecy and un-observ'd, the custom they
have acquired in singing would be apt by some sudden Eruption to betray their
Privacy, and discover the silence and obscurity they desired. A Conjecture at
the reason of this Singing.
I fancy the warmth of the Air, which is apt to stupifie the Spirits, and
render them unweildy and dull, was as likely a Reason for introducing this
melodious Diversion, which is apt to keep them active and awake at their Work,
as it was to exercise the Devotion of their Thoughts. Its rise, used in China.
The Introduction of this Custom was probably designed by him, who writ the
second Volume of the five principal ones that are extant in China; which is a
Collection of Odes, and several other little things of that nature. For Music
being greatly esteemed and much used in China, and whatever is published in
this Volume, having respect only to the Purity of Manners, and practice of
Virtue, those that wrote it composed it, in Verse, to the end that every one
being enabled to sing the things therein contained, they might be in every ones
Mouth. And from thence it might spread it self, for this very reason, as far as
India.

Aureng-Zebe, Aureng-Zebe's restraining Pagan-worship.
upon an implacable detestation to the Idolatry of the Bannians and other
Gentiles, has forbid in a great measure their Pagodes, and commanded both a
defacing of them, and suppressing the Solemnities of their public Meetings,
which thereupon is not so common as formerly, and that which is connived at, is
generally in some distant Priviledg'd Parts.

They repeat their Devotions, The Indians very public in their Devotions.
especially the Moors, in the Corners of the Streets, and upon the House tops,
in the High Ways, and where there is commonly a public Concourse of People; as
if they were ambitious of opportunities of demonstrating their Zeal to the God
they worship, whom they always approach with Postures most submissive, and
suitable to the respect of that awful Majesty they implore. After they have
bended the Knee, They show great Reverence at Prayer.
they in the most profound Prostration kiss the Ground frequently with their
Foreheads, express their servency in Devotion with the most ardent pathetick
Aspirations, in the Mornings especially, and with the setting Sun.

Their constant Ablutions.
They are constant in their washings, either in the River Tappy, which runs by
the Walls of Suratt, or in their own Houses before they stir abroad; at which
time they cannot endure the least touch from any Stranger's Hand upon their
naked Bodies, 'till they have finished their Lustrations. And all their Infants,
even in their tender Years, are washed all over both Morning and Evening. When
they are called upon by the Necessities of Nature, Their cleanliness.
they always carry in their Hands a small Jarr of Water, which they use to wash
themselves clean with; and this Office is never performed but only with the
Left Hand. They never drink out of the same Cup with a Christian, The Bannians
Superstition in drinking.
or any Person of a different Sect; nor defile their Lips with the same Water
that has been touched by any Stranger; whereby all their Water-Pots are
reserved entirely for their owe Use, nor are ours ever desired by them.
Therefore they carry about with them Kousers or Jarrs of Water when they go
abroad, to quench their Thirst, and pour it into their Mouths at a certain
distance, according to the Thracian manner of taking full draughts without
winking, without either shutting the Mouth, or fetching Breath. See Horace,
Book the first, Ode 36.

-- multi Damalis meri
Bassum Threicia vincat amystide.
The Kousers are made of a sort of Earth, Ko^sers.
which preserves the Water cool and palatable, and so porous, that once only in
a minute or thereabouts, a single drop distills through the body of it, which
falls into a Basin underneath, and acquires a little pleasing Coolness, as well
as Rarefaction, by the Distillation.

When any European is invited by a Bannian to a Collation, the Repast is little
else but variety of Sweetmeats laid upon the green Leaves of Trees, Their
Entertainments.
which after the Entertainment are thrown away. Sometimes a Dish or two of rich
spic'd Palau may come in to make up a complete Banquet. Sherbet, that is Wine,
Water, and Lemon; it is the best Drink they indulge themselves, or allow others
commonly to partake of. For Wine they abominate as well as Flesh, and hate it
as much as Manes, the Author of the Manichees, who pronounced it to be the
Blood of Devils.

Their tenderness to living Creatures.
India, of all the Regions of the Earth, is the only public Theater of Justice
and Tenderness to Brutes, and all living Creatures; for not confining Murder
to the killing of a Man, they Religiously abstain from taking away the Life of
the meanest Animal, Mite, or Flea; any of which if they chance wilfully to
destroy, nothing less than a very considerable Expiation must Atone for the
Offense. This Precept was comprehended in that short System of Injunctions laid
down by Draco and Triptolemus, the most ancient Lawgivers among the Athenians,
To Honor their Parents, and neither to kill Man nor Beast. And it is observed,
that the Benefits which the Barbarians fancied they received from Beasts, made
them less Cruel and severe toward them, and sometimes Consecrate them; which
Plutarch thus excuses in the Egyptians, saying, That it was not the Cat, the
Ox, or the Dog which they adored; but that in these Beasts, they adored some
resemblance of the Divine Perfections; in this, the Vigilance, in that the
Patience and Vtility, and the Vivacity in the other. But however a Civil
Regard, though no Veneration, is enjoined as a common Duty of Humanity, which
forbids an Arbitrary Violence, a Cruel or Wanton Malice toward them. Therefore
the Romans, pleased with the Vigilance of the Geese, by public Voice took care
of their Nourishment. And beyond this, the Athenians Decreed a liberty of
Summering it up and down, and taking their Choice and Range in any Pasture,
Hill, or Valley, to the Mules that were Employed in Building the Temple, called
Hecatompedon.

The unreasonableness in their Opinion of killing young Creatures.
But that which most of all amuses and disturbs the Bannian, is our destruction
of living Creatures in their growing Years; for in this they condemn us of
Folly, as well as Cruelty, in preventing that greater advantage which we might
promise our selves by their Increase in Bulk and Age; and denominates it, in
their Opinion, a disadvantagious, as well as barbarous Action in those that
kill them. And therefore they mightily decry our Inhumanity, and inveigh
severely against our Imprudence in slaughtering Kids, Lambs, Chickens, etc. But
above all, A Calf their Darling Animal.
the Calf is the Darling Animal among them, as the Goat is the Idol adored by
the Bonzes of Tunquin, whose Life they seldom fail to Ransom, and that
sometimes at an immoderate rate, when they find it is in danger. Therefore the
Gentiles near Goa used to divide the meat, when it was ready, into three parts;
the first was given to the Poor, the second to the Cow, and the third to the
Family. The Young Factors at Suratt divert themselves with this fondness of the
Bannians to the dumb Creatures, and make an advantage of their tenderness and
respects to them; for the English Caterer is cautious in buying a Calf for
Slaughter, lest some Bannian, Friend to the Factory, should beg the Life of it,
or some way molest or prevent him in taking it away; though at other times he
makes himself a gainer by its Redemption. Sometimes the Young Men enter with a
Gun or small Fowling-piece into the Fields and Enclosures adjoining to the
Habitations of the Bannians, The young Factors at Suratt in their sports
imposing upon the Bannians.
and there make a show of shooting Sparrows, Turtle-Doves, or other small Birds
among the Trees, which when the Bannian observes (as it is designed he should)
he runs in haste, as it were for Life, to bribe the Fowler, not only with
courteous Expressions and fair Speeches, but with ready Money, not to persist
in his Diversion; and drops in his Hand a Roupie or two to be gone, and not
defile the Ground with the effusion of any Blood upon it; for all kind of Fowl
are as dear to them, as ever the Dove was to Semiramis, or the Swan was unto
Philip; and they entertain all their fellow Animals with a singular Esteem and
kind Respect; and are at considerable Annual Expenses for preserving their
Lives from Inhumanity and Death.

For within a Mile distance from Suratt is a large Hospital, A Hospital for old
Cows, Horses, etc.
supported by the Bannians in its maintenance of Cows, Horses, Goats, Dogs, and
other Animals diseased, or lame, infirm or decayed by Age; for when an Ox by,
many Years Toil grows feeble, and unfit for any farther Service; lest this
should tempt a merciless Owner to take away his Life, because he finds him an
unprofitable Burden, and his Flesh might be serviceable to him when he was
dead; therefore the Bannian reprieves his Destiny, either by begging him from
the Owner, or by buying of him at a certain Rate, and then places him in the
Hospital, where he is rescued from any other Death, but what is due to Nature,
and is there attended and fed, 'till he spins out the appoint^d customary term
of Life. This Chaerity which they extend to Beasts, is accounted by them an act
of great Reputation and Virtue; nor can they be reconciled to that inhuman
Cruelty, which destroys those Creatures which are the Nurses of our Lives, and
by whose labor we live at Ease.

Near this Hospital is another built for the preservation of Buggs, Fleas, and
other Vermin, A Hospital for Buggs, Fleas, etc.
which suck the Blood of Men; and therefore to maintain them with that choice
Diet to which they are used, and to feed them with their proper Fare, a poor
Man is hired now and then to rest all Night upon the Cot, or Bed, where the
Vermin are put, and fastened upon it, lest the stinging of them might force him
to take his flight before the Morning, and so they nourish themselves by
sucking his Blood, and feed-in on his Carcass.

Once a Year the charitable Bannian prepares a set Banquet for all the Flies
that are in his House, A Feast for Flies.
and sets down before them, upon the Floor or Table, large shallow Dishes of
sweet Milk and Sugar mixed together, the most delicious Fare of that liquorish
little Creature.

At other times he extends his Liberality to the Pismires, Their Charity to the
Pismires.
and walks with a Bag of Rice under his Arm, two or three Miles forward into
the Country, and stops, as he proceeds, at each Ant-Hill that he meets with, to
leave behind him his Benevolence, a handful or two of Rice straw'd upon the
Ground, which is the beloved Dainty on which the hungry Pismires feed, and
their best reserve and store in time of need.

Therefore they never taste the flesh of any thing that has breathed the common
Air, nor pollute themselves with feeding on any thing endued with Life; and are
struck with astonishment at the voratious Appetites of the Christians, who heap
whole Bisks of Fish upon their Tables, and sacrifice whole Hecatombs of Animals
to their Gluttony. They cannot be tempted, either by the delicacy of the Food,
No tasting of Flesh.
or for prevention of either Sickness or Death, to so enormous an Offense as
the tasting of Flesh. Vegetable products, and the Milk of Cattle, Rice, and
other sorts of Grane, which Nature affords in plenty, and they with Innocence
can enjoy, is the lawful Nourishment they delight in; nor will they be induced,
by the mere indulgence of their Appetites, to make their Tables Altars of
Luxury and Excesses, no more than the original Inhabitants of the World, whom
Antiquity supposes not to have been Carnivorous, nor to have tasted Flesh in
those first Ages, but only to have fed upon Fruits and Herbs.

The Prohibition of Flesh being eaten with the Blood, was an ancient Sanction
of the East, and is very universal to this day. It was forbidden by Moses,
because he placed the Life in it; nor is it dispensed with by the Mahometans.
Some ancient Philosophers, as Empedocles, placed the seat of the Soul in the
Blood, and Democritus assigned it the whole Body: And though the Bannians are
under restraint from the Blood of either Animal, or that of the Grape, yet will
they freely taste the Grapes themselves, and entertain themselves Luxuriously
with their Juice, while it is innocent and harmless. We have Grapes brought to
Suratt, The Season of Grapes.
from the middle of February 'till toward the end of March; some from
Amadavad, some from a Village called Naapoure, four days Journey distant from
Suratt. They feed likewise upon Pine-Apples, Custard-Apples, so called, because
they resemble a Custard in Color and Taste, and many other sorts of Fruit
unknown to Europe. But the Mangoes are of principal esteem, and the most common
Fruit of India: Mangoes much eaten
They have a Stone in the middle, by which and their outward shape, they come
nearest to the form of our long Plums of any Fruit, only they are generally
much larger; they attribute many medicinal qualities to this sort of Fruit, and
ascribe to it those Virtues which free them from all Diseases incident to that
Season of the Year, and sometimes those Chronical Distempers they labor under.
They are of exquisite Taste when they come to Maturity, and are Eaten then in
vast quantities by the Indians and Europeans, as well for the Security of their
Health as for pleasure and delight. When they are Green, they are Pickled there
and sent abroad, and make that Mango Achar, which we taste in England.

Cucumbers much eaten
The cold quality of the Cucumber is here so prepared and digested by the Sun's
Heat, that the Bannians, without endangering their Health, will feed upon them
as plentifully as we do upon Apples. And the Water-Melons are very large,
delicious, and easily purchased, and very refreshing cooling Fruit in the
warmer Season. But the Musk-Melons from Amadavad, highly deserve that fragrant
Name, The delicacy of the Musk-Melons.
being enriched both with a flavor and a taste superior to any of that kind
in the World.

The Bannians are not restrained from the liberal Draughts of Tea and Coffee,
Tea and Coffee drunk by them.
to revive their wasted Spirits, any part of the Day; but in those they may
Revel uncensur'd, as long as they please; and have there more inviting
Temptations to drink them plentifully, than with us. For the Coffee, Great Art
in making Coffee.
when it it truly boiled and prepared, carries a kind of yellow Oil upon the
head of it, by which it acquires a soft, pleasant Relish, and requires so much
Art in bringing it to this Perfection, that it ingages some who affect this
sort of Liquor in the expense of a skilful Peon, on purpose to look after it in
the Preparation. This Berry is of very common growth in Arabia, especially
about Mocha, and from thence is transported to the remotest Regions of the East
or West. Coffee is said to be good for Cleansing the Blood, for helping
Digestion, and quickening the Spirits.

Tea likewise is a common Drink with all the Inhabitants of India, as well
Europeans as Natives; and by the Dutcb is used as such a standing
Entertainment, that the Tea-pot's seldom off the Fire, Tea healthful in India.
or unimploy'd. This hot Liquor it may be supposed might not seem so proper and
agreeable to so hot an Air, and yet we find is very convenient for our Health,
and agreeable to the Habits of our Bodies. And even all the Arak Punch which is
dunk there, is seldom touched, 'till by a heated Iron, or Wedge of Gold, it is
made luke warm. This both supplies the Vapors which are continually exhaled
from the Body, and helps the prevention of Fevers by keeping the Pores open.

Tea, with some hot Spice intermixed and boiled in the Water, has the Repute of
prevailing against the Headache, Gravel, and Griping in the Guts, and it is
generally drunk in India, either with Sugar Candy, or, by the more curious,
with small Conserved Lemons. And a Dram of double distilled Arak, is prescribed
likewise as an Excellent Remedy against tht Gripes, and such inward Twistings
of the Bowels. The frequent use of this Innocent Tea, and the perpetual
perspiration caused by the Heat, which is augmented by this Liquor, are the
reason why the Gout and Stone, Agues, Rheumatisms and Catarhs are rarely heard
of in these parts. The Heat indeed abates the vigor of our Spirits, and
thereby induces a languid Faintness, which is the general, but withal a very
tolerable Infirmity, in respect of those acute Distempers. The Chinese, among
whom the Tea grows, take abundance of this Drink before their Meals, and are
generally very plump and in very good likeing.

Our English President inquired much for the Flower of Tea, among those who had
been Conversant in China, but could never obtain a sight of any; and it seems
very doubtful whether that Shrub bears any Flowers at all upon it. For a
Chinese Madarine, who arrived at Suratt in the quality of an Envoy from Limpo,
brought with him several kinds of Tea, but no Flower; some of it was so
valuable in China, that a single Catte of it was reputed a noble Present for
the chief Ministers, and it was very rarely to be found, however he brought
with him a Taste of it for our President, among several other kinds, wherein he
gave him a Morning Entertainment. And a Learned Physician, who for some Years
had lived in China, spoke nothing of this Flower of Tea, only gave this Account
of three other sorts that grew there, Three sorts of Tea.
and were most frequently drunk among them, viz. Bing, Singlo, and Bohe. Bohe
is a small Leaf and very young, and by its moisture, upon the score of its
under-growth, requires more than an ordinary frixure, which makes it acquire
that blackness visible in it, and which discolours the Water to a kind of
Redness The second is Singlo, which is a larger Leaf, because more grown. The
third, which is Bing, is the largest of all; and is in China of a
proportionable larger rate than the other two. Singlo obtains most among the
Europeans; but Bohe among the Chinese has so much the esteem and precedence
above the other two, Bohe the best Tea.
that in their Sickness they totally forbid them, but in their most dangerous
Distempers instantly make use of this; and Experience convinces them of the
Choice and Utility of that Leaf in their Extremities. How Tea grows.
They all proceed, he told me, from a Shrub about the height of our Goosberry
or Curran Bushes. The Leaf is first green, The way it is prepared.
but is made crisp and dry by frying twice, or oftener, in a Pan; and as often
as it is taken off the Fire it is rolled with the Hand upon a Table, till it
curls. This Preparation is cautiously concealed from all Strangers, and was
accidentally known to him by the opportunity he once had of peeping through the
Crevice of a Door when it was a preparing. He found it growing in the Latitude
of 51, as well as in a warmer Air; which gives a probable Conjecture for its
thriving in our Kingdom; for London lies near the same Parallel.

As Musk and Amber grease are said to damage Pearl, so is Tea prejudiced by the
approach of unsavory Smells, and particularly of Assa Foetida, and is so
delicate and tender, that it is injured by the very Breath of only the common
ambient Air. For preventing which it is enclosed in Pots of Totaneg, or in
strong large Tubs of Wood, and in them is safely sent abroad.

Rain Water commonly drank by the Bannians.
The Bannian seldom drinks of the common Water of the Wells or Rivers, only what
falls from Heaven in the time of the Mussouns, which is preserved in large
Tanques and Cisterns made on purpose to receive it, and keep it ready for their
use the following Year. For in this, as well as his Diet, he is very squeamish;
and therefore he confines his Draught to those Heavenly Showers, which he
esteems a more pure and Etherial Liquor for descending from above.

Dye asort of Food.
Dye is a particular innocent kind of Diet, fed upon by the Indians for the
most part about Noon. It is sweet Milk turned thick, mixed with boiled Rice and
Sugar, and is very effectual against the Rage of Fevers and of Fluxes, the
prevailing Distempers of India. Early in the Morning, or late at Night, they
seldom touch it, because they esteem it too cool for their Stomachs and
Nocturnal Delights.

Kitcheree an Indian Dish.
Kitcheree is another Dish very common among them, made of Dol, that is, a
small round Pea and Rice boiled together, and is very strengthening, though not
very savoury. Of this the European Sailers feed in those parts once or twice a
Week, and are forced at those times to a Pagan Abstinence from Flesh, which
creates in them a perfect Dislike and utter Detestation to those Bannian Days,
as they commonly call them.

Wood is the only combustible matter in Suratt, No Coals in India.
which is commonly made use of in the Kitchen, either by Indian or European,
for boiling and roasting their Victuals. Some of the more poor Natives make
Fires of dried Cow Dung. There is not any Necessity of Fuel in private
Apartments, the great Globe of Light is the universal Fire all over India,
which cherishes and keeps them warm without any Expense of Chimneys or of
Hearths in their Lodging-Rooms. The Firewood is bought in the Bazar by Weight,
Wood bear bought by Weight.
for so much the Seer, and is brought home by Servants. And every Roupie which
the Servant lays out in buying either this or any other Goods, he peremptorily
demands back for his own use a Couple of Pice from the Seller.

The Bannian is very curious in dressing his Meat, Bannians curious in what
they eat.
and preparing his Victuals; and therefore least some unclean Hand should have
touched what is sold already cookt in the Shops or the Bazar, he seldom buys
any from thence, but eats what is dressed only by his own Domestics. In their
solemn Entertainments they are kind and communicative, to the meanest Attendant
of any Person of Consequence or Rank whom they invite to their Houses; and like
the Great Men at Tunquin, will provide almost for the very Dogs.

A Caravansaray.
In the middle of the City is built a noble spacious Caravansaray, or Inn, for
the Convenience of Merchants that are Strangers, and resort hither for
Traffic, where they may decently repose at Night. For here are no Public
Houses for the Entertainment of Guests or Travelers, No Houses of
Entertainment.
lest the Jealousy of the Husbands should be raised concerning their Wives and
Daughters, by the frequency of such Temptations. And upon this Account, all Men
whose Affairs call them into the Country, either take care of providing their
own Victuals, or commit that Charge to their Peons and Attendants, to make it
ready for them at their Resting-places by Day, or in the Fields where they
sleep at Night.

As the heat of the Sun, when it is in the Meredian, is very apt to pall the
Appetite, and dissipate that warmth and Heat of the Stomach, which is proper
for Digestion; Their times of Eating, are the Morning and the Evening.
so the Bannians and Moors, to prevent that inconvenience, change their Repasts
to other Seasons of the Day, and take their Collations about 8 or 9 in the
Morning, and at 4 or 5 in the Afternoon. And often at Midnight, after their
nocturnal Embraces, they recover their Spirits by some nourishing Food, to
excite them again to fresh Amors.

The Heat of the Day is spent in Rest and Sleeping, The Heat of the Day spent
in Rest.
to refresh their exhausted Strength, sometimes upon Cotts, and sometimes upon
Bechanahs, Bechanahs.
which are thick Quilts, spread the breadth of a Room, and the length of a Man,
with Bolsters at the Head, where Eight or nine may sleep together. They seldom
take their Repose without a Wench in their Arms, that is a small Pillaber upon
their Stomach to defend it from the ambient Vapors that might be apt to annoy
it; and seldom use any other Covering but their Shirts and Drawers, except it
be a Sheet or slight Callico spread over them.

White Callicothe common Indian Garment.
The Garments which the Indians wear, are generally made of white Callico,
fashioned into Caba's, that is, outward Coats, somewhat like our Frocks,
turning over their Breasts as far as the Shoulders, and from thence tied with
strings down to the middle; with a Puggarie, or Turbant upon their Heads. It
was very surprising at first, to view so many People passing up and down, most
of one colored Clothes, and those white. For a distinction between the Moors
and Bannians, The difference of Garments between the Moors and Bannians.
the Moors tie their Caba's always on the Right side, and the Bannians on the
left; and if any European thinks fit to dress himself, and take upon him the
Indian Garb, he therein compliments the Moors, and pays his Respect to their
manner of wearing and putting it on. No Stockins in India
The length of their Breeches, which descend to their Heels, serve them instead
of Stockins; which is the reason that their Language has no word for our
Stockins, so that they thrust their Feet always bare into their Shoes, which
are very neatly Imbroider'd with Gold, or Silver, or Silk Flowers.

No Man in India, Vmbrellas permitted to be used by none but the Mogul.
no not the Mogul's Son, is permitted the Privilege of wearing a Kittisal or
Umbrella, let the Sun's Beams be never so scortching, but a Peon goes before
the great Men, carrying a small Skreen made of Ostrich Feathers, to shade his
Eyes. The use of the Umbrella is sacred to the Prince, appropriated only to his
use.

The Bannians observe several Fasts; but one more solemn in the Year is much
remarkt, when they drink nothing in the Morning but the fresh Stale of the
Worshipful Cow, The Stale of a Cow, drunk by the Bannians.
which they fancy is abstersive, and endowed with a kind of lustral quality,
apt to purify the Defilements of a Bannian; as one of themselves was pleased
to tell me.

Their constant Ablutions and daily Washings, Their Religious observations
convenient upon a natural account.
their Abstinence from Animals and from Wine, had doubtless a prospect more
than what was merely Religious in it; they were not imprudently designed upon a
Civil Account, to keep their Organs clear, their Spirits lively, and their
Constitutions free from those Diseases, which a grosser Diet is apt to create
in these warm Climates, and to preserve their Bodies Neat and Clean by frequent
Bathings and Lustrations. For there is not one of these Customs which are
fastened upon them by the Rules of their Religion, but what comport very well,
and highly contibute to the Health and Pleasure of their Lives. And for this
end they are much addicted to sweet Smells and fragrant Exhalations, and
generally each Night procure a Necklace of Jessemy Flowers to sleep with, for
at that time they more sensibly emit their Fragrant Vapors. The scent of
flowers is much abated on the day time, Ill Smells not so offensive in India.
being dissipated by the great Heat; which is the reason why the Streets of
Suratt, tho in many places overspread with the Excrements of Men and Beasts,
yet never molest those that pass through them, by an unsavory Smell, because the
Sun's attenuation of the Vapors, diminishes their strength from annoying the
Sense.

Under their abstemious mortifying Diet, The Bannians live to a good Age.
the Bannians maintain as good a Habit of Body, are as comely and proportionable
as other People, and live to reckon as many Years as those that pity their
spare Food. But in their Thoughts they are often more quick and nimble, They
are quick of Thought.
by that course of living they choose to delight in, which renders their Spirits
more pure and subtle, and thereby greatly facilitates their Comprehension of
things. Besides, this Religious abstinence very much disingages their
Affections to the World, They die easily.
disintangles their fears of Death, and Passions for these momentary things; it
sets their Spirits upon the Wing, ready without reluctance to quit this Life,
in expectation of a better; and makes many of them pass as cheerfully into the
invisible World, as they would take a Journey from their own Kingdom to another
Country.

Their Wealth consists only in Cash and Jewels, Cash and Jewels are their only
Estate.
the distinction of personal and real Estate is not heard in India, and that
they preserve as close and private as they can, lest the Mogul's Exchequer
should be made their Treasury. This curbs them in their Expenses, and awes them
to great secrecy in their Commerce, especially in their receiving, Their
Wealth kept secret.
or Payments of Money, for which they either make use of the darkness of the
Night, or of the obscurity of the Morning, in conveying it to the place of
Payment. For should the Mogul's Officers see the Chests and Bags of Gold and
Silver carried as publicly here, as they are in the Streets of London, they
would be apt to change their Owner, and be delivered to him who calls himself
the Original Proprietor. And yet the condition of these Indians is not so vile
and lamentable by much, as that of the Commonalty at Tunquin, where the vulgar
Mechanics are Slaves for one part of the Year, and work three Months for the
King, and two for the Mandarins, and are only allowed the rest of the Year for
themselves, for supporting of their Wives and Families. This is called there
Viecquam, Viecquam.
that is the condition of a Slave.

But I was told of a Noble Bannian at Amadavad, who, by bribeing the Nabob into
a connivance, did on public Festivals, and times of Jubilee make his
Entertainments in Dishes and Plates of solid Gold. But poor Man, his splendid
living did not hold out long, A Bannian poisoned for living splendidly.
before it raised the Envy of a neighboring Moor, who could not endure this
repeated Magnificence in a Gentile, and therefore dogging the Merchant as he
rode one day out of the City, he followed him at a distance, and shot him dead
with a poisoned Arrow. Sumptuousness and State suit not very well with the Life
and Condition of a Bannian; they must not both flourish long together. This
keeps our Brokers at Suratt, who are Bannians, from all costly disbursements,
though they are reckoned by some to be worth 15, by others 30 Lacks of Roupies,
and causes a Contraction of their Expenses, and a retrenchment of their Tables
to three or four Thousand Roupies a Year, without any show of a luxurious
Garniture, either on their Dishes, or in their Houses.

Their main Cost is expended upon their Women, The Bannian Women very richly
attired.
who ambitiously affect a Gayety in their Dress and Clothing. Jewels and
Ornaments are the very joy of their Hearts, (as they usually call them) with
which they are decked from the Crown of the Head to the very feet. Their Toes
are adorned with Rings, and their Legs with Shackles of Gold, or Silver, or
some other Metal, which are sometimes above two Inches in Diameter, wreathed
and hollow. The Women that carry the Water about the Streets, will not walk
abroad without these Ornaments upon them. Some tie up the Hair of their Heads,
and put it under a hollow large piece of Silver, raised somewhat like a Bell,
gilt, and neatly embellisht on the outside, and fastened to the Crown of their
Heads. Some wear Earrings all round their Ears, which for Ornament's sake will
dangle sometimes almost down to their Shoulders, and have Bracelets about their
Necks and Arms, and Rings about their Wrists, and on every Finger. Some adorn
themselves with Breast Jewels, formed in Fashion of a Heart, composed of
variety of Diamonds, Rubies, Saphirs, and other Stones of Esteem; and on their
Foreheads wear a Gold Bodkin, broad at the end, beset with glittering
Diamonds, or some other precious Stones. And as they are much taken with this
gaudy Attire, and delight in these splendid Ornaments themselves, so they think
them a kindness to the very Brutes; Beasts and Trees adorned by the Bannians.
and show their Affection to a Darling Cow, or Favorite Goat, by fastening
large Rings of some Metal or other about their Legs. Nor will they spare their
Ornamental Favors to the Fruit Trees in their Gardens, but show them their
profuse Respect in adorning them with a Painting of diverse Colors.

The meanest Female in Suratt is not wholly destitute of Ornaments upon her
Body, though she be able to spend no more than two or three Pice a day. For
Herbs (which are the common Food of the Poor) are here in plenty, and bought at
very low Rates, All things cheap at Suratt.
which encourages the daily Laborers to work for very low Wages. And the
moderate Barber (which is not the meanest Profession) shaves the Beard, and
cuts the Hair, picks the Ears, and pairs the Nails, all for one Pice or two.

The Love of Women, which is rooted in Men's Hearts by Nature, and which
discovers it self in People of all Ages, Nations, Qualities and Constitutions,
is cherished betimes by the Bannian, Marriages at 6 o^ 7 years of Age.
who courts and sometimes marries his Mistress at Six or Seven Years of Age,
and cohabits at Eleven or Twelve, or sometimes sooner. And some of the Gentile
Sects, before they feel any great Warmth of this amorous Passion, are by their
Parents joined together in their very Infancy, at three or four Years of Age.
From which time they endeavor mutually to kindle this tender Passion, till the
growing Years blow it up into a lively Flame. And by a thousand little Tricks
and Arts of Love they endeavor to stamp their Affections upon their Infant
Souls, which like melted Wax are pliant and easy to receive the Impression,
and so they are insensibly captivated by each others Snares. The young Lover
wins upon his Mistresses Passions by frequent Visits, large Presents, and
munificent Gifts, whilst her soft Looks and Innocent Air form his Mind into
kind and amorous Inclinations toward her. And thus being happily prepossessed
with a mutual good liking, even as it were from the Womb, as if they had been
born Lovers, they are taken off from all Objects, and freed from the
Disappointments of fickle Mistresses, and from being wearied with whining
Addresses to coy Damsels. Which, besides others, may be some Reason why the
Indian Wives committed themselves with so much cheerfulness into the Funeral
Flames with their Dead Husbands; A Reason why the Indian Women freely burn with
their Husbands.
because their Sympathetick Minds, linked together from their Infancy, were
then fed with such early Tastes of Love, as became the Seminary of those strong
and forcible Inclinations in their riper Years, and made the Pains of Death
become preferable to a Life abandoned the Society of those they so entirely
loved. For what could fix their Affections more than the cherishing of them in
their tender Years, and digesting them with their Mother's Milk? Or form their
Embrio Passions into more Strength and Duration, than confining them early to
such an Object, as might receive their entire good liking, before ever they
were distracted by various volatile Affections?

But the Reason alleged by them for these Infant Marriages, is, because they
esteem it a matter of more Decency to approach their Brides in their purer
state, before they come to riper Years. And for hastening the young Mistress's
Maturity for the Conjugal Embraces, great Care is taken of a proper Diet, and
that she feed plentifully upon Milk, Milk very nourishing.
boiled two or three Quarts into one, which they find by Experience is very
nourishing, and ripens them for being fit to come together at Eleven or Twelve.
The Husband drinks largely of melted Butter, Melted Butter drunk by the
Bannians. No Women allowed second Marriages.
which he finds very apt to invigorate his Spirits, and makes use of it as Oil
to his Flame.

Second Marriages, which are indulged to the Men, are solemnly prohibited the
Women, because this engages their Fidelity so much the more to the first
Lovers, in that they are debarred all Hopes and Prospect of all others. But
with this Additional Severity upon the young Maids, whose Husbands die before
they cohabit, that they are obliged to a disconsolate Virginity all the Days of
their Lives; and must never contract with another Man, though they are
unfortunately Widows at Six or Seven Years of Age.

Polygamy likewise, Polygamy permitted to the Husbands.
besides second Marriages, is allowed the wanton Husbands, who notwithstanding
are not often so very Amorous as to prosecute that Liberty, or rather Thraldom,
to more Wives than one at once. The nature of the Climate inclines them much to
this Amorous Passion, which stings them with impatient Desires, and makes them
restless by Delays; and yet though Marriage upon this account is so very
necessary and agreeable, they do not think that the variety of Women will
compensate for the double Burden and Inconvenience of them in a Family; nor do
they imagine that it is worth their while to satisfy the fervor of their
wandering Desires, that is attended with such a train of mischievous
Consequences. A merry Bannian was wont often to complain of this Folly, The
inconvenience of Poligamy.
of engaging with two Wives at once, and venturing too hastily upon a double
Marriage, because the fondness of the two Wives provoked them to continual
Feuds and Jealousies. For he could never enjoy the one without disturbance to
the other, whose Passions were presently alarmed upon any token of Kindness
extraordinary. When he was wheedled into a liking of the one, the other would
pout and ask him if he meant to forsake her? And if he was going that way,
would hold him by the Coat, and pull him back to her. This urged to him, that
she was the Wife of his Youth, that they had contracted a long and intimate
acquaintance, and his first solemn Engagements were made to her: The other
replies to him, that she now ought to partake more liberally of his Favors,
and his Thoughts should incline more kindly toward her, since the other
possessed him so long before. Thus the distracted Husband was twitted on both
sides, and at a stand many times which way to turn for his own tranquillity and
their satisfaction, and often in his Indian English confessed, English fashion,
sab, best fashion have, one Wife best for one Husband. And it is seldom but
among a multitude of Wifes, there will now and then happen Debates and
Contests. We read of a Custom among the Ancient Britains which seems peculiar
to themselves, An odd English custom concerning many Wives in common.
and not found in the Stories of any other Nations, either Civil or Barbarous,
not of many Wives belonging to one Husband, which is the case of many Heathen
Nations, but a Society of Wives among certain numbers, and by common consent.
Every Man married a single Woman, who was always after and alone esteemed his
Wife: But it was usual for five or six, ten or twelve, or more, either Brothers
or Friends, as they could agree, to have all their Wives in common. But neither
did this method preserve an entire Amity and Affection among them, but
sometimes Encounters and Disputes happened.

The Nairos Women hold Matrimony in such singular esteem, The Nairos Women
great esteem of Matrimony.
That they think it sacred, and so necessary in this Life, that if they chance
to die Virgins, they are debarred from entering into Paradise. And are therefore
extreme sollicitous of not neglecting the happy opportunity of the Marriage
state, which is reckoned by them a necessary introduction to so much Bliss.

Clandestine Marriages and stolen Brides are things unheard of at Suratt. No
private stolen Weddings.
For both the Bridegroom and the Bride, and their several Attendants, appear
publicly in the Richest Garments, The gay solemnities of Marriages at Suratt.
in the gayest Equipage and splendor, which they can either purchase for their
Money, or procure by their Friendship. Flags, Flambeaus, Music, State-Coaches,
and Led Horses, are all too little for this Day's Solemnity. The Pretty Bride
then puts on her costly Jewels, and is trimmed with all the finest Silks; sits
Queen of the Ceremony, carried in Triumph through the Streets of the City. The
Bridegroom likewise is set off with all the advantage of rich Clothes and
Trappings; and there is nothing great and noble in Suratt, but is purchased for
them, according to their Abilities, to give credit to the Nuptials, and adorn
the Solemnity; which is performed after this manner. When the Joyful Bridegroom
and the Bride, with their costly Equipage and Pompous Train, have marched through
the principal places of the City, in public view of all Spectators, seated
upon some delicate Indian Horse, or Persian or Arabian Steed, ambitiously
courting the Eyes and observance of all as they pass along, to take notice of
that honorable state they are now proceeding to: When with a blameless
undisguis'd Assurance they have finished their stately Progress through all the
noted places of the Town, they turn about to the Bride's Habitation, The
particular Ceremony at Weddings.
where they enter, and are seated opposite to one another in two Chairs, with a
Table put between them. Then stretching forth their Hands to each other over
the Table, they join them together, and the Bramin, standing by, covers each of
their Heads with one large Hood or Pamarin, which is spread over them about a
quarter of an Hour, 'till he has finished his Prayers for their Happiness, and
made an end of his Benediction; and then loosing their Hands, and uncovering
their Heads, the Ceremonious part of the Marriage is concluded. And now the
Mirth and Festivity follow; now they begin to scatter about their Perfumes, The
Guests at Weddings sprinkled with Rose Water and Perfumes.
to sprinkle their Guests with Rose Water, poured upon them out of Silver
Cruets, and so refresh them with sweet smells. The Caba's and Puggaries, i. e.
all their exterior Garments, are wet with Unguents, and Colored yellow with
the rich and fragrant Essence of Saffron, which remains upon their Clothes for
a Week, to declare their presence at this joyful meeting. For the nature of
Saffron being very Cordial, and apt to exhilerate the Mind, is sprinkled
outwardly as a token of their inward Mirth and Gladness. And to complete this
sumptuous jollity, the Guests are all invited to lie down to a large and costly
Banquet.

A Superstitious Observation of days for Marriages.
In the Celebration of these Marriages, they are much addicted to the strict
observance of particular days, and only upon those that are accounted lucky,
will they undertake the Celebration, because their pitiable foolish
Superstition has laid severe Restraint upon their Consciences, from Marrying
upon any days of bad Omen. Upon those which they account Lucky, will sometimes
be solemnized more Weddings, than in two or three Months at other times,
sometimes two or three hundred on a day. Such as are Wealthy, Funeral expenses,
and costly Marriages designed to keep the People poor.
continue the sumptuous Festival Entertainments above the space of a Week,
which with the large Expenses at their Funeral Feasts, drains their Fortunes,
and keeps them low; and if they are Poor, never suffers them to grow Wealthy.
These Charges upon their Estates, the Mogul encourages on purpose, by this
Artifice to break their Spirits and Fortunes, that he may keep them servile and
less able to Rebel against him.

When once the Husband and the Wife come to cohabit, The Wives in some measure
servile.
she is then under great distinctions of Respect, and in a manner obliged to a
kind of servile Attendance upon his Person; however in Language and Deportment
the Man appears very kind and obliging, and shows a tenderness to the Partner
of his Bed.

But among all the Nations of the East, The great Civility which the Siamese
Language shows to Women.
the Siameses excel in Civility of Expressions to the Female Sex. For their
Language (as we are told) admits no distinction of Masculine and Feminine in
their Genders, which is the cause, that whenever they would Express a Woman,
they add young to the Masculine, to imply the Feminine; whereby their Language
hinders a Woman from ever growing Old, by affixing always Youth to the Female;
as when, for Example, they would name an Empress, they would say young Emperor.

The Bramins Marry.
The Bramins Marry, as well as the other Indians; and treasure up sometimes
abundance of Wealth, which is bequeathed to their Families, for maintenance of
their Widows, and to portion their Children. One of the Bramins, who had been
straightened in his Abilities from giving a competent Portion with his Daughter, A
Bramin's Craft to get a Portion for his Daughter.
which was then closely Courted, contrives this Stratagem to squeeze some
hundreds of Roupies from the People for that purpose. He ascended a Tree, which
stood without the Gates of his City, and then declared, that there he would fix
his Habitation; there he would stay and starve, and never come down, 'till they
contributed among them to make up the Sum. The affrighted Inhabitants, who are
tender of the Life of any Animal, thought it not fit to dally with that of
their Priest, but lest his obstinate Resolution of continuing there might
endanger the welfare of him they so highly esteemed, and involve them in the
guilt of Sacred Blood, therefore with united Hearts they clubb'd together to
make up a common Purse, which was delivered to the Damsel as a Dowry. The
crafty Priest upon this descended from perching aloft in the Boughs of the
Tree, and was kindly congratulated at his coming down for sparing his Life,
which he had taken private Care of that it should not be in any Danger, by
engaging an Accomplice to convey to him secretly what Nourishment might be
necessary for his Subsistence.

One sort of Bramins at Suratt, A strict sort of Bramins.
which are by much the strictest Sect among them, do far exceed the rest in
Abstractions from Sense, and abstemious living, and refrain from entering the
Conjugal State, lest some Animals, as they tell us, might be crushed to Death by
their mutual Embraces. And therefore to keep up the Succession of this
Priesthood, if any Lay-Person of their Tribe has two or three Sons, one of them
is chosen from among the rest to be consecrated to this Order. This sort of
Bramins are sparing of their Speech, and will rarely speak, for fear of killing
some invisible Creatures, which they affirm float in the Air, and which some of
their Holy Men have seen, though others cannot. They also sweep the places
where they rest with a Brush, lest they should crush some Animal by sitting
upon it. And for this end a Cloth is always tied cross their Mouth, and
fastened at each Ear, to prevent all invisible volatile Creatures approaching
their Breath, lest it might prove fatal to them. Bramins that never wash their
Bodies.
And though Ablutions are so necessary in India, so universally practiced, and
so solemnly enjoined, yet cannot this sort of Bramins be brought over to this
convenient Discipline, to wash their Bodies, and cleanse themselves with Water,
for fear of murdering some Creatures which they fancy live in that Element.
Nor will they drink cold Water till it is boiled, because they say it has Life
in it, and that would destroy it. They neither cut their Beards, nor shave
their Heads; Nor cut their Hair.
but notwithstanding all the Pain of it, pull all the Hair up by the Roots, as
fast as it grows on those parts of their Bodies. And wholly careless of the
Future, Nor make any Provision for the future.
and never anxious for to Morrow's Concerns; they take all cheerfully that
happens each Day, and of the Provision which Providence sends them, if any
Overplus remains, they liberally distribute to such as want it, and trust the
same Providence for the following Day. Thus they live ex tempore, and as little
sollicitous for the World, as if they had been intimately acquainted with our
Savior's Rule, Take no thought for to morrow, but let the morrow take thought
for the things of it self; sufficient unto the Day is the Evil thereof.

The Bannians, at the naming of their Children, The Ceremony of naming the
Bannian Children.
which is about Ten Days after the Nativity, perform that Ceremony after this
manner. They call together about a Dozen Children, and put into their Hands a
large Sheet, which is spread, and they standing round, take hold of it in a
Circle, and bear it up from the Ground. The Bramin standing by, has brought to
him thither two or three Sere of Rice, which he pours into the middle of the
Sheet, and upon the Rice lays the Child to be named. The young Boys that hold
the Sheet shake the Child and the Rice together to and fro, for a quarter of an
Hour, or more. The Father's Sister then steps near, and has the right of naming
the Child; but in case of her Absence, or Death, this Privilege devolves upon
the Father or the Mother of the Infant. When the Child has thus received its
Name, it continues so for the space of a Month or two, after the expiration
whereof they proceed further toward its perfect Initiation into the Bannian
Religion; and then it is brought to the Pagode, where the Bramin is ready, and
mixes some Shavings of Sandalwood, Champhire, Cloves, and several other
sweet-scented Perfumes, and puts them upon the Child's Head; after which it is
esteemed a Member of their Religion, and commences complete Bannian.

Women in Childbed not touched.
The Mother, till Ten Days after Childbed, is touched by none but a dry Nurse,
nor is she allowed her self to put forth her Hands for the Dressing of any Meat
till Forty be past after lying in, and she be perfectly past her Purification.

Hanging-Cradles.
The Cradles for the Children in India are much easier, and more convenient than
ours, that are placed and move upon the Ground. For theirs are hung in the Air
by strings tied to each end, and fastened to a Beam or Post above, and so swing
to and fro with a soft quiet Motion by the slightest touch of the Hand. And
this was answerable to the Tenderness and Care they had for their Children's
Temper, Women with Child always kept cheerful.
even whilst they were carried in the Womb; who provided such convenient Food
and innocent Diversions, such pleasing Entertainments of their Senses and Fancy
for the Teeming Women at that time, that the Minds of the Children might
participate thereby of those Delights, might be cheerful and serene, and free
from all dismal Impressions from their Parent; and so their Lives afterward
might be composed and exempt from all anxious Thoughts, from all turbulent
Desires, and vexatious Agonies of Spirit. And from hence I will proceed to one
of the last things I shall take notice of concerning the Bannians, and that is
their Burials.

As every Man's coming into the World necessarily infers his going out of it,
and consequently a Separation of Body and Soul; all the World therefore seems
much concerned, what will become after Death, of that other part of themselves,
in the Sepulture of their Bodies. Five ways of disposing of the Dead
And as there have been five ways of disposing of the Dead; one, to put them
into the Ground; another, to cast them into the Water; the third, to leave them
in the open Air; the fourth, to burn them; the fifth, to suffer them to be
devoured by Beasts: So of these Five, two have principally obtained in the
World; that, of committing their Bodies to the Earth; and the other, The
Bannians burn the dead Bodies near the Waterside.
to the Flames. The last of these is made choice of by the Bannians, who carry
their dead Bodies to a Pile of Wood near the Waterside, not far from Suratt,
which is presently kindled after the Corpse is laid upon it; and when the Flame
has reduced it to Ashes, the Remains are thrown into the River. They likewise,
if they are able, Fragrant Wood burntt with the Corpse.
burn some fragrant Wood of great Value with the Corpse, to sweeten the Air, and
mix its Perfumes with the black Exhalations. Burning more honorable than
burying.
And were it not for the Tyranny of Custom, it seems more Honorable to have
our Bodies consumed by that lively Element, than to have them devoured by Worms
and Putrefaction; whereof Fire being an Enemy, and the Emblem and most sensible
Hieroglyphick of Immortality, there can be no better Expedient to secure our
Friends from Oblivion, than that of burning their Bodies, whereof we have
either the Bones or Ashes Left, which may be preserved whole Ages. The several
Nations of the World had Customs of their own, Custom a second Nature.
which commencing upon uncertain Principles, have been derived to their
Posterity, and received with a Religious Fancy; and they would rather die, than
do an Act of Violence to them, and believed it the greatest Impiety in the
World to break them. Whereof Herodotus gives a full Instance in a Trial made by
Darius to the Indians and Greeks. He asked the Greeks, what they would take to
do as the Indians did, who eat their dead Parents and Friends, and accounted it
the most honorable Burial? They answered, They would not do it at any Price.
And when he asked the Indians, upon what Account they would be induced to burn
the Bodies of their Fathers, and not to eat them? They desired him not to speak
to them of any such horrid Impiety, as to burn their Fathers Carcasses, and to
deny them the Honor of a Natural Burial in the Bowels of their dear Children.
This shows how Custom is the Spirit and Genius of a Man's Actions, and
introduces a Nature and Religion it self: and were the Prejudice of that
removed, other civilized Nations might doubtless be as zealous for burning
their dead Friends, as the Bannians are nowadays.

Four ways of disposing of their Dead among the Siamese.
The Four Elements were formerly worshipped by the ancient Siamese, who
committed their Bodies, when dead, to what they adored when they were alive. He
therefore that worshipped the Earth, made choice of that for his Interrment;
the Fire consumed the Corpse of its Adorers; the Worshippers of the Air were
exposed to the Birds to devour them; and those that reverenced the Element of
Water, were drowned in it at their Burial. This Care of Men's Bodies after Death
seems natural to Mankind, All Nations take care of their Dead.
and almost universal; which Osiris King of Egypt taking notice of, made use of
as an Encouragement to Virtue, and an Argument for the practice of Morality
among his People. Those whose Virtues were Illustrious, and whose Characters
were unblemisht, were appointed by him to be buried in Beautiful Fields, near
Memphis, verdant with all manner of Flowers; whilst the others were assigned to
places of Punishment and Ignominy, whose lives had been Dissolute and Vicious.

The Gentiles of India, The Corpse Burnt sometimes before it is quite dead.
as it they were weary of their Friends when alive and loath to harbor them
when dead, burn the Body sometimes before it is quite dead, and when they think
it past recovery. A Bannian, who was Broker to the English, was thus hurried
away to the burning Place, as he was just expiring; but being happily met by
the English Surgeon, who felt his Pulse, and gave some hopes of Recovery, some
kinder Friend among the rest, dissuaded the Company from proceeding, and in a
little time, by the application of a few Cordials, he was recovered to his
Health, and by that Miraculous chance evaded an untimely end.

The Corpse is carried upon a Bier, The manner of carrying the Dead to be Burnt.
according to the Custom of the Moors, attended by Friends and Relations, who
as they pass along the Road, are incessantly repeating Ram! Ram! that is, in
their Language, God! God! For Ram, they say, was formerly the name of a mighty
Prince among them, and is now invoked by them, as if he were God, or the name
translated to the Almighty.

Shaving the Hair a token of deep mourning.
If a Rajah dies, his Subjects and Dependants cut off all their Beards, and
shave their Heads, as tokens of the deepest Mourning for his Decease; which is
such a solemn sign of Grief and extraordinary Sorrow, that this nakedness and
want of Nature's Covering and Ornament of the Head and Face, is never shown,
but for a Prince, a Parent, or some nearest Relation.

Funeral expenses costly.
Upon the Death of any Friend, the Bannians are not sparing of their Cost, but
spend profusely in Banqueting and Feasts, which are kept publicly for the two
or three days following; then they observe upon the same account, the Twelfth,
the Twentieth, the Thirtieth, and the Fortieth, besides once each Quarter of
the succeeding Year, 'til the Annual Solemnity returns. And he who at these
times is parsimonious, and endeavors to contract his Expenses, is accounted,
if he be a Man of Wealth, the most sordid Miser in the World.

The Impious Opinion which the Indians formerly entertained, The Reason which
the Indians had for burning themselves.
of having a power over their own Lives, as they were Masters of themselves,
caused many of them to venture upon Death at pleasure, and as advantageous to
the Soul, by securing it some degrees of Felicity and Virtue. Sometimes the
Husband would burn with his dead Wife.
And for this reason the loving Husband enamored with his kind or beautiful
Wife, would sometimes burn himself with her in the Funeral Pile, in expectation
of a happy future Enjoyment of her. But this was seldom. For it generally fell
to the Wives lot to be committed to the Flames with the dead Husband. The
Reason why the Wives were burnt with their Husbands.
And this Heathenish Custom was introduced, because of the libidinous
disposition of the Women, who through their inordinate Lust would often poison
their present Husbands, to make way for a new Lover. This was so far encouraged
by the Politic Bramin, who was always a Gainer by her Death; that if any Woman
refused to burn, This custom encouraged by the Bramins.
her Head was ordered presently to be shaved, that she might appear
Contemptible and Infamous for ever after. For all the Jewels she put on, who
decked her Body for the Flames, when she was resolved to die, were carefully
looked after by the Priest, and made his Propriety after her Death; because he
only had power to touch the Ashes, and rake therein for Gold and Silver.

This Custom restrained by the Mogul.
Since the Mahometans became Masters of the Indies, this execrable Custom is
much abated, and almost laid aside, by the Orders which the Nabobs receive for
suppressing and extinguishing it in all their Provinces. And now it is very
rare, except it be some Rajahs Wives, that the Indian Women burn at all; and
those that do, obtain the liberty by costly Presents and powerful Applications
to the Governors; by which the Women who are forced to survive their Husbands
by a superior Authority, evade that Ignominy and Contempt which would
otherwise be cast upon them. This foolish desire of Dying with their Husbands,
is expressed by the Poet in these Verses. Propertieu L. 3. Eleg. 11.

Vbi mortifero jacta est fax ultima lecto
Vxorum fusis stat pia Turba comis:
Et certamen habent lethi quae viva sequatur
Conjugium, pudor est non licuisse mori;
Ardent victrices, and flammae pectora praebent,
Imponuntque suis or a perusta viris.
It Is from this barbarous persuasion of a Power they have of disposing of their
own lives, and those that belong to them; that the Tunquinese poison each Year
one of the Fruits of the Araguer, and gives it to a Child to eat, imagining
that by the death of that innocent Child, they shall thrive the better the
succeeding Year. The unreasonableness of this Custom.
And indeed it is an unaccountable Folly in the Indians to be so profligate of
their own lives, and yet so sparing of the Life of any the most insignificant
living Creature; as if the life of a Man were of less consequence and
consideration than that of a Beast. The usefulness indeed of some Brutes may
gain them an esteem, and the kindness and fidelity of others, as of the Dog
Hircanus belonging to Lysimachus, who leapt, as we read, into the Fire with the
Body of his dead Master, and was burnt for Company; and Tyranny even to any
Creature argues a savage inhumane Nature; but then it argues the pitch of
stupidity and madness, for a Man to destroy and cast away himself in a vain fit
of Fancy or of Humor; who is by the dignity of his Nature advanced so far
above the rest of the Animal World.

Some Gentiles in India are In^^mb'd.
Though all the Gentiles do for the most part consume the Corpse of their Dead by
Fire, yet some small Tombs are seen here and there, where their Bodies have
been immured; but all of them very small and mean in respect of the rich and
stately Monuments erected by the Principal Europeans near Suratt. For the
Bannians are not of the Opinion of the Egyptian Kings, who fancyed that the
Souls after Death were delighted to hover about their Bodies, and to keep as
intimate a Correspondence with them as they could; the Bannians, I say, never
dreamt this, and were not therefore sollicitous for any stately Receptacle for
their Bodies after Death, as those Monarchs were, who erected those stately
Pyramids, as Palaces of their last Repose; which neither the fury of the
Elements, nor the Assaults of Time were able to Demolish; and where their Souls
might live with their Bodies solitary and undisturbed, by the approach of any
rude Guest or vulgar Spirit.

Six Years are now elapsed since a violent Pestilence first broke out among the
Indians at Suratt, A tedious Pestilence at Suratt.
and has raged without interruption from the time of its first rise, tho not
always with equal fury; for as it had some sort of Interval, in the times of
the Mussouns, which cooled the Air; so its greatest Paroxysms were always
immediately before, and after that Season of the Year. Before the Rains fall,
the Air is extreme dry and parching, and when they are fallen, such store of
hot unwholesome vapors are raised and scattered in the Air, that they give
Birth to more Diseases, than all the Year besides produces. Above an Hundred
Gentiles in one of these Seasons were carried out of the Gates of this City one
Morning to be Burnt, besides the Moors which were carried off by the Plague,
and those of both Casts which died in the Suburbs; which by a very modest
Calculation will amount to the number of 300 a Day. And yet the Inhabitants are
very numerous still, the Streets populous, and there is but little appearance
of any such violent Destruction of the Natives. Before the Eruption of this
Pestilence, An Earthquake.
there happened a small Earthquake, which alarmed the People, but without the
Ruin of Houses, or mortal effect to any Inhabitant. But that which creates the
greatest Admiration in the Moors, and not a little Joy in the English, is our
escaping all this while the direful Influence of this mortal Disease, so that
not one English man was ever yet affected by it. This makes the Heathens cry
out, that God is among us, whilst they observe whole Families of their own
swept away, without the least Infection touching any one of our Nation; they
observe those menial Servants that attend us, both constantly in our Chambers,
and in all public places, falling Dead within a few Hours after they have left
our presence; and both the Wives and Children of these persons that wait upon
us, languishing at home of this Pestilential Sickness, whilst we all escape its
horrid Mortal Blasts. And though I cannot in this case but ascribe something to
second Causes, to the generous Wines and costly Dishes, to the strength of that
Aliment whereon we feed; yet when I consider how languid and feeble several of
the English are at sometimes of the Year, and notwithstanding their Food, much
less vigorous and Athletick in their Bodies than the Indians, and therefore
less able to repel a contagious Disease; I think there is some Reason for the
Pious Opinion of the Indians, and that the Almighty displays an extraordinary
Power in our Preservation.

From Balsera we received Advice, A violent Plague at Balsera.
in the Year 1691, that Two Hundred ThOusand People, in Eighteen Days time,
were taken away by a sweeping Pestilence; but it soon abated its Rage, and the
violence of it shortened its continuance.

The common Distemper that destroys the most in India, is Fevers, Fevers
common in India.
which the Europeans with difficulty escape, especially if they have boild up
their Spirits by a solemn Repast, and been engaged in a strong Debauch. Besides
this, The Mordechine.
the Mordechine is another Disease of which some die, which is a violent
Vomiting and Looseness, and is caused most frequently by an Excess in Eating,
particularly of Fish and Flesh together. It has been Cured by a Red-hot Iron
clapped to the Heel of him that is sick, The Cure of it.
so close that it renders him uneasy by its nearness, whereby it leaves a Scar
behind it. Another Distemper with which the Europeans are sometimes afflicted,
The Barbeers.
is the Barbeers, or a deprivation of the Use and Activity of their Limbs,
whereby they are rendered unable to move either Hand or Foot. This arises
sometimes from the neglect of guarding the Limbs from the cold Vapors of the
Night, and securing them from the Moistness of those Nocturnal Mists which are
sometimes felt in these Parts. The Cure.
And nothing contributes more to the Recovery of the benumbed Limbs, than
frequenting the Humhums, which are here in great plenty.

The White-Powder good against Fevers.
The general Ease and Cure which the White Powder in India gives to Fevers,
makes that a very common and acceptable Receipt there; and it has, with very
good Success, been administered in England, sent from thence by the Indian
Physicians. And all their Medicines here are generally of the cooler sort,
because of the Heats to which the Climate naturally inclines them.

Though Theology is the proper Profession of the Bramins, yet some of them are
skilled in Arithmetic, Astrology, and Physic; and make pretensions to the
Prediction of Events, the Calculation of Nativities, and Cure of Diseases. But
such as addict themselves to the Practice of Physic, Some Bramins Practice
Physic.
are bound to pay an Annual Fine to the rest of their Sect, because Physic is
both Advantageous and Foreign to their Profession.

A Bramin, A Bramin Physician's Observation upon Urine.
who had spent some Years in studying the Art of Physic, was invited to visit
an English Gentlewoman, laboring under a Chronical Disease, who when he came
desired a sight of her Urine, and pouring it into a small China Cup, he let
fall upon it one drop of Oil, upon which he made this Remark in my presence.
That if the Oil sank to the bottom, it inevitably betoken'd Death; the
spreading of it self immediately upon the Urin, prognosticated an Increase of
the Distemper; but if slowly, and by little and little, an abatement of the
Disease.

The best cure for Fevers.
Cooling Herbs, and Congy, that is, for Water with Rice boiled in it, and
Abstinence, are the best Receipts they prescribe for mitigating Intestine
Fervors of the Spirits, and allaying the Heat of the Blood, which they think is
better preserved and cooled within the Veins, than let out, if it boils too
fast.

The Chinese's skill in the Pulse.
I could never learn that our Indian Physicians could pretend to that wonderful
Knowledge in the Pulse, which those of China confidently boast of, and presume
to so much Skill in it, as to tell not only the Term of a Man's Disease by it
to a Day or Hour, but how many Years, excepting Violence and Accident, a Man in
perfect Health may live.

For Astrology, and Natural Physic, the Indian Bramins account themselves
however still very eminent and renowned, by which they foretell such distant
Occurrences, and effect such strong Operations, as seem to Men very wonderful
and astonishing, and not to be done without some secret Recourse to the
Invisible Spirits, or Familiarity with Supernatural Powers. We read the same of
some excellent ancient Philosophers, so learned in the Works of Nature, as
thereby to point out the times both of Eclipses in the Planets, and Commotions
in the State, Earthquakes and Inundations, Storms at Sea, and Plagues at Land.
And that the Reader may see that their extraordinary Skill in Magical
Operations is not yet vanished, I will here relate a Story of them, The Story of
a strange Prediction of a Bramin.
which I remember was often publicly repeated by the last President at Suratt,
Bartholomew Harris, concerning a certain Bramin, in the time of the Presidency
of Mr. Aungers, who foretold the Arrival of a certain English Ship several
Months before she came to the Harbor. President Aungers being under a
Disturbance of Mind, and oppressed with some perplexed Thoughts for want of
Intelligence from England, was desired by the Bramin Physician, who observed
his Grief, and the melancholy of his Spirit, the Reason of his Concern and
dejected Looks, with a cheerful Tender of his Service, and Willingness to
administer to him in any thing that might contribute to the removal of his
Malady, and to his Cure. The President told him, that it was beyond the Power
of Physic to heal his Disease, or abate that Distemper he labored under; that
no Cordial could revive his Thoughts, but News from England; or cheer his
Heart, except it were the sight of an English Ship, which he had long expected,
but now despairs of. If an English Ship then, says the Bramin, is your only
Cure, be pleased to give me leave to be absent for three or four Days, and I
question not by that time but to remove your Trouble, and bring you undoubted
News of that Medicine you long for. Upon which the President consented to his
Departure for that time, and withal promised him as an Encouragement to his
Skill, a rich Paramin, or Indian Mantle, for a Reward. Within Four Days the
Bramin returns, and addressing himself to the President, assured him, that at
such a time an English Ship would arrive at Suratt River's Mouth, with such a
particular Person, who had formerly been in India, on board her; and that on
such a particular Day of the Month he would arrive at the Custom-House of
Suratt, before Eleven in the Morning. The President pleased with this
Assurance, and this confident Relation of the Bramin diverted himself with the
thoughts of it for some time, and a little after rehearsed it jocularly at a
public Dinner to all the Factors. The Young Men who heard this Discourse, did
sometime after recollect with themselves, as they were walking down the Banks
of the River to enjoy the Morning Breeze, that this was the critical Morning
foretold by the Bramin, when an English Ship should arrive, and such a
particular Person in her. The Thoughts of it hastened them back again toward
the Custom-House, to enquire if there were any English News; and upon their
Return were surpised at the sight of an English Boat, which they espied was
rowing up the River; and were no sooner arrived at the Custom-House, but they
found the English Man who had been expected in her. The News of this was very
grateful to the President, and not ungrateful to the Bramin, who received a
curious Paramin from the Hands of the Governor, whom he had obliged with so
faithful and particular a Prophetic Relation.

And the worthy President Mr. Harris, who had himself been sometimes in
distress for English News, has likewise told me of a Bramin's Proposals to him,
of bringing him undoubted Intelligence, how the Companies Affairs in England
stood, within the space of four days. But that he durst not accept of the
Proposition, because he was confident that it depended upon the Assistance of a
Familiar. And surely those sprightly Beings can easily dispatch a very tedious
Voyage in a very short time. For if we only consider the nimble progress of
Light through the Air, with what swiftness it darts its bright active Atoms from
East to West, and flies through the immense Expanse from the lofty Regions of the
Sky; we cannot with any great Reason deny this same or greater Power to the
active Spirits of Darkness, who are stripped of all the Clogs of Matter, and void
of all material Substance.

The Bannians are far from any thing of Severity, and not prone to the
inflicting any Corporal Punishments, The reproach of being slipper'd.
and have a perfect Antipathy to those that are Capital; but the ignominious
Punishment which they all sorely dread, is Slippering; that is, when any
Person, who has been offended by a Bannian, takes off his Slipper, spitts upon
it, and then strikes the Bannian with the sole of it. This is more detestable
and abominated by them, than for any among us to spitt or throw dirt in
another's Face; for it is not only esteemed the most heinous Abuse, but the
redemption of the Affront is very costly, and the disgrace is not wiped off
without difficulty and Expense. This touching the Bannian with the sole of a
Slipper, is as unsufferable and odious in India, as touching with the Hand the
Head of a Siamese; An Affront to touch the Head at Siam.
for that being the highest part of the Body, is with them accounted of
principal Honor, and never to be stroakt or touched without the greatest
Offense and Affront. Insomuch that the King himself permits no Person to dress
his Head, but is so far his own Valet, that he puts the Covering upon it
himself.

This is the Substance of what I thought might contribute to fill the Account
of the Bannians, of whom I have discoursed concerning their Natural Tempers,
and Religious Opinions concerning their Abstinence, and Days of Devotion; their
Diet and Ingenuity in their Vocations; their Attire and Ornaments; their
Marriages; Naming of their Children, and their Burials; and have Concluded with
a Relation of some of the common Diseases of India, and of the tedious Plague
at Suratt. And shall now endeavor to entertain the Reader with a Description
of the strange Manners of the Indian Faquirs near Suratt, and with an Account
of the Parsies, and Halalchors.

THE FAQUIRS NEAR SURATT.
TWO Miles distant from Suratt, Pulparrock, frequented by the Faquirs.
is a very delightful place, named Pulparrock, adorned with pleasant Walks and
Groves of Trees, near the gentle Streams of the River Tappy. The Ground is all
very even, except only near the Banks of the River, where the rising Hills
enlarge the prospect upon the Water. And the Hot Air is tempered by the shady
Walks under the spreading Branches, and the nearness of the Current of the
Water glideing by. For these Religious Santones here, as well as in Europe, are
industrious in culling out the most delightful Habitations in the Country, and
taking up their Abode where ever either Art or Nature Invite, their Residence
by a commodious pleasant Dwelling. For there is not any place near Suratt, that
yields either the Beauty, or the Delight that Pulparrock affords.

The Original of the Faquirs.
The Original of these Holy Mendicants is ascribed, according to their Account,
to a certain Prince named Revan, who quarreled with Ram, a Knowing and
Victorious Prince; and being Conquered and deprived of all by a certain Ape
named Herman, or Hanneman, which was his Assistant on Earth, spent the
remainder of his Days in Pilgrimage, and rambling, without any Maintenance
either to himself or his Followers, but what was given them in Charity: It was
for the good Services done to Ram in his Life time by the Apes, The Indian's
respect for Apes.
that they are in so great Esteem both with the Moors and Gentues in the
Indies; and this arch unlucky Creature is in that Repute among them all, that
they seriously declare, were the Blood of one of them spilt upon the Ground,
the Earth would suddenly become unfruitful, and the Judgment upon it would be
at least a Years Famine. And therefore when a large Ape had broke loose from the
English Factory at Suratt, and skipping to and fro' had snatched away several
things of value, and in his Anger had bit a Child or two so sorely, that they
afterward died of the Wounds, (as it was reported,) yet was it an inexcusable
Crime at the same time for any violent Hand to touch him.

These Philosophical Saints have since the first forming of their Order, The
Rudeness of the Faquirs.
assumed a liberty of taking that by violence, which they find is denied their
civil Requests, and sometimes force a Charity from the People, when Entreaties
cannot prevail, especially in the Country Villages. For their numbers render
them imperious, and upon pretension of extraordinary Sanctity, they commit a
thousand Villainies unbecoming their Profession. They imitate the Romish Orders
in Vows of Piety and Celibacy, and in their Pretensions to a strange Intimacy,
and prevailing Interest with Heaven. Thus they endeavor to raise their
Veneration and Respect; thus they acquire constant Homage and Address, daily
Applications, and large Presents from the People. And some, by a seeming
neglect of themselves, indulge their Bodies, and pamper their Ambition the more.

Their filthiness.
They are called Faquirs by the Natives, but Ashmen commonly by us, because of
the abundance of Ashes with which they powder their Heads, and mix with their
Hair, which falls down sometimes to the middle of their Backs. They use no
Pillabers to repose their Heads on, but lay them unconcernedly upon the Ground,
where they gather a constant supply of Dust and Filth, which makes them (in
their Opinion) of a very becoming appearance, because it is squalid, but gives
the Ascetick or votary in our Eyes a very disagreeable and sordid Aspect.

The Immodesty of some Faquirs.
Of this Persuasion and kind of life, are several sorts both among the Gentiles
and the Moors; some of whom show their Devotion by a shameless appearance, and
walking naked, without the least Rag of Clothes to cover them. And even at
Midday, and in the heart of the City, and places of chief Concourse, will they
walk the Streets, as shameless and unconcerned, as if they were Clothed all
over. The constant sight of them in the City, which offers it self at every
turn, abates that bashfulness in the Spectators, which such an immodesty might
be apt to create, and diverts neither Sex from their Society, from a familiar
Conversation and Intimacy with them; and Custom has wore off all that Coyness
even in the Women, which would be startled at such an immodest Spectacle at
first.

Others make solemn Vows of continuance in such and such kind of Postures all
the days of their life, The several tormenting Postures of these Faquirs.
and will never move from them or alter them, though the Pains are never so
violent, which seem to be attended with so much Torture, as would even force
them to forbear. For these are Penitentiaries in earnest, without any Mask or
possible appearance of Deceit, and voluntarily mortify their Limbs, and
distort their Joints to a perfect Dislocation. For by the Delusions of Satan,
these infatuated Votaries are possessed with a wretched Opinion of making
themselves unspeakably happy hereafter by these insufferable Torments here: And
the Enemy of Mankind, impatient of Delays in exercising his infernal Cruelty,
persuades them to undergo these Torments which will end in making them
Meritorious Saints, and that by these horrid Punishments they may secure a
future larger Bliss.

Among these violent Postures, some I observed with both their Arms stretched
out toward Heaven continually, which they never let fall, and are therefore by
long use grown so much into that Position, that by long continuance it begins
to grow Natural, and without Violence they cannot move them downward. The Nails
from their Fingers too, are grown beyond the Paws of any Lion, into three or
four Inches length, (by an Opinion which they have imbibed, like that of the
Emperor of Japan, who, after his Coronation, is deterred from permitting
either Razor or Scissers to come near his Hair or Nails,) upon a Persuasion
that it is a kind of Sacrilege in those cases to cut them.

Others, as devout as these, gaze with their Eyes continually toward Heaven, by
holding their Faces, directly upwards. They throw their Heads so far backwards
between their Shoulders, that their Eyes can never behold any other Object but
the Stars and Sky, whither with unwearied Earnestness they look continually,
delighted as it were with the pleasant sight of the blessed Regions above, and
loath to cast their Eyes upon any thing of this vile and wicked World. But
before their Eyes can be thus fixed, and their Heads settled in this Posture, the
Faquirs run through much Uneasiness and Trouble, molested both in the Utterance
of their Words, and in receiving any Food. And both those who extend their Arms
continually toward Heaven, as if they were reaching at that place; and those
whose Eyes are constantly fixed upwards, are rendered thereby wholly
unserviceable to themselves, and are therefore attended always by a Servant or
two, who administer to them in their Necessities, and conduct the gazing Saints
to different places of Abode.

Others there are with their Right Arm brought round the Neck over the left
Shoulder, and the Left Arm over the Right Shoulder, and their Fingers clasping
one another before their Breasts, with the Palms of their Hands turned
outward. This twists the Arms, dislocates the Shoulder-bones, and therefore
vexes the Patient with inexpressible Torments.

Some of the Faquirs neither sit, nor ever lie down, but constantly either walk
or lean. They lean upon a small Pillow, or Quilt, laid upon a Rope, which hangs
down from the Boughs of a Tree, where the two Ends are fastened above, and swing
in that posture to and fro Day and Night. But when these Faquirs prepare
themselves to pray, they change this Gesture, and fasten their Feet in two
Ropes that hang down from the Boughs of a Tree, and with their Heels upwards,
and their Heads down, as if they were ashamed to lift up their Eyes to Heaven,
they pour out their powerful Supplications. And from the Prayers of these
humble Saints are expected to flow considerable Blessings, and the prevention
of many Mischiefs.

Some of these devoted Mendicants extend only one Hand toward Heaven, others
turn only one Arm round their Shoulders. But they are all in singular Esteem,
and religiously resorted to by the Vulgar; and by these Distortions of their
Bodies they gain the Repute of Men of perfect Hearts and of upright Minds.

Besides these painful unnatural Postures near Suratt, A savage Custom near
Carwar.
a savage Custom is still maintained by the Gentiles near Carwar, in offering
Sacrifice to the God of Plenty, at the Season of the growing Corn. The Bramins
at this time kill a Cock, and make an Oblation of his Blood, as was usual with
other Heathens; while the People that are concerned in it are struck with
amazing Horror and Consternation, their Faces are writhed, and their Looks
ghastly; their Flesh creeps upon them, and their Joints tremble; and to all Men
they appear frightful, as if they were possessed; and they own too, that the
Devil at that time inhabits them, and acquaints them with several strange
things. After the Sacrifice is past, Six Men, and an equal number of Women, are
appointed to perform a Ceremony very dreadful. Upon each side of the Backbone
of the Men are stuck two Iron Hooks into the Flesh, by which they are lifted up
to the top of a Pole standing out like a Gibbet, above 20 Foot high. This
Gibbet is fastened to an Engine with four Wheels, which is drawn upon the
Ground above a Mile, with the Men hanging upon the Tenters all the way. The
Women have each of them a sort of Basin upon their Heads, upon which are set
Six Cups as large as Tea-Cups, one upon another, with Fire in each of them,
which being very tottering, makes the Women exceeding careful how they tread;
lest if they slip, and thereby any Cup falls, or the Fire be shaken out of any,
the Woman forfeits her Life, and is sentenced to immediate Death. But if with
Care and Dexterity they go through with the Walk as far as the Men, they then are
safe, and the Solemnity ceases. And notwithstanding all the tediousness of the
Passage, and the jogging of the Carriage whereon they hang, which one would
think would force the Hooks to tear the Flesh in pieces; yet will the Men, poor
miserable Wretches! take Swords and brandish them in their Hands, as it were,
in defiance of their Torments all the way

The Faquirs resort sometimes together in great numbers, and live upon the
Spoil and Alms of the Country, as they pass in their Pilgrimage. If they find
the People unwilling to give, they audaciously demand, and that not in the
humble strain for a Pice or two, but sawcily beg a Roupie. One of these
Mendicants in a petulant Humor, A Story of a saucy Faquir.
impudently requested from an English President, whom he met abroad, twenty
Roupies. The President to humor his Forwardness and Impudence, offered him
Nineteen, which he magnanimously refused, because he thought it unbecoming his
Greatness, to sink a Farthing below his first demands.

Of these Imperious Godly Beggars, I have seen an hundred (at least) of them in
a Company, seated under a shady Grove of Trees, rejoicing at a public
Entertainment, which was prepared by a leading Man of their Company. I observed
that they drunk very freely of Bang, steeped in Water, while I stood among
them, whose Intoxicating quality is very apt to disturb the Brain. The Faquirs
very orderly at their Feasts
Which made me enquire whether such Jovial Meetings were not apt to end in
Madness and Quarrels; and the Excess of that Liquor, by kindling an unruly
Heat, disturb their Spirits, and convert their friendly Meetings into feuds and
discords, and mischievous Debates? To which they answered, That they took care
of preserving Peace and Amity, and as much decency and order at these times of
Mirth, as at their ordinary Meetings; for which end, they chose a number from
among themselves, who were totally debarred from Drinking, and were Censors
upon others, to inspect their Carriage, and interpose in their Disputes, to
restrain them from all exorbitant Mirth, and excessive Drinking.

The Persies
Besides the Moors and the Bannians, and these Faquirs, which belong to both
Professions, the Persies are a Sect very considerable in India, of whom the
Tradition is, that coming from Persia in a Tempest, at the time that Mahomet
and his Followers gave Laws to the Persians, (which they were unwilling to
submit to) they were driven to that distress, that they almost despaired of
Life, 'till hearing a Cock Crow, and espying Fire at Land, they recovered their
hopes of safety, and gained a speedy Arrival. The Cock therefore is as much
esteemed by them, Their Respect to a Cock and to Fire.
as the Cow is by the Bannians, of the lives of both which, they are the
zealous Patrons and Protectors. For the Worshipping of Fire seems to be the
Ancientest instance of Idolatry in the World, inasmuch (as some think) that
Cain, after he was banished from the Presence of the Lord, turned a downright
Idolater, and then introduced the Worship of the Sun, as the best resemblance
he could find of the Glory of the Lord, which was wont to appear in a flaming
Light. And in aftertimes, they Worshipped Fire in the Eastern Countries, as
the best Emblem of the Sun, when it was absent. Nor was the Vestal Fire ever
more Sacred, than all other Fires are with the Persies, the extinction of
which, if it is voluntary, is a Crime as heinous, as if the vital Heat of the
Cock, or some other beloved Animal were destroyed; so that if their Houses were
on Fire, they would sooner be persuaded to pour on Oil to increase, than Water
to assuage the Flame. If a Candle is once lighted, they would judge the Breath
of him more than Pestilential, that durst attempt to blow it out. And a Persy
Servant, who is commanded to bring a hot Steel, and warm with it a Bowl of
Punch, will plead his Excuse, and that he dare not hasten the coolness of the
Steel by a violent abatement of the Heat. The active Flame must be allowed to
live, whilst there is any Fuel for it to feed on; if the Fire is once kindled,
all care is taken that it comes to a natural Expiration, and no violence
allowed to bring it to a period sooner. Another account we have for their
respect for Fire, is, that their great Lawgiver Zertoost, was taken into
Heaven, and brought from thence Fire with him ( Prometheus like) which he
commanded his Followers afterward to Worship.

They have other Fables concerning Abraham, that he was once in the Devil's
Power, who exposed him to the Flames, but the kind Fire would not fasten on
him; from which they infer the great unreasonableness of destroying that
Element, which was so averse, (notwithstanding all its Fury) from hurting
Abraham their Friend; Their days of Devotion.
the Reason of this may be, because that Abraham came from the Land of Vz,
which signifies Fire, which might give the occasion for the Fable of his
Escaping the Fire.

They own and Adore one Supreme Being, to whom, as he is the Original of all
things; they dedicate the first Day of every Month, in a solemn observance of
his Worship. And enjoin, besides these, some others for the Celebration of
Public Prayers.

At their solemn Festivals, whither an hundred or two sometimes resort, Eating
in common.
in the Suburbs of the City, each Man according to his Fancy and Ability,
brings with him his Victuals, which is equally distributed, and eat in common
by all that are present. For they show a firm Affection to all of their own
Sentiments in Religion, assist the Poor, and are very ready to provide for the
Sustenance and Comfort of such as want it. Their universal Kindness, either in
employing such as are Needy and able to work, The Persies kind to their own
Cast.
or bestowing a seasonable bounteous Charity to such as are Infirm and
Miserable; leave no Man destitute of Relief, nor suffer a Beggar in all their
Tribe; and herein so far comply with that excellent Rule of Pythagoras, to
enjoy a kind of Community among Friends.

Their Transportation to India.
These Persies are by another Name termed Gaures, or Worshippers of Fire,
because of their Veneration for that Element; and were Transported into India,
when Calyf Omar reduced the Kingdom of Persia, under the Power of the
Mahometans; and they profess the Ancient Religion of the Persians. But their
Religion spread it self more Westerly, it seems than Persia; for the
Babylonians, who by their Religious Discipline, were engaged to the Worshipping
the Sun, did likewise under the Names of Nego, and Shaca, Adore the Fire and
the Earth. And the Parents of Gregory Nazianzene, who was born in the Fourth
Century at Arianzum, an obscure Village belonging to Nazianzum, a Town of the
second Cappadocia, were of a mixed Religion made up of Judaism and Paganism, or
rather some select Rites of both; for with the Gentiles they did honor to Fire
and burning Lights but rejected Idols and Sacrifices; and with the Jews they
observed the Sabbath. But I believe what remains of this Cast, are most of them
in the Kingdom of the Great Mogul. But we read of some in Persia of great
Antiquity. For near Yesd in the Province of Ayrack, (or Hierack Agemi) which
yields the richest and Fairest Tapestries of all Persia, and of the World; and
on the Mountain Albors, there are yet some Worshipers of Fire, who are said to
have used it above 3000 Years.

They are not quite so Abstemious in their Diet as the Bannians, Superstitious
in-eating and drinking.
but Superstitiously refuse to drink after any Stranger, out of the same Cup.
Some Hindoes will eat of one kind of Flesh, some of another, but all refrain
from Bief, out of respect to Kine.

In their Callings they are very Industrious and diligent, Many of the Persies
Weavers.
and careful to train up their Children to Arts and Labor. They are the
principal Men at the Loom in all the Country, and most of the Silks and Stuffs
at Suratt, are made by their Hands. The High Priest of the Persies is called
Destoor, their Ordinary Priests Daroos, or Harboods.

I shall not mention their Marriages, which much resemble the manner of the
Bannians, but proceed only to a Description of their way of Burying, which is
this. Their dead Bodies exposed to the Birds of Prey.
The noblest Sepulture which they fancy they can bestow upon their deceased
Friends, is exposing them to be devoured by the Fowls of the Air, and bestowing
their Carcasses on the Birds of Prey. The Ceremony used by the Persies in their
Burials.
After the Body is for some time dead, the Halalchors (which area sort of
sordid Indians) take and carry it out upon a Bier into the open Fields, near
the place where it is exposed to the Fowls of Heaven. When it is there decently
deposited upon the Ground, a particular Friend bears the Fields and
neighboring Villages, upon the hunt for a Dog, 'till he can find one out; and
having had the good luck to meet him, he cherishes and intices him with a Cake
of Bread, which he carries in his Hand for that purpose, 'till he draws him as
near the Corpse as he is able; for the nearer the Dog is brought to the dead
Body, the nearer are its approaches to Felicity. And if the hungry Cur can by
bits of Cake be brought so nigh the Deceased, as to come up to him, and take a
piece cut of his Mouth, it is then an unquestionable Sign, that the Condition he
died in was very happy; but if the timorous Dog startles at the sight, or
loathes the Object, or being lately well fed, has no Stomach to that ordinary
Morsel, which he must snatch out of the dead Man's Jaws, the Case then with him
is desperate, and his state deplorable. The poor Man whom I saw, was by these
Prognostics, very miserable; for the sturdy Cur would by no means be enticed
to any distance near him. When the Dog has finished his part of the Ceremony,
two Daroos, at a Furlong's distance from the Bier, stand up with joined Hands,
and loudly repeat for near half an hour, a tedious Form of Prayer by Heart; but
with such a quick dispatch, that they scarce drew Breath all the while, as if
they had been under some invincible necessity of running over the Words in such
a time. All the while they were thus gabling, a piece of White Paper fastened
to each Ear, o'rethwart the Face, hung down two or three Inches below the Chin;
and as soon as they had ended their Petitions, the Halalchors took up the
Corpse, and conveyed it to the Repository, which was near; all the Company
ranking themselves by two and two, and following it with joined Hands. The
place of Sepulture is in the open Fields, within a Wall built in form of a
Circle, about twelve Foot high, and about an hundred in the Circumference; in
the middle of which was a Door of Stone about six foot from the ground, which
was opened to admit the Corpse. The Ground within the Walls is raised above four
Foot, and made shelving toward the Corner, that the Filth and Moisture which
are drained continually from the Carcasses, may by an easy passage descend
into a Sink made in the middle to receive them. The Corpse therefore was left
here, and all the Company departing thence, betook themselves to a Rivolet that
run near the place for Ablution, to cleanse themselves from what defilements,
on this Melancholy occasion, they might have contracted; and retired afterward
to their proper Habitations in the City, from whence this place is distant
about a Mile. But within the space of a Day or two after, some of the nearest
Relatives return again hither, to observe which of the Eyes of their deceased
Friend was first picked out by the hungry Vultures; and if they find that the
right Eye was first seized on, this abodes undoubted Happiness; if the left,
they then are sorrowful, for that is a direful sign of his Misery.

The Persies are very nice in the preservation of their Hair, The Burying of
their Hair every Year.
and careful to preserve whatever is cut off their Heads or Beards, that
nothing of it be lost or carelessly thrown about, but once a Year be decently
laid in their Burying place. A description of which, though it be dressed with
nothing but Horror, yet may here properly be inserted.

The Burying-place of the Persies is an Object the most dreadful, The Persies
horrid Burying-place.
and of the most horrid Prospect in the World, and much more frightful than a
Field of Slaughtered Men. It contains a number of Carcasses of very different
disagreeable Colors and Aspects. Some are seen there bleeding fresh, but so
torn by the Vultures that crowd upon the Walls, that their Faces resemble that
of a Death's Head, with the Eyeballs out, and all the Flesh upon the Cheeks
picked off. And on the Fleshy part of the Body, where the Ravenous Bird tasted a
more delicious Morsel, are eaten several large Holes, and all the Skin on every
part is mangled, and torn by the sharp Beaks of these devouring Creatures. Here
was a Leg, and there an Arm, here lay half, and there the quarter of a Man,
Some looked as if they were partly Jelly, others were hardened like Tanned
Leather, by the various operations of the Sun and Weather upon them: Here lay
one picked as clean as a Skeleton, near that, another with the Skin in some
parts Green, in others Yellow, and the whole so discolored, as if all within
were Putrefaction. A sight terrible enough almost to afright an hungry Vulture
from his Prey. But these Birds are most delighted with these dismal Objects,
and that noisome smell which evaporates from the dead Corpse affords a pleasant
Odor to their Senses. The stench of the Bodies is intolerable, and of
malignity sufficient to strike any Man dead that would endure it; and yet the
Vultures choose to fit to the Leeward upon the Wall, luxuriously to suck up and
indulge their smell with these deadly foul Vapors. Some of these glutted Birds
were so cloyed and crammed with Humane Flesh, that they seemed scarce able to
take Wing, and the Feathers of others were much moulted away, by this kind of
rank feeding.

Besides this manner of Burying, in use with the Persies, near Suratt, there
are other Eastern Nations who have peculiarly affected the Intombing their dead
Bodies in Animals. The Inhabitants of Pegu reckon him happy, Two odd ways of
Burying.
whose Fate it is to be devoured by a Crocodile. And the Natives formerly, near
the Mouth of Ganges, if weary of this Life by Sickness or Old Age, committed
themselves to be devoured by the Dog-Fish, as the safest passage to their
future Felicity.

The Halalchors a sordid sort of People.
The Halalchors, (whom I occasionally mentioned a little before) are another
sort of Indians at Suratt, the most contemptible, but extremely necessary to be
there. They are termed Halalchors, by the Moors and Indians, in the Persian
Language, which signifies Eatalls, or Eaters at large. They will indulge
themselves with Wine, as well as drink Water; they Eat all kinds of Fish or
Flesh, and without any scruple of Conscience or of Appetite, will feed upon
either Horse or Cow, and will satisfy their Stomachs as well with a piece of
Carrion out of a Ditch, as with the freshest Meat that can be bought in the
Bazar. These are the Persons employed in sweeping the Houses, and cleaning the
Streets, in carrying away the Dirt and Dung, in washing the dead Bodies, and
conveying them to their proper places of Sepulture, which makes them absolutely
necessary in these parts, because such Employments as these are an Abomination
to the Moors and defile the Bannians, and are only engaged in by these poor
People, who for this Reason are accounted Vile and Mean, the most abject and
Scandalous of all the Inhabitants of Suratt. One of the greatest marks of
Ignominy, when any Person is reflected on, is to be called Halalchor. Yet these
despicable Persons take all in good part, cringe and bow to all they pass by,
Eat whatever is offered them from any Hand, and go through with their Drudgery
without noise and concern. The Halalchor industriously avoids the touching of
any Person for fear of Offense; he is separated from all the rest of the Casts,
as a thing Unclean; for if he happens to come too near a Bannian, he defiles
him by his touch, and puts him to the trouble of some Purification, to wash off
the Defilement he contracted upon it. Therefore are they shunned by all, and
endeavor to keep at a distance from all.

I have now finished my Discourse of the City and Inhabitants of Suratt, of its
Government and Trade, and of the Customs and Religion; the Language, Arts and
Recreations of the Natives; with a particular Account of the Mendicant Friars,
or Faquirs, of the Persies and Halalchors, and shall conclude all my Thoughts
of India, in a brief Description of the English Factory at Suratt, and of the
Troubles which happened to the English while I was there.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE English Factory AT SURATT.
THE English East India Company (from an Account we have of it in a Pamphlet
concerning their Trade) are at the Annual Expense of one hundred Thousand
Pounds. The yearly Expense of the Company.
For they esteem it necessary, as well for the Honor of the English Nation, as
facilitating of their Traffic, to maintain their principal Servants in India,
not only in Decency, but Splendour, as is visible to any that has traveled
either to Suratt, or the Fort of St. George, to Gombrone in Persia, or Bengal.
These are the chief places of Note and Trade, where their Presidents and Agents
reside, for the support of whom, with their Writers and Factors, large
Privileges and Salaries are allowed.

The several parts of India have each their peculiar Commodities proper to
them, which are bought up, and made ready by the Companies Servants, to load
upon their Ships at their Arrival. And were not the English constantly upon
this Account kept in those parts, The necessity of English Factors in India.
the other European Nations would soon fill up all our vacant Factories, and so
monopolize the Indian Trade, that not only the Spice Islands would be their
darling Propriety, but all Indian Commodities as well as Spices, Silks,
Callicoes, Drugs, Precious Stones, etc. should (within a while) be apt to bear
what Rates in Europe they thought fit to lay upon them. For accomplishing which
design, some People have already some time ago, profer'd to the Great Mogul the
advancement of his Customs at Suratt, to a much higher Rate than now they are
at, upon condition of Establishing that entire Trade upon them. And both by
large Presents, and by raising of the Price of Pepper upon the Coast of
Malabar, they have indefatigably endeavored a total subversion of our Trade
therein among the Natives. Therefore the continuance of Factors in India by a
Company, seems very necessary and just; and were this practice once withdrawn,
the Indian Trade to England, would probably soon be removed too. For other
means would soon be projected for accomplishing what Bribes and Presents to the
Mogul and his Officers could not effect, by which those that secured the Trade
for themselves, would soon find a Way of stopping all Traffic from the Indies,
but what came through their Hands. Therefore are our Presidents obliged
continually to watch their Motions in India, and observe their Designs, to
countermine their Projects, and gratify not only the Mogul now and then, with
grateful Gifts, but likewise to be always upon the same method with the Omrahs
and Favorites at Court, engaging a continuance of their Favors.

This makes those that are concerned in the Trade of India think fit, that this
necessary Expense of Factors for continuance of the Indian Trade to England,
should be recompensed with some public Privileges for its support. And that
therefore the private Advantage which grows from this great Care and Cost,
should not easily be checked and discouraged, especially considering likewise
that the securing the Traffic in the power of the English from Foreign
Designers, contributes not a little to the common good, especially if thereby
their Ships be enabled to come home in good Fleets, as the Dutch do, which
would thereby the better secure them from the common Enemy the French, that
they might not be so easily Seized to the public Damage of the Nation.

The House where the Factors live.
The House provided for the Entertainment of the English at Suratt belongs to
the Mogul, and is fitted with the best Accommodations of any in the City. It is
situated in the North-West part of it, and is able to give convenient Lodgings
to forty Persons, besides several decent Apartments to the President. Our
Landlord Aureng-Zebe is extreme kind and liberal in permitting us to expend
the Rent, which is 60 l. Yearly, either in Beautifying, Repairing, or in
additional Rooms to the House, so that he seldom receives much Rent from us. It
is built with the Convenience of several Cellars, and Warehouses, of a Tanque
of Water, and an Humhum.

The President of the Northern Parts of India resides here, The Privilege of
Traffic allowed the President and Factors
who is dignified frequently with the Government of Bombay, and invested with
the Title of Honorable. A few Years stay here has raised several of the
Presidents to Plentiful Estates, who besides their Salaries, which is 300 per
An. and several Advantages by the Ships, are permitted a free Trade to all the
parts of the East. This is indulged likewise to all the Companies Servants of
what station soever, which is a Favor attended with considerable Benefit,
suits well with the freedom of an English Subject, and is a profitable Blessing
for which the Dutch Factors are earnest Supplicants, and from which they are
very strictly restrained.

The Council.
The Accountant succeeds the President, next to him is the Store-keeper, and to
him the Purser Marine. These four constitute the Council, among whom the
President has a double Vote; and all Cases and Affairs relating to the Company,
or their Servants, are debated and determined by them.

Advancements according to every ones standing.
The Secretary, though none of the Council, yet always attends their Orders and
Consultations, and stands Candidate for the first Vacancy among them; to which
all are gradually advanced according to the Seniority of their time or Station;
except the Authority of the Company interposes in their Earlier Exaltation,
which they seldom attempt, because as the other method is most equitable, so
they find it most suitable to their Affairs and Interest.

The Chaplain, who is respected as third in the Factory, the Senior and Junior
Factors, the Writers and Apprentices make up the rest. These all remain in
their various Stations, for three or five Years, or as many as they and the
Company have agreed upon at their first coming out, before they rise to new
Degrees, as from Apprentice to Writer, from Writer to Factor. And every step
they take in Promotion, the Company raises their Salary, and allows them some
new Privilege. They all have given to them their Diet and Lodging gratis by the
Company, besides Wages, and the advantageous liberty of Trafick to all parts,
wherein from China to Suratt, they commonly make Cent per Cent; they can
sometimes make 50 per Cent. from thence, if they only carry out Silver and bring
home Gold: And those among them that are Persons of Credit and Esteem, but of
small Fortunes, may borrow from the Bannians Money for China at 25 per Cent.
and that only to be paid upon the safe Arrival of the Ship, which if it
miscarries in the Voyage, they are exempt from all damage. To some parts their
Gains amount to more, to some they are less, according to the distance of
Ports, and opportunities of Trade.

For dispatching of the Companies Affairs, Several Peons maintained by the
Company.
and attending on the President and Council, there are kept always in the
Companies Pay, Forty or Fifty Peons, who wait daily upon the President in the
Morning, that they may receive his Commands for the Service of the Day; and
appear before him in a Body in the Evening, to pay him their Homage, who then
(at his pleasure) with a Nodd dismisses them to their Homes in the City.
Besides these, the President is allowed for his personal Attendance several
others, the Accountant or second is allowed two, the Minister, and the rest of
the Council, and the Secretary, each of them one.

The whole Business and Concern of all is zealously to promote the Honor and
Interest of the Companies Affairs, in maintaining their Reputation, and vending
their Commodities at as high Rates, and buying for them others at as low as
they can.

The Salaries and Wages of the Companies Servants.
The President and all the rest of the Society are paid their Salaries once a
Year; the Second 120 l. the Senior Factors who are of the Council, 40 l. the
Junior Factors 15 l. the Writers 7 l. Besides which, the Council and Secretary
have several advantageous Perquisites belonging to their places. The Peons
receive their Wages every Month, which are four Roupies to each, and six to
their Captain. At the beginning of the Month they give their Attendance, and
respect; address themselves first to the Moon, and then to the President, who
then appoints the Steward to discharge their Accounts.

Lest any thing of value might be lost in the Factory, The honesty of the Peons.
through this multitude of Peons who are called to their Service there
continually, the Butlers are enjoined to take an account of the Place each
Night before they depart home, that they might be examined before they stir, if
ought be wanting. But their Honesty is our security from being damaged by any
Theft, which has not been charged upon them in the Factory these many Years:
Nay, such is the approved Honesty and Fidelity of these Servants to our
Affairs, that whenever the President designs to run the Custom of a
considerable Sum of Gold or Silver, he commits the secret to some of these
Peons, who manage it dexterously, and are Faithful to a Roupie.

Without Liberty from the President, None permitted to lie without the Factory.
none are permitted to leave the Factory, to lie abroad, or depart into the
Country; and the Porter who attends the Gate both Day and Night, keeps all from
Entering into our Precincts, whose admittance he judges may not be proper. But
each Thursday Night he craves leave of going home, because he is a Moor-man and
Married, and he fears that the neglecting a Visit to his Wife for more than a
Week, might give an occasion of Complaint. Therefore on this Night the Poor Man
that beg in the Streets commonly do it in the prevailing Style of Jimroot sab,
Jimroot sab; intimating as much as, Sir, since this is Thursday Night, let me
(I pray you) partake something of your Bounty, as a means the better to enable
my Kindness to my Wife.

A public Table.
Each Day there is prepared a Public Table for the Use of the President and the
rest of the Factory, who sit all down in a public place according to their
Seniority in the Companies Service. The Table is spread with the choicest Meat
Suratt affords, or the Country thereabouts; and equal plenty of generous
Sherash Wine, and Arak Punch, is served round the Table. Several hundreds a
Year are expended upon their daily Provisions which are sumptuous enough for
the Entertainment of any Person of Eminence in the Kingdom; and which require
two or three Cooks, and as many Butchers to dress and prepare them. But Europe
Wines and English Beer, because of their former Acquaintance with our Palates,
are most coveted and most desirable Liquors, and though sold at high Rates, are
yet purchased and drunk with pleasure. A Wealthy Indian who was curious to see
our manner of Eating, and desirous to please himself with the Pride of our
Etertainments, was strangely amazed and surpised at the opening of a Bottle of
Bottled Drink, when he saw it froth and fly about. The President asked him what
it was that struck him with such Admiration? which was not, he told him, the
sight of the Drink flying out of the Bottle, but how such Liquor could ever be
put in.

The President and Council only meet at Supper, The President and Council, only
meet at Supper.
for the maintenance of a Friendly Correspondence, and to discourse of the
Companies Business, and prevent all Jealousies and Animosities which might
obstruct the public Affairs from that Progress, which a joint Unanimous
Affection might carry them on with. For the Current of the common Interest has
been sometimes very much lessened and diverted by the unhappy Intervention of
private misunderstandings and Quarrels. And though it has been a repeated
Contrivance of some leading Men, to play their Servants in India one against
another, and to set them as Spies of each others Actions, yet I Am sure the
public Affairs have suffered when the Design has been unmasked, and the
Jealous Eye has been awaked. For nothing vexes a Man of Honor, and who is
conscious of his own Integrity more, than to find himself suspected of
Dishonesty, and Designs laid by those to entrap him in his Actions, who have
the least Reason in the World to distrust his Fidelity.

Both before and after Meals, a Peon appointed for that purpose, attends with a
large Silver Ewer and Basin, for those that sit down to wash their Hands; which
at both times is a Decency in all places, but here necessary, because of the
Heat and Dust which are so very troublesome. All the Dishes and Plates pure
Silver.
All the Dishes and Plates brought to the Table are of pure Silver, massy and
Substantial; and such are also the Tosses or Cups out of which we drink. And
that nothing may be wanting to please the Curiosity of every Palate at the
times of Eating, an English, Portuguese, and an Indian Cook, are all
entertained to dress the Meat in different ways for the gratification of every
Stomach. Palau, that is Rice boiled so artificially, that every grain lies
singly without being added together, Several sorts of Indian Dishes.
with Spices intermixed, and a boiled Fowl in the middle, is the most common
Indian Dish; and a dumpoked Fowl, that is, boiled with Butter in any small
Vessel, and stuffed with Raisons and Almonds, is another. Cabob, that is, Bief or
Mutton cut into small pieces, sprinkled with Salt and Pepper, and dipped with Oil
and Garlic, which have been mixed together in a Dish, and then roasted on a
Spit, with sweet Herbs put between every piece, and stuffed in them, and basted
with Oil and Garlic all the while, is another Indian Savory Dish. Bambou and
Mangoe Achar, and Souy the choicest of all Sawces, are always ready to whet the
Appetite. The Natives at Suratt are much taken with Assa Faetida, which they
call Hin, and mix a little of it with the Cakes that they eat, which though very
unpalatable and unsavory, yet because they esteem it beyond all things
healthful, the English are tempted sometimes to taste it. The whole City
sometimes smells very strong of the nauseating Vapors which flow from that
abundance that is eat in it.

The Great Entertainments on public Days.
Upon Sundays and public Days, the Entertainments keep up a Face or more
Solemnity, and are made more large and splendid, Deer and Antilopes, Peacocks,
Hares, Partridges, and all kind of Persian Fruits, Pistachoes, Plumbs,
Apricocks, Cherries, etc. are all provided upon high Festivals; and European as
well as Persian Wines are drunk with Temperance and Alacrity. Then the King's
Health, and afterward that of the Companies, are sent round the Table to the
lowest Writer that sits down. When the Banquett is past, they generally divert
themselves for a while with some Innocent easy Recreation.

The state the President goes abroad in.
The President upon Solemn Days generally invites the whole Factory abroad to
some pleasant Garden adjacent to the City, where they may sit shaded from the
Beams of the Sun, and refresht by the Neighborhood of Tanques and Waterworks.
The President and his Lady are brought hither in Palanquins, supported each of
them by six Peons, which carry them by four at once on their Shoulders. Before
him at a little distance, are carried two large Flaggs, or English Ensigns,
with curious Persian or Arabian Horses of State, which are of great value, Rich
in their Trappings, and gallantly equipt that are led before him.

The Furniture of these, and several other Horses, whereon the Factors Ride, is
very costly; the Saddles are all of Velvet richly Embroidered, the Head-stalls,
Reins, and Croupers are all covered with solid wrought Silver. The Captain of
the Peons at this time ascends his Horse, and leads forty or fifty others after
him, which attend the President on foot,. Next the President follow the Council
in large Coaches, all open, except their Wives are in them; the several Knobbs
about them are all covered with Silver, and they are drawn by a Pair of stately
Oxen. After them succeed the rest of the Factors, either in Coaches, or
Hackeries, or upon Horses, which are kept by the Company to accommodate their
President, and People at these times, or whenever they fancy to take the Air.
In this pompous Procession does the President, when he goes abroad, travel
through the Heart of the City.

The Evenings and the Mornings being allayed with moderate Breezes, and cool
and temperate in respect of the Heat when the Sun is at the Height, invite the
Factors daily almost to the Groves or Gardens near the Water side, there to
spend an Hour or two with a Bottle of Wine, and cold Collation which they carry
with them. The Natives respects to the English because of the state maintained
by them.
And neither the Chaplain nor any of the Council stir without the Walls of the
City without the attendance of four or five Peons upon the Coach. This creates
a Respect from the Natives as they pass along, strikes them with a Regard to
the English wherever they meet them; makes them value our Friendship, and place
an Honor in our Intimacy and Acquaintance. The Probity and Grandeur of the
English Living has formerly raised the Presidency of Suratt to that Veneration
and Esteem, among the Native Inhabitants, that it has Eclipsed the greatness of
their own Government, by encouraging the Injured and Distressed Indians, to
apply themselves for Relief, rather to our President, than their Governor.

The Factors when they eat at Home, The Factors sometimes eat lying.
do it after the English manner, but abroad they imitate the Customs of the
East in lying round the Banquet upon the Persian Carpets which are spread upon
the Ground, twenty or thirty Foot in length.

For the Buying and more advantageous disposing of the Company's Goods, The
Companies Brokers.
there are Brokers appointed, who are of the Bannian Cast, skilled in the Rates
and Value of all the Commodities in India. To these is allowed three per Cent.
for their Care and Trouble. The Dually time.
And once a Year, which is their Grand Festival Season, called the Dually time,
they have a Custom, much like that of our New-Years-gifts, of presenting the
President and Council, the Minister, Surgeon, and all the Factors and Writers
with something valuable, either in Jewels or Plate, Atlasses, or other Silks,
according to the Respect which they owe to every Man's Station. Whereby the
Young Factors besides their Salaries, Diet and Lodgings, are supplied likewise
with Clothes sufficient for their Service a great part of the Year. Which
things prevent their Necessity of any great Annual Expense, and happily
contribute toward giving them a Life of Delight and Ease. Besides these
Gratuities, the Minister and Surgeon seldom fail of the President's Bounty at
the Christmas Season; and whenever there is occasion for either of their
Services, they commonly meet with very liberal Returns.

A Doctor and a Surgeon provided for the Factory.
If either a Disease, or any unlucky Casualties should happen to any in the
Factory, the President has provided an Indian Doctor of Physic, and an English
Surgeon to take care of them. The Surgeon, whose Salary is about forty Pounds a
Year, gains considerably too by his outward Practice and Traffic. And whatever
Medicinal Drugs, or Unguents, Balsoms, or Spirits are thought necessary for
prevention or healing of Diseases and Sores, they are presently acquired, and
charged upon the Company's Account; that their Factors might in all things be
nicely taken care of, and not destitute of any thing for the support of either
Life or Health.

And that their Souls might not be neglected amidst all this Affluence and
Ease, and care of their Bodies, A Minister of the Factory.
there is a stated Salary of an Hundred Pounds a Year appointed for a Minister,
with Diet and convenient Lodgings, a Peon to attend him in his Chamber, and the
command of a Coach, or Horse, at any time he thinks fit to use them. Besides
many private Gifts from Merchants and Masters of Ships, who seldom fail of some
valuable Oblation to him, or Rarity of the place they come from; and the noble,
large Gratuities which he constantly receives for officiating at Marriages,
Baptisms, and Burials. And that nothing might be wanting to the making of
either his Life happy, or his Function Venerable, he is enjoined from all a
civil Deference and Deportment, and a Precedence next to the second in the
Factory. And indeed such is the constant obliging Carriage of all to a Man of
his Character, that were he the Principal Man of the Province, or Primate of
Indoston, he could not wish for more Respect.

The Ministers Duty.
The Minister is obliged to a public Discourse once, and public Prayers thrice
on Sunday, and to read Prayers Morning and Evening in the Chapel, each other
Day on the Week, viz. about six in the Morning, before the Factors are called
forth to Business, and at Eight at Night, when all is past. He is engaged to
Catechize all the Youth; to visit the subordinate Factories upon the Coast of
Malabar, at Carwar, Calicut, Ruttera, etc. and to give Instructions for their
Administration of Divine Service in his Absence

The Chapel.
The Chapel, where they meet at Prayers, is within the Factory, decently
Embellisht, so as to render it both neat and solemn, without the Figure of any
living Creature in it, for avoiding all occasion of Offense to the Moors, who
are well pleased with the Innocence of our Worship.

For want of a Minister qualified for the Administration of Baptism among the
Dutch at Suratt, they request that Favor from the English, who performs it for
them in their Chapel; which at first sight might be very well taken for a
Guard-Chamber, because they keep their Arms in it.

The English and all the Europeans are priviledg'd with convenient Repositories
for their Dead, The stately Burying places of the Europeans.
within half a Mile of the City. There they endeavor to outvie each other in
magnificent Structures and stately Monuments, whose large Extent, beautiful
Architecture, and aspiring Heads, make them visible at a remote distance,
lovely Objects of the sight, and give them the Title of the Principal Ornaments
and Magnificencies about the City. The two most celebrated Fabrics among the
English, set off with stately Towers and Minorets, are that which was Erected
for Sir John Oxonton, and the other for the Renowned and Honorable President
Aungers. The two most noted among the Dutch, is one, a noble Pile raised over
the Body of the Dutch Commissary, who died about three Years ago; and another
less stately, but more famed; built by the order of a Jovial Dutch Commander,
with three large Punch-Bowls upon the top of it, for the Entertainment and
Mirth of his surviving Friends, who remember him there sometimes so much, that
they quite forget themselves.

Lest all the Care and Instruction of a Minister might be inavailable for
reclaiming the Dissolute and Refractory among the English, the Company have
interposed their own Authority, and published their Orders and Injunctions in
these following words.

The Company's Instructions.
The Governor, Deputy, and Committees of the East India Company, having been
informed of the disorderly and Unchristian Conversation of some of their
Factors and Servants in the parts of India, tending to the dishonor of God,
the discredit of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the shame and Scandal
of the English Nation: And being desirous, as much as in them lies, for the
future to prevent the like, and reduce all their People in their several
Factories and Colonies, not only to a Civil, but also to a Religious and Pious
Comportment, that may render our Nation Honorable, and the Religion we profess
amiable in the sight of those Heathens, among whom they reside: Have thought
fit to require and enjoin a strict observation of the ensuing Rules and Orders,
to which they do expect from all their Factors and Servants a due compliance.

Then after some Rules enjoining a strict Observance of Sundays, and of public
and private Prayers, this follows.

That the Agents and Chiefs in their several Factories, take care to prevent
all profane Swearing, and taking the Name of God in vain by cursed Oaths; all
Drunkenness and Intemperance, all Fornication and Uncleanness; and that if any
will not be Reformed, and do not abstain from these Vices, but after Admonition
and Reprehension, shall be found faulty again, that then such Punishment shall
be inflicted on them, consisting with the Laws of God and this Kingdom, as the
Agent and Council shall find their Crime to deserve. And that if after such
Punishment inflicted, he or they will not amend, or be reformed, then the Agent
is strictly enjoined and required, to send home for England by the next Ships,
such Person or Persons so unreclaimable, that they may not remain in India, to
the dishonor of God, the Scandal of Religion, the discredit of our Nation, and
perverting of others.

And that both the Company and their Servants may be constantly blessed with the
Favors of Heaven upon them in their respective Stations, therefore they have
ordered a Form of Prayer to be used daily in their Factories, for the obtaining
a common Blessing upon them all; which is as follows, The Prayer for the
Company.
O Almighty and most Merciful God, who art the Sovereign Protector of all that
Trust in thee, and the Author of all Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, we thy
unworthy Creatures do most humbly implore thy goodness for a plentiful Effusion
of thy Grace upon our Employers, thy Servants, the Right Honorable East India
Company of England. Prosper them in all their public Undertakings, and make
them famous and successful in all their Governments, Colonies, and Commerce
both by Sea and Land; so that they may prove a public Blessing by the increase
of Honor, Wealth and Power to our Native Country. as well as to themselves.
Continue their Favors toward us, and inspire their Generals, Presidents,
Agents and Councils in these remote parts of the World, and all others that are
entrusted with any Authority under them, with Piety toward thee our God, and
with Wisdom Fidelity, and Circumspection in their several Stations; That we may
all discharge our respective Duties faithfully, and live Virtuously, in due
Obedience to our Superiors, and in Love, Peace and Charity one toward
another: That these Indian Nations among whom we dwell, seeing our sober and
righteous Conversation, may be induced to have a just esteem for our most holy
Profession of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be
Honor, Praise and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

THE TROUBLES WHICH THE ENGLISH Suffered from the MOORS AT SURATT, in the Years
1691, 1692.
The Confinement of the English.
AUGUST the 27th 1691. All the English the Factory of Suratt were under a close
Confinement from the Moors Governor of the City, and surrounded with a Guard
of Horse and Foot. Nor were the French or Dutch permitted to pass without the
Walls. The occasion of it was a Report spread abroad, The occasion of it.
that a Rich Moor-ship belonging to one Abdel Gheford, was taken by Hat-men,
that is, in their Dialect, Europeans; and therefore 'till Restitution is made
by them of nine Lacks of Roupies, which exceeds the value of 100000 l.
Sterling, no liberty must be granted. The Ship was in her Passage from Mocha to
Suratt, and though the Indians were averse from Fighting, or hazarding their
Lives for four Roupies a Month, yet the Turks, who had a valuable Cargo of
Goods on Board, behaved themselves with redoubted Valor, 'till after the loss
of some of their Lives, they were overpowered by Men, and forced to surrender.

The Accusation run against all the Europeans, because the Pirate showed both
English, French, and Dutch Colors, All the Europeans Accused.
and a Restitution was expected from them all; especially too, because the
Moor-ship which was taken, sailed from Suratt River with all their several
Passes.

The English Presidents Defense.
Our Honorable President Bartholomew Harris made his Defense to the Governor
after this manner. That for the certainty of the Fact, though it might be
disputable, because our grand Accuser Abdel Gheford had been found formerly
faulty in such a case, wherein he suborned a Multitude of Sailers, who
afterward confessed his Bribery and their Perjury; yet admitting it true, he
thought it unreasonable for us to be charged any more with the payment of Money
taken by the Pirates at Sea, than the Mogul is for Robberies at Land. However
thus far he will engage his Honor for satisfaction of the Piracy, if it can be
fairly proved, that the Ship belonged to his Masters, the East India Company.

The Governors Better to the Mogul.
The Old Governor finding the Mogul's Customs begin to sink, by reason of the
Embargo, which was as well upon our Ships, as our selves; and knowing that the
Advancement of them was the great instrument of his Promotion; and unable to
remonstrate any thing material to our Presidents Reasons, directs a Letter to
Aureng-Zebe to this effect. That since the late Wars the English Merchants at
Suratt have traded fairly, and lived peaceably; that much of the Money due to
the Merchants upon the Account of the Wars was already paid, and the rest would
follow; and that for the Pirates at Sea, they were neither Authorized by the
Company, nor were they within the reach of their Command: All which things
might justly plead the Innocence of the English, excuse their payment of any
Money, and give them therefore a Release. But the exasperated Turks, and the
violent Abdel-Gheford prevailed for a closer Confinement of us, not only to the
Walls of the Factory, but our very Chambers, had not the vigilant Industry of
our President opportunely repealed that severe Decree. Our Enemies, likewise,
incessantly urged the Governor to menace and disturb our President, that he
might be thereby wrought upon to their Designs. To which the sage Governor
mildly replied, The Governors Character of the English President.
That he knew Mr. Harris too well, to value any Threatenings which were
Injurious to the Company's Interest or Honor; and that though he suffered much,
he would endure much more, rather than yield to an unjust Compliance.

The Turks threaten the Lives of the English.
The enraged Turks finding their Machines would not work, and that they could
get no ground upon us this way, began now to threaten our Lives, because the
loss of our Liberty did not appease them, so much that the Governor as he
formerly set a Guard upon us to shut us in, now increases it to keep our
Enemies out.

The Turks private Discords.
In the mean time, the Providence of God so contrived for our Innocence, that
the Turks began to clash among themselves, and heated with some private
Dissentions, became their own Accusers. For some of them came to Dungevora, a
famous Persy Merchant, and Friend to the English, and informed him that all
their Allegations against us were built upon Falsehood and Malice, and their
Charge was all a contrived Design, in as much as they were all satisfied in
their own Minds, that the Pirates were Danes, and not English. But this they
durst not discover to the Governor, for fear of a public Examination, which
if they submitted to, their lives would be exposed to the Fury of the rest of
the Confederates. Neither durst we encourage them with any Present of Money to
proceed in their Depositions, lest we should find it a Stratagem of theirs,
thereby to ensnare us.

November the 1st. arrived a Pattamar or Courrier, from our Fakeel, The Danes
found to be the Pirates.
or Solliciter at Court, acquainting us that the Mogul had News from the Danes
themselves, of their taking and plundering the Moor-Ship, and that they
resolved upon a continued Enmity to the Moors, 'till their Demands were fully
satisfied for the Injuries which they formerly sustained from them. The Letter
was directed to Isa Cooly, Principal of the Armenian Merchants at Court, who by
making a noise, which is the method for obtaining Audience, was called upon by
the Mogul, to read his Letter upon a public Court day.

This brought down the Mogul's Letters to the Governor, The Mogul's Letters
for our release.
requiring a speedy Respect and Civility to the English, with a permission and
Encouragement of Trade. But the Pishcashes or Presents expected by the Nabobs
and Omrahs retarded our Enlargement for some time notwithstanding. The Reason
of the English's longer Confinement.
For the strong Contest and Application which was made for the Government of
Suratt, which was then said to be disposed of, put a stop to the Emperors more
absolute determinations. The Mogul's Resolution of continuing the present
Governor, frustrated all the Court Interests for themselves, which moved
Salabet Chan, a Bosom Favorite, to wave the Solicitations he had begun for his
Son, and end them for the Governor. For he designed to send his Son to Suratt,
Invested with the Command of the City, and the Messenger of this welcome News to
us, which would render him thereupon more acceptable to the English Nation, and
would be apt to gain him some costly Present from us at his Entrance upon his
Authority.

The English released.
Therefore December the 2d. in the Evening, word was brought by the Brokers to
our President, of a Cosset's Arrival with Letters from Court to the Vacinavish,
injoyning our immediate Release; and the day following the Chocadars or
Soldiers, were removed from before our Gates.

A generous Arab.
Sheak Jemme, a brave and hearty Arab, who had all along wished Prosperity to
our Affairs, was so transported at the hearing of our Enlargement, that he gave
to the President's Peon, who carried him the News of it, a rich flowered Coat.
And when this generous Arab was called upon by one of the Mullahs or Priests,
and authoritatively demanded why he would countenance the Cafries, or
Unbelievers, meaning us, against the Musoulmen, or true Believers? Bravely
answered that it was his principle to Encourage Truth wherever he found it; and
that he knew the English innocent of the Fact, which the Turks insisted upon
against them. That none were so much Cafries, in his Opinion, as those that
were false in their Words, and Dishonest in their Actions, and that the best
Believers should always act the best things.

In September the Year following, The second Confinement of the English.
which was 1692. did Abdel-Gheford, our Old Implacable Adversary, revive his
Enmity, upon a Report he forged, that some of his Ships from Mocha were feiz'd
on by some English Pirates; and upon this pretense, secured us in our Factory
under a Guard of Chokadars, The Reason of it.
'til the latter end of October. The Governor upon this sent for the English,
Dutch, and French Presidents, the two latter of which disputed that Precedence
which they allowed to the English, but the French, unwilling to raise any
Contest in the Governors Presence, immediately departed. He insisted upon a
Restitution for the Damages which were sustained by Abdel-Gheford, and menaced
them with a Prohibition of Traffic. Which they told him they were willing to
relinquish, rather than be liable to the Payment of such unjust Demands.

Abdel-Gheford's baseness to the English discovered.
The Villainy of Abdel-Gheford, and the Baseness of his Actions were after a
while made apparent to the whole City. For part of the Money which he charged
upon us, was conveyed from on Board his Ship, into a Garden near that of Nocha
Damus's by the River side. Four Thousand Checkins he privately tied to the
Flooks of an Anchor under Water; and some lie hid within his Tanques on Board,
and in the Ballast of his Ship. The rest was put privately into a Palanquin,
which the Soldiers observed to sway very heavily as it past the Gates, and
searching it upon the mistrust, found the Gold in it. So the Injury he would
have laid upon us, was fixed with a scandalous Note of Infamy upon himself; The
Releasment of the English.
and we were before November, fortunately released.

I shall now take leave of these Misfortunes, which in some measure compensate
for their Uneasiness, by the Pleasure which they afford in a Relation; and
before I proceed to Cape Bone Esperance in Africa, will make some stay in
Arabia Felix, in a Description of two of the most Famed Emporys and other parts
of that Kingdom, viz. Muscatt upon the Persian Gulf, and Mocha which lies upon
the Red Sea.

THE CITY OF MUSCATT IN Arabia Felix.
MVSCATT is a City in Arabia Felix, which lies to the Eastward of that Kingdom,
The Situation of Muscatt.
situated upon the Persian Gulf. Though none of the Arabia's are equally fruitful
as many other parts of the World that are less famed, yet this part of Arabia,
because of its Pleasantness and Fertility, in respect of the other two, has
obtained the name of Hyaman, which signifies Happy. For besides the great
increase of Cattle which is here to be seen; the Soil in some places is Rich
and Fruitful, and Corn and Wine, Fruits and fragrant Spices are produced in
great plenty. Arabian Goods.
It abounds with many useful and Beneficial Commodities, with several kinds of
Druggs, with Balsom and Myrrh, Incense, Cassia, Manna, Dates, Gold,
Frankincense and Pearl, and maintains a constant Trade of rare and valuable
Goods to Persia, Egypt, Syria, the Indies, etc. And Muscatt above all those
places which are situated near the Gulf of Ormus, is the Principal Town of
Traffic between the East, and that part of Arabia the Happy; only at one
Season of the Year, which is in June, July and August, the Pearl-Fishing of the
Island Baharem, which lies higher up in the Gulf, renders that place of more
Note and Fame, yielding to the Persian Emperor yearly, the value of Five
hundred Thousand Ducats, besides one hundred thousand more, which are supposed
to be diverted.

Muscatt lies under the Tropic.
Muscatt is Situate between the Capes of Raz al-Gate and Moccandon in 23
Degrees, 30 Min. North Latitude, exactly under the Tropic of Cancer. It Is
about three Miles in its Circumference, built at the bottom of a small Bay, Its
Extent.
encompassed with high Rocky Mountains, and guarded with a strong Wall. Besides
it is fortifyed with five or six Castles and Batteries, and lies very
convenient for Trade by its nearness to a safe Harbor.

Though this City lies at the utmost Bounds of the Suns progress toward the
North, The great Heat here.
yet it is infested with a more intense Heat than several places that are
nearer the Line. The Desert Ground and high Mountains reflect the warm Rays of
the Sun with so much vigor, that it may as justly challenge a Title to the
name of the Torrid Zone, as any place between the Tropicks; for some would
persuade us that it has a Title to the most literal meaning of these words, and
that a small Fish laid in the hollow part of a Rock, where the Sunbeams reflect
from every side, in the heat of the Day, and when the Sun is in the Zenith,
will be half Roasted in a little time by the Heat. Rains fall seldom.
It rains here but seldom, and in some places of Arabia, not above twice or
thrice in two or three Years; but the abundance of Dew which falls at Night
refreshes the Ground, supplies the Herbs with Moisture, and makes the Fruits
excellent.

The Muscatters (for the most part) are lean, and of a middle Stature, The
nature of the Inhabitants.
very swarthy in their Complexion, and not of very strong Voice. They are stout
and manly, and expert at the Bow and Dart, and since their engagement in the
War with the Portuguese, are excellent Marks-men, and very dexterous and ready
in the exercise of Firearms, in which they Employ always some part of the Day.

The Ground yields them variety of excellent Fruits, as Oranges, Lemons,
Citrons, Grapes, Apricocks and Peaches, and most sorts of Roots and green
Herbs: But the Staple Commodity of the Country is Dates, Dates the chief
Commodity.
of which there are whole Orchards for some Miles together. They have so much
plenty of this Fruit, for which they have so ready a vent in India, that
several Ships are sent thither loaded from hence without any other Cargo.

The Hills are bare.
The Hills are generally all steril and bare, and he that takes only a prospect
of them would conclude the Land quite uninhabitable, and unable to afford
either sustenance for Man or nourishment for Beast. For the Soil there
languishes for want of Moisture, and the ground is dried up like a barren
Wilderness; The Valleys fruitful.
the Earth brings forth neither Grass nor Flowers, nor Trees with either Leaves
or Fruit. But casting his Eyes down into the Valleys, he sees them all
flourishing and green, and covered with Vegetables fit for the Pleasure and
Refreshment of Animals, and very Beautiful to Admiration. There are Arable
Fields and green Pastures, Fruit Trees that look neither withered nor faded;
nothing there is Barren or Unprofitable, but bountiful Nature compensates with
the fruitfulness of the Valleys for the nakedness of the Hills; so that here,
if upon their Tops, a Man would be apt to think himself among the Lybian
Wastes; yet let him but descend lower, The Watering their Trees.
and he would fancy himself in the pleasant Fields of Tempe. All this is due to
the Industry of the People, who for want of Rains, are forced to water their
Gardens every Morning and Evening, by the labor of the Ox, who draws the Water
twice a day to the Root of every Tree in their Gardens. There are several
Channels cut out in the ground for the Water to run through, and at the Banks of
these Canals, the Trees are Planted near the Water for the Moisture and
Nourishment of the Roots, which together with the Mists that descend in the
Night time, preserve them fresh, and green, and very Fruitful.

Having spoke thus much of Arabia in general, of the Extent and Situation of
Muscatt, and the quality of its Climate, of the Stature and Complexion of the
Inhabitants, and nature of the Soil thereabouts; I will now relate one thing
observable concerning the Food of their Cattle, and will then proceed to an
Account of the Temperance and Justice of the Arabians of Muscatt, for which two
things they are more remarkable than any other Nation this day in the World.

Their Cattle here are fed with Fish, Fish the Food of their Cattle.
which is a sort of Food that seems as Unnatural for them as for Fish to live
upon Grass, which is the proper Meat for Cattle. But the Fish which they eat is
not fresh, and just taken out of the Sea, but when a great quantity of it is
caught, the Muscatrers dig a large Hole in the Ground wherein they put it,
'till it remains so long that it rotts and comes to a kind of Earth. After this
it is taken up, and boiled with Water in great Earthen Pots, which makes a kind
of thick Broth; and standing 'till it is cool, it is then given to the Cattle,
by which they grow extreme Fat, and yet their Flesh is very savory, not tainted
with either an ill Taste or Smell.

The Food of the Natives.
The Inhabitants of Muscatt feed promiscuously upon either Fish or Flesh; they
eat Beef, Mutton, Goat and Deer, and the Flesh of Camels is admired by them,
and is in repute for a Healthful sort of Meat. But they are very nice and
curious in killing those Animals on which they feed, and which they refuse to
taste 'till the Meat is cleans'd and washed from the Blood. They abound too in
many sorts of Fish, and are scrupulous in Eating of some kinds of them, such
especially as have no Scales, from which they totally refrain, and esteem the
Food of such as well as of Blood, an Abomination. The Soil affords abundance of
Wheat, which might be properly made use of for their Bread, but the Dates are
so plentiful, so pleasant and admired, that they mix them with all their Food,
and eat them instead of Bread, through all these parts of Arabia, both with
their Fish and Flesh.

But of all the Followers of Mahomet, and zealous Admirers of his four
principal Doctors, Abu Becre, Osman, Omar and Hali, none are so rigidly
Abstemious as the Arabians of Muscatt, The great Abstinence of the Natives.
as well from the Juice of the Grape, as other more common and innocent
Liquors. For Tea and Coffee which are judged the privileged Liquors of all the
Mahometans, as well Turks, as those of Persia, India, and other parts of
Arabia, are condemned by them as unlawful Refreshments, and abominated as
Bugbear Liquors, as well as Wine. He that would turn Advocate for any of these
sorts of Drink, and commend the Use of them as convenient for their Stomachs,
as fit to cheer their Hearts, and chase away Melancholy from their Spirits,
would be looked upon as a vile Contemner of their Law, and an Encourager of
Libertinism and Intemperance. They abhor likewise the smoking of Tobacco, and
the warm intoxicating Fumes of that Indian Weed, and constantly burn all that
they can find brought into their Country. Sugar, Water, and Orange mixed
together, which they call Sherbet, is their only Drink; such is their Antipathy
to all Liquors that are warm and strong, that in perfect Indignation they rased
a Jews House to the ground, that had only made some strong Waters. Therefore
they call themselves the strict Arabs, the Chaste Mahometans, the only true
Professors of the Mussulman-Law, and genuine followers of the Prophet. To this
degree of Abstinence they are all bred up, who are Natives of this Region
hereabouts; thus they abstain from all those sensible gratifications of their
Palates, which may any way inebriate their Faculties, and render the Mind dull
and unactive; and shun the Taste of any thing that may disturb their Person, or
raise up in them any irregular Appetites.

Nor is the Justice and Civil Conversation of the Arabians at Muscatt, Their
Extraordinary Justice and Civility.
less remarkable and to be admired, than their extreme Temperance and Sobriety.
The Governor of the City, who is nearly related to the King of the Country,
takes care that a strict Watch be kept in the Castle every Night, for the
safety of the City, and prevention of all Disorders that might happen. And will
not allow any Boat to go, or come ashore, or to row from Ship to Ship, either
before the Sun rises, or after it is down; to the end that all that Traffic
may do their Business while it is Day, that no man might dispose of his Goods
secretly, and shelter himself by the obscurity of the Night.

They forbid all Despotick Authority in private Families, No private Correction
in Families.
and the Arbitrary proceedings of either Masters or Parents toward their
Domestics. So that if either a Child or a Servant chance to transgress, let
the Crime be what it will, either more heinous, or less villainous, Public
Justice must determine the Punishment, and the Magistrates must interpose in
awarding the Penalty, and no man must lift up his Hand to punish any that
offends in his own Family. By this Economy in their Affairs, the Inferiors
are freed from the violence of all Splenitick Disgusts, and unreasonable
Severities of their Superiors. A Revengeful Master cannot vent his Passion at
his Pleasure upon his Servant, nor an unnatural Parent Beat and Chastise his
Son at his will: Complaint must first be made to the Magistrates of the place,
who being dispassionate and unprejudiced in their Tempers, examine the matter
with a still Mind, and Arbitrate calmly in the Case. No private Punishment is
ever inflicted in Muscatt and the adjacent parts; they cannot there think that
any Corrections are so equitable, as those that proceed from the deliberate
Sentence of unbyassed Men.

The way of punishing Malefactors.
If Murder or Theft, or any such execrable Crime is at any time committed among
them; which are seldomer here than in any other part of the World, the
Malefactor is never Punished with sudden Death, nor does any fatal hand touch
him, but his Sentence is, to be Immured, where he leasurely dies, between two
Walls. For they hate by any violent direct Death, to take away the life of any
Offender. Justice speedily administered.


They are never dilatory in their Administrations of Justice, nor vex the
Clients with tiresome Delays, but quickly determine in the Case, and dispatch
all matters that are brought before them. The Governor with fifty or sixty
more sit openly to the public view, whenever they do justice, which is not by
plurality of Voices, but all unanimously consent to the Sentence that is
pronounced.

These Arabians are very courteous in their Deportment, and extreme Civil to
all Strangers; they offer neither Violence nor Affront to any; and though they
are very tenacious of their own Principles, and Admirers of their own Religion,
yet do they never impose it upon any, nor are their Morals leven'd with such
furious Zeal, as to divest them of Humanity, and a tender Respect. The
extraordinary honesty of the Arabians.
A Man may travel hundreds of Miles in this Country, and never meet with any
abusive Language, or any Behavior that looks Rude. And if you happen to be
loaded with any Money in your Travels, you need no Arms to defend your Person,
nor any Guards to secure your Purse; for you may sleep with it in your Hands in
the open Fields, or lay it by you with safety as you repose your self in the
King's Highway. Captain Edward Say, who had lived among them at Muscatt for
several Years, and who affirmed all this Relation to be really true, had passed
from one part of the Country to another, some hundreds of Miles, and never was
troubled by any Person, though he slept sometimes in the Roads and Fields,
neither heard he of any that had been pillaged by Robbers all that while.

In fine, these are a People naturally Temperate and Just, and endued with
those excellent Qualities which the Grecian Philosophers and Roman Moralists
endeavored to inspire into their Subjects, though they missed of their aim. For
these are directly opposite in their Temper and manner of Life to those wild
Arabs, that haunt the Banks of Tigris, and sculk about near the River of
Euphrates, that live by Rapine, spoil and violence. I shall relate only one
remarkable Passage more, concerning the Justice and Kindness of these Arabs,
and leave this Theme.

When the forementioned Captain Say had unluckily lost his Ship on the Island
of Macira, The Arabians great kindness to Captain Say, after his Shipwreck.
which is near this Coast of Arabia; he and his Mariners were so fortunate that
they saved all their Lives, and got on Shore, though naked and in a very
distressed forlorn Condition. The sight of this deplorable Accident moved the
Arabs to Pity and Compassion toward them, and made them offer their Service,
by such Signs, as they thought might be most Intelligible, for assisting them
in the Recovery of those Goods that were on board the WracK. They were perfect
strangers both of them to each others Persons and Language, and therefore one
among the rest, who looked like the Governor, raised a heap of Sand, as they
sat near one another, upon the Shore, which he divided into three parts,
reserving two to himself, and offering the other to the Captain. But the
Captain esteeming it unequally proportioned, shook his Head, in token that he
disliked the Bargain. The Governor seeing this, adjusted the matter with more
equality, and divided the Heap of Sand into two parts only, one of which he
took to himself, and gave the other half to the Captain; which because he
thought it very fair, they shook Hands upon it, as a sign they were both well
contented. The Money which was brought on Shore, and saved from the Wrack, was
twelve or fourteen Thousand Pounds, which they contrived to divide in this
manner. They tied to a Stick two Baskets instead of a pair of Scales, and made
them as equipoize as they could, and by these they weighed each parcel that was
brought off from the Ship with great exactness; if there appeared any seeming
advantage in either Balance, the Governor forced that always upon the
Captain, so that he was not injured one Mite, nor in all that Account lost a
Farthing that was his Due. If the Inhabitants upon all the Coasts of Europe
were as Hospitable and Just to all Persons of their own Persuasion, as these
Arabians were to those of a strange Faith, and distant Nation, those that do
narrowly escape with their Lives from the Dangers of the Sea, would not so
often by a merciless People be so barbarously deprived of them at Land. The
King too in Compassion to his Miseries, required only 2 per Cent. for his
Goods, whilst he made other Strangers pay 4.

The Portuguese formerly were received by the Arabians at Muscatt, with
abundance of Civility and Candor, and allowed not only the freedom and Exercise
of their Religion, but encouraged to build a stately Church, and erect a
College, and were no way stinted in the Profession of their Faith, and
ostentation of their Pompous Worship. The Reason of the War of the Arabians
with the Portuguese.
The King granted them the freedom of the Port, by which they grew very
Powerful and Wealthy, and by that means Indulged themselves in Ease and Luxury,
built many fair Houses in the City to dwell in, and at length began to be so
Insolent and Unruly, that they openly abused that Civility which had
entertained them so friendly, despised that Government by which they had been
Protected, and endeavored to wrest the Authority out of the Hands of the Civil
Magistrate, and set up their own instead of it. The Arabs who are naturally
Civil and obliging, bore the repeated Insolences with great Patience, and were
loath to be drawn into any Quarrels or Debates with them, notwithstanding all
this turbulent Carriage of the Portuguese; 'till alarmed with the danger of
their City, and unable to endure their Affronts any longer, the King himself
appeared in Person with a numerous Army of resolute Arabs, with whom he set
down before the City. The Portuguese defended themselves against him with great
Courage for a long time, and shut themselves up in their Church and College,
which were converted into Cittadels for their Safeguard, because they were
strong. But the Arabs at length blocking up all the Avenues whereby they might
expect any Succor either by Sea or Land, and placing themselves upon heights
which overlooked the Fortifications of the Enemy, who received no Relief either
from Goa or Cong, as they expected; the Portuguese at length betook themselves
privately to two or three of their Ships which lay in the Harbor, and made
their Escape that way. The Holes of the Gunshot which the Arabs made in the
Church and College of the Portuguese, during the time or the Siege, are yet
visible. Since this Rebellion, there arose an invincible Hatred between these
two Nations, that were thus at variance; so that they are always designing upon
each others Lives and Estates wherever they meet. The Arabians are a Stout,
Courageous, Hardy Nation, and will in nothing, give place to the Portuguese,
and generally are Victorious, and prevail against them as often as they Attack
each other at Sea. The Portuguese are mightily sunk, as well in their Courage,
as in their Fame and Fortune, and are found to be such contemptible Enemies,
that they are seldom discoursed of, but with Reproach, by the name of
Gallina's, i. e. Hen-hearted Fellows. The Arabs carry in some of their Ships
above 500 Men, go out in Fleets, and are so very strong in their Naval Forces,
that the Portuguese generally endeavor to avoid them, and never dispute it
with them but with great Advantage on their side. The Arabs kindness to their
Enemies.
All the Prisoners of War are made Slaves of on both sides; and those that are
taken by the Inhabitants of Muscatt, are used so very kindly, that they are
tempted almost to be in love with their Confinement, and are never used with
any such Hardships, so as to be forct to attempt an Escape by Flight. They
neither correct them like Slaves, nor impose upon them any servile work, but
maintain them in Ease and Idleness, with a certain allowance of Provisions
every day. Of such inconquerable Generosity are these Arabians even to their
very Enemies! And though they sometimes persuade them to their own Faith, and to
turn Mahometans, it is never but with Mildness, with gentle Allurements, and
Hopes of Reward.

I will here insert a short Account of the taking of Captain Edward Say by the
Sanganians, who Inhabit a Country opposite to the Arabian Shore, and then pass
over to the other Coast of Arabia the Happy, which borders upon the Red Sea.

Captain Says Captivity by Pirates.
This Commander, after his Shipwreck upon the Island Macira, and a tedious stay
among the Arabians at Muscatt, set Sail from thence to the Island of Bombay in
the Company of eighteen or twenty Ships bound for Suratt, and other parts of
India. After they had been some time at Sea they parted Company, and the Ship
wherein the Captain had embarked, espied a little after, two Sail to windward
of them, as far as they could see from the top-Mast-Head, which made all the
Sail they could after them, and thereby forced them to bear away right before
the Wind with all the Sail they had; and to lighten their Ship so as that she
might the better escape them, they cut away their Boat which was towed a stern,
and threw abundance of valuable Goods overboard. But the two Ships
notwithstanding this, outsaild them, and as they came up toward them, the
Black Seamen descried them by their Colors, to be Sanganians. They gave the
Captain Chase all the Day long 'till four a Clock in the Afternoon, who fired
the Stern-Chase with his four Guns all the while; at length they shot his Man
at the Helm through the Head, and laid him on board in the Midships, entering 70
or 80 Men with Sword and Target. The Black Sailers, who were thirty, leapt
overboard to save their Lives, leaving the Ship to the Captain and his two
Servants. The Throat of one of them was immediately cut, and as they came in
fury to hew down the Captain, and slay him instantly, as they had done his
Servant, he fended off the fatal Blow by receiving it on his Hand, which was
cut half off through the dint and violence of the Stroke. While they were thus
eager for his Destruction, and intent in taking away his Life, they espied a
Rich Prize which diverted their Fury and Design; for the Captain wore a set of
Gold Buttons upon his Coat, which they presently flew at upon the first sight,
and were so zealous for the Purchase, that he ransomed his Life by the price of
his Gold. They stripped him as naked as an Indian Faquir, excepting only a small
piece of a shirt to cover his Nakedness, and left him in that Santone-like
Condition for two Months, without either Hat to his Head, or Shoe to his Foot.
One of the Sanganian Ships which had made them a Prize, was of some Force, she
carried ten Guns and 150 Men; the other was only a small Galley of no more than
four Guns and 50 Men, whereby the Captain who had resisted them stoutly for
some time, being easily overpowered, was forced to surrender. The Sanganians
after the Dispute wat over, finding no more resistance, grew compassionate and
kind, and refresht the Captain with Water and Opium, Opium a refreshment.
which was the Nourishment they found most proper for themselves after any hard
Labor or Languishment of Spirit, and the speediest Relief for decayed Nature.
They were much concerned too for the Cure of his Hand, which was in danger of
being lost by the deepness of the Wound, and applied to it Loaf Sugar to stop
the Bleeding, and something else to keep the Wound clean; after which the Wool
of a Sheep's Back, and the Oil of their Lamps, without any other Medicines, in
a short time thoroughly perfected the Cure.

The Ship was taken near the Island of Bombay, which made them spend a Month in
Sailing before they Arrived in their own Country. When they drew near Aramra,
which was the Port to which they designed, they according to Custom, fired a
Gun belonging to the Captain's Ship, to salute their Country and Relations; in
which the Captain had hid 1500 Venetians, to secure them from the Rapine of the
Pirates, thinking them safe in that strong Hold, but were by this means
unluckily lost; which made it a very costly Salute to our poor Commander, of
whose Money they discharged near 700 l. at one Shot.

The Queen of the Country, after she heard of their Arrival, sent a Messenger
for the Captain to bring him up to Court, whither he traveled for two or three
Miles without Covering either to his Head or Feet, very ill equipt to appear in
the Presence of a Queen. When he came in this distress before her Majesty, she
spoke to him by a Portuguese Interpreter, who inquired of him by the Queen's
directions, which of her People they were that had his Moneys; which he
answered he could not tell. Then she threatened to keep him a perpetual Exile
from his Country, and for his further Comfort, would allow him only Salt Water
to drink.

It happened about a Month before this time, that a Portuguese Ship with a
Priest and his Images had been taken and brought into this Harbor, which
because they were devoutly Revered by that Nation, therefore did the Queen
imagine, that all Europeans had them in the same Religious Esteem: And because
that the Captain was inflexible to her other Menaces, she ordered the Image of
the Virgin Mary, with those of two or three Saints more, about a Foot high, to
be brought before him, and told him if he would but yield to kiss them, she
would give credit to what he said. The Captain who was a very Rational Man, and
bred out of the Road of Romish Superstition, was neither so sparing of his
Civilities, as to forbear a Complement to the piece of Wood, nor of such
unrefin'd Principles as to give it a Religious Adoration, but was ready either
to kiss or burn it, which they pleased, since he had an assurance of his
Release upon such easy terms, and therefore kissed it very freely; and after
two or three days stay here, where he fed upon Rice and Water, and lay in the
Night time with the Cattle, he was dismissed. The Captains release.
A while after they sent him aboard his Vessel for a day or two, which lay in
the Harbor, and gave him along with him about twelve Pints of Wheat, the
Sweepings of the Ship, to sustain him in his Voyage to Suratt; but he embarked
upon an Arabian Ship which was then loading for Muscatt, in which he was
carried to that City.

Aramra.
Aramra, where the Captain was brought in Prisoner, lies opposite to the
Arabian Shore, between Sindy and Cape Jugatt, a little distance from Diu, which
belongs to the Portuguese. The Country of these Sanganians lies between those
vast Empires of Persia, which is on the West, and Indiston, which borders upon
it on the East. They are great Pirates, and live by those Prizes which they
take at Sea, where they range from the Streights of Ormus to the Gulf of
Cambay, and down the Malabar Coast, Cruising about from one place to another,
where any hopes of Booty invites them forward. They infest all the Western
Coasts of India, and though their Ships are of no great Force, yet they are
seldom taken because they are made so well for Sail, that they are ready to run
when they see a Vessel of any Countenance; and those they think they are able
to Encounter, they endeavor to make of them a Prey.

Though the Principles of these Saganians are so far leven'd with Fraud and
Injustice, An instance of Justice in these Sanganian Pirates.
that they wholly devote themselves to a life of Piracy, and subsist by the
Spoil of the Innocent Traffickers at Sea, yet have they not all divested
themselves of their obligations to all kinds of Justice, but are very faithful
to what they promise, and inviolable observers of their Word; as our Captain
had occasion to try by an Experiment very successful and advantatagious. For
being robbed of all his Wealth, but an hundred Checkins which were privately
hid in some part of the Ship, his Cook came to him and acquainted him, that the
Boatswain of the Man of War, who was put in Commander in chief on Board them,
would engage to return him half of whatever Money was committed to his Custody.
The Captain delivered to him an hundred pieces of Gold, which the Boatswain
tied in a small bit of Cloth, with a small Line to it and a Bouy at the end of
it, and threw it overboard. For every Man was searched before they went
ashore, and not suffered to come from aboard, 'till the Vessel was unladed. The
day following, the Boatswain went overboard in quest of the Bag he had dropped
in the Ocean, and after a little search found it, and delivered half of the
Gold to the Captain; at which the Captain was so well pleased, being wholly at
his Mercy, and in that distress, that he offered him ten pieces as a gratuity,
which the Boatswain rejected for this Reason, because he told him he would keep
his word according to his Promise.

I shall now proceed to an Account of Mocha, and other remarkable Places
situated upon the Red Sea, according to the Method I lately proposed.

MOCHA, And other Remarkable Places Upon the RED SEA.
I Shall here give the Reader a short View of Mocha, and other places of Note
and Traffic, which border upon the Red Sea on the Arabian side, The
Introduction.
in the full extent of it from the Island of Socatra, where it begins to mix
with the Oriental Sea, or Indian Ocean, to the very Head of it, which reaches
to that Isthmus, or Neck of Land which divides Asia from Africa. I shall not
detain him with any tedious Description of these places, or run out in
expatiating upon their Government and Laws, the Manners and Customs of their
Inhabitants, or their Strength and Polity, but only lead him along the Shore,
and give him a view of the Harbors as we Coast along, to prevent all
Miscarriage at his first entering into these Ports, many of which are scarce
known to the Navigators of Europe. A fuller Account of these Parts may be
expected from another Hand; from Mr. Edward Clyve, who by his Personal
Observations is qualified not only for confirming all this Relation, but also
is furnished with such Remarks, as enable him for a larger performance, in a
clear and ample Account of what is yet unknown, and very worthy the public
Notice, among these People.

I shall observe no other Method in this Relation, than what Nature has chalkt
out to us in the Situation of the Towns, which shall briefly be described
according as they lie upon the Seacoast.

Why called the Red Sea.
And shall begin with the Arabian Gulf, or Red Sea, the reason of which Name is
perplexed with variety of Opinions and different Conjectures; for Antiquity (we
find) did not confine the Name of the Red Sea, only to that narnow Channel
which divides Arabia from Africa, and gives a boundary to some parts of those
Ancient Kingdoms, but included also the Persian Gulf, and all the Seas about
Arabia, and all that vast Tract of Ocean which extends from Cape bone
Esperance, even beyond the River Ganges: And the later Western Writers have
limited it only to this Gulf, because it lies the nearest, and was first
discovered to them. Therefore they contend, that because King Erythros, who was
Master of this Sea, was interred in one of its Islands, it obtained the Name of
Mare Erithraeum, which signifies the Red Sea, and the Latins and others from
thence, have retained the same Appellation. Some fancy that the redness of the
Sand or Coral, which lie at the Bottom, or the redness of its Waters; and
others affirm that the strong reflection of the Sun's Beams upon the Surface, or
the redness of the Neighboring Hills, might justly occasion the immposition of
this Name. Herodotus takes notice of a place hereabouts, called Erythrobolus,
or the Red Soil, which might Countenance another Opinion. In the Hebrew this
Sea is called Suph, or the Sea of Weeds, because according to Kimchi, there
grew abundance of Weeds upon the sides of it.

The length of the Red Sea.
This Gulf runs from 12 Degrees No. Latitude to 29, and farther, most of it
along the Shore of Arabia the Happy, which is a large Peninsula, as it stands
divided from the other two Arabia's.

The time of the Ships coming toward Mocha.
The Ships from Suratt that Sail for the Red Sea take their departure generally
about March, and Arrive at Mocha toward the latter end of April, or before the
20th of May; at which time, (or as the Moon Changes, or is in the Full) the
Winds vary, and prevent any more Ships entering into the Sea that Year. In their
Passage at that time of the Year, they generally make the Island of Socatra,
and keep under Cape Guardifeu and the Abasseen Coast, to escape the danger of
those impetuous Currents that run strong on the Arabian Shore.

Socatra.
The Island of Socatra lies 12 Degrees. 30 M. No. and is subject to the King of
Casseen, one of whose Sons is always placed in the Government, whose main
Revenue arises from the Aloes, Dragons-Blood, and Goats and Cows Skins, which
are sent every Year either to Seer or Casseen. The Road here is very good, when
once the Danger is past in entering into it, and that is easily evaded by the
Pilots, who are always ready to conduct the Ships with safety into the Harbor.
To the Eastward of this Island is very good Anchorage, but the Water is neither
Healthful, nor is there any great store of Provisions. They exceed all their
Neighbors in the quantity and Art of making Butter, and furnish with it
Casseen and Seer, sometimes Mocha and Aden with that valuable Commodity. Their
Ships for Traffic are very few, not above 6 or 7 Grabbs or Gelva's belonging
to the Island, most of which are employed upon the King's Account. The Natives
are of a swarthy Complexion, and of civil Demeanor, and would gladly invite
the English to a settlement among them, but the meanness of the Trade will not
permit them to accept the Profer.

Cape Guardifeu.
Opposite to this Island upon the Main of Africa is Cape Guardifeu, which is
very remarkable Land, and lies in 12 Degrees. No. Lat. The Reason of mentioning
this Cape is, because most Ships that come for this Sea in April, or later,
desire for their safety to make that Land or Promontory. Mount Felix.
Near this is Mount Felix, which is only a small Mountain, but shows it self in
appearance at a distance, like a small Island, yet joins the Main by low Land;
and the Ships keeping their Course along this Shore for about 150 Miles
Westward from the Cape, at length they espy a small white Island, from whence
they cross the Gulf toward Aden on the Arabian Shore, which now follows in
order to be described.

Upon this Coast of Arabia, are variety of places noted for Traffic, the first
of which that I shall here take notice of is Dofar, Dofar.
which is situated toward the Eastern part of this Sea. The King of this place
Ingages now and then in small Skirmishes, and Martial Disputes with his
Neighboring Princes, the Kings of Seer and Casseen, but their Contests are
seldom very Bloody. And his People are inured but very little to the Laws of
Hospitality and Kindness, The nature of the Inhhabitants.
but are injurious in their Commerce, and Villainous to Strangers. The Country
produces only some Olibanum, Coco-Nuts and Butter. The Religion of the Natives
is Mohammedan, of which they are such zealous Admirers, and are heated with such
extatick Warmths, that they are not ashamed sometimes to pretend even to
Inspiration, especially when they are seized with a sit of Dancing. For among
them prevails a particular Custom of Dancing with so much pains and Zeal, A
violent Enthusiastic sort of Dance.
so much fervency and Passion, that their strength decays, and their Spirits
fail them through those violent Motions, and being at length quite spent, they
fall as it were quite dead upon the Ground. All the while this merry Humor
does possess them, they cry aloud, God is a great God, the only God, and
Mahomet his Prophet, and fill the Air with such like pious and devout
Expressions of their Law, 'till they are not able any longer to speak or stand.
While they lie thus lifeless, as it were, and intranc'd upon the Ground, they
talk, they say, with God and the Prophet, who Communicates to them Divine
Revelations; and the credulous Multitude who are easily persuaded to give
assent to what they say, firmly believe that they are Heavenly Inspired. This
is done in imitation, as I conceive, and to countenance the Practice of their
False Prophet, who wisely contrived that a Bodily Disease should pass for the
Infusion of the Spirit; and being subject to the Falling Sickness, declared
that those Swoonings were Heavenly Raptures, in which he conversed familiarly
with the Angel Gabriel.

Casseen.
Next to this place Westward is Casseen, which stands in 15 Degrees. No. The Road
here in the Western Mussouns is very safe, but it lies open to the Eastward.
The Town looks mean, and is no way beautified with stately Edifices, nor made
strong by Fortifications, only it is dignified sometimes with the residence of
the King, when his Revenues come from Socatra. For as his Royalties are very
small, and his Income inconsiderable, because his Subjects are both Poor and
Slavish; so is he hereby debarred from maintaining a Princely Pomp, or making a
show in any Magnificent Appearance, and therefore very often turns Merchant
himself, for hopes of Advantage, and for supporting his Royal State and
Grandeur. Several Gelva's come hither freighted with Rice, Its Commodities.
Dates, Camlees, which are a sort of Hair Coats made in Persia, and Red and
White Callicoes; which are bartered for Olibanum, Aloes and Butter. For the
Necessities of the Natives incline them rather to an Exchange of Commodities,
than a Traffic for Silver, which loses its Esteem here, as much as it is
Idolized in other parts. Some Coins however are current among them, viz.
Dollars, Abassees, and Mamoodees. Seed used here instead of Coin.
That which is here esteemed instead of Money, is a sort of Seed, which passes
in the room of small Coins, and is distributed commonly by handfuls. Here the
Natives are mainly addicted to those mean Vices of Cozenage and stealth, and
think, they make a good purchase of any thing, which they can compass by Fraud
and Cheating. Another sin to which they are often given, is so vile, that the
foulness of it I cannot without Immodesty mention. The proper Season of the
Year for Trade is May, June and July.

Seer.
A place next to this, much more noted both for the Civil Deportment of the
Natives, and for the Convenience of a Port, for a greater concourse of People,
and for Traffic, is Seer, which is much frequented by Ships from several
Ports, viz. Muscatt, Gombroon, Suratt, and Gella, and some other places on the
Abasseen Shore; from whence they bring Butter, Myrrh and Slaves; and those from
Muscatt and Suratt transport with them Olibanum, Aloes, and what the Port
affords.

Aden.
Aden, which is situated in 12 degrees. 20 m. No. is one of the Ancientest, Fairest
and most Pleasant Cities of all Arabia, surrounded with Walls on one side, and
Mountains on the other. It was formerly in the Possession of the Portuguese,
when they were renowned for their Conquests in the East, but by Treachery, the
Turks made themselves the Masters of it, after some time, 'till the puissant
King of Hyaman became Victorious over the Turks, and seized it for his own
Inheritance. This Prince is here Invested with the Title of the King of Hyaman,
(or Yeoman, as the Natives seem to pronounce it) which signifies Arabia Felix;
not that his Dominions stretch so far, but because the extent of his
Territories and vast Treasures, do much exceed all the rest of the Kings that
inhabit Arabia. For his Kingdom reaches near 400 Miles on the Red Sea, from
Aden as far as Geron.

Aden formerly surpassed all the rest of the Neighboring Ports upon this
Shore, Formerly Noted for Traffic.
was a famous Magazine for the various Commodities of India, Persia, Arabia,
and what was brought hither by the Abasseens; and was Inhabited by a Miscellany
of People, Turks, and Arabians, Persians, Indians and Ethiopians, who resided
here for the Advantages of that mighty Trade. The Houses were built both neat
and strong, and the Castles from the top of the Mountains afforded a curious
divertive Prospect: Nature gave it such a fortified Situation, that it was a
Garrison without Art, and was able to defend it self with a small Force, from a
potent Enemy that might Invade it, either by Sea or Land. 'Till the Eastern
Luxury which is more intent upon Indulgence and Ease, than building Forts and
raising Sieges, made them neglect their Fortifications, and leave it open and
defenseless for the first bold Assailant. The proper Months for Trade here, are
April, May, June, July, Months proper to Trade in.
and some part of August, at which time all the Ships in the Sea take their
Departure, because of the Change of the Mussouns, which always happen toward
the end of that Month. They carry nothing from hence, but Coffee, Aloes,
Olibanum and Myrrh; the three last of which are not the product of the Country.

I should now take leave of this place, and proceed to give some account of
Mocha, were it not convenient, before my departure, to insist a little upon the
Discovery of some Ports and Passages hereabouts, to instruct such as design to
Travel into these Seas.

The Land of Aden, because it makes like an Island, was formerly reputed to
have been one; from whence steering W. and W. by N. you will come to the Babbs,
which in the Arabian Language, signifies Gate or Door. The Babbs is a small
Island opening to the Red Sea, The Babbs.
and makes in form very like a Garr-Fish, being low and flat. Between this and
the Main Land, is a safe Passage, if you keep the Mid-Channel, where is 10, 11
and 12 fathom Water. But the great Ships for better Security, choose rather to
go on the outside, where is seldom less than Forty Fathom, 'till they hale in
for Shore, which is commonly done, as soon as they are past the Streights. Here
are seven Islands, but none of them so remarkable as the Babbs. The Streights
here are commonly called those of Babel Mandel, Babell-Mandell.
which are about 7 Leagues over from main Land to main Land, about 20 Leagues
from Aden, and 12 or 13 from Mocha. The Course from the Babbs is about N. by
West, and N. North West.

Before you come to these Streights, you will make a very high Table Land, and
an opening to the Southward of it; which appears very like the passage into the
Red Sea; but then you will discover the said Babbs Island to rectify you,
through which steering North, or N. by W. as you see occasion; there is opening
to the Southward of the said high Land, a great River that leads to Gella,
which is the greatest Port on the Abasseen side without the said Babbs.

Steering up the Arabian Coast before the Arrival at Mocha, is a seeming Wood,
which is several Date-Trees and Gardens, to the Northward of which is Mocha,
which yields a more beautiful prospect at Sea, than on Shore. Here you must not
come into less than 7 Fathom, nearer are so many dangerous Over-falls, that
they will be apt to scare a young unexpert Pilot. When the Southermost Mosque
is once brought to bear, E. by S. the Ships may luff up, or bear into the Road,
and Anchor in 4, 5, 6, or 7 Fathom. Before this Road lies a long Ridge of
Sands, which has seldom above two Fathom Water, which renders it dangerous for
those that enter to go in, 'till they have the Bearings abovesaid.

Near the Southern Fort is a Channel, for the Grabbs that use these parts, that
gives them a passage in or out; but is dangerous for Europeans without the
assistance of Pilots.

Mocha, its great Trade
Mocha lies in 13 Degrees. 30 M. North, and has been of late the principal Port in
the Red Sea, and to which Ships Traffic from Surat, Cambay, Dieu, Malabar, and
other parts of India. Hither also come the Ships from several parts of Europe;
England, Holland, France, Denmark, Portugal; Portugal; as also from Casseen,
Socatra, Muscatt, and all the Gulf of Persia, which bring hither the Products
of their several Countries; and are met by the Merchants of Barbary, Egypt,
Turkey, by the Abasseens, Arabians, etc. who buy off their Goods for ready
Money, and make little other Returns but Coffee, Sena, and some Aloes,
Hepetica, and other small things of no great moment.

The Custom paid for their Goods by the Europeans is 3 per Cent. The Custom
upon Goods.
both out and in, and they are prviledged to lay their Goods in their Houses
which they vent here, without being constrained to bring them to the
Custom-House. The Goods of all other Merchants are Examined, and the Customs
stated, which are 5 per Cent. that is 2 per Cent. more, than what is required
from the Europeans. This was formerly done in favor to those Merchants, but is
of late turned much to their prejudice.

If the Europeans bring hither any Cloth or piece Goods, they are some of them
opened to discover what kind they are of, and that a just Account of them may
be carried to the Governor. But the Custom for them is paid according only to
what they are sold and bought at, which is accepted by the Governor; but then
if the Broker falsifies in his Accounts, and is ever found guilty of fraudulent
Returns, he smarts severely, and is fleeced for it after the Ships departure.

Whatever Commodities are bought or sold by Weight, must be brought to the
Scales at the Custom-House, by which both Parties must be determined. The
Weights here are those that follow, The Wrights and Measures.
viz.

C. Q. L. Bahars are English, 3 3 or 420. Frassells are 15 to one Baharr 28
Manns 10 to one Frassel. Fuckeas 40 to one Mann. Coffila's 10 to one Fuckea.

Dry Measure are these, viz. Teman is 40 Memeeda's. Medeeda is 3 Pints English.


By this Medeeda they sell Oil, Butter and Liquids; but it yields not above two
Pints and of Corn, etc. in dry Measures. They measure their Cloth, Silk, etc.
by a Covit or Guz, which is 24 Inches, and Buy our Cloth by the Piece, of
which they measure 4 or 5 together, and take our Accounts and Packers Marks.

Their Coins are Dollars of all sorts, but they abate 5 per Cent. The Coins
on Pillar Dollars, because they esteem their Silver not very pure. The Dollar
Weight with them is 17 Dr. 14 Gr. as it is only 17 D. and 12 Gr. with us. All
their Coins are taken by Weight, and valued according to their fineness, and of
Gold they have several sorts, viz.

The Ducket of Venice. Germany. Barbary. Turkey. Egypt, etc.


The Comassees are a small Coin valued according to the Governments Pleasure;
but they keep their Accounts by an imaginary Coin of Cabeers, reckoning 80 to a
Dollar.

The Reason of the decay of Trade here.
The Natives were very civil and courteous to the English, especially 'till the
Year 1687, when the War commenced between the English and the Mogul, which was
so severe among the poor Moor Merchants, and such a disturbance and loss to the
Innocent Indians that Traded hither, that it has quite (in a manner) destroyed
the Traffic of this Port, and driven the Trade to several other parts in this
Sea. This War has since occasioned the utter Ruin of several Indian, Turkey,
and Arabian Merchants. For when the English Sailers at that time perceived the
softness of the Indian Lascarrs; how tame they were to all their Cruelties, how
patient and submissive to their Force and Arms, and how willingly they endured
the spoiling of their Goods, rather than engage their Lives in a bloody
Contest; they no sooner returned for England, but they Embarked again upon a
new Design with some more Europeans to turn Pirates, and rob these harmless
Traffickers in the Red Sea. And accordingly in the Year 1691, they took from
the Merchants that Traded between Mocha and Suratt to the value of 120000 l.
The succeeding Year they did the same; and at this time there are two or three
small Ships more upon the quest for Rich Prizes, and making seizure of those
Ships they meet with; which has so impoverished already some of the Mogul's
People, that they must either cease to carry on a Trade, or resolve to be made
a Prey. Though the Mogul cannot justly charge the E. India Company with the
barbarous Actions of these Pirates, yet the unhappy occasion of it may be very
apt to excite in him very Ireful Resentments, because of the Misery of so many
of his Subjects. And the English at Suratt have been already made sensible of
some Inconveniences and Hardships consequent upon it, by their Imprisonment in
their Factory twice in two Years, while I stayed there.

Coffee is the only Commodity in repute in this Port, Coffee.
of which there is no scarcity at all. It grows in abundance at Beetlefuckee,
Sonany, Asab, and other parts; but from these it seldom comes grabled, or well
packt, which puts the Buyers upon a new Trouble. It may be bought one Year with
another, at about 45 Dollars per Baharr, and shipped. It is ripe at a proper
Season of the Year, and is subject to Blasts, as our Corn and Fruits are. It
thrives near the Water, and grows in Clusters like our Holly-Berries; the Berry
it self resembles a Bay-Berry; two of which are enclosed in one Shell, which
separates when it is broken. The Leaf of it is like a Lawrel's in bigness, but
very thin. The Tree it self neither shoots out in largeness, nor is very long
productive of Fruit, but is still supplied by new planting of others. This
Commodity is proper only to these Parts, and, as the Arabs tell us, is by the
Bounty of Heaven given only to them, as a means to procure for them all those
Necessaries, which they stand in need of from other parts. Few Commodities of
any value are here besides, except Sena, some quantity of which may be bought,
and very cheap; as also Aloes Hepetica. From Casseen, Seer, and Socatra, come
Aloes Socatra, and Olibanum; from Gella and other parts on the Abasseen Shore,
Mirrh; from Socachim, Elephants Teeth, and Gold Dust, which are bought by the
Merchants of India.

Moseck is distant N. W. Moseck:
from Mocha about 10 Leagues, and is of no importance for Trade, except it be
for Salt, since Mocha drew the Indian Merchants from it, and drein'd its
Commerce; for the City of Mocha cannot boast of its Foundation above two
hundred Years. This Port is situated near Zebid and Beetlefuckee, but Hodeeda
is supplied with Coffee from several places of Note for that Commodity.

Jutor was formerly a burning Island, Jutor.
and is at present uninhabited, and is distant from Mooseek about 3 Leagues.

Hodeeda is placed in about 14 d. 50 m. Hodeeda.
and is distant from Mocha about 60 Miles. In this is a Creek very covenient
for Building Grabbs or Gelva's, and it is likewise very happy in a Port, in
which is shipped abundance of Coffee for Judda, Mocha, and other places. It is
under the Government of Lohia, the next Port of moment upon the Main.

Comoran, Comoran.
is an Island which is blessed by Nature with a favorable Soil and advantageous
Situation, but unfortunate in the Entertainment of Villainous Inhabitants, who
are Uncharacterized with no better Names, than that of Robbers, or Bandittoes. It
lies in 15 Degrees. 20 M. and is about 10 Miles long, and two broad. Ships of the
greatest Burden may Anchor safely, in a Bay or Road which lies on the
Eastermost side of it, not subject to any danger by violent frets of Wind, or
Tempestuous blustering Weather. It is Fortified with a Castle, in which are
some few Guns and Men; and it produces no Commodities of considerable
Advantage, but supplies the Ships with good Water, Goats and Fish. The Passage
from hence to the Main, is not above an English Mile.

Since the Port of Mocha was disturbed by the English Ships in the Indian War,
and the Merchants Goods which were bound for Suratt, were there seized on by
Captain A -- s, This struck such Terror in all those People that were formerly
wont to Trade thither, that they declined the Port, and removed the Trade to a
Town not very remote from it, Lohia.
named Lohia, which is situated in 15 Degr. 4 m. and is now grown into that
Credit which Mocha had, and draws to it both the adjacent Merchants, and the
Ships from India and other parts. The entrance into the Harbor here, is
difficult and dangerous without Pilots, but the Port is noted for its
Convenience and Trade in small Vessels, and Ships for Judda. It is honored too
with the Residenc of the Governor of all this part of the Country, and the
Island before mentioned.

Gezon, which lies in 17 Degrees. No. Gezon.
is the last Town of Note upon this Coast, appertaining to the King of Arabia
Felix. It Is eminent for its Trade of Pearl-Fishing, which is managed by
Bannians, with that Advantage, that they raise themselves thereby to very great
Estates. The Island Fersham, Fersham famous for Pearl-Fishing.
which is situated from hence about 3 Leagues, is most remarkable for this
Fishing, wherein the Natives are employed by the Bannians. The Town it self is
small, and only considerable for this Pearl-Fishing, and for sending a great
quantity of Corn to all parts of Arabia Felix. From hence to Comphida, is no
Port of Moment, or that is any way remarkable for Traffic; and if there were
some convenient Harbors in this distance, the Wild Arabs, who are expert
Robbers and live by Spoil, and inhabit those parts, would certainly divert all
Merchants from coming near them.

The next place as we ascend toward the Head of the Red Sea is Comphida, which
lies in 19 Degrees. Comphida.
5 M. It was formerly subject to the Turks, and its present Governor commands
only about 50 Soldiers, which carries only a Face of Command to keep the
People in awe, but is more probably designed for prevention of the stealing of
Custom, because many persons choose to land here, and from hence travel by Land
to Mecca.

Judda.
Judda is the principal Port in this Sea, beloning to the Grand Signior, lying
in about 21 Degrees. 30 M. This Port is environed with dangerous Sands, which make
the Passage into it difficult to Strangers, but is very safe for Ships when
they come to an Anchor. The Air is healthful, and its Provisions sound and
plentiful, for it affords choice Mutton, Beef, Fish, Grapes and other Fruits.
It is the Seaport to Mecca, Mecca very Barren.
a place Renowned for the Nativity of Mahomet, the vile Impostor, who first
drew Breath in this Barren Soil. And indeed the Land about that place is so
useless and unprofitable, and unfit for any Improvements, that it seems to be
accursed by Nature, and debarred of Heaven's Blessings, by a constant scarcity
of all things, unless they are imported from other Kingdoms. Therefore is the
Grand Signior obliged to very great Expenses, for its support, to furnish out a
Maintenance for it yearly from Egypt, and send from thence 20 or 25 Sail of
large Ships, laden with Provisions, Money, etc. for its subsistence and the
support of Trade.

Judda flourishes in a constant Traffic from India, Persia, other parts of
Arabia, and the Abasseen Shore; it is subject to the Turkish Government, and
defended by their Arms and Valor; for its Fortifications otherwise, are but
very weak, being only surrounded by Mud-Walls. A Gate through which no Christian
must pass.
There is a passage into this Town three ways, by so many Gates, two of which
are not considerable, but the third which is the Principal, and leads toward
the celebrated Birthplace of the Prophet, is so sacred, that no Christian must
pass through it without forfeiture of his Religion, and Converting to the
Profession of the Mohammedan Law. Except he be a Man of Wealth, and then his
Soul is not so valuable as his Money, which will freely be taken in Exchange
for it, and makes all Offenses venial here.

Hither the Arabians bring their Coffee, which is bought here by the Turks, and
shipped for the Sues. The Dollar weight here is 17 D. 10 Gr. Hither likewise
resort every Year several Hoggees from all parts of the Mohammedan Countries,
who come hither as Pilgrims in a Spirit of Devotion, to visit their Famed City
Mecca. And as soon as they are Arrived here, or at Yamboe, which is a Port a
little higher in this Sea, they instantly strip themselves, out of a humor of
mortification, and set out in a holy Pilgrimage for Mecca, with only a Longee
about their middle, which is a piece of Callicoe about 3 Yards length But I
leave off from any Description of these Customs, being engaged only to proceed
in an Account of their Ports. From hence therefore the Ships Sail in November
and December for the Sues, to which the Passage is rendered very tedious by
their coming to an Anchor every Night. For Rocks and Sands, which are very
numerous between these two Places, must needs be very dangerous to Pilots, that
trust only to their outward Senses, and are guided by the Eye, without any use
of either Lead or Line, or Compass. They place themselves upon the Ships
Fore-Castle, to espy the Color and Ripplings of the Water, and to direct them
clear of all the Shoals. The Anchoring places all along this Coast are very
good, but the Towns are few, because the Country is much disturbed by the Wild
Arabs, whose Life is a Pilgrimage of Rapine and Spoil. Therefore if the Wind
shifts at Noon, or if they cannot reach their Port before the Night comes on,
they certainly bear away to the Port from whence they came, if there is no
Harbor nearer.

From Judda to Yamboe, Yamboe.
which is the next Port of any note, is reckoned above 10 Leagues, for it is
situate in 25 Degrees. 10 M. The Harbor is safe for Ships when they have once
escaped the Passage into it which is dangerous, by reason of the many Shoals
and Sands. The Castle with which the Town is fortified, is rather built for a
Terror to the petty Insolences of the Arabs, than as a Fort of Defense against
a powerful warlike Enemy. This Town, which is reputed very Ancient, has lost
abundance of its former Glory, in that it once was dignified with the Title of
Chief Port for the City Mecca, but is now confined a Seaport only to Medina,
the Burying-place of their Victorious and Triumphant Prophet; from which it is
distant about four Days Journey. The adjacent Country produces little but
Grapes, for the use of the Natives, and of the Ships; therefore Stores and
Provisions for Medina are here unloaded, that are brought for that end in Ships
from Sues.

From hence is nothing remarkable besides the Barrenness and strangeness of the
Country, 'till we come to the narrowing of the Sea which is next Mount Sinai;
the Cape of which Sea is called Ross Mahomed, or the Head of Mahomet; from
which to Tor, which is the Port of Mount Sinai, is about seven Leagues, and
about the same distance from the Egyptian Shore.

Tor.
Tor is the Seaport of Mount Sinai, distant from it about 40 Miles, wherein is
a Castle of small Force, under the Government of the Turks.

At Sinai live the Caloyers, or a Convent of Religious Greeks, who give a
friendly Reception to all sort of Pilgrims that resort thither. This Monastery
is said to have been built by Justinian, and Dedicated to St. Catherine. The
Greeks distribute their Charity promiscuously, as well to the Arabians, as
those of their own Nation, both to the Christians and the Mahometans. The
Greeks here enjoy too, a large Plantation of Date-Trees, the Fruit whereof is
generally consumed by the Arabs, who behave themselves imperiously toward
these Christians, and mightily inslave them, merely for allowing them the
liberty of enjoying their Monastery at the Mount.

Near Tor is a Bath called Hummum Mosa, Hummum Mosa.
or the Bath of Moses, the Water whereof is warm as New Milk. And at their
return from Mecca, the Caravans in their passage stop here.

From Tor to the Head of the Red Sea, which may be about 100 Miles; nothing is
to be seen very considerable, but that place which is so remarkable in the
History of the Holy Scriptures, and which these Natives, The Passage of the
Israelites.
as well as the Turks and Greeks say, was the very place where the Children of
Israel passed the Red Sea, in their flight from Pharaoh, which is about 40 or
50 Miles distant from the Head of it. The Passage is not above 15 Miles broad,
and the Midd-Channel is about 35 Fathoms deep. Josephus giving an Account of
this Wonderful Escape of the Israelites, tells us, L. 2. c. 7. how that
Alexander's Army had such another Passage through the Sea of Pamphilia, which
divided it self to give way to his Soldiers, in his Expedition against the
Persians, because there was no other way to come to destroy them.

The Egyptian Shore all along that Coast which is opposite to this, is observed
to be very steep, except it be a part of it, through which the Children of Israel
journey'd, which is a very fine Descent aboout eight or nine Miles down to the
Sea. On each side of which are impassible Mountains, like so many high Walls,
which are called Gibbal Pharoon, or the Hills of Pharaoh. So that except the
Sea had opened for the safety of God's People, they had no where to turn,
either to the right Hand or to the left, but must have inevitably perished by
the Hands of Pharaoh's Army.

Sues is an Ancient Town at the very Head of the Red Sea, Sues.
and lies nearest the Latitude of 30 D. It is defended by a Wall and a Castle
of some Force, designed rather as a small Bulwark against the Incursions of the
wild Arabs, than to guard it from the Arm of a potent Assailant. It is the
Seaport of Egypt, and under the Government of Grand Cairo, from which it is
distant about 50, or 60 Miles. The best Ships belonging to the Port are bought
at Suratt by the Turks, who carry on the sole Trade of this place, though some
Vessels of very good Burden are built here too, tho by very unskilful Artists.
Pliny in his Not. Hist. L. vi. cap. 29. mentions a Town called Suasa, so
called, as some think, from Shuak, one of Abraham's Sons by Keturah, Genesis 25.2.
and says it lies in that part of Arabia which is next to Egypt. This probably
must be the same.

I have now finished these Travels upon the Arabian Shore, all along the Red
Sea, as far as from Babel-Mandell, which is the opening into the Indian Ocean
to Sues, which is at the Head of that Gulf, lying nearest N. W. and S. East,
and distant above 1200 Miles. And have principally described only the Ports on
the Arabian Coast, without insisting much upon other matters, to give some
light to Sailers, and such as Travel into some of those unfrequented parts,
where they may find convenient Ports, and what is the Condition of their
Harbors, and something of their Trade.

THE CAPE OF Good Hope.
FEBRVARY the 14th 1692/3, The Benjamin's return for England.
did the Benjamin set Sail toward the Cape of Good Hope, on her homeward bound
Voyage, whither the Passage was safe and pleasant 'till we were driven upon the
Chagoes by some undiscernible Tides, which are a company of sharp Rocks visible
to the Eye, The Chagoes.
as we sailed along upon the shallow Water; the sight whereof for the space of
half a Day, and the distance we were at from any Land, had we unhappily
miscarried, struck us with very formidable Apprehensions of the extreme Danger
we were exposed to all that while. But having fortunately made our way through
those perilous Craggy Shelves, we kept our Course with good Success 'till our
Arrival at the Cape.

Signs of approaching the Cape-Land.
The Sailers have commonly notice of this Land before they Espy it, by the
Soundings which run out sixty Leagues into the Ocean, and the Almitrosses which
is a large Sea-Fowl, and never fly very far from Land; and the Manga Voluchoes,
another Sea Fowl that keeps thereabouts. On May the 15th. 1693, The Variation
of the Compass.
when we approacht the Cape, in the Evening, the Amplitude made 9 D. 45 Min. N.
Wly. variat. In the Morning 10 Degrees. 14 Min. and by the Azimuth 10 Degrees. 6 Min.
In the Morning the Table-Land bore E, S. The variation at the Cape alters much,
for in the Year 1689, when we came out, the variation then was eleven Degrees,
in the Year 1670 it was only six. At Java, the variation has not altered these
hundred Years, as is evident from Journals of that date.

On May the 16th. about ten at Night we came to an Anchor at the Cape, Our
Arrival at the Cape.
but the Commander being a Stranger in the Bay, fired two Guns, to signify we
were in Distress, which presently brought two Dutch Masters on board us, who
told us that we Anchored in bad ground; whereupon we weighed and stood near the
Shore, and there dropped our Anchor in better.

We found in the Road ten Dutch-East India Ships, most of them of good Burden,
richly laden, bound for Europe; these staid expecting two or three more from
the Indies, and six had sailed a little before from thence to Holland. And
every Year the Dutch Trade to the Indies, employs near 20 Ships, and as many
return home; The prodigious advantage of the Dutch E. I. Company.
which with the Trade that they drive there, where they Traffic with at least
an Hundred Sail, advances their Profits to some hundred Thousands, I had almost
said some Millions every Year. For by their very Commerce at Suratt, which is
inconsiderable, in respect of the Advantage which they reap from several other
Factories in India, that not exceeding the twentieth part; they reckon an
Annual Gain, after the deduction of all Expenses of their Factory, of fifteen
hundred thousand Gildars, which in English Money rises almost to an hundred and
fifty thousand Pounds. This Account I had from one intimately acquainted with
those Concerns.

The Harbor of the Cape.
The Harbor here is very safe and commodious for Ships, free from all
inconvenience and Danger; except it be toward mid Winter, which is there in
June, at the Suns approaching the Tropic of Cancer; then the North-West Winds
blow sometimes so very fierce, that the Ships are unable to ride against them.
For by a violent Gust from that Quarter, in A. 1692, about the latter end of
May, two Dutch, and one English Ship, not able to bear up against the fury of
the Weather, were driven upon the Shore and Foundred.

The Convenience of the Cape to the Dutch.
All the Holland East India Ships, both those outward and homeward bound, touch
in here for fresh Provisions, and furnish the place with plenty of all
Commodities, both from India and Europe. By which means there is scarce one
part of all the Tripartite Continent, that is furnished with that abundance of
Conveniences, which the Cape can boast of. And that I may present the Reader
with a more regular Account of this famous Promontory, and give him a more
methodical Idea of the place, The method of this Discourse.
I shall insist upon the following Description of it in this manner. First, in
observing its situation, its pleasant Air, and fertile Soil. Secondly in
considering the Nature and Customs of its Original Inhabitants. And thirdly, in
showing the Profit and Convenience, which this Plantation affords the Dutch.

First therefore the Cape of Good Hope is situated between thirty four and
thirty five Degrees of South Latitude, The Situation of this Cape.
and is the furthermost Tract of our Continent toward the most Southern part
of Africa, and esteemed by all, the most Renowned Promontory in the World. The
Greeks and Latins, as far as we can see, have had no certain knowledge of it,
much less those before them; yet from some Ancient Authors it is evident, that
the Barbarians, that is, the strange Nations have made, or caused to be made
the Circum-navigation of Africa, which could not be done without knowing of
this Cape. Its Discovery.
Bartholomew Diaz was the Portuguese, who first discovered it in A. 1487, which
occasioned Emanuel, King of Portugal, to give it the name of Cape Bone
Esperanse, because he hoped a Passage would be opened to the E. Indies by the
doubling of it; which accordingly happened to the mighty enriching of his
Kingdom, and of his Subjects who settled there.

It was the second time discovered by Vasco da Gama, in A. 1497, at the command
of Don Emanuel King of Portugal. And was at those times esteemed so dangerous a
Promontory, that the Navigators were wont to call it the Lion of the Ocean, or
the Tempestuous Cape, because of the ruffling Weather and boisterous Winds;
which used to discourage their touching upon it, The storms at the Cape.
unless they were constrained by some Necessity. The Thunder and Lightning, and
Impetuous Storms, which have been observed upon the Cape Sierra Leona, have
made some conjecture that this place was called by Ptolomy and Hanno of
Carthage the Chariot of the Gods. And to this day, if the Ships from India are
retained beyond their proper Season of returning, they sometimes beat the Ocean
at the Cape for a Week or a Fortnights space, and after all that Toil and
Danger are forced upon retiring to the Island Mauritius, 'till the Winter is
past.

The inaccessible Heights and craggy Clifts of some of the Mountains toward
the South, have made the Portuguese give them the name of Os Picos Fragosos, i.
e. sharp-pointed, because they rear their lofty forlorn Heads so high in the
Clouds.

The Neighborhood of Cape Bone Esperanse, The Reason of the coolness of the
Air at the Cape.
to that vast Ocean toward the South, cools the Air to some Degrees beyond
what the proportion of that Latitude might otherwise seem to give. For in the
same Degree North, as Mariners observe, particularly where there is not the
Extent of so wide an Ocean, the coolness of the Air is not so perceptible. The
reason of it may be the spacious spreading Tract of Sea, which gives the Air
once agitated, more liberty to continue its motion, and constantly to increase
its Coldness; which on the contrary, is straitn'd and repressed on Land, by the
meeting of Mountains, Trees, Houses, and other Obstacles, and therefore not so
impetuous; neither so Cold, because the Sulphurous Vapors which arise from
the Earth, and make fiery Exhalations, often intermixing with the Nitrous,
which make Wind, qualify them in some measure. As at Suratt, the Winds are by
much Hotter, which fly over the Land to us, than those that come from the Sea.
The South Winds here therefore are observed to be the coolest, because they
blow from the great Sea. The Air however, is not scorching here for this
Reason; nor very Cold, because of its nearness to the Fountain of Heat. The
moderation of the Climate
It has no excesses, but what are tolerable to Children, nor any thing
offensive to Old Age. It Is temperate and sweet, healthful and pleasant; and is
very agreeable to the Constitution of the Dutch, as well as the Natives, to
whom it gives Activity and Vigor. It quarrels with no kind of natural Temper,
and cherishes all sorts of Animals, as well as Plants. Nor did I ever know any
that had been in this Paradise of the World, who denied it the Character of one
of the loveliest Regions they had ever seen.

The fruitfulness of the Soil.
And this fair Country which the Blacks inhabit, is blessed with a Soil as
pregnant as the Days are pleasant, and prepared for any Improvements. Beeves
and Sheep, Hogs and Goats feed here upon the Herbage of the Field, which makes
them flesht, and very well tasted. And all those sorts of Grain which are
proper for Food, or for making strong Drink, thrive here, and grow in that
plenty, that no part of Europe can abound with them more. Which is all to be
ascribed to the indefatigable Diligence and Industry of the Dutch, who being
forced to a good Husbandry of the Ground by the scantiness which they live upon
at home, continue their thrifty Cultivating humor, when they are removed to a
Soil where they may Cultivate what quantity they please; for they are a People
remarkable for Improvements, for their commendable Pains and Care where ever
they Inhabit.

But here grows the fruitful Vine, as well as the Wheat and the Barley, and the
Dutch delight themselves in the double variety both of French and English
Liquors, of Beer and Wine of their own growth, with the sprightly Juice of the
one, and the healing Oily quality of the other. The Rivers and Ponds are full
of Fish, of great variety and very delicate. The Country is covered with Woods
and Forests, which abound with store of Beasts and Fowls, as Deer, Antilopes,
Baboons, Foxes, etc. Ostriches, whose Eggs are transported to various
Countries, Herons, Partridges, Feasants, Pelicans, Geese, Ducks. Tigers and
Lions are very numerous, and so bold, that they range sometimes within Gunshot
of the Fort, and for that reason seldom return back, and do often prey upon the
Cattle, for which cause they are kept within shelter in the Night.

Two French Ships taken at the Cape.
Two French Ships returning from the Indies in A. 1689, with very rich Cargoes,
were invited to touch at the Cape, by the store of delicate Provisions which
they heard were there. But the taste of that fresh Mutton cost them both their
Ships and Men. For the speedy Intelligence which the active Dutch had sent
abroad of the Eruption of the War that Year, arriving at the Cape before any
News could reach the French, betrayed them to the vigilance of the Hollanders,
who seized their Ships as soon as they were well Moored in the Bay.

The Ancient Inhabitants of this Cape.
The next description which I come to, Secondly, is of the Ancient Inhabitants
of this Promontory, in what relates to their Nature and Customs. They retain
the vulgar name of Hotantots, The reason of their Name.
because of their constant repetition of that word in their hobling Dances.

There is a vast difference between the nature of these People that dwell upon
this place, and the Country they Inhabit; for of all parts this affords a
Dwelling most neat and pleasant, and of all People they are the most Bestial
and sordid. They are the very Reverse of Human kind, The Bestial nature of the
Hotantots.
Cousin Germans to the Halalchors, only meaner and more filthy; so that if
there is any medium between a Rational Animal and a Beast, the Hotontot lays the
fairest Claim to that Species. They are sunk even below Idolatry, are destitute
both of Priest and Temple, and saving a little show of rejoicing, which is made
at the Full and the New Moon; have lost all kind of Religious Devotion. Nature
has so richly provided for their convenience in this Life, that they have
drowned all sense of the God of it, and are grown quite careless of the next.

They are more Tawny than the Indians, Their outward form.
and in Color and Features come nearest the Negroes of any People, only they
are not quite so Black, nor is their Cottony Hair so Crisp, nor their Noses
altogether so flat. For Nature pleases her self as well in the variety of
Individuals of the same kind, as in a great number of Species of all sorts of
Animals.

A Discourse concerning the Negroes blackness.
It might seem here a rational Conjecture for the reason of the Negroes
Blackness, that they are burnt by the Sun's Beams, which we experimentally find
tinctures the fairest Complexions, when it comes near them, which recover again
by withdrawing to a cooler Air. And therefore that those who are most exposed
to the Sun's Heat should always be the Blackest. For Blackness and Whiteness
are not supposed natural to any People whatever, it is presumed to be the effect
of the Climate, because those that are Fair by living a long time under or near
the Line, shall in two or three Generations, as it is affirmed, become tawny and
Black, though they Marry only with fair People. But methinks there is something
in Nature which seems to thwart this current Opinion. For under the same
Parallels are People of quite different Colors; as for instance, the
Hotantots, who live between thirty four and thirty five Degrees are Black; the
Inhabitants of Candie, who are under the same Elevation of the Pole, are White.
The People of England are white, and the Natives near Hudson's Bay, which is as
Cold and Northerly a Climate, are Black. And neither the Colony of the English
near Hudson's Bay, nor the Dutch at Cape Bone Esperanse receive any alteration
in their Color, but are fresh and fair as in Europe, and yet the Natives in
both parts are Olive-colour'd. Some are apt to ascribe this to the Air and
Climate or Earth, which in some places produces Patagons, who are Giants, as in
other, Pygmies; but this seems weak and unaccountable. Others resolve much of
it into the effect of Food and Diet, which I believe may be of some power, and
efficacy in this matter upon this Account. Because at Suratt, I observed a
young Indian very Black, taken into the English Service, who by tasting Wine
and Eating Flesh, grew paler sensibly than he was before. The strong Aliment by
a frequent mixture of its lively Juyces with the Blood and Spirits, which for a
long time had been kept low by a Phlegmatic Nourishment, did actuate and
purify them by degrees, and thereby showed in sometime the effect of their
fermentation by a faint Varnish upon the Face. Besides, it is a Remark of the
Ancients, but not methinks very sound, whereby they took notice, that it is the
Humidity of the Elements, which defends the Indians against that Action of the
Sun, which burns the Complexion of the Negroes; and makes their Hair grow like
Cotton; whereas some of the Indians, whose Hair is long and uncurled, live as
near the Equator, and endure as intense a Heat as the Hotantots and several
Negroes of Africa, whose Hair is crisp and frizl'd. And therefore something
must be added besides the Sun's Heat, for distinction of Complexion and of Hair
under the same Parallels. Lewenhoock observes that the Blood of the Negroes is
of a different Contexture from ours. And Malpighi observed a small Membrane not
transparent between the Cutis and Cuticula, which caused the Blackness.

The filthiness of the Hotantots.
The Hotantots are as squalid in their Bodies, as they are mean and degenerate
in their Understandings. For they are far from being Curious either in their
Food or Attire, any further than what they find Nature reaches forth to them.
They think it a needless Toil to spend time in dressing of the Hides of Bulls,
or in Spinning and Weaving the Wool of Sheep, for Ornaments and Covering to
their Bodies. They are satisfied with the same wrought Garments that Nature has
clad the Sheep with, and therefore without more Labor or Art, they take them
from the Backs of the Sheep, and put them presently upon their own, and so they
walk with that Sheep-Skin Mantle about their Shoulders, or sometimes thrown
like a Hood over their Heads, which seem to be the Ancientest Garments,
according to Genesis 2.21. unto Adam and his Wife did the Lord make Coats of
Skins. They generally turn the Wool inwards, that the outside of the Garment
may defend them from Rain, and the inside from the impressions of Cold. The
Ornaments about their Heads are small Shells, or little pieces of Lead or Iron
fastened to their friz'ld Hair, or put into their Ears. The Hair of their
Heads, and of all their Bodies are besmeared with Kitchin-Grease, though never so
stinking and Loathsome, which when dissolved and heated by their Bodies, sends
from thence such an unsavory Smell, as may be scented at a Furlongs distance,
and nearer hand it never fails of a strong Emetick to a weak Stomach. Stinking
Grease is their sweet Oil, and the Dust of the Streets the Powder of their
Hair. They Anoint their Bodies to render their Nerves supple and active, and to
fortify the Pores against the Violence of the ambient Air. For they are both
nimble and swift of Foot, and of Courage to outface and worst a Lion. Before
their Nakedness hangs a small Skin about a foot broad, tied by a string about
their middle, which the motion of their Bodies, or of the Air, sometimes turns
aside.

The Apparel of the Women upon the upper part of the Body is the same with the
Men's; but round their Legs are twisted Sheeps Guts two or three Inches thick,
which are serviceable upon a double account, both for Food and Ornament. The
Guts, which are made more savoury by the Dirt which sticks to them, affords
them as good a Meal as the Flesh of the Sheep, and are eaten with as good a
Gusto.

The Huts they dwell in, Their Huts which they dwell in.
which are made of Bul-Rushes, or Branches of Trees, are fashioned round almost
like a Bee-hive, reaching about five Foot high, and nine broad, with a small
Passage in the side to creep in at, and a Hole in the middle for the Fire.

They disallow Polygamy in all, but in their Chief, who may entertain three
Wives at once. And the kind Wives, after the Death of every Husband, The Wives
penance for a dead Husband.
if they Marry again, cut off a Joint from the little Finger, and proceed to
the middle, if they Bury many. The same is imitated by some fond Indulgent
Husbands, but on neither of them is there any incumbent necessity, only as they
are led by Humor at those times.

The Male Children at Eight or Ten Years of Age, are Cut in their Privy Parts,
The Castration of the Males.
and deprived of one of their Testicles. The same is likewise done at Cape
Comoron, for increasing their Valor and Activity. But here, I believe upon
another Score, viz. For prevention of a too Luxuriant Increase by Generation;
The reason of it.
because when their Children Increase beyond their Desires, and the just number
which they design, to prevent a heavier Charge upon the Parents, they dispatch
the Supernumeraries to the other World, without any Remorse for the horrid
Crime, The Murder of their Children.
or Consciousness of the execrable Sin of Murder, which is the Reason, I
presume, of the Hotantot's losing part of their Virility, that they may
debilitate that Native Heat, which powerfully prompts them to Propagation. This
Barbarity has prevailed amongst a much politer People than the Hotantots, even
the Chinese, who hold a Transmigration, and allege this Reason for killing
their Children, when they abound with them, which is, to make them spring up
the more Happy. When the King of Sciam too has any Design upon the Honor or
Estate of a Mandarin or Great Commander, he causes him to undergo a total
Castration, that their Titles and Riches, for want of Issue, may fall into his
Hands.

There is a vulgar Opinion which has formerly been received, The Hotantots no
Hermophradites.
that the Natives of this Cape were Hermophradites, which was founded only upon
Conjecture; for two Gentlemen, who were resolved not to be liable to this
Error, assured me the Report was false, upon the Curiosity they had of knowing
the Reason of it, which was because the Female Parts were cut in the Fashion of
small Teats hanging down.

Those that can be induced to labor, Their Laziness.
and undergo any Toil among the Hotantots, are made Slaves of by the Dutch, and
employed in all servile Drudgeries. But their Native Inclination to Idleness
and a careless Life, will scarce admit of either Force or Rewards for
reclaiming them from that innate Lethargick humor.

Their common Answer to all Motives of this kind, is, that the Fields and Woods
afford plenty of Necessaries for their Support, and Nature has Amply provided
for their Subsistence, by loading the Trees with plenty of Almonds, which grow
in the Forests, and yield them Food; and by dispersing up and down many
wholesome Brooks and pure Rivolets to quench their Thirst: So that there is no
need of Work, when such innocent Diet offers it self daily without Pains, and
on which they can live without Care. And thus many of them idly spend the Years
of a useless restive Life. But the Governor of the Fort, and several Dutch
Inhabitants of the Town prevail upon some of them, and make Converts of them to
labor and hardships. Thus the Hotantots have degenerated into the strangest
kind of Rationals, and have successively survived the Noble and common
Instincts of Humanity; but in their Innocence of Life, the Customs of the
Ancient Britains did in many things resemble the Inhabitants of this
Promontory, in their drinking Water, and the simplicity of their Food, which
was upon Acorns or Berries, or such natural Productions; sometimes upon Milk,
or what they could gain by Hunting. A great part of their Bodies too was
uncovered, especially their Arms and Legs, and their Clothing was the same
with that of the Hotantots, made generally of the Skins of Beasts.

The Third thing observable at the Cape, The Advantage which the Dutch reap by
this Cape.
was the Profit and Advantage which that Plantation affords the Dutch. As this
Climate is most delightful, and the Native Turf capable of producing any thing
that may administer either to the Exigence or Delight of Man; so is it suited
with the greatest convenience imaginable to the important Negotiations of the
Dutch, whose Ships that Design for India, and those that return from thence to
Holland, are refresht here with all Conveniences, as in the midway between
those two distant Regions.

The Industry of the Hollanders has enlarged their Borders so far upon the main
Land of this Delightful Fertile Cape, that were they ever put to those straits
as to be forced to Decamp, and leave their Native Country, here they might fix
in a Soil of so much more desirable Habitation, that they might thank the Fates
that caused the Change, and bless the Authors of their Misery. Here they might
live without any danger of the Seas Incroaching upon their Banks, to threaten
continually a second Deluge, and free from all dread of Invasion from any
Neighboring Land-Tyrant. And might spread themselves over spacious Plains,
which would afford them Work sufficient for all their Husbandry, and Pastures
Pleasant and large enough for all their Cattle. And because nothing can please
these People so much as Trade and Traffic, therefore here they might find
convenient Harbors for their Ships, by which they might keep up their Spirit
of Merchandising, and establish their Commerce to the Indies and other parts of
the World. The Refugees of France, who are received here with the same
privilege the Dutch enjoy, acknowledge the happiness of their Transportation;
and boast that their Misfortunes are turned into their Felicity, since they are
blessed here with peaceable Dwellings and kind Accommodations, who had not
formerly where in safety to lay their Heads.

The Encouragements to such as settle here.
The Encouragements of such as come hither to Cultivate the Land for their own
Livelihood and Benefit of the grand Proprietors, is thus stated, as I
understood it. Those that design to settle here, are allowed their
Transportation from Holland gratis. After their Arrival they are invited to
range and view the Country, and survey such parts as lie wild and unmanur'd,
where they may choose such a Portion as they fancy they are able to stock and
Manure, and will yield them a Commodious settlement for their Families. This is
to be a Patrimony entailed upon their Children, without any Rent or other
Acknowledgment to the Dutch East India Company, but the Sale of their Goods to
the Governor, and at his Price. This by the way presses hard upon the Tenants
and keeps them under, by running the chief Profits of what they possess into
the Company's hands. The Governor and Council agree with the Countryman for
his Goods and Cattle at a very low rate, and sell them again to the Ships that
put in there, as dear as they please; because all Men are strained from vending
any Commodities to Strangers without the Council's leave. But however the
Industrious Planters want neither plenty of Wine for their Tables, nor variety
of Tame and Wild Fowls for their ordinary Entertainments, of which they have
often rather too much Store than any Scarcity, because the Company has no
occasion for them, and therefore they lie dead upon their Hands. Some upon this
account quit the place, and very few of any Substance but easilier may increase
their Goods than their Treasure.

Those whose Poverty renders them unable to stock their Land, the Kindness of
the Governor provides with Necessaries 'till their Abilities can reach a
Payment. Which has mightily increased the number of Inhabitants within a few
Years. For whereas about nine Years since, they could scarce reckon above four
or five Hundred Planters, they can now number almost as many Thousands;
abundance of whom were sent hither by the French Persecution, who are much
delighted with the Convenience of their Dwelling.

The space of Land which the Dutch at present inhabit.
They have stretched their Plantations in the Country above seventy five English
Miles, and see still a vast space of untilled Land before them. In this
District they rear their Cattle, sow their Corn, plant Vines, and sedulously
improve all things of worth to the best advantage. So that within the
Revolution of a few Years, many valuable Commodities will be Exported thence,
to the other Quarters of the Universe. The Cape Wine.
Their very Wines, in which they will suddenly increase both to a great plenty
and variety, are now able to supply their Ships, and to furnish the Indies with
some quantity, where they sell it by the Bottle at a Roupie. It Is Colored like
Rhenish, and therefore they pass it under that specious Name in India, but the
Taste of it is much harder and less palatable; its Operations are more
searching, and the strength of it more intoxicating and offensive to the Brain.

The Impositions which are laid upon Wine and other Liquors that are sold by
Retail, seem almost incredible, The great Taxes upon Liquors.
especially when the small number of People that are presumed to drink them, is
considered. For in the Town of the Cape are not reckoned above 500 Inhabitants,
besides those that are brought in Ships and come out of the Country; and yet
the Annual Impost upon Europe Beer and Wine is four thousand Gilders; upon Cape
Wine four thousand one hundred; and Brandy, Arak, and distilled Waters, pay
twenty Thousand Gilders Yearly to the Governor of the place for a License to
sell them. All which Taxes summed together, make up above twenty eight Thousand
Gilders Yearly, which according to our Accounts, raise between two and three
Thousand Pounds, for the liberty of selling Liquors by Retail. This exorbitant
Fine upon the Taverns and Tippling Houses makes them exact extravagant Rates
from the Guests that drink the Liquor, who are indeed the People that pay it.
For he that resolves to drink Brandy must pay at the rate of ten Shillings a
Bottle for it; and the Cape Wine which in the Cask is sold for less than six
Pence a Quart, is in the Tavern half a Crown, and such proportionably are the
excessive Prices of the rest. A tame submission is the only Remedy for these
Impositions, from which there is no Appeal or Relief, which is apt to imbitter
the Lives of the People, nor can any be very happy, who are subject to the
Tyranny of a Government that is under no Restraint. The Arbitrary Proceedings
of the Dutch Commissaries in India, have been much resented, and have likewise
raised loud complaints against them by the injured Factors, but have met with
very little redress.

The Governor of the Cape, Min Here Simon Vanderstel, labors much in
Improvements and Accommodations for the Inhabitants and Seamen, The Governor
of the Cape.
and to render it valuable to the Company. The Sailers are well furnished with
fresh Water and fresh Provisions; and in the Bay is caught great store of Fish,
which is Pickled and put up in Barrels, and sent home instead of Pickled
Herrings. A delicate Watering-place.
The Watering for Ships is contrived with such Convenience, that it is scarce
equalled by any in the World. For from the Mountains are conveyed in narrow
Channels clear Water down to the Shore, from whence in Leaden Pipes it is
carried above forty Foot in the Sea, and there raised so high above its
Surface, that the Ships Long-Boats can row under the Pipes, and fill their
Vessels with much Ease.

The famed Garden abundantly supplies the Ships with variety of Roots and green
Herbs, The Garden at the Cape.
which contribute not a little to the Health, and even preservation of Life, in
these tedious Eastern Voyages. Here is that variety of Excellent Fruits, of
Pulse and Roots, which either Europe, or Asia afford. Here are those large
Walks, those stately Hedges, and Alleys of Cypres, and Beds of Flowers, which
make it Beautiful and Pleasant as the Garden of a Prince, and useful as that of
a Peasant. The Conveniences it abounds with may denominate it a Kitchih
Garden, but its Delights a Garden of Pleasure. It is of large Extent, at some
distance from the high Mountains, but cut out upon a rising Hill, watered with
pure Springs descending from the Mountains, which make their Passage through
various Channels that are cut out in every Quarter. The Garden in all its Walks
is kept so very neat and clean, that even in the Winter Season, scarce a Leaf
is seen upon the Ground. The Trees are Curiously Pruned, and the Hedges Trimmed
with such exactness, that no one irregular Excrescence appears, or Branch
shooting out beyond his Fellow. Much of the Fruit in it comes to maturity twice
a Year, and many Trees by their nearness to the Sun, are verdant and Beautiful
all the Year. Three and Thirty Slaves, besides Europeans, are daily employed in
looking after it. This forced a Confession, even from the Jesuits, in their
Siam Voyage, of allowing it an equality, if not precedence, to their most
celebrated Gardens they had in France.

That the Inhabitants might be subject to no surprisal from any Enemies nigh
their Plantations, The Governors Travels in the Country.
the Governor with a few Attendants and Victuals necessary for such an
Enterprise, traveled by Compass for several Weeks, to find its Northerly
bounds and Situation, 'till he was stopped by impassible Mountains, which forced
a Return from any farther progress that way. In this Journey he traveled over
vast Tracts of Land, very fit for Agriculture, but all Waste and Untilled; and
was very well satisfied, that those inaccessible heights of Mountains which he
saw, would stand as immovable Bulwarks against all Inland Invasions; so that
nothing was to be dreaded, but Attacks upon them from the Sea.

For their Defense from any Onsets by Water, The Fort.
is built a strong Fort near the Sea, with Bastions and Guns mounted for its
security, and Officers and Soldiers to guard it from an Enemy. It Is beautified
with stately Convenient Lodgings within; as well as fortified without.

Near the Fort is a small Town, The Town.
consisting of about an Hundred Houses; strong and neatly built with Stone
Walls and pretty Apartments.

The state which the Governor lives in.
The present Governor, who lives with his Council in the Fort, is a very kind
and knowing Person, is maintained in Grandeur, and lives Honorably. His
public Table wants no plenty either of European or African Wines, or Asian
Liquors; and whatever the Land or Water, or Air affords in that place, is
served up in his bountiful Entertainments. To Complete the Magnificence of
which sumptuous Fare, all the Dishes and Plates upon the Board are made of
Massy Silver. And before the departure of their Fleets, the Dutch Commanders
are all invited to a public Repast, where they Drink and Revel, bouze and
break Glasses, what they please; for these Frolicks are the very life of a
Skipper; and the Governor by indulging these Wild licentious Humors,
ingratiates with them more, than by any thing else he could devise.

I have now considered the Situation and Air of this pleasant Promontory; the
Nature and Customs of the Hotantots; and the Profit and Convenience which this
Plantation affords the Dutch; and should now leave it, only a passage or two
may divert the Reader, which happened while I was there.

While we staid here, we met with 3 Spaniards, A passage concerning three
Spaniards at the Cape.
who came from the Moneiloes to Batavia, and from thence imbarkt upon a Dutch
Ship that was loosing from thence to the Cape. The Principal of these Spaniards
was sent out privately by the K. of Spain, in the Employment of Visitor
General. He was free in his Discourse, and not easily warmed into Passion, and
could well discern both other Men's Failings and dissemble his own. But he was
very zealous in Proselyting all he discoursed with, with the Assurance of Ease
and Wealth in Spain while they lived, and Immortal Happiness after Death. But
he Corrupted his Parts by false Maxims, which he borrowed from an insufferable
Pride, which not being Contradiction proof, could not well bear opposition from
an Heretic.

This Ancient Gentleman was hot in converting us by his Arguments, whilst
another young one endeavored it mightily by his Relics, which were hung in a
small Box about his Neck, and were sacred Preservatives against all Perils and
Misfortunes. They were such as these. A piece of St. Leonards Thumb, of St.
Peter's Nail, and a little of St. Bridgets Hair. Which things tho they seemed
to us inconsiderable, yet were of Value and Esteem for those Excellencies that
were found in them. For as Barbarous Nations commenced Civil upon their
Infranchisment at Ancient Rome; so things Contemptible and Profane, become
August and Sacred by their Adoption into the Romish Church. However the Relics
had as little Charm in them toward us, as the Arguments. But at length the
young Gentleman produced a Tamback Ring, which I knew was accounted a valuable
Rarity in the East. This Tambac is a kind of Metal, The Value and Virtue of
Tambac.
whose scarcity renders it more valuable than Gold; as the Corinthian Brass had
its Price augmented by its Rarity. It Is thought to be a kind of natural
Compound of Gold, Silver, and Brass, and in some places the mixture is very
Rich, as at Borneo, and the Moneiloes, in others more allayed, as at Siam. But
it is much more remarkable for its Virtues against all noxious Blasts, from the
unhappy effects of which it effectually preserves him that wears it. This is
commonly ascribed to it in India, and thus far received a Confirmation, that
very lately some Persons walking abroad there, were Blasted on a sudden, among
whom, those that wore those Rings were saved, and the rest killed. And to
preserve me from such Misfortunes, the Gentleman was pleased to afford me one
of them. Our President at Suratt was presented while I was there with a Knife
Haft of this Metal, which was thought a noble Gift.

At the same time a German Physician, who had Traveled for ten Years in the
East, brought with him from China the Root Nisan, a pound of which sells there
for two hundred and seventy Dollars. The Root Nisan.
It is frequently used in Sickness, especially Deliquiums of the Spirit, which
recommends it mightily to the King and his Nobility. He was afraid of its decay
before he could Arrive in Holland, and left it therefore to try its Fortune at
the Cape, as an additional Ornament to that spacious and pleasant Garden. Yet
it is affirmed, that this Soil was no Stranger to this Root, before that this
was Planted here.

We Sailed from the Cape on the 2d of June, 1693. in the Company of ten Dutch
East India Ships bound for Europe, and on the 4th of July made Ascension.

THE Island ASCENSION.
TO the Westward of St. Helena, appear the Isles of Sancta Maria, and of the
Trinity, uninhabited, and serve for Signs unto the Mariners. The Reason of the
Name Ascension.
To the N. West of this Island, toward the Coast of Brasil, is the Isle of
Ascension, so denominated by Tristan Acunna its first Discoverer, Its discovery
and Stuation.
who in his Return from the Indies, in the Year 1508, espied it upon Ascension
Day. It lies toward the Coast of South America; is extended in length about
four Leagues, in breadth one, and distant from America about 100.

This is made generally a place of Refreshment to the East India Ships,
homeward bound, lying in about 8 Degrees of South Latitude, directly in their
way for England. The barrenness of this Island.
The Land is Mountainous, as most other Lands are that are situate remotely
from the Continent. And excepting some very few places, it is all steril and
Desert, and the Surface Cinereous, covered with a kind of Sinders or Ashes,
which gives occasion to some, of thinking it formerly to have been a Fogo or
Burning Island: Yet in some parts the Soil seems fit for Culture and
Fructification. But because it is wholly destitute of Springs and fresh Water,
this prevents all Designs of any Inhabitants fixing there, though the Native Turf
were never so promising and fruitful. However it affords some Accommodation and
Refreshment for Ships tending toward Europe, to which also it gives a very
safe and convenient Harbor.

The most inviting stay for Ships here, Store of Turtle.
are the store of Turtle with which the Island abounds, some of which are grown
to four or five hundred weight, but others are of less Dimensions; on these the
hungry Mariners feed deliciously, for the space of ten or 15 Days sometimes
together. They esteem it no less nourishing and healthful, than delightful, nor
need they incur the danger of any Surfeit by the plenty of this dainty Food;
but Chronical Distempers, and inveterate Diseases, have by this sort of Diet
been often abated; and those unwelcome Guests, by a constant use of the Food,
have been forced to withdraw from their old accustomed Habitations. The
Purgative quality in which it ends, carries away the Disease with it, and
repairs the Body to its former strength and Constitution.

The Birds very tame here.
Besides these, here are Birds in great quantity, but very unpalatable, and so
distastful to the Sailers, that they rarely touch them; by which usage they are
kept in a gentle tameness and familiarity, and never stir from their Nests for
fear, of any Passengers approach, but sit billing and pecking at such as pass
by. Among these the Boobies are most numerous, a Fowl so stupidly tame, that it
freely endures to be touched and handled, without any timorousness or fear.

Goats only live here.
Some few Goats are also left here, a Creature of such a thriving Nature, that
it finds Nourishment many times from what no other of the Animal Generations
can subsist on; and therefore in India sustain themselves by grazing on the
Milk-bush, the ordinary Hedge of that Country, the Juyces of which are so
Malignant and Corrosive, that the tender parts of Man's Body are highly
offended by the very touch. The Goats grow not much in flesh upon this Island,
because the leanness of the Ground, and want of Moisture, allow them no more
than a bare subsistence, which yet secure their Lives from the violence of
Famine and of the Mariners.

The method made use of in taking the Turtle, A Discourse concerning the Turtle.
is carefully to observe those particular times they come on Shore, to lay or
hatch their Eggs, at which times they turn them by surprizal upon their Backs,
which is a Posture they are utterly unable to recover from, and are thereby
frustrated of all Defense or Escape, and are a ready Prey to any that resolves
to seize them. When the sensible Creatures find themselves in this desperate
Posture, by which they know themselves in a lost and hopeless state, they then
begin to lament their Condition in many heavy sighs, and mournful Groans, and
shed abundance of water from their Eyes, in hopes, if possible, to secure their
Safety by their Tears, and Mollify the cruel Assaults upon their Lives. They
are of celebrated strength, much beyond the Proportion of their Bulk, so much
that I have seen one of a small size, not above eight Inches Broad, able to
sustain the weight of a Man. And the inward strength of their Animal Spirits is
equal to that of their outward Contexture, which is not easily abated or
dissolved. For after the Neck of one of these had been quite cut off, except
only a small piece of Skin by which it hung to the Body; and after its Bowels
were ripp'd up, and its Heart was taken out, and placed upon the Deck of the
Ship, it both opened its Mouth, and the Heart for a long time after had a
motion; which some of the Spectators affirmed would continue for the space of
two or three Hours; and some of them have been known to live twelve Hours after
their Heads have been cut off. The parts of Reptiles continue, I think,
animated for some considerable time after they are dissected from one another,
because of the viscous Quality of their Animal Spirits, but for the Heart of so
large an Animal as this, to move for some Hours after it was torn from the
Body, seems a little more strange and surprising. However, I made this
Experiment my self upon a Cock-Roach, which is a sort of large unwieldy Fly,
whose Spirits may be presumed to be most volatile, the Head of which I severed
from the Body, and kept it apart in a small Box for twenty four Hours, after
which time looking on it, I saw it perfectly move some parts, but with a very
faint slowness. As we see the Flesh of a Viper, after it is beheaded and
imboweled, will move for the space of 24 Hours.

Of the Turtle or Marine Tortoise, Three sorts of Turtles.
there are three sorts, the Hawk-Bill, the Logerhead, and the Green Turtle,
which swim in the Water, and creep upon Land. It Is of such an Amphibious
Nature, that you may fancy it Beast, or Bird, or Fish, as you please; for it
lives in the Ocean like a Fish; it feeds upon Grass on Shore, as an Ox; and
lays Eggs, as a Bird, sometimes the quantity of a Bushel. The two Fins of it
placed before, are in the shape of Wings; those two behind are broad and long
like Feet, and its Head and Eyes, which it opens and shuts, resemble those of a
Hawk; so that both in its shape and other qualities, the Body of it is divided
among those Creatures whose proper Elements are Land, Water, and Air. The flesh
of it is White, and Eats beyond any Veal, and admirably contributes to the Cure
of the Scurvey, and as it is commonly affirmed, the Impure Disease. But the
Dutch, notwithstanding the delicacy, will not touch it; and the Barbarity of
the French, after they have been satiated with their Plenty, expose them to
starve and stink above Ground, by leaving many of them turned upon their Backs,
upon their departure from the Island. The English treat none cruelly, but turn
only such as are necessary for their Refreshment, being loath to express a
severity to the very Beasts, especially such whose Deaths contribute so
considerably to the Health, and support of their own Lives. Great plenty of
these Shel-Fish are found in the West Indies, the Genitals of which dried, and
drunk in Wine, are prescribed as singular Dissolvers of the Stone. The store of
them upon this Island, where so little Herbage grows, seems to supply the
Necessity of green Herbs for Curing the Scorbutic Humors in the Mariners, to
which nothing does contribute more; as we happily experimented in the Voyage.
For three or four French Vineroons designed for St. Helena, were so lamentably
overrun with the Scurvey, after we had spent two or three Months at Sea, The
Scurvey Cured by Eating green herbs
that they were unable either to walk or stand upright; and yet three days
eating of Purslain and other Herbs, after we were landed in Africa, rectifyed
the ill Humors in the Blood, restored their Limbs, and recovered their
Stomachs and lost Health again. And were those made more frequently the Diet of
these that live on Land, as they are sometimes of those at Sea, I doubt not but
the Scorbutic Humors, and all that Train of Diseases that follows them, would
be less numerous and prevailing than they are.

Upon this Island is a certain place named the Post Office, The Post Office.
from the Letters left there by the last Commander that came thither, giving an
Account of the time he came there, when he departed from the Island, and what
other News of moment he thinks convenient. The Letter is commonly thrust into a
Bottle corked close, which the succeeding Commander breaks in pieces to come to
it, and leaves another in its stead. But I will leave this Barren Island, and
proceed on the Voyage.

A day set apart for the invoking a Blessing upon the Voyage.
About the middle of our Passage from the Cape to Europe, the Captain Commandant
of the Fleet called a Council of all the Commanders, and then enjoined a
particular Day to be set apart by every Ship, as a public Thanksgiving for our
past safety, and for imploring the Favor and Benediction of Heaven upon the
Fleet for the rest of the Voyage; and desired from me a Form of Prayer, which
was translated into Dutch for that purpose. This was a pitch of Piety, which
well became his Care and Station, but was far beyond the common strain of a
Sailer's Devotion. A great Storm.
I doubt not but it was very Instrumental in our avoiding those threatening
Dangers that encompassed us in our Voyage, and from which we had a very
Fortunate Deliverance to Europe. For besides the Storm which increased to such
a Rage, and on a sudden grew so insupportable and Fierce, that it separated the
whole Fleet, and every Ship was forced to make the best of her way for her own
safety; the Benjamin, besides this, had another Deliverance as happy, which was
in her Escape from two French Privateers, The Stratagem our Captain used to
make his Escape from two French Privateers
the one a Head, the other a Stern, by the Commander, Captain Leonard Brown's
prudent Management of himself in that juncture. For having formerly shortened
Sail, in hopes that one of them might be our Friend, as soon as ever he
discerned they were the Enemy, he ordered all Hands aloft, and commanded the
Sails to be spread in a trice, by which he made them suppose, that our Ship was
very well Manned, and that we must therefore needs be a Man of War. This
stratagem had its desired effect, for upon it they both left us; though the next
Day following, they took a stout Fourth Rate, the Diamond Frigate.

On September the 18th 1693, Our Arrival in Ireland.
we came into Kingsale in Ireland, where, as a Testimony of our Gratitude to
our great Deliverer in the Voyage, the Captain, Officers, and Sailers, The
Officers and Sailers Charity, after the Voyage.
contributed amongst them, betwixt twenty and thirty Pounds, part of which,
about four Pounds, was designed as a small Oblation to the Minister, and the
rest was given to the Poor of the place. Which was to be Recorded by a public
Inscription in the Church, as an Encouragement to others to imitate the
Precedent that was given them.

The kindness and civility of the English in Ireland.
The English welcomed us on Shore with many generous Civilities, and showed to
us the Ancient Temper of the English Nation, in their frank Hospitality, and
the Spirit of liberal Entertainments. Though they lately smarted with intestine
Broils, yet now they were at Peace, were unanimously Loyal, and universally
Kind; not sowr'd with Faction, nor grown sordid by Covetousness, but here we
found that Love and Allegiance which seemed indeed to be the Genius of all the
Protestants of that Kingdom. After we had stayed here five Weeks, for want of a
Convoy, we at last set Sail, and on the 5th of December arrived safe at
Gravesend,

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX CONTAINING I. The History of a late Revolution in the Kingdom of
GOLCONDA. II. A short Description of the Kingdom of ARRACAN, and PEGU. III. A
Collection of Coyns now Current in the Kingdoms of INDOSTON, PERSIA, GOLCONDA,
etc. AND IV. Observations concerning the Nature of the Silkworms.


LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judges Head in Fleet Street. 16^6

THE HISTORY OF A Late Revolution IN THE KINGDOM OF GOLCONDA.
THE Account of this Revolution, and those other matters which are discoursed
of in this Appendix, might have fallen in very luckily in some part of the
preceding Voyage, had I been so fortunate as to have had the perusal of the
Papers while the Book was a finishing; but not coming to my Hands 'till it was
Printed, I thought it best to affix them to it, as both agreeable to the
Subject, and containing things in them very remarkable and New: And must needs
own the peculiar Obligation I am under to a very worthy Gentleman, Mr. Daniel
Sheldon, in the free and kind Communication of these Memoirs. I shall not
therefore detain the Reader with any further account of this matter, but pass
on to what I am satisfied will be very agreeable to him, viz. The History of
this Revolution in Golconda.

The present King of Golconda was Son to an Arabian of good Family and Esteem,
but low in Estate and Fortune; to raise which, resolving to Travel, and seek
Employment from some Foreign Prince, he came to Golconda; and, by the Favor of
some persons of Quality, had the opportunity of presenting himself and his
Service to King Cotub sha; who, being pleased with his Person and manner of
Address, gave him a small Government, wherein he behaved himself so well, that
he was advanced to one of the most considerable Commands in the Kingdom, in
which and his Prince's favor he continued 'till his Death: After which his
Estate (being very great) was seized on by the King, who is the general Heir of
all his Nobles and Persons employed by him (none of those Countries having any
Hereditary Estates) so that his Son was reduced to a very poor Condition; but,
having that left which could not be taken from him, viz. his Father's Wit and
Courage, he resolved to follow his Example, hoping to find his Fortune. Full of
which hopes he enters himself into Munsub (that is, the Kings Pay) and had
allowed him twelve or fifteen new Pagotha's (which is about four Pounds sixteen
Shillings, or six Pounds Sterling) per Month, with which, and the hopes of
better Preferment, he made a shift to maintain himself. The King Cotub-sha had
at this time no Son, but three Daughters; the Eldest of which was Married to
Sultan Mamood, Eldest Son to the Great Mogul, Aureng-Zebe: The second to an
Arabian of great Quality, Meera Mamood; and the third was unmarried: To this
unmarried Daughter an Arabian of high Birth and Quality called Siud Sultan, was
an importunate Suitor; and the King grown Old, and oppressed with the Factions
of those to whom he had left the management of Affairs (having all his time
wholly minded Pleasures, and left Business and the Concerns of the Kingdom to
the Cares of others) and mortally hating Sultan Mamood (who by a cruel War,
almost to the utter Ruin of him and his Kingdom, had forced his Consent to the
Marryage of his Eldest Daughter, hoping thereby, after Cotub-sha's Death, to
add the Kingdom of Golconda to the Empire of the Great Mogul) and having no
Kindness for his second Daughter or her Husband, but being extremely fond of
his Youngest, he designed to Marry her to one whose Quality, Parts, and
Courage, might make him able either to break or manage the Factions of his
Court; withstand Sultan Mamood, who he resolved should not succeed him; and
one, who being raised by his Favor, he thought would wholly depend upon it,
and thereby only expect the Succession. And this Young Servant to his Daughter,
being an Arabian (who in these Countries are thought the Wisest and fittest for
Government) and of the Cast of the Siuds (that is of the Family or Kindred of
Mahumet, and therefore much reverenced by all) likewise of a brisk and lively
Wit and Spirit: He thought him a fit Person by whom to manage his Designs, and
consequently to Marry his Daughter; therefore countenanced his Adresses to her;
but the young Man was so dazzled with the prospect of so glorious a Fortune,
that he could not see his right way to it; for, presuming too soon upon the
King and Princesses Favor, instead of contriving how to increase and
strengthen his Interest, by gaining the Consent and Support of the great
Ministers of State; he carried himself so insolently toward them, that he
utterly disobliged, and made himself hateful to them; and they fearing the
Tyranny of one who, when their Equal, began to exercise it over them, resolved
to disgrace and ruin him, by hindering the Match. The chiefest Persons about the
King, were Moso Cawne, Siud Mere Zapher, and Musshuke, these three managed the
King and his great Affairs; for Meera Mamood, the King's Son in Law, being not
in Favor, was not in Business; yet not so quite laid aside, but that he had
free Access to the Court and Presence, and was by all respected as one, that
having Married the King's Second Daughter (Circumstances considered) was likely
enough to succeed him. Therefore having great hopes (and not enduring the
Insolent Carriage of this new Favorite, nor to think of his Marrying the
King's beloved Daughter) put himself in the Head of the Faction against him:
And the Old Courtiers perfectly knowing the King, and the usual and surest ways
of working him to their Designs, soon unsettled the unwary young Man in his
Affections, and then threw him from the height of his Prince's Favor, to the
contempt and scorn of the meanest Subject. For they possessed his Majesty with
an Opinion, that he was an high Spirited, Ambitious Man, and aimed at great
things; that he was at the Head of a great Party and Faction at Court; that if
he were once strengthened with so near an Alliance to the King, he might do
whatsoever he designed; what he designed they knew not, but he gave them great
Reason to fear, it was not his Majesty's safety, nor the Kingdom's Peace; and
Affairs being wholly managed by their Directions, and all Officers at Court
about the King being their Creatures, they made their Information seem more
than probable. The King being naturally jealous, and frighted with the Shadow
of any thing that he thought might disturb his Pleasures, was quickly persuaded
not to marry the Princess to so dangerous a Person, and immediately upon the
breaking off the Match, one of the three Persons before mentioned, ('it is not
certainly known which of them, but thought Musshuke) advised his Majesty to
find out some one for the Princess of small Fortune, but noble Birth and
Courage; a comely Person, and of a generous and cheerful Disposition, and
inclined rather to Pleasures than Business; for, if he was qualified with high
Birth, and the Endowments of Nature, it lay in the King's Power to supply the
Defects of Honor, Riches, etc. and Men of such Dispositions (being given to
Pleasure) were seldom ambitious or designing; therefore such a one being
Created merely by his Favor, would wholly submit by it, and enjoying what he
most desired, (his Pleasures) would not disturb himself or them with the
thoughts of Business, or Cares of Government, but be Obedient and perfectly
contented with the Condition he was in, without aspiring to untimely Greatness.
The Advice was liked, and communicated to the two other Counselors, who
(considering it was a way for continuing them in their Governments, and all
Affairs and Business in their management) confirmed the King, by approving of
the Counsel given him; and having his Order to find out such a Person, the
Young Arabian Soldier (whose Father's Estate had been seized on by the King)
was proposed as one every way qualified according to the King's desire. He is
therefore sent for by Ziud Mere Zapher to his House, and (the King being placed
where he might perfectly see and hear, without being taken notice of) Ziud Mere
Zapher entertained the Young Soldier with some Discourse concerning the
Greatness and Merits of his Father; how much he was beloved and favored by the
King; told him he was sorry to see the Son of so great a Man in so low a
Condition; promised his Assistance in getting some handsome Command for him; bid
him therefore be cheerful and not dejected and Melancholy: And after he thought
the King had fully viewed, dismissed him. When he was gone, the King told Ziud
Mere Zapher, he was not so comely a Person as he was presented to be, nor had he
that Life and Vigor in his Countenance, that he would willingly have in the
Person he made choice of. To which Mere Zapher replied, that his Majesty rather
saw his Misfortunes than the Man himself; for, being the Son of so great a
Person, and having lived in all the plenty of his Father's Great Estate, to be
now reduced to the poor Condition and Allowance of an Ordinary Horseman, must
of necessity make melancholy Impressions both upon his Body and Mind; but if
his Wants were supplied with Money to maintain him according to his Birth and
Quality, he would quickly come to, and appear like himself, and to be such a
one as his Majesty sought for. The King resolves to try, and therefore orders
Mere Zapher to contrive how to furnish him with as much Money as he would have,
without letting him know the Bountiful Hand that relieved him. Immediately some
Xeruffs, (or Money Merchants) are sent for, and Mere Zapher gives them
directions to offer and let him have as much Money as he would take, promising
to see them repaid again; but strictly Commanded them (upon the forfeiture, not
only of their Money, but Lives) not to let him know they had any such Order to
furnish him. Away the Xeruffs go and give him several Visits, under a pretense
of desiring his Assistance in some Business they had with some great Men; for,
he being a Man of high Birth and Quality (such Persons though never so poor,
being by all much respected in those Countries) would have better Access, and
be sooner heard and taken notice of. After two or three Visits, growing more
familiar with him, they told him he looked Melancholy and Discontented, and
desired to know if it were for want of any thing with which they could furnish
him; if Money, they would supply him with any Sum he would please to take; and
desired him to try them for two or three Thousand Old Pagotha's, (which is
about a Thousand or fifteen Hundred Pounds Sterling) His Wants made him ready
enough to take Money, but (considering who they were that offered it, and that
such kindnesses from such Men were always paid for at the dearest Rates) though
his Condition was bad, he was unwilling to make it worse, by putting himself
into such Men's Clutches; for, being once in their Debts, he could not foresee
any hopes of ever getting out, and therefore would not sacrifice his Liberty,
and the little Content he had left, to his Inclination (which but two earnestly
persuaded him to enjoy the present Conveniences of the Money offered, without
troubling himself with the Thoughts of future Payment) but resolved to content
himself in his Wants, till they were by some better and more agreeable way
provided for: So refused their Money, but accepted of their Kindness in the
most grateful and obliging manner he possibly could. But at last the
importunity of the Xeruffs, and his own Wants, prevailed upon him to receive a
considerable Sum, for which (to his great Admiration) they were so far from
taking Security, (as accustomary) that they persuaded him not to spare his
Money, but to live like the Son of so great a Father, offering him more, when
that which he had received was spent. The young Man, naturally inclined to
Gallantry and high Living, being thus plentifully supplied with the Means,
resolves to please and appear like himself with a handsome House, Retinue,
Palankeen, Horses, and all things fit for a Person of his Quality; more
wondering at the Merchants for lending, than at himself for Spending so much
Money. All this while Siud Mere Zapher had his Eye upon him, and quickly
perceived the alteration he expected both in his Person and Humor, and that he
began to be very much esteemed and respected by all that knew him: So desires
the King to see him again, which he does, and now so well likes him, that he
gives Mere Zapher Order to let him have as many opportunities of seeing him as
he could; and the oftener he does see, the more he is pleased and taken with
him: Therefore resolving to Marry his Daughter immediately to him, one Evening
he sends the Deveer or Secretary of State, with an Omrah (or Noble Man) called
Jabber Beague, and a Guard of Horse, to fetch and Conduct him to Court. The
Young Gallant was entertaining some Friends and himself with some Dancing
Women, when News was brought him that some great Officers belonging to the
Court, were at the Door; away went his Friends and Women by a Back-way, and he
to meet the Secretary and Jabber Beague, to conduct them in: As soon as he saw
them (well knowing who they were) he was very much troubled, not imagining why
so Eminent Persons with a Guard of Horse, should come to visit him: And his
Fears were very much increased by a rich Vest with which the Secretary
presented him with from the King: For verily believing it was poisoned, he
desired them to Excuse him, for being so surpised, that he could not tell
whether to receive the King's Present as his Honor or Disgrace and Ruin; for
his Father's Services being long since Rewarded and forgot, and he having never
yet the opportunity of doing his Majesty any, he could not expect any
honorable Notice could be taken of him; and yet he was in hopes he less
deserved Punishment than Reward, since he could not call to mind any one Crime
he had committed in his whole Life, that might give his Majesty the least, or
any Offense: And if his late living in a more plentiful way than formerly had
been taken notice of, and was displeasing, he did assure them he had no other
design in it, than to appear according to his Birth and Quality; that upon the
least Command or notice he would have retired to his former Obscurity; that he
had done no unjust thing to get the Money he spent, but would have been willing
to have given, either his Majesty or them an Account how he did get it. Then he
told them he always had been, and still was so truly Loyal to his Prince; that
he should upon all occasions, freely have ventured his Life for his Service,
and now durst lose it for his Pleasure. So snatching the Vest for to put it on,
he desired the Secretary to present his humble Duty to the King, and tell him
he very much feared he would have more reason to Cherish and Preserve such
Subjects as he was, than to delight and sport himself in the Contrivance of
their Deaths.

The Secretary was, by Order, strictly to observe both what he said, and how he
behaved himself, and therefore did not interrupt him, but permitted none but
himself and Jabber Beague to help him on with his Vest; after which with a low
Salam (or Reverence) he told him they were not sent by the King to Execute any
Sentence of his Displeasure, but to conduct him to his Favor, and the greatest
Honor he could bestow upon him; therefore desired him to go along with them
cheerfully and immediately. So with them he goes, not very well assured of his
Safety, 'till they brought him a goodly Horse with rich Furniture, and desired
him to mount, which he did, and betwixt the Secretary and Jabber Beague rode to
Court, where he was the same Night Married to the Princess: And the whole
business was managed with so much privacy, that Meera Mamood (who had Married
the King's second Daughter) had not the least knowledge of it, 'till it was
publicly declared to whom the King had Married the Young Princess: Which made
Meera Mamood almost mad with Rage, railing at the King, and his Nobility; but
perceiving no body took notice of it, but those that laughed at and despised
him, he left the Court and Kingdom, and went to Delly, where making his
Addresses to Aureng-Zebe, the Great Mogul, he was kindly entertained, and
allowed a Royal Pension. The King is every Day more and more satisfied with his
Son in Law, yet (being resolved not to trust him with any Command or Business,
nor to give him any opportunity of enriching himself, or getting more Money
than he spent) gives him no Munsub (that is no Command of Soldiers, nor
Government of any place or Province) and orders one of his Eunuchs constantly
to pay his Expenses be they never so great, but not to furnish him with any
Money, thereby to give him opportunity of laying up any. The Young Sultan
having an Excellent Understanding, quickly perceived the Design, and wisely
resolved to comply with it, and be wholly governed and managed by the King's
pleasure, without taking any notice of his Jealousy: So he seems not to care
for, nor so much as to think of any Command, Business, or getting of more Money
than would pay for his Pleasures, which did not only fix the Omrahs (or Nobles)
and Governors to him (they verily believing that if he were once King, they
should be all such in their general Governments) but made the King himself even
dote on him, as a Man sent from Heaven to Marry his Daughter, being just such a
Person, as in his thoughts he had wished for. He therefore contrives by all the
ways he could desire to secure the Succession to him, for, being sick and worn
with Age and Pleasures (to which he had been all his time wholly addicted) and
thinking he should die, he summons all his Omrahs before him, and publicly
declares for his Successor Sultan Abdulla Hoosan his Son in Law; conjuring them
by the last Request of their Dying King to settle him (after his Death) in the
Throne, and to submit to his Government; making them, one by one, not only
promise, but swear upon their Alcharon to perform what he had commanded; after
which he immediately dyed, having lived above Eleven Years since the Marriage
of his beloved Daughter, who in that space of time had comforted him with a Son
and two Daughters. The King was no sooner dead, but his second Daughter (Wife
to Meera Mamood) having made a small Party, seizes upon, and secures the Palace
on the behalf of a Son her Husband had by a former Wife, (for by her he had
none) whom she endeavored to make King; but Moso Cawne, Siud Mere Zapher, and
Musshuke, quickly suppressed the Tumult she had made, and immediatel proclaimed
Sultan Abdulla Hoosan Potshaw, or Prince Abdulla Hoosan Emperor.

After all the Ceremonies both of a Funeral and Coronation were performed, the
King begins to think of gratifying those that had made him so; for though he had
long observed Moso Cawne, and Siud Mere Zapher, to be corrupt and ill
Governors, yet they had done him good Service, and he could not, without
lessening his Name in the World, but continue, and something increase their
Honor and Commands: (nor perchance was it in his power to lessen them in
either, since those that had made him King, might still be made able to make
another so) yet it very much troubled him to think he should add to the too
great Power they already had; therefore taking some little time to consider
what was fit for him to do, at last he concludes, that the way to lessen these
two powerful Noblemen, was to make them both too great, for very well knowing
they mortally hated one another, and would never endure each others greatness,
but be always striving which should throw the other out of his Prince's Favor,
he therefore resolved so to divide the Administration of Affairs between them,
that they should be sure to check one the other, and to carry himself so
equally, that it should not be discerned which he most favored; by which he
both answered the Opinion the World had of his Bounty, (a thing much regarded)
in rewarding them with Honor and great Employments, and yet secured himself
from the danger of two such powerful Subjects, by making them too great ever to
agree in an Attempt against him; and setting them both up at so equal and
spreading a height, that they must of necessity justle one another down;
concluding they could not be dangerous to him, while they were so to one
another; and sought only by the advantage of his Favor to ruin each other. To
Moso Cowne he therefore gives the Title of Cawne Cawna, and being a Man of
Courage, makes him General of his Army. To Siud Mere Zapher he gives the Title
of Emir Zemla, and being a Man of Business, makes him Duan (in which Office is
comprehended both that of a Chancellor and Treasurer) so that the General
being to receive the Army's Pay of the Duan was sure to find delays and
affronts, and the Duan being by his Place to inspect into the Disposal of the
King's Money, and Payment of the After the King had honored and Rewarded
others likewise that deserved well of him, he seems wholly to retire from
Business to his Pleasures; but posted himself at so convenient a Distance, that
he had perfect Knowledge of every thing that passed. In this time of leisure he
would often sequester himself from all kind of Company, to meditate and write;
and its since certainly known, that when he was thus retired, he took
particular notice of all the Abuses in the State, and the best ways of
redressing them; likewise set down in Writing several Rules and Maxims for his
future Government.

In the mean time the two great men (or rather Kings) strove who should procure
the finest Women, best Minstrels and Dancers to divert the King, thinking by
such Charms to continue him in the Lethargy they thought he was in. But what
the Wise Prince foresaw soon came to pass; for they (not enduring each others
Greatness, and enraged at the equal Favor of the King) endeavored, by finding
out matter of Accusation aginst, to ruin each other; and the Duan (being by his
place to inspect into the Payment of the Army) received many Complaints against
the General, whose wretched love of Money made him defraud the King and his
Soldiers of great Sums. Of this the Duan complains to the King, who seems not
to believe, and takes little notice of it. The Duan therefore resolving to
bring such Evidence as should convince the King of the Truth of his Complaint,
seizes the General's Braman or Accountant, who kept all the Accounts of the
Army; at which the General is so enraged, that taking some Soldiers with him,
he is resolved to go and cut the Duan in pieces; but the Duan, being a
notorious Coward, is the more careful to have Valiant Men about him, and always
paying them well, they now serve him faithfully, stoutly defending him against
the General, 'till the King sent and Commanded him to retire. At first he was
so out of his Wits, that he would not, but (being persuaded by better tempered
Men, and his Friends) at last he returned to his own House, leaving the Duan
half dead with Fear; who coming to himself, goes immediately to the King, and
desires him to consider with what safety he could be in his Palace, if such
Outrages were committed in the Garrison. The King calmly tells him, he will
take care both for his own, and his future safety, by preventing such Violences
for the time to come, and by perfectly reconciling the General to him; and though
the Duan knew that to be impossible, yet seems to go away contented. The King
sends to the General to let him know that he had undertaken a Reconciliation,
and therefore would have him frame himself to it; but he storms, and calls the
Duan a thousand Names; at last better remembering, calms himself, returns the
King Thanks, and a submission to what he shall Command. Some few days after the
King sends for him (as accustomary) and he (having by that time considered the
rashness of what he had done) is unwilling to go, but (being persuaded by some
he thought Friends, there was no danger, and that the King had inwardly more
kindness for him than for the Duan) to Court he goes, and was no sooner entered
the Palace Yard, but is seized on, and clapped into Irons and Prison.

The Charge against him was for slighting the King's Commands; daring to
assault one of his Counselors within his Garrison; purloyning the King's
Treasure, and converting it to his own Use; and for refusing to pay several
Sums of Money to the Ambassadors of the Great Mogul, very much to the
Dishonor of the King; (he having passed his word for the punctual Payment of
them) for which and some other things he was Imprisoned, and had all his Estate
seized on; in his House being found in ready Money, Five Hundred Thousand new
Pagotha's (which is about Two Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling) besides Jewels,
wherein he was very Rich, having for many Years been Governor of the Diamond
Mine of Color. Immediately after he was seized on, the King mustered the
Army, pays them their Arrears, gives the Command to Musshuke; but, to their
great satisfaction, inrolls them in his own Rolls, and promises to take care
of them himself for the Future. The Duan is infinitely pleased at the fall of
the General, and thinking he had no Equal in the King's Favor, takes upon him
to meddle in every Man's matter, depriving several of the Benefit of their
Places, by taking their Business out of their Hands; and the King lets him go
on without taking notice of small Presumptions, so that by degrees he grows so
confident of his own Authority, and the King's neglect, that he begins to do
things of the greatest Consequence, without acquainting his Majesty; and at
last (having made himself hateful, by doing and undoing every Man's Business,
according to his own Interest and Designs) his Ruin was so generally wished,
that there was a necessity of removing so great a grievance; which gave the
King a fit opportunity of doing what he had so long designed. Notice is
therefore given, that such a Morning the King intends to appear at the Durbar;
(that is at the place where he usually shows himself to his Nobles) so that the
Duan and all the rest of his Omrahs (or Nobles) were to come according to
Custom to make their Salam. When the King was sat, and had a little looked
about him, he commands the Duan to stand before him, and began to speak to him
in so obliging a manner, that every one at first verily thought he designed him
some fresh Honor, and not Disgrace; telling him how particular a kindness he
always had for his Person; how great a Confidence in his Fidelities and
Abilities; insomuch that he had left almost the whole Affairs of his Kingdom to
his management, making him, as it were, King in Power, and contenting himself
only with the Name: But that, to his extreme Discontent, he found himself quite
deceived in him; for he had made use of the good Opinion he had of him, and his
own great Abilities, only to Affront his King, and oppress and wrong his fellow
Subjects. Then in the sharpest Language he could speak, tells him of all his
Insolences and Affronts, by presuming to do things of the greatest consequence
without acquainting him; likewise reckons up all the Miscarriages of his
Administration; then telling him, that he preferring his own Honor, and the
good of the Public, even before his own Life, he could not expect he should
spare his, but Sacrifice it to his own Vindication and public Justice, on the
behalf of his oppressed and injured Subjects: However as a Reward of some
former good Services he had done, he gave him his Life and the Government of
such a Province, commanding him immediately (upon the forfeiture of both) to
retire to his Government, and for the future not to meddle with any Business
but what concerned it. And so, without further Disgrace, dismissed him, not
permitting any to affront him, but commanding all to respect him as the
Governor of a Province.

The King, with Reputation, and the infinite satisfaction of his People, having
thus lad aside his two Partners in the Government (as if he thought himself
then and not before a King) leaves his Retirement; dismisses the lewd Women
and Dancers; and breaks the Charms of his former Pleasures, with the Thoughts
of Business; which he wholly minds and delights in; appears frequently at the
Durbar; inspects into the whole Affairs of his Kingdom; calls for all the
Accounts of his Revenues, the auditing of which he leaves to Musshuke (who is
now the Favorite) rewards bountifully; punishes not with Death, but other
ways, very severely; giving his People great assurance of being happily
Governed for the future, by a Wise and most excellent King.

THE KINGDOM OF ARRACAN.
CRossing the Gulf of Bengala, and the Out-lets of Ganges, Name and Bounds.
from the Kingdom of Golconda toward the East, you arrive in the Kingdom of
Arracan; by some called Orracan, and by Father Tosi, sometimes the Empire of
Mogo; which is a Title lately assumed by the King, Vol. 2. p. 29.
probably upon his late Conquests over the Emperor of Pegu, to whom he was
formerly Tributary and Dependent. It is bounded on the North-West by the
Kingdom of Bengala, some Authors making Chatigam to be its first Frontier City;
but Texeira, and generally the Portuguese Writers, reckon that as a City of
Bengala; and not only so, but place the City of Bengala it self upon the same
Coast, Baudrand.
more South than Chatigam. Though I confess a late French Geographer has put
Bengala into his Catalogue of imaginary Cities, and such as have no real
Existence in the World; but I wish he had given us a more particular account of
his Reasons. Along the Coast which is washed by the forementioned Golph, it is
extended as far as the Cape, called by the Portuguese, Nigraes, where it
touches upon Pegu, and is enclosed by it on the South and East. Toward the
North it borders upon Ava But to fix all these limits to a determinated Point,
is altogether impossible, by reason of those frequent Alterations, and new
Conquests, that are made on the one side or the other daily.

Arracan.
The Metropolis Arracan, from whence the Kingdom it self takes its Denomination,
is situate in the middle of a Valley, containing no less than fifteen Miles in
compass, and being environed on all sides with a continued Ridge of steep and
craggy Mountains, which serve it instead of Walls; and appear on the inside as
such, being artificially cut to resemble the Fortifications of a strong City.
The Outlets, which serve for Gates, are hewn out of the Rocks by main force,
and being defended by Bulwarks, make the City impregnable. Besides these
outward Fortifications, it is defended by a Castle of that incredible strength,
that the King of Brama coming against it with Three Hundred Thousand Men, and
Forty Thousand Elephants, was forced to raise the Siege with Disgrace. Through
the Valley runs a large River, which Maginus calls Chaberis, which dividing it
self into several little Rivolets and Streams, passes through all the streets,
affording thereby a wonderful Advantage to the City, by the ready Conveyance of
all sorts of Merchandises and Provisions unto every part thereof. At its
parting from the City, which is said to be about Forty Five, or Fifty Miles
from the Sea, all these little Rivolets are Collected again into two Channels,
which opening toward the North and South, at length fall Westward into the
Gulf of Bengala, that toward the North at Orietan, and the other at Dobazi or
Duabacam, both which places are much frequented by Merchants; but the alternate
Ebbings and Flowings of the Sea are so violent, especially about the time of
the Full Moon, that the Ships can hardly ride safely in the Ports. But before
we leave Arracan, to speak of these places, it will be convenient to say
something of its Buildings, which are indeed ordinarily mean; though there are
several spacious Piazza's or Bazars, which afford both Conveniences for
Markets, and tolerable Prospects to the Spectators. For Timber they make use of
Bambou Cane, and instead of Nails, tie the pieces together with the smaller
sort of the same Cane, which when slender and Green, is so pliable, that it may
be wreathed and twisted as you please. The Princes and Nobiliry make use of a
different sort of Wood, and are very profuse in adorning the Insides of their
Houses with exquisite Carvings and Guildings. Nor are their common sort
destitute of Ornaments to set off and Beautify them. The Palace Royal is
vastly large, but not so beautiful for its structure. It is supported with
large and tall Pillars, made of whole Trees, and covered over with Gold, with
Chambers above built with the most precious and odoriferous Wood the East will
afford, as Red and White Sandal, and a sort of Bois de Aquila. In the Middle,
and as it were Center of the Palace, stands a great Hall, which they call the
Golden House, because the Inside is wholly over-laid with Gold, from the Bottom
to the Top, and over a raised place hangs a Canopy of Massy Gold, round which
hang above an Hundred Combalenghe, as they call them, which are large Wedges of
the same Metal, made in the Fashion of Sugar-Loaves, each of above Forty Pound
weigbt. Here also are to be seen seven Idols of massy Gold likewise, of the
height of an ordinary Man, and about two Fingers in thickness, but within
hollow; which are also adorned with precious Stones, Rubies, Emeralds, Saphirs,
and Diamonds, of an exiraordinary Bigness, upon their Foreheads, Breasts, and
Arms, and about their Middles. In the midst of this Hall stands a square Stool,
of three Hands breadth, all of pure Gold, which supports a Cabinet of pure Gold
also, and overlaid with precious Stones, containing the two Caneques, i. e. two
famous Pendants made in the Form of two Pyramids, of two Rubies of the length
of a Man's little Finger, and the Circumference at the base, as wide as that of
an ordinary Pullets Egg.

The Quarrel about these Jewels is said to have caused as much Bloodshed among
the Neighboring Kings hereabouts, as might have been sufficient for the
obtaining an entire Empire; the Contest being not so much for the value of the
Jewels, as that they are supposed to bring along with them a right, or at least
a claim of Dominion over the Neighboring Princes. And now they are in the
Hands of this King, but never worn by him, except upon the Day of his
Coronation. In another Apartment stands the Statue of the King of Brama,
treacherously Murdered by his Subjects, so natural and to the Life, that it
causes Admiration in all the Spectators, which are very Numerous, he having
obtained the Reputation of a great Saint, and being famed for Curing the
Diseases of those that resort to him; especially the Bloody Flux. In the whole
City are numbered no less than six Hundred Pagods, or Idol Temples, the
Inhabitants amounting to an Hundred and Sixty Thousand, besides Merchants and
Strangers; the City, as indeed the whole Kingdom, being said to be very
Populous. Not far from this Palace, there is a great Lake, with many small
Islands therein, which are Inhabited by their Priests, which they call Raulini.
There are also constantly a great number of Boats running up and down in it,
but hindered from all Communication with the City by a Bank, so contrived, that
should they be Besieged, and overpowr'd by their Enemies, so as to be
constrained to yield the City to them, they could overwhelm both it and them in
a whole Deluge of Water, by breaking down that Bank.

From this City, passing down that Branch of the River, Orietan.
which runs toward the North, you come to Orietan; the whole Course of the
River being extremely delightful, the Banks being covered with tall Trees
always green and shady, which bending their Head toward the Water, make one
continued Arbor, and defend the Travelers from the scortching Sun. And the
variety of Apes or Peacocks flying or skipping from branch to branch, adds very
much to the pleasure of the Passage. Orietan is a City of great Concourse of
Merchants from most Countries of the East, Pegu, China, Japan, Malacca; and
from Malabar Westward; and other parts of India. It Is governed by a Deputy
appointed by the King at his Coronation, receiving a Crown from his Hand, and
always enjoying the Title of King himself; this City being one of those Twelve,
the Capitals of Twelve Provinces, subject to the Kingdom of Arracan; which are
always governed by Crowned Heads. Not far from this City arises the Mount of
Maum, which imparts its Name to a Lake washing the Foot thereof; thither are
sent all those that are Exiled by the King, who causes strict Guards to be kept
in all the Passes, and further to prevent the flight of the Criminals, cuts off
their Heels. The Mountain is hardly passable for Travelers, being not only
craggy and impervious, but so infested with wild Beasts, that it is a difficult
thing to escape them.

From the Mountain of Maum, Peroem.
crossing the Gulf you come to another City Peroem, which being situate near
the Sea, and having a good capacious Harbor, is a Town of great Traffic. It Is
likewise the Residence of a Governor, who exercises absolute Authority within
his Precincts, and keeps a Court answerable to the Majesty of a King.

Ramu is another City of equal Condition with Peroem, Ramu.
from which it is not many Days Journey distant, but he Way betwixt them very
dangerous, whether by Land or by Water; The Sea being subject to sudden
tempestuous Storms, and that by Land lying cross the Mountains of Pre, which
separate Arracan from Pegu, as dangerous, by reason of the Wild Beasts, as the
former. What is further taken notice of in there parts, is a Mountain called
Pora, which in the Language of the Country signifies God, or an Idol; which
Name it borrows from an Idol placed upon the very top thereof, sitting
cross-legg'd upon a Pedestal, to which those Heathens resort with great
Devotion. By this place runs a large River, from which some Engineers would
have persuaded the King to have cut a Channel as far as Arracan; but he
absolutely refused to hearken to the Proposal, because he thought he should
thereby expose the place of his Residence to the Incursions of the Great Mogul,
who might with Ease convey his Forces down such a Channel.

Dianga.
The next Town of Note along a tempestuous Coast, is the City of Dianga, or
Diango, which seems to belong to the Kingdom of Bengala, but made by Father
Tosi a principal City of this. Indeed this City, as well as Chatigam, which was
undoubtedly once a City of this Kingdom, and the Government thereof commonly
allotted to the King's second Son, has run the risque of Frontier Towns,
frequently to change its Master, and to be sometimes in the Hands of one of the
Neighboring Princes, and sometimes in those of the other. The greatest part of
its Inhabitants are Portuguese Fugitives, who live here, and enjoy great
Privileges and Immunities granted by the King. The Fathers of St. Augustine
have here likewise a firm Residence, with a good House, and very decent Church.
Many of them likewise make their abode in two neighboring Villages, Arracale,
and Angarracale.

Other places along this Coast subjected to this King, are Coromoria, Sedoa,
Sundiva.
Zara, and Port Magaeni. To which let me add the Island of Sundiva, which is an
Island in the Gulf of Bengala, scarce twenty Miles removed from the Continent
of that Kingdom. It Is about an Hundred Miles in Compass, and affords such vast
quantities of Salt, that it needs no other Commodities to give in Exchange for
any of those of the Neighboring Countries, being able with it alone, to lade
two Hundred Vessels every Year. It Is so well fortified by nature alone, without
the Assistance of Art, that it is almost impossible to seize it without the
consent of the Inhabitants; which made the Portugueses cast an Eye upon it,
with intent to make it a Retreat for themselves. Accordingly in the Year 1602,
they took it from the Moguls, who some time before had deprived its lawful
Prince thereof; who, after they had (...) it, confirmed their Title to it, by a
free Grant of all his Right and Claim thereto. But they never quietly enjoyed
it, first the Inhabitants molesting them; and when they were Defeated, the King
of Arracan, fearing the growth of their strength in those parts, endeavored to
dislodge them; and though at first he was constrained to raise the Siege, and to
make an Agreement with them, yet in the Year 1603, they were compelled to yield
it to him, and retire into Bacala, and other parts of the Kingdom of Bengala.

Assaram, Tipora, Chacomas
Upon the Northern parts of this Kingdom, lie the Cities of Assaram, Tipora, and
Chacomas, all said to be the Capital Cities of so many Kingdoms, but all
subject to this of Arracan. Indeed I take their Kings to be no more than
Deputies, or Viceroys, and Governors of these Cities, placed there with the
great vaunting Title of Kings, by the King of Arracan; as we are assured of
those Governors before mentioned, and that there are no less than Twelve of the
same Dignity in his whole Dominions. Nor do I meet with any thing remarked of
any of them, but that being places upon the Frontiers, they are constantly
provided of good Garrisons: Unless I may have leave to add what Mr. Tavernier
has Recorded of three of the Subjects of Tipora, which he calls Tipra, that he
found them such notable Topers, that they never gave out 'till they had drunk
him dry; and at last when all his Wine was spent, seemed to express a great
deal of concern that they could have no more. He tells, it is true, further,
that there is a Gold Mine in the Dominions of this Prince; but so very course
that it is not fit to be exported; that the King exacts no Subsidies of his
Subjects, but obliges the prime of his Nobility to work six Days in the Year in
his Mines in lieu of them. There are besides, some Silk-works here, of which
they make good Advantage.

Taking the Southern Stream from Arracan, it conducts you to the City Dobazi,
Dobazi.
which is a place of very great Traffic, being a Port much frequented by
Strangers. Thence continuing your Voyage along the Coast you arrive at Chudabe,
Chuda
which being situate near the Sea, and having a commodious Port, is also a
place much frequented by Strangers.

Not far from hence lies Cape Nigraes, and by it the Island Munay, famous for
the Religion of the place, Cape Nigraes.
being filled with Pagods and Temples, one whereof is called Quiay Figrau, or,
the The Temple of the God of the Atoms of the Sun, and another Quiay Doceo, the
Temple of the God of the afflicted of the Earth; and especially for being the
place of Residence for the chief of the Raulini, whom they sometimes call Xoxom
Pungri. This Xoxom Pungri is the chief of all the Ecclesiastics in the
Kingdom, this Title importing as much among them, as Pope at Rome; on him
depend all Spiritual Causes, and he is had in so great veneration, not only by
the People, but even by the King himself, that he always places him at his
Right Hand; and never speaks to him without a profound Reverence. This Island
is likewise spoke of by Ferd. Mendez Pinto, but as in the Dominions of the
Emperor of Pegu. He tells us too that he happened to be in those parts at the
Death of one of those great Men, whom he calls only the Roolim of Munay, and
sets down at length he Ceremonies of his Interment, with those of the Election
and Inauguration of his Successor; which would be too tedious here to recite.
Let it suffice that the King and all the Grandees of the Court, together with
all the Ecclesiastics, according to the Ancient Custom of Pegu, were obliged
to attend the Funeral; the Expenses of which, which were defraid by the King,
amounted to an Hundred Thousand Ducats; besides the Garments which the King and
Nobility gave to Thirty Thousand Priests. See Ferd. Mendez Pinto, chapter 60, 61,
62.

Leaving Munay, and doubling the Cape Nigraes, you come to Siriam, which Tosi
makes the last City of Arracan, Siriam.
though others account it a City of Pegu. However they differ not in the
Situation thereof, all placing it upon the Borders of the two Empires. But
Father Tosi adds, that it was thither the Emperor of Mogo retired with his
Victorious Army, laden with the Spoils of the City of Tangu, Subject to the
King of Brama; where he found not only a vast Treasure, but the white Elephant,
and the two Caneques before mentioned. The City of Siriam, is not at present in
that Splendor and flourishing Condition it has formerly been, having once been
the Metropolis of a Kingdom, and the place of Residence for the King and Court;
and encompassed with very strong Walls, the Foot steps whereof remain to this
Day. But the last King thereof, being in the Year 1567, besieged therein by the
King of Pegu, with an Army of Fifteen Hundred Thousand Men, and having
sustained a tedious Siege, to the Destruction of no less than the third part of
the Enemies Army, when he could no longer hold out, rather than fall into their
Hands, destroyed himself by Poison, leaving the City with all its Nobles and
Treasury a Prey to the Conqueror, who Transported them to Pegu. From this
place to Arracan, you may pass by Barges along a small River that runs between
them.

In short, this Kingdom of Arracan, or Empire of Mogo, is said to comprehend
twelve lesser Kingdoms, and twenty four Provinces, of which, besides those
already mentioned, my Authors have not given me so much as their Names.

Inhabitants OF ARRACAN.
THE Inhabitants of Arracan, Tosi, vol. 2. page 46. Features, and Diet.
for their Shapes and Features seem most to affect those, which are most
contemned by those of other Nations; they prize a broad and flat Forehead; to
effect which, they bind a Plate of Lead hard upon the Foreheads of their
Children as soon as they are born, which they do not remove 'till it has had
its effect. Their Nostrils are large and open, their Eyes small, but Quick;
their Ears reach down to their Shoulders, like the Malabars; and no Color is
so pleasing to them as a dark Purple. In their Feasts they have always plenty
of Provisions, but such as are neither pleasing to the Eye, nor grateful to the
Palate. They mix with their choicest Dishes, Rats and Mice, and Serpents, etc.
which, to those that are not accustomed to see such things upon their Tables,
are very offensive. Fish they never eat, but when putrid and Corrupted,
affirming them then to have the sweetest Relish. Of these also they make a kind
of Mustard, which they call Sidol, taking out the backbone, and beating their
Putrid Flesh into a Consistency, after it has been dried in the Sun, and with
this they sprinkle all their Victuals. The poorer sort especially, make use for
this purpose, of a Fish so rotten, and of so ill a savor, that no man can pass
by the places, where it is prepared, without stopping his Nose: The Richer use
Crab-fish less Corrupted, with some other Ingredients mixed therewith, which
makes it less unsavory. Their manner is to set upon the Table a Hundred or two
Hundred small Dishes at once, that every one may taste what he likes best; but
Bread they have none, instead of that serving themselves of Rice, either
parched or bruised; or otherwise ordered by them in the Flower.

Customs about the Sick.
When they are sick, they make use of the Physician, but send for the Raulini,
who are their Priests; who coming to them blow upon them with their Mouths, and
repeat some certain Prayers over them; which, if it immediately effects not the
Cure, (as you may believe it seldom does) then they make use of the opportunity
of making their Advantage of the Patient. They tell him he must offer a
Sacrifice to Chaor-Baos, i. e. the God of the four Winds; who, they persuade
them is the Author of all Distempers. This Sacrifice they call Calouco,
consisting of fat Capons and Hens, Hoggs and other Creatures, according to the
Abilities of the Sick Person; and must be repeated four times, to every Wind
distinctly, if he does not recover before; upon all which the Raulini's feast
themselves, with a great deal of Jollity. But if all this does not avail to the
driving away the Distemper, then must the Wife or nearest Relation of the
infirm Person, make a solemn Vow to perform, if he recovers, another Ceremony,
which they call a Talagno. The performance whereof is thus; the Person that
makes the Vow, having provided a Convenient Chamber, and hanged it with the
richest Tapestry, and erected an Idol upon an Altar at the end thereof, with
other necessary Preparations, upon the Day appointed, the Priests and Relations
of the Sick, repair to the place, and are entertained with most sumptuous
Feasts for Eight Days together, all sorts of Music attending all the time. But
what is the most absurd part thereof, the Person that makes the Vow, is obliged
to dance as long as he is able to stand, and when his Legs will support him no
longer, he must take hold of a piece of Cloth, fastened to a Beam for that
purpose, and continue dancing 'till he has quite exhausted his Spirits, and he
drops down as a Dead Man in the place. Then is the Music redoubled, and all
the Spectators second it with their Rejoicings, and are ready to Envy him the
happiness he then Enjoys, supposing him all the while he lies in this
Condition, to Converse with the Idol. This Exercise he is bound to repeat as
long as the Feasting continues; but if his weakness will not permit, then must
some near Relation succeed in his place; and if at last the Person recovers
after the Talagno is completed, he is carried to the Pagods, and anointed with
Oils, and Odoriferous and costly Perfumes, from the Head to the Foot. But if
notwithstanding all these Sacrifices and Vows, the Sick Person die at last, the
Raulini have another fetch, they tell them all these Sacrifices were well
accepted by the Gods, and the Reason why they granted not the Sick a longer
life, was, because they designed him a greater Favor by taking him to
themselves, and recompencing him in another World.

Not less Superstitious and absurd are they in their manner of Interment.
Funerals.
For the Dead Corpse being brought into the middle of the House, the Raulini
walking round about it, cant over certain Prayers, whilst others perfume the
place with Incense; the greatest part of the Family in the mean time keeping
strict Watch, and beating upon a broad piece of Brass. This they tell you they
do, lest to the great Disgrace and Damage to the Party deceased, a Black Cat
should pass over him, for then he would be constrained to return to life again
with Ignominy, and be deprived of that happiness they suppose him to Enjoy in
another World. Before the Deceased be carried out of the House, they invite to
a Banquet, a sort of People called Graii, of which if they are not at leisure
to accept, it causes a most doleful Lamentation among the Relations of the
deceased, taking that for a certain Sign that his Soul is Condemned to Hell,
which they call the House of Smoke. The Coffin is adorned according to the
Abilities of the Person, and being firmly persuaded of the Transmigration of
Souls into other Bodies, they never fail to paint upon it the Figures of
Horses, Elephants, Eagles, Cows, Lions, and the most noble Creatures they can
imagine, as it were to direct the departed Soul to the best Lodging. Unless out
of pure Humility, the deceased order beforehand, Rats and Frogs, and the
vilest and most despicable Animals to be drawn in their stead, as the most
suitable Receptions for his polluted Soul. In this manner the Body is carried
out into the Fields, and there burnt to Ashes, the Raulini kindling the Fire,
and the Relations attending clad all in White, which is their Mourning Attire,
except a black Hatband round their Heads.

Religion.
Their Religion in general is nothing else but an absurd Heathenish
Superstition; and they are disturbed at the most common things, looking upon
the Barking of a Dog, or the like, as the Omen and Presage of some notable
Event. Upon which the Raulini are immediately consulted, who know how to
Entertain them with a Thousand Fopperies. They have their Domestic Idol,
besides those in their public Temples, which are so numerous, that in one
alone are said to be no less than Twenty Thousand. To this Domestic God, they
constantly before they Eat, offer a part of their Provision; and wear his Mark
burnt into their Arms, or Sides, or Shoulders with a hot Iron; and by him
Swear. Those that are of ability, send Portions likewise to the public
Temples, which are built in the form of a Pyramid or Steeple, higher or lower,
according to the Pleasure of the Founder. In the Winter time, they Cloth their
Idols that they may not take cold, in hopes of a mighty Recompense for such an
act of Charity to them. At a certain time of the Year, they celebrate a
Festival, which they call Sansaporan, in commemoration of the Dead, wherein
they make a solemn Procession in Honor of one of their Idols, called Quiay
Poragray, which is carried in an heavy Chariot, with Ninety of the Raulini clad
in yellow Satin, attended through all the Streets of the City; many, as he
passes, throwing themselves under his Chariot Wheels, and others hanging
themselves upon Iron Hooks, fastened for the purpose, and Sprinkling him with
their Blood. And in such high Veneration are held these Martyrs of the Devil,
that every Man thinks himself happy, on whom one drop of their Blood shall
chance to light. Nay, the very Hooks on which they hang, are with great
Reverence taken down by the Raulini, and as sacred Relics, carefully preserved
in their Pagods.

Priests.
Their Raulini, or Priests, are divided into three Orders, distinguished by the
names of Pungrini, Pangiani, and Xoxom, something resembling the Distinction of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons. They are clothed in Yellow, having their Heads
Shaven, and all below the Pungrini uncovered; but these wear a Yellow Mitre,
with the point turned, and falling backwards. They are tied to live single,
both by Vow, and under Penalty of Degradation, and being reduced into the
number of Laics, and taxed as they. They live partly in Cloisters founded by
their Kings, or great Men, which are generally very sumptuous, and partly in
their own Houses, and of their own Estates; but all under one Head their Xoxom
Pungri before mentioned. To these are recommended the Children, as well of the
Nobility, as of the inferior sort, to be Educated in the Knowledge of their
Religion and Laws; and they are said to be exceeding Hospitable to Strangers.
They have amongst them many Hermites, not unlike the Jogues before spoken of;
whom they divide into Grepi, Manigrepi, and Taligrepi, who for some severe and
rigorous Penances inflicted upon themselves, are had in great Esteem among the
People.

THE GOVERNMENT, etc. OF ARRACAN.
THIS King, for the vastness of his Treasure, and strength for War, is as
considerable as most of the Princes of the East, and within less than an
Hundred Years space, has much enlarged his Dominions by his Conquests, as well
in Pegu, Jarric. l. 6. c. 29.
as Bengala. But in his Wars against the Portuguese he was never successful, a
Fleet of his, of no less than five hundred and Forty Sail, being defeated by
them in the Year 1605. And not long after coming against the Fort of Siriam
with a Fleet of Twelve Hundred Sail, together with a Land Army of Thirty
Thousand Men, with three Thousand five Hundred great and small Canon, he was
thrice beat both by Land and Sea, and forced to retire.

The Government is chiefly in the hands of Twelve Princes, to whom he gives the
Title of Kings, residing in his Principal Cities, in Twelve Magnificent Palaces
built for the King himself; in all which are great Seraglio's, the Governor
being obliged Yearly to choose Twelve Girls, born that year within their
Precincts, who are brought up at the King's Charge, 'till they are twelve Years
old, at which age being brought to his Court, he chooses by the smell of their
Garments, in which they have been made to sweat, those whose Scent pleases him,
disposing of the rest to the Gentlemen of his Court.

He assumes to himself as great Titles as any of his Neighbors, The King's
Titles.
stiling himself Padxa, or Emperor of Arracan, Possessor of the White
Elephant, with the two Caneques, and by virtue of them, rightful Heir of Pegu,
and Brama; Lord of the Twelve Boioni of Bengala, and the Twelve Kings who lay
the highest Hair of their Heads under the Soles of his Feet; with others of the
like importance. His ordinary residence is at Arracan, but in the Summer time
it is usual with him to spend two Months in a kind of Progress by Water from
thence to Orietan; in which he is attended by all the Nobility, in Boats so
artificially contrived, with distinct Apartments, and Conveniences for the
Court, that they appear rather a floating Palace or City, than a Fleet of
Boats. Nor does he at this time omit the Administration of Justice, but hears
Causes, and attends public Business, as much as in his Palace. One Pretense
for his Marine Progress, is to visit the Pagod of their Supreme Deity, whom
they call Quiay Poragray, and to whom the King daily sends a sumptuous Dinner.
By this and several other Instances, they show themselves very Superstitious;
and this Superstition frequently leads them into Acts of the most inhumane
Cruelty. Tosi vol. 2. page 45.
It Is related of one of them, that being told he could not long survive his
Coronation, which is usually performed with the greatest Ceremony and Pomp
imaginable, the Twelve Royolets attending, and the Xoxam Pungri setting the
Crown upon his Head, he deferred that Ceremony Twelve Years after he came to
the Crown. But being pressed to it by his Lords, and not able handsomely to put
it off any longer, he consulted a Mahumetan, whether there was any way to avert
the Omen; who, with a barbarous intent to destroy those whom he counted Enemies
of his false Prophet, advised him to make a Composition of six Thousand of the
Hearts of his Subjects, four thousand of those of White Cows, and two thousand
of those of White Doves, which, being used as an Electuary, would protect him
from that Presage. This the King believing, built a House, the Foundations
whereof, to make it still more auspicious, were laid upon Women great with
Child; and in that, butchered no less than Eighteen Thousand innocent Persons,
to preserve his own hateful Life.

Race.
Of the Descent of these Kings, we have no account in any Author I have seen;
nor whence they derive that Appellation of Moghi. Only we are told by Tosi,
they are very careful to preserve the Blood unmixt, upon which account the King
is obliged to Marry his Eldest Sister.

THE KINGDOM OF PEGU.
THE Kingdom of Pegu is bounded on the North with the Countries of Brama,
Bounds and Extent.
Siammon, and the Calaminham; toward the West it is partly separated from
Arracan by the Mountains of Pre, and partly washed by the Gulf of Bengala,
extending it slf along the Coast from Cape Nigraes, being about 16 Degrees. of
Northerly Latitude, as far as the City of Tavay, whose Elevation is said to be
13 Degrees. On the East it joins with Lao, on the South it touches upon the
Territories of Siam. But these Bounds are by no means fixed and determined,
being subject to many Alterations, as it has prevailed over its Neighbors, or
they on the contrary over it. In the Year 1690, one Brama, King hereof, by his
Victorious Arms extended its limits beyond those known to his Predecessors,
subduing the King of Siam, and reducing him to be Tributary to the Crown of
Pegu. But this continued no longer than to the time of his immediate Successor.

The Soil, being watered with several Rivers, one whereof arising from the Lake
Chiamay, takes a Course of between four and five hundred Miles before it falls
into the Sea, is very rich and fertile, abounding especially with Rice and good
Pasturage for their Cattle. The River is known by the Name of Pegu, after that
of the Country and City which is washed by it; but for the Advantages it brings,
and its constant Annual Inundations, it is not unfitly styled by Maffeius, the
Indian Nile. Mafeius, lib. 16.
Its Overflowings are indeed almost incredible, reaching Thirty Leagues beyond
its usual Course; and by leaving behind it a kind of Slime or Mud upon the
Ground, so Enriches their Soil, and increases their Crops of Rice, that a
hundred Ship Loads thereof have been Exported in a Year, without so much as
being missed.

But a great augmentation of the wealth of the Country, which, before a late
Desolation in its Wars against Arracan and Siam, was esteemed as great as of
any Kingdom in the East, are the Precious Stones, such as Rubies, Topazes,
Precious Stones.
Saphirs, Amethists, etc. all which the Inhabitants comprehend under one common
Name of Rubies, and distinguish them only by their Color, calling the Saphir
the Blew; the Amethist the Violet; the Topaz the Yellow Ruby; and so of the
rest. But that which properly obtains that Name, is a Jewel transparent,
sparkling Red, and toward the extremities thereof, or near the surface,
something incling to the Violet of the Amethist. Some take it to be the same
with the Hyacinth of the Ancients, Cl. Salm.
and a notable Critic would persuade us, that Jacut, the Name given it by the
Arabians and Persians, is derived from the word Hyacinthus. It Is found in
several places of the Indies, as also in Europe; but those most valued, are the
Stones of Ceylon and Pegu* the chiefest place for them in this (...), being the
most barren part thereof, viz. a Mountain near Capelan, or Cablan, between
Siriam and Pegu; as likewise those Hills which stretch from this Kingdom to
that of Cambodia. They are distinguished into four sorts or species, the Ruby,
the Rubacel, the Balace, and the Spinel; of which the first is much preferred
before the rest. The natural shape is generally Oval or Globular, being scarce
ever found with Corners. Their Value, as that of the Diamonds, increases
proportionably to their Weight, being weighed by Ratis, whereof one is reckoned
three Grains and a half, or seven eighths of a Caratt, and a Stone of this
Weight has been fold for twenty Pagods; one of two Ratis, and one of eight, for
eighty five Pagods; one of three Ratis, and one fourth, for an hundred eighty
five; one of four Ratis, and five eighths, for four hundred and fifty; one of
five Ratis, for five hundred twenty five; and one of six Ratis and half, for
nine hundred and twenty Pagods. But if the Stone exceed this Weight, and be
clean and perfect, there is no certain value to be set upon it. Of the Virtue
of this Stone, as well as the Diamond, it is pleasant to read the Conceits of
some fanciful Men, Tavern. part 2. page 144.
as that it is a Sovereign Antidote against Poison, either wore, or taken
inwardly in Powder, and a great Preservative against the Plague; that it chears
the Heart, expels Sorrow, restrains Lust, drives away frightful Dreams, lessens
sleep, Beot. l. 2. c. 14.
inspirits the Blood, and incites to Anger; and, what is beyond all these, by
its changing Color, foretells approaching Dangers or Calamities to him that
wears it; and the more darkened and obscured it appears, the greater will be
the Misfortune. To this purpose one Wolfgangus Gabelchoverus relates of
himself, That traveling with a Wife, a Rubie set in a Ring, which he wore upon
his Finger, changed color several times, 'till at last it seemed to have lost
its splendor, and was turned almost quite black; whereupon he took it from his
Finger, and laid it aside, his Mind presaging some great Evil hanging over the
Head either of himself or Relations; which happened accordingly, for in a few
Days, he tells us, his Wife fell sick and died; after whose Death, his Ruby
immediately recovered its Ancient Luster and Beauty. The Balace Ruby is
supposed by some, to have taken its name from Palatium, or Palace; because it
is, as it were the Palace or Matrix, in which are formed the true Rubies.
Others think the Name is derived from Bala, which in the Persian Language
signifies high or topping, which agrees to the natural Form of the Stone, which
is commonly oblong or pointed; the most probable Conjecture is that of Marcus
Paulus Venetus, that it is borrowed from the Country, where they are found in
the greatest Plenty, which he says is by the Inhabitants called Balaheia. Though
I must confess, I could have wished he had given us some better hints, whereby
to find out that Country.

THE INHABITANTS OF PEGU.
THE Inhabitants are of Color, Customs.
rather Tawny than Black, not unlike those of Arracan; but in their manners
more corrupt, than any I have yet met with. Their very Women seem to have lost
all Natural Modesty, going almost quite Naked, with only a thin Covering about
their Middles, so carelessly bound about them, as not to cover their shame. They
tell us indeed, in excuse for it, they were enjoined to go so by an ancient
Queen of the Country; who to prevent a worse Vice in the Men, commanded them to
use this means of stirring up and inflaming their Desires toward them. Their
Habitations are as slovenly as their Manners corrupt, Tosi Vol. 2 page 69.
making no Scruple to lodge in the same Room with their Hoggs; and as for their
Diet they always take care to season it with Sidol, mentioned in the
Description of Arracan, so nauseous and offensive, that none but themselves can
endure so much as the smell thereof. Their Marriages are likewise loose and
uncertain; for the Man, as it were buying his Wife, being obliged to pay a
Dowry to her Parents; if after he has some time Enjoyed her, he dislikes either
her Person or Conditions, he has liberty of divorceing her, and remitting her
back to her Relations. On the other side, if the Woman or her Friends dislike
her Husband, they may take her away from him, repaying only the Dowry he gave
to them. When any Stranger comes to reside amongst them, they offer him his
choice of their Daughters, one of which he hires at a certain rate, according
to the time of his stay, to cohabit with him; and at his departure, she returns
again to her Parents, without the least disgrace. Nay, should the same stranger
return again into the Country, tho she should be Married to another Man, her
Husband is obliged to restore her to him for the time of his continuance there,
and when he leaves the place, receive her again.

They are Superstitious to the highest Degree, and great Worshippers of the
Devil, making, as the Manichees of old, two Authors of Beings; one the Author
of all Good, which is God, and the other of all Evil, which is the Devil.

Upon this Principle they are as zealous in the Worship of the Devil as of God,
and use as much Art and Pains to obtain his Favor. When any sickness, or other
Calamity befalls them, their first Addresses are to him, making Vows to him, if
he will free them from their present Misery, and cease to afflict them for the
future. Nor dare they omit the solemn Performance of these Vows, upon their
Recovery. But choosing a Man, whom they call the Father of the Devil, as being
one of the greatest of his Priests, and best understanding, or at least
pretending to do so, what will be most acceptable to him, to direct them, make
a great Feast, attended with Music of all sorts, to pacify and appease this
incensed Adversary. Many of them will run about the streets in the Morning,
with one hand full of Rice, and a Torch in the other, crying aloud, They go to
give the Devil his Breakfast, that he might not hurt them all that Day. Others,
before they eat, throw part of what they have over their Shoulders to feed him.
And with such a panick Fear are they struck at the thoughts of this Author of
Evil, that they will run, as if they were really possessed, from a Man in a Mask,
lest he should prove a Devil come out of Hell to torment them. And at a place
called Tavay, they have a Custom to replenish their Houses with Victuals, and
then leave them for three Months, that the Devils may come and dwell in them,
feeding upon what they have provided; and to be propitious to them all the rest
of the Year.

They have an Order of Religious among them had in much esteem, who do
frequently oppose this Diabolical Worship, but are not able to root out of the
minds of the People, what their Fears have so deeply imprinted there. These
Religious they call Telapoi, who are not unlike Mendicant Friars, living upon
the Alms of the People, and so highly venerated by them, that they would be
glad to drink the Water wherein they wash their Hands. They are usually of the
very dregs of the People, but assume to themselves great stare and Majesty,
walking through the streets with a grave composed Countenance and Gate, in long
Robes girt with a leathern Girdle four Fingers broad, at which hangs a Bag in
which they bestow what they get. Their Heads are always covered, but they
suffer not a hair to grow on them, or any other part of their Bodies. Their
Habitations are in the Woods, in little kind of Nests or Cages upon the Tops of
the Trees, for fear of the Tigers that infest those Parts. Every New Moon,
others say, every Monday, they preach to the People, calling them together by
the sound of a Bell, or Basin; and for the Subject of their Discourses, they
generally make use of some Precept of the Law of Nature, as not to steal, not
to commit Adultery, not to bear false Witness, etc. a strict performance
whereof they think sufficient to Salvation, however extravagant they may be in
matters of Opinion and Speculation. Nor do these latitudinarian Principles fail
of a very good effect, making them very Charitable, and Hospitable to
Strangers; nor in the least displeased when any of their People embrace
Christianity, and are baptized. When they die, they are most sumptuously
interred at the Expense of the People, being burnt in a very costly Pile of the
most precious Woods that can be got. Their Ashes they cast into the River, but
the remainder of their Bones they bury near the Hut where they lived.

In matters of Faith, besides that Manichean Principle before mentioned, they
hold diverse others, hardly consistent with it; as an eternal Succession of
Worlds, without Creation; and a multiplicity of Gods to govern them; as for
Example, they say this present World is to be under the Government of Five
several Gods, of which four are already passed; and now above two thousand two
hundred Years elapsed since the Death of the last of these; so that they expect
suddenly the coming of the Fifth, after whose Decease, the World it self is to
be destroyed by Fire, that a new one, Phaenix-like, may spring out of the
Ashes. The Souls of Men, they say, after several Transmigrations, attain the
Perfections and Felicity of their Gods; which is no other than a state of
Annihilation. For first they pass through the Bodies of living Creatures, Beasts,
and Birds, etc. and they are received into a place they call Naxac, i. e. the
place of Torments. Whence they being, after a long Confinement, set free, they
are admitted into Sevum, a second receptacle for departed Souls; a place of all
sorts of sensual Pleasures, and a true Mohammedan Paradise. Having accomplished
their time in this likewise, they arrive at their last and irreversible state,
which they call Nibam, which imports as much among them as a total Privation of
the Essence both of Soul and Body, or a state of Annihilation. But this is to
be said for them, that they are not so wedded to any of these Opinions, as not
to be willing enough to hearken to, and embrace other Doctrines, when they are
made known to them.

They have a strong Opinion of the Sanctity of Apes and Crocodiles; insomuch
that they think them infallibly happy, who chance to be devoured by them.

Festivals.
Every Year they keep five solemn Festivals, which in their Language are by a
general name called Sapans, and distinguished by the Names Giachie, Catena
Giaimo, Segienod, Daiche and Donon; the first of these is solemnized about
thirty six Miles from the City of Pegu, the King, Queen, and whole Court being
obliged to be present, with great Pomp and Splendor. The second is observed in
the City of Pegu, where the chief Men erect Pillars and Pyramids of different
Fashions, round which in the Night they hang lighted Torches and Wax Candles,
and the like, to enlighten those that come to Worship the great Idol. The Third
is kept in Honor of a particular Idol, before which the King, Queen, and their
Children, present themselves in Triumphal Chariots. The Fourth is the Feast of
Water, the King, Nobles, and all the People sporting themselves by throwing
Water one upon another; and it is impossible to pass the Streets without being
soundly wet. Lastly, the Fifth is celebrated only at Macao, but the King and
whole Court are always there; and their greatest Recreation and Entertainment
is to see the Courtisans in their Barks upon the Water; the Prize of the first
being a Statue of Gold; to the second, one of Silver; and all the rest are
exposed to the Derision of the Spectators.

The King of Pegu has been reckoned by some Authors, next to the Great Mogul,
Tosi, Vol. 2. Page 63.
and the Emperor of China, one of the greatest Princes of the East. Especially
during the Reign of Brama, who was able to bring an Army into the Field,
consisting of above a Million and half of Men, and not arm above one in ten of
his Subjects. And his Son lay Siege to Joudia the Capital City of Siam, with an
Army of Nine Hundred Thousand Men; and had certainly taken it, had not the
besieged found means to drown the Country round about; which Inundation swept
away all that vast Army, except Seventy Thousand Men, many that escaped
drowning being afterward destroyed by the Siameses, sallying out upon them,
shut in by the Water, in Barges; but the rest, after much hardship, without
either Horses or Baggage, got back to Martaban. This Misfortune was followed by
several others; for being incensed by his Losses, he grew Cruel and Tyrannical
against his own Subjects, provoking them thereby to Rebel against, or at least
Revolt from him.

Fort St. George January 1st, Anno, 1679/80.
A Collection of Coyns now Current in the Kingdoms of Indostan, Persia,
Gulcondah, Vizapore, Japan, Syam, Pegu, Atchein, Quedda, Arabia, etc. With
their several Weights, Fineness and Values here at this present, etc.
No Ps. oz. dw. gr. Matts Pa fa ca: Pa fa ca: Pa fa ca: Indostan. 1 1 The Gold
Mohurpo. 7 2 fine. 9 7/8 3 22 3 2 1 The Silver Rupee. 6 19 9 10 3 1 The Copper
Pice. 3 33 The Cowree Shell. Persia. 3 1 The Silver Abass 5 sh. 5 20 9 8 4 1
Ditto of 4 Shahees. 4 16 8 6 3 5 2 The Silver Mamoode. 2 8 7 2 4 4 8 Golcondah.
19 5 6 1 The Silver Rupee. 7 2 9 11 7 Ditto Half. 3 13 5 3 8 4 Quarter. 1 18 2
5 11 9 4 Eighths. 21 1 2 5 3 10 8 Sixteenths. 10 5/8 4 5 3 1 2 3 The Pagoda of
11 1 Madrass. 2 5 8 1 12 1 Polliacatt. 2 5 8 5/8 1 3 13 1 Gulcondah. 2 4 8 35 3
14 1 Ditto half Pa. 1 2 8 5/8 18 1 15 1 Cavere Pack. 2 5 8 35 4 16 1 St. Thoma.
2 5 8 34 5 15 5 The Gold Fannam of 17 2 Madrass. 2 4 3/8 1 2 18 1 Polliacatt. 6
2 7/8 1 2 2 4 19 2 Trevelore. 6 4 9/16 2 4 1 20 1 Carullepollam. 6 4 9/16 2 2 1
21 1 Trippote 6 3 1 3 22 1 Madrepack. 6 3 1 3 23 1 Apperingee. 3 10 2 10 The
Copper Cash of 1 Golcondah. 2 Madrass. 1 Polliacatt. 1 Metchlepatam. Vizapore.
24 1 The Silver Coyns the same with Gulcondah, except the Rupee of Seere Cawn.
1 18 9 2 4 2 4 The Gold Pagoda of Sanagree. Vizapore. 25 1 2 4 8 34 3 26 1
Chengie. 2 4 8 34 27 1 Porto Novo. 1 16 8 27 28 1 Jellice Pa. 1 2 8 17 3 4 3
The Gold Fannam of va 29 1 Candera. 6 5 3 30 2 Arrellure. 6 3 3 3 31 1
Neggapatam. 6 3 1 1 3 32 1 Madre Naigue. 5 3 1 5 33 2 Jelcurcoo. 6 3 2 3 5 14 2
Atchein. 34 2 The Gold Mace. 9 7 5 10 1 10 1 Quedda. 35 2 The Gold Copan or
Mace. 10 8 6 12 12 Goa. 36 1 The Gold St. Thoma. 2 5 7 32 2 37 The Silv.
Sherephene. 7 4 7 7 7 Japan. 1 3 2 38 The Gold Copan. 11 10 8 5 6 1 Ditto
Quarters. Syam. The Silver Tecull. 7 4 9 12 Ditto Halves. Quarters, 42 Eighths.
1 3 Gold Matts 23 -- Ps. their fineness, as p No viz. p mo No ^ Matts No 12th.
^ Ma.

OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Nature of the SILKWORMS.
IN India the Silkworms in November are in Eggs 12 Days. Or according to the
Natives Account, one Aggoa, from which the Silk then made, is called
Aggoued-bund, and is the best that is made all the Year. After twelve Days from
the first of November, the Worms are hatched, or come out of their Eggs, and
are laid upon Matts.

The four first Days after they are laid upon Matts, they give them Mulberry
Leaves, cut into small thin pieces, to feed upon Four times a Day, viz.
Morning, Noon, and at 3 and 9 a Clock.

The 5th Day they must not be fed at all.

The 6th day the Worms will be somewhat bigger, and must be fed with big pieces
of Leaves, and that four times a Day, according to the times before mentioned.

The 7th, 8th, 9th, feed them as on the 6th day.

The 10th Day they must not be fed at all.

The 11th Day they must be fed with larger pieces of Leaves, and four times a
day, as formerly.

The 12th day they are to be fed with whole Leaves, and four times a Day.

The 13th and 14th they must not be fed at all.

The 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, they must be fed with whole Leaves, and four times
a day.

The 19th Day, feed them five times, viz. Morning, Noon, at 3, and 9 a Clock,
and at Midnight, and continue to feed them so to the 26th inclusive.

The Worms from about the 14th day, will begin to be green, and at the 26th day
will be about 2 Inches long.

The 17th day they will be of a Color like Yellow and White, and then you must
not feed them any more, because they begin to spin.

The 28th day, they must be put upon Ledges of Matt, fastened to a large piece
of round Matting, the Ledges being about an Inch high from the Mat, and running
round like a Screw, beginning at the Center of the Mat, and running round at
about a handful or three Inches distance to the Circumference. When the Worms
are put upon those Ledges, they set the Mats leaning in the Sun, about 8 in the
Morning, and let them stand for 1 Hour; then they put them into the House or
Shade, leaning against the Wall; after, at 4 a Clock in the Afternoon, they put
them again into the Sun, and let them stand 'till Sunset; then they put them
in the House or Shade, leaning against a Wall, and in this Day and Night's
time, they will have made their Houses.

The 29th Day they take the Worms with their new Silk Houses, and put them upon
other Mats, flat, without any Ledges or Partitions, and so lay several Mats
upon Frames one over another.

The 30, 31, 32, and 33 days, they spin within their Houses of Silk, and then
they take each Worm with its House, and shake it at their Ears, and those that
are alive, they are good, and fit for Breeders, which are kept for such, and
those that make no noise are dead, having spun away their Life. Sometimes 1/16
live; sometimes more, and sometimes less; for great Heats and Colds kill many.

The 34, 35, 36, 37th days, they continue spinning.

The 38th day the Worms eat through their Houses, and are like a Butterfly; after
which they take up their Houses, and put the Worms upon new Mats; the Males
they know by their slenderness, and the Females by the contrary, which, being
placed near each other, join; but if there be more of one sort than the other,
then after they have done with the lesser number, either Males or Females, they
join them with the rest, and let them lie all Night.

The 39th day they throw away the Males.

The 40th the Females lay their Eggs, after which they throw them away
likewise. So that the whole Life of these Worms, is but 12 days in the Egg, and
40 days out of it; in all 52 Days.

The next Silk is made in January; and then the Worms are fourteen days in the
Egg, and 40 afterward before they die. This Silk is called Maug-Bund, and is
the Sixth, and worst sort of Silk. The making of it ends about February the
14th.

The next is made from February the 14th to the 24th of March, and is called
Cheita-bund. The Worms stay in the Eggs 8 days, and live 32 days after. This is
esteemed the second sort for goodness.

The next is Sauk-Bund, esteemed the fifth sort for Goodness. The Worms stay in
their Eggs 8 days, and live 32 days after. The making of this Silk ends about
the 6th of May.

The next is Assoree-Bund, esteemed the 4th sort for Goodness. The Worms
continue in the Eggs and die, as the two last sorts. And the making of the Silk
ends about the 4th of June.

The next is Sowaud-Bund, and is esteemed the third sort. The making of this
also ends about the last of July.

In August and September no Silk is made, and but very little in October.

This is the Nature of the Silkworms in the Indies where the Heat of the Sun
renders them much more fruitful than with us; for in India the Worms breed and
spin their Silk six times in the Year, and in England only once, because here
they remain in the Egg from the latter end of August, 'till about the latter
end of May. There likewise they are sooner brought to perfection, and begin to
work sooner, viz. 28 days after they are hatched, but in England not 'till the
40th. Where also they are by a third part more tedious in breaking out of their
Houses, from the first day of their Spinning, than they are in the East, which
is there done in ten days, but here only in fifteen.

The Silkworm derives its Birth from the Seed of the Butterfly, which is as
small as the Heads of Pins, and does somewhat resemble Rape-Seed, being flatted
on both sides. This Insect, by whose Industry we have the Silk, which is spun
out of its Bowels, and artificially formed by its Mouth into the Fashion of a
Clew, differs not very much from a Caterpillar, either in the Shape or Bulk,
baiting that this is more Hairy, and its Web is weaker, and of another Color.
And yet for want of Mulberry-Leaves (which is the most proper Food for the
Silkworm) when they are forced to subsist by the Leaves of the Rose-Bush,
Lettice, or some others (which sometimes are made use of) this Nourishment
either weakens the Thread they Spin, and makes it as useless as that of the
Caterpillars, or else they will not work at all. But that which seems most
remarkable and wonderful in this Animal, is its change of shape, and one would
think of Species, in the transformation of it from a Reptile to a Volatile,
from a creeping Worm into a Butterfly. The Grain or Seed of these Creatures was
transported into Italy, above three hundred Years ago, by two Religious
Persons, but their Silk was of a longer Date, and brought above a Thousand
Years since among the Europeans, who called it in Latin, Sericum, from an
Oriental People, called Seres, who were very industrious and careful in its
Improvement.

FINIS.

