Tutamen Evangelicum: OR, A DEFENSE OF Scripture-Ordination, Against the
EXCEPTIONS of T. G. In a Book Entitled, Tentamen Novum, Proving, That
Ordination by Presbyters is Valid; Timothy and Titus were no Diocesan Rulers;
The Presbyters of Ephesus were the Apostles Successors in the Government of
that Church, and not Timothy; The First Epistle to Timothy was Written before
the Meeting at Miletus; The Ancient Waldenses had no Diocesan Bishops, etc.

By the Author of the Plea for Scripture-Ordination.

Confirmatio juvenum, Clericorum Ordinatio, locorum Consecratio reservatur
Papae and Episcopis propter cupiditatem lucri temporalis and honoris. Art. 28.
Doctr. Joh. Wiclef. in Conc. Constantiens. London: Printed for Zachary
Whitworth, Bookseller in Manchester, 1697.

THE PREFACE.
J. O. Published some Years since, A Plea for Scripture-Ordination, Proving by
Scripture and Antiquity, That Ordination by Presbyters, without Bishops, is
Valid.

Several Hands were said to be at Work, preparing Remarks upon it; at length,
after near Three Years Silence, comes forth a sort of Answer, by one Mr. T. G.
Rector of B. in Lancashire, an Author well known in his Country, by some
Prerogative Sermons, which he Printed some Years since.

I. He Fronts his English Book with a Latin Title, and calls it Tentamen
Novum, that is, A new Trial of Skill. Here is an implicit Confession of a
baffled Cause; he dare not trust to the Old Arguments for Episcopacy, but is
glad to betake himself to New Shifts. It Is a desperate Cause that needs new
Arts to support it.

The plain English of Tentamen Novum is this: Gentlemen, I am very sensible the
Cause I Plead for cannot stand on its old Foundations; therefore I will make a
New Effort, and try, Whether the lofty Fabric of Diocesan Episcopacy may not
be Supported on the Slender and Nice Foundations of a new Point of Chronology.
If this fails, the Cause is lost.

However, his Title looks a little Modest, but a Man of Assurance cannot be
long Concealed under a Vizard, for in the very next Words he calls his Argument
a Demonstration. For thus his Title Page runs; Tentamen Novum, Proving that
Timothy and Titus were Diocesan Rulers, by an Argument drawn frhm the time of
St. Paul 's beseeching Timothy to abide at Ephesus, and leaving Titus at Crete,
as it is demonstrated by Bishop Pearson.

A Doubtful Attempt, and a Consident Demonstration, are something inconsistent.
But I have been so kind to him as to Reconcile the Title Page to the Title of
his Book, by proving his Supposed Demonstration to be only a Tentamen Novum, a
new and fruitless Attempt, to defend an Un-scriptural Hierarchy. This the
Reader way find in the Third and Fourth Chapter of this Book.

II. I desire the Reader to observe, That there is but one Chapter (Chap. V.)
in the Rector's Book, which he calls an Answer to J. O's Plea, and in that he
briefly touches upon Two or Three of Ten Arguments, which J. O. has urged for
Ordination by Presbyters. This is Tentamen Novum, a new way of Answering Books.
He pretends to Answer J. O's Plea for Scripture-Ordination, which is the
Running-Title of the whole Book, and so would persuade his Reader that he has
Answered the whole.

I will not impeach his Candor in this Form of Speech, which shows his Skill
in a Rhetorical Figure, that Substitutes a Part for the whole: As if a
vainglorious Captain, who had Attacked a Company or two, should say by a
Romantic Syneedoche, he had beaten an Army.

III. The Design of his Book is to prove, That mere Presbyters have no Inherent
Power of Ordination; and that all Ordinations by Presbyters are a Nullity. This
Notion is very singular, and I hope has but few Patrons in the Church of
England, because,

1. It Vn-churches all the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, who have no Bishops of
the English Species, and by this Gentleman's Principles, no Ministry, no
Sacraments, and consequently no Salvation. He owns a true Ministry in the
Popish Church, and overthrows the Ministry of the Reformed Churches. His
Neighbors of the Romish Communion are obliged to conn him Thanks for the
Service he would have done to their Cause against the Reformed Interest. To
say, Theirs is a Case of Necessity, but so is not ours, is to triste, as J. O.
has proved in his Book, but Mr. G. wisely passed over that Chapter, as if it
were not there.

2. This uncharitable Hypothesis contradicts the Moderate and Learned Defenders
of Episcopacy, who generally grant the Validity of Ordination by Presbyters,
though they judge it irregular where Bishops may be had.

Mr. Hooker allows the Ordination of Presbyters alone, on this Principle, That
the Church can give them Power, for according to him all Power is originally in
the whole Body. Eccl. Polit. VII. p. 37, 38.

Bishop Downame grants, That extraordinarily, in case of necessity, Presbyters
may ordain without Bishops, and gives this Reason for the Validity of their
Ordination; because Imposition of Hands in Confirmation, and Reconciliation of
Penitents, were reserved to Bishops, as well as Ordination, and yet in the
absence of Bishops may be done by Presbyters. Def. of his Cons. Sermon. III. 3.
P. 69, 108.

Forbes acknowledges, That Jure Divino Presbyters have the Power of Ordaining,
as well as of I reaching and Baptizing, though they must use it under the
Bishop's Inspection, in those places that have Bishops. Iren. p. 164.

The same was the Judgment of Archbishop Usher. See his Life and Reduct. by
Dr. Bernard. The Archbishop of Spalato speaks to the same purpose. De Rep.
Eccles. in several places. He says, That the Presbyterial Order has always
the Keys annexed, and that when any is Ordained Presbyter, the Keys are given
him, and Jurisdiction with Orders, by Divine Right. Lib. V. Cap. 12. p. 473.

3. This Hypothesis condemns the very Church of England, who in her Articles
(Composed by the Archbishops, Bishops, and the Clergy in Convocation, and
Confirmed by Parliament, 13. Eliz. 12.) allows the Ordinations of the Reformed
Churches beyond Sea, which are by Presbyters.

Art. 23. Those we ought to Judge lawfully Called and Sent, which be chosen and
called to this Work by Men who have Public Authority given unto them in the
Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the Lord's Vineyard Vid. Rog. in
Prop. 5.
.

The Article does not say, None are Lawfully called but by Bishops, but that
Ministers ought to be Called by Men who have public Authority given unto them
in the Congregation, which Ordaining Presbyters may have, and actually have in
the Foreign Reformed Congregations

The Church of England acknowledged Ordinations by Presbyters, and looked upon
Superior Bishops to be but a prudential Constitution of the Civil Magistrate,
as J. O. has proved at large in his Book, Cap. IX which Mr. G. also prudently
overlooks. We may presume he has good Reason for his Omissions.

The Ordinations of Foreign Churches were not Questioned here before Bishop
Laud's time. My Lord Bacon complains of it, as a new thing, and uncommon in his
days. Some indiscreet Persons, says he, have been told Forte Leg. Bold.
in open preaching, to use derogatory Speech and Censure of the Churches
abroad, and that so far, as some of our Men, as I have heard, Ordained in
Foreign Parts, have been pronounced to be no Lawful Ministers Resusc. Part I.
P. 137.
.

The Jus Divinum of Episcopacy began to be urged about that time, to the great
Joy and Advantage of the Popish Party, as appears by a Letter to a Popish Peer
in Ireland, from T. White, Dat. Land. Feb. 12. 1639. in which are these Words.
We be in a fair way ever long, to Assuage Heresy and her Episcopacy, for
Exetor 's Book has done more for the Catholics than they could have done
themselves: For having written that Episcopacy in Office and Jurisdiction is
absolutely Jure Divino, which was the old Quarrel between our Bishops, and K.
H. VIII. (during his Heresy) then disputed upon, which Book does not a little
trouble our Adversaries, who declare this Tenent of Exetor 's to be contrary to
the Laws of the Land.

This Letter was found, with other Papers, at the taking of Droghedah, after
the Rout of Remines. Copia vera ab Origin. ut fuit cum Hen. Midens. Episcopo.

The Book which White refers to, is Bishop Hall's Divine Right of Episcopacy,
which was altered, and put into the Form in which we now have it, by
Archbishop Laud. Bishop Hall's first Draught, called, Episcopacy an Ancient,
Holy, and Divine Institution, the Archbishop directed him to alter it into, So
Ancient, as that it is of Divine Institution. Hall defined Episcopacy, by being
joined with Imparity and Superiority of Jurisdiction, Laud directs him to
define it by a distinction of Orden. Hall grants that the Presbyterian
Government may be of use where Episcopacy may not be had. Laud tells him this
is of dangerous Consequence, and that we must not use any mincing Terms, nor
hamper our selves for fear of speaking plain Truth, though it be against
Amsterdam or Geneva.

The Bishop of Exon found good Cause (says my Author Dr. Heyl. Life of A.
Bish. Laud, p. 400, 401, 402.
) to Correct the Obliquity of his Opinion, according to the Rules of these
Animadversions.

Bishop Hall's Book being finished, the Archbishop read it over with care and
diligence. In the perusal of which, he took notice amongst other things, That
the strict Superstition of the Sabbatarians, was but lightly touched at;
whereas he thought, that some smarter Plaster to that Sore might have done no
harm. He observed also, that he had passed by this Point, viz. Whether
Episcopacy be an Order or a Degree, as not material: Whereas, in the Judgment
of such Learned Men as he had consulted, it was the main ground of the whole
Cause, and therefore desired him to alter it with his own Pen. But that which
gave him most offense was, That the Title of Antichrist was positively and
determinately bestowed on the Pope, which he allowed not of.

According to which good advice, says Dr. Heylin, the Bishop of Exon qualified
some of his Expressions, and deleted others. ubi supr. p. 406. It is
remarkable, that at the same time that the Divine Right of Episcopacy began to
be asserted here, the Divine Right of the Christian Sabbath was called in
question, and the Conscientious Observers of it were branded with the odious
Name of Sabbatarians. At the same time also, the old Doctrine of the Church of
England, That the Pope is Antichrist, began to be out of request.

4. This Hypothesis condemns the late Episcopal Church of Scotland, which
admitted Ordination by Presbyters to be valid, as Dr. Burnet, Bishops of Sarum
affirms. Thus he: The Bishops of Scotland never required the Presbyterian
Ministers there to take Episcopal Ordination; they required them only to come
and act with them in Church-Judicatories. Even Archbishop Sharp himself, when
he was to be Consecrated Archbishop of St. Andrews, stood out for some time
here in England, before he would submit to take Priest's Orders. -- No Bishop
during my stay in that Kingdom, ever did so much as desire any of the
Presbyterians to be Re-ordained Bishops of Sarum 's Vindie. p. 84, 85. Land.
1696


The advancing of an Hypothesis so favorable to the Romish Church, so
destructive to the Reformed Churches abroad, so inconsistent with the Articles
of the Church of England, (which Mr. G. has subscribed) and so contrary to the
Practice of the Scottish Bishops, and the repeated Declarations of several of
our English Bishops, may tempt Persons to suspect the design of the Book, if
not of the Author. But we will charitably hope he meant well, and in a
transport of Zeal, which excludes freedom of thought, might easily overlook
the fatal Consequences of his indigested Principles.

IV. He tells us a long Story in his Preface of the occasion of his publishing
of his Book, p. 1. and 2. and complains that his Sermon of the Consecration and
Holiness of Churches has not been Answered by the Dissenters, and, says he,
there is good reason for it, which I shall not here repeat. To repeat a thing
not mentioned before is a little improper. I confess there is good Reason why
that Sermon has not been answered, and that is, his not Printing it; let him
Publish it, and he shall not long complain, That that Controversy is dropped.

I am a Stranger to that Sermon, but I expect he should prove the Consecration
and Holiness of Churches by the Scripture, for he allows (Pref. p. 13.) That we
ought to be Governed by Scripture, and to keep close to Scripture-practice. I
am sure he cannot prove it from the New Testament, which is the peculiar Law of
Christ, and the Rule of Christians. It does not appear, that Christ, or his
Apostles, ever Consecrated any Places of Worship. Nor can he prove it from the
Old Testament. By the Ceremonial Law (which in the main Branches of it was more
Ancient than Moses, and expired with the Jewish Temple) our public Churches
are so far from being holy, that they are unclean, because the Dead are buried
there. He that touched a Grave was unclean by the old Law, Number. 19.16. The Jews
buried their Dead not in their Temple, or Synagogues, but in places
appropriated to that use, which they accounted unclean. They buried ordinarily
without the Cities, Lu. 7.12 Vid. Ligh. vol. II. p. 323.
.

Their Synagogues, which answer to our Parish Churches, were not Consecrated as
the Temple was: nor was there any Law for the Consecration of them, nor of
their Divinity-Schools, which they judged more Holy than their Synagogues Maim.
in Godw. Moses and Aaron, II. 2.
.

Optatus observes, That the Donatists began to bury in Churches in his time,
and adds, That it was not Lawful to Bury in the House of God Ad Parm. lib. 3.
p. 36.
He seems to refer to a Law of Gratian the Emperor, as Baldwin observes in his
Annotations on Optatus.

The purest Ages of Christianity had no Consecrated Temples nor Altars Arnob.
adv. Gent. lib. VI.
. For this Reason Caecilius in Minucius Foelix, reproaches the Christians, and
asks, Cur nullas Aras habent, nulla Templa? Why have they no Altars, no
Temples, no visible Images Min. Foel. Octav. p. 29. Oxon.
? Minucius answers, What Temple can I build unto Him, whom the World, which is
Created by His Power, cannot contain? And since I, a Man, dwell more at large,
shall I include so great a Majesty within one little House? Is He not better
Consecrated in the bottom of our Hearts Ibid. p. 94.
?

To the same purpose speaks Clemens Alexandrinus; He that is endued with
Knowledge, says he, Honors God, that is, gives Thanks for the knowledge of an
upright Life, neither in a definitive place, nor in a select Temple, nor on
certain stated Festivals, but through his whole Life, and in every place. And a
little after, Every place is truly Sacred in which we Converse with God Strom.
7.
.

The Heathen built their Temples upon the Graves, or Ashes of their Dead, as
Arnobius affirms Lib. VI.
. For this reason Clemens Alexandrinus calls them Sepulchers; You call them,
says he, by the specious Name of Temples, but they were Sepulchers, that is,
Sepulchers were called Temples In (...).
.

These they dedicated by certain Ceremonies to the Memory of their deceased
Friends, whom they honored as Gods, and accounted their Temples Sacred, as
Caecilius speaks Vbi supr. p. 18, 19.
. He complains that the Christians despised them as polluted Graves p. 25.
. The wiser sort of Heathens acknowledged, that their Consecrated Temples had
no real Holiness in them. No Edifice, says Plato in Clemens Alexandrinus, is
of any great worth, or truly Holy, that is built by sordid Mechanics Strom. V.
.

In imitation of them the Christians, as they degenerated from the Apostolical
Simplicity, built Temples in honor of departed Saints and Martyrs. They called
their Temples after their Names, Dedicated them to such and such Saints, in
Memory of which they kept Festivals, which gave occasion to our Wakes. We have
some Instances of these Dedications and Festivals in the Fourth Century. Eusebius.
Vit. Constant. IV. Nazian. Orat. in Nov. Dominic.

No Instance can be given of any Dedication of Temples till about Constantine's
time, and the Dedications of that Age were no Ceremonious Consecrations; they
were only celebrated with Solemn Prayers, Praises, Preaching, and Administering
the Eucharist, which are the stated Duties to be performed in such places. The
first performance of these Religious Duties can have no more Virtue for
Consecration of the Place, than the continued Series of them. Eusebius mentions
also some Orations in Commendation of the Benefactor, and the Magnificency of
the Structure, which were delivered at those Solemnities Vit. Constable. IV. 45.
. These had no Consecrating Virtue in them.

Ceremonious Consecrations appropriated unto Bishops, were unknown in the three
first Centuries.

I find but one Instance of it in the Fourth Century, and that in the Roman
Church, in which Superstitions grew faster than in other Churches, and this
instance is very dubious. The Roman Council under Sylvester is said to Decree,
That no Presbyter presume to Celebrate Mass, but in Places Consecrated by the
Bishop Epit. Syn. Romans Sub. Sylvest.
.

The Acts of this Council are justly suspected to be Spurious, for certain the
Twentieth Canon, which forbids Judging the first Seat is so. Vid. Conc. Nicen.
Can. 6..

Above a hundred Years after, A. D. 456. an Irish Council under St. Patrick
determined, That no Presbyter, who had built a Church, do offer (the
Eucharistic Sacrifice) until he bring the Bishop to Consecrate it, C. 23.

About the Year 494. the Power of Consecrating Churches, which the Bishops had
before appropriated to themselves, was restrained to Metropolitans by Pope
Gelasius Ep. IX. c. 4. and 25.
.

In the Year 619. the Second Council of Sevil acknowledges, That the
Consecration of Churches is forbidden Presbyters, Novellis and Ecclesiasticis
regulis, by certain new Ecclesiastical Canons Con. His. 2 Can. 7.
.

The Consecration of Altars is almost as ancient as the Consecration of
Churches. It is mentioned about the Year of Christ 506. in the Council of
Agatha, Can. 10. and 29. and about the Year 563. in the Council of Braga Conc.
Bracar. Can. 37.
.

For the same reason that we have laid aside the Consecration of Altars, we may
also that of Churches.

We conceive that all places are equally near to Heaven, and that all Places
where the Worship of God is Celebrated, are equally Holy. God looks more on the
disposition of the Worshipper, than he does on the place of Worship Aug. de
Unit. Cap. 16.
, as Austin well speaks.

1. Mr. G. will do well to show us, 1. some Warrant from the New Testament, for
Consecration and Holiness of Places, which he seems so fond of.

2. When he has done that, let him show us what Authority from the New
Testament the Bishops have to appropriate the Consecration of Churches to their
Order. Did Timothy or Titus, whom he calls Bishops, Consecrate Churches?

3. If the Gospel give them no such Power, can he show any Canons made since
the Reformation, that do empower them to Consecrate Places of Worship. We have
Forms for the Ordering of Priests and Deacons, and for the Consecrating of
Bishops and Archbishops; we have a Form for Confirmation also; but no Form,
nor Order, nor Direction, about the Consecration of Churches that ever I could
meet with. Indeed the Roman Pontifical can supply us with one.

Dr. Heylin tells us, that Archbishop Laud had a design to draw up an English
Pontifical, to be approved by the Convocation, in the Year 1640. This new
Pontifical was to contain, among other things, a Form to be observed by all
Archbishops and Bishops, for Consecrating Churches, Churchyards, and Chapels
Laud's. Life, p. 441.
. But the Troubles of the Time obliged him to defer the prosecution of it till
a fitter conjuncture. When King Charles II. returned, and the Bishops had all
the advantage they could desire, they did not prosecute the design, not being
so violent in that Point, as Laud and his Party had been.

4. Wherein does a Consecration promote the acceptance of our Devotions with.
God? Is the Worship of God more acceptable in a Consecrated, than in an
Unconsecrated Place? If it be not, what are we the better for Consecration? If
it be, let the Rector prove it. Can he show any Promise that is made to
Consecrated Places as such, under the Gospel? He cannot produce either a
Command of Precedent for Consecration of Places under the Gospel, nor a Promise
to such Places above others. Jesus Christ Promises to meet his People in all
places, without distinction, Mat. 18.20. John 4.21, 23. 1 Timothy 2.8. He dwells
not in material temple, Acts 7.49. and 17.24.

The Rector has studied this Subject, and can resolve these Difficulties,
which we shall expect in his Celebrated Consecration-Sermon.

V. But to return to the main Subject. Our Author would say something, if he
knew what, for the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy, but his Discourse is so cloudy,
confused, and inconsisten, that it is hard to imagine what he drives at in
several places.

His Book consists of Five Chapters.

1. In the first Chapter he endeavors to prove that none but Apostles and
Prophets did Ordain. Suppose this were granted him, which I have proved to be
false, I cannot see what advantage he can make of it; for Bishops are neither
Apostles nor Prophets. He himself makes 'em Evangelists, which are different
from Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 4.11.

2. In the second Chapter he would prove, That St. Paul, toward the declining
part of his Life, made Timothy and Titus Bishops of Ephesus and Crete. In
Answer to which, I have fully proved, from acts 20. That the Government of the
Church of Ephesus, and by undeniable consequence of all other Churches, was
committed to the Presbyters in Parity, and not to one Supreme President.

I have evidenced this Government to be Divine, Perpetual, and an apt Remedy
against Schism. I have showed that it was settled by the Apostle, when he could
Over-see that Church no more, and had no prospect of ever seeing it again.

It Is pretended by the late Asserters of Episcopacy, That the Apostles when
they took their last leave of the Churches, settled Bishops for their
Successors to preside over the Presbyters, as a Remedy against: the growing
Schisms. I have demonstrated from the 20th of the Acts, That it is quite
otherwise, that St. Paul left the Presbyters of Ephesus as his ordinary
Successors in the. Government of that Church, and that in prospect of Schisms,
and of his final departure from them.

The evidence of this Establishment is so bright and convincing, that our
Author cannot but acknowledge it, p. 47. and the poor shifts which he uses
there to avoid the force of this unanswerable Argument, shows the power of
Interest and Temptation upon self-convicted minds.

The Proofs for Timothy's being Bishop of Ephesus, depends upon a nice Point of
Chronology, which at best is doubtful, and amounts to no more than a
probability, and is not capable of a Demonstration. This leaves the Foundations
of Episcopacy doubtful and uncertain.

But our Proof that the Government of the Church of Ephesus was settled in the
Elders of that Church, is grounded upon plain matter of Fact, that cannot he
denied.

It Is certain that the Apostle had no prospect of seeing the Ephesian Elders
any more, when he committed the Government of that Church to them, Acts 20.25,
28. and therefore the Elders of Ephesus succeeded the Apostle in the Government
of that Church.

But it is not certain that the Apostle made Timothy Supreme Governor of that
Church afterward. Most Chronologers, the Defenders of Episcopacy not excepted,
are of Opinion, That the First Epistle to Timothy was written before the
Congress at Miletus, mentioned in Acts 20.17. whence it naturally follows, that
his Charge in Ephesus was occasional and temporary, as an unfixed Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.5. and the Government of that Church was left in the Elders of it, Acts
20.17, 28. as the Supreme and Perpetual Governors of it after the Apostle Paul.

It seems no small disparagement to the Diocesan Cause, that the grand
Patrons of it so extremely differ among themselves, and cannot agree about the
Foundations of it.

The Popish Writers, Jesuits and others, do generally affirm, That Bishops were
settled betimes by the Apostles in all Churches, and that though the Names of
Bishops and Presbyters were common, the Offices were distinct.

The old Protestant Writers confess, That God has prescribed no one Form of
Church Government in the New Testament, so Whitgift in Dr. Stillingfleet's
Iren. and Hooker's Eccl. Polit. Lib. III. and if no Form be commanded,
therefore not the Prelatical.

Others, both Papists and Protestants do say, That the Presbyters mentioned in
the New Testament, were Bishops in a proper Sense, thus Petavius and Hammond,
but with this difference; Petavius thinks there were many Bishops in one
Church, as in Ephesus, and that the simple manners of the Church would then
bear this, till Ambition had corrupted Men. Dr. Hammond conceives there was but
one Bishop in one Church. This Notion of Bishops without Subject Elders was
begun by Scotus, as Fr. a Sancta Clara intimates.

Some late Writers acknowledge, That Bishops and Presbyters were the same at
first, but that the Apostles, toward the latter end of their Days, appointed
the new Order of Superior Bishops. Bishop Pearson, Dr. Beveridge, and others
go this way. The former Hypothesis makes all the Presbyters mentioned in the
New Testament to be real Bishops, and this makes all the Bishops mentioned
there to be mere Presbyters, and pretends that Diocesan Bishops were settled
afterward.

Our Author espouses this last Opinion, and pleads for it in his loose and
confused way.

This Hypothesis is no less precarious than the former, and receives very
little Confirmation from the Author of Tentamen Novum.

It were much more honorable, and safer for the Defenders of Episcopacy, to
fix it on the best Foundation it has, to wit, the Laws of the Land, by which
the first Reformers professedly held it. It was the express Doctrine of the Old
Church of England, before Bishop Land's time, That Bishops, as Superior to
Presbyters, are an appointment of the Civil Magistrate, as J. O. has proved in
his Plea, p. 113, 114.

This is agreeable to the Laws of the Land, which acknowledge nothing by Divine
Right in a Bishop, but his being a Presbyter.

37. Hen. VIII. Cap. 17. It is Enacted and Declared, That Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, have no manner of
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but by, under, and from his Royal Majesty -- the
Supreme Head of the Church of England and Ireland, to whom by Holy Scriptures
all Authority and Power is wholly given, to hear and determine all manner of
Causes Ecclesiastical.

The same is declared in an Act of Parliament made 1 Edw. VI. Cap. 2. in these
Words: All Authority of Jurisdiction, Spiritual and Temporal, is derived and
deduced from the King's Majesty, as Supreme Head of these Churches and Realms
of England and Ireland. See Cook 's Rep. de Jure Reg. Eccl. Fol. 8.

The Institution of a Christian Man, Printed in the Year 1543. and allowed by
both Houses of Parliament, mentions two Orders only, viz. Priests and Deacons,
as of Divine Right.

3. In the Third Chapter the Rector attempts to prove, That the first Epistle
to Timothy was mitten after Paul's first Bonds at Rome, and consequently after
the Meeting at Miletus, Acts 20.17. In my Animadversions on this Chapter, I
have Vindicated the Ancient Chronologers, and proved by several Arguments, That
that Epistle was written before the Meeting at Miletus, and by necessary
consequence, the Government of the Church of Ephesus was in the Presbytery
after the writing of that Epistle, on which Timothy's supposed Episcopal Power
is grounded. I do not pretend that my Arguments are Demonstrations (as he calls
his for the contrary Opinion) but they carry with them the greatest
probability, That that Epistle was written earlier than the Rector pretends,
whose Arguments I have evinced to be weak and fallacious. Though if it were
written after, it does not prejudice my Argument from Acts 20.

4. In the Fourth Chapter he pretends to prove, That Evangelists were fixed
Church Governors, that is, Bishops. His main Argument, by which he would
Establish this fancy, is a begging of the Question; he takes it for granted,
that Timothy was a fixed Evangelist at Ephesus, and Titus at Crete. That they
were Evangelists he cannot deny; that they were unfixed, I have proved, in my
Remarks on this Chapter. I have proved Philip also to be no fixed Evangelist,
and vindicated Eusebius and Chrysostom.

5. In the Fifth Chapter he makes a flourish as if he would answer J. O's Plea,
but leaves the greatest Part untouched, and answers only the three first
Arguments, and that very slatterinly.

Thus you have a short Idea of his Book, in which he discovers little of
Argument, less of Reading, and nothing of Candor. Tedious Digressions, Nauseous
Repetitions, and Scornful Reflections on J. O. and the Dissenters, make up very
near one Third of his Book. The Truth of this will appear to any intelligent
and impartial Reader.

I should not have thought it worth while to have Answered it, but for the
clamorous Confidence of some weak People, who reckon a Book unanswerable, when
no Reply is made unto it.

His Preface being large, I must consider the main parts of it in a distinct
Chapter, and in the following Chapters shall Examine the several Chapters of
his Book, so as my second will answer to his first, and my third to his second,
and so of the rest.

He must pardon me, if I be more just to him, than he has been to the Author of
the Plea, and if I follow him Paragraph by Paragraph, in all that is material,
and may seem worth Answering throughout his Book: For I judge it below a
Scholar, and a Man of Ingenuity, to pick quarrels with a few Passages here and
there, in a Book, and leave the greatest Part unanswered, as he has done by

J. O.

THE Reader may observe the Parallel between our Rector's, and Dr. Manwaring 's
Political Notions, Condemned in Parliament, 4 Carol. 1628. The Doctor's Charge
drawn up by a Committee of the Commons was this. Rush. Hist. Collect. Vol. 1.
p. 585. Edit. 1659.
1. He labors to infuse into the Conscience of His Majesty, the persuasion of
a Power not bounding it self with Laws, which K. James, of Famous Memory, calls
in His Speech to the Parliament, Tyranny, yea, Tyranny accompanied with Perjury.

The Rector goes beyond Manwaring in this Point, for he says, That the King's
Coronation Oath is a voluntary Act of Grace, unto which the King is not obliged
by the Fundamental Constitution: And if a Prince should not give this
Assurance, the Rector conceives he is not obliged to Govern strictly by the
present Law.

2. Manwaring is charged, to endeavor to persuade the Conscience of the
Subjects, that they are bound to obey Commands illegal.

The Rector says, We must supply the Prince's Occasions, though Five Hundred
Men (i. e. a House of Commons) at once should forbid us, and to this we are
bound in Conscience, though the Prince should happen to be an Usurper and a
Tyrant.

3. The third Charge against Manwaring was, That he robs the Subjects of the
Propriety of their Goods.

The Rector says, We must supply the Prince's Occasions, though five hundred
Men should forbid, because our Gold and Silver bear his Image and
Superscription. He complains that the Rights of the People were too much
swelled, and affirms, That it is one main ground of Political Government, to
deprive the Subject from being his own Judge, and Asserter of his own
Privileges.

4. Dr. Manwaring brands them that will not lose this Propriety with most
scandalous Speech, and odious Titles.

The Rector is very liberal in odious Reflections on my Lord Shaftsbury, and
others, who opposed the Arbitrary Proceedings in the latter end of King Charles
II's. Reign.

5. To the same end, not much unlike to Faux and his Fellows, says Mr. R. in
the Name of the Committee, he seeks to blow up Parliaments, and Parliamentary
Powers.

The Rector says, The Prince, in effect, is the sole Sovereign Power, if he
pleases to Usurp and Exercise it.

You see the Rector Confirms all Dr. Manwaring 's Positions, and adds some
grosser ones of his own, especially that the King's Coronation Oath is a
voluntary Act of Grace, to which he is not obliged.

This puts me in mind of the Words of a worthy Patriot, spoken in Parliament,
March 22. 1627. upon occasion of Sibthorp and Manwaring 's Sermons. Rush. Ibid.
P. 503.
It is well known, says he, the People of this State are under no other
Subjection than what they did voluntarily consent to, by the Original Contract
between King and People; and as there are many Prerogatives and Privileges
conferred on the King, so there are left to the Subject many necessary
Liberties and Privileges, as appears by the common Laws and Acts of
Parliaments, notwithstanding what these two Sibthorp and Manwaring.
Sycophants have prated in the Pulpit to the contrary.

The Commons formed the Charge against Dr. Manwaring into a Declaration, which
being Engrossed and Read, was sent to the Lords for their Concurrence. Mr. Pym
's Learned Speech at the delivery of the Charge before the Lords, is well worth
the reading. Rush. ubi supr. p. 595 -- 604.

Not long after the Commons proceeded to give Judgment against Dr. Manwaring.
1. To be Imprisoned during the Pleasure of the House. 2. To be Fined 1000 l. to
the King. 3. To make such a Submission as the House shall prescribe. 4. To be
Suspended from his Ministry three Years. 5. To be disabled to have any
Ecclesiastical Dignity, or Secular Office. 6. To be disabled to Preach at Court
hereafter. 7. That his said Book is worthy to be Burnt, and that His Majesty
may be moved to grant a Proclamation to call in the said Books, that they may
be all burnt in London, and both Universities. Rush. Ibid. p. 605.

Mr. Fuller Church Hist. Lib. XI. p. 130.
says, That much of this Censure was remitted, upon his humble Submission at
both the Bars in Parliament, the Form of which you have in him, and in Mr.
Rushworth.

But the King Issued out His Proclamation for the total Suppressing of the
Sermons Rush. Ibid. p. 633.
.

I mention these things not to expose the Rector, who is secured by several
Acts of Grace passed since the Publishing of those Sermons, but to expose his
dangerous Doctrine, that overturns the Foundations of our excellent Government.

THE Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. THE Dissenters Vindicated in their way of managing Controversies.
Calvin Vindicated. Bishops Lordly Titles considered. The Parallel between the
Canons in Acts 15. and the English Canons. Parish-Ministers have no Power of
Discipline. The Waldenses had no Superior Bishops, proved, 1. From their
Doctrine, That Bishops and Presbyters are the same. 2. From their own
Testimony. 3. The Testimony of F. Paul. 4. By several Instances of Ordination
by their Presbyters in England, before the Reformation. Of the uninterrupted
Succession of Bishops. P. 1 to 45. Chap. II. Whether the Jewish Church was the
First Established Church. The Levitical Priesthood no Pattern for
Gospel Ministers. Clemens Romans Vindicated. Whether Jesus Christ modelled His
Church after the Jewish Pattern, or left His Church in a State of Oligarchy, as
our Author says. His first Instance of Ordination, from Acts 1. Considered. 2.
The Ordination of the Seven Deacons: They were Ministers of Tables, not of the
Word and Sacraments, proved from Scripture and Antiquity. Objections Answered.
3. His third Instance of Ordination, from Acts 9.17. considered. 4. His Fourth
from Acts 13.1, 2, 3. This Instance of Ordination by Presbyters Vindicated. The
difference between Apostles and Prophets, as stated by him, considered. 5. His
fifth Instance from Acts 14.13. Examined. 6. Acts 19.6, 7. considered. 7.1 Cor.
5.3, 4, 5. Vindicated. 8.1 Tim. 4.14. for Ordination by Presbyters, Vindicated.
Dr. Owen Defended. The Rector unsound in the Doctrine of Justification. 9.1
Pet. 5.2. Vindicated. P. 45. to 99. Chap. III. The Apostle left the Government
of Ephesus in the Presbyters. This Establishment proved to be his last, Divine,
Perpetual. Acts 20. Explained. This Government never altered Presbyters a
Divine Remedy against Schism. Superior Bishops not the Remedy. Timothy no
Diocesan Bishop. An unfix'd Evangelist. Of the Asian Angels, not so called from
the Provincial Guardian Angels. Ignatius his Bishop, not Diocesan. Titus no
Diocesan Bishop. Presbyters are Rulers. P. 99. to p. 121. Chap. IV. The first
Epistle to Timothy was written before Paul's Imprisonment at Rome. Acknowledged
by the Ancients, and by the Learned Asserters of Episcopacy, Bp. Hall, Dr.
Hammond, etc, denied by the Rhemists, Bp. Pearson, etc. Paul's Journey to
Macedonia, 1 Timothy 1.3. considered. Jerome Vindicated. Reasons to prove that the
First Epistle to Timothy was written before Paul's first Bonds. The second
Epistle written in his first Bonds. An Objection Answered. Acts 20.25.
Considered. P. 121. to p. 141. Chap. V. Of Evangelists, whether they were
fixed? Neg. Acts 21.8. considered. Timothy and Titus unfixed. Hilarious his
Account of Evangelist. Eusebius's Testimony Vindicated. Mark no fixed
Evangelist. Chrysostom's Account of Evangelists, agreeing with Eusebius. P.
141. to p. 151. Chap. VI. Of Parish-Discipline. Presbyters have Power of
Government. 1. J. O's first Argument for Ordination by Presbyters, viz. the
Identity of Bishops and Presbyters acknowledged. 1 Timothy 5.17. considered. 1 Timothy 1.3. does not prove Timothy Bp. of Ephesus. Dr. Whittaker Vindicated.
Ignatius's One Altar explained. The extent of the Church of Ephesus. An
Objection Answered. Rev. 5.11. Vindicated. Dr. Lightfoot's Notion of Angel
Vindicated. 2. J. O's second Argument for Ordination by Presbyters, and third
Argument Vindicated. Presbyters succeeded the Apostles. Ignatius and Ireneus
Vindicated. More Testimonies to the same effect. P. 151. to p. 190.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. Marg. after 80. read 1. P. 12. M. for 1235. r. 1245. P. 14. M. for
5.30. r. 530. P. 26. M. f. P. 14. r. p. 13* 14. P. 35. l. 25. r. Pope's
Casualties. P. 46, l. 20. f. 24. r. 26. P. 53. l. 22. f. 72. r. 73. P. 63. M.
f. clerios r. clericis. P. 67. l. 13. dele a. l. 15, r. resolved. P. 87. l. 6.
r. Sanhedrin. P. 89. l. 11. f. of r. at. p. 100. l. 10. f. 18. r. 28. p. 104.
l. 3. r. story. p. 106. l. 31. r. Presbyters. p. 109. l. 38. r. Mal. 2.1.7. p.
111. l. 38. r. Diocese. p. 120. l. 7. r. 2 Cor. 2.12, 13. p. 122. l. 15. r.
Goncession. p. 140. l. 13. r. ye. p. 143. l. 13. r. Cretensis. p. 148. l. 3.15.
r. (...) and l. 30. p. 149. l. 15. r. (...), p. 151. l. 22. r. Crambe. p. 153.
l. 8. r. there. p. 157. l. 12. r. Apostle. p. 160. l. 2. f. 22. r. 2.2. l. ult.
r. an. p. 172. l. 36. f. dot. r. not. p. 175. l. 8. r. Conduct.

A Defense of Scripture-Ordination, etc.
CHAP. I. The Dissenters Justified in their Way of Managing Controversies.
Calvin Vindicated. Bishops Lordly Titles Considered. The Parallel between the
Canons in Acts 15. and the English Canons. Parish-Ministers have no power of
Discipline. The Waldenses had no Superior Bishops, proved, 1. From their
Doctrine; 2. From their own Testimony; 3. From F. Paul's Testimony; 4. By
several Instances of Ordination by their Presbyters in England, before the
Reformation. Of the uninterrupted succession of Bishops.
BEFORE he enters upon his Subject, he desires his common Reader to observe the
unfair way the Dissenters have in managing Controversies. Pref. p. 2.
1. Do they pick up imperfect Notes of Sermons Preached a Year or two before,
and take upon them to Confute them, when the Authors are dead, and cannot
Vindicate themselves? This were a little unfair; but he knows who did so, when
he Preached his Sermon of Consecration, in Answer to a Sermon of Mr. Baldwin,
under the Fictitious Name of Calvin, (as I am told) because, forsooth, Calvus
is Bald, and Vin is Wine, and so you have the English of Calvin, que Bald-wine;
Doubtless so Learned an Etymologist can give a Reason why the odd Epithet of
Bald is attributed to Wine. I am apt to think Calvin himself, as Learned as he
was, never thought of this rare Etymon of his Name. But to return to our
Subject;

2. Do the Dissenters use to lodge their Manuscripts in some Friend's hand,
with a charge that none shall see them, except they undertake to Answer them,
and promise to return them the same Day? This is an unfair way of managing
Controversies, and it is much more unfair for a Man to triumph that a
Manuscript clogged with inch unreasonable Conditions is not Answered. The Rector
can Name the unfair Man that has thus managed the Controversy of the
Consecration-Sermon, mentioned before.

3. Or do the Dissenters pretend to Answer Books, and leave the greatest part
of them unanswered? He knows who does so also, and Insinuates in his Title
Page, as if he had Answered the Whole, when indeed deed it is far otherwise.
This is an unfair way of managing Controversies, which somebody is guilty of.

But let us hear how he proves his Charge.

I. In most of their Books, be the Argument what it will, Pref.
they represent us as Arminians, says he.

Persons that have a sore place complain they are hurt, if one do but touch
them. This Charge of Arminianism is either true, or false; if true, confess it,
and give glory to God; if false, disprove it. I doubt the Rector cannot acquit
himself, whatever others do; for I see not why he should mention it here,
except it were to vent his Spleen against poor Calvin, not the English Calvin
(alias Baldwin) but the French Minister of that Name, upon whom he passes this
Censure;

I am persuaded, Page 3.
if the most understanding Calvinist would represent the Opinions of that great
Man in their true Colors, he would fright more out of their Wits, than he
could solidly satisfy, or Proselyte to his Party.

If I should attempt to represent the Opinions of Calvin in their true Colors,
I despair of satisfying a Man of Mr. G's. Kidney; nor would I be so spiteful,
as to fright him out of his Wits: However, I hope I may, without prejudice to
his Intellect, refer him to the Seventeenth Article of the Church of England,
concerning Predestination and Election, and to the Prayer at Burials, That God
would shortly accomplish the number of his Elect, which assert one of Calvin's
most frightful Doctrines, namely, that of Election, which implies Reprobation,
or Preterition. To choose, is to Select some from among others that are left.

I presume he has declared his Assent and Consent to the Articles and Liturgy,
with what Sincerity he knows best: Perhaps his pre-conceived Notions have given
such a Tincture to his Eyes, as happily secures him from the Intellectual
danger of seeing some Truths in their own Colors.

He wonders with what Confidence the little Striplings which Mr. Frankl.
Instructs, so soon as they have Commenced, Ibid.
he knows not what Degree, are ready to determine the Cause between Arminius
and Calvin, as if they were Doctors of the Chair.

I am afraid our Rector is no great Philosopher; for a Philosopher, who
inquires into the Reasons of things, wonders at nothing; but,

1. Why should he wonder that Mr. Fr.'s Pupils should with the same freedom
determine for Calvin, that many raw Youths that come from the Universities do
for his beloved Arminius? Can that be a Crime in ours, which passes for a
Virtue in theirs?

2. To cure his wonder, I will tell him the Reason why they determine against
Arminius, beause Judicious and Learned Mr. Fr. who as little needs my
Commendation, as he fears the Rector's Censure, directs his Pupils to the Study
of the Scriptures, and their own Hearts, which will enable them betimes to
exalt the Free Grace of God, and to depress the proud and enslaved Will of Man.

3. One that is a Genuine Son of the Church, will not wonder that Mr. Fr.
should acquaint his Scholars with the Orthodox Ancient Doctrine of the Church
of England, whose Learned Divines Subscribed the Decrees of the Calvinistical
Synod of Dort, in Conformity to the Doctrine of the English Church, which
preferred them after their return, and never Censured that Act of theirs.

The Sense of the Church of England may be seen in her Articles, whereof the
Tenth is against Free Will, the Thirteenth against Works preparatory to Grace,
and the Seventeenth for Predestination and Election. The Articles were
Composed, A. D. 1562. Some Years after, viz. A. 1595. the Lambeth Articles came
out, which were drawn up by Archbishop Whitgift, with the Advice of several of
his Clergy, and Subscribed by the Archbishop of York, and afterward Inserted
into the Articles of the Church of Ireland These agree with that Determination
of the Synod of Dort. Fuller's Eccl. Hist. lib. IX. p. 230.


Why may not Mr Fr. ^cholars as well Determine for the Doctrine contained in
the Articles of the Church of England, which they Sincerely and Honestly
Subscribe, as Mr. G. and his Friends do determine against the Doctrine of the
Church, under the odious Name of Calvinism? Who yet make shift to Subscribe her
Articles, by the help of a sorry distinction, that they Subscribe them not as
Articles of Faith, but as Articles of Peace; a Distinction that may help a Man
to swallow the Mass or the Alcoran, when his Peace and Temporal Advantages
require it. Mr. Fr's. little Striplings, (as he calls them) Thanks be to God,
are better instructed.

4. As to Scholastical Degrees, they are Ornamental Titles of no great
Antiquity in the Christian World, invented in the Lateran Council, Gentil.
exam. Con. Trid. p. 6.
Ann. Dom. 1215. A wise Man values Persons by their real Worth, and not by
empty Titles, which are most coveted by such as are least worthy of them; and
since the new Conformity, clogged with such Conditions, as the Dissenters cannot
comply with. For the same Reason the Waldenses and Bohemians rejected Popish
Degrees, nor would Bucer accept of a Doctor's Degree in Cambridge, until the
offensive initiating Ceremonies were dispensed with. Hoorn. sum Contr. l. 10 p.
754.


Degrees were freely given to all deserving Persons, before the Year 1616. when
Subscription beg^n to be urged, by the Interest of Dr. Laud, and his Party at
Court, who procured an Order from K. James, directed to the Vice Chancellor,
the Heads of Colleges and Halls, etc. in Oxon, That none should take any
Degrees, without Subscribing the III. Articles in the XXXVI. Canon. Cambridge,
not long after, Laud's life by Dr Heylin, p. 71, 72.
submitted to the same Innovation. For Mr. Hildersam Commenced Bachelor, and
Master of Arts, without any Subscription: But about 1617. one Mr. Smith,
Minister of Clavering in Essex, desiring to Commence Doctor, it was imposed to
put him by, and so upon all Doctors and Batchelors in Divinity, by Letters from
the King. It was afterward Imposed also upon Masters of Art and Batchelors.

II. Another common Topic, as our Author tells us, Is to represent the
bishops, proud and haughty Persons, and chiefly, Pref. p. 4.
because of the Honorable Title of Lord given them, which is more excusable,
than for every I reacher to assume the Title of Master: For the Law has
bestowed that Title upon the Bishops, but not that of Master upon all Preachers.

This is a general Charge, and not proved. I am sure. J. O. does not Charge
them with being Proud and Haughty. It Is true, some grave Dissenters, and sober
Churchmen also, have expressed their wishes, that the Bishops would divest
themselves of their Honorable Titles, and Secular Grandeur, for these Reasons,
among others.

1. Because the Holy Apostles, whose Successors, they say, they are, assumed to
themselves no such Titles. We no where read of My Lord Peter, My Lord Paul. The
Apostles little dreamt, that a sort of Men should succeed them, that would look
more like the Princes of the Earth, than the plain and mortified Ministers of
the Humble Jesus.

2. Lorldly Titles, and Spiritual Domination, seem to be forbidden by the Great
Lord of the Church, Mat. 20.25, 26. The Princes of the Gentiles exercise
dominion over them; and they that are great, exercise authority upon them, but
it shall not be so among you.

That which distinguishes Civil Magistrates from Gospel Ministers, is the
Exercise of Dominion, and Titles of Honor; both these are forbidden unto
Ministers. It shall not be so among you. You must not Exercise Lordship, and
Dominion over your Flocks and Brethren in the Ministry. The Papists, and some
others object, That Tyrannical, Bellarm. de Romans Pon. V. 10.
and not Lawful Dominion, is here forbidden. And therefore, say they, Matthew
uses the Words (...), and (...), which signify Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Dominion.

But it will appear, that our Savior forbids all Dominion, as well as Tyranny,
if we consider,

1. That St. Luke uses the Simple Verbs (...), and (...), Luke 22.25. which
signify Lawful, and not Tyrannical Dominion. And St. Matthew ought to be
interpreted by Luke, because the Apostle, speaking of Spiritual Dominion, uses
the simple Verb (...), 2 Cor. 1.24. (...), Not that we have dominion over your
Faith. The Apostles did not exercise any Dominion over the Consciences of Men;
they reckoned themselves Ministers, not Lords. They had the power of the Word,
and not of the Sword. Their Weapons were not Carnal, but Spiritual; (...)
signifies Lawful Dominion. Adam's Dominion over the Creatures, in a State of
Innocence, which was far from Tyranny, is expressed by (...), in the LXX. Genesis
1.28. (...). Christ's Dominion, which is most Holy and Righteous, and
infinitely remote from Tyranny, is set forth by the same Word, Psalm. 110.2.
(...), rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.

2. Christ forbids that Dominion which the Apostles coveted, and were ambitious
of. What was that? Not a Tyrannical Power over their Brethren, far be it from
us to impute such horrid wickedness to such good Men; they were not so wicked
as to desire an absolute Power to Tyrannize over the Consciences and Bodies of
their Fellow Subjects: The Strife among them was, which of them should be
accounted the greatest, Luke 22.24. They expected to be so many Princes,
dignified with Power, and Titles of Honor above others. They dreamt of a
Temporal Kingdom the Messiah was to set up, as most of the Jewish Nation did,
and were Ambitious of the Chiefest Dignities in this Kingdom, Mat. 20.21. They
thought Jesus Christ would set up for a Temporal Prince, and they aspire to a
Temporal Dominion. He tells them, That Dominion belongs to Temporal Princes,
but it must not be so among his Ministers.

It ill becomes Servants to assume the form of Princes, when their Great Prince
assumed the form of a Servant, Mat. 20.27, 28. Whosoever will be chief -- let
him be your servant, even at the Son of Man came not to be Ministered unto, but
to Minister.

3. It was not a Tyrannical Dominion they Coveted, for the Dominion they
desired was in Subordination to Jesus Christ, as their Prince and King, under
whom they desired to be Chief Ministers of State, next unto Jesus Christ in
Power and Dominion. One would sit on his right hand, another at hi, left, in
his Kingdom, Mat. 20.21. Now the Power which they desired, being in
Subordination to Jesus Christ, as Lord and King, cannot be a Tyrannical Power,
for this were to impute Tyranny to Christ Himself, which were Blasphemy.

It cannot therefore be imagined, That Christ should forbid Tyrannical Dominion
here, which they had no thoughts of. Therefore all Dominion, like that of the
Princes of the Earth, which consists in a Coercive Power, worldly Grandeur, and
swelling Titles of Honor, is here forbidden.

3. The Dissenters are not the only Persons who have opposed the Secular
Dominion, and Lordly Titles of Bishops.

In the Primitive Church they were forbidden to intermeddle with Secular
Affairs, which are the Province of Civil Magistrates, upon pain of Deprivation.

The Ancient Canons, called the Apostles, which are Confirmed by the Sixth
General Council, at Constantinople, Can. 2. Can. Apost. 6. al. 7. and 80.
Saecularia officia negotiaque abjiciant: Honorum gradus per ambitionem non
subeant. Conc. Mogunt. Can. 10. Sentel in clero deputati, nec ad militiam,
neque ad aliquam veniant dignitatem mundanam. Quasi bruta animalia, liberate
a^ desiderio suo feruntur.
do depose all Bishops that engage themselves in Public Administrations, and
Worldly Cares.

They are forbidden to receive Secular Honors, by the great Council of
Chalcedon, Can. 7. (...).

In the Council of Mentz, which was called by Charles the Great, A. D. 813. The
Clergy are enjoined to abstain from Secular Offices and Affairs, and from an
ambitious Assuming of Degrees of Honor.

I find another German Council about the Year 895. making the Clergy incapable
of Secular Dignities.

Conc. Tribur. Can. 27. The Canon refers to the Decree of the General Council
at Chalcedon, Can. 7. and pronounces an Anathema against those that violate
this Determination, as the Council of Chalcedon had done before.

The Canon adds, That Isidore compares those Clergymen, who are for Secular
Affairs and Dignities, to Hippocentaurs, who are neither Horses nor Men, but
are acted by a brutal Appetite.

Jerome desires the Bishops to remember, Meminerint Episcopi, se sacerdotes
esse, non dominos. Hie. ad Nepot.
That they are Priests, not Lords.

Austin says, Episcopacy is a name of work, and not of honor De Civ. Dei XIX.
19.
.

Valentinian made a Law, recalling the Judicial Power of Bishops in all Causes,
except those of Faith and Religion, unless voluntarily chosen by the contending
Parties: Yet they grasped all Power into their Hands, Conc. Constant. VIII.
Can. 14.
until at last they were able to Cope with Kings and Princes, and Emperors
must acknowledge them for their Equals.

This made them a common Grievance to the Princes of Europe, insomuch that
Frederick the second Emperor, about the Year 1245. attempted to reduce them to
the Primitive Simplicity, as appears by a Letter which he wrote to the King of
England, and to the King of France, and to many other Princes, Nobilitatem and
Dignitatem Vniversalis Ecclesiae annullare. M. West. ad A. D. 1235. p. 203.
in the close of which he signifies his Intention to divest the Universal
Church of it is Nobility and Dignity, and to reduce the Church to its Primitive
Poverty and Humility.

It cannot be imagined, that he designed to deprive Bishops of a necessary and
just Maintenance, but of their excessive and superfluous Wealth, and of their
lordly Dignities. But the Time was not yet come, the Ecclesiastical was too
hard for the Temporal Power, the Emperor was at last deposed by Pope Innocent
IVth, and his Council of Bishops at Lions, and at last destroyed by Manfred,
his Natural or rather Unnatural Son.

In the Year of Christ, 1247. many of the Nobility of France enter into a
Confederacy, confirmed by a solemn Oath, to reduce the Clergy to the Primitive
Simplicity. They Published an Instrument, signifying, That the Clergy had
swallowed up the Jurisdiction of secular Princes, and that the Sons of Slaves,
or Servants, did judge Freemen according to their own Laws, who ought to have
been judged by the Nobles. They put us in a worse Condition (say the
Confederate Nobles) then God would have the Pagans to be in, when he said,
Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods. We Decree and Enact, that from henceforth no Clerk, or Layman bring any
Cause before the Ordinary or his Delegate, except it be that of Heresy,
Matrimony or Usury: That so our Jurisdiction being revived, and that they, who
are enriched by our Impoverishment, may be reduced to the State of the
Primitive Church. They conclude in the Words of the Emperor's Letter, It was
always our Intention to oblige the Clergy of every Order, especially the
greatest, to continue the same in the Faith, that they were in the Primitive
Church, leading an Apostolical Life, M. West. ad An. 1247. p. 217, 218.
and imitating the Humility of the Lord Jesus.

The Civil Dominion of the Clergy was one of the main Grievances of the
Bohemians, which they would have redressed in the Council of Basil. Fox's Acts
and Mon. ad An. 1438.
Their Delegates Disputed fifty Days upon this, and three other Articles in the
Council.

The Lordly Titles and Dominion of the Clergy were very offensive to several
Confessors, and Martyrs in this Kingdom before the Reformation.

That eminent Light of his Age Jo. Wickliff affirmed; Non stat pure Clericum
absque Mortali peccato civiliter dominari.
that it was a Mortal Sin for a Clergyman to exercise Civil Dominion.

My Lord Cobham calls the Possessions and Lordships of Bishops the Venom of the
Church.

Swinderby, Walls. Hist. p. 208.
a learned Confessor (and Martyr, as Mr. Fox thinks) has these Words. If Men
speaken of worldly Power, and Lordships, Fox ad Ann. Do. 1413.
and Worships, with other Vices that reignen therein, what Priest that desires,
and has most hereof (in what Degree soever he be) he is most Antichrist of all
the Priests that been on Earth.

John Purvey, Fox ad A. D. 1390.
a Learned Writer against Popery, whom Thomas Walden calls the Library of
Lollards and Gloser upon Wickliff, says, It is a great Abomination that
Bishops, Monks and other Prelates, Ibid. p. 5.30. Edit 1576.
be so great Lords in this World, whereas Christ with his Apostles and
Disciples never took upon then secular Dominion

He adds, That all Christians ought to the utmost of their Power and Strength
to swear that they will reduce such shavelings to the Humility and Poverty of
Christ and his Apostles.

William Tindal, that famous Instrument of Reformation, who was burnt in
Flanders by the Instigation of the English Monks, because he had translated the
Scriptures to the English Tongue, writes, That it was a shame of all shames,
and a monstrous thing that Bishops should deal in Civil Causes. See his Works,
p. 124. and in p. 140. What Names have they? My Lord Bishop, my Lord
Archbishop, if it please your Lordship, if it please your Grace!

The brightness of this Truth has shined upon some Doctors of the Roman Church
in the darkest Times.

Ocham wrote against the temporal Dominion of the Pope and Prelates, Genesis 45.
ad An. Dom. 1338. Ad nihilum deducens potestatem Papae and Praelatorum in
temporali Dominio. Acts and Mon. p. 667.
as Nauclerus tells us.

One of the Cardinals in the Council of Basil in a warm Speech for Amedeus,
Duke of Savoy, Candidate for the Popedom, has these Words. I have often
consented unto their Opinion, which said it was expedient that the Temporal
Dominions should be divided from the Ecclesiastical Estate; For I did think,
that the Priests should thereby be made more apt to the Divine Ministry.

The Roman Pagan Priests meddled not in Civil Affairs, because if they had, they
must of Necessity either (...), neglect the Worship of the Gods, or (...),
prejudice the Citizens, by omitting the Duties owing to the one or the other,
which would often interfere. Plut. Quest. Romans ult.
The very Light of Nature, taught the Heathen that the Service of the Gods, and
Attendance upon secular Employments were inconsistent. For this Reason, the
Apostle forbids the Ministers of Jesus Christ, especially Bishops, To entangle
themselves with the Affairs of this Life, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4.

I will conclude this Head with a Passage or two out of Mouns. Jurieu's
Pastoral Letters to the persecuted French Protestants.

In his first Pastoral Letter, Past. Let. 1. p. 4, 5.
he thus animadverts upon The Pastoral Letter of my Lord the Bishop of Meaux.
These Gentlemen are well advanced, since the Authors and Founders of
Christianity, who called themselves plainly by their own Names, without any
other Title than that of Servants of Jesus Christ, and Apostles of our Lord. My
Lord's St. Peter, and St. Paul had forgotten to set the Character of their
Grandeur on the Front of their Pastoral Letters or Epistles. It Is not very
Edifying to see the marks of Pride and worldly Vanity on the front of a
Pastoral Letter.

He adds a little after, Do not suffer your selves to be abused by those that
tell you, that in some Protestants States, the Bishops retain the same Honors.
The Bishops of England have this to say for themselves, that they are Peers of
the Realm, to which State and Condition the Name and Title of my Lord does
appertain and belong: But besides, I am persuaded that the wiser of these
Gentlemen, will willingly sacrifice these Titles (which do not suff ciently
bespeak the Humility of a Minister of Jesus Christ) to a general Reformation in
the Church when it shall be received.

I hope by this Time, the Reader is convinced how impertinently Mr. G. Appeals
to the Quakers, Pref. p. 4.
whom he calls indifferent Persons, and honest in this Case, because they have
quarreled, not at the Title of Lord only, but at that of Master also.

Jesus Christ and his Apostles, the General Council of Chalcedon, the Fathers,
Princes, Confessors, and Doctors here witnessing against the Lordly Titles and
Dominion of Bishops, were no Quakers. J. O. will not contend for the Title of
Master, which Mr. G. in Conformity to his indifferent Quaker, does not think
fit to give him in his whole Book.

3. A third Way (says the Rector) is to accuse us of symbolizing with Papists.
p. 5.
I could wish there were no occasion for this Charge. Our Disagreement with the
Church of England is in those things, wherein she agrees with that of Rome, and
in which both of them disagree with the Practice of the Apostles, and the
Reformed Churches abroad.

He tells us out of Eusebius. Lib. 1. (it should have been Lib. 2.) c. 16. That
Mark constituted Churches in Alexandria, that so great a Multitude both of Men
and Women there embraced the Christian Faith, etc. These Churches Mark
governed, and after him Bishop Anianus, as is showed in these Papers. This
Quotation he the rather produces, because it has been overlooked of late.

This Passage is a little unluckily produced, for

1. It over-throws the Notion of the learned Assertors of Episcopacy, that a
Diocese is the lowest Species of a Church, and that particular Congregations
are but Oratories, and no Churches: A Bishop and a Church being Relatives. But
Eusebius speaks of Churches of Alexandria, therefore there must be Bishops of
Alexandria, not one Bishop, and this agreeable enough to the Apostolical
Platforms, who appointed several Bishops in one City, Acts 20.17, 28. Phil. 1.1.

2. Mark was an Evangelist, an extraordinary unfixed Officer, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Pet.
5.13. Eusebius calls him Peter's Companion, and an Evangelist. Hist. 11.14.23.
Ibid.


3. Anianus succeeded Mark the Evangelist in the Ministry of the Church of
Alexandria, not as a Bishop of a Superior Order to the Presbyters there, but as
an honorable President in their Assemblies, such a Moderator as the Reformed
Churches have in their Synods and Assemblies, without Power of Jurisdiction
over his Colleagues: And that he was no more, Cap. to. p. 126. 130.
J. O. has proved at large in his Plea, out of Jerome and Eutychius, Patriarch
of Alexandria, where we have a clear Proof of Presbyters Ordaining for almost
two hundred Years together. The Rector did not judge it advisable, to meddle
with J. O's. Remarks upon the Church of Alexandria. Either he had read that
Chapter in J. O's Book, or he had not: If he had, he is inexcusable; if not, he
should read Books before he undertake to answer them, Prove. 18.13. He that
answers a Matter before he hears (or understands it) it is Folly and
Shame unto him.

4. Moreover so great a Multitude (says the Rector out of Eusebius.) there
embraced the Faith, etc. He suppresseth the rest of the Sentence, which is
thus, that even Philo judged it worth while to describe their way of Living.
Our Author would persuade us by this half Sentence, that there were vast
numbers of Converts in Alexandria in Mark's Time, but leaves out the rest by a
Cunning, etc. for he knew the invalidity of Euseb's Reason, that Philo had
described the Christians in Egypt, whereas the Truth is, he writes of the
Essenes, and not of the Christians, as the Learned have proved

This I Note only by the by, as an Instance of this Gentleman's unfairness in
quoting Authors, otherwise I am not concerned in the numbers of the Alexandrian
Converts, for as they increased there and in other Places, they multiplied into
more Churches, who had Pastors assigned them, with Power of Discipline over
their respective Flocks.

In short, the instance of the Alexandrian Bishop makes altogether for us, for
he was but the chief Presbyter (as an Archdeacon was the chief Deacon) chosen
and named by the Presbyters without any Consecration, and in his room the
Presbyters ordained another, as J. O. has proved in his Plea.

Mr. G. in the next Place, shows the Parallel between their Church Government,
and that of the Apostles. Our Episcopal Government (says he) is established
upon certain Canons and Laws made and consented unto by the Convocation,
consisting of Bishops and Presbyters, and by the Multitude of Believers, that
is, their Representatives in Parliament. And thus it was in the Council of
Jerusalem, Acts 15.

Let Us a little consider this Paragraph,

1. I expected, he would have said the Episcopal Government is established upon
the Word of God, but he ingeniously confesses the Truth of the Matter, that it
is established upon certain Canons and Laws of humane devising. We conceive the
Laws of Christ and the Canons of the Apostles, contained in the New Testament,
sufficient for the Government of the Church.

2. He makes the Multitude of Believers in Jerusalem, to be as the
Representatives of the People in Parliament. Many of our Learned Antiquaries
have industriously labored to search into the Original of Parliaments, some
conceive they owe their beginning to the Normans, some to the Saxons, others
derive them higher, all confess the Rise of them, like the Head of Nilus very
obscure; but this Gentleman by an unparalled Felicity of Invention, has found
them in the Council at Jerusalem, Acts 15. where no Body before ever dreamt of
them.

However, I am glad to find him speaking any thing in favor of Parliaments,
for some Years ago, when they were out of Request, he advanced the Prerogative
to that Degree, that Parliaments, the Bulwarks of the Subjects Liberty, were
very insignificant things with him. I will give a few Instances, 1. He would
exempt the Clergy from the Power of Parliaments in Point of Taxes. We the
Clergy, says he, are hooked in, Three Sermons of Subjection, Pr. 1683, Pref.
p. 4.
I know not how, to Pay Taxes without the consent of the Convocation. 2. He
will not allow the aggrieved Subject, the benefit of Petitioning and Addressing
their Prince, especially when he is under some disadvantage. 3. He makes the
King in Effect the sole Proprietor of our Estates, and says, Sermon 1. p. 11
we must supply his Occasions, the five hundred at once (i. e. a House of
Commons) should forbid us, because our Gold and Silver bear his Image and
Superscription. p. 13.
The meaning is this, the King has Power to Tax us without the Consent of
Parliament. 4. He adds, and to this (i. e. to supply the King without the
Consent of Parliament) we are bound in Conscience, though the Prince should be
an Usurper and a Tyrant: p. 13, 14, 15.
Nay, says our Author, a Violent and Originally unjust Power, by success
becomes a Legal and Righteous Authority. 5. He complains that the Rights of the
People were too much sweld, their Properties too much enlarged, their Liberties
too much extended. p. 17.
This was in the Year 1683. when the Popish Plot had been stifled, sham-Plots
set on Foot for the Destruction of the best Patriots, the Rights and Franchises
of Cities and Corporations undermined and violated, Parliaments disgraced,
Popery and Slavery breaking in irresistibly upon us under the Conduct and
Influence of the then Duke of York. 6. He affirms, that the Prince is
accountable to none but God for any misgovernment, nay he is in Effect,
continues he, the sole Sovereign Power, if he pleases to Vsurp and Exercise it,
nor can the Subject conscientiously resist him. p. 21.
7. He thinks it is one main ground of Political Government, to deprive the
Subject from being his own Judge and Asserter of his own Privileges. 8. p. 22.
He conceives the Kings Coronation Oath is a voluntary Act of Grace, unto which
he is not obliged by the Fundamental Constitution. P. 23.
9. If a Prince should not give this Assurance, it is my Judgment (says he) he
is not obliged to govern strictly by the present Law. Ibid.


I doubt I have tired the Reader with these Political Maxims. Sibthorp and
Mainwaring were dull Fellows to this grand Master of Politics, who has left it
wholly to his Prince's good Nature, whether he will make use of his multitude
of Believers, or no. He is the sole sovereign Power, and not obliged to take
the Coronation Oath, or to govern according to the Established Laws, if we may
believe our Rector.

I will not trouble my self, or the Reader, by making Remarks upon these
Passages, which are but a few, of many, with which his Three Sermons abound.
All these you may find in the first.

These Sermons were designed (as he tells us, Pref. 10 the Sermon. p. 3.
and I dare believe him) To assure the higher Powers of his steadiness and
fidelity, and of may more in these Northern Climates. It was a Point of mighty
Consequence to the higher Powers, to be assured of the Rector's Fidelity,
especially in a time when the Prince was under some disadvantage. Most happy
Prince! who can assure himself of the Fidelity of such a Man as Mr. G. for in
him he assures himself of many more in these Northern Climates. The higher
Powers then in being, were highly obliged to so Profound a Casuist, who by
another Tentamen Novum, attempted to prove the Jus Divinum of Absolute
Monarchy, and Arbitrary Government: But all well-deserving Expectants have not
the Happiness of being Preferred according to their Merits.

But to return to his Parallel.

3. The Council at Jerusalem, under the Conduct of the Holy Ghost, enjoined the
necessary forbearance of a few things to avoid offense, Acts 15.28. The
Convocation has made Canons, injoyning the Practice of abundance of unnecessary
things to create offense. That Council widen'd the Door to Church Fellowship,
by taking away the ancient ceremonial Terms of Communion, and breaking down the
partition Wall between Jews and Gentiles: The Convocation has straightened the
Door to Church Fellowship, by setting up new ceremonial Terms of Communion, and
erecting a partition Wall between Brethren.

4. The Council at Jerusalem freed the Christians from a divine Yoke, namely,
Circumcision; the Convocation binds a humane Yoke of burdensome Ceremonies on
our Necks. The Apostles asserted that Christian Liberty, which the Lord Jesus
purchased at a dear rate, and obliged us to maintain, Gal. 5.1. Others unjustly
deprive us of it, and mancipate us under more beggarly Elements than those of
the Jewish Pedagogy, Gal. 4.9. Had the Apostles Successors imitated the
excellent temper of their wise Fathers in this Council, the Christian World had
not been divided into so many Factions as it is at this Day. When Rehoboam's
little Finger proves heavier than Solomon's Loins, no wonder there is a Schism
in Israel.

5. The Council at Jerusalem made no new Canon, only thought fit to continue
some divine Prohibitions, that were obliging before, Acts 15.29. The
Convocation has made but 141 new Canons, concerning most of which there is no
Divine Law. The Canons of that Council are contained in one short Verse, v. 29.
The Canons of our Synod make a large Volume.

6. The Canons of that Council have no Penalty annexed; the Decree of the
Council ends thus, v. 29. From which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well.
Fare ye well. Our Canons thunder out terrible Anathema's, and Excommunications,
ipso facto, not known to the Apostles, against all the breakers of them.

7. The Canons at Jerusalem were made by the Apostles, Elders, and the whole
Church, v. 22. Our Canons are made by the Bishops and Presbyters in
Convocation, which are the true Church of England by representation, as Can.
139. obliges us to believe, on pain of Excommunication. Mr. G. makes the
Parliament to represent the Multitude of Believers, that is, the Church,
according to his Parallel; for he makes the Bishops to answer the Apostles, the
Presbyters the Elders, and the Parliament the whole Church, or multitude of
Believers.

I leave the Rector to the Censure of his Diocesan, who is obliged by the
Canon, to Excommunicate, and not to restore him, until he repent, and publicly
revoke this his wicked error Can. 139
, in affirming the Parliament to be the Church representative, instead of the
Convocation.

I hope the Impartial Reader is now fully convinced how exactly the Episcopal
Government, as described by this Gentlemen, agrees with the Council at
Jerusalem.

He is angry with J. O. for saying Parish Priests have no power of Discipline;
Pref. p. 14
and Answers, They have power to rebuke and admonish, and suspend for a while
from the Lord's Supper.

This is in effect an acknowledgment of the Truth of what J. O. Asserts. They
have power to rebuke and admonish, so have private Persons, Lev. 19.17. Col.
3.16. The Admonitions of a Master, who has no Power to use the Rod, will have
little influence upon froward Lads. But Parish Ministers can suspend for a
while: For how long? But for fourteen Days at the farthest; and then they are
obliged to put the whole Matter out of their Power, and to commit it to the
Ordinary. See the Rubric before the Communion.

The true State of the Case is this:

1. They have no power left them to judge whom to Baptize, and whom not, Can.
68.
but must Baptize all that are offered, though the Children of Jews, Infidels,
Deists, etc. who have no right to the Privileges of the Covenant of Grace.

2. They have no power to forbear giving the Eucharist to any one, how
notorious an Offender soever, unless they will prosecute him at the Bishop's
Court, nor then, but for once: So that if he pays his Fees, and be Absolved
there, though the Minister know him to be never so Impenitent, he must give it
him the next time. And the Prosecution is so troublesome, odious and fruitless,
that it is very rarely undertaken.

3. They have no Power to call Persons to Repentance openly before the Church.

4. They have no Power to judge any Person to be Excommunicate, nor to absolve
any Person that is Penitent after Excommunication; they only read the
Chancellor's Sentence (who is usually a Layman) sent them in the Bishop's
Name; much like our Cryers in Civil Courts, that publish the Orders of the
Court. Yea, though they are satisfied in their Consciences, that the
Chancellor's Decree is sometimes unjust, Et clave errante, Excommunicating a
Conscientious Person scrupling a Ceremony (as was done in the late Reigns) or
absolving an Impenitent Person, who has Commuted for Notorious Scandal, yet
they must publish it, or be Suspended. All the Power left them, is the
Privilege of being the Chancellor's Servants to execute all his Decrees,
without once Examining whether they be right or wrong.

Many Sober Conformists, who have a tender concern for the Souls under their
Charge, have complained of this Restraint, and impute the growing Debaucheries
of the People to the want of Parish Discipline.

The very Liturgy complains, That the Godly Primitive Discipline is wanting in
our Churches. See the Office of Commination.

If the Parish-Ministers have the Power of Discipline, as the Rector would have
us believe, the more to blame they for admitting all Persons promiscuously to
the Lord's Supper. It is rarely that any scandalous Persons are excluded, as
they ought to be, Mat 18.15, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 5.2 Cor. 3.6.

His Fancy that our Ministers ask leave of the Lay Elders to Suspend is a great
mistake. Though common Sense might teach him, that two or three Experienced
Persons of the Congregation (whom he Styles Lay Elders) in conjunction with the
Ministers, are more competent Judges of Offenses within the Congregation, than
a Lay-Chancellor, who lives at a distance, and is a mere Stranger, and usually
makes the best advantage of his Office, without any great regard to the
Salvation of Souls.

He complains, That the Dissenters call them Priests in contempt, P. 13.
though the Word he but Presbyter contracted.

1. I know no Reason why this Gentleman should be offended that we call them by
a Name which themselves are so fond of. The Words Pri^sthood and Priests are
used five or six times in the Form of Ordination: And the Word Minister was
changed by the Reformers of the Common Prayer, in 1662. into that of Priest, at
least in five places, in the Absolution, in the Responses, in the Litany, and
at the Communion, etc.

2. Admit it to be a Contraction of Presbyter, we must consider Words non a
quo, sed ad quid, as the Schoolmen speak, not as they did Originally signify,
but as they do at Present. It is certain that the Learned Translators of the
New Testament never render the Greek Presbyter by Priest in English, and they
had reason for it, because the Word Priest in common use, signifies the
Sacrificing Priests of the Law, whose name is never in the New Testament given
to Ministers of the Church, as Dr. Fulk observes against the Rhemish Seminary,
Rhem. in Act 14. S. 4.
who quarrel with our first Reformers, for Translating (...) Elder and not
Priest.

The Hebrew (...), and the Greek (...), are generally Translated Priest in our
English Bibles, and they properly signify Sacrificing Priefts.

Our Author confesses, Pref. p. 14.
That it is very requisite that we should not know of any interruption in the
Succession of Holy Orders; but it is infinite Satisfaction when we have a moral
assurance that there has been none.

J. O. has proved in his Plea, that the Succession has been interrupted, P.
168. to 178.
and that it is morally impossible by this Principle, for any Man to know
himself to be a true Minister of Christ: But our Rector never takes notice of
it; not unlike some sort of Disputants, who resolve to hold the Conclusion, let
what will come of the Premises.

He that has moral assurance that there has been no Interruption, which begets
in the Rector infinite Satisfaction, must be sure, that he who Ordained him was
Ordained by a Canonical Bishop: that that Bishop's Ordination was not void by
Canon; particularly he must be sure to know he came not in by Simony, that he
was not an Heretic, or Erroneous in the Fundamentals, or Ordained by a Bishop
out of his own Province: He must know that all the Bishops successively, from
the Apostles times, by whom he derives his claim, were thus Ordained: one
Interruption spoils the whole Line. He must be able to disprove all the
Interruptions mentioned by Historians. He must prove that Sergius the II. not
obtain the Popedom by Magie, Naucl. p. 742.
which he himself confessed he did, that Liberius did not subscribe the Arian
Confession in the Council of Sirmium, that Pope Honorius in the second General
Council was wrongfully condemned for a Heretic, that Marcellinus was no
Idolater, nor Celestine a Nestorian Heretic, that the Charge of Simony put in
against the English Bishops, Vide Fox Acts-ad A. D. 1405.
scarce one excepted among King Henry IVth's Bishops was false.

If any one of these be true, as all may be for ought we know to the contrary,
and a thousand the like, the Succession of Ordaining Bishops is interrupted,
and the Ordinations of all that derive from them are a nullity. See the Learned
Reasons of the Bishop of Worcester against this Succession. Iren. p. 299.


The Scriptures no where mention this Succession. Where was the Succession of
the Jewish Highpriests, when the Roman Governors set up whom they pleased,
and changed them annually, without regard to the Divine Law? See John 11.51.
Joseph Antiq. xviii. 3.


Where shall we find the Succession when the Woman is in the Wilderness, and
the Witnesses slain? Gospel Ordinances are plain things and not clogged with
insuperable difficulties.

But so much is said to this Subject in J. O's Plea, that it is needless to add
more.

To justify their Ordinations, says Mr. G. by the Example of the Lollards,
Pref. p. 15.
is but to talk of Yesterday, of those who appeared not in the World till about
Henry III's Reign.

1. J. O. gave about twelve Instances of Ordination by Presbyters, Plea cap. x.
p. 125.
all more Ancient than this of the Followers of Wickliff. Our Author according
to his great Candor, overlooks all the rest, and attacks only this late
Instance: And why this? That he might say, it was but of Yesterday. And yet his
Yesterday is above four hundred Years ago, for King Henry III. dyed in the Year
1272.

2. The Lollards, as they were called in contempt, were famous Witnesses
against Antichristian Errors in their Time, and abundance of them sealed their
Testimony with their Blood. We cannot therefore judge so lightly of their
Practice as the Rector does.

It is true, they labored under great Difficulties, as he observes, but that
was not the Reason of Presbyters Ordaining among them, but their asserting an
inherent Power in Presbyters as such to ordain, as J. O. has proved out of
Walsingham's Hist. p. 339. in the very Place, which he animadverts upon, but it
was not his Interest to take notice of it.

3. This Instance is the more considerable, because the Lollards were the
offspring of the Ancient Waldenses, as Perrin observes, In England, Hist.
Wald. lib. 1. c 3.
says he, they were called Lollards from one Lollard who taught there. The
persecuted Waldenses being scattered fled into Provence, and the Alps, some
into Calabria, Bohemia, Polonia, and into Britain, as Thuanus observes. Lib. v.
ad A. D. 1550. Pref.


So that this is a further Confirmation that the Waldenses had no Bishops of
the present English Species.

But, says our Author, P. 15, and 16.
As for Waldenses, or Vaudois having had no other Ministers than Presbyters,
ordained by Presbyters for near five hundred Years past, as J. O. affirms, it
may prove one, and not the least of his mistakes, when I shall here have set
down what a Learned Neighbor of mine communicated to me. He told me, that he
finds in the History of the Church of Bohemia. That the Brethren of Bohemia,
suspecting the Validity of Ordination by Presbyters, sent unto the Waldenses
(A. D. 1467.) Michael Zamburgius, their Rector, with two others. These find
Stephen the Waldensian Bishop, who with another Bishop, and some Ministers
create Zamburgius, and his two Companions, Bishops, conferring on them the
Power to Ordain Ministers. This is sufficient, says he, to make a Man doubt J.
O's Quotations.

This Quotation, which Mr. G. borrowed of his Learned Neighbor, and Triumphs
in as a wonderful discovery of the State of the Waldenses, he might have found
in J. O's Plea, p. 157. quoted out of the History of Bohemia, to which he
refers his Reader in the Margin of his Book.

The Rector is a singular Man for answering Books, who must be obliged to his
Learned Neighbors for a Quotation, which any Common Reader could find in the
Book which he undertakes to Answer. A Man who reads Books with so little
Observation, may be presumed to answer them with less Judgment.

The Reader may see the Remarks upon that Story in J. O's Plea, which may
convince him, that the Waldensian Bishops were only the Senior Pastors, with
whom the Power of Ordination was entrusted for Orders sake, as was done here in
the late Times of Presbytery, and is still both here and in the Foreign
Reformed Churches. In all Ordinations by Presbyters, there is a Moderator, or
President, who is the Chief Manager of the Action for Order's sake, but in
Conjunction with his Brethren, over whom he claims no Jurisdiction or
Superiority in Power. This was the State of the Waldenses, their Bishops were
only Nominal and Titular, but had no Power over their Brethren: They were only
for Orders sake the Principal Managers of Ordination. This appears,

1. Because it was their received Doctrine that all Presbyters are in a State
of Parity. To this purpose they speak in a certain Confession of their Faith,
Perr. Hist. I. 13.
Art. V. We hold that the Ministers of the Church ought not to have any
Superiority over the Clergy.

Aeneas Silvias, who wrote a Book of their Doctrines, Inter sacerdotes nullum
discrimen, Boh. Hist. de Vald. Dogm.
reports this concerning them, that they affirm the Roman Bishop to be equal to
other Bishops, and that between Priests there is no difference.

The same is affirmed concerning them by Nauclerus, he represents them saying,
That all Priests are equal, Chronog. Vol. 2. Genesis 47.
and it is not any Superior Dignity, but the Merits of their Conversation that
advances some above others.

This was the constant Doctrine of our English Apostle John Wickliff, Vide
Hist. Arg. ad Ann. Dom 1389.
and his Followers, as Walsingham Notes, in several Places.

This also was the Doctrine of the Bohemians, who were enlightened by
Wickliff's Books. The Taborites in their Confession say, That the conferring of
Orders only by Bishops, Ex consuetudine habertur ecclesiae. Lyd. Wald. p. 23.
and that they have greater Authority than other Ministers, is not from any
Faith or Authority of the Scriptures, but from the Custom of the Church.

The Bishops they received from the Waldenses, were made by two of their
Titular Bishops, Hist. of the Persec. of Bohem.
and some Presbyters, which bespeaks them to be no Superior Order of
Ministers, for Presbyters cannot make Bishops of the English Species.

One of the Articles against John Hus, the Bohemian Martyr, was that he
affirmed, That all Priests are of like Power, Acts and Mon. in Conc. Constant.
and that the Reservation of the Casualties, the ordering of Bishops, and the
Consecration of Priests were invented only for Covetousness.

2. That they had no real Bishops Superior to Presbyters is evident from their
own Testimony. The Papists misrepresented them (as some others would do now)
that they had Bishops, to whom they paid a mighty deference. This was most
false, Hist. Wald. l. 10.
as Perrin evinceth out of their own Writings. The Monk Rainerius (says he)
reports many things touching the Vocation of the Pastors of the Waldenses,
which never were. As that which is imposed upon them, that they have one
greater Bishop, and two Followers, which he calls the Elder Sou and the
Younger, and a Deacon, that he laid his Hands on others with Sovereign
Authority, and sent them whither he thought good, like a Pope. That they had no
such Bishop, he proves out of the Book of the Pastors, George Maurel, and Peter
Mascon, who give this account of their Discipline.

The last that are Received (or Ordained) are to do nothing without the Leave
and License of their Seniours Received (or Ordained) before them; as also, they
that are first ought not to attempt any thing without the Approbation of their
Companions, to the end that all things might be done amongst us in Order.

The Reader may note here,

1. That the Waldensian Bishops were only the Seniour Pastors.

2. That these had no Power over other Ministers.

3. That they could not put forth any Act of Government, without the
Approbation of their Brethren: So that the Waldensian Churches were Governed by
the Common Council of the Presbyters or Pastors.

4. All this was for Order's sake. I leave it to the Impartial, to Judge
whether this sort of Government has any thing of the Form of our Episcopal
Government.

These Testimonies are sufficient to satisfy unprejudiced Persons, that the
Waldenses had no Bishops Superior to Presbyters, but I will add a few more ex
abundanti.

3. That they had no Bishops in a proper Sense appears by Father Paul's
description of them. The People of the Valleys were a part of the Waldenses,
who four hundred Years since He ends his History with the Year 1563.
forsook the Church of Rome, and in regard of the Persecutions, fled into
Polonia, Germany, Puglia, Provence, and some of them into the Valleys of
Mountsenis, Lucerna, Angronia, Perosa, and St. Martin. These having always
continued in their Separation with certain Ministers of their own, whom they
called Pastors, when the Doctrine of Zuinglius was planted in Geneva, did
presently unite themselves with those, as agreeing with them in Points of
Doctrine and principal Rites. Hist. of C. of Trent, Lib. V. ad A. D. 1559
Thus he.

Observe in this Quotation,

1. He ascribes to the Waldenses certain Ministers (not Bishops) whom they
called Pastors. If there had been any Superior Bishops among them, so exact an
Historian would not have omitted them.

2. He says, they agreed in Doctrinos and Rites with those of Geneva.

3. They presently united with them by reason of this agreement.

I hope the Rector will not affirm, That the Protestants of Geneva had Bishops;
no more had the Waldenses, who agreed with them in Rites and Doctrines, and
among other Doctrines in this of the Parity of Bishops and Presbyters, and so
readily united with them.

I doubt it will not be so easy to reconcile this Gentleman to the Doctrines
and Rites of Geneva. To be sure then his Notions of Episcopacy are very
different from those of the Anti-Popish Waldenses.

4. That they had no Bishops may be further evidenced by their Ordinations here
in England, which were by Presbyters and not by Bishops.

Walsingham says, Vt eorum Presbyteri, more Ponti^icum, novos crearent
Presbyteros. Hist. Arg. p. 339. ad A. D. 1389
That their Presbyters, after the manner of Pontifs (or Bishops) created new
Presbyters, affirming that every Priest had as great power of binding and
loosing, and performing all other Ecclesiastical Acts, as the Pope himself has
or can give.

This was not a case of mere necessity, for they assert an inherent Power in
Presbyters to Ordain. These Presbyters made by Presbyters, were the eminent
Witnesses against Antichristian Usurpations in this Land, and many of them
Sacrificed their Lives for the Testimony of Jesus.

Their Ordinations, though private, by reason of the Iniquity of the Times,
were many and considerable. If they Ordained Ministers in K. Rich. II. time, as
Walsingham says they did, Vbi supra.
much more under K. Henry IV. and the following Reigns, when they could not
have Episcopal Ordinations, if they had desired them; the Bishops being become
their mortal Enemies, and conspiring their Destruction by the bloody Statute de
Haereticis comburendis, and Archbishop Arundel's wicked Constitutions.

In the Year 1401. I find one of their Presbyters burnt at Smithfield.
Walsingham, according to the old Popish Hypothesis, that none but Bishops could
Ordain, calls him Pseudo-Presbyter, Hist p. 364
a false Presbyter.

In the Year 1414. William Cleydon, an inveterate Lollard (as the Monk calls
him) made his own Son a Priest. In tantam dementiam ruerat -- ut etiam silium
proprium sacerdotem constitueret. Hist. Arg. p. 390. Act and Mon. ad A. D. 1391.
It is not to be doubted but he was a Presbyter himself, though not Popishly
Ordained, and with the Assistance of others Ordained his Son.

Mr. William Swinderby, an Eminent and Learned Confessor, in the Sentence which
the Bishop of Hereford past upon him, is said to pretend himself to be a
Priest. Had he been Ordained by a Bishop, he had been a real Priest, in the
Bishop's account, but having no such Ordination he calls him a pretended Priest.

Mr. W. Thorp went to the Lollards, and by them was sent to Preach. The
Archbishop of Canterbury tells him, Ibid ad A. 1407. p. 514, 516.
That no Bishop would admit him to Preach, and that he was not sent or licensed
by them,

They could not submit to Episcopal Ordinations, Ibid.
without taking unlawful Oaths, as Mr. Thorp says to the Archbishop; before
whom he proves the Truth of their Mission, from the Success of their Ministry
in the Conversion of Souls. Letters of Licerse from the Bishop were invented
here about this time, to obstruct the course of the Gospel.
Since this aforesaid witnessing of God, says he, suffices to all true
Preachers, we think that we do not the office of Priesthood, if that we leave
our Preaching because that we have not, or may not have duly Bishops Letters to
witness, that we are sent of them to Preach.

John Purvey, a Learned Writer against Popery, says in one of his Books, That
every holy Man, who is a Minister of Christ, although he be not shaven, is a
true Priest Ordained of God, Act and Mon. p. 529.
although no Mitred Bishop ever lay his Character upon him.

We read of Four Ministers in the famous Congregation at Hamersham, who all
died Martyrs for the Truth. Tho. Man, called Dr. Man, one of them, confessed
that he had turned 700 People to his Doctrine. He was burnt in Smithfield.
Another of them, Tilesworth, called Dr. Tilsworth, was burnt at Amersham: The
third, Rob. Cousin, otherwise called Dr. Cousin, was burnt in Buckingham: The
fourth was hanged in the Bishop of Lincoln's Prison. The three former were
formally declared Heretics, and delivered up to the Secular Power, but none of
them are owned for Priests by their Judges, or degraded by them, which they
must have been by the Popish Laws, had they been Ordained by Bishops, before
the Secular Arm could reach them.

One Tho. Arthur, who at length Abjured (as several others did, and yet
afterward died Martyrs) about the Year 1531. as he answered to some Articles
of Wickliff's Doctrine laid to his Charge, told the People, Good People, if I
should suffer Persecution for the preaching of the Gospel of God, Ib. p. 973.
yet there is s^ven Thousand more that would preach the Gospel of God, as I do
now. Note here,

1. That the Preachers of Wickliff's Doctrine were very numerous here at this
time; Mr. Arthur affirms them to be 7000, perhaps he puts a definite for an
indefinite Number, alluding to the 7000 in Israel, that had not bowed down the
Knee to Baal. It cannot be denied but by 7000 he intends a great number.

2. This great number of Ministers must be Ordained by Presbyters, for the
Bishops would send none of them, as was observed before. They clogged their.
Ordinations with such hard conditions, as the Conscientious Lollards could not
comply with, and used all the precautions possible to hinder their Preaching.

We see here, notwithstanding the severe Persecutions against the poor
Lollards, they grew and increased exceedingly, as the Israelites in Egypt, and
had so many Thousands of Faithful and Laborious Ministers, who must be Ordained
by Presbyters, the Bishops being their Sworn Enemies, and obliged by their
Pontifical Oath to extirpate them.

The Lollards here were a Branch of the old Waldenses, as we proved before, and
as may be gathered from that Passage in Rainerius, who says, Contra. Wald. c.
4.
There is hardly any Country, into which this Sect has not made a shift to
creep.

And being I am upon this Quotation, I will observe one thing in Rainerius; he
says they were more pernicious to the Church of Rome, than any other Sect, for
three Reasons. 1. Because more lasting; for some say that it has been ever
since the time of Silvester, and others deduce it since the time of the
Apostles. 2. Because more general; there is hardly any Country into which it
has not crept. 3. Because all others are abominable to God for the immanity of
their Blasphemies; but this of the Waldenses only carries with it a great show
of Piety, because they live justly before Men, and believe truly of God, and
all the Articles of the Creed, only they blaspheme and hate the Roman Church.

If they are so Ancient as Rainerius seems to confess, and had no Bishops, as I
have proved, J. O's. Assertion, That they had no Bishops for 500 Years holds
good, nay, he might have said 1500 Years, according to this account of
Rainerius.

I hope I have sufficiently proved that the Waldenses had Superior Bishops for
500 Years last past, and Explained, or rather Vindicated his Learned
Neighbor's (as he calls it) but indeed J. O's. Quotation.

He concludes his Preface with a strong presumption and moral assurance of the
uninterrupted Succession of Orders. p. 17.


It should seem, if I understand him, that a strong presumption and moral
assurance, are one and the same with him, which most will acknowledge to be
very different things. Or does he mean, that some of them have strong
presumptions, others have moral assurance of the Succession? Or rather, that
their moral assurance is no more than a strong presumption, and so the meaning
is, they strongly presume they are Ministers, but cannot be certain upon this
Principle. This is but very cold comfort to one who labors under Fears and
Temptations, about his acceptance with God in the Exercise of his Ministry. The
inextricable difficulties about the Succession, which have puzzled the most
Learned and diligent Inquirers, may increase, but can have no tendency to
remove his Doubts.

The Waldenses proved their Call to the Ministry by the Success, Act and Mon.
p. 234.
and not by the Suecession of it, as we noted before; and instead of perplexing
their Heads with an uninterrupted Succession, they asserted this Position, Such
as hear (or obey) the word of God, and have a right Faith, are the right Church
of Christ; and to this Church the Keys of the Church are given, to drive away
Wolves, and to institute true Pastors.

Nor are they singular in this Principle, it is asserted by the Learned
Defenders of the Reformation (in their Discourses against the Jesuits, the
stiff Maintainers of this Succession) and they have demonstrated, That the
Being of the Christian Church cannot depend upon this Succession, and that it
has been interrupted again and again. There may be a sort of Succession
without a true Church, as in the Romish false Church; there may be a true
Church without a Succession, as the Foreign Reformed Churches. Eccl. Polit.
Lib. VII. p. 37, 38.
Mr. Hooker affirms the whole Church visible, the true original Subject of all
Power, and thence infers, that a continued Succession of Bishops is not
necessary to Ordination.

This Strongly Presumptuous Gentleman should have answered. J. O's Reasons
against this Succession, before he had talked of his moral assurance concerning
it. But some people are never more sure, than when they are furthest from Truth.

Thus I have followed him through his tedious Preface, let not the Reader blame
me for want of Method in some places, because I follow the Author in his
Digressions.

CHAP. II. The Jewish Church, not the first established Church. The Levitical
Priesthood, no Pattern for Gospel Ministers. Clemens Romanus Vindicated.
Whether Jesus Christ modeled his Church after the Jewish Pattern, or left it
in a State of Oligarchy, as our Author says. His (1.) instance of Ordination
from Acts 1. considered. (2.) The Ordination of the seven Deacons. They were
Ministers of Tables, not of the Word and Sacraments. Proved from Scripture and
Antiquity. Objections answered (3.) His third instance of Ordination from Act.
9.17. considered. (4.) His fourth from Acts 13.1, 2, 3. This instance of
Ordination by Presbyters vindicated. His account of Apostles and Prophets
examined (5.) His instance from Acts 14.13. examined. (6.) Acts 19.6, 7.
considered. (7.) 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. vindicated. (8.) 1 Timothy 4.14. For Ordination
by Presbyters, vindicated. Dr. Owen defended. The Rector unsound in the
Doctrine of Justification. (9.) 1 Pet. 5.2. vindicated.
HE takes a great deal of pains to prove that the Apostles were Superior to
Presbyters, which no Body ever denied. This is the chief Scope of the first
Chapter of his Book, in which he has furnished us with some rare Notions of
Church Government.

He tells us, P. 1.
that the Church of the Jews was the first established Church in the World,
that we know of.

Had God no Church in the World for about 24.50 Years, till the Law was given
upon Mount Sinai? Were there no worshipping Congregations, no Divine Laws of
Worship in the World before Moses's Time? We read of Sacrifices and Invocation
on the Name of the Lord, Genesis 4.3, 4, 24. And were there no Assemblies for
those Acts of Worship? We read of the Sons of God, as distinct from the
Daughters of Men, and that the mixture of the professedly Holy Seed of Seth
with the profane Gainites, sill'd the World with Wickedness, Genesis 6. The
degeneracy of the Sons of God, the visible Church of God at that Time, caused
the Flood. He that can believe that God had no Church before the Flood, may
also believe there never was a Flood.

Did Noah, the Father of the new World, who had immediate Rcvelation from God,
as most of the Patriarchs had, establish no Church among his numerous
Posterity? Was God indifferent whether he would have a Church? Or was Noah
unfaithful in transmitting the Divine Establishment to his Offspring? It is
true, they soon degenerated, Genesis 11. but that is an Argument they had been a
Vovenant People.

Was there no Church established in Abrabam's numerous and princely Family?
Genesis 14.14. and 23.6. He erected Altars for Sacrifice, and called upon the Lord
wherever he came. God renewed his Covenant with him, and admitted his Infant
Seed by Circumcision into a visible Church Membership, whereby they were
distinguished from the rest of the World.

Did righteous Melchizedeck, King of Salem, who was Priest of the most High
God, as the Patriarchs generally were, take no care to establish a Church among
his Subjects?

I hope one may lawfully doubt this Gentleman's Notions of Church Government,
who thus blunders about the very existence of a Church.

But, continues he, P, 1.
The Jewish Church was governed by a High Priest, Inferior Priests, and Levites.

1. I begin now to suspect the Reason, why he would have no established Church
before the Jewish, he does not read of any subordinate Priests and Levites,
that were subject to the Patriarchal Priests. He seems to be content that God
should have no Church in the World for almost 2500 Years, rather than want a
Model for his Hierarchy, consisting of Bishops, Priests and Deacons: This is
agreeable enough to his Hypothesis, that Diocesan Bishops are essential to a
Church.

2. The High Priest, Priests and Levites are not the Model for Gospel Churches,
for we read of no Institution of Bishops, Priests and Deacons in the New
Testament. We find Bishops and Deacons there, Phil. 1.1. but the
Scripture-Bishop is the same with the Scripture-Presbyter.

3. The Jewish High Priest was an eminent Type of Jesus Christ, the High Priest
of our Profession. He is one as the Jewish High Priest was; and in this respect
we follow the Jewish Typical President. Woe are under Jesus Christ, our only
Chief-Priest, who has appointed Presbyters and Deacons, as under Officers in
the Christian Church.

4. This is the great Argument of the Papists for the Pope's Supremacy; the
Jews had one Chief-Priest, therefore the Christians must have one Chief-Bishop.

So Bellarmine Argues, De Romans Pontif. I. 9.
It is unhappy, that the Arguments for Diocesan Episcopacy equally serve the
Papacy.

The Fathers, especially Clemens Romanus, says the Rector, seems to make this
a President for the Government of Christian Churches by a Bishop, Presbyters
and Deacons; Ibid.
The first answering the High Priest, the second the Inferior Priests, and the
third the Levites.

Either the Rector has never read Clemens Romanus, or he disingenuously abuses
his Reader, for

1. Clemens no where says, as he makes him to speak, that there were Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, as three distinct Officers in the Christian Church.

2. He no where says, that the Bishop answered the High Priest, the Presbyter
the Inferior Priests, and the Deacon the Levites. There is not a Word of this
in all that Epistle to the Corinthians, to which Mr. G. refers us.

3. He mentions but two Orders of New Testament Officers, Bishops and Deacons.
The Apostles, says he, Preaching the Gospel in Countries and Cities, ordained
the first Fruits of them (that believed) having tried them by the Spirit to he
Bishops and Deacons, for them that should afterward believe (...). Clem. ad
Cor.
.

The same Officers were in the Church of Corinth at this Time, which the
Apostle had settled in the Church of Philippi, Phil. 1.1. Bishops and Deacons.
There were several Bishops in the single Church of Philippi, and not one Chief,
so in this Church of Corinth, which was governed by several Bishops whom
Clemens calls Presbyters. These governed the Church in Common. He does not
mention any chief Bishop in Corinth, but he affirms, that the Presbyters there
performed the Duties of their Episcopacy (...).
.

He exhorts the Corinthians to be subject to their Elders (...).
.

I could wish this excellent Epistle of Clemens, which I hear is lately done
into English, were in every hand: It would abundantly satisfy the
unprejudiced, that the Order of Superior Bishops had no being in the Church in
Clemens his Time. He writes to the Corinthian Church about Schism, and that
occassion'd by some of their Presbyters, but has not one Word of Obedience to a
Superior Diocesan Bishop, as the remedy against Schism.

The only Passage that gives the least umbrage to a Diocesan Episcopacy is that
which mentions Highpriests, Priests, and Levites under the Law, and a little
after, Bishops and Deacons under the Gospel. Not that he makes the former
Patterns of the latter, for then he would have said, Bishops, Priests and
Deacons (as the Rector falsely affirms he does) but he expressly says, the
Apostles instituted Bishops and Deacons.

We must explain Clemen's Bishops, and Deacons by the New Testament, and not by
the Old, for he speaks of an Apostolical Institution which we must look for in
Paul's Epistles, and not in the Levitical Law.

Now we find Bishops and Deacons in Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3. Paul's Bishops and
Clemen's Bishop are the same. Paul's Bishops were Presbyters, for there were
several of them in one Church, Phil. 1.1. Clemen's Bishops are but Presbyters,
of which there were several in the Church of Corinth.

The force of Clemens his Argument is this, As the Old Testament Church was
guided by a Divine Institution in the Levitical Priesthood, so must we in the
Gospel Ministry: They rested in the Orders of the Old Law, and we must in those
of the New Testament. The Orders are different, as he expressly declares, but
the Authority enjoining them is the same.

That we must thus understand him appears further from these Words of his (...).
, Even our Apostles understood by our Lord Jesus Christ, that there would be
strife about the Name of Episcopacy; for this very Reason therefore, having
perfect Knowledge thereof before hand, they ordained the aforesaid Officers, i.
e. Bishops and Deacons.

Clement observes here, (1.) That the Apostles did foresee, there would be
Contentions about the Order and Dignity of Bishops in the Church. (2.) That
they took care to accommodate the Differences about Episcopacy, by settling
Officers in the Church. (3.) The Officers they settled, were Bishops and
Deacons, and of these Bishops there were several in a Church, who governed it
in Common, as we find in Ephesus, Acts 20.17, 28. and at Philippi, Phil. 1.1.
and here at Corinth.

It is manifest, says the Rector, That Jesus Christ whilst on Earth modeled
his little Flock, p. 2.
according to this Pattern, himself being as it were the High Priest, the
twelve Apostles his seconds, and the seventy Disciples still of a loner Rank.

This is spoken with great Assurance, it is manifest, says he, but you must
take his bare Word for Proof.

1. Is it manifest, that Jesus Christ was as it were the High Priest? This is a
dangerous Assertion, and savours of Socinianism. The Socinians deny the reality
of Christ's Priesthood and Satisfaction, the Rector makes him but as it were
High Priest. If he will be at the Pains to read the Epistle to the Hebrews, he
will find that Jesus Christ had a real Priesthood, and that he was and is the
High Priest of our Profession. I hope the Rector is no Socinian, but when I
compare this with some odd Passages of his about Justification, of which
hereafter, its no breach of Charity to say, he ought to clear himself from the
appearance of that growing Heresy. They that are sound in the Faith ought to
study a Form of sound Words. The Scripture no where calls Jesus Christ as it
were a High Priest. He that can degrade Jesus Christ from the Honor of a real
Priesthood, to advance the honorable Order of Bishops, is but as it were a
Friend, that is no real one to either.

2. Is it manifest, that the twelve Apostles were under Christ as the Priests
under the Chief Priests? That they were under him none Questions; but not as
Priests, for they were none as all Protestants confess: And I hope, this
Gentleman will not make them Priests in a Popish Sense to offer up the
Idolatrous Sacrifice of the Mass. The number of Twelve has no relation to the
Priesthood. The Priests were divided into twenty four Orders, and not into
twelve, 1 Chronicles. 24.

Bishop Andrews makes the twelve Apostles to answer the Princes of the twelve
Tribes, Form of Goverr, p. 25.
which our Rector mistook perhaps for twelve Priests But be it as it will, Number.
1.16.
he is manifestly mistaken in his Notion of the Apostles, as well as of Christ.

3. Is it manifest, that the seventy two Disciples answered the Levites? Bishop
Andrews, and other Assertors of Episcopacy make them to answer the seventy two
Elders, whom no Man but Mr. G. will affirm to be a Bench of Inferior Levites.
Number. 11.16.
The Great Council of seventy had the supreme Judicature under Moses (who was
not the High Priest) which he will scarce allow the Presbyters, much less the
Deacons, whom the seventy Disciples represented, according to his Parallel.

Having told us how Christ Modelled his Flock, whilst he was on Earth, he
proceeds to acquaint us in what State he left it at his Death. Here he is at a
loss what to say, and yet must needs teach his Reader what he does not
understand himself.

He seemed, p. 2.
says he, to leave his Church in a State of Oligarchy, or in the Power of
Twelve.

When I read these Words, I turned to the Errata, and expected to find them
Corrected there, as sight is put for blindness, p. 8. but was disappointed.

Did the Lord Jesus leave his Church in a State of Oligarchy? The Writers of
Politics say, that Oligarchy is the Corruption of Aristocracy.

Oligarchy, (says Burgersdicius,) is the Disease and Destruction of
Aristocracy: And he describes it to be the Oppression of the Multitude by a few
of the Nobles, who exclude their Colleagues, usurp the Government, and trample
upon The Laws Idea Doct. Pol. Cap. 22.. 10.11.
.

Bodin, the Famous Lawyer, says, That Oligarchy is a factious Aristocracy, or
a Seigniory of a very small number of Lords, as were the thirty Tyrants of
Athens, and the Roman Triumviri, who oppressed the Liberty of the People. And
for this Reason, adds he, the Ancients have always taken this Word Oligarchy in
an evil Part De Republ. II. 6.
.

An Error in Politics is excusable enough in a Divine, but a Man, who takes
upon him to write Political Sermons, and to Publish a Book of Church
Government, should not blunder about the Common Terms which Schoolboys
understand.

I presume he meant Aristocracy, for he explains himself, that Christ left his
Church in the Power of Twelve. This also is a mistake, for Judas, one of the
Twelve, was gone, or going to his own Place. It is true, Matthias succeeded in
his Room, but Christ left not his Church in the Power of Twelve, exclusive of
other Apostles. Paul, who was not one of the Twelve, was not Inferior to the
Chief Apostles. 2 Cor. 11.5. and 12.11.
Many judge Barnabas an Apostle of equal Authority with the rest.

He thinks the Church was governed after Christ's Ascension by the Apostles in
a Parity, p. 2.
that we easily grant, but do not understand the Proof of it, For, says he,
neither did he commit the Power unto the Twelve themselves, but was wholly
silent therein. How then came they by it? He adds, by Order of Nature, one
would think.

One would think the Rector were in a Dream, when these Words dropped from him.
He makes the Apostles to govern the Church by an usurped Power, which Christ
never committed to them. If this be so, all their Acts become nullities, which
overturns the Foundations of Christianity, and makes their Episcopal Successors
act by an usurped Power.

You must not admire, that he denies the governing Power to Presbyters, for the
very Apostles had it not from Jesus Christ, as he positively speaks.

He is positive, they had it not from Jesus Christ, but is not certain how they
came by it, only he thinks it must by Order of Nature fall to their share.

He should help us to a New Dictionary to explain his Terms: What he means by
the Order of Nature is hard to understand. If he means by it, that the Eldest
should be preferred, as in the Patriarchal Government, his Expression is very
improper, for the Apostolical Power was not founded in natural Generation, but
in a positive Institution, and if the Order of Nature must carry the Power, the
Eldest Apostle must succeed in the Government, which destroys the Parity he
allows.

It seems he overlooked, Mat. 16.19. John 20.21, 22, 23. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
Where Christ commits the Power unto his Apostles.

We will now proceed to his Scripture Instances of Ordination, in which he
pretends the Presbyters had no share.

In some of his Instances, Ordination is not concerned, in others, Presbyters
could not be concerned, because they were not in being, in others the
Presbyters had a hand, as we shall evince, notwithstanding his endeavors to
exclude them.

I. His first Instance of Ordination in Acts 1. we are not concerned in, for
none ever questioned the Apostles Power of Ordaining before this Gentleman, who
denies their having a Power from Jesus Christ, and where else they could have
it, is a Mystery which Mr. G. only is concerned to unfold.

If Matthias was Ordained, as he says he was, it is an instance of Ordination
without Imposition of Hands. Dr. Willet infers from it, That Imposition of
Hands is not of the Essence of Orders; Synop. Pap. Con. 16. q. 2.
which Assertion he confirms as the Protestant Doctrine; and if so, persons may
be true Ministers, though the Bishops have not laid hands on them.

II. His next Instance is the Ordination of the Seven Deacons, Acts 6.
concerning whom he says, P. 3. and 4.
They were designed to distribute the public Alms unto the Poor, the multitude
of Believers chose them, the Apostles approved them, and appointed them over
that Business (of distributing the public Charity) by Fasting and Prayer, and
laying on of hands, (v. 6.) whereby also they became Ordained to the Ministry
of the Word and Sacraments.

It Is observable here;

1. He acknowledges the People's right to choose Ministers; Why then are they
deprived of it, and no Overtures made toward the Restoring of this Power to
them? It were a Province worthy of a Convocation, instead of laying new
Burdens on the multitude of Believers, to contribute their Endeavors to have
their Ancient Privileges restored.

2. He owns that the Employment whereunto the Seven Deacons were first
designed, was to serve Tables; but he adds, of his own, their Ordination for
the Business made them also Ministers. But this is a great mistake:

1. Because the very Apostles found it too difficult a Province to serve
Tables, and to attend the Ministry of the Word, Act. 6.2. It is not reason that
we should leave the Word of God and serve Tables. V. 3, 4. Wherefore look ye
out among you Seven Men -- whom we may appoint over this Business, but we will
give our selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word.

The Ministry of the Word, and the Serving of Tables are distinct Offices, and
inconsistent in the ordinary exercise of them, otherwise there were no force in
the Apostles reasoning, that they must not leave the Word to serve Tables. If
serving of Tables was a hinderance to the Apostles Ministry, would it not be
also to that of the Deacons. What Absurdity do they put upon the Apostles, who
would make them say, We cannot attend the Ministry of the Word, and serve
Tables, wherefore Brethren, choose you among you Seven Men, whom we may appoint
to do both.

2. The occasion of choosing Deacons was the necessity of the Poor, whom the
Apostles were desirous to have relieved out of the public Alms, and could not
do it themselves, being taken up with the Ministry of the Word. The end of the
Institution was to serve Tables, Acts 6.3. Pursuant to this end, the People
chose Seven, not to Preach, but to serve Tables: Pursuant to this choice the
Apostles appointed them over that business, by Fasting, and Prayer, and laying
on of Hands, Acts 6.3, 6. Here is not one Syllable of Ordination to the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments. The end of the Institution, Choice and
Ordination, was to Serve Tables, and no other is mentioned.

3. Compare this Scripture of the Institution of Deacons, with the
qualifications of Deacons, in 1 Timothy 3. and it will appear their work was to
serve Tables. Ability, or aptness to Teach, is not mentioned among their
Qualifications, as it is in those of a Bishop, or Presbyter, 1 Timothy 3.2. The
Apostle mentions several Characters that are common to both, but distinguishes
the Bishop from the Deacon by this, that the Bishop be (...), apt to Teach,
which is not required in the Deacons; an evidence they are Ministers not of the
Word, but of Tables.

4. The Sixth General Council of Constantinople, acknowledges the
Scripture-Deacons to be no more than Overseers of the Poor.

Thus the Council: Seeing the Book of the Acts mentions Seven Deacons Ordained
by the Apostles, Invenimus eos locutos esse non de viris qui ministrant
Mysteriis, sed de Ministerio quod in usu mensarum adhibeatur Sexta Syn. in
Trullo, Can. 16. A. D. 692.
the Council of Neocesarea determines there ought to be Seven in every Church;
but we having adapted the Opinion of the Fathers to the Apostles Expressions,
do find that they speak not of those who Ministered in the Sacred Mysteries, but
of such as Served at Tables. Thus Chrysostom expounded the place, as they add
there.

This Testimony is the more considerable, as not only containing the Opinion of
166 Bishops, who lived about the latter end of the Seventh Age, but affirming
the Sense of the Fathers of former Ages to be the same with theirs. By all
which it appears, That Deacons originally were but Overseers of the Poor. In
future Ages the case was much altered, the Bishops affected to be Guardians of
the Poor, and to make the Deacons amends, admitted them to Baptize and Preach.
The Bishops omit Preaching, and become Servants of Tables, and the Deacons from
serving of Tables, step up into the Pulpit, and become Preachers.

5. About the middle of the Fifth Age they were permitted to read Homilies in
the Church, but only in cases of necessity, as when the Presbyter was disabled
by reason of some Infirmity Conc. Vasens. Can. 4.
.

6. If the Ordination of Deacons as such, made them Ministers of the Word and
Sacraments, as the Rector affirms, how comes the Church of England to Ordain
them again, before they are complete Ministers of the Sacrament? What president
have they in Scripture for this?

7. It Is absurd to say, That the Ordination of Deacons to serve Tables, made
them also Ministers of the Word and Sacraments. One individual Ordination to
one and the same work, cannot confer two distinct Powers. They may as well say,
the Ordination of a Parish Priest makes him a Diocesan Bishop. But let us hear
the Rector's Reasons.

He thinks it is clear, they were Ordained not only to serve Tables, but to the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments.

1. Because it is immediately noted (says he) that the Word of God increased,
P. 4
V. 7.

But he considered not that this is rather to be imputed to the Apostles giving
themselves continually to the Ministry of the Word and Prayer.

Ver. 4. Having consigned the Service of Tables to the Deacons, they attended
the Ministry of the Word more constantly, and with less distraction; and then
it follows, the Word of God increased, v. 7.

2. His next Reason is, Stephen, one of them, Ibid.
did great wonders, etc. none were able to resist the wisdom by which he spoke,
v. 8, 10.

It Is not said that he Preached to the People, only that he disputed in the
Synagogue in defense of the Gospel, which a private Man might do ( v. 9.) 1
Pet. 3.15.

3. His third Reason, Philip, another of them, afterward preached at Samaria,
chapter 8.

He did not Preach at Jerusalem but at Samaria, after he had left Jerusalem,
and ceased to exercise the Office of a Deacon there, Acts 8.4, 5. He might be
advanced to the Degree of an Evangelist, Acts 21.8. If you find one that was a
Presbyter half a Year ago, now exercising Episcopal Jurisdicition, will you say
that a Presbyter, as such, has Episcopal Jurisdiction? Philip had served
Tables at Jerusalem, and afterward preaches at Samaria, does it follow that he
preached as a Deacon, when Preaching was no part of the Office of a Deacon, as
such. Bishop Pearson confesses he was an Evangelist at this time Lect. V. in
Act. p. 66.
.

But suppose he had Preached at Jerusalem, which docs not appear, it was no
more than what was usually done by all gifted Persons in those extraordinary
times.

Apollos, who was not perfectly Catechized in the Word of Christ, nor so much
as Baptized with the Baptism of Christ, and therefore not Ordained by any
Apostle, yet Preached, Acts 18.24, 25.

Grotius acknowledges, that in those times to Persrcution, private Persons
might preach, and he quotes to that purpose, Acts 11.20. In tali cumstantia
evangelium praedicare, non diaconorum tantum sed and privatorum. Grot. in Act.
8.5.


Hilarious, the Roman Deacon, goes higher, and says. That at the first planting
of Christianity, all were permitted to Preach, Baptize, and explain the
Scriptures in the Congregation, 1 Cor. 14.24. Omnibus inter initia concessum
est, and evangelizare, and baptizate, and scripturas in Ecclesia explanare.
Hilar. in Ephesians. 4.


Origin being persecuted from Alexandria, Preached publicly at Caesarea, upon
the desire of Theoctistus, Bishop of the place, before he was Ordained.

When Demetrius of Alexandria censured the action as irregular, Theoctistus and
Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem, Justified it, and produced several Examples of
the same nature Niceph. Eccl. Hist. V. 14.
.

A Layman is allowed to teach at the request of the Clergy, in a Council of
Carthage, held about the Year 436 Laicus praesentibus clerios nisi ipsis
rogantibusdocere non audeat. Carth. Conc. IV. Can. 98..


4. His fourth Reason, Because long after it is observed by Luke, that the rest
(of the Seven, as I understand him) preached the word in Phenice, Cyprus, and
at Antioch, P. 4.
etc. Acts 11.19.

Luke says (...) -- they which were seatured abroad, preached the Word. The
Rector makes bold to pervert the Text, and says, the rest (of the Seven)
Preached the Word; and which is more unpardonable, he puts the Words in a
different Character, as if they were the Words of Luke: He has no color to
foist his (...) the rest, into this Text, but it is apparently done upon design,
to support an unscriptural Hypothesis.

It Is more pardonable to misrepresent a hundred Fathers, than to alter one Text
of the Sacred Scriptures. He is a very bold Man that dare put Words in the
Mouth of Inspired Writers.

Luke refers to Acts 8.1. They were all seattered abroad, except the Apostles.
Who were these All? Not the Six Deacons only Pears. Annal. Paul. p. 1 and Lect.
IV. in Act. Apost. p. 63
. What Sense would it be to say, All the Six Deacons (for Stephen the Seventh
was Martyred) were scattered, except the Apostles? All were scattered. That is,
all the 120, which made up that Famous Council in Acts 1.15 except the
Apostles. Vid. Lighis. in loc.
Lucius of Cyrene, who was none of the Seven Deacons, was one of those that
were sc attered, Acts 11.19, 20. and 13.1.

The Rector would persuade, they were only the Six Deacons that were scattered,
of which Philip Preached in Samaria, and he has found the rest in Acts 11.19.

We have seen the invalidity of his Four Reasons, to prove Deacons to be
Ministers of the Word* and Sacraments.

He is apt to believe these Deacons were afterward called Elders, P. 6.
as having power to Minister the Word and Sacrament, first mentioned Acts
11.30. but it will not follow that they were equal with the Apostles.

They that are so disposed may take Conjectures for Articles of Faith, but we
have proved the Deacons to be very different from Presbyters, and if the Church
of England did not think them so, she would not Ordain them over again to make
Presbyters of them.

Who ever affirmed Presbyters to be equal with the Apostles? Dare he say
Bishops were equal with them?

Ordination at least must be excepted, says the Rector. I always thought the
Apostles excelled Presbyters in far greater things than that of Ordination; but
if you be so good natured as to allow the Rector, that the Apostles were
superior to Presbyters in point of Ordination, and entrusted none but the
Bishops with it after their Decease, he is even content that a Presbyter should
be equal with an Apostle in other respects.

Though Elders are first mentioned, Acts 11.30. they were in being before; they
are spoken of as the ordinary settled Governors of the Churches.

Mr. G. proceeds to prove, That Presbyters could not Ordain, P. 7, 8*
because Philip the Deacon could not confer the Holy Ghost upon the believing
Samaritans; the Apostles sent Peter and John, who by Prayer, and laying on of
Hands, conferred the Holy Ghost upon them, Acts 8.12, 15, 17. and thereby
Ordained them. Therefore the Government of the Church, and Ordination, was
lodged in the Apostles only, or as Supreme.

1. He is not sure Ordination was intended there, himself owns, That some may,
P. 7
and with reason, believe it Confirmation. So does Dr. Hammond, and sevcral
others; and if we understand Confirmation by this miraculous Conferring of the
Holy Ghost, his Argument is spoiled.

2. If Ordination was intended, it no more prejudices Presbyters Power of
Ordaining, than it does that of the Bishops, for neither can confer those
extraordinary Gifts.

3. All that had power of Ordination had not power of giving the Holy Ghost.
Evangelists were trusted with the former, but not with, the latter. Timothy and
Titus Ordained, but did not give the Holy Ghost.

He fancies that Simon Magus desired the Ordaining Power, v. 19. Give me this
Power. What Power, What Power, P. 8.
says the Rector? Not Power to labor in the Word and Doctrine, and to
administer the Holy Sacraments. Like enough, for Simon Magus as little cared
for that, as some others who have possessed themselves of that Power he so much
coveted. What Power was it? I doubt not but you will expect some rare Discovery,
having raised our Expectations to a great height, at length he resolves the
Question, and tells us, it was a Power of conferring that Power, i. e. as he
explains it, That on whomsoever he laid his hands, he might be Ordained to the
Ministry. That is in plain terms, he desired to be made a Bishop, and to be
entrusted with the ordaining power, I question whether the Power then was so
profitable as it has proved since; however, we are obliged to this Gentleman,
for helping us to so clear a Notion of Simony.

III. He finds another Ordination in Acts 9.17. p. 8, 9.
Where it is said, That Ananias laid his hand upon Saul: this might he to
Ordain him, for he laid his hands on him, not only that he might receive his
sight, but be also filled with the Holy Ghost. But I desire the Reader to
observe, that according to this Hypothesis, Saul was Ordained before he was
Baptized. He was Ordained, as he calls it, v. 17. and was Baptized after
Ananias had laid his hands on him, v. 18. That is, he is first made an Apostle,
then a Christian.

He makes Ananias but a private Believer or Disciple. P. 9.
His being called a Disciple, v. 10. is no evidence of it; for the Apostles are
so called, Acts 1.15. How comes he to forget that Dorotheus calls him a Bishop
of Damascus? This would have something helped his Hypothesis; seeing he was
tesolv'd to have him Ordained before he was Baptized, even let it pass for an
Episcopal Ordination.

But that which spoils all is, Paul says of himself that he was an Apostle,
not of Men, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, Gal. ^.1.

IV. In the next place he considers the Ordination in Acts 13.1, 2, 3. P. 10.
Now there were at Antioch certain Prophets and Teachers, and the Holy Ghost
said unto them, Separate me Barnabas and Saul. J. O. Argued from this Instance,
that Presbyters have Power to Ordain, for the Ordainers were Prophets and
Teachers: now Teachers are ordinary Presbyters, who are distinguished from
Prophets, and other extraordinary Officers, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. What says
Mr. G. to this? even nothing to the purpose. Ibid.
The Persons here spoken of, says he, were Teachers, that is, ordinary
Ministers, generally speaking, but called Prophets, because they received this
special Command from Christ, to Ordain Barnabas and Saul.

1. He confounds Prophets and Teachers, which are distinguished here, and in 1
Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. Prophets were extraordinary, Teachers ordinary Officers;
this Gentleman, to serve a turn, makes them one and the same. If this be not to
pervert the Scripture, I know not what is. Luke says, There were at Antioch
certain Prophets and Teachers: That is, if we may believe the Rector, Prophets
and Prophets, for the Teachers were Prophets, says he.

2. The Teachers are called Prophets, says he: They are so called by him, and
not by the Holy Ghost.

3. They are called Prophets, because they received this special Command from
Christ by the Holy Ghost, as he thinks. How can he prove that the Holy Ghost
did speak by Immediate Revelation to the Teachers here? The Text speaks nothing
of it: Dixit spiritus per Prophet as istos. Grot. in loc.
It Is most reasonable to think he signified his Mind by one or more of the
Prophets to the rest of the Ministers, then to fancy he advanced the Teachers
into the order of Prophets for the time.

Had the Revelation been Communicated to all in Common, what needed the
Evangelist to have called the Ordainers Prophets and Teachers? It would have
been enough to call them Prophets. But there were both in Antioch, Prophets to
whom the Revelation came, and Teachers, or ordinary Presbyters, who were
included in the Command of separating Paul and Barnabas for the Apostleship of
the Gentiles.

This Ordination which was in favor of the Gentile World, was intended for a
President to the Gentile Churches in after Ages, as Learned Dr. Lightfoot
observes Vol 1. p. 289.
.

This Instance of Ordination by Presbyters remains firm and unshaken, and all
that Mr. G. has said against it, serves only to discover the Strength of it

He undertakes to show the difference between Apostles and Prophets, but not a
Word of difference between the Prophets and the Teachers, that would have
discovered the Fallacy of his Reasonings.

He says, Apostles and Prophets had an extraordinary Assistance of the Spirit
of God, P. 10, 11.
yet with this difference; The Authority of the Apostles was fixed and habitual,
their Character indelible, and their Office perpetual.

I expected he would have said an infallible Assistance, but it may be he
intended that by extraordinary, though the following Words are a little
inconsistent, and divest the Apostles of the extraordinary Assistance of the
Spirit, except in some cases.

The Apostles, says he, for the most part, P. 11.
acted as it were according to their own discretion. What? without the Conduct
of the Spirit?

The Rector should have had the discretion to have concealed so dangerous a
Position, which strikes at the Foundations of our Faith.

This Principle naturally leads to Deism and Irreligion.

But worse follows. I suppose (says he) in Matters of Importance, and in
Doctrines Essential, guided by the Spirit. I hope he does not mean as he
speaks. Does he but. Suppose they were guided by the Spirit? Admit he means by
supposing, his taking it for granted, then the meaning is, They were guided by
the Spirit only in two Cases.

1. In Matters of Importance, i. e. in Practicals, if I underftand him. Ibid.
We conceive all the Rules the holy Apostles left its about the agenda of
Religion, were given by Inspiration, and that all the practical Duties they
recommend to us are Matters of Importance; to us they are so, what they are to
this Gentleman, he knows best.

2. He supposes they were guided by the Spirit in Doctrines Essential.

1. It Is well he ascribes any of their Doctrines to the Holy Spirit of God; but
why not all as well as some? The Spirit was promised them to guide them into
all Truth, John 16.13. Jesus Christ says, The Spirit should guide them into
all Truth: No, says Mr. G. the Spirit guided them in Doctrines Essential only.
Christ says, The Holy Ghost shall teach you all things, John 14.26. Mr. G.
says, Not all things, but Matters of Importance, and Doctrines Essential only.

Doubtless the Lord Jesus was as good as his Word, and gave the Infallible
Assistance of his Spirit to the Blessed Apostles in all Points of Faith and
Practice they recommend to us, though Mr. G. does not believe it. His Unbelief
cannot make the Faith of God without effect; let God be true, and every man a
liar. Romans 3.3.4


2. According to his n retched supposition the holy Apostles might be mistaken
in Doctrines not Essential, for they had not the Assistances of the Spirit, as
he suggests: And if they might be mistaken, who knows but they were mistaken,
and might obtrude Errors instead of Truth upon the World? And if so, how can it
be proved to be our Duty to believe those Doctrines not Essential? But, thanks
be to God, we have a sure word of promise, and consequently a sure rule of
Faith and Practice, whatever the Rector insinuates to the contrary, in favor
of Atheistical Spirits.

3. The Learned are not agreed about the Number of Doctrines Essential; those
are Doctrines Essential to Christianity with some, that are but Integrals (if I
may so say) with others. All Protestants are agreed that Essential Doctrines
are but few; so that most of the Doctrines of Christianity are but
discretionary Opinions, and no Dictates of the Holy Ghost, with this Man. Tell
it not in Gath, lest the uncircumcised rejoice.

4. Admit the Creed (called the Apostles) be a Summary of Essential Doctrines,
it does not expressly assert the Divinity of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, and
therefore the Socinians can freely Subscribe it. Will the Rector say the
Divinity of Christ, and the Personality of the Holy Ghost are Doctrines not
Essential, and consequently not delivered by the Spirit of God?

5. Is the Superiority of Bishops an Essential Doctrine? If it be, they are no
Christians who do not believe it, for they reject an Essential Doctrine of
Christianity: But no Sober Protestant will affirm it, for this were to damn all
the Foreign Reformed Churches, who believe it not: If it be no Essential
Doctrine, as certainly it is not, we are left to our liberty, whether we will
believe it or not, for the Apostles were not guided by the Spirit in delivering
it, according to Mr. G's. Hypothesis.

He proceeds to describe the Prophets. Their Power (says he) was not constant,
they spoke only as the Spirit moved, P. 11.
which if he ceased to do, they were no long^r Prophets. Thus the Teachers at
Antioch (ordinary Ministers, and under the Apostles, yet) being moved by the
Holy Ghost, became Prophets, and Ordained Barnabas and Saul. Here he mistakes
also:

1. In making the Prophets, to be only such while they were actually Inspired.
There were Prophets by Office, and they are so called, when the Spirit of
Prophecy did not actually move them, 2 Kings 3.11, 15. 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. Their
Power was constant, though the Exercise of it was not so, Nathan is called a
Prophet, when the Spirit of Prophecy was not actually upon him, 2 Samuel 7.2, 3.

2. All Inspirations by the Holy Ghost do not make a Prophet. Balaam and
Caiaphas were Inspired, but no Divine Prophets. Ananias was moved by the Holy
Ghost to lay his Hands on Paul, for recovering of his sight, but it does not
appear that he was a Prophet; he is no where so called. God's speaking to him
in a Vision, does not make him a Prophet, as Mr. G. fancies, for so he did to
Cornelius, who was so far from being a Prophet, that at that time he was not a
Christian, Acts 10.3, 4.

Admit the Ordinary Ministers at Antioch were inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost,
to Ordain Paul and Barnabas, which is not said in the Text, that does not make
them Prophets. For Luke distinguishes between the Prophets and the Teachers,
though Mr. G. designedly confounds them. Nor does a particular direction of the
Holy Ghost constitute Prophets, as appears in Ananias, a Disciple, (and it may
be a Teacher) and in Cornelius, neither Disciple, nor Teacher.

3. He calls the Teachers at Antioch, Ordinary Ministers, and yet says they
were Prophets, that is, extraordinary Ministers, for himself owns Prophets to
be extraordinary Officers. One would think, if they were ordinary Ministers,
they were not extraordinary: If extraordinary, they were not ordinary. I leave
it to him that can to reconcile these Contradictions.

V. His next Instance of Ordination is from Acts 14.23. p. 12.
The Ordinations mentioned there, were by Apostles and not by Presbyters, as he
says.

This Instance makes as little for him as the former, because

1. There was good Reason why the Apostles alone should ordain Presbyters in
Churches that had no Ministers in them, until the Apostles had constituted
them. Presbyters could not ordain before they were in being.

He is aware of this Reason, and allows these Churches had no Presbyters in
them at this Time; p. 13.
But this, says he, was not the Reason, for then Philip would have laid Hands
on those that were Ordained at Samaria. The Instance of Philip we considered
before. If he were a Deacon, as he affirms, all will own he had no Power of
Ordination: If an Evangelist, as it should seem from Acts 21.8. all will own,
Evangelists might Ordain: But they could not give the extraordinary Gift of the
Holy Spirit, which was given by the Apostles.

2. The Apostles made Elders in every Church with the Suffrages of the People.
So (...) (which we render, Ordained, Acts 14.23.) signifies, Significat hos
suffragiis electos esse. Erasmus in loc.
The Multitude of Believers chose the Deacons (whom Mr. G. would have to be the
same with these Elders) before the Apostles Ordained them: And so they did the
two Candidates for the Apostleship, Acts 1. Mr. G. allows this Power of the
People: Now if these Ordinations be presidents unto us, as he takes them to be,
they are but ill followed by our Episcopal Ordainers, for the Election of the
People seldom precedes their Ordinations.

3. They Ordained Elders in every Church, not one, but many, and why not
Bishops also, if they had been necessary? It Is evident there were none at this
Time. The Apostles left the Churches under the Care or these Elders, without
Superior Bishops. It will be said, these Elders were subject to the Apostles:
And were not the Bishops subject to the Apostles also? I hope none will say
they were equal to them.

How come the Apostles not to Ordain a Bishop in every Church, when they
themselves made but a short stay with them? Acts 14.23, 24.
They could not personally oversee them all, and if Bishops had been necessary
in their absence, doubtless they would have appointed them.

It will be said, they intended to return to visit them again, but when they
they took their last leave of them, then they appointed Bishops for their
Successors.

This is notoriously false, for the Apostle Paul commits the Church of Ephesus,
to the Government of the Presbyters there, when he took his last leave of them,
intending to see them no more, Acts 20.17, 25, 28.
whether he did see them again or no, is nothing to the purpose, for it is
certain he thought he should see them no more: How comes he then not to leave a
Superior Bishop over the Presbyters of Ephesus, for his Successor, when he was
taking his final leave of them? No one Instance can be given in all the New
Testament of the Apostles ordaining a single Person to succeed them as a fixed
Officer in the Government of any one Church, when they took their last leave of
it.

When the Apostle left Timothy at Ephesus, he intended to come again, 1 Timothy
3.14. when Titus had ordained Elders in Crete, to govern the Churches there,
the Apostle calls him away, Tit. 3.12.

His next Act of Church Government, which he finds in Acts 15. p. 13.
we have considered before. None that I know of have argued for Presbyters
ordaining from this place, as he imagines they might.

He grants that Elders have a share in the Deliberative and Legislative Part of
Church Government: p. 14.
But seems loath to trust them with the Executive Power: He gives them the
greater, and more difficult part of Church Government, viz. a Power of making
Laws, and denies them the easier and less honorable Power of executing those
Laws.

He observes, p. 15.
The Elders were subordinate to the Apostles: Who ever denied it? And so were
Timothy and Titus his supposed Bishops.

The Epistles written to them are convincing Evidences of their Subordination
to Paul, 1 Timothy 1.18. and 4.16. and 6.13, 14. 2 Timothy 4.1, 9, 13. He charges
him, orders him to bring his Cloak, and personally to attend him.

So he enjoins Titus to attend him, Titus 3.12. His Epistles to both are in a
style at least equally Authoritative with that which Bishops use in their
Pastoral Letters to their Clergy: And therefore all the Reasonings of Mr. G.
from the Subordination of Presbyters to the Apostles, are impertinent, for
Timothy and Titus whom he calls Bishops, were subordinate to the Apostles. So
that if Presbyters had no Power of Government, no more had Bishops, for these
were under the Apostles also.

He says, James was not the Apostle, p. 16.
but Brother of Christ. Paul reckons him among the Apostles. Gal. 1.19. Other
of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's Brother. Bishop Pearson
observes, that the Opinion that makes him no Apostle, took rise from the
Fictitious Writings of Clemens, Lect. in Act. Apost p. 58.

VI. He sinds an Ordination in Acts 19.6, p. 17.
7. In which Paul only laid his Hands on twelve Persons at Ephesus, and not
Timothy and Erastus who were with Paul at this Time, Acts 19.22.

1. It is not said that Timothy and Erastus were with Paul, when he laid his
Hands on those twelve Men: Acts 19.22. does not prove it, for it speaks of
Paul's sending them to Macedonia, which was about two Years after, Acts 19. 10,
21, 22.

2. But suppose they were, Paul laid Hands on those twelve Men to confer the
gift of the Holy Ghost on them, which. Timothy and Erastus could not do. Act.
19.6.
This Power was peculiar to the Apostles, Act. 8.17.
we do not read that any Prophets or Evangelists were ever entrusted with this
Power Pears. Lect. V. in Act. p. 68.
much less were ordinary Officers. The Case of Ananias was singular, and
depended on a particular Revelation, which is an Evidence that the Power of
giving the Holy Ghost was not inherent in him, as in the Apostles, Acts 9.17.

3. If there be any force in this Argument, it excludes Bishops as well as
Presbyters from the Power of Ordination, for neither of them could nor can
confer the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were given by the
Apostles Hands.

VII. He thinks that the Corinthian Elders had no Power of Excommunication: p.
17.
Paul decreed it, says he, and commanded them to Confirm and Publish it, 1
Cor. 5.3, 4, 5.

1. If they had no Power, why does the Apostle reprove them for not doing it? 1
Cor. 5.2. and enjoin them to avoid disorderly Walkers, ver. 13. and to Judge
them that are within, ver. 14. To Judge is to Decree, as the Rector expounds it
in v. 3. So that according to his own Interpretation, the Elders had Power to
Decree an Excommunication. He fancies the Apostle to be a sort of
Lay-Chancellour, and the Corinthian Elders to be like the Presbyters of the
Church of England, who have the Privilege of Publishing the Excommunicating
Decrees of the Chancellor.

2. He alters and perverts the sacred Text, for thus he renders and explains
it, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. I verily, as absent in Body, but present in Spirit, have
judged (have Decreed) as tho I were present (personally) concerning him that
has so done this Deed: Ibid.
In the Name (or Authority) of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered
together and of my Spirit (that is, by my Authority) with the Power of our Lord
Jesus Christ to deliver such an one to Satan.

The English Translation, according to the Original, renders it, When ye are
gathered together, and my Spirit, he renders it, of my Spirit, as if the
Construction were in the Name of my Spirit, that is, by my Authority (...).
; intimating that the whole Authority of excommunicating the Incestuous Person
had been in Paul and none in the Church.

The Syriac which is very Ancient, renders it, That ye all gather together, and
I with you in Spirit, with the Power of our Lord Jesus Christ. So does the
Ancient Latin Version express it Congregatis vobis and meo spiritu
. Thus the Rector disturbs the Order of the Text, contradicts the most approved
Versions, both Ancient and Modern, to serve a Design. The Apostle speaks of the
Presence of his Spirit, joining with, and going before the Corinthian Elders,
but does not assume the sole Power to himself. He enjoins them by his
Apostolical Authority to do their Duty, and allows them to Judge those within,
1 Cor. 5.12. In like manner he enjoins several things to Timothy and Titus.

The same Apostle (says Mr. G.) excommunicated Hymeneus and Alexander, p. 17.
1 Timothy 1.20. No Elder joining with him.

He cannot prove there were any Elders in Ephesus, when Paul excommunicated
these two Men; or if there were any, that they did not join with him, But
suppose the Apostle did Excommunicate them by his eminent Apostolical
Authority, and deliver them to Satan to be tormented by him (which some think
he did) I see not what Advantage he can make of it, except he could prove, That
Bishops are endued with the same miraculous Power.

VIII. He comes at length to Timothy's Ordination, p. 18.
here he Notes from 2 Timothy 1.6. That Timothy was ordained by Paul without
Elders mentioned. This Scripture, he says, the Presbyterians seldom take
notice of, and Mr. Pryn passes it over in silence.

Mr. Pryn does mention it The unbish. of Timothy and Titus. p. 76. Edit. 1660.
, and allows that Paul laid on his Hands in Conjunction with the Presbytery.
The Rector being unprovided with better Matter, sills part of two Pages with an
Invective against Mr. Pryn, for passing over this, 2 Timothy 1.6. in Silence, by
this the Reader may see what Credit is to be given to this Gentleman's
Accusations.

J. O. also has considered this Scripture in his Plea, p. 46. and says, That
Paul's laying on of Hands upon Timothy might be, for ought appears to the
contrary, for the conferring the Holy Ghost, which was given by the laying on
of the Apostles Hands, Acts 8.17, 18. but if he laid Hands for Ordination, its
certain he joined the Presbyters with him, which he had not done, if their had
not been an inherent Power of Ordination in Presbyters as such.

He promises to show, p. 10.
that 1 Timothy 4.14. makes little or nothing for Presbyterian Ordination, and to
reconcile it with their's and it is Parallel, 2 Timothy 1.6.

It is a Favor that he allows the 1 Timothy 4.14. to make a little for Ordination
by Presbyters, but he is not sure whether it makes little or nothing for us.
This Gentleman is so Tenacious, that where he yields an Inch, you may reckon an
Ell is due.

The Words are these, 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which
was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.
This is a clear Instance, as we think, for Ordination by Presbyters. No, says
the Rector, it makes little or nothing for it. But let us hear his Proof.

He has four things to offer, which if they fail him, our Instance holds good.

I. It Is no doubt with him but that Timothy was Ordained twice, P. 20
first a Presbyter, by Prophecy with the Presbytery, and then a Bishop by Paul.
How will he prove this? Why, Paul was Ordained twice, first a Minister of the
Word in ordinary, then unto the Apostleship of the Gentiles.

1. His Proof wants another. Was the Apostle Paul but an ordinary Minister at
first? Who was called not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, Gal.
1.1. who was caught up into the Third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. and had abundance of
Revelations, v. 7. who saw the Lord Jesus, and reckons himself one of the
Apostles from the time of his miraculous Conversion, 1 Cor. 15.8, 9. Gal. 1.15,
16, 17. Neither went I up to Jerusalem (he speaks of the time immediately
following his Conversion) to them which were Apostles before me. This implies
he was an Apostle himself at that time Pears. Ann. Paul. p. 2.
.

Was he but an ordinary Minister who had the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, Acts 9.17. He that has the Confidence to make one of the chief Apostles
an ordinary Minister, may with equal assurance assert every ordinary Minister
to be a chief Apostle.

St. Paul expressly says, That he was not taught his Gospel by Men, but by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. Was he but an ordinary Minister who
received his Gospel by extraordinary Revelation? Bishop Pearson's Judgment,
which is followed by the Rector in his Annals, I presume is of some value with
him. The Bishop will set him at rights: he owns Paul to be an Apostle, before
the Mission mentioned in Acts 13.1, 2. This he does both in his Annals, p. 2.
and in his Lection in Act. Apost. p. 74, 75. So does Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. II.
1.

2. He was sent by Revelation unto the Gentiles, before the Ordination
mentioned in Acts 13. as appears Acts 22.18.21. The Ordination mentioned there
did not make him an Apostle, as the Rector dreams, but he had an antecedent
immediate Call from Jesus Christ.

The Holy Ghost thought fit he should enter upon the Stated Exercise of his
Apostolical Ministry amongst the Gentiles, at the Door of Ordination by
Presbyters, for a President of Ordination to the Gentile Churches. When the
great Apostle of the Gentiles enters at this Door, it is fit that ordinary
Ministers should; and if Presbyters may lay hands on an Apostle, much more on
inferior Ministers.

3. He allows that Timothy was made a Presbyter by Presbyters, but that he was
made a Bishop by Paul, is barely Asserted and not Proved.

II. He examines the meaning of (...), Prophecy. P. 21.
If Timothy was Ordained but once, then, says he, by Prophecy, signifies by
Prophets, the Abstract for the Concrete, and these Prophets were Paul and Silas.

I add (says he) the Presbytery here mentioned, or Presbyters themselves,
might have been Prophets too, P. 22.
and Ordained Timothy according to Prophecy.

1. Lets see how the Words run with this Explication, Neglect not the Gift that
is in thee, which was given thee by Prophets, with the laying on of the Hands
of the Prophets. Profound Sense! He is resolved to make Apostles or Prophets of
all that are concerned in Ordination, but the mischief on it is, the Bishops
whose Cause he pleads, are neither one nor the other.

Prophecy with him signifies Prophets, and the Presbyters were Prophets, so
that Timothy was Ordained by Prophets with Prophets. The Rector has highly
obliged the Learned World by this Famous Commentary. If you should ask why he
degrades Paul an Apostle, into an inferior Order of Prophets, I hope it will
satisfy you, that he has made amends by exalting inferior Presbyters, into a
superior Order of Prophets. One while Paul is an ordinary Minister with him,
another while a Prophet, and sometimes he is content, provided he do not stand
in the way of his beloved Episcopacy, he should be an Apostle.

2. The Truth is, by Prophecy respects the Prophecies that went before of
Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.18. It seems they were many, if we respect the Persons
Prophesying, and therefore called Prophecies, and but one if we consider the
thing Prophesied, and therefore called Prophecy Est. in 1 Timothy 4.14.
. The Text does not say who these Prophets were, but the Rector, a Man of happy
Invention, has found them out, and assures us they were Paul and Silas.

III. He lets us see what we are to understand by Presbytery. It Is a Word
borrowed (says he) from the Jewish Church. P. 23.
Moses took the heads of the twelve Tribes to be assistant to him in the
Government; unto these answered the Twelve Apostles: but at length God
commanded bim to choose Seventy Elders of the People, Number. 11.16. It is worth
our Remark here.

1. That he made Christ and the twelve Apostles to answer unto the High Priest,
and the inferior Priests, p. 1, 2. And he told us, it was manifest it was so,
p. 2. but now by a new Manifestation, he tells us the Twelve Apostles answered
the Heads of the Twelve Tribes.

2. Where does he find that Moses took the Heads of the Twelve Tribes, to be
his Assistants in the Government, before the Seventy Elders were chosen. Moses
himself gives a different Account: he says, he judged the People alone, until
Jethro, his Father in Law, advised him to join others with him in the
Government; and that thereupon he chose, not Twelve Heads of the several
Tribes, but Rulers of Thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, of Fifties, and of Tens,
Ex. 18.13, 25. Deuteronomy. 1.15. That there were Heads of the Twelve Tribes every
body knows, but that these were chosen exclusive or others, to be Moses his
Assistants in the Government, is a new discovery, which no body knew before. We
will not envy the Rector the Honor of being the first Discoverer of this
Cabbala.

3. The Seventy Elders of the People, to whom the Presbytery answers, were
chosen (as himself confesses) to be Assistants to Moses in the Government.

This instance of his own producing, evinceth that Presbyters have Power of
Government. The Jewish Sanhedrin was the Supreme Court of Judicature among the
Jews, and were entrusted with the Power of Ordaining Elders.

At first, every one that was regularly Ordained himself, had the Power of
Ordaining his Disciples; but in the time of Hillel, it was resolved that none
might Ordain, without the presence of the Nasi, or President of the Sanhedrn,
or a License from him Seld. de Syned. II. 7. 1.
.

If the Presbytery answers the Sanhedrin, as the Rector confesses it does,
the Power of Government, and particularly of Ordination belongs unto it.

He says the Jews called that Celebrated Council in their own Language, P. 24.
the Sanedrim, but the N. T. and the Greek Tongue (...), or (...). He seems to
make Sanhedrin (so the Jews write it (...), and not Sanedrin, as he does) a
Hebrew Word, whereas it is the Corruption of (...), in a Hebrew Dialect. I
mention this only by the by, to give the Reader a taste of the Learned Rector's
Skill in Philology.

He adds, That Moses was Head, Ibid.
and a part of his Council of Seventy; yea, that Christ Himself, who was also a
Prophet lice unto Moses, had Twelve Apostles, and Seventy Disciples, who made
up a Presbytery.

1. In Acts 22.30. the (...) is expressly distinguished from the (...), as the
(...) is, v. 5.

2. Moses was a Type of Christ, and as he was Head of the Council of Seventy,
so is Christ of the Presbytery. It is improperly said that Moses was part of
the Seventy, for there were Seventy, or Seventy Two, besides Moses.

3. The Seventy Disciples answered the Jewish Presbytery with him above, but
now finding he had yielded too much, he Corrects himself, and makes the Twelve
Apostles part of Christ's Presbytery, as he calls it; but the N. T. no where
calls them so, nor does it appear that ever the Twelve Apostles, and Seventy
Disciples, acted together as one Presbytery.

Ignatius (says he) styles them (...), P. 25.
the Presbytery of the Church.

Ignatius calls the Apostles so (not the Apostles and Seventy Disciples, as he
insinuates) in a general Sense, as they call themselves Presbyters. But the
New Testament sufficiently distinguishes between Apostles and Presbyters
properly so called, but no where distinguishes between Bishops and Presbyters.

So likewise, if we may believe the Rector, every Apostle in his Plantation,
Ibid.
had his Presbytery in the Cities where he had settled Churches, as is clear
from Acts 15. but that Apostle was head of them.

1. Doubtless every Constituted Church had a Presbytery, which was the Church's
Presbytery, and not the Apostles, as he calls it. His Presbytery is a Form of
Expression not known in the New Testament. Paul does not call the Presbytery of
any Church his Presbytery.

2. What if two Apostles settled a Church in Conjunction, as Paul and Barnabas
did many; whose then was the Presbytery? was it divided between both? or were
they joint heads of the Presbytery? or did one resign his right in them to
another? Perhaps Mr. G. can tell us how the Point was settled, without the
danger of making two Apostolical Heads of the Presbytery of a Church, for that
would be a bad President, and might warrant the setting up of Two Bishops in
one Church.

3. The Elders of Jerusalem had not one Apostle, but Apostles Superior to
them, Acts 15.2. and so were Prophets and Evangelists. But we do not find that
they were under the Inspection of one Apostle, Prophet, or Evangelist, more
than another, but Subject to all, and willing to be guided by them, as there
was occasion.

4. Were not the Apostles Heads of the Bishops also? This we have proved
already. The Superiority of the Apostles over the Presbyters, does not in the
least diminish their Power as such; it was fit they should act under the
Inspection of the Apostles, who were Infallibly Assisted by the Holy Ghost.

After a great deal of needless labor to himself and Reader, at length he
grants, P. 25.
That Timothy was Ordained by the Presbytery, of which Paul was the principal
Head

Here you have his own Confession, That Timothy was Ordained by the Presbytery.
Truth is great, and will one time or other extort Self-condemning Testimonies
out of the Mouths of Adversaries. But he adds, That Paul was the principal Head
of this Presbytery.

Head is an Ambiguous Word: If he means by it Supreme Governor, it belongs
properly to Jesus Christ, who is the Head of the Church, and Head over all
things to it, Ephesians. 1.22. and 5.23. No Apostle is ever called Head, much less
principal Head, either of the Church or of the Presbytery, in all the N.
Testament. It Is a Title the Pope of Rome affects.

If he means a subordinate Governor, as I presume he does, he was no more the
Head of this Presbytery, than of all other Presbyteries, not only in Churches
Planted by him, but in all others to whom the Spirit guided him. His Power was
the same in Rome and Coloss, where he found Churches Established by others, as
in Ephesus or Corinth, where lie settled Churches himself.

If the Apostle joined the Presbytery with him in Ordination, as the Rector
confesses he did, it is sufficient to demonstrate, That Presbyters have an
inherent Power of Ordaining.

The Apostle's being President of the Presbytery, makes no more for Bishops,
than it does for Presbyters, for neither of them pretend to Succeed the
Apostles in the extent of Apostolical Power; and all Presbyteries have a
Moderator, or President, for Order's sake.

Upon the whole Matter, it is clear to me, P. 27.
(says Mr. G.) That the Presbytery spoken of, 1 Timothy 4.14. includes the
Apostle Paul.

1. He told us before, that Paul was included in the Words by Prophecy, now he
includes him in the Presbytery: Let us see what Sense this Interpretation
makes. -- The gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy; i. e.
Paul and Silas, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; i. e. of
Paul, and ordinary Ministers. The Gift, according to this Interpretation, was
given by the laying on of the Hands of Paul, with the laying on of the Hands of
Paul: risum teneatis?

2. The Apostles are distinguished from the Presbytery, Acts 15.23.

IV. The Fourth thing he has undertaken is to consider Paul's (...) -- By
Prophecy, P. 28.
with the laying on of the Hands of the Fresbytery. Heace he infers, That
Timothy was properly Ordained by Prophets, in the presence, or witness, and
with the consent of the Presbyters.

1. J. O. Proved in his Plea, p. 47, 48. that (...) and (...) used
promiscuously in the N. T. which Mr. G. takes no notice of.

2. Himself applies (...) as well as (...), to Paul, by affirming that he is
included in the Presbytery.

3. He forgot himself in saying, That Timothy was properly Ordained by
Prophets, for he owned, p. 25. That he was Ordained by the Presbytery. Truth is
one and the same, but Error is inconsistent with it self.

4. The laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery signifies more than their
presence, witness, and consent, for the presence, witness and consent of the
People was requisite, as he confesses, but they never laid on Hands in
Ordination.

5. He makes Paul one of the Presbytery; the laying on of his Hands, according
to this Hypothesis, signified no more than his Presence and Consent. Thus in
denying Ordination by Presbyters, he destroys Apostolical Ordination, and
consequently that which is Episcopal.

He Flurts at the Learned and Judicious Dr. Owen, whose Name will live in the
Church of God, when such Men as he are written in the Dust. He disingeniously
makes the Dr. to say, That we are Justified by Faith with good Works; P. 29.
that Faith is the Instrument whereby Justification is conveyed, and good Works
wherewith it is conferred.

He should have showed the place where Dr. Owen says so, but this he could not
do. The Words are his own, and easily betray the Author, though he would fain
father them upon the Doctor. Dr. Owen says, according to the Scriptures, That
we are Justisy'd by Faith without Works; the Rector makes him to say, we are
Justisy'd by Faith with Works.

In the next Lines he contradicts himself, and explains the Drs. with Works, by
without Works; for he affirms, That the Presbyters contributed no more unto
Ordination, than good Works in the Drs. Opinion, do unto Justification, that
is, nothing at all.

1. He told us once, That the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery
signified Ordination, P. 25. afterward it signified only Consent, P. 28. and
here it signifies nothing at all. We must crave the help of his Learned
Neighbor, who communicated a Quotation in J. O's. Book to him, to reconcile
him to himself.

2. It seems good Works contribute something to our Justification in the
Rector's Opinion; he declares himself fully of that Opinion in the next
Paragraph, and says, He is so far of the Drs. mind, that in Justification
Faith is the first and chief Instrument of Conveyance. This implies, That good
Works are a secondary and subordinate Cause of Justification.

I will put this Gentleman in mind of a Passage or two in the Book of Homilies.
St. Paul declares nothing here upon the behalf of Man concerning his
Justification, but only a true and lively Faith: And yet that Faith does not
shut out Repentance, Hope, Love, Dread and the Fear of God, to be joined with
Faith in every Man that is Justified, but it shuts them out from the office
of Justifying; so that although they be all present together in him that is
Justified, yet they Justify not all together Sermon. of Salvat. Part 1. P. 13.
Edit. 1673.
.

In the Second Part of the same Homily P. 15. Ib.
we have this remarkable Passage: This Faith the Holy Scripture teaches us,
this is the strong Rock and Foundation of Christian Relligion, this Doctrine
all old and ancient Authors of Christ's Church do approve; this Doctrine
advances and fetteth forth the true Glory of Christ, and beats down the vain
glory of Man: This whosoever denies, is not to be accounted a Christian Man,
nor for a fetter forth of Christ's Glory, but for an Adversary to Christ and
his Gospel.

Note here,

1. That the Doctrine which the Rector ridicules in Dr. Owen, is the Orthodox
Doctrine of the Church of England, and of all ancient Authors of Christ's
Church.

2. That whosoever joins Works with Faith, in the Act of Justifying, is an
Adversary to Christ, and his Gospel. and not to be reputed for a Christian.

Either the Rector has subscribed the Book of Homilies, or he has not; If he
has not, he has no Legal Right to his Benefice, being not duly qualified
according to the Statute, which requires all Ecclesiastical Persons to
Subscribe the XXXIX Articles (on pain of Deprivation) whereof the XXXV Article
declares, That the Book of Homilies does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine,
and necessary for these times. The same Subscription is required by the Canon
in this Form; Can. 36. I N. N. do willingly, and ex animo, Subscribe to these
Three Articles above mentioned, and to all things that are contained in them.
The Third Article in the Canon respects the XXXIX Articles of Religion, which
the Subseriber is to acknowledge to be all agreeable to the Word of God.

If he has Subscribed the Articles, and consequently the Book of Homilies, he
has Subscribed to the Sentence of his own Condemnation, viz. That he who joins
Works with Faith, in the Office of Justifying, is an Adversary to Christ, and
his Gospel, and not to be reputed for a Christian.

He that is so liberal in passing Sentence on his Neighbors as no true
Ministers, should review the Sentence he has passed upon himself, as no true
Christian, while he corrupts the Foundation-Doctrine of Justification.

Thus I have vindicated 1 Timothy 4.14. from the weak and Self-contradicting
Exceptions of the Rector. The rest of this Chapter is only a recapitulation of
his long perplexed Commentary upon that plain Text.

He refers 1 Pet. 5.2. where the Elders are exhorted (...) and (...), to Feed
the Flock, and to take the oversight of it, P. 37.
to an Appendix by it self, because he knows not in what order of Time to place
it.

Let it be imagined (says he) for it cannot be proved to be written before it
was Decreed throughout the World, that one Presbyter should be set over the
rest.

No such Decree can be produced in Scripture, nor was there any such Decree
made in the Apostolical Times.

This is a mere Fiction of his own.

He allows the Elders in 1 Pet. 5. to be Governors, P. 38, 39.
but not Supreme Governors, for Christ and Peter was above them.

Did ever Man more egregiously Trifle? who ever affirmed Elders to be Supreme
Governors, equal to Christ and his Apostles? Peter here exhorts the Elders to
Feed, or Govern the Flock (for so (...) signifies John 22.16. Rev. 2.27.
) and to perform the Duties of Bishops ((...)) toward them, and he does not
set one Presbyter over the rest, therefore they were to Govern and Oversee the
Church in a State of Parity.

But says Mr. G. Peter was a Shepherd above them.

1. So were all Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, above ordinary Presbyters:
But he cannot show in all the N. T. that Persons of one and the same Order,
were set over others of that Order; as for Example, That any one Apostle was
set over the other Apostles, or any one Prophet set over the rest of the
Prophets, or any one Evangelist set over the other Evangelists, nor any one
ordinary Presbyter set over the other Presbyters. Until he has proved this,
which has not been yet done, he does nothing.

2. He ascribes unto Peter a large Diocese, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia
and Bythynia, 1 Pet. 1.1.

He acknowledges, p. 39.
That Pastors and Teachers are the lowest rank and degree of Church Officers,
Ephesians. 4.11. And if so, they are all in a State of Parity: for those in the
lowest degree, cannot be at the same time, and in the same respect in a
superior Degree. He makes Bishops of a superior Degree above Pastors and
Teachers; if so, they are either Apostles, or Prophets, or Evangelists, for the
N. T. knows no other Church Officers, Ephesians. 4.11. Now Apostles, Prophets and
Evangelists, were extraordinary Officers (as the Learned acknowledge) which are
ceased long ago. Therefore the Rector has excluded the Bishops from the
Catalogue of N. T. Ministers.

He does not find any express Commission given to these Elders, P. 41.
for exercising the several Supreme Acts of Power and Authority, such as he
noted in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus.

1. Timothy and Titus are no where expressly called Bishops, but Timothy is
expressly called an Evangelist. He that pleads for an express Commission, should
produce such an one constituting Timothy and Titus Diocesan Bishops, which he will
never be able to do.

2. These Elders are commanded to govern the Flock, and to perform the Duties
of Bishops, and consequently are entrusted with the Episcopal Power.

Observe the Rector's way of Arguing, he would persuade us that Timothy and
Titus, who are no where called Bishops, and one of them expressly called an
Evangelist, were real Bishops; and that the Jewish Elders, who are bid to
govern or feed the Flock, and to do the Duties of Bishops, have nothing to do
with the Episcopal Power.

In like manner, when the Apostle tells the Elders of Ephesus, That the Holy
Ghost had made them Bishops of the Flock, to feed, or govern the Church of God
Acts 20.17, 28.
, he would persuade us these are no Bishops, though the Holy Ghost expressly
affirms it; and that Timothy, who is expressly commanded to do the Work of an
Evangelist, was Bishop of Ephesus.

They whom the Holy Ghost Constitutes Bishops, must be no Bishops with him, and
he whom the Holy Ghost declares to be an Evangelist, must pass for a Bishop.

He must pardon us if we believe these express Testimonies of the Holy
Scriptures, before his ungrounded Assertions.

CHAP. III. Remarks upon bus Second Chapter of the Government of the Church of
Ephesus and Crete. The Apostles left the Government of the Church of Ephesus in
the Presbyters. This Establishment his last, divine, perpetual. Acts 20.
Explained. The Government by Presbyters in parity never altered. Presbytery a
Divine Remedy against Schism. Superior Bishops not the Remedy. Timothy no
Diocesan Bishop, an unfixed Evangelist. Of the Asian Angels, not so called from
the Provincial Guardian Angels. Ignatius his Bishop, not Diocesan. Titus no
Diocesan Bishop. Presbyters are Rulers.
HE undertakes to show that St. Paul, toward the declining part of his Life, p.
45.
and in his absence from the Churches, did not commit the Government to the
Presbyterles in Parity, but appointed one as Supreme to preside over them in
his absence, and by consequence to Succeed him, when he departed the World.
This(says he) I shall demonstrate he did in the Churches of Ephesus and Crete,
and by a reasonable Consequence in all his other Churches, and the rest of the
Apostles must be presumed to have done the same.

1. If the Apostle did not appoint one Presbyter as Supreme, to preside over
the rest, and to Succeed him in the Government of the Presbyters, the
Government by his own Confession must lodge in the Presbyters of the Churches
in Parity.

2. Timothy and Titus were not ordinary Presbyters, but extraordinary Officers,
that is, Evangelists, and as such were Superior to Presbyters, as Apostles and
Prophets were: There is not the least hint in the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, that they were Ordained to be the Apostles Successors in Ephesus and
Crete.

3. The Apostle did commit the Government of the Church of Ephesus in his
absence, to the Presbytery in a Parity, ( Acts 20.17, 18.) and that when he was
taking his last leave of them, without thoughts of seeing them any more, v. 25.
This was the proper Season for him to provide a sirgle Person to Succeed him in
the Presidency over the Presbyters of Ephesus, had such a Presidency been of
necessary and perpetual continuance in the Church. It is but rational to
affirm, That when the Apostles took their final leave of any Church, then was
the proper time to take care of it is future Government. It is not to be
imagined that the Holy Apostles would be wanting in their Duty toward the
Churches in such a Conjuncture as this.

They were Faithful Stewards of God's House, and gave the necessary Rules for
its future Government and Conservation: accordingly the Apostle is very
particular and express, in giving Directions about the Government of the Church
of Ephesus after his departure.

He sends for the Elders of Ephesus, Preaches his Farewell Sermon to them, Asts
20.17 -- 36. In all which there is not one word of setting a single Person over
them, but the whole Government of the Church is committed to them in a State of
Parity: And least any should think this was a prudential Constitution, he tells
them this Power was consigned to them by the Holy Ghost, who made them Bishops
to Feed (or Rule) the Church of God, v. 28.

The Elders, to whom the Government of the Church of Ephesus was thus committed
by the Holy Ghost, took their solemn and final leave of Paul, with many Tears,
sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should see his
face no more, ver. 38.

Whether he did return again is not material at all; it is evident he thought he
should not, and the Elders of Ephesus thought so also,

There is no one Presbytery of which the Apostle took such a Solemn leave, as
he did of this; and there is no doubt, if it had been the mind of God that a
single Person should be set over them, but the Apostle would have mentioned it
at this time. He tells them in his Charge to them, That he shunned not to
declare to them the whole Counsel of God, Acts 20.27. and immediately adds, v.
28. That the Holy Ghost made them Bishops of that Flock; this therefore is part
of the Council of God, That the Church be Governed by the Elders in Parity. If
the Superiority of Bishops had been any part of the Council of God, the Apostle
would not have withheld it from the Presbyters of Ephesus at this time. They
that affirm, That the Government of this Church was afterward changed, must
bring as clear Proof for it, as we do for this Establishment.

It is very plain and incontestable, that the Apostle left the Government of
the Church of Ephesus in the Presbyters of that Church, when he took his final
leave of them: And is it as plain, that the First Epistle to Timothy, upon
which his Episcopacy is Founded, was written after this Settlement of a
Governing Presbytery, which most Ancient and Modern Chronologers, except Bishop
Pearson, and two or three others, affirm to be written before?

It is very evident that the Holy Ghost appoints the Presbyters of Ephesus the
sole Bishops of the Church, when Paul bid them a final Farewell: And is it as
evident that an Evangelist, as Timothy was, may be degraded from an
extraordinary unfixed Officer, to an ordinary fixed Pastor?

In this Establishment of Presbytery, without a Superior Bishop, it is
observable, that,

1. It is an Apostolical Divine Establishment; the Apostle was guided by the
Holy Ghost in his determination, v. 28.

2. It was the last Establishment which he intended to make in that Church, for
he had no thoughts of seeing them again.

3. It was intended for a perpetual Establishment, not only in the Church of
Ephesus, but in all other Churches. Mr. G. allows the Government of this Church
to be a Platform for other Churches, p. 45. That it was Perpetual appears, 1.
Because the Apostle gave them his last Thoughts, which are the same with his
dying Thoughts, for he positively tells them, He should see their Faces no
more. 2. Here is not one Circumstance in the whole Context that makes for a
Temporary Establishment. If any say it was Temporary, he ought to prove it. We
may with much better Reason affirm, That the appointing of Timothy an
Evangelist, to settle some things in Ephesus in Paul's absence was Temporary.
3. Paul does not give the least hint in his whole Discourse with the Ephesian
Elders of any Bishop he had set over them, or that he intended to set one
hereafter. It Is certain Paul must needs know what sort of Government God would
have settled in his Church after his departure. We cannot imagine that he was
ignorant of the Pattern of God's House. The extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit
were not given them in vain, it was to lead them into all Truth. Now if the
Apostle knew of this pretended future Establishment of Episcopacy, how comes he
not to acquaint the Presbyters, with it? He should have told them how they were
to Govern the Church in Subordination to their Bishop, present or future. But
not a word of all this in his whole Discourse, A certain evidence that it was
the Apostle's mind, and the mind of the Holy Ghost, that the Presbyters should
Govern the Church in common.

Timothy was now present, or not far off, Acts 20.4, 6. -- Why had not the
Apostle recommended the Presbyters to his charge? They wanted a present Bishop,
according to Mr. G's. Hypothesis, for the Apostle was taking his final leave of
them. What should hinder his being set over them? His Years? He was but Young
when the first Epistle was written, which supposes him Bishop of Ephesus, 1 Timothy 4.12. There were Prophecies concerning him, 1 Timothy 1.18. He had been
Ordained by Prophecy, 1 Timothy 4.14. And was there no Prophecy of his being
future Bishop of Ephesus? If there was, how comes the Apostle to suppress it,
in this necessary Juncture, when it so greatly concerned the Ephesian Elders to
know how the Church of Ephesus was to be Governed after the Apostle's
departure? Would not the Elders of Ephesus acquiesce in this determination of
the Apostle, as his last and unalterable Settlement? 4. No reason can be given
why this Government of the Church of Ephesus should be afterward changed. The
Rector thinks it was done as a Remedy against the Schisms, p. 47. But the
Establishment of the Presbytery in Ephesus was for a Remedy against Schisms, as
appears Acts 20.28, 29, 30. After my departure grievous wolves shall enter in
among you, not sparing the flock, and of your selves shall men arise -- This he
mentions as a reason why the Elders of Ephesus should oversee the Flock, v. 28,
31. This Remedy was appointed by the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost, which cannot Err
in Judgment; He knows how to provide apt and effectual Remedies. He is in one
Mind, and does not appoint that to day which he repents of to morrow; His
Provisions are not merely prudential, like those of Men's devising, to whom
future Events are wrapped up in obscurity; and therefore upon trial of their
aptness to the ends for which they were designed, change their thoughts
concerning them, and take new measures. It is not so with the All-wise God, He
sees the End in the beginning, and Effects in their Causes, and with Him is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning.

Now let us hear what the Rector can say for the Change of this Government by
Presbyters, settled in the Church of Ephesus.

He Promises to Treat of three Things.

1. Of the Plantation and Government of the Church of Ephesus by Paul, so long
as he was in a condition to manage the Affairs of the Church.

2. He Will show the last Orders he took about the Government of this Church of
Ephesus in his absence.

3. He Will give us the glory of it, unto the Writing of Ignatius 's Epistles.

As to the first, we agree with him, that the Presbyters of Ephesus were
Subject to Paul, and good reason for it, for he was an Apostle infallibly
guided by the Holy Ghost.

He observes two Things from Acts 20.28.1. That the Apostle committed the
Government of this Church, in his absence, unto these Presbyters (or Bishops)
for I Will suppose at present, that the Title and Power of Bishops belonged to
them.

1. Here Is a plain acknowledgment of our Hypothesis, That the Government of the
Ephesian Church was devolved upon the Presbyters there, but he insinuates as if
this was only for a time, i. e. during his absence; whereas the Apostle
intended to see their Faces no more; so that his Absence was to be perpetual,
(as to his present Intention at least) and consequently the Power committed to
these Presbyters was perpetual.

2, He seems loath to call them Bishops, but is so kind as to suppose it at
present, though the Holy Ghost expressly calls them so, and made them so, Acts
20.28. Feed the stock, over which the Holy Ghost made you (...) Bishops.

2dly. He observes from this Scripture, p. 47.
That Paul certainly foresaw, that Schisms would arise among them. He did so,
and provided a Remedy against them, by committing the Government there to the
Presbyters. If Diocesan Episcopacy had been the Remedy, how comes the Apostle
not to mention it at this time? He makes mention of the Disease, v. 29. as he
confesses, and why not of the Remedy also, neither here, nor in the Epistle to
the Ephesians? which he observes was written to give a check to their Schisms,
chap. 4. That Epistle and Chapter mentions the several degrees of Ministers in
Christ's Church, chap. 4. v. 11. but not a word of a Bishop, as the Center of
Unity in the whole Epistle. Nor does he require one ordinary Minister to obey
another, either in this Epistle, or that to the Corinthians, who were pestered
with Schisms also, as he takes notice. If Bishops had been the Remedy, the
Apostle would not have omitted mentioning them, having such proper occasion
given him, and writing designedly to them upon that Subject. We would reckon
him but a sorry Physician that would prescribe several Remedies for a
Distemper, and omit the only proper Remedy. Such a Spiritual Physician the
Rector makes the Apostle to be: He (says he) foresaw the Schisms of the
Ephesians, wrote an Epistle to unite them, p. 47.
and has a warm Discouase about Unity, Chap. 4. And wrote another to the
Corinthians to cure their Divisions. But has not so much as touched upon his
proper Remedy of Diocesan Bishops. There is a like warm Exhortation to Unity,
Phil. 2.1, 2. and yet that Church was Governed by Bishops and Deacons, Phil.
1.1. and not by one Superior Bishop.

2. The Second thing he promised was to tell us, P. 48.
The Order he took afterward about the Government of the Church of Ephesus,
which was this: The Apostle being set at liberty, and returning back from Italy
to the East, and being now old, Phil. v. 9. and finding that Factions and
Divisions every where increased and prevailed, Constituted Timothy Bishop of
Ephesus, (as doubtless he did the same in all other places) 1 Timothy 1.3.

1. He takes it for granted the Epistle to Timothy was written after Paul's
Imprisonment at Rome, which I deny. We shall hear his Proofs in the next
Chapter, which we will there consider.

If he be mistaken in this Point of Chronology, as I shall prove he is. then
all his Reasonings from this Epistle fall to the ground.

2. There were Factions and Divisions in the Churches long before, as he
himself confesses, and as is apparent from 1 Cor. 3. Why had not the Apostle
provided this Remedy sooner, to have prevented the increase and prevalence of
them? A Distemper is easier prevented than cured If Divisions increased under
the Government of the Apostles, was the new Order of Bishops like to put a stop
to them? Why is this then assigned as the Reason of the Institution?

3. 1 Timothy 1.3. Does not say that Paul Constituted him Bishop of Ephesus. It is
agreed by the Ancients, that St. John the Apostle was at Ephesus, and resided
there for a considerable time after St. Paul's departure thence, and after the
Writing of the First Epistle to Timothy. Euse. Hist. Eccl. III. 17. al. 18.
Iren. adv. Haer. III. 3 Hierom. Catal. Scrip. Eccl.
Eusebius, upon the Testimony of Irenaeus and Clemens Alexandrinus, affirms
that he returned to Ephesus, after he was released from his Banishment at
Patmos, and lived there, and among the other Asian Churches until Trajan's
Days. His ordinary Residence was at Ephesus, as Eusebius and Clemens, etc.
affirm.

If St. John kept his Residence at Ephesus, and ruled that Church (as he did
other Churches of Asia) by his Apostolical Power, Timothy could not be the
Supreme Ruler of the Church of Ephesus, Where an Apostle was Present and
Resident to Govern, his Superior Authority Suspended all Episcopal
Jurisdiction; so that according to the Rector's own Principle, there was no
need of a Bishop, while an Apostle could Oversee the Church.

4. He gives not the least Proof that Paul made Bishops in all other Places.
Doubtless it was so (says he) you must take his ipse dixit for Proof, and then
all your Doubts will vanish.

He confesses that the Apostle might justly Admonish and Commend Timothy. P. 49.
The Scope of his former Chapter was to prove the Presbyter^ were Subject to
the Apostles, and therefore were not Supreme Governors: Now he owns Timothy to
be Subject to the Apostle. So that his Argument, that the Presbyters had no
Power of Government, because Subject to the Apostles, is thrown out of Doors by
himself. Had he been so kind as to insert this Concession in its proper place,
he would have spared us the trouble of several Remarks upon the former Chapter.

He picks out of Paul 's Epistle to Timothy, the particular Rules and Orders,
P. 49, 50.
which are prescribed unto him for the discharge of his Episcopal Office.

The several Powers committed to Timothy in this Epistle, he might execute as
he was an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4, 5. and Assistant of Paul in his Apostolical
Function, and as his Delegate to Order and Regulate the Church.

It was Timothy 's part to see to the Qualifications of those who were to be
Ordained at Ephesus. P. 50.
If this be the proper work of a Bishop, how come our Bishops to depute this
work to one of their Presbyters?

At his death he left a Successor with the same Powers. P. 55.


Timothy was an Evangelist, an extraordinary Officer, Ephesians. 4.5, 11. Did he
leave Successors with the same extraordinary Powers? If Evangelists, one
Species of extraordinary Officers, have Successors, why should not Apostles and
Prophets also, have Successors assigned them?

Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, were alike extraordinary, and Superior to
Pastors and Teachers, the ordinary Officers of Christ's Church. No reason can
be given why one sort of extraordinary Officers should be continued, more than
the rest which are confessedly ceased.

But let us hear his Proofs.

1. It was no ways likely but that Timothy was expressly Empowered by St. Paul,
to provide for the future Government of the Church; and perhaps his Commission
is in that (2 Timothy 2.2.) or if not, yet he would of his own accord settle it
upon the same bottom, that himself had received it from the Apostle.

Something he would say, but knows not what. I expected a clear Proof, but we
are put off with a perhaps it was so, or so, or so, one way or other it must be.

It Is likely he was Empowered to provide for the future Government of the
Church. Paul provided for it in Acts 20.28.

His Commission in 1 Timothy 22.11. is to commit the things that he had heard of
Paul to faithful Men, which should be able to Teach others also. Is this a
Commission to Ordain Bishops? Are all Teachers Bishops? The Bishops in Ephesus,
Acts 20.28. are but mere Teachers with him, and now the Teachers in Ephesus are
Ordaining Bishops. The Bishops which the Holy Ghost made in Ephesus, he
degrades into ordinary Teachers, who have no Ordaining Power; and now when it
serves his turn, he advances the Teachers Ordained by Timothy, into the Order
of Superior Bishops.

But Timothy would of his own accord settle the Government, as he received it.
He received the Power of an Evangelist, which was Temporary, as was that of the
Apostles and Prophets.

2. Timothy left a Successor, P. 56.
because Christ directs his Message to the Angel of the Church in the singular
Number; if that Church had been Governed by a Presbytery, the Message must have
been Expressed in the Plural.

1. Angel is a Metaphorical Term, and is generally applied to the Heavenly
Spirits, which are Ministering Spirits to the Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14, So
that this Title denotes a Ministry rather than Degrees of Superiority.

2. Angel is often taken collectively, and seldom personally, in the Mysterious
Book of the Revelation, Rev. 9.11. and 14.6, 8, 9. And so are Stars used, which
are the same with Angels, Rev. 1.20. and 12.1. and 8.10. and 9.1. They are
Mystical Terms, and no clear Consequence can be deduced from them. Austin, in
his Disputations with the Donatists, excepts against Mystical, Figurative
Scriptures, and requires some clear Texts that carry their own Evidence with
them Haec Mystica sunt, opertasunt, Figurata sunt aliquid manifestum quod
interpret non egeat stagitamus. De Unit. Eccl. Cap. XIX.
.

The Epistles were Dedicated to all the Churches as well as to the Angels, and
by the same reason must be directed to all the Ministers, as well as to one.
Can it be imagined that the Spirit should speak to all the Churches, and not to
all the Ministers.

3. There were several Bishops in Ephesus, Acts 20.28. and doubtless all of
them were concerned in Christ's Message, though it might be directed to one, as
President or Moderator, for Order's sake. But Mr. G. will never be able to
prove, that one Angel had Jurisdiction over the rest,

4. If there were any thing of certainty in the Celestial Hierarchy, which is
described by the Supposititious Dionysius, the Order of Angels (strictly called
so) is the lowest of all the rest Extremo loco inter Coelestes Essentias
Angelicam proprietam obtinent. De Coel. Hierar. Cap. 9.
.

How comes that to be the highest Order among Ecclesiastical Angels, which is
the lowest among Celestial Argels?

He adds the Reason, why it is said Angel in the singular Number, because (says
he) there was an Opinion current in those Days, that every Province had his
peculiar Guardian Angel, Deuteronomy. 32.8. in the LXX, Dan. 12.1. and 10.12, 13.

1. The current Opinion of a Provincial Guardian Angel is very doubtful at the
best, and without Foundation in the Scriptures he quotes.

2. The Seventy Interpreters render Deuteronomy. 32.8. He set the bounds of the People
accordirg to the number of the Angels of God; whereas according to the Hebrew
it should be, according to the number of the Children of Israel. They seem to
allude to the Jewish Fabulous Tradition, concerning the Seventy Angels set over
the Seventy Nations of the World Lights* Vol. II. p. 402.
.

3. According to this Allusion the Rector would have the Holy Ghost to
constitute but one Bishop for one Province, or Nation, and but Seventy for all
the Nations of the World. But the Holy Ghost, who is no Friend to Fabulous
Traditions, mentions Seven Angels in one Province, namely, the Pronconsular
Asia, and there were as many in every Church, as there were Presbyters therein.

4. Is it not more probable that the Spirit alludes to the (...) the Argel of
the Church, as the Jews called the public Minister of every Synagogue Lights.
Vol. II. p. 133.
in Conformity to the Language of the Old Testament, Job 33.23. Hag. 1.13. Mal.
21.7. He is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. The Word (...) Messenger or
Angel (...) Mal. 2.7. in LXX.
is taken collectively for all Teaching Priests, Mal. 3.1, 8. and 2.7.

If Angel be taken Collectively by Malachi, why not by John also? I appeal to
the Learned Reader, whether is most probable, that the Holy Ghost should Allude
to Provincial Angels, the doubtful Ministers of Providence (under that
Denomination) or to the Synagogue-Angels, the known Ministers of Sacred Things.

3. His third Reason to prove that Timothy left an Episcopal Successor, is
taken from Ignatius his Epistle to that Church, P. 59.
in which he Names Onesimus their Bishop.

1. He knows that the Learned are not agreed, whether the Epistles of Ignatius
be Genuine or no; Mouns. Daille has written a Learned Dissertation to prove
them Spurious. Doct. Pearson has Learnedly Defended them. Le Roque has with
great Judgment Answered the Learned Bishop.

2. If Ignatius be Genuine, which is very doubtful, it should seem that in his
time the Name of Bishop, which the Holy Ghost gives to all Presbyters in
common, began to be appropriated to the first or chief Presbyter, who for Order
sake Presided over the rest, and had the Honor of the chief Place in their
Assemblies, and of moderating the Debates of the Presbytery, but without any
Power of Jurisdiction or Government over his Brethren.

This was the Primitive Bishop, as J. O. has proved in his Plea (p. 136. 139.)
out of Hilarious, etc.

3. Ignatius his Bishop was but the chief Pastor of a Church that ordinarily
Assembled together for Personal Communion, as will appear to any Impartial
Person that Reads these Epistles with Observation. Congregational, or Parochial
Bishops were throughout the World, not only in Ignatius his time, but in Paul's
time, who fixed more than one of them in every Church, Acts 20.28. Phil. 1.1.

That the Bishop's Diocese in Ignatius time, and long after, exceeded not the
Bounds of a Modern Parish, appears,

1. The whole Diocese met together, with the Bishop, for Public Worship. Let
all follow the Bishop, as Jesus Christ, and the Presbytery as the Apostles --
Let no Church Affairs be managed without the Bishop. Where the Bishop appears,
let the multitude be Ign. ad Smyr. p. 6. Edit. Vos.
.

If the Prayer of one or two be so powerful, how much more is the Prayer of the
Bishop and the whole Church. He that comes not into one place, he is proud and
self-condemned Ad Ephesians. p. 20. 33, 34.
.

Do nothing without the Bishop and Presbyters; Run all of you together into one
Temple of God, as to one Altar Ad Mag. p. 33, 34.
.

Where the Shepherd is, there do you follow, as the Sheep ought to do Ad Phil.
p. 40.
.

2. Baptism was generally Administered by the Bishop within his Diocese.

It is not lawful without the Bishop, either to Baptize, or to Celebrate the
Lord's Supper Ad Smy. p. 6.
.

So Tertullian, Under the hand of our Bishop we protest, That we renounce the
Devil, and the Pomp of this World de Cor. mil. p. 336.
.

3. The Bishop had but one Altar, or Communion, in his whole Diocese, at which
he had Administered the Lord's Supper to his whole Flock. Give diligence to use
one Eucharist, for there is one Flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Cup,
which represents the Union of his Blood, one Altar, and one Bishop, with the
Presbytery and Deacons, my Fellow Servants Ad Phil. p. 41.
.

One Altar here must be taken individually, as one Bishop is. It Is absurd to
say, one specifical Altar, and one individual Bishop.

Tertullian says of the Lord's Supper, We receive it from no hand, but from
the hand of the Presidents, or Bishops De Cor. Milit. p. 338.
. They Communicated at least once a Week, in some places twice or thrice. One
of our Bishops would scarce be able to Administer the Lord's Supper in a whole
Month to all his Diocese.

4. No Marriages were made without the Bishop: Those Unions were made with the
Sentence of the Bishop Ad Poly. p. 13.
.

5. The Bishop took care of all the Poor of the Dicess. Neglect not the Widows;
do you take care of them next unto the Lord: Let nothing be done without thy
Advice; let the People often Assemble together; inquire after all by Name;
despise not Menservants, and Maidservants Ad Poly. p. 12. 13.
.

Here the Bishop was to take care of the poor Widows of his Diocese, to see
that nothing be done without his Advice, and that the Congregation often met
together; he was to take an account by Name of those that were absent, not
omitting Servant-Men and Maids. What Diocesan Bishop can perform all this in
his Diocese, which consists of some Scores, or hundreds of Parishes?

Many more Testimonies might be gathered out of these Epistles, to prove that
Ignatius his Bishop, was but a Parish-Bishop.

Thus we have made it evident, that the Government of the Church of Ephesus was
ledged in the Presbyters of that Church, and that there was no Change of the
Government afterward by the Apostles, and that there was no Diocesan Bishop
there in Ignatius his time. The present Bishop of Salisbury, does ingenuously
acknowledge, That Ignatius was but the Pastor of a particular Church. See the
Quotation in J. O's. Plea, p. 30,

Having invalidated the Rector's Arguments for Diocesan Episcopacy, from 1 Timothy
and Ignatius his Epistles, I proceed to consider what he has to offer in
favor of Titus, his being Bishop of Crete.

If Timothy was not Bishop of Ephesus, no more was Titus of Crete; for the
Epistles directed to both, are much of the same Strain. Their Powers were the
same, and both were Officers of the same Species, namely, Evangelists.

Timothy is expressly so called, and Titus was really one, (as will be
acknowledged by the Learned) for he was the Apostle's Assistant, and Messenger
to the Churches, particularly to that of Corinth, where he seems to have spent
a great part of his time; 2 C^r. 2.13. and 7.6. and 8.6. The Apostle calls him
his Companion, and Fellow-Worker, 2 Cor. 8.23. We find him with the Apostle at
Jerusalem, Gal. 2.13.

Paul left Titus in Crete, P. 63.
to set in Order the things that were wanting, and to Ordain Elders in every
City, as the Rector observes, Tit. 1.5.

1. It Is no where said that Paul made him Bishop of Crete: The Trusts committed
to him were such as an Evangelist might discharge: This I presume will not be
denied. Eusebius expressly affirms, it was part of their Work to Ordain Pastors
Eccl. Hist. III. 31.
. And the Rector acknowledges that Branch of their Power, p, 115.

2. He was left in Crete but for a Season (as Timothy was in Ephesus) for the
Apostle charges him to come to him to Nicopolis, Tit. 3.12
when he should send Artemas or Tychicus to him, for there he intended to
Winter.

By which it is evident his stay in Crete, by Paul's appointment, was not long,
perhaps not above half a Year, if so much; after which we never read of his
returning thither; but we find him after this sent into Dalmatia, 2 Timothy 4.10.
and we hear no more of him.

3. He thinks Titus 1.5. That thou might Ordain Elders, not rightly
Translated; it should be, That thou might appoint and settle Elders in every
City. This presupposes that Titus had the Power of Ordaining also.

1. Here he gives up one of Titus's main Powers, for which they feign him a
Bishop, to wit, his Ordaining of Elders: This he says is not the meaning of
Titus 1.5. If this Text does not prove his Ordaining Power, no one in that
Epistle does.

2. He fancies that assigning unto Presbyters their power and special places,
was the work of Titus in Crete, and that this was after Ordination. Did not
Titus ordain Elders in every City, or particular Church, as he himself explains
it? Act 14.23. and were they not chosen by the Multitude before Ordination, as
he also confesses in the case of his Deacon-Presbyters, Acts 6. He would do
well to tell us, What new power was assigned unto the Presbyters by Titus after
Ordination? Perhaps he Dreamed that the Elders needed a License from their
Bishop, to empower them to Preach after Ordination, as the Canon requires. Can.
36.


Paul, says he, entrusts him with the charge of seeing unto the Qualifications
of Elders, P. 65.
v. 6, 7, 8, 9. The same, though more compendious, than those in 1 Timothy 3.

1. All that he might do as an Evangelist, or the Apostle's Delegate: as the
Bishop's Chaplain, or Archdeacon, examine the Candidates for the Ministry with
us.

2. He wisely overlooks the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters, which is
asserted in both the places he Quotes, Titus 1.5, 6, 7, 8. Ordain Elders -- if
any be blameless; for a Bishop must be blameless. The Reason were Incogent if
Elder and Bishop were not the same. The Qualification of Elders here, are the
same with those of a Bishop in 1 Timothy 3. as he confesses. Bishops and
Presbyters were the same, not only at first, but even at this time, when these
Epistles were Written, to Timothy and Titus; which makes it evident, they were
Evangelists, Superior to Presbyters ( Ephesians. 4.11.) and not Bishops in a proper
Sense, who are one and the same with Presbyters. He will not be able to give
one Instance in all the New Testament of any one ordinary Minister or Elder,
that was made Superior to his Brethren of the same Order with him: Nor of any
extraordinary Officer that was made Superior to others of the same kind. One
Apostle was not made Superior to another Apostle, nor one Prophet to another
Prophet, nor one Evangelist to another Evangelist, though the Apostles were
above the Prophets, and the Prophets above the Evangelists, and all the Three
were Superior to the Presbyters; but no one Presbyter is made Superior in
degree, much less a Ruler over another Presbyter.

The Apostle impowers him (says he) Cap. 1.11. to stop the Mouths, or Silence
false Teachers, to rebuke them sharply, v. 13. that is, v. 10. the Unruly, or
Non-conformists, etc.

1. The Apostle Explains his Meaning about stopping the Mouths of false
Teachers, in v. 9. That he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and
convince Gainsayers. He speaks of the Presbyters ordained by Titus, that they
must be able to convince Gainsayers, and so to stop their mouths. Even private
Persons are exhorted (...), to stop the mouths, or put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.15.

2. But suppose it be meant of an Authoritative Silencing of such, it is no
more than what Titus might do as an Evangelist, and the Apostles Delegate.

3. The Rector shows his good will to have the Nonconformists silenced, but
it is well that cursed Cows have short Horns.

4. The Nonconformists, or uaruly Persons the Apostle speaks of, were a sort of
Judaizing Christians, that retained the Legal Ceremonies, and the Commandments
of Men, Tit 1.10, 13. They were not content with the Simplicity and Plainness
of Gospel-Institutions, but would super-add their own Inventions, and impose
them upon others. These were the Nonconformists, that would not conform to the
Simplicity of the Gospel, nor leave others in the quiet possession of
Gospel-Priviledges, unless they submitted to their Impositions, Acts 15.2. Gal.
4.9, 10. and 5.1, 2 Col, 2.20, 23.

Grotius gives another Character, by which these Nonconformists may be known:
He says, That the Apostle pointed at those who taught that all Israelites had
a part in the World to come. Grot. in Tit. 1.10.
Not unlike some People who affirm all to be saved, Vid. Com. Prayer Burial
Dead.
that have the happiness to die in their Communion, and do not lay violent
Hands upon themselves.

We are obliged to the Rector, for helping us to a right Notion of
Nonconformity. There are two sorts of Nonconformists: Some are so called
because they do not conform to Unscriptural Impositions; these the Text speaks
nothing of: Others, as the Rector well observes, may be so called, because they
do not Conform to the Simplicity of the Gospel but impose humane ^nventions as
Terms of Communion.

The latter of these two are the Culpable Nonconformists. I believe Mr. G. will
not be for Silencing these, lest be be condemned out of his own Mouth.

Paul instructs him to reject a Heretic, p. 66.
Tit. 3.10.

That he might do as an Evangelist.

What he transcribes out of Ignatius from p. 67. to p. 73. does not concern
Crete, and we have already considered Ignatius bis Bishop.

Here is not one Direction or Command given to the Presbytery, P. 76.
nor any share in the Government communicated to them in these Epistles, says
our Author.

1. The Epistles were directed to Evangelists, who were superior to
Presbyters; and therefore it was fit the Exhortation should be immediately
directed to them.

2. The Directions concerned the Presbyters also, as the ordinary perpetual
Governors of the Church; and doubtless were intended for the use of the Church
unto the end of time, 1 Timothy 4. 2 Timothy 3.

The Presbyters are concerned, I hope, in the several Directions to Purity,
Patience, Constancy, Faithfulness in dispensing the Word, etc. 1 Timothy, 6.11, 12.
2 Timothy 2.3, 4. and 4.1, 2, 3.

3. It is a very gross mistake, that the Presbytery had no share in the
Government communicated to them in these Epistles. Paul ordained Bishops there,
who among other Qualifications must be such as Ruled well their own Houses,
that they might take care of the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. And in 1 Timothy
5.17. he mentions Elders that Ruled well, and mere worthy of Double Honor.

He contradicts himself, and says, that the Presbyters had some Interest in
the Government, (though their Power was subordinate) as appears from the Council
at Jerusalem, P. 77.
Acts 15. even with the Apostles themselves; doubtless then, and much more with
Timothy and Titus. They had no share in the Government, and yet they had some
Interest in it; himself can best reconcile these inconsistent Propositions.

They were subordinate to the Apostles, Acts 15. and so were the Evangelists:
But can he produce any ordinary Presbyters, that were subordinate to others of
the same Order?

Ignatius, says he, allows 'em a great stroke in ordering the Affairs of their
Churches, p. 77.
but still in Subjection to their Bishop, without whom they could do nothing.

It does not appear that Ignatius his Bishop could do any thing without his
Presbyters, no more than they could without him. And long after his time, the
Bishop had no power to determine Church Matters without his Presbyters; as
appears by that Canon in the Council of Carthage, -- Let the Bishop hear no
Man's Cause without the Presence of his Clergy; otherwise his Sentence shall be
void, unless it be confirmed by the presence of his Clergy. Council. Cath. IV.
Can. 13.


Cyprian did nothing without the Council of his Presbyters, and without the
Consent of his People. Statuerim nil sine Concilio vestro and sine consensu
Plebis meae privata sentemia gerere. Cypr. Ep. 6.


To be sure then the People and their Bishop ordinarily met in one place.

Ignatius frequently exhorts the People to do nothing without their Bishop,
Presbyters and Deacons in Conjunction. The Bishop and his Presbyters made one
Consistory: The Bishop, says he, presiding in the Place of God, and the
Presbyters in the Place of the Council of the Apostles. (...) Magn. p. 33.
And a^ little after he mentions the Complex Spiritual Crown of the Presbytery,
who sat round about him in the Church. P. 37.


Again, Let all reverence the Deacons as the Command of Jesus Christ, aid the
Bishop as Jesus Christ, who is the Son of the Father, and the Presbyters as the
Council of God, and the Conjunction of the Apostles. Ad Tralles. p. 48.


By these and many other Passages in Ignatius his Epistles, it is evident that
the Bishop and Presbyters sat in Council together, and were only the Guides of
a Parochial Church, in which the Bishop did nothing without his Presbyters, nor
they without him. This Agreement of the Bishop and his Presbyters; Ignatius
compares to the Strings of a Harp; and adds, That under their joint Conduct the
whole Church made a Chorus, a sacred Choire, and by their consenting Unity made
a Divine Melody. Ad Ephesians. p, 19.


This is agreeable to what Jerome affirms, that the Churth was anciently
Governed Communi Concilio Presbyterorum, by the Common Council of the
Presbyters. Hier. in Ep. ad Tit.
who had a Moderator or President, for Order's sake, but without any
Jurisdiction over the other Presbyters. This Moderator at the first was not so
much as chosen, but the Honor was devolved in course upon the Senior
Presbyter; and when he died, the next to him succeeded. This is expressly
arffirm'd by Hilarious the Deacon. Vt recedente uno sequens ei succedederet.
Hill. in Ephesians. 4.
But the Senior Presbyters proving sometimes not so fit for the Place, as he
adds, they changed the Succession, by Seniority, into that by Election. The
Presbyters chose the fittest Person to be their Moderator or President, as is
done in all the Presbyteries of the Reformed Churches. This President had no
new Ordination, had no Power over his Brethren, and was but Primus Sacerdos,
the first Presbyter, as Hilary affirms. See this Quotation more at large in J.
O's Plea, p. 136. -- Mutata este ratio, ut non Ordo sed Meritum crearet
Episcopum, etc. In Ephesians. 4. and in 1 Timothy 1.3.


Thus it was at Alexandria, as Jerome observes, ad Evagr. By all which it
appears, that the Primitive Bishop was not of the same Species with our Modern
Bishops; and that the Government of the Churches by the Presbyters, under their
respective Moderators, is most agreeable to the Primitive Practice.

He thinks that he has sufficiently proved that Timothy and Titus were
Diocesan Governors, tho not Bishops in Title P. 78.
I leave it to the Impartial Reader to consider of his Proofs, and my Answers.

As to Timothy and Titus, I will add these few things, and so conclude this
Chapter.

1. It is certain there was an Order of Evangelists in the Church, Ephesians. 4.11.
This all will acknowledge.

2. They were Vnsixed Officers, subordinate to the Apostles, and sent by them
to supply their absence, in the Churches planted by them, 1 Cor. 3.6. Not as
their stated Pastors, for they had Pastors and Teachers resident with them; but
to guide the New Pastors in Faith, Worship and Discipline, during the present
Necessity, until the Canon of the New Testament were written for a complete and
infallible Directory unto all Churches unto the end of Time. The Apostles
themselves could not be every where, and the ordinary Ministers would be often
at a loss without their Directions. Therefore it was necessary they should
entrust some Persons, as Delegates, to go in their names, and with full
instructions to the Churches, to settle, direct and establish them.

Some of these Evangelists generally attended the Apostles, that they might be
assistant to them.

Sometimes they send them to one Church, sometimes to another, to make a
shorter or a longer stay, as the circumstances of their work required, and then
to return again to the Apostle that sent them.

Thus Timothy is sent to Corinth, 1 Cor. 16.10. and 4.17. we find him with Paul
again, when he writ the second Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.1. at Berea
he was with Paul, and abode there still with Silas, Acts 17.14. (...), as he
did afterward at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1.3. I besought thee, (...) to abide still,
but no more as Bishop of Ephesus than of Berea. And yet this is the great
Argument to prove him Bishop of Ephesus, that Paul besought him to abide there.
It Is true, he soon left Berea, and followed Paul to Athens, Acts 17.15. whose
companion he was: Nor was he to stay at Ephesus, but until Paul came to him, 1 Timothy 3.14. and 4.13. And in the second Epistle, which was written not long
after the first, the Apostle calls him away to Rome, and sends lychicus,
another Evangelist to Ephesus, 2 Timothy 4.9.12.21. In 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. we find him
in Athens, whence he was sent to Thessalonica, and thence returned back to
Athens, 1 These. 3.1, 2, 6. After this he removed with Paul to Corinth, Acts
18.5. thence he accompanied Paul to Asia and Ephesus, Acts 19.1. thence he was
sent to Macedonia, v. 21, 22. But it were tedious to follow him in all his
Travels to so many distant places. He is expressly called an Evangelist, 2 Timothy
4.5. and no one else is expressly so called but Philip, Acts 21.8.

Titus was such another unfixed Officer. He was Paul's partner, and
fellow-helper, 2 Cor. 8.23. and seems mostly employed in the Church of Corinth,
2 Cor. 8.6.16, and 7.6.13. Paul expected him at Troas, and not finding him, he
had no rest in his spirit, but took his leave of them, and went into Macedonia,
2 Cor. 12.13. We find him with Paul at Jerusalem, Gal. 2.1, 3. and after his
being in Crete, the Apostle sends for him to Nicopolis, Titus 3.12. we find him
with Paul at Rome, whence he sent him to Dalmatia, 2 Timothy 4.12. and we hear no
more of him.

3. Evangelists were subordinate to the Apostles, and superior to Presbyters,
Ephesians. 4.11. They were the Apostles Colleagues and Companions, and their
Authorized Messengers to the Churches, to set in order what was wanting in
them, and to instruct, admonish and reprove the Presbyters, as there was
occasion.

4. They had power to Ordain Ministers where there was need of them. This
appears in Eusebius, who says of them, That traveling far from home, they
performed the Office of Evangelists, Eccl. Hist. III. 31.
and preached Christ to such as heard not of the Faith, and delivered unto them
the Scriptures of the holy Gospels with great application. When they had laid
the foundation of Christian Doctrine in certain strange places, and ordained
other Pastors, and committed the new Converts to their Care and Conduct, they
went into other Countries and Nations, attended with the favor and power of
God. Thus he. Timothy and Titus, who were both of them Evangelists, were
entrusted with the power of ordaining, We have already proved, That ordinary
Presbyters have exercised this power, much more might Evangelists, who were
extraordinary Officers.

5. Evangelists were Temporary Officers in tho Church, and are long since
ceased, as Apostles and Prophets are.

6. Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, as we have proved, and therefore no
Diocesan Bishops. It would be a degrading an extraordinary Officer, whose Power
was general over all the Churches, in Subordination to the Apostles, to make an
ordinary Officer of him, and to confine his Power to one particular Church.
It Is like the Degrading of the Colonel of a Regiment, to be the Captain of a
single Company; or the Confining of a Diocesan Bishop, to a mean Parochial Cure.

Mr. G. and some Others, will own they were Evangelists, and Unfixed at first,
but that the Apostle toward his latter End had made them Bishops, and that
they were such when he wrote his Epistles to them, which was after his first
Imprisonment at Rome: This he undertakes to prove in his next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. The First Epistle to Timothy was written before Paul's Imprisonment
at Rome, acknowledged by the Ancients, and by the Learned Assertors of
Episcopacy, Bishop Hall, Dr. Hammond, etc. Denied by the Rhemists, Bishop
Pearson, etc. Paul's Journey to Macedonia, 1 Timothy 1.3. considered. Jerome
vindicated. Reasons to prove that the First Epistle to Timothy was written
before Paul's First Bonds. The Second Epistle written in his First Bonds. An
Objection Answered. Acts 20.25. considered.
ONE and the leading Argument for Timothy 's being Bishop of Ephesus, P. 79.
says he, is grounded on 1 Timothy 1.3. I besought thee to abide still at
Ephesus, when I went to Macedonia.

1. To abide still, does not imply a continued residence. Timothy is said to
abide still at Berea, where he made but a short stay, Acts 17.14, 15. This
Argument will as soon prove him Bishop of Berea, as Bishop of Ephesus.

2. His stay there was but short, that is, until the Apostle came to him, 1 Timothy 3.14. and 4.13. Mr. G. himself allows in p. 90. That the Church of Ephesus
was Governed by Presbyters under Paul, whilst he was vigorous and active, and
had opportunity to oversee both the Flock and the Elders themselves. The
Apostle was vigorous and active when he writ this first Epistle to Timothy, and
he intended shortly to visit the Flock and Elders of Ephesus. Therefore by his
own Confession Timothy could not be Bishop of Ephesus when that Epistle was
written.

3. He was not fixed as Resident at Ephesus, for the Apostle afterward calls
him to Rome, 2 Timothy 4.9, 21. and sends Tychicus the Evangelist to Ephesus. We
do not read that Timothy ever returned to Ephesus again.

Thus we see the Weakness of his Leading Argument, as he calls it, by which we
may judge of the rest.

He adds, That the Dissenters, to avoid the Argument built upon 1 Timothy 1.3. and
the rest of the Epistle, say, That the first Epistle to Timothy was written
before the Meeting at Miletus, in which the Apostle committed the Flock to the
Elders of Ephesus, and not to Timothy, Acts 20.17, 28.

Our Argument from Acts 20.17, 28. holds good, though that Epistle should be
written after, as we have proved already in Cap. 3.

2. It is not the Dissenters only (as he unfairly suggests) that say that this
Epistle was written before the Meeting at Miletus; It Is the general and
prevailing Opinion of the greatest part of Chronologers, Ancient and Modern,
the most Learned Asserters of Episcopacy not excepted. Bishop Hall is of this
Opinion Vindic, p. 97. and Div. Right of Episcop. Part 2d. p. 38.
, so is Dr. Hammond and Grotius, Lud. Cap^llus, Dr. Lightfoot, Carry, etc,
Gothofredus quotes Athanasius, Baronius, etc. as of the same Opinion.

The Rhemists were sensible that this Opinion was prejudicial to the Cause of
Episcopacy, and therefore they say, though not positively, That the first Epistle
to Timothy, was written after Paul's first Imprisonment at Rome, when he was
set at Liberty Rhem. Test. Arg. in 1 Timothy
They are followed by Bishop Pearson and by Mr. G. only with this difference,
That the Seminary at Rhemes deliver themselves more modestly than the Rector
does; They say, it seems so; the Rector says, He has demonstrated it.

One that had not read Bishop Pearson, would think the Rector very ingenuous in
acknowledging that he is beholden to the Bishop for what he pretends to say on
Paul's Journey to Macedonia, mentioned in 1 Timothy 1.3.

That Miracle of his Time (says he, p. 80.
meaning Bishop Pearson) in his Annals Paulini, has given us a plain Account
and Proof thereof: All that I pretend unto is, to build on his Foundation, and
to enlarge on what that excellent Prelate has demonstrated, in a few words.
Thus the Rector.

I will not dispute whether the Learned Bishop were the Miracle of his Time; if
he were, Miracles are grown very Common in this last Age, for the Bishop had
many Equals, whose Learned Works are nothing inferior to his.

I dare affirm that our Rector is no Miracle in Architecture, for he builds
very sorrily on the Bishops Foundation. Instead of raising a Superstructure, he
has rather disturbed the Foundation; The Learned Bishop discourses distinctly
and clearly, the Rector confusedly and darkly.

He refers to Dr. Pearson's Annals Paulini, and pretends to enlarge on what
the Bishop had demonstrated in few words; but takes no notice of the Bishops
enlarging on that Argument in his Dissertations, whence he borrowed what he
pretends to say on Paul's Journey to Macedonia, but would have his Reader
believe the Enlargements are his own. See Pears. Dissert. 1. de Succession.
Romans Episc. Cap. IX. S. 5. ad S. 10.

But let us consider what the Rector has to offer out of Dr. Pearson. Thus he
goes on.

The Characteristick of the precise time of Paul's beseeching Timothy to abide
at Ephesus, is set down by Paul himself, P. 80.
1 Timothy 1.3. When I went into Macedonia: This was not, says he, at any of
those times of Paul's going into Macedonia, remembered in the Acts, and
therefore it was after the Apostle bad the Ephesians farewell at Miletus. Here
he spends several Pages to show it was none of the times mentioned by St. Luke.

1. Though Luke does not mention (in Acts 20.) Timothy's being left at Ephesus,
it is enough that Paul mentions it, 1 Timothy 1.3. In Acts 19.21.22. Paul sends
Timothy into Macedonia, appointing him to call at Corinth by the way, and
intends himself to stay at Ephesus, until he should come thither again to him,
1 Cor. 16.10, 11. He charge the Corinthians to Conduct him forth in Peace,
that he might come to him, for he looked for him with the Brethren. It Is most
likely then, he returned from Macedonia to Ephesus, unto Paul. The disturbance
there, occasioned Paul's departure before the time he had fixed, 1 Cor. 16.8.
And so he sets for Macedonia, as he intended, 1 Cor. 16.5. Acts 20.1.

At his departure from Ephesus, he leaves Timothy there behind, not as a
Resident, but in his* absence to supply the present Necessity, 1 Timothy 1.3, 4.
until he returned again, which he intended shortly to do, 1 Timothy 2.3, 14.

2. Nothing can be concluded from Luke's silence in this point: for it is
certain that he does not mention all the Journeys either of Paul or Timothy, In
Acts 20.1, 2. he says that Paul departed from Ephesus to go into Macedonia,
but speaks nothing of his stay at Troas, which though but short, was not without
some Success: Yet this Omission of Luke, 2 Cor. 2.12, 13. does supply.

Where does Luke mention Paul's preaching the Gospel in Illiricum, which we are
sure he did, before his Imprisonment at Rome, Romans 15.19. Nor does he mention
his preaching in Arabia, which is spoken of in Gal. 1.17.

Nor does Luke mention Timothy's Journey to the Thessalonians, to confirm them
in the Faith. In Acts 17.13, 14. we find him at Berea with Paul and Silas, who
were driven from Thessalonica by Persecution. Paul experts him speedily at
Athens, verse. 15. And we hear no more of him till Paul came to Corinth. Acts
18.15. But what is omitted by Luke, is mentioned by Paul, in 1 These. 3.1, 2.
(viz.) That Timothy was sent to Thessalonica, while Paul staid at Athens.

Now because I find Timothy in Berea, a Town of Macedonia, Acts 17.13, 14. and
sometime after coming from Macedonia, to Corinth, Acts 18.5. Shall I therefore
conclude that he was in Berea all that time? When I find Paul expecting him in
Athens, and sending him from thence to Thessalonica, between those times, as is
mentioned by himself in 1 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. With as much reason may the Rector
conclude, that because he finds Timothy in Macedonia, Acts 19.21, 22. And there
again about half a year after, Acts 20.4. That therefore he was not out of
Macedonia in all that time; Though we find the Apostle expecting him at Ephesus,
1 Cor, 16.10, 11. And leaving him there, 1 Timothy 1.3. when he went into
Macedonia. He may as rationally affirm, That the first Epistle to the
Thessalonians was written after Paul's Imprisonment at Rome, (which all
acknowledge to be written before) because it mentions a Journey of Timothy's to
Thessalonica, which Luke, in the History of the Acts of the Apostles, takes no
notice of.

As the Epistle to the Corinthians, Romans, and Thessalonians, supply some
Passages in the Travels of Paul and Timothy, omitted by Luke in the Acts of the
Apostles, even so does the first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 1.3, supply what is
omitted in Acts 20.

It is usual in all Histories, for one Author to supply It what is omitted by
another: And in Scripture-History, what is omitted in the Books of Kings, is
inserted in the Chronicles, which are therefore called (...), Things omitted,
by the Lxx. What Is omitted by one Evangelist, is reported by another.

So what is omitted by Luke, is mentioned by the Apostle to Timothy, to wit,
That he besought him to stay at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1.3. Luke no where mentions
Titus, Paul's* Companion, whom the Apostle so often mentions in his Epistles.

Paul, after his Release from his first Imprisonment at Rome, (continues our
Author) went back to visit the Eastern Churches, P. 87.
as he intended, Phil. 1.25, 26. and 2.24. Philem. 22. Heb. 13.23. He went from
Italy to Crete, and so to Judea. In his passage by Crete (which was his way by
Sea to Judea) he planted a Church there: For no other time can be assigned for
it but this.

All this is confidently affirmed, after the Rector's usual way. But,

1. Here is no express proof that he visited the Church of Ephesus, after his
Imprisonment at Rome. He might visit the Philippians, Colossians, and the
Churches of Judea, without ever seeing Ephesus, as he had positively said he
should not, Acts 20.25.

2. It is not certain whether he visited the Philippians and Colossians, after
his Imprisonment at Rome, for he does not positively promise it. He seems
uncertain what would become of him, Phil. 2.23, 24. He had some hopes of seeing
them, but was not certain, Philem. 22. Nay, had he passed a Promise of seeing
them again, it does not necessarily follow he did see them. Many things might
happen to divert his Intentions* as it happened with respect to the Promise he
made of Visiting the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1.15, 16, 17.

3. The Learned Dr. Lightfoot assigns another time Vol. 1. p. 309.
for Paul's visiting of Crete, and that was when he returned from Macedonia to
Greece, Acts 20. 2. And then he left Titus there, Tit. 1.5. thinking that he
should presently after a little stay in Greece, have set toward Jerusalem; As
he was about to fall into Syria, the Jews laid wait for him, which made him to
return through Macedonia, Acts 20.3. About that time, as Dr. Lightfoot
conceives, he writ the Epistle to Titus, in which he calls him to Nicopolis,
where he intended to winter, Tit. 3.12. It is certain he wintered in those
Parts, for the Spring following he sails into Asia, Acts 20.6. He had some
thoughts of wintering in Corinth, 1 Cor. 16.6. But It seems, altering his
Resolution, he determined to winter in Nicopolis a City in Epirus, not very far
distant from Corinth. Titus, according to appointment, came to him, and was
sent by him to Corinth, to hasten the Collection for the Saints in Judea, 2
Cor. 8.16, 17.

We do not deny but St. Paul might go into Spain, and perhaps to Britain also,
as some affirm, but no Man ever affirmed so palpable an untruth, as that all
the Fathers should say so, before this man, whose assertions are so crude and
indigested, P. 90.
that it would require a just Volume to make a Collection of them.

He would make Jerome say, That it was decreed in the Apostles time, that one
elected out of the Presbyters (who before Governed the Church in common) was
set over the rest, P. 91, 92.
and that the Decree was occasioned by the Corinthian Schism.

Here he abuses Jerome and his Reader, for Rerom no where says, that the
superiority of Bishops was decreed in the Apostles time, Jerome proves the
Identity of Bishops and Presbyters not only from the Epistles of Paul, but from
the Epistle of John, the last of the Apostles. Then he adds, quod autem postea,
etc. That afterward one was chosen, and set over the rest, as a Remedy against
Schism.

Jerome's afterward must refer to the Writing of John's Epistle, and so his
meaning must be, that after the Apostles time this Decree was made, for he
proves that Presbyter s and Bishops were the sam in the Apostles time.

It Is true, he alludes to the Corinthian Schism, but it is evident, That Paul's
Epistles to the Church of Corinth contain no such Remedy against Schism, as the
Superiority of Bishops. The Corinthian Schism was a most proper occasion for
the Institution of Bishops, if they were the aptest remedy against Schism. But
there is not a word of it in Paul's Epistles to that Church; Nor in Clemens's
his Epistle written long after. What he says of Ignatius agreeing with Jerome
in his account of Bishops, we have considered before.

The Rector adds, That the Apostle was as much concerned at the Corinthian
Schism, as any other, and that seeing Divisions arising every where, (not only
at Corinth) he weighed the matter well, and asked counsel of God, what he
should do. And in the end concluded, to set one Presbyter over the rest, to
prevent the mischief of Schism, God so appointing it, 1 Timothy 1.18.

1. Doubtless the Apostle was concerned at the Corinthian Schism, as it was a
dishonor to God and Religion, but not so much as it was against him and his
authority, which is the reason Mr. G. assigns: He dare not say, he appointed
the remedy at this time, he knew that would be too gross: But he cunningly
says, in the end he concluded to set up one Presbyter over the rest, and
refers us to 1 Timothy 1.18.

The first Epistle to the Corinthians which mentions the Schisms there, was
written about the year of Christ 55, as Dr. Lightfoot calculates Vol. 1. p. 299.
The first Epistle to Timothy was written about the year 69, according to the
Rector's Hypothesis. So that he makes the Apostle to provide the Remedy about
fourteen years after the Disease. Was the Apostle weighing the matter all those
years? Or did he ask Counsel of God, and was not heard? Or did he neglect
Consulting God, till about the time he wrote to Timothy?

2. Had not Paul weighed the matter of Schism, and consulted God, when he wrote
to the Corinthians? Doubtless he had: If so, we may expect a Remedy against
Schism, in those Epistles; but there is no mention of the Superiority of
Bishops, in either of those Epistles; therefore that is not the Remedy against
Schism.

3. The Church of Ephesus was in danger of being broken with Schisms, when the
Apostle left them without any thoughts of seeing them any more, Acts 20.25.
What Remedy does he provide? Not a Superior Bishop, but he commits the Flock
in common to the Presbyters, Acts 20.17, 28. Perhaps the Rector will say he had
not weighed the matter well at this time, nor consulted God in the case. For
our parts we are satisfied he was infallibly guided by the Spirit of God, in
all the Rules of Government he left the Church, and as such we receive them.

He has several Pages to prove that Paul was twice imprisoned at Rome: It is
very probable he was. Eusebius says, There was a Tradition in his days, of his
being Acquitted the first time, and that he went to several places preaching
the Gospel; and coming to Rome the second time, he ended his Days with a
blessed Martyrdom Eccles. Hist. 11, 21.
. Several Ancient W^iters speak t^ ^^e same purpose. But our Author will prove
it by Sc^^pture; nay, he will demonstrate it beyond all farther Controversy.

This Gentleman is singular at Demonstrations; but let us see the strength of
them.

1. Paul left Trophimus at Miletus sick, P. 95.
2 Timothy 4.20. This was not when he met the Ephesian Elders; for then he went
with him to Jerusalem, Acts 21.29.

It Is most likely that he touched at Miletus, when he returned from Jerusalem
in Bonds to Rome; it is evident he intended to sail by the Coasts of Asia, Acts
27.2. and might touch at Miletus (which was a part of those Asian Coasts) though
Luke does not mention it. Or if Miletum. were a City of Crete, as Heylin
thinks, he might leave him there when he touched upon those Coasts, as he
sailed for Rome, Acts 27.7, 8.

But if this Miletum be Malta (anciently Melita)as Grotius and Beza affirm,
it is certain Paul was there in his Voyage from Judea to Rome, Acts 28.1. and
might leave Trophimus sick behind him, as he says he did, 2 Timothy 4.20.

2. It is pretty plain, P. 96.
Paul was once released from Prison, Heb. 13.24. says the Rector.

I thought a Demonstration, which he promised us, made things very plain.

3. That which will put the matter out of all question, is, the vast difference
between that his Imprisonment, in Acts 28. and that in the second Epistle to
Timothy.

He was in little or no danger, but held Libera Custodia, in his first
Confinement; but in his second, he was a close Prisoner, in Chains, 2 Timothy
1.16. Expected no Deliverance, P. 98.
2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8.

1. He was in some danger in his first Imprisonment, Phil, 2.23.

2. And bound with a Chain, Acts 28.20.

3. He mentions his Deliverance, that he might preach the Gospel to the
Gentiles, 2 Timothy 4.17.

Thus we have seen the Invalidity of his Demonstrations, as he calls them; and
how improbable his Conjectures are, (which pass for Demonstrations with him)
that the first Epistle to Timothy was written after the Congress at Miletus,
and after Paul's Imprisonment at Rome.

For the farther satisfaction of the Impartial Reader, I will vindicate the
Ancient Chronologers, and prove that the first Epistle to Timothy was written
before Paul's first Imprisonment at Rome, and consequently before that Meeting
at Miletus, in which the Apostle commits the Government of the Church of
Ephesus to the Presbyters thereof, and not to Timothy their pretended Bishop;
and if he was no Bishop when that Epistle was written, he was none at all. If
that Epistle was writ before the Meeting at Miletus, all the Arguments from
that Epistle to prove him Bishop of Ephesus, are impertinent: For the
Government of that Church was committed to the Presbyters in common, and not to
Timothy who was an Evangelist, and not the fixed ordinary Governor of any one
Church, Acts 20.17, 28. 2 Timothy 4, 5.

That Paul left Timothy at Ephesus, and wrote his First Epistle to him, before
his Imprisonment at Rome, appears,

1. From his Journey to Macedonia, mentioned 1 Timothy 1.3. which can be no other
than that in Acts 20. as most of the Learned agree, and as is proved already.

2. From his Excommunicating Alexander the Copper-Smith, 1 Timothy 1.20. who is
the same Person that is mentioned Acts 19.33 Vid. Grot. in 1 Timothy 1.20. and
Estium, and Lightfoot, Vol. 1. p. 306.
.

This Excommunication was not long after his Apostasy, as we may rationally
suppose, and so is mentioned as a late thing.

3. That place in 1 Timothy 3.14, 15. where the Apostle says, That he hopes to
come shortly unto Timothy, agrees well with the time of his stay in Macedonia
and Greece, mentioned in Acts 20.1, 2. He designed to stay in Ephesus until
Pentecost, 1 Cor. 16.8. but was driven away sooner by the Tumult there, Acts
20.1. and spent very near a whole Year in Macedonia, Greece, and those parts,
and returned for Asia after Easter in the following Year, Acts 20.6. having
Wintered in Nicopolis, Tit. 3.12. Sometime this Year, while he was in
Macedonia, or the parts thereabouts, he writes his first Epistle to Timothy,
telling him, He designed to be shortly with him, 1 Timothy 3.14. Accordingly, not
long afterward, he Sailed for Asia, and came to Miletus, the time being far
spent, that he could not conveniently go to Ephesus, Acts 20.15, 16.

Obj. But Timothy was with Paul in Macedonia, when he set out for Asia, Acts
20.4, How comes he to leave Ephesus, seeing the Apostle desired him to stay
there till he came?

Answ. The Learned Dr. Lightfoot conceives it very probable, That Paul
designing to have Sailed for Syria, Acts 20.3. came near to Timothy, and there
discovering the danger that was laid in his way by the Jews, which also might
have involved Timothy, he brought him away back again with him, and so both
returned again into Macedonia, and when Winter was over, they set for Asia
again Lightf. Vol. 1. p. 312.
.

4. Tiie First Epistle to Timothy must be Written before Paul's first
Imprisonment, because the Second Epistle was Written in his first Bonds, as the
Famous Dr. Lightfoot affirms Lightf. Vol. 1. p. 324.
; and so does the Learned Dr. Hammond Ham. in 2 Timothy
, a Zealous Assertor of Episcopacy, to whose Opinion I Subscribe for these
Reasons;

1. When the Second Epistle was written to Timothy, he was a Young Man;
therefore Paul bids him flee youthful lusls, 2 Timothy 2.22. For the same reason
he says, 1 Timothy 4.12. Let no Man despise thy Youth. See 1 Cor. 16.11.

Suppose Timothy was about 24 or 25 Years old when Paul took him into the
Ministry, Acts 16.34. which was about the Year of Christ, LI. Lightf. Vol. 1.
p. 294.
; from this time to Paul's Second Bonds and Martyrdom, (which happened A. D.
LXX. Eusebius.
, or LXVIII. say others Lightf.
) there passed near XX Years; so that by the lowest Computation, Timothy must
be above XL. when the Apostle was under his Second Confinement at Rome. It is
not likely the Apostle should caution him against youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22.
at three or four and forty Years old, especially being a sickly man, 1 Timothy
1.23.

Therefore he wrote this Second Epistle to Timothy, many Years before his last
Confinement, i. e. in his first Bonds, when Timothy was indeed a young Man,
about 33, or 34, or perhaps Younger, not much Elder than when he wrote his
first Epistle to him, in which he says, let no man despise thy youth, 1 Timothy
4.12. Or when he sent his First Epistle to the Corinthians (which all confess
to be Penned before his first Bonds) that charge them not to despise him for
the same Reason, 1 Cor. 16.11 Vid. Pise and Grot. in Loc.
.

For the same Reason he calls him Son, 1 Timothy 1.2.18. 2 Timothy 2.1.

2. Paul sends for Timothy to Rome, 2 Timothy 4.9. His Letter finds him some where
near Ephesus, 2 Timothy 4.19. and 1.16, 18. and 4.13. Accordingly Timothy came to
Rome, and it does not appear that he came thither before this time that he was
sent for. The last mention we have of him in the Acts is, That he accompanies
Paul into Asia, Acts 20.4. We read nothing of him in Paul's Voyage to Rome,
therefore it is most likely, he parted with Paul at Miletus, and staid among the
Asian Churches, until he was sent for by Paul to Rome. After his coming
thither, the Epistle to the Philippians, Colossians, and Philemon, were
written, for his Name is Prefixed to them, as well as Paul's: Now these
Epistles were written in his First Bonds at Rome, Phil. 1.26. and 2.23, 24.
Philemon. 22. This will not be denied: therefore the Second Epistle to Timothy
was written in his first Bonds, though sometime before these.

3. Timothy is desired to bring Mark with him to Rome, 2 Timothy 4.11. Accordingly
he went to Rome, and was with Paul at Rome, when he wrote his Epistles to the
Colossians and to Philemon, Col. 4.10. Philem. 24. which Epistles were
undoubtedly written in his first Bonds. It cannot be pretended that Mark went
with Paul to Rome; there is not the least mention of him, either in Scripture,
or any other approved Author, as Paul's Companion to Rome. He was sent for in
this Second Epistle to Timothy, to come along with him to Rome, and it is
certain he was with Paul in his first Bonds.

4. He mentions, in 2 Timothy 3.11. his Sufferings which befell him at Ieonium, at
Lystra and Antioch, of which we have an account in Acts 14. Now this
Persecution happened about the Year of Christ, 49, or 50 Lightf. Vol. 1. p. 291.
Paul's Second Imprisonment at Rome, was in the Year of Christ 68, or as
others, 69, which was the Year in which he wrote this Epistle, according to
this new Hypothesis: So that his Persecutions at Antioch, Lyconium, and Lystra,
were near 20 years before his last Imprisonment at Rome. Now it is not likely
that the Apostle would mention an Event so long past, when there were* other
latter Sufferings of his that were much fresher in his Memory.

Therefore we may rather think, that he mentions his Sufferings at Antioch,
etc. as a late thing, not very many Yeats past, and if so, this Second Epistle
was written much earlier than is pretended.

5. The Epistle to the Ephesians was written in Paul's first Bonds, (as Mr. G.
confesses, p. 86, 87.) and was sent by Tychicus, Ephesians. 6.21. who was also the
Bearer of the Epistle to the Colossians, Col. 4.7. which was written at the
same time with that to Ephesus, as he observes, p. 87. Tychicus had gone along
with Paul for Rome, Acts 20.5. This sending of Tychicus to Ephesus is mentioned
in 2 Timothy 4.12. Therefore this Second Epistle to Timothy, which mentions this
Journey of Tychicus to Ephesus, was written about the same time.

6. It is agreed by all, That Paul was not set at Liberty in his last
Imprisonment at Rome, but he was delivered from the Confinement mentioned in
the Second Epistle to Tim. Chap. 4.17. Therefore that Epistle was not written
in his last Bonds. He was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion, that all the
Gentiles might hear the Gospel. That is, that he might go about, and preach the
Gospel to many Nations*

This is agreeable to the account that the Fathers give of his Preaching the
Gospel to several Nations after his Imprisonment. Hence it is evident, says
Estius Est. in Loc.
That this Epistle was not written in Paul 's Last Bonds.

7. It is undeniable that Luke accompanied Paul to Rome, Acts 27. and 28. He
includes himself all along in the Narrative he gives of their dangerous Voyage
to Rome, and speaks in the first Person plural, Chap. 28.16. When we came to
Rome. He was at Rome with Paul when he wrote the Epistle to the Colossians,
which was written in his First Bonds, as is confessed, Col. 4.14. And so he was
when Paul sent the Second Epistle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.11. Therefore this
Epistle was Penned during his First Bonds.

8. He mentions his Cloak, etc. which he left at Troas with Carpus, 2 Timothy
4.13. These were left there, as it seems, as he was going among his Nation in
Judea, Acts 20.16. where he had no occasion for his Roman Habit, which might
have proved inconvenient in Judea, among his own Contrymen, who were too
much prejudiced against him already, Acts 21.21. and to whom he was desirous to
render himself acceptable by all Lawful Compliances, Acts 21.26. But now he was
at Rome, he had need of his Roman Garb, which was the Pallium, or Cloak. There
is no Evidence of his passing by Troas to Rome, in his last Journey thither,
nor can any reason be given why he should leave his Cloak there, as he went to
Rome and Roman Colonies: but it looks Rational enough that he should do so,
when he was going into Judea, and that he should send for it in his first
Imprisonment at Rome, whither he was carried Prisoner from Judea. And therefore
this Second Epistle was Written in his first Bonds.

9. It should seem he was under a favorable Confinement, when he writ the
Second Epistle to Timothy, for he mentions only one Chain, 2 Timothy 1.16. and so
does Luke, in Acts 28.20. which speaks of his first and favorable Confinement,
Ephesians. 6.20. In his Second Imprisonment he was more severely handled, as all
agree. Now such as were in strict Custody were bound with two Chains, Act.
12.6. Hence it should seem to follow, that this Second Epistle to Timothy,
which speaks but of one Chain, was Written in Paul's First Imprisonment, which
was more favorable than the Second.

10. Demas was with Paul at Rome, in his First Imprisonment, Col. 4.14. but the
tediousness of Paul's Confinement, and the love of this present world, which is
inconsistent with patient Suffering, tempted him to forsake the Apostle, 2 Timothy
4.10. We read nothing of his being there in his Second Imprisonment, but we are
sure he was there in his first Imprisonment, and that he left him in his Bonds,
2 Timothy 4.10. which we may rationally conclude were his first Bonds.

I will not mention Paul's leaving Trophimus at Miletus sick, 2 Timothy 4.20.
which might well be when he went in Bonds from Judea to Rome, as we observed
before.

Nor will I insist upon Erastus abiding at Corinth, 2 Timothy 4.20. Romans 16.23.
Acts 19.22. when Paul sent for Mark from thence unto him. That he was at
Corinth when Paul wrote his Second Epistle thither, may be gathered from 2 Cor.
8.19 Vid. Lightf. Vol. 1. p. 311.
. who was chosen of the Churches to travel -- Mark was chosen by the Church of
Jerusalera, Acts 12.25. and by the Church at Antioch, Acts 13.5. It Is true,
Paul had taken some distaste at Mark; Acts 15.39. but he was reconciled to him
again, as appears from 2 Timothy 4.20. We have proved already, that Mark was sent
for in Paul's First Imprisonment, therefore his Reason that Erastus abode at
Corinth, to supply Mark's Absence, refers to the same time.

These Reasons put together, may be sufficient to satisfy any unbiased Man
(for nothing will convince Prejudiced and Interessed Persons) that the Second
Epistle to Timothy was Written in Paul's first Bonds, and therefore his First
Epistle must be written before his First Bonds, when he was in Macedonia, or
thereabouts, 1 Timothy 1.3. Acts 20.1, 2. Unless any will say, That his Second
Epistle was Written before the First.

It is remarkable that this Epistle has more Characters, and all concurring, of
the Time in which it was written, than any one of Paul's Epistles, the Holy
Ghost so ordering the Matter, for the Conviction of such as are willing to
receive the Truth.

There is one Passage in this Epistle, which has occasioned some Doubt about
the time of it, viz. 2 Timothy 4.6. I am now ready to be offered, and the time of
my departure is at hand. Which some have understood of his approaching
Martyrdom. (...), I am prepared, or ready for death* as the Sacrifices were for
Offering: this seems to respect his Martyrdom as near at hand.

But if we compare this with other Scriptures, it will be evident that he
speaks not of an approaching Martyrdom, but that he was grown old, and worn
with Travels and hard Labor, and could not now last long: And besides all
this, in Bonds at present, and so in continual danger.

Thus Lightfoot, Hammond, and others understand the place, and that this is the
meaning of it will further appear:

1. He uses the same Words in the Epistle to the Philippians, which was
written in his first bonds, Phil. 2.17. (...), if I be offered upon the
Sacrifice of your Faith. 2. He speaks the same thing in different Expressions
some Years before, Acts 21.13. I am ready to dye at Jerusalem. 1 Cor. 4.9. God
has set us forth to be as it were, (...), appointed to death. 1 Cor. 15.31. I
dye daily. So in 2 Cor. 4.11. (...), we are always delivered unto death. 3.
That a sudden Martyrdom is not intended in 2 Timothy 4.6. appears from v. 17, 18.
I was delivered -- and the Lord shall deliver me. Much like that in 2 Cor.
1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; in whom we
trust that He will yet deliver us. 4. Suppose the words should imply some
apprehensions of his approaching Death; that he had long before, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9.
We despaired even of life, but had the sentence of death in our selves. 5. The
Apostle was now grown aged, as is evident in the Epistle to Philemon, Written
in his first Bonds, Philem. v. 9.22. and a Prisoner, not knowing how God would
dispose of him, Phil. 2.23. As he was aged he lived in constant expectations of
Death; as he was a Prisoner, in danger of being made a Sacrifice, he could not
but think his dissolution was approaching, 2 Cor. 5.2, 3, 4. -- Acts 20.23.
Being stricken in Years, and wasted with indefatigable Labors, and hard
Sufferings, and in Expectation of the Fiery Trial, he might well say he had
finished his course, 2 Timothy 4.7.

But yet he did not expect to dye very suddenly, for he sends a Letter from
Rome to Timothy, at, or near Ephesus, to desire him to come to him, before
Winter, 2 Timothy 4.21. It would require a considerable time to send a Letter from
Rome to Ephesus, and for Timothy to return from Ephesus to Rome, and to take
Mark with him, who it should seem was at Corinth: all this could not be done
under three or four Months, and perhaps a longer time, considering the several
Winds that were necessary for such a Voyage.

Had Paul been under a Sentence of Death at this time, he could not have made
an appointment for Timothy to come unto him at a distant time. Prisoners in
constant Expectations of Death, do not use to make appointments for a remote
Time to come.

Thus we have Vindicated the Ancient and Received Opinion, That the First
Epistle to Timothy was Written before Paul's Imprisonment at Rome, and have
also proved that the Second Epistle to him was Written in his First Bonds; and
therefore the Journey to Macedonia mentioned in 1 Timothy 1.3. must be that in
Acts 20.1, 2.

Our Argument then holds good, That Timothy was no Bishop of Ephesus, because
he was no Bishop there when the First Epistle was Written to him, for Paul
commits the whole Government of the Church of Ephesus unto the Presbyters of
it, after the Writing of that Epistle, and at a time when Timothy was present,
or not far off. Acts 20.4.17, 18 -- 28. And when the Apostle knew he should
never see their faces more, Acts 20.25.

To this last Scripture the Rector opposes two Things.

1. He Corrects the Translation, and says it should be rendered -- I know that
ye shall no more see my face all of you; P. 107.
-- it is in no wise probable that all of them saw his face any more, Death, and
other Casualties would doubtless hinder it.

The Elders, to whom he spoke those Words, we may presume understood Paul's
meaning a little better than the Rector. They all wept sore, and sorrow'd most
of all for the Words which he spoke, that they should see his Face no more,
Acts 20.37, 38. The Words All of you are here omitted, which spoils the
Parson's gloss. It cannot be imagined they would all have wept so passionately,
had they expected to have seen him again. It Is Pity but our Critical Author had
been there to explain Paul's Words, and to mitigate their ill grounded sorrow,
by telling them, they should see his Face again, tho perhaps some of them might
Dye before he came again. But he himself is sensible of the impertinency of
this new Criticism, and therefore adds that he will not insist on it.

2. When Paul says, P. 108.
he knew they should see his Face no more, it is to be understood of a
conjectural Knowledge only, as he says.

1. It is enough to confirm our Argument, that he thought he should see their
Faces no more, it is undeniable he had no Hopes of seeing them again, and would
not be wanting to settle the Government of this Church at this Time: And it is
as undeniable, he settled the Government in the Presbyters, and not in a
Diocesan Bishop, Acts 20.17, 28.

The Assertors of Episcopacy, and among others, Mr. G. says, That the Apostles
settled the Government by Bishops, when they were leaving the Churches, and
could not oversee them any longer: This was the Case here. The Apostle is
leaving the Church of Ephesus, without any thoughts of seeing it again, and at
this Time commits the Government of the Church to the Presbyters. Nor was this
Constitution Temporary or Prudential, but Divine, Acts 20.17, 28. It was an
appointment of the Holy Ghost, Take heed to your selves and the stock, says
the Apostle, over which the Holy Ghost made you Bishops, to feed the Church of
God, but of this we have spoken before.

2. Paul does not use to express himself so positively, when he speaks
conjecturally. It would look like rashness, if not worse, in any of us, to say
positively, I know I shall never see such a Place, or People, and afterward to
excuse it, by saying it was only a conjectural Knowledge. The Holy Apostle did
not use Lightness in his Speech, 2 Cor. 1.17, 18. he says in Acts 20.29. I
know that grievous Wolves shall enter in among you. Was this also a conjectural
Knowledge? If this was a certain Knowledge, as it is evident by the Event, it
was, why should we not understand, ver. 25. of a certain Knowledge?

3. In the Form of Ordaining Priests, the Words are thus rendered. And now
behold, I am sure, that henceforth yea all (through whom I have gone Preaching
the Kingdom of God) shall see my Face no more Form of Ordaining Pr. Land. Edit.
for Bl. Pawlet, 1684.
.

4. It has not been yet proved that Paul was at Ephesus after this Time. One
would expect a very clear Proof that he was afterward there, from those that
dare Charge the Apostle with rashness in his Expressions. All the Proof we have
is but a qualified Promise of visiting Macedonia and Coloss again, Phil. 2.24.
Philem. 22.

1. But what is this to Ephesus? Here is not a Promise of seeing the Church of
Ephesus again. It will be said it is likely he did, I say, it is more likely he
did not, because he himself said, he knew he should never see them again.

2. He does not positively Promise to see Macedonia and Coloss again, Phil.
2.24. Philem. 22. I trust, etc. Here he speaks more doubtfully and not so
positively as in Acts 20.25. I know, etc. This Gentleman's way of arguing is
very singular, when the Apostle speaks doubtfully, I trust, he is sure he
performed: But when he speaks positively, I know, he is sure he was mistaken.
He expounds his Conjectural Expressions for Absolute, and his Absolute
Expressions for Conjectural.

I overlook his confident Triumphs, and weak Reflections with which he stuffs
the concluding Pages of this Chapter, as having nothing of Argument in them,
and therefore not worthy my Notice.

I will follow him to his next Chapter, which Treats.

CHAP. V. Of Evangelists. Whether they were fixed? Neg. Acts 21.8. considered.
Timothy and Titus unfixed. Hilarious his account of Evangelists. Eusebius's
Testimony vindicated. Mark no fixed Evangelists Chrysostom's account of
Evangelists, agreeing with Eusebius.
THis Species of Church Officers, says he, P. 113.
is spoken of but thrice in the Holy Scriptures, Acts 21.8. Ephesians. 4.11. 2 Timothy
4.5.

The Office and Work are spoken of in many Places, but the Name only in three
Places. It is agreed by the Learned, that those who are called the Apostles
Fellow-workers, and were sent by them as their Messengers to the Churches to
supply their Absence, were Evangelists: This is acknowledged by Mr. G. P. 118.
where he speaks of Itinerant Evangelists.

We agree with him, P. 113.
That Evangelists were in Dignity and Power next to Prophets, and above all
other Church Officers.

He proceeds to give us a Description of an Evangelist, Ibid.
It appears, says he, from 2 Timothy 4.5. that an Evangelist was one entrusted by
the Apostles with the Government of some Church. That Timothy was an
Evangelist, and that Titus therefore was another Evangelist. For it has been
demonstrated already ( Cap. 2.) that all the Supreme Powers of Ecclesiastical
Government were committed to them in their respective Churches.

The meaning of this Paragraph is, that Evangelists are Diocesan Bishops, for
he makes Timothy the Evangelist, that is, the Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus the
Evangelist or Bishop of Crete. It is well he owns Timothy and Titus to be
Evangelists, it is as much as we desire. I, but Evangelists and Bishops are the
same. To which I Answer.

1. Few or none of his Judicious Brethren will subscribe to this new Notion of
Evangelists, by which he evidently gives up the whole Cause. When he happens
now and then to Answer the Title of his Book (which is Tentamen Novum) by
advancing some New Notion, he weakly betrays the Cause he pretends strongly to
defend.

2. He owns Evangelists to be a Species of Church Officers distinct from
Pastors and Teachers according to Ephesians. 4.11. and consequently he denies the
Diocesan Bishops to be the Pastors of their respective Churches. I doubt he has
forgot the Prayers of the Church, in which the Bishops are called the Pastors
of the Flock The Prayer in the Ember Weeks.
.

If he say they are both Pastors and Evangelists, he confounds those Officers
whom the Apostle distinguishes.

The Presbyters are the Pastors of the Flock, that is the ordinary and settled
Rulers of it. Acts 17.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. ( Rev. 2.27.) Let them have this Power
which the Holy Ghost has given them, as the proper Bishops of the Flock, and
when he has proved Evangelists to be Diocesan Bishops, we will readily receive
them.

3. Dr. Hammond says, that the Pastors (not the Evangelists) in Ephesians. 4.11.
were the Bishops that governed particular Charges.

4. I have fully answered his Arguments by which he pretends to demonstrate
that Timothy and Titus were Bishops of Ephesus and Crete.

He advances a new Order of Evangelists, P. 114. 115.
who were the fixed Governors of some Cities and the Countries Adjacent: And
cannot altogether allow their Notion, who say an Evangelist, was an unsettled
Church Officer that went from Place to Place to finish the Churches begun by
the Apostles, and particularly to ordain Elders among them: And yet he grants
that an Evangelist, as Ravanellus expresses it, Ordained Elders Oppidatim, in
every Town or Village.

1. He owns that Evangelists might Ordain in every Town, and why not in every
City? Ravanellus explains his Oppidatim, by Tit. 1.5. (...), in every City: But
he wilfully overlooks that, for he knew that there were many Cities in Crete,
and according to the Rule that every City must have a Bishop, Titus must be
Archbishop of Crete: And the sole Power of Ordination being in Titus, it would
naturally follow, that none but Archbishops can Ordain. Andrew Cretentis calls
him Archbishop, and says, he had twelve Bishops under him.

2. He cannot altogether allow Evangelists to be unsettled Officers, It seems he
does in part allow it, P. 115.
it is too bright a Truth to be denied, but he endeavors to obscure it what he
can, and would fain persuade his Reader, that Evangelists were fixed Officers:
But let us hear his Proof.

Philip was a fixed Evangelist, because Luke leaves him at Caesarea, Acts 8.40.
And we find him there almost twenty Years after, having a House and a settled
Family, Acts 21.8.

1. When he has proved, that Philip resided at Caesarea, as the settled Bishop
of that Church, and that he was no where else all those Years he may talk of a
fixed Evangelist.

2. May not an unsettled Officer have a settled Family? Which he may Visit at
Times? Paul continued two Years at Ephesus, Acts 19.10. a Year and a half at
Corinth, Acts 18.11. two Years in his own hired House at Rome, Acts 28.30. was
he therefore a settled or fixed Apostle?

3. As much as we have of the History of Philip bespeaks him an unsettled
Officer. We find him in Samaria, Acts 8.12. with the Ethiopian Eunuch, in the
way from Jerusalem unto Gaza, Acts 8.26. at Asotus, and Preaching in all the
Cities, till he came to Caesarea, Acts 8.40. which perhaps might be his
Birthplace, or he might Marry there, which is more likely, because we read of
Four Daughters he had, which did Prophecy, Acts 21.9. He was an Evangelist
before he came to Caesarea J. Pears. Lect. in Act v.. 1. and 5. p. 66. 68.
, for he Preached up and down by Virtue of an extraordinary Call, Acts 8.6, 7,
26, 39. and it is not to be imagined he laid aside the Office of an Evangelist
after his Marriage: And therefore Luke testifies concerning him, that although
he was Married, and had a settled Family, he was an Evangelist, an unsettled
extraordinary Officer still, Acts 21.8, 9, 10. He could not produce any Ancient
Author that makes him Bishop of Caesarea. Eusebius says he dyed at Hierapolis
Eusebius. Hist. III. 25. Edit. Lovan. 1569.
.

His other Proof from Timothy and Titus being fixed or settled Evangelists, we
considered before: And it is Petitio Principii.

I will add this.

1. All that he says to prove them fixed Officers of Ephesus and Crete,
depends upon his Supposition that the Epistles to them were Written after Paul's
first Bonds at Rome, which I have disproved with respect to the first Epistle
to Timothy, and it is confessed by all that this Epistle to Timothy, and the
Epistle to Titus were Written about the same Time. The Epistle to Titus was
Written, when Paul was in Macedonia designing to Winter in Nicopolis, Tit.
3.12, He Promises to send Tychicus or Artemas unto Titus, the former of these
two was with Paul in Macedonia, and afterward accompanied him into Asia, Acts
20.4. Therefore this Epistle was Written before Paul's first Imprisonment at
Rome.

2. Timothy and Titus were no resident Evangelists of Ephesus and Crete, for
the Apostle calls them both away: He calls Titus to Nicopolis from Crete, Tit.
3.12. which is an evidence he was to make but a short stay there, to set in
Order the Things that were wanting, Tit. 1.5. Which when he had done, he must
attend the Apostle, as he had done before: Accordingly he went to Paul to
Nicopolis, and was his Companion and Messenger to several Churches, and at last
is sent by him to Dalmatia, 2 Timothy 4.10. And we hear no more of him. It cannot
be made to appear that ever he returned more to Crete.

The Apostle calls Timothy away from Ephesus to Rome, 2 Timothy 4.9. for the same
Reason that he sends for Mark, both being profitable to him for the Ministry,
having none with him but Luke, v. 10, 11. accordingly Timothy came to him, and
he promises to send him to Macedonia, and not to Ephesus, Phil. 2.19. But it
should seem he could not go as soon as he intended, being made a Prisoner at
Rome: When he was set at Liberty he accompanied the Apostle to Judea, or
designed so to do, Heb. 13.23.

From all which it appears, that they were Evangelists in a proper Sense, that
is, extraordinary and unsettled Church Officers who assisted the Apostles in
their Ministry. and were their Messengers to the Churches to establish, settle
and build them up as they had Directions from the Apostles, having Power to
ordain Elders, and to put forth other Acts of Government as occasion was
offered. All this is evident from the Powers committed to Timothy and Titus.
which doubtless were the same in other Churches, as in Ephesus and Crete, for
they were Evangelists as much in one Place as in another: And the Power of
Evangelists was the same in all Places.

3. This agrees with the account that Hilarious gives of Evangelists, who are
succeeded by the Deacons, as he thinks; as the Prophets are by the Presbyters,
and the Apostles by the Bishops.

Evangelists, says he, did Evangelize or Preach the Gospel, sine Cathedra,
without a fixed residence.

J. O. quoted Eusebius in his Plea ( P. 18.) to the same purpose, he says of
the Evangelists, Hill. in 4. Ephesians.
That they Preached Christ to Infidels, ordained Pastors, and passed into other
Countries and Nations.

To this Mr. G. Answers, It was not the proper Work of Evangelists to go up and
down Preaching the Gospel.

Eusebius says, They went far from their Houses, did the Work of Evangelists,
and diligently Preached Christ to such as had not as yet heard the Word of
Faith, and delivered to them the Scriptures of the Holy Gospels, ordained other
Pastors, and went into other Countries and Nations.

I have proved out of Paul's Epistles, they were unsettled Officers, and
therefore it was their proper Work to go up and down Preaching the Gospel, and
Eusebius affirms they did so.

But, says he, Eusebius writes, L. 2. Cap. 24. That Mark the Evangelist being
Dead, Annianus (so he writes it for Anianus) entered upon the Administration of
the Church of Alexandria; hence he infers, That Mark was a resident Evangelist,
not roving up and down.

1. He may as well say, that Peter was a resident Apostle, because Eusebius
says, that Linus succeeded him in the Government of the Church of Rome Eccl.
Hist. III. 2.4.
.

2. Mark was no resident Evangelist, he was a Companion of Peter and Paul, and
traveled with them up and down, and was sent by them to several Churches, in
Acts 12.25. we find him with Paul and Barnabas, at Perga in Pamphylia; he left
them and went to Jerusalem, Acts 13.13. he afterward for some time accompanied
Barnabas to Cyprus and other Places, Acts 15.39. We find him after that with
Timothy, or not far from him, and sent for by Paul to assist him in the
Ministry, 2 Timothy 4.11. when he was Prisoner at Rome. We find him there with
Paul, Philem. 24. from whence he sends him to Coloss, Col. 4.10. When Peter
wrote his first Epistle, Mark was with him at Babylon, 1 Pet. 5.13. and yet our
Rector has the Confidence to call him a resident Evangelist.

3. Eusebius calls him Peter's Companion Lib. 2. Cap. 14.15.
, and adds, They say he first passed over into Egypt, and Preached there the
Gospel, which he had written, and planted the first Churches in Alexandria.

Perhaps he might End his Days here in settling this Church, as all the
Evangelists and Apostles must end their Days in some place or other, and in the
Service of some Church; but this could not make either Apostles or Evangelists
resident Officers.

J. O. had said, P. 119.
that Chrysostom agreed with Eusebius, that Evangelists were unfixed
Church Officers. The Rector here exclaims against J. O's insincerity in putting
the Affirmative for the Negative, that is (...) for (...) and leaving out (...).

He further Notes out of Chrysostom, that Timothy and Titus were (...),
employed in one Place, that is, were resident Evangelists, and he tells us he
has employed his Friends to examine all the Editions of Chrysostom in both
Universities, and finds that nothing could lead J. O. into this Error but
Design, and want of Sincerity. St. Chrysostom then must be acknowledged (says
he) on my side, and to have affirmed the Evangelists were fixed and resident
Church-Rulers, and that Timothy and Titus were so.

1. Here is a very severe Charge for a Syllabical Mistake of the Transcriber of
J. O's Copy, who put (...) for (...) which was overlooked in the Errata. I
doubt not but this Candid Gentleman has examined J. O's other Quotations, it is
well he can find no more faults in a Book that contains some hundreds of
Quotations.

2. J. O. did not leave (...) out to serve his Cause, Chrysostom. in Epist. Edit.
Donat. Veron. P. 163.
as Mr. G. falsely affirms, but he transcribed the Passage as he sound it in the
Edition which he had by him, which has not (...).

3. J. O's notion of Evangelists, that they were unsettled Church Officers,
needed neither Eusebius nor Chrysostom's Testimonies to confirm it, for the
History of the Apostles and Evangelists in the Acts and Epistles of Paul, make
it evident that they were such, and Mr. G. himself cannot deny but there were
Itinerant Evangelists, as he calls them, P. 118. and he owns it to be the
general Opinion, which he would rectify by his Notion of fixed Evangelists. J.
O 's Notion of Evangelists being grounded on the Scriptures, and agreeable to
the received Opinion of the Learned, he could be under no Temptation to alter
(...) into (...) in Chrysostom, Especially:

4. Having Chrysostom of his side, without that Alteration, Thus he, (...),
etc. he gave, Thirdly Evangelists who did not go about every where, but
Preached the Gospel as Priscilla and Aquilla. Pastors and Teachers were those
to whose Care the the People were wholly committed. What then, were the Pastors
and Teachers Inferior? Yes, they who were resident and employed only in one
Place, as Timothy and Titus, were altogether Inferior to those that went about
and Evangeliz'd. He speaks a little after of Evangelists who wrote the Gospels.
In this Passage Note.

Chrysostom does not deny, but Evangelists did go about, he only says, they
did not go about (...) every where, as the Apostles did; they moved in a
narrower Orb than the Apostles whose, Messengers and Ministers they were, and
by whose appointment their Motions were guided and limited.

That this is Chrysostoms meaning appears, 1. From the Instance of Aquila and
Priscilla, which he gives, these are Evangelists with Chrysostom: Now these did
remove from one Place to another, from Rome to Corinth, this remove was
occasioned by an Edict of Claudius, Acts 18.1, 2. some time after they removed
with Paul to Ephesus, ver. 18. doubtless by Paul's appointment, as other
Evangelists did. Thus we see Chrysostom's Evangelists did go up and down but
not (...), every where at their own Pleasure, as the Apostles did, who had no
Superiors to direct their Motions, but the Evangelists removed under the
Conduct of the Apostles. The Apostles were immedintely under the Conduct of the
Spirit, and went about every where, whither the Spirit guided them: The
Evangelists were under the Conduct of the Apostles, and went about also, but
only to such Places and Services as the Apostles directed them.

Priscilla a Woman is an Evangelist in Chrysostom See Acts 18.22.
, I hope Mr. G. will not make a settled Church Officer, that is, a Bishop of
her, for an Evangelist and a Bishop is the same with him.

Chrysostom here seems to confess that Women went about to communicate the
Doctrine of Christianity to the Women, to whom the Men had not access in the
Eastern Countries. The same is affirmed. by Clement of Alexandria, who thinks
the Sisters mentioned in 1 Cor. 9.5. Ministered unto the Women who kept at home,
by whom the Doctrine of our Lord might enter into the Apartments of the Women,
without Reprehension or evil Suspicion Clem. Alex. Strom. III. vid. Constit.
Apost. III. 15. Conc. Laod. Can. xi. Epiph. haer. 79.
.

2. Chrysostom does not reckon Timothy and Titus among Evangelists, but among
the Pastors or fixed Officers, whom he makes Inferior to those that went up
and down and Evangeliz'd, i. e. The Evangelists.

-- (...). In Ephesians. 4. (...). Edit. Donas. Veron.

He calls Timothy and Titus fixed Pastors, according to the received Opinion of
his Age: But he rightly distinguishes between Evangelists and Pastors, and
makes the (...), or Evangelists to be the same with the (...), or these that
went about Preaching the Gospel.

Thus after all the Noise and Clamor which Mr. G. has made, its evident that
Chrysostom agrees with Eusebius in his Notion of Evangelists.

Their calling Timothy and Titus Bishops does not affect us, who make the Holy
Scriptures the Rule of our Faith, and not the Sentiments of any fallible Men.
We have proved from Scripture, that they were Evangelists, and not Diocesan
Bishops. Eusebius says only, Hist. III. 4.
it is reported that Timothy was the first Bishop of Ephesus, and he
ingeniously acknowledges, that they had no certainty, who succeeded the
Apostles in the Government of the Churches planted by them, those only excepted
who are mentioned in Paul's Epistles. It is fit therefore we should be
determined in this Point by the Writings of the New Testament.

Its well observed by the Learned Bishop of Worcester, that the first that
called Timothy Bishop of Ephesus was Leontius Bishop of Magnesia in the Council
of Chalcedon. This was four hundred Years after, in which time Records being
lost, and Bishops being after settled there, no doubt they would begin the
Succession with Timothy, because of his Employment there once for settling the
Churches thereabout. He adds, that this was not the Act of the Council, but of
a single Person, delivering his Private Opinion in it, and that by the by too,
and he was contradicted in the Face of the Council, for saying, that the
Bishops of Ephesus had all of them been ordained upon the Place.

See more in that Learned Author, who judiciously Confutes their Opinion, who
make Timothy Bishop of Ephesus. Dr. Stillingfleet Iren. p. 302, 303. The
Fathers call the Apostles Bishops, which all grant they were not in a proper
Sense. Epiphanius says, that Peter and Paul were both of them Apostles and
Bishops at Rome. Epiph. haeres. xxvii. The Fathers therefore, when they call
Apostles or Apostolical Men Bishops, speak in the Language of their time, and
are not to be taken in a strict Sense.

Having gone through his Book, and discovered the fallacies ot his Reasonings,
it were needless to take Notice of his last Chapter, which he calls an Answer
to J. O's. Plea, in which there is scarce any thing, which has not been
considered already. Yet for the sake of the more Ignorant Reader, I will make
some short replies to his Answers.

CHAP. VI. Of Parish-Discipline. Presbyters have Tower of Government. 1. J.
O's. First Argument for Ordination by Presbyters, viz. The Identity of Bishops
and Presbyters acknowledged. 1 Timothy 5.17. Considered. 1 Timothy 1.3. does not
prove Timothy Bishop of Ephesus. Dr. Whittaker Vindicated. Ignatius's. One
Altar Explained. The extent of the Church of Ephesus. An Objection Answered.
Rev. 5.11. Vindicated. Br. Lightfoot's Notion of Angel Vindicated. 2. J. O's.
Second and Third Argument for Ordination by Presbyters Vindicated. Presbyters
succeed the Apostles. Ignatius and Ireneus Vindicated. More Testimonies to the
same effect.
HE Charges J. O. with reflecting on Episcopal Ordination, P. 122.
but gives no Instance of any such Reflection, which doubtless he would have
done, if he had been able. Let this pass among his other Calumnies.

His Crambe about Jerome and Ignatius has been considered before: P. 123.
It were endless to tire my Reader and my self with nauseous Repetitions, as
often as this Author gives occasion.

He falls foully upon J. O. for saying that Parish Priests have no Power of
Discipline, P. 125, 126.
which I have proved. They have Power of Discipline, says he, because all the
Canons, or Laws of the Church, are made by the Priests of the Church of
England, as well as by the Bishops.

1. Their Executive Power is the same with their Legislative Power, that is,
none at all. The Acts of Convocation are no Laws, till they be Confirmed in
Parliament.

2. Has every Parish Priest a power of making Church-Laws? If not, this
Instance is impertinently brought in, to prove that the Parish Priests have
Power of Discipline. If it be said they make Laws by their Representatives; so
do the People of England by their Representatives in Parliament: Does it follow
therefore, that every Freeholder has the Power of Governing? Though the Truth
is, the Convocation is not a Just Representative of the Clergy. For in the
Convocation for the Province of Canterbury, there are but 44 Clerks
representing the Clergy; the Bishops, Deans, Prebendaries and Archdeacons,
make up 122. The Archdeacons, who are the Bishops Creatures, as being chosen
solely by them, are 10 in Number more than the Clerks: so that the Clerks are
little more than Ciphers in Convocation, there are enough in the lower House to
out-vote them, besides an upper House of Bishops, who have sometimes a
considerable Influence in the Election of the very Clerks.

3. The Rector may please himself with his Power of making new Laws, all the
Power we plead for is, a Liberty for Parish-Ministers to execute the Laws of
Christ, in the exclusion of the Scandalous, and the admission of such as are
duly qualified for Gospel Ordinances.

The Parish-Ministers, or Priests, as he calls them, (and yet is unreasonably
angry with us for calling them so) have Power to Heprove, and Suspend for a
Time.

We had this before in the Preface. A Private Person may Reprove; they can
Suspend from the Lord's Supper for a time, i. e. till the next Return of the
Carrier, or about 14 Days, and then they are obliged to deliver up all to the
Ordinary; with whom the Offender often commutes for his Crime, and returns as
Impenitent as he went (except he repent that he has parted with so much Money:)
When he has made his Peace with the Ordinary, or his Commissary, or Chancellor,
the Minister must admit him, or be proceeded against himself, for disobeying
his Superiors.

Is their any Presilent for this in the Gospel? Did Christ, or his Apostles,
Establish this sort of Discipline?

Mr. G. Challenges J. O. to prove out of Scripture, That ever any Ordinary
Presbyters did Excommunicate. P. 126.


We have but few Instances of Excommunication in Scripture; but we have proved
already, That the Corinthian Presbyters, and consequently all others, had Power
to Judge, i. e. to decree Excommunicated, (as the Rector explains it) those
that are within, 1 Cor. 5.12. See Romans 16.17. 2 Cor. 2.6. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.

Can the Rector, who so liberally demands Scripture-Proofs, give us any
Instance of Presbyters Suspending for a Fortnight? If he can find no Proof in
Scripture, That ordinary Presbyters did Suspend at all from the Communion, how
dare they do it for a Fortnight? If he finds by Scripture they may Suspend, how
dare he condemn our Presbyters for Suspending Persons until they see some
evidences of their Repentance?

But since he calls for Proofs, let him show us some Proof out of Scripture for
the Power of Lay-Chancellors to Excommunicate? or some Instance of commuting
Penance for a Sum of Money. I have read in Scripture of the Priests eating up
the sin of the People, and setting their Heart on their Iniquity, Hosh. 4 8.
The Covetous Priests then got a small share out of the Sacrifices occasioned by
the sins of the People, Iev. 6.26. and 10.17. but our Commuters ingross the
whole Offering to themselves.

It is odd to hear a Man call for Scripture Proof, who cannot pretend to any
Scripture Proof for abundance of things which they Practice, and Impose as
Conditions of Communion on Ministers and People. Tliis Gentleman has a measure
and a measure, that is, a double measure, one for himself and Brethren, and
another for the Dissenters. Were he willing to be determined by the Scripture,
as he pretends, our Controversies would be soon at an end.

He ignorantly affirms, Ibid.
That the Presbyterian Bishops (as he calls them) are at best but the
Executioners of the Lay Elders Will.

I know but very few of the Congregations called Presbyterian, that have any
Ruling Elders at all; and those that have, receive them only as Assistants to
the Ministers, and not as Rulers Superior to them.

J. O's. First Argument, to prove that Presbyters may Ordain, is because they
are Scripture-Bishops. Plea, p. 12, 13. He proves the Identity of Bishops and
Presbyters in the New Testament times, and some Ages after.

To this Argument the Rector answers:

1. He grants they were the same in the New Testament, P. 126, 127.
and were the Ordinary Rulers of the Church, but Timothy and Titus were above
them.

Nothing but the brightness of Truth could extort such a Confession from him;
for,

1. If Presbyters and Bishops were the same in the New Testament, let him show
us who had Power afterward to distinguish them.

2. If they be the same, they have the same Powers. Therefore if the Bishop has
Power to Ordain, so has the Presbyter: If the Presbyter has no such Power, no
more has the Bishop.

Thus he has kindly Established our Argument; but I hope his Episcopal Friends
will not impute it to any ill design in him, for he is full of good Will to
their Cause, and it is their own fault that they have chosen no better an
Advocate.

3. But he hopes to come off, by saying that Timothy and Titus were above the
Presbyters or Bishops, for hereafter you must take them for one and the same.

Timothy and Titus, Evangelists, were above the Bishops. What then? It is as
natural to infer thence, That Presbyters are above Bishops, as that Bishops are
above Presbyters.

Not only Evangelists, but Prophets and Apostles were Superior to Ordinary
Ministers. But no Example has been yet produced, that one Ordinary Minister was
Superior to another Ordinary Minister. No instance can be given in the New
Testament of any one mere Presbyter that was Superior to another Presbyter.

If there must be some Church Officers, called Bishops, Superior to
Presbyters, because Evangelists were so; by the same reason there ought to be
some Church Officers Superior to Bishops, because the Prophets were Superior
to the Evangelists; and another sort of Church Officers Superior to them also,
because the Apostles were Superior to the Prophets.

He Subscribes to J. O's. Assertion, P. 128.
That there were several Bishops in one Church in the Apostles Days, and that
those mentioned in Scripture, were not of our English Species.

Therefore by his own Confession, English Bishops are not Scripture-Bishops.

But there was an Order of Church Officers above these Presbyter-Bishops, says
he, as we have demonstrated in the Churches of Crete and Ephesus.

There were no less than three Orders above them, that is, Apostles, Prophets,
and Evangelists, each of them extraordinary Church Officers, Ephesians. 4.11.
designed for the Planting of the Christian Church, as the ordinary Pastora and
Teachers were appointed for the propagating of it unto the end of Time.

The Foundations were to be laid by those extraordinary Church Officers, the
Superstructure to be carried on, according to the Platform they left us, by
ordinary Officers.

J. O. Proved out of Justin Martyr, and the Syriac Version of the New
Testament, That Bishop and Presbyter were the same in the Ages after the
Apostles, P. 13, 14. This the Rector prudently overlooks.

He thus Paraphraseth on 1 Timothy 5.17. They who Rule well, P. 129.
and also labor in the Word and Doctrine, deserve better than they only who
Rule well, but don't withal labor in the Word and Doctrine.

Here he supposes that some in the Church may Rule well, who don't Labor in
the Word and Doctrine: But who are these? He will not say Bishops, for then the
Presbyter, who Rules well, and Labors in the Word and Doctrine, is worthy of
more Honor than the Bishop; that he will not like: There remains no other but
the Presbyterians Ruling Elder, whom he vindicates by his kind Paraphrase. Had
this Gentleman been retained by them, he could not better have pleaded their
Cause.

And although the Elders, P. 130.
proceeds he, received a Commission from St. Paul, and Peter, (...), (Acts
20.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.) will it thence follow, that there was none to Overruled
them? Or does it hence appear, That these Elders had Power to Ordain?

1. It hence follows they were real Bishops, as he has confessed; and if
Ordination be a Branch of Episcopal Power, as he says it is, these Elders had
Power to Ordain.

2. It hence follows, that these Presbyters were the Supreme Ordinary
Church-Rulers, if Bishops be such. The extraordinary Superior Rulers were
Temporary.

He dare almost Swear it, Ibid.
that (...) implies not the Ordaining Power. Verily, says he, If this be so,
every Believer has the same Power, for they are bid, (...) to play the
Bishops; or, as we Translate it -- to look diligently, lest any Man fail of the
Grace of God, Heb. 12.15.

Are all Believers bid, (...), to look diligently to the Flock, as the Pastors
of it? If they be not, this Allegation is impertinent.

He says the ordinary Elders had not the Supreme Authority over the Churches,
Ibid.
after the time we have Assigned, nor did they ever Ordain Elders.

This implies, That the Ordinary Elders had the Supreme Authority before the
time he assigned, and it is certain the Elders of Ephesus had it in Acts 20.28.
He cannot prove they were ever deprived of it. We have proved that they had the
Supreme Authority after the Writing of the Epistles to Timothy and Titus.

We have also proved out of Acts 13.1, 2. and 1 Timothy 4.14. That ordinary Elders
did Ordain, and have Vindicated those Texts from his corrupt Glosses.

J. O. observed that the Apostles does not mention Superior Bishops in his
Catalogue of Gospel Ministers, Ibid.
Ephesians. 4.11.

Mr. G. Assigns this for a Reason: Bishops, as a distinct Species of
Church Officers, were not as yet established. The Itenerant, or unfix'd
Evangelists, Governed the Churches under the Apostles, and Ordained Elders for
'em.

1. Here is a fair Confession, there were no Bishops in the Christian Churches,
when the Epistle to the Ephesians was written, which was in Paul's First Bonds
at Rome. We have proved that the First Epistle to Timothy was written before
his First Bonds, and so Timothy could be no Bishop of Ephesus.

2. The Church of Ephesus was Governed by Presbyters, Acts 20.28. without
either Evangelist or Apostle to over-see them, that we read of. The Apostle
commits the Flock wholly and solely to them, when he parted with them, having
no thoughts of ever seeing them again, v. 25.

3. He grants that Evangelists were unfix'd Officers under the Apostles, and
Ordained Elders; as such, Timothy and Titus might Ordain Elders in Ephesus and
Crete, as unfix'd Evangelists, for such they were after the Epistles written to
them, 2 Timothy 4.9, 21. Tit. 3.12. 2 Timothy 4.10. Therefore those Epistles do not
make them fixed Governors, as he supposes.

J. O. took notice that the Papists urge the Instances of Timothy and Titus,
for Superior Bishops against the Protestants, and that the Bishops best
Arguments have been dexterously managed against the whole Reformation. What can
the Rector say to this? Matter of Fact is so plain that he cannot deny it, and
therefore endeavors to palliate it as well as he can.

J. O. says he, in this very Book has made use of the Popish Schoolmen, P. 131.
p. 55. 107. and therefore I cannot avoid taxing him with great Insincerity and
Partiality.

The Rector's Invention runs low, that he can find nothing but the old, dull,
threadbare charge of Insincerity, which we have had over and over. But the
comfort of it is, his Tongue is no Slander. All the difference between J. O's.
Arguments out of the Popish Doctors, and Mr. G's. Arguments out of them is this:

1. He treads in their Steps without once naming them; J. O. names them all
along, when he makes use of them.

2. J. O. Quotes the Popish Doctors, against themselves, and for the Reformed
Churches, who most of them have no Bishops; and all will allow, that the
Testimony of an Adversary is good against himself: Mr. G. improves their
Arguments against the Reformed Churches, whom they and he condemn as no
Churches, for want of Ordaining Bishops. The Rector is too cunning to deliver
thc Conclusion in express Words, but he lays down, and endeavors to establish
those Premises, that necessarily infer this conclusion, That Popish
Ordinations are valid, and, that all the Ordinations of the Reformed Churches
(except those in England and Ireland by Bishops) are a Nullity. This is the
design of his Book, in which he pretends to prove, That no ordinary Presbyter
has Power to Ordain, and that no Instance can be given in all the New
Testament of any Ordaining Presbyter; and that Bishops are Superior to
Presbyters by a Divine Right. The Truth is, the Performance is as weak, as the
Undertaking is bold.

I leave it to the Reader to Judge, who is to be charged with Insincerity, one
that Defends the Reformed Churches against the Popish Writers, though he quotes
them sometimes against themselves; or one who under the Name of a Protestant,
joins with the Popish Church and Doctors, in destroying the Ministry of the
greatest part of the Protestant Reformed Churches.

Since we like not Popish Arguments, P. 132.
one thing he will be bold to tell J. O. that he will here meet with an
Argument borrowed from Bishop Pearson, which he thinks neither any Papist, nor
J. O. himself ever thought of before.

Who so bold as blind Bayard? This Man boldly tells us, That no Papist ever
thought of Bishop Pearson's Argument, drawn from the time of Writing the
Epistles to Timothy, etc. I showed before that the Seminary at Rhemes thought
of the Bishop's Argument before he was born.

The Rector has a great many Qualities that are very singular, this among
others, That when he is remotest from Truth, he is then most confident.

He thinks J. O. never thought of this Argument before. His Memory is as
defective as his Reading. J. O. told him before his Book was talked of, that he
had thought of this Argument, and had prepared a Dissertation to Vindicate the
Old Chronology. Some Gentlemen that were then present, may relieve his Memory,
if need he.

J. O. Argued, that those Words, Lay hands suddenly on no Man, do not prove the
sole Power of Ordination in Timothy.

To this he answers, It ought to be hence concluded, that the sole Power of
Ordination was in Timothy, P. 133.
till J. O. can produce a like Commission given to the Presbyters.

That has been proved from Acts 13.1, 2. 1 Timothy 4.14.

He adds, J. O's. Reason is a very pleasant one, it may as well follow (says
J. O.) that the sole Power of Teaching belongs to him, because the Apostle hids
him be instant in Preaching the Word. By no means, says Mr. G. because the
Apostle directs him expressly to appoint other Teachers. 2 Timothy 22. We desire to
see some like Passages of other Ordainers, beside Timothy.

The Apostle, or rather the Holy Ghost, appointed several Bishops in Ephesus,
Acts 20.28. If the Power of Ordination belongs to Bishops as such, these
Ephesian Bishops were Ordainers. It is an old, and a true Maxim, Quatenus ad
omne valet consequentia.

2. But lest we should want other Ordainers, he will furnish us with some from 2 Timothy 2.2. which though his Argument inclines him to understand it of Teachers at
present, yet in another Mood he explains it of Ordainers, p. 53.

J. O. proved that Timothy could not receive the sole Power of Ordination,
because Paul himself took in the Presbyters, 1 Timothy 4.14.

To this the Rector says, It is something to the purpose, if it were well
proved. 1 Timothy 4.14. has been fully discussed already, says he. And fully
Vindicated say I, from his Self-Contradicting-Exceptions.

J. O. Gives another Reason to prove that Timothy could not be entrusted with
the sole Power of Ordination, because Paul Joined Barnabas with him, Acts 14.23.

The Rector Answers, The Mischief is, Barnabas was Paul 's equal, Ibid.
and an Apostle as well as himself, Acts 14.4.14.

Many think Barnabas was not Paul's equal; that he was properly an Evangelist
Vid. Sad. ad Tur. Soph. p. 783.
. Evangelists were Secondary Apostles, Apostoli vicarii, as some call them.
They seem to be included in Apostles, 1 Cor. 12.28. compared with Ephesians. 4.11.

It Is true, he is called an Apostle, Acts 14.4, 14. so are others, who were not
Apostles in a strict Sense, Romans 16.7. 2 Cor. 8.23. Phil. 2.25.

2. But suppose he were an Apostle in a strict Sense, and Paul's equal, J. O's.
Argument still holds good. If Paul and Apostle, Joined Barnabas with him,
another Apostle, or Evangelist; it is not likely that Timothy would Ordain
alone, but that he joined the Bishops of Ephesus with him. If an Apostle would
not lay on Hands alone, much less would an Evangelist.

It Is but J. O's. Dream, says he, P. 134.
when he talks of other ordinary Presbyters Ordaining with these two Apostles.
I desire to see this made out by any tolerable Conjecture.

1. J. O. did not affirm that Presbyters Ordained with Paul and Barnabas, Acts
14.23. because it is uncertain whether there were any in these Churches before
this time.

2. But if there were any, it is probable they joined in the action, as they did
in Timothy's Ordination, 1 Timothy 4.14. which may ground a probable Conjecture.

Paul's intention to go to Ephesus, Ibid.
1 Timothy 3.14. and 4.13. hinders not Timothy from being the Resident Bishop
there, as he thinks.

1. His intention of going shortly to Ephesus, shows the inconsistency of Mr.
G's. Hypothesis; for he told us before ( p. 90.) That the Apostle Governed the
Church of Ephesus himself by the Presbyters in his absence, who were
responsible to him. This continued so long, says he, as he was vigorous and
active, and had opportunity to over-see both the Flock and the Elders
themselves. And now he tells us, That this Church was Governed by a Bishop,
when the Apostle was both able and resolved to oversee it.

2. He told us before that the Presbyters were responsible to Paul, and now he
makes Timothy responsible to him. Nothing can be inferred from their being
subject to Paul, that does not* equally affect Timothy.

3. If Paul's going to Timothy does not hinder his being Resident at Ephesus, I
hope Timothy's going to Paul does, 2 Timothy 4.21. Except the Rector can prove
that Timothy had an ubiquitarian Body. If he says he returned again in a
little time to Ephesus, he ought to prove it; which he can never do from the
Writings of the Apostles.

He charge J. O. with foisting the Words till he came, Ibid.
into 1 Timothy 1.3. This Charge is as groundless as it is disingenuous; for J. O.
did not quote thc Words of Scripture, but gave the meaning of it in these Words:

Paul did not enjoin Timothy to be resident at Ephesus, but besought him to
abide there till he came, 1 Timothy 1.3. and 4.13, 14. which he intended shortly
to do, 1 Timothy 3.14, 15.

The Joining of the Scriptures together, and the Explaining of one Scripture by
another, will be allowed by any one that does not seek occasions of quarrelling.

Till I come, bespeaks a Temporary Stay at Ephesus, for he was besought by Paul
to supply his absence there; when the Apostle came in Person, there was no need
of a Substitute.

Whether Timothy went from Ephesus to Paul, or whether Paul went from Macedonia
to Ephesus, it is one and the same thing, his Work there was Temporary, and
became unnecessary, when the Apostle was with him.

Thus Paul sent him not long before this to Macedonia, and sometime after
followed him thither, Acts 19.21, 22. In like manner he designed to follow him
to Ephesus, 1 Timothy 3.14.

The Rector takes for granted what he should have proved, That Timothy was
obliged to perpetual Residence at Ephesus, which has not been yet proved. He
calls him away, 2 Timothy 4.21. and so he does Titus from Crete, Tit. 3.12.

All that has been hitherto urged for his perpetual Residence at Ephesus, is
that in 1 Timothy 1.3. I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus. These words do
not look like the Installing of a Bishop in his Diocese: (...) signifies
frequently, a short abode, Mat. 15.32. Mark 8.2. Timothy is said to abide still
at Athens, when his stay was very short there, Acts 17.14, 15.

He calls upon us to prove that Timothy was Furnished with the same Powers at
Corinth, P. 135;
Philippi, Thessalonica, etc.

I will prove it from his own Confession, p. 130. The unfix'd Evangelists
Governed the Churches under the Apostles, and Ordained Elders for 'em: Thus he.
Here he ascribes the Power of Govenirg and Ordaining unto the unfix'd
Evangelists; and yet has the Confidence to require us to prove it.

Whereas then, says he, Ibid.
Paul besought him to abide and reside at Ephesus, and we never find him in the
Apostle's Company again, nor in any other place after; we must take him for the
Resident Evangelist or Bishop here, until J. O. shall please to tell us out of
Sacred or Ecclesiastical History, whither he removed.

I will show him that Timothy was in Paul's Company, and in another place,
after Paul besought him to abide at Ephesus. In order to which I desire him to
grant this reasonable Supposition, viz. That the Second Epistle to him was
Written after the First.

In the First Epistle Paul said he besought him to stay at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1.3.
In the Second Epistle he calls him to Rome, 2 Timothy 4.9, 21. Doubtless he went
thither, according to the Apostle's Order, and we find him there with the
Apostle, when he wrote his Epistle to the Philippians, Phil. 1.1. Col. 1.1.
Philem. 1. In like manner he sends for Titus from Crete to Nicopolis, Tit.
3.12, and afterward sends him to Dalmatia, 2 Timothy 4.10.

Thus we have told him, in compliance with his desires, out of Sacred History,
That not only Timothy, but Titus also, removed, the former to Rome, the latter
to Nicopolis and Dalmatia.

As to Ecclesiastical History, we have little certain concerning Timothy, or
any other of the Apostle's Survivors and Successors, as Eusebius observes Hist:
III. 4.


He says of Timothy, It is reported he was Bishop of Ephesus.

But other Historians say, He removed from Ephesus, and came into Britain, and
Baptized King Lucius, and his Subjects, and removed hence to Curie in Germany,
where he was Bishop, and died a Martyr.

This is reported by grave Authors, Nauclerus, Petrus de Natalibus, Pantaleon
de viris Illustrib. Germ. etc.

Nauclerus, says he, finds this Recorded in the Legend of St. Thomas the
Apostle, which agrees with Legend of St. Lucius, which is to be found among the
Records of the Church of Curie Chron. Vol. II. Genesis 6. p. 472.
.

I do not pretend to warrant for the Truth of this Account. There may be some
Truths, though intermixed with Fables, even in a Legend. Archbishop Usher,
that great Antiquary, quotes this Story, in his Britan. Eccles. Primord. Cap. 3.

It may not be improbable but Timothy might Preach in these Countries, if Paul
was here, as the Rector seems to allow, p. 90. For Timothy was his Companion in
most of his Travels, and Served with him in the Gospel, as a Son with the
Father, Phil. 2.22.

J. O. opposed Dr. Whittaker, the Learned Cambridge Professor, and Maul of
Popery, to Bellarmine, who grounds Timothy's Episcopal Jurisdiction, upon 1 Timothy 5.19. Against an Elder receive not an Accusation. The Dr. says, That to
receive an Accusation, is to acquaint the Church with the Crime, which Equals
and Inferiors may do.

The Rector has two or three Pages in Confutation of Dr. Whittaker, P. 135,
136, 137, 138.
the Sum of which is, That if Timothy was only to acquaint the Church with it,
he was no better than an Informer, or Prosecutor.

He might be an Ecclesiastical Judge, though he acted in Conjunction with the
Church, as Paul did in Excommunicating the Incestuous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5.3,
4, 5. The Doctor does not deny him to be Superior to the Elders, as he was an
Evangelist, but shows the invalidity of the Argument drawn from his receiving
Accusations.

J. O. showed ( p. 21.) that the Presbyters and the People may receive an
Accusation against their Bishop, and Instanced in Epithetus, and the People of
Assura, to whom Cyprian writes not to admit Fortunatianus to be Bishop again,
because he had denied the Faith. He instanceth also in the Clergy and People of
Spain, who rejected Bisilides and Martialis, their Bishops, because they had
Sacrificed to Idols.

The Rector wisely over-looks all this, and proceeds to another Argument.

J. O. Asks how comes Paul to promise to come shortly to Ephesus, if he had
settled a Successor there?

Mr. G. Answers, this is a trifling Objection, and makes equally against the
Presbyters of Ephesus, Acts 20.28. Who ever thought Timothy so absolute, as not
to be subject to St. Paul?

When this Gentleman gives a diminutive Epithet to our Arguments, understand
him by the Rule of Contraries. You may perceive by his Uneasiness that he is
Gravelled, and would relieve himself by a big Word, which may disparage an
Argument with unthinking People.

1. This trifling Objection, as he calls it, shows how groundless his
Hypothesis is, That Paul settled Timothy at Ephesus, when he could over-see the
Church no longer.

2. It shows the weakness of his Reasonings, That the Elders had no Episcopal
Power, because they were subject to the Apostles. The Scope of a great part of
his Book, is to prove that the Presbyters were not Supreme Governors, because
the Apostles were above them. See P. 38, 39, 40, 41. He does in the same place
affirm, Timothy and Titus to be Supreme Governors. Here he forgets all his
former Reasonings, and acknowledges Timothy Subject to Paul.

Either Timothy was no Supreme Governor or Bishop, because he was Subject to
Paul, or the Presbyters of Ephesus might be Supreme Governors, notwithstanding
their Subjection to him.

3. What he adds, of his visiting his Neighbor Presbyter, P. 139.
without claiming any Power over him and his Flock, is very impertinent; for an
Apostolical Visitation, was something different from a private Visit from one
Neighbor to another.

I hope he will allow it to be as Solemn as any Episcopal Visitation. I might
return his own Words upon him, But such Stuff as this does our Author impose
upon his Friends, Ibid.
and needlessly troubles his Adversaries with, but I shall forbear.

He thinks that the Church of Ephesus consisted of many Congregations, though
he agree that it consisted not of two hundred or three hundred Parishes or
Congregations, Ibid.
as our Diocesses do.

Here we have his own Confession, That the Modern Diocesses are very different
from that of Ephesus, and other Ancient Diocesses.

That there were more Congregations than one, he proves from the Jus Divinum
Ministerii Anglicani. P. 140.


1. Suppose there were two or three Congregations in Ephesus, as the London
Ministers conceive there might be more than one, what is two or three, to two
or three hundred? It can never be proved, there were more Christians in
Ephesus, in Timothy's, or if you will in Ignatius his time, than are in some of
our great Parishes, which contains some Ten, some Twenty, some Thirty Thousand
Souls.

2. Some of our larger Parishes have several Chapels, some three, some four,
some six: He knows a Parish in his Neighborhood Manchester.
that has Seven or Eight: Will he say that a Rector, who has several Curates
under him, is a Diocesan Bishop.

I hear the Rector's Parish has four or five Chapels in it.

He thinks the number of Cities, P. 142.
or great Towns in Crete was extraordinary, because Florus calls it a Noble
Island. His Proof is a little extraordinary. Must every Noble Island have an
extraordinary number of Cities?

Well, but to do him a kindness, I will tell him the number of the most
considerable Cities or Towns in Crete.

Pliny, who lived in Vespasian's time, says there were about Forty Famous
Towns in Crete, and the Memory of about Forty more Not. Hist. 4.12.
. But let the Cities of it be more or less, it is all one to my Argument: We
have proved Titus already to be an Evangelist, and the number of Cities he was
to Ordain Elders in is a Confirmation of it. For by his own Confession, Crete
has had in it, at one time, Four Archbishops, and Twenty one Bishops P. 142.
. And now we are upon this Subject, let us see the extent of their Bishoprics.
He tells us out of Dr. Heylin, There were 207 Parishes in Crete; which divided
between twenty five Bishops, there falls but Eight Parishes to the share of
each Bishop, and an overplus of 7/25 Parts.

How different were these from Modern Bishoprics? A Bishop may better Over-see
Eight or Nine Parishes, than Eight or Nine Scores of Parishes.

J. O. Proved that the Church of Ephesus consisted of no more Members than
could ordinarily meet in one place, because that Church had but one Altar. at
which the whole Congregation ordinarily Received the Lord's Supper, in Ignatius
his time.

Mr. G. Answers, That Ignatius's one Altar, signifies not one Numerical, P. 143.
but one Specifical Altar.

Then Ignatius's one Bishop, must signify not one Numerical, but one
Specifical Bishop.

He thinks there was more than one Numerical Altar, because after the Words
Alleged by J. O. Ignatius goes on thus: Ibid.
Let that Eucharist be accounted good and firm, which is Celebrated under the
Bishop, or which he consents to.

Under the Bishop, is plainly in his presence (and not under his Authority, as
he explains it) as being opposed to his Consent in his absence.

His consenting that the Presbyters might Administer in his absence, does not
prove more than one Altar. The Parson of one Parish (which has but one Altar)
may consent that his Curates may Administer the Eucharist.

He further proves there were many Altars under Ignatius his Bishop, from that
Passage -- Wherever the Bishop appears, there let the People be, even as where
Jesus Christ is, (not appears, as he falsely renders (...)) there is the
Catholic Church.

Nothing could have been produced more impertinently than this Passage, which
shows that the Multitude must be where the Bishop was, or appeared; his
Appearance must be understood of his personal, visible Appearance. To talk of
an Invisible Appearance is ridiculous.

And yet you must understand it so, says our Author; It is not to be
understood of his Person, but Authority, says he, even as Jesus Christ is with
the Catholic Church, not in his Person, but in his Spiritual Power.

1. This is worse and worse; Ignatius did not say, Where Christ appears, as he
to serve a Design falsely renders (...), but where Jesus Christ is. Ignatius
knew Jesus Christ to be Invisible on Earth, since his Ascension, and that a
Bishop was visible; and therefore says, where the Bishop appears ((...)) and
where Christ is.

2. To deny Christ to be personally present with his Church, is to deny him to
be the Second Person in the Trinity. I hope he believes the Divinity and
Omnipresence of our Lord Jesus Christ, though in a Transport of Zeal he forgot
the Form of Sound Words. The Spiritual Power of Christ does not exclude his
Personal Presence.

Some Men will talk any thing, though never so little to the purpose, rather
than yield to the Evidence of Truth. P. 145.
He tells us that the Church of Ephesus, took in all Asia (the proper) because
all they that dwelt in Asia, heard the Word of the Lord Jesus, viz. at Ephesus.

He might as well have said, That the Church of Jerusalem took in the
Parthians, and Dwellers in Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, etc. for
those heard the Word of the Lord Jesus at Jerusalem, Acts 2.9, 11.

He says J. O. should have Entered the Lists with Dr. Maurice, P. 146.
who Answered Mr. B. and Mr. Cl. about the extent of Bishoprics.

J. O's. Subject being Ordination, he was not concerned in Dr. Maurice's Book,
though he said something occasionally concerning the Extent of Churches, from
Ignatius, and others. He complains J. O. has troubled them with a New Book
upon an Old Subject, Ibid.
without adding any thing considerable to it.

It seems J. O's. Book has created some trouble to them, but what is the
trouble? Is it that he writes a New Book upon an Old Subject? That cannot be
it; for the Rector has done so himself. If it be a fault to write upon an Old
Subject, no Man must write at all, for there is scarce any thing New under the
Sun. Or does it trouble him that J. O. has not added any thing considerable to
the Subject; that cannot be also, except we suppose his own Performance, (which
has little of Addition to what is found in Bellarmine, and other Popish
Authors,) to be a Trouble to him. I doubt then, something else in the Book
troubles him. He can tell what it is, for he had good Reason why he would not
Answer a Book which he undertakes to Answer, but contents himself with a few
slight Remarks upon two or three Chapters, and leaves the greatest part of the
Book untouched.

I leave it to such as have read other Authors upon the Subject of Ordination
by Presbyters, to Judge of J. O's. performance, whether the Subject has
received any Improvement by it.

He takes a great deal of Pains to prove what no Body denies, P. 146, 147, 148,
149.
viz. That (...) signifies sometimes Agreement or Unity, and not always one
place, as J. O. rendered it in those Words of Ignatius, (...) -- give diligence
to Assemble together ((...)) more frequently -- for when ye often come
together, (...) -- Ign. ad Ephesians. p. 25.
or into one place, the Powers of Satan are destroyed.

One would think J. O's. Translation very natural, for (...) refers to one
place, and so must (...), which follows immediately after. But it ought not to
be so rendered here, says our Author: And the Proof is, There might have been
several Places for Worship at Ephesus, p. 148. But he does not prove there were
several places. I have proved the contrary from the one Altar mentioned in
Igna. ad magna. p. 34.

He thinks Ignatius does not intend one place by (...), P. 149.
because he speaks a little after of the Unity of their Faith. Might they not
have Unity of Faith in one place? But we have sufficiently proved above, That
Ignatius his Church ordinarily met in one place.

Dr. Burnet acknowledges there was but one Numerical Altar to one Diocese, in
Ignatius's time, as J. O. quoted him, P. 30. Mr. G. passes by the Bishop
unsaluted. The Learned Mr. Mede confesses, That in those First Times, they had
but one Altar to a Diocesan Church. This he confirms by Instances out of Justin
Martyr, and out of Cyprian, Ep. 40.72, 73. De Unit. Eccl. etc. Mede of
Churches, P. 48, 49, 50.

I will not contend with him about the number of Churches built at
Constantinople, by Constantine the Great; but it is very improbable that they
should be two Hundred, as he extravagantly talks. Socrates mentions but Two,
Nicephorus speaks of Three Great Temples, whereof that of Sophia, which he
ascribes to Constantine, was built by Constantius his Son, and was but an
Addition to the Temple of Irene.

He speaks also of Four or Five lesser Oratories, (which were probably like our
Chapels) one of which did bear the Name of the Apostles, the other of some
Martyrs Niceph. Eccl. Hist. VII. 49.
.

This may well agree with Eusebius's Account, viz. That he built there many
Oratories, and splendid Houses of God Vid. Con. III. 47.
. Eusebius magnifies all the Actions of Constantine, and would not have omitted
such a Number of Temples, as the Rector fancies to be there.

Ignatius exhorts Polycarp, Ign. ad Pol. p. 12, 13.
Not to neglect the Widows, to be their Curator after the Lord -- to have
frequent Assemblies, to seek all by Name, and not to despise the Menservants,
and Maidservants.

Here Polycarp is, first, to take care of the Poor Widows, who were to be
Relieved by him, or by his Order. This he could not well do, without some
knowledge of them.

2. To have frequent Church-Meetings, and to seek all by Name, who ought to
frequent the Public Assemblies.

3. He must not neglect the very Servants, or Slaves, but Exhort them not to be
puffed up, but to Serve for the Glory of God, that they may receive of God a
more glorious Liberty. Ign. Ibid. He speaks of Christian Slaves, and such as
frequented their Church Assemblies.

What can the Rector say to this plain Quotation that carries it is own Evidence
with it?

(...) in the New Testament, says he, P. 152.
signifies to seek the Conversion of Unbelievers, Luke 19.10. And if Polycarp
must seek the Conversion of every single Person in Smyrna, and deal with every
one of them, then J. O. has reduced this great City to a small Village.

This is a Chimera of his own; Ignatius speaks of Believing Servants, as is
evident, and so J. O. applied it to prove the extent of Polycarp's Church,
Plea, p. 34. But our Author either wilfully or ignorantly, confounds the Church
of Smyrna, and the City of Smyrna.

To seek all by Name, says he, is to be understood not of every individual
Person, P. 153.
but of all States and Conditions of Men, even the lowest of them, the Slaves.

This is a very poor Evasion. Ignatius speaks of Religious Assemblies, and of a
Pastoral Care, that the Bishop must seek all by Name, the Servants not
excepted. He must take care of his whole Flock, and not despise poor Servants.
(...), by Name, cannot admit of any other tolerable Sense. Ignatius, in the
same Epistle, explains himself, when he says, I Salute all by Name Ad Polyc.
p. 16.
, and some of them he Names there. And in another place he says, Ye do all of
you commonly, even every Man by Name, ((...)) meet together in Jesus Christ Ad
Ephesians. p. 29.
.

By Name here respects every individual Person, and not the several States and
Conditions of Men. For every Member of the Church ordinarily attended Public
Ordinances, and not some of all Degrees only. Ignatius, in both places, speaks
of Church Assemblies, where every one by Name was to attend, and the Bishop
must see that they did so, and not overlook the meanest Servants.

Suppose his Diocesan required the Rector to seek all his Parishoners by Name,
and dot to despise the Servants. I question whether he could satisfy the
Bishop: I am sure he cannot acquit himself to the chief Bishop of our Souls, by
telling Him he took care of some of all States and Conditions, as well Servants
as Masters, as well Mechanics, as Rich Shopkeepers, P. 153.
as he speaks.

(...) is not to be found in the Scriptures to which he refers, Mat. 10.41, 42.
Ephesians. 1.21. And therefore they are improperly Alleged.

Mark 16.15. is as little to the purpose. The Apostles could not possibly
Preach the Gospel to every individual Creature, but a Bishop might seek all his
Flock by Name.

If you will not allow him, That to seek all by Name, is to be understood of
all States of Men, he has found out another shift. P. 155.
Take Care of all by Name, says he, i. e. give it in Charge to thy Presbyters
and Deacons to do so.

This is a Figment of the Rector's own Brain, which he does not pretend to
ground upon any Passage in Ignatius. He fancies the Primitive Bishops to be
like those of the latter Ages, who enlarged their Diocesses, and diminished
their care of the Flock: The Ancient Bishops took care of the Flock in their
own Persons, and not by Proties.

It Is true, they had their Assisting Presbyters, and Governed the Church by
their United Councils, the Bishop doing nothing without his Presbyters, nor
they without the Bishop.

It Is evident to any one that reads Ignatius his Epistle to Polycarp, that he
speaks of Personal Duties, seek all by Name, and a little after, says he,
avoid evil Arts (...), etc. p. 13.
. The Rector may as well say, He must avoid evil Arts by his Presbyters, as
seek all by Name by them.

Our Author offers one Observation (for he will not be too prodigal on so
tender a Subject) to prove that the Church of Smyrna consisted of more
Congregations than one.

It Is the First Proof of this kind he has given us, (though we have given
several to the contrary) and therefore deserves regard.

My Observation is this, says he, P. 155, 156.
how that Ignatius ( Parag. penult. of the Epistle to the Smyrnaeans) thus
Addresses to the Bishop. It will be fit, O most worthy Polycarp, to gather
(...), a most Venerable and August Assembly, etc. This implies a great number
of Presbyters and Deacons: Either then the Bishop of Smyrna had many
Congregations under him, or this little Church, ( as J. O. believes it,)
Swarmed with a number of Idle, and Unnecessary Presbyters, which no Man in his
Wits will believe.

1. This Argument he thinks better than any J. O. has produced to the contrary,
P. 155.
unless he flatters himself by an unusual Charientism.

It is possible a Man of Mr. G's. Character may Flatter himself, whether it be
unusual with him to do so, I leave the Reader to pass Judgment.

2. His Quotation is not in the Epistle to the Smyrnaeans, as he affirms, but
in the Epistle to Polycarp Ign. ad Polycarp. p. 15.
, who was Bishop of Smyrna, which I suppose might occasion his mistake. The
Epistle to the Smyrnaeans, has no such Passage.

3. The Presbyters were the Bishop's (...), his Council, and the Church in
Ignatius's time was Governed by the Bishop and Presbyters in common. He calls
them (...), Presidents Ign. ad Magn. p. 33.
. They were (...), The Bishop's Council Ad Phil. p. 43.
, and his Complex Spiritual Crown Ad Mag. p. 37.
, that sat round about him. He calls them in another place, (...), the
Presbyters that were with the Bishop Ad Phil. p. 39.
. They lived with the Bishop, and managed the Concerns of the Church in common;
they did nothing without the Bishop, nor he without them. Hence Ignatius
Exhorts the Magnesians to do nothing without the Bishop and Presbyters Ign. p.
33.
. No Church Assembly was held without them (...). Ad Tral. p. 48.
.

It does not appear by the Epistles of Ignatius, that the Presbyters were
Governed by the Bishop, or Subject to him, they were joint Governors of the
Church, only the Bishop was chief, for Orders sake. The Deacons were Subject to
the Bishops and Presbyters Ad Mag. p. 31.
, but the Presbyters were not Subject to the Bishop. It Is true, they could do
nothing without him, no more could he without them.

4. It does not appear that (...), The God-becoming Assembly, (not most
Venerable and August, as he renders it) consisted only of the Bishop,
Presbyters and Deacons, as he suggests. It should seem rather that it was a
Church-Assembly, under the Cnnduct of the Bishop and Presbyters, who were
desired to send a Message to the Church of Antioch, to comfort them in the
Absence of their Bishop.

The next Paragraph confirms this Sense: Write, says Ignatius to Polycarp, to
other Churches, Ad Polyc. p. 15.
that they do the same thing; such as are able may send Foot-Messengers, others
may send Letters by thy Messengers.

In the same manner he speaks to the Church of Philadelphia, It becomes you, as
the Church of God, to appoint a Deacon to perform there ( at Antioch) the
Message of God. He adds a little after, some near Churches have sent Bishops,
and some have sent Presbyters and Deacons Ad Phil. p. 45.
.

It was the manner in those First Ages to send Epistles and Messengers, in the
Name of the whole Church, as appears by the Epistles written by the Churches of
Vienne and Lions, to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, concerning the
Sufferings of the Gallic Christians Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. V. 1.
.

Therefore Ignatius his (...), seems to be an Assembly of the whole Church.
Ignatius calls the Church of Smyrna (...), Deo-decentissima in two places Ign.
ad Smyr. p. 1. and p. 8.
.

5. Suppose this (...), God-becoming Assembly, had consisted of the Bishop and
his Presbyters, it will not follow that there were a great number of Presbyters.

Ignatius abounds with Epithets, and such as may seem, if not swelling, at
least Superfluous. He gives to the Roman Church Nine or Ten big Epithets, in
one breath, as (...), etc. He calls his Bonds, God-becoming Bonds, (...) Ad
Smyr. p. 8.
.

He Styles the Bishop of Smyrna (...), worthy of God, and the Presbytery,
(...), becoming God. As one Bishop is God-worthy, so a few Presbyters may be
God-becoming.

6. J. O. does not say the Church of Smyrna was a little Church, it might be a
large Church, (as many Parish-Churches are) and find work enough for several
Presbyters with the Bishop. P. 156, and 157.
What he says of the Asian Angels has been considered before.

He wonders that J. O. should say, The Authorized Bibles call the Angels
Ministers, not Bishops. J. O. added, This shows the Sense of the Old Church of
England, agreeable to many of the Ancients, such as Aretas, Primosius, Ambrose,
Gregory the Great, Bid, Haymo, etc.

This he wisely over-looks: P. 157,
but asks, What if a Man should say they expressed themselves too loosly and
negligently?

They expressed their own Sense, and that of the Ancient Church. They could
easily have called the Angels Bishops, had they thought them so. Our first
Reformers were not such loose, negligent Souls, as some of those who pretend to
Correct them, evidence themselves to be.

After having spent some Pages in such Scornful Reflections as may become him,
but would scarce drop from a Scholar, or a Gentleman, especially when no
Provocation is given, he proceeds to an Ingenuous Confession of the weakness of
this Argument for Bishops from the Asian Angels.

It would have been a strange Consequence, he acknowledges, that Angels should
be expounded Bishop, one that had Authority over other Ministers, had not he
read in Paul 's Two Epistles, That Timothy had Authority over the whole Church
of Ephesus, and again in Ignatius, P. 160.
That there was a Bishop of Ephesus.

If these two Evidences fall him, as I have proved they do, this of the Asian
Angels falls of it self.

Our Author is very angry with J. O. for saying that St. John places the
Presbyters next the Throne of Christ, and the Angels at a greater distance,
Rev. 5.11. Shall we therefore say the Presbyters are more worthy than the
Bishops? P. 161.
The Inference is much more natural than the other, if Angels be Bishops. Thus
J. O.

This plain Scripture-Observation, does so move the Rector's Choler, that he
cannot forbear his old Railing Language. If J. O. says he; has managed this
Argument Honestly and Sincerely, I Will henceforward renounce all pretense to
those scurvie Pieces of Morality.

1. He himself acknowledges, that the Words may bear that Sense J. O. puts upon
them: that (...) and (...) may be Governed of (...), or coupled with (...), and
so the Angels being round about the Throne, and round about the Elders, it
follows the Elders were nearer the Throne. Why does not he disprove this Sense?
A Scholar should use Arguments, and not Bilingsgate-Dialect.

Angeli ponuntur in extimo ambitu Grot. in Loc.
2. This Construction of the Words is not new; their admired Grotius says, that
the Angels are in the remotest place: so do several others, and it seems
agreeable with their Office of Guarding the Church, Psalm. 34.7.

Where then is the dishonesty and insincerity of managing this Argument? Is it
in saying, That the Inference is more natural, that Presbyters are more
Honorable than Bishops, if Angels be Bishops? Why does he not disprove this
Inference? J. O. did not urge this Scripture as a concluding Argument, but to
show the weakness of the Argument for the Superiority of Bishops. They are
Angels, therefore they are Superior to Presbyters. I say still, J. O's.
Inference is much more Natural, If Bishops be Angels, and Angels be remoter
from the Throne of Christ than Elders, Elders are more Honorable than Bishops.

So then J. O. has managed this Argument honestly and sincerely, for any thing
the Rector has said to the contrary.

I would wish him to consult the Honor of his Profession a little better, than
to perform his rash Promise of Renouncing henceforward all pretense to those
scurvy Pieces of Morality, as he scurvily calls them. His Casuists will tell
him, That an immoral Promise is better broken than kept.

It would raise ones Stomach to see him compare Timothy with Judas. It Is no
more impossible, says he, that Timothy should leave his first Love, Rev. 2.2.
than that Judas the Apostle should betray his Master. P. 162.
We must not think but that some of the Apostles, Friends and Disciples, made
Shipwreck of the Faith. Alexander did so, Acts 19.33. And why not Timothy; so
did Demas.

The Apostle says of Timothy, There was no Man like-minded, Phil. 2.20, 22.
And that there were Prophecies concerning him, that he should War a good
Warfare, 1 Timothy 1.18. Can any such thing be said of Judas? We say, Comparisons
are odious, was there ever a more odious one, than to compare one of the most
excellent New Testament Saints, with the vilest of Hypocrites? I will refer him
to his own Words, if it be not offensive to him to review them. Critics will
be busy, and advance Paradoxes, and who can help it? P. 163.
Timothy shall be an Apostate-Bishop, rather than no Bishop. But he thinks to
mend the Matter, by supposing Timothy might be dead, when the Revelation was
written, because he was an infirm Man, 1 Timothy 5.23. and would scarce live to
Seventy Years. We have known infirm Men that were Temperate, to live above
Seventy. J. O. observed, that many Chronologers affirmed, that Timothy was
alive then. This he overlooks. J. O. showed out of Dr. Lightfoot, That the
Angel of the Church was a Parish-Bishop, in Conformity to the Jewish
Synagogues, each of which had its Angel, or Bishop.

Our Author here enters the Lists with Dr. Lightfoot, not with J. O. He has
not showed us, says he, P. 164, 165.
that every Synagogue had a Presbytery.

Let him consult Dr. Lightf. Vol. 1. p. 302. and p. 611. and Vol. II. p. 133.

But the Rulers of the Synagogues, adds he, P. 165.
were subject to the Highpriests, and their Presbytery.

So are the Presbyters to Jesus Christ, our great High Priest, and to all
Rulers of his appointment. He told us above; That the High Priest and
Presbytery were the chief Court of Judicature among the Jews, and had the
highest Jurisdiction: And so it had in things Civil and Sacred. What is this to
Episcopal Power over the Presbyters? Let the Bishops produce as clear a Charter
for their Order, as the High Priests did for theirs, and we'll submit.

He remembers Mr. Bois scoffs at the Bishop of L. for Arguing with Dr.
Lightfoot, P. 166.
but does not refer to the place, lest we should see what great Reason Mr. B.
might have to reject Rabbinical Traditions, and what little reason our Author
had to charge him with scoffing.

When Rabbinical Learning is of any advantage, we are content to make use of
it, if against us, P. 167
we deride it, says he.

When it is against the Truth we reject it; when there is a Harmony between it,
and the New Testament, we receive it not for Confirmation of Divine Truth, but
for Illustration. Mr. G. cannot deny but the Minister of every Synagogue was
called the Angel of the Church, and Bishop of the Congregation, as Dr.
Lightfoot has proved: Therefore it looks highly rational that the Angels of
the Asian Churches should be so called, in Allusion to the Ministers of the
Synagogue. Christian Oratories are called Synagogues, James 2.2. Our Author
cannot deny the Agreement in many things between both: But, says he, The
Temple-Worship, whereof a great deal was Moral, was as much the Pattern of the
Christian, as was the Synagogue-Worship: and if so, the Jewish Priesthood was
the Pattern of the Christian Hierarchy, p. 166.

1. The Jewish Priesthood was appropriated to the Ceremonial Worship of the
Temple, though they performed the Moral parts there also. The Legal Priests,
and the Legal Altar, were Relates, Heb. 7.13, 14. and both were Abolished
together, Heb. 7.12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of
necessity a change also of the Law. What Law? not that which concerned the
Moral Worship, but the Law of Ceremonies, to which the Levitical Priesthood was
adapted.

2. The Moral Worship in the Synagogues might be performed by such as were no
Priests Lightf. Vol. II. p. 133, 134, 135.
, but none but Priests gave attendance at the Altar, Heb. 7.13. Therefore the
Ceremonial Worship, Temple, and Priesthood, being Abolished, and the Moral
Worship (which was the only Synagogue-Worship) being Transplanted into the
Christian Church, it follows that the Jewish Priesthood was no Pattern of the
Gospel Ministry. But this has been considered before.

J. O's. First Instance of Ordination by Presbyters, from Acts 13.1, 2, 3. has
been sufficiently vindicated above, Cap. 2.

He is in one of his hot Fits again, P. 168.
and Charges J. O. with insufferable Artifice, Fallacy, Sophistry, etc. for
saying, That if Barnabas was one of the Seventy Disciples (as the Ancients
affirm he was) then was he of the Order of Presbyters, according to that
Hypothesis, that makes Bishops to succeed the Twelve Apostles, and Presbyters
the Seventy Disciples,

J. O. did not call Barnabas a Presbyter, but argued ad bominem.

He might as well have affirmed, says he, That Matthias, another of the
Seventy, was but a Presbyter, who succeeded Judas.

We read of Matthias his Solemn Call to the Apostleship, and that he was
Numbered with the Eleven, Acts 1.26. but we have not the like account of
Barnabas.

It Is true, he is called an Apostle, Acts 14.4.14. so are Evangelists
sometimes, as we proved before. Many conceive he was but an Evangelist. Paul
seems to own no Apostles in a strict Sense, but the Twelve and himself, 1 Cor.
15.5, 7, 8. It was the Prerogative of the Apostles to confer the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, but we do not find that Barnabas ever conferred that Gift. Though I
will not be positive but he might be a real Apostle.

J. O. Argued, That those who have power to Dispense the Gospel, to Baptize,
and Administer the Lord's Supper, have also Power of Ordination, because these
are Ordinances not inferior to Ordination. Et parium par est ratio. They are
not inferior to Ordination.

1. Preaching the Gospel is not inferior to Ordination. The Publishers of it
are Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. represent the great Prophet of the
Church, Mat. 5.20. are Workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6.1. And is an
Ordainer morethan this?

Baptism is our Solemn Dedication to God. Ordination is no more, only the
former is to Christianity as such, the latter to a particular work.

2. Baptism is a Sacramental Dedication, which Ordination is not.

3. In the Lord's Supper, the Minister sets apart Bread and Wine, as Symbolical
Representations of Jesus Christ. Jerome says of Presbyters, Ad quorum preces
Corpus and Sanguis Christi consicitur. Now which is greater, to Impose Hands,
or to make the Sacramental Body and Blood of Jesus Christ? If they have Power
to Consecrate Holy Things, why not Holy Persons also? Thus J. O. who proved
also, that the Ministerial Acts now mentioned, are not inferior to Ordination,
from 1 Cor. 1.17. Mat. 28.19, 20.

What can our Author say to this? Instead of answering J. O's. P. 170.
Arguments, he says, He knows not by what Authority J. O. has entered into the
Comparison.

His Scripture-Reasons are his Authority, which Mr. G. has not touched; only he
nibbles at 1 Cor. 1.17. which is a Text, says he, that few understand; but at
length he gives the meaning of it.

Paul's main work, says he, was to Preach, not to Baptize. P. 171.


If Preaching was his main Work, it was not inferior to Ordination.

It does not hence follow, that Preaching is a more honorable Office than
Baptizing, P. 172.
says the Rector.

None ever affirmed the Office to be more Honorable, for the Office is one and
the same; Preaching and Baptizing are Acts of one and the same Office. The
Apostle seems to prefer the Work of Preaching, before that of Baptizing: so
does Christ also, who Preached Himself, but committed the Work of Baptizing to
his Disciples, John 4.2.

Though he blames J. O. for comparing Ministerial Acts, yet he cannot forbear
doing it himself.

Ordaining, says he, is a higher Ministerial Act than Baptizing. P. 173.
Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

J. O. thinks Christ mentioned the chief part of a Minister's Work in Mat.
28.19, 20. Go Teach, Baptize, etc. If Ordination had been the main and chiefest
part of the Apostle's Commission, He would have said, Go, Ordain, Preach,
Baptize, etc. Ordination therefore is not the principal part of a Minister's
Office, but rather Subordinate to Preaching and Baptizing, and included here,
as the Lesser in the Greater. A Commission usually Specifies the principal Acts
which one is empowered to do, and do not run a minori ad majus.

Mr. G. takes no notice of J. O's Argument, but pretends that the Reason why
the Lord's Supper, Ibid.
and Ordination are not mentioned in Mat. 28.19, 20. is because they were
mentioned before, Luke 22.19. John 20.21.

So Teaching and Baptizing were mentioned before, and practiced by the
Apostles. Christ gives them no new Commission at this time, only enlarges
their former Commission: They Taught and Baptized before, but in one Nation
only, now they are sent to all Nations.

It is agreed, that Mat. 28.19, 20. contains the Commission, not only of the
Apostles, but of their Successors, to the end of Time, for the Work of the
Ministry, v. 20. I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Amen.

Either this Commission does empower them to Ordain Successors, in the ordinary
part of their Ministry, or it does not; if it does not, it is imperfect and
insufficient for the continuance of a Gospel Ministry unto the end of the
World, in pursuance of the Promise made to that end, v. 20. Ordination is not
mentioned in John 20.21. and it must needs be implied in Mat. 28.19, 20. as a
necessary means for the continuance of the Church unto the end of Time.

If this Commission in Mat. 28.19, 20. does empower the Apostles to Ordain, as
doubtless it does, then the Ordaining Power must be included in Teaching and
Baptizing, as Subordinate and Subservient to them.

He says, The Power of Conferring other Powers, P. 174.
is greater than those other Powers, John 13.16.

If this be true, the Bishops who make an Archbishop are greater than he: And
those who Consecrate the Pope are greater than the Pope. John 13.16. does not
speak of Ordination, all that can be gathered from it is, That we should learn
Humility of Jesus Christ, who is our Lord and Master, John 13.13, 14, 15, 16.

Inferiors often confer Superior Powers: Bishops do Crown Kings; a Recorder,
or Town Clerk, may Swear a Mayor.

It Is endless to follow our Author in all his undidigested Notions, and yet I
cannot but touch on 'em, for the sake of the less Judicious Readers, who expect
his Book Answered Paragraph by Paragraph.

He affirms, but cannot prove, That the Apostles reserved Ordination to
themselves. P. 175.
We have proved the contrary already. He asks with what Effrontery dares J. O,
call Peter Lombard to his Assistance, Ibid.
who says the Ancients argued from Baptism to Ordination. Lomb. Lib. 4. Did.
25.

I have Answered this already. In short, the Testimony of an Adversary is Valid
against himself.

He acknowledges, That if the Ordaining Power, did by Scripture-Charter belong
to the Presbyters, P. 176.
then to pretend to deprive 'em of it were a Nullity.

I have proved that it does belong to them by Scripture-Charter: And therefore
his Instance of a Presbyter Baptizing a Believer, who has no Power to Baptize
another, is not to the purpose.

He has often professed, That he will not trace J. O. through the Fathers, and
Ancient Writers: So he does p. 122. and p. 175. and yet as a Man who is no
Slave to his Word, he will needs be nibbling at Antiquity, where he thinks he
has any advantage; so he does p. 116. and p. 119. and in the concluding Pages
of his Book.

He makes a long stride from p. 58. of J. O's. Plea, P. 177, 188.
to p. 179. and there he picks quarrel with two Quotations of his, which show
the Presbyters to Succeed the Apostles as much as the Bishops. He skips over
but 120 Pages of J. O's. Book, and yet would persuade the World he has Answered
it. Suppose I had done so by his Book, (which I have answered in all that is
material, Paragraph by Paragraph) would not some People be tempted to think it
unanswerable, and that I undertook what I was not able to perform. But to
proceed to the Remarks on J. O's. Quotations.

Ignatius says, That the Presbyters Succeeded in the place of the Bench of the
Apostles.

There Is nothing more unfair, says my Author, P. 178.
than to misrepresent the Meaning of an Author.

J. O. only Quoted the Words, without Explication, how then could he
misrepresent the meaning?

But the meaning is, as he tells us, That the Presbyters are the Bishops
Seconds, as the Apostles were Jesus Christ's Seconds.

Our Rector wants a Second to explain his Explication, it is so obscure and
unintelligible.

I hope he would not make Ignatius say, that the Bishops are as much the Head
of the Presbyters, as Christ is of the Apostles. But let us hear Ignatius
himself. I exhort you, says he, Ad Mag. p. 33.
do all your Works in the Concord of God, the Bishops presiding in the place of
God, and the Presbyters in the place of the Bench (or Council) of the Apostles,
and the Deacons, who are precious to me, to whom is committed the Ministry of
Jesus Christ.

So in another place: Let all of you follow the Bishops, as Jesus Christ
followed the Father, and follow the Presbytery as the Apostles, and reverence
the Deacons as the Command of God Ign. ad Smyr, p. 6.
.

He says one Bishop, with the Presbytery and the Deacons. And a little after,
he calls the Apostles, the Presbytery of the Church Ad Phil. P. 41.
.

In another place, Reverence the Deacons, as the Command of Jesus Christ, and
the Bishop as Jesus Christ, and the Presbyters as the Council of God, and the
Conjunction of the Apostles. And a little before; Be Subject to the Presbytery,
as the Apostles of Jesus Christ Ad Tral. p. 48.
.

He speaks more expressly a few Pages after, Be inseparably United to God, Jesus
Christ, and the Bishop, (...), and the Orders of the Apostles, i. e. the
Presbyters Ibid. p. 50.
.

I leave it to the Impartial Reader's Judgment, whether all these Expressions
put together, do not make it plain, That the Presbyters according to Ignatius,
Succeed the Apostles. Can any thing be expressed with more clearness? They
preside in the place of the Bench of the Apostles. They must be followed as the
Apostles, reverenced as the Conjunction of the Apostles, and as the Orders of
Apostles.

But our Author proceeds in his usual and proper Style.

J. O 's. last disingenuous Perverting the Sense of Ignatius, P. 178.
has put me, says he, upon the Examination of his Testimony out of Irenaeus.
For I must confess, I dare not trust him in any thing, that he offers out of
Antiquity.

See the Candor of this Gentleman, he declines J. O's Testimonies out of
Antiquity, and yet turns over above a Hundred Pages, to search out one or two
Quotations that he may Cavil at them.

Having treated J. O. with such scornful and ill Language, so often in his
Book, it is not to be expected he should forbear bestowing upon him some of his
best Compliments now at parting. And he is the more obliged to him for them,
because they are Undeserved, and are the free Emanations of the Rector's good
Nature.

His attempt upon Ignatius failing him, he proceeds to J. O's. Second Quotation
out of Irenaeus, which was this. Cum autem ad eam iterum Traditionem, quae est
ab Apostolis, quae per Successionem Presbyteriorum in Ecclesiis custoditur.

Here he taxes J. O 's: Sincerity, for a literal Fault of the Printer's, P. 179.
who instead of Presbyterorum Printed Presbyteriorum, with the Addition of the
Letter (i). This would pass for a Venial Fault among Friends, but Mr. G. is as
severe a Judge, as he is a Corrector of the Press.

But, says he, J. O. like a Man wise in his Generation, turned Presbyters into
Presbyteries, Ibid.
that this place may be understood not of Bishops, but of the Colleges of
Presbyters; but Irenaeus by Presbyters means Bishops.

1. J. O. spoke of Presbyters (not: Presbyteries) Succeeding the Apostles; and
quoted Irenaeus for Proof. He does not use the Word Presbytery in all that
Argument, p. 179, 180.

2. Mr. G. cannot deny but Irenaeus says, the Presbyters Succeeded the
Apostles, but he thinks by Presbyters he means Bishops. We think so too, and
thence infer, That Presbyters and Bishops are the same in Irenaeus, as they are
in Paul's Epistles.

He says in another place, We must obey those Presbyters that are in the
Church, who received their Succession from the Apostles (as we have shown) who
with the Succession of their Episcopacy, have received the certain Grace of
Truth, according to the Father's Pleasure. And a little after: Such Presbyters
the Church nourishes, of whom the Prophet says, I will give thee Rulers in
Peace, and Bishops in Righteousness Iren. ad. Haeres. IV. 43, 44.
.

Observe here, 1. That Presbyters Succeed the Apostles. 2. Presbyters have an
Episcopacy. 3. Those whom Irenaeus calls Presbyters, he calls also Bishops.
Irenaeus his Bishop was but the first Presbyter, as Hilarious the Roman Deacon
calls him Int. ad. Ephesians.
.

By those first Presbyters (who for Order sake, had the precedence of the rest)
Irenaeus, and others, derive the Succession. But the Churches were Governed not
by those single Presbyters, or Bishops alone, but by the College of Presbyters
in common, among whom the Senior Presbyter, or the most worthy, had the (...),
or chief Seat, but without Power of Jurisdiction over his Brethren.

As the Athenians reckoned the Years in which the Archontes Governed their
Republic, by the first Archon, though there were Nine of them in all; and the
Lacedaemonians denominated the Years of their Ephori (who were Five in all) by
the Name of the First Vid. Blon. Apol. Pref. p. 38.
; so the Fathers derive the Succession of Presbyters, by the First and Chief
Presbyter, to whom the Name of Bishop, by degrees, was appropriated.

Thus we have Vindicated Ignatius and Irenaeus, against the angry Exceptions of
our Author. I will add one or two more, but with no design to stir up his
Choler.

Jerome says of them, They (the Clergy) Succeed in the Apostolical Degree, they
make the Body of Christ with their Sacred Mouths, and by them we are made
Christians. He speaks not of Bishops, but of the Clerici, without Distinction,
even of all that Administer the Eucharist, and Baptize. And a little after
expressly Names the Presbyters. The Presbyter, says he, may deliver me to
Satan, if I offend Hieron. Ep. ad Heliodor.
.

Origin, in Mat. 16. makes all Presbyters to succeed the Apostles, in the Power
of the Keys.

Prosper makes all Holy Priests, that conscienciously discharge the Duties of
their Office, the Successors of the Apostles.

If the Holy Priests (says he) turn many to God, by their Holy Living and
Preaching, who can doubt such to be Partakers of the Contemplative Virtue, by
whose Example and Instruction, many are made Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven?
These are the Ministers of the Word, the Hearers of God, the Oracles of the
Holy Spirit. These are the Successors of the Apostles of the Lord Isti sunt
Apostolor. Domini Successores Prosp. de Vit. Con. Templ. I. 25.
.

The same is affirmed by Ambrose, De dign. Sacerdot. Cap. 1.
Claves Regni Coelorum in beato Petro Apostolo, cuncti suscepimus Sacerdotes.

Cyprian also speaks to the same purpose. Christ says to the Apostles, and to
all (Ecclesiastical) Rulers, who by a deputed Ordination Succeed the Apostles,
he that hears you, hears Me, and he that hears Me, hears Him that sent
Me Dicit ad omnes praepositos qui Apostolis vicaria ordinatione Succedunt. Ep.
LXIX.
.

I do not deny but Cyprian calls the Bishops Praepositi, Church-Rulers, and
speaks here of himself, who was a Bishop; but the Words are general, and must
include the Presbyters also.

1. Because he says, all the Praepositi succeed the Apostles, The Presbyters,
as well as the Bishops, are the Praepositi in Cyprian, so he calls them, The
Lord chose the Apostles, that is the Bishops and Praepositos Ep I. XV.
, Rulers. Here Cyprian calls the Presbyters Praepositos, and he makes the
Bishops and the Praepositi equally to Succeed the Apostles.

2. He says, all the Praepositi Succeed the Apostles, to whom Christ says,
he that hears you, hears Me. Now these Words of Christ belong to the
Presbyters, as much as to the Bishops. He that hears them, hears Christ.
Therefore these Words were spoken to them also, as the Apostles Successors,
according to Cyprian, And this is agreeable to the 1 Pet. 5.1. where the
Apostle Peter, Writing to to Presbyters, calls himself a Presbyter. Had the
Apostle written thus: The Bishops which are among you, I exhort, who am also a
Bishop; this would have been cried up for an Invincible Argument, to prove that
Bishops were the Apostles Successors, for he Writes to Bishops, and calls
himself a Bishop. The Argument is ours, to prove that Presbyters succeed the
Apostles, (who Style themselves Presbyters) in the ordinary part of their
Office. We do not deny but the Bishops succeed the Apostles, but as Presbyters,
and not as an Order of Church Officers, Superior to Presbyters; and therefore
Irenaeus, as we observed before, says, The Presbyters Succeed the Apostles,
making Presbyters and Bishops to be the same, according to the Holy Scriptures.

I have already proved, That the Presbyters of Ephesus Succeeded the Apostle in
the Government of that Church. Timothy was left there in Paul's Absence, when
he intended to come to Ephesus himself shortly, 1 Timothy 3.14. and 4.13. The
Presbyters were entrusted with the Government of the Church, when he had no
Thoughts of seeing them again, Acts 20.25.38.

Timothy, an Evangelist, was to supply the Temporary Absence of Paul from that
Church, the Presbyters his perpetual Absence, and therefore are properly his
Successors in the Government of that Church.

FINIS.

