A PLEA FOR Scripture Ordination: OR, TEN ARGUMENTS FROM Scripture and
Antiquity PROVING Ordination by Presbyters without Bishops to be valid. By I.
O. Minister of the Gospel.

To which is prefixed an Epistle by the Reverend Mr. Daniel Williams.

Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate,
Presbyteris esse majores. Hieron. in Ep. ad. Tit. 1 Cor. 4. 1. (...). London:
Printed for I. Salusbury at the Rising Sun in Cornhil over against the Royal
Exchange. 1694.

THE PREFACE.
THE Cause which these Papers Vindicate is not that of a Party, as some
unthinking People may imagine, but of the Reformation in General, which has
been propagated and supported, in its most flourishing Branches, by the
Ministry here pleaded for. The Ancient Vaudois, or Waldenses, those eminent and
faithful Witnesses against Antichristian Usurpations, have had no other for
near 500 years past Perrin's Hist. p. 53, 62.
. The first guides of the People from Mystical Egypt, Hist. of the Vaudois, c. 3
were Presbyters Ordained by Presbyters. These are they that gathered the first
Fruits unto God; under the Conduct of these the persecuted WOMAN FLED through a
Sea of Blood into the Wilderness: by their Ministry she has been fed and
nourished, these make the first Figure among the Witnesses that prophecy in
Sackcloth; they have gone in mourning from one Generation to another. When
others have assumed Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for mourning, the Garment
of Praise for the Spirit of heaviness; these have been fed with the Bread of
Tears, have been filled with bitterness, and made drunk with Wormwood. They
have been Men of Sorrows, and acquainted with grief. They have been sore broken
in the place of Dragons, and covered with the Shadow of Death, yet have they
not forgotten the Name of their God, or stretched out their hand to a strange
God.

It Is by the Ministry of these that the Truth prevailed, the Eyes of Nations
were opened, and vast Multitudes reduced to the Obedience of the Gospel. They
sealed their Ministry with their Blood, and Heaven sealed it with the most
glorious success.

Contra Waldens. cap. 4.
Rainerius, one of their Tormentors, complains of them, that they had spread
through all Countries, and crept into every Corner.

Walsingham, our Countryman, tells us how the Lolards (as they were here
called) had filled our Land, Walsing. Hist. p. 339.
and had their Ministers Ordained by Presbyters without Bishops: that they
justified these Ordinations, and asserted an inherent Power in Presbyters to
put forth all Ecclesiastical Acts without distinction.

We may rationally presume that their practice was uniform in other Countries;
and had we exact Records of their Church Administrations, we should find
innumerable Instances of Ordination by Presbyters among them: but the account
they give of themselves is so very imperfect, that had not their Enemies
transmitted to Posterity a Narrative of their Actions and Sufferings (though
very partially) we should have known little of them.

We have no reason to think that those blessed Worthies did either alter their
Judgments, or supersede their Practice concerning Ordination by Presbyters; and
therefore I take it for granted, that the same Ministry continued among them
until the beginning of the Reformation.

Here in England several of the Bishops were eminently instrumental in
promoting the Reformation, which gave them a deserved esteem in the thoughts of
all good men, especially of the poor Lolards, to whom that great Change was a
Resurrection from the dead.

By this means the Bishops continued their stations in the Church, and were
entrusted with the principal management of Ordination, which their Popish
Predecessors had engrossed into their hands long before.

But though Matters were thus settled, they were far from Claiming to
themselves a superior Power over Presbyters, or stamping a Ius Divinum upon
their Office. They acknowledged the identity of Bishops and Presbyters, that
Ordination by Presbyters was valid, and that Episcopacy was a bare Constitution
of the Civil Magistrate Dr. Stillingfl. Iren. p. 393.
, for the better governing of the Church. All this will be fully proved in the
following Discourse.

Thus it was in England, but in the foreign Churches it was quite otherwise;
there the Bishops were implacable Enemies to the Reformation, which gave the
Presbyters an Opportunity of re-assuming their inherent Power of Ordination,
and of laying aside the pretended superior Order of Bishops, as those who had
appropriated to themselves the just Rights of Presbyters, and divested them of
the inseparable Privileges of their Order: and had been so far from answering
the first design of their Constitution, of being a Remedy against Schism Hier.
in Ep. ad Tit.
, that partly by their Arbitrary Impositions, and partly by their boundless
Ambition, they had miserably torn and divided the Christian Church for several
Ages before, and contributed to the establishment of the usurping Bishop of
Rome. For these and other Reasons, they rejected Bishops from having any part
in their Church Government. This they committed to the Presbyters, as their
ancient Right Communi^ Concitio Presbyterorum gubernabatur Ecclesia. Hieron.
ubi supra, and ad Evagr.
.

If a Popish Bishop happened to be Converted to the Protestant Religion, he was
not capable of Exercising his Ministry among them, no not as a Presbyter, until
he submitted to a new Ordination See La Rocque's Conform. of D^scipline. cap.
1. art. 3.
.

This Establishment enraged the Roman Prelates, and drew forth their strongest
Efforts to assert their tottering Hierarchy, and to overthrow the Reformed
Ordinations.

Therefore the principal and leading Antagonists we have to do with, in the
present Controversy, are the Papists, especially the Jesuits, who with one
Mouth condemn Ordinations by Presbyters.

With us it is a very small thing that we should be judged of Man's day, we
acquiesce in that Judgment which will dispense Rewards and Punishments, not
according to the disputable Modes of Men's entrance into the Office, but as they
have faithfully, or otherwise, discharged the Duties of the Sacred Ministry.

Happy they, whose Record is on high, whose Witness is in Heaven, whose
Testimony is in their own Bosoms, and in the Consciences of those that hear
them.

I leave the following Discourse to recommend it self unto thee; Read with
observation, weigh every thing in an even Balance, and let the Impressions of
Truth form an Impartial Judgment.

I. O.

TO THE READER.
THE indispensible use of a Gospel Ministry must appear to such as at all
consider, the ignorance of Mankind in the way of Eternal Life, the innate
aversion to the terms of Reconciliation with God, the Mystery of Gospel
Revelations, the subtle and unwearied Attempts of Seducers against the Truth,
the backwardness to improvement in Grace and a Life according to the Rules of
Christianity, which even they discern, who are not utter Strangers to the
Impresses of a Divine Power, by the Word, in the illumination of their Minds,
and renovation of their Wills. Yea further, who would sustain the Labor and
Hazards of this holy Calling, or attend thereto with an assiduity requisite to
the ends thereof, if not by Office obliged? Nay, how would it enervate our
Pleadings with Sinners, and abate that Assurance given to Believers by the Word
and Sacraments, if we did not transact between God and them, as clothed with
the Authority of Ambassadors, delegated by Christ thereto, and supportted by
his Presence and Power in our Administrations?

The Lord Jesus, as Head of the Church, promises and dispenses Gifts suitable
to the Ministerial Office, and renders them so essential thereto, as that none
can be duly admitted to this Trust, who are not in some good degree fit to
teach, divide the Word aright, convince Gainsayers; yea credibly appearing
devoted to God, and concerned for the Salvation of Men. No Ordainers can
dispense with the want of these; nor is the Ministerial Office conveyed by
the greatest Solemnities to any Man void of these Qualifications; though the
best accomplished may awfully say, (...), 2 Cor. 2. 16.

The same holy Instituter of this Office ^ath wisely provided against
Intruders; and also for the encouragement of such as are capable, by subjecting
Probationers ordinarily to the Enquiry and Judgment of Men fit, and authorized
to determine of their Call and Endowments, and to invest them in the Office of
a Presbyter, by Fasting and Prayer, with imposition of Hands: the Authority and
Obligations of which Office are in the Scriptures adjusted by Christ, and can
admit of no Change at the Will of the Ordainers.

Reason directs that the Ordainers should be fit to judge of the necessary
Qualifications of such as are proposed to this Charge: The Scriptures determine
that the Ordainers be such as are invested and exercised in the same holy
Office. And who so capable to judge, or likely to be careful and faithful in
their Admissions? These are appointed to make a Minister, though Churches are
to elect who so approved shall be their Minister: Pastors invest in the Office,
though the People do appropriate the more stated and usual Employment of the
Officer. Confusion and a degenerate Ministry must ensue Men's attempting the
Ministry, if they get but a good conceit of themselves, or that particular
Churches assume the sending forth Preachers, or making Ministers for
themselves, unless in Cases very extraordinary.

The Reverend Author in the following Treatise has no design to reflect on
Episcopal Ordination, nor to raise any unseasonable Debates among Protestants.
But being in a peculiar manner assaulted as an Usurper of the Ministerial
Office, because separated thereto by the imposition of no Hands besides those
of Presbyters. He herein affirms, and I think with great Judgment and Evidence
proves, That Presbyters, though no Prelates, are authorized by the Lord Jesus
to Ordain fit Persons to the Office of Presbyters, and that the Ordination of
such is valid. Many have successfully engaged in this Debate heretofore, yet
thou will find some very considerable Addition to what occurs in most other
Authors. It Is not unworthy the Animadversion of all concerned for the mere
being of Religion, that there is a general Attempt this day, not only against
the Exercise of the Ministry in an aptitude to its end, but against the very
Office of the Ministry: many that widely differ in other things, do yet center
herein. The fordwardness of some to nullify the Mission of their Brethren,
conduces as much thereto as any thing, except the Personal Faults of
Ministers. Such decisions of the Subject in debate, yields no small Advantage
to the Romish Hierarchy, whiles most Protestants are unchurched, and their Holy
Administrations arraigned as Nul^ities: A Notion that never obtained in the
English Church till the Grotian design received Patronage here, and that to
subserve purposes as little propitious to our Civil Rights, as to Religion it
self. The Increase of Purity, Self-denial, Light and Love, would soon decide
Cases more important; and render the Vitals of Christianity more secure, which
are now so variously exposed.

October. 14. 1693. I am thy Servant in our common Lord, Daniel Williams.

ERRATA.
PAge 65. l. 4. r. Writers. ibid. l. 18. r. occasionally. p. 91. l. 2. r.
excluduntur. p. 100. l. 7. r. 100.

Through a Mistake of the Printer Chap. VI. Is made Chap. V. and Chap. VII. is
made Chap. VI. and so unto the end of the Book. So Arg. V. is made Arg. IV. and
Arg. VI. is made Arg. V. and so forward unto the last.

A PLEA FOR Scripture Ordination, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Use and Efficacy of the Ministry. It Is opposed by open Violence, false
Teachers, Divisions; the last of which occasioned the present Undertaking. The
Case of Ordination by Presbyters stated.

THE Ministry of Reconciliation is that powerful Engine by which the strong
Holds of Satan are demolished, the Gates of Hell broken down, Sin's Captives
reduced, and Trophies erected in honor of the victorious Prince of Peace. The
Dispensation of the Gospel is the Glory of Nations, the Support of
Christianity, the Shield of Truth, and the Triumph of the Cross. By this
despised means Christ divides him a portion with the great, Isa. 53. 12.
and shares the spoil with the strong: by the foolishness of Preaching he
confounds the Wise, and by weak earthen Vessels he breaks the Iron-Scepter of
the Prince of the Power of the Air.

For this reason it is that Gospel Ministers are so much opposed in the world,
while the Prince of Darkness has a Kingdom in it, he will bend all his Forces
against them, as Invaders of his Dominions, and irreconcilable Enemies to his
usurped Regiment.

Many and various are his Serpentine Devices and repeated Stratagems to render
their Endeavors of winning Souls ineffectual. Sometimes he assaults them by
open Violence, he pours upon them the strength of Battle, to the disgracing of
their Persons, the spoiling of their Goods, the infringing of their Liberties,
and the sacrificing of their very Lives to the insatiable Rage of unreasonable
Men. Romans 8. 36, 37.
They are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for the slaughter,
and yet in all these things are more then Conquerors through him that loved
them, and has promised his Presence with them to the end of Time: He holds the
Stars in his right Hand, guides their Motions, and restores a declining World
by their powerful Influences.

Their restless Adversary failing in his former method transforms himself into
an Angel of Light, that he may more insensibly destroy the Angels of the
Churches. What he cannot effect by Power, he will attempt by Craft. He Will send
forth his daring Emissaries to undermine Preaching by Preaching. Thus the
Adversaries of Judah offered to build the Temple, that they might hinder the
building of it. St. Paul's Enemies preached Christ of envy and strife, that
they might obstruct his sincere Preaching. The Devil himself turns Preacher in
the Pythonic Woman to scandalize the Apostle's Ministry. He emits Wolves in
Sheeps clothing to tear and devour the unwary Flock.

If he be defeated in this Attempt, he will make trial of skill in as pernicious a
way as either of the former, to wit, by alienating their Affections, and
imbittering their Spirits toward one another. He arms them with Weapons that
are foreign to the nature of their warfare, he turns their Plow-shares into
Swords, and makes Ambassadors of Peace to become Heralds of War, and the
Fathers of Unity Sons of Discord. Ephesians. 4. 11, 14.
Of all Divisions those amongst Ministers have the saddest tendency; of all the
Divisions of Ministers, those that concern their Ministerial Call are the most
destructive.

It is not strange that Romish Priests should Condemn all Reformed Ministers
without distinction, that the spurious Offspring of the Scarlet Whore should
conspire against the Seed of the Woman, that the Ministers of Antichrist should
reject the Ministers of Christ. Their unmerited Condemnation is our Convincing
Justification.

But that which administers just cause of Sorrow, is to behold Protestant
Ministers uncharitably Arraigning one another. Some unthinking Dissenters
ignorantly condemn all that are Ordained by Bishops as no Ministers of Christ,
not considering that thereby they nullify their own Baptism, which most of
them received from Episcopal Ministers; if they are but mere Laymen, their
Baptism is no Baptism, and ought to be repeated in the Judgment of many. This
Principle naturally leads to Anabaptism.

On the other hand, some Dignitaries of the Church of England condemn all that
are not Ordained by Bishops as no Ministers, and so they Anathematize all the
Reformed Churches that have no Bishops; they affirm their Ministry and
Sacraments to be mere Nullities, and that there is no Salvation to be had in
their Communion; and therefore that it is safer to continue in the Roman
Church: as if the empty Name of a Bishop were more necessary to Salvation, then
an interest in the great Bishop of our Souls, the Lord Jesus; and an Idolatrous
Heretical Church under the Conduct of Antichristian Bishops, were preferrable
to an Evangelical Orthodox Church without them. But these severe Judges that
pass a damnatory Sentence upon the greatest, if not the best part of the
Reformed Churches are worthily deserted by all sober and moderate Churchmen.

Others of that Communion own Ordination by Presbyters without Bishops to be
valid, but they look upon them as Schismatical, where Bishops may be had. We
have no Controversy with these about the validity of Ordination by Presbyters,
but about the Charge of Schism, which we conceive falls upon the Imposers of
unscriptural Conditions of Ordination.

Others allow Ordinations by Presbyters in the Foreign Churches, who have no
Bishops; but they Censure such Ordinations for Nullities, where Bishops may be
had, as in England. Our present Controversy is with these. For the stating of
the Point in difference, we will consider, 1. Wherein we are agreed; 2. Wherein
the real difference lies.

Our Agreement.
We agree,

1. That Christ has appointed a Ministry in his Church. A Gospel Ministry is
not of Humane, but of Divine Original. It belongs to Jesus Christ to institute
what sort of Officers must serve in his House.

2. We agree that the Ministry is a standing Office to continue in the
Christian Church to the end of Time, Matthew. 28.19, 20.

3. That no Man ought to take upon him the Sacred Office of a Minister of the
Word, without a lawful Calling or Mission, Romans 10.14, 15. Ier. 14.14. Heb. 5.4.

4. That Ordination is always to be continued in the Church, Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy
5.21, 22.

5. That Ordination is the Solemn setting apart of a Person to some Public
Church-Office.

6. That every Minister of the Word is to be Ordained by Imposition of Hands,
and Prayer with Fasting, Acts 13. 3. 1 Timothy 5.22.

7. That he who is to be Ordained Minister must be duly qualified both for Life
and Ministerial Abilities, according to the Rules of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.
Tit. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.

In these things which comprehend all the Essentials of the Ministry, whatever
more, we are fully agreed.

The main difference is about the Persons Ordaining. We say, Ordination may be
performed by mere Presbyters. Some of our Brethren of the Episcopal Persuasion
say, That no Ordinations are valid but such as are done by Diocesan Bishops.
The common Cry against Protestant dissenting Ministers is, That they are no
true Ministers of Christ, but Intruders and false Prophets. And why so? Not
because they are not Orthodox in their Doctrine, for they have subscribed all
the Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England: Nor can they charge them with
Insufficiency or Scandal, for they are generally Persons of approved Abilities,
exemplary Conversations, and great Industry in the Lord's Vineyard, who seek
not their own things, but the things of Christ. They are willing to be tried by
the Characters of Gospel Ministers. Where lies the defect then? why in this,
they are not Ordained by Bishops. They derive not their Power from such
Diocesans as pretend to an uninterrupted Succession down from the Apostles.
They were Ordained by mere Presbyters that have not the Ordaining Power, and
none can communicate that to another which he has not in himself.

Our Case then in short is this, Whether Ordination by mere Presbyter's,
without Diocesan Bishops, be valid. The Question needs but little Explanation.

By Ordination, I mean the setting of Persons apart by Imposition of Hands for
the Sacred Office of the Ministry.

By Presbyters, I understand Gospel Ministers, who are called to the Oversight
of Souls, and to whom the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are committed.

By Diocesan Bishops I intend that Species of Church Officers which claim to
themselves a Superior Power of Order and Jurisdiction above Presbyters, and to
be the sole Pastors of several hundreds of Congregations, having Parish Priests
under them who have no Power of Discipline in the Church.

By valid, I mean not what the Old Canons make so, but what the Scriptures
determine to be so. Those Sacred Oracles which are of Divine Inspiration, and
not Arbitrary Canons of weak Men's devising, are the Foundation of our Faith,
and the infallible Standard by which Truth and Error must be tried.

The Question being thus explained, I affirm,

That such as are set apart with Imposition of Hands for the Office of the
Ministry by Gospel Ministers, without the Species of Church Officers who claim
a superior Power over Presbyters, are regularly Ordained, and their Ordination
is valid according to the Scriptures. This Truth I hope to demonstrate by the
following Arguments.

CHAP. II
Presbyters have power to Ordain, because they are Scripture Bishops. The
Syriac Translation uses not different Names. If there be a difference, the
prebeminence belongs to the Presbyter. Objection concerning Timothy and Titus
answered. 1. The Jesuits urge this against the Protestants. 2. The Scripture
does not call them Bishops. 3. The Government of Ephesus was in the Presbyters
of that Church. 4. St. Paul does not mention Timothy in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, as he does in other Epistles. 5. When St. Paul took his last leave
of them, he made no mention of Timothy for his Successor, though he were
present. 6. He did not reside at Ephesus. 7. Ephesus no Diocesan Church, but a
Parochial or Congregational. The Asian Angels no Diocesan Bishops: Proved from
the extent of the Asian Churches, from Tyconius in Austin. Contents of our
authorized Bibles, and acceptance of Angel in the Jewish Church.

THAT Ordination which has all the Scripture requisits is valid, Arg. 1.
but Ordination by Presbyters has all the Scripture requisits, Therefore --
The Major is undeniable to Persons that own the inspired Writings to be a
perfect Rule. The Minor I thus prove: The Scripture requisits of Ordination,
are some in the Ordainers, some in the Ordained, some in the Circumstances of
Ordination. As to the Ordained, they must have such Qualifications as the
Scripture requires 1 Timothy 3.... These we are willing to be tried by. As to the
Circumstances there must be Examination, Approbation, public and solemn
setting apart by imposition of Hands, with Fasting and Prayer. As to the
Ordainers, it is enough that they were Presbyters, and as such had an inherent
Power to Ordain; for according to Scripture, a Bishop and a Presbyter are one
and the same, not only in Name, but in Office. The Elders or Presbyters of
Ephesus are called Bishops of Ephesus, to whom the sole oversight of that
Church did belong, Acts 20. 17, 28. The Presbyters of the Jewish Diaspora, to
whom St. Peter wrote, are required (...), to feed or rule the Flock, and to
perform the office and work of Bishops among them 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2.
: (...) signifies to rule Rev. 2. 27
. They are called Rulers and Governors 1 Timothy 5. 17-(...).
... Justin Martyr calls the chief Minister of the Church (...). St. Paul's
ruling Presbyter is Iustin's ruling Bishop. Bishops and Presbyters have one and
the same Qualifications, Tit. 1. 5, 7. After he had given the Character of
Persons to be Ordained Presbyters, v. 5, 6. he adds a reason, v. 7. (...), etc.
There would be no force in the Apostles reasoning, if Bishops were of a
superior Order to Presbyters.

The Scriptures own but two Orders of ordinary Church Officers, Bishops and
Deacons 1 Timothy, 3. Phil. 1. 1.
, and of these Bishops there were more then one in every Church: So there was
at Philippi and at Ephesus Acts 20. 17, 28.
. To be sure then, they were not Bishops of the English Species, i. e. sole
Governors of many Churches, but Presbyters in a proper sense; many of which
were Ordained in every Church, Antioch it self not excepted Acts 14. 21, 22, 23.
The Apostles gave that Church no Primacy above Lystra and Iconium, but settled
the same sort of Officers in all. Though afterward it overtopt it is Neighbors,
and became a Metropolitical Church. But from the beginning 'twas not so.

The Syriac Translation, which is so very ancient, that it comes nearest in
time to the Original, uses not two words, one for Bishop, another for
Presbyter, as our Translation and the Greek, but it has only (...) the word in
Chaldee and in Syriac signifies Presbyters. Tit. 1. 5. and Constitueres.. (...)
Seniores in qualibet Civitate, v. 7 debet enim (...) Senior esse
irreprehensibilis. I have left thee in Creet to ordain Elders in every City,
for an Elder [we say Bishop] must be blameless... So in 1 Timothy 3. 1. The Office
of a Bishop, as we render it out of the Greek: The Syriac reads it (...) the
Office of a Presbyter. Instead of Bishops and Deacons in Phil. 1. 1. the Syriac
reads it Presbyters and Deacons. This is a strong proof that the distinction of
Bishop and Presbyter was unknown when that Translation was made, for it uses
not so much as different Names. Of the Antiquity of the Syriac Version vide
Walt. Praef. de Edit. Bib. Polygl. p. 30 -- 40.
Walt.

If there be any distinction between a Bishop and a Presbyter, the pre-eminence
must be given by the Scripture to the Presbyters; for as our Bishops say, their
Office distinct from Presbyters, is to Rule and Govern, and the Office of a
Presbyter is to Preach and Administer the Sacraments. Now the Administration of
the Sacraments and Preaching, are more excellent Works then Ruling and
Governing. The Apostle says expressly, that they that labor in the Word and
Doctrine, deserve more honor then they that rule well 1 Timothy 5. 17.
.

Moreover, the Apostles style themselves Presbyters, but never Bishops. St.
Peter calls himself Presbyter 1 Pet. 5. 1.
, but never calls himself a Bishop. And therefore it is a wonder the Pope, his
pretended Successor, and those that derive their Canonical Succession from his
Holiness, should call themselves Bishops, unless it be by the Divine Disposal
to show the fallibility of their Foundations.

The Papists, Object.
who therein are imitated by some of our Adversaries, do say, That the Names
are common, but the Offices are distinct. Thus Spensoeus Spens. contra Bucer.
, a Sorbonist, objects, Nominum quidem esse, sed non munerum confusionem.

The Instances mentioned above do clearly Evince an Indentity of Offices. Answ.
When the Apostle bids the Presbyters of Ephesus take heed to all the Flock
over which the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops Acts 20. 28.
; he does not speak of the Name but the Office. And it is evident that St. Peter
1 Pet. 5. 1. 2. (...).
speaks of the Office, when he Exhorts the Presbyters to feed the Flock, and to
perform the Office of Bishops among them; so that there were as many Bishops as
there were Presbyters in Churches of the Apostles planting.

How comes it to pass when the Apostle reckons up the several Ephesians. 4. 11.
sorts of Ministers, which Christ had appointed in his Church, that he makes no
mention of Superior Bishops, if they be so necessary as some would have us
believe. He mentions Pastors and Teachers. The Patrons of Episcopacy will not
say Bishops are meant by Teachers, their proper work being Ruling: nor can they
be meant by Pastors, for Presbyters are Pastors, and exhorted to feed the Flock
Acts 20. 17, 28. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2.
. Our Learned Writers against Popery think it a good Argument to disprove the
Pope's Headship, that he is not mentioned in the List of Church Officers 1 Cor.
12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11.
reckoned up in the New Testament: no more is a Bishop superior to Presbyters,
so much as named in those places. If any say it is omitted, because he was to
succeed the Apostles, he has the Pope ready to join with him in the same Plea
for his Office.

Object. Object.
Timothy and Titus were Scripture Bishops, superior to Presbyters.

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
The Papists urge this Objection against the Protestants. So does Turrianus the
Jesuit Vid. Turr. Sophis. inter Sadeel. Op. p. 598.
; so does Bellarmine. Our English Episcopacy has scarce one Argument for it is
Defense, but what will indifferently serve the Popish Prelacy. The Bishops best
Weapons have been Consecrated in the Jesuits School, and have been dext'rously
managed against the whole Reformation.

Timothy and Titus the Title of Bishops? The Postscripts to the Epistles
directed to them, are confessedly no part of Scripture, nor are they very
ancient. The Postscripts to the Syriac makes no mention of their being Bishops;
nor can it be gathered from the Body of the Epistles, that they were Bishops.
When the second Epistle to Timothy was written, he was an Evangelist, and
therefore no Bishop. He is exhorted to do the work of an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4.
5. Suppose Paul had said, Do the work of a Bishop: would not our Episcopal Men
have judged it a clear Argument for his Episcopal Power? Who could do the Work
of a Bishop, but a Bishop? In like manner we say, None can do the work of an
Evangelist, but an Evangelist? Evangelists were extraordinary Officers, above
Pastors and Teachers Ephesians. 4. 11
. The work of an Evangelist is set forth at large by Eusebius. Hist. 111. 34.
Eusebius: They did preach Christ to those which had not as yet heard the Word
of Faith, they delivered unto them the Holy Scriptures, or dain'd Pastors,
committed to them the Charge of those that were newly received into the Church,
and they did (...), pass over unto other Countries and Nations. With whom
agrees In Ephesians 4.
Chrysostom, (...).

A Learned Prelate of the Church of England, conceives the Bishops to succeed
the Apostles, the Presbyters to succeed the Prophets, and the Deacons to
succeed the Evangelists; and if so, the Deacons may put in a Claim to the
Ordaining Power; for Timothy an Evangelist assumed it, whose Successors they
are. If Evangelists were not proper Successors to the Apostles, and Bishops be
not Successors to the Evangelists, I cannot see how Timothy's doing the work of
an Evangelist can support the Ius Divinum of English Episcopacy.

Nor can anything be concluded from the Apostle's words to him, L^y hands on no
man suddenly 1 Timothy 5. 22.
: Does it follow therefore the sole Power of Ordination in Ephesus did belong
to him? It may as rationally be inferred the sole power of Exhorting and
Teaching did belong to him; for the Apostle bids him be instant in season and
out of season in preaching the Word 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2.
. If it be said, Preaching is common to Presbyters, but so is not Ordination,
it is gratis dictum, and a begging of the Question. Paul did not invest Timothy
with a greater power then he himself did Exercise. He did not assume the power
of Ordination into his own hands, but takes the Presbytery with him 1 Timothy 4.
14.
. He joined Barnabas with him, if not others, in the Ordination of Presbyters
at Antioch Acts 14. 23.
Timothy's abiding in Ephesus does not prove him to be Bishop there; for Paul
did not enjoin him to be resident there, but besought him to abide there till
he came 1 Timothy 1. 3. and 4. 13, 14.
, which he intended shortly to do 1 Timothy 3. 14, 15.
. The Apostle sent him to Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica, furnished, without
doubt, with the same powers which he had at Ephesus, otherwise his Negotiations
had not been effectual to settle those Churches; and was he Bishop of these
places also?

Bellarmine grounds Timothy's Episcopal Jurisdiction upon 1 Timothy 5. 19. Against
an Elder receive not an Accusation, etc. which Dr. Whittaker, Divinity
Professor in Cambridge, undermines and overthrows by demonstrating that this
place proves not Timothy's power over over Presbyters: his words are these, Ex
Apostoli mente -- According to the meaning of the Apostle to receive an
Accusation, is to acquaint the Church with the Crime Whitt. contr. 5. q. 1. c.
2. s. 16.
. Which not only Superiors, but Equals, yea and Inferiors also may do.

The Presbyters and the People may receive an Accusation against their Bishop;
are they therefore Superior to him? Cypr. Ep. 64 -- 68.
Cyprian writes to Epictetus, and the People of Assura, not to admit
Fortunatianus to be Bishop again, because he had denied the Faith. He commends
also the Clergy and People of Spain for rejecting Basilides and Martialis who
had sacrificed to Idols.

III. When Timothy was made Bishop Ephesus, where we find several
Presbyter-Bishops before Acts 20. 17, 28.
: what became of them? were they unbishop'd and made simple Presbyters, that
they must no more Ordain or Govern, but be subject to Timothy? 'Twas thought no
small punishment in after Ages for a Bishop to be degraded into the Presbyter's
form, and 'twas for some notorious Crime. What Crime were these guilty of?

Timothy was the fixed Bishop of Ephesus, whom St. Paul had deputed for his
Successor, and so not subject to him any more, how comes he to promise to come
shortly to Ephesus himself 1 Timothy 3. 14. 15. and 4. 13.
. What had Paul to do in Ephesus now, if he had settled a Successor there, and
had no power over him or his Church? He forbids others to be (...), busy
bodies in other men's matters 1 Timothy 5. 13.
; and would he himself be such a one? (...) are condemned 1 Pet. 4. 15.
, and shall we make Paul of this number?

It Is more unaccountable that St. Paul should write an Epistle to the Ephesians
(long after the first Epistle to Timothy) and not mention their pretended
Bishop Timothy in the whole Epistle, as he does in all his Epistles to the
Churches, except that to the Galatians. It Is a certain Evidence he was neither
Bishop there, nor Resident there. We find him long after this at Rome, and
invited by the Apostle thither, that he might be helpful to him in the Ministry
2 Timothy 4. 9, 10, 11.
, from whence the Apostle intended to take him along with him to visit the
Churches of Judea Heb. 13. 23.
: and was he Bishop of Rome and Judea also? The truth is, he was no fixed
Officer in any one place, but went up and down, sometimes as Paul's Companion,
sometimes as his Messenger, to settle the Churches, as other Evangelists did.
If Non-residency has such a Patron, and Timothy has taught Men, to leave
their Churches year after year, and play the Pastors many hundred Miles
distant, it may tempt us to dream that Non-residency is a Duty.

V. If he was not Bishop of Ephesus, Ephesus when Paul took his last leave of
the Presbyters there Acts 20. 17, 28.
. He commits to them the oversight of the Church, as the proper Bishops of it,
without the least mention of Timothy, though he was then present Acts 20. 4, 5,
6, 7, 13, 14.
. The whole Episcopal Power is given to the Presbyters, before their supposed
Bishop's face: or if he had not been there at that time, how comes Paul to be
so regardless (when he concluded he should never see their Faces any more Ib.
v. 25.
) as not to name his Successor? was he only ignorant of the prophecies
concerning Timothy 1 Timothy 4 14. 1 Timothy 1. 18.
. If he had not been qualified for this Office now, he might have given the
Presbyters of Ephesus some hints concerning the Prophecies that went before on
him, of his future usefulness as a Bishop in that Church. But why should any
imagine so worthy a Person not qualified for this Undertaking? He that was
qualified to be the Apostle's Messenger to so many Churches 1 Cor. 4. 17. Act.
17. 14. and 18. 5.
, whom St. Paul styles his Work-fellow Romans 16. 21.
, and whose name he joins with his own in his Epistles written to several
Churches 2 Cor. 1. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. 3 These. 1. 1
, could not want a Character to render him worthy of this Charge at Ephesus.
How then comes the Apostle to overlook him, and to fix the Government, in the
Presbyters of that Church Act. 20. 28 27.
? He told the Elders of Ephesus at Miletus, that he had not spared to declare
unto them all the Counsel of God. How can this be, when he neglects to inform
them about his ordinary Successor? If Ministry and Churches depend upon this
Succession, 'twas no small part of the Counsel of God to be declared unto them.
He tells them he knew they should never see his face any more Acts 20. 25.
. Whether he did see them again, or no, is not material to the point. It Is
certain he thought he should not; how then comes he to leave them as Sheep
without a Shepherd, to defend them against those Wolves that should enter after
his departure Acts 20 29 V. 28.
? The reason is obvious, he thought the Presbyters of Ephesus fit for this
undertaking, without a superior Bishop.

Thus we see that Timothy was no Bishop at this time, nor had the Apostle
pointed at him as his intended Successor, but the first Epistle to Timothy
(upon which his pretended Episcopacy is built) was written before this time;
therefore no power given him in that Epistle, can prove him to be a Bishop.

That this Epistle was written before his Imprisonment at Rome, when he went to
Macedonia Acts 20. 1, 2, 4. 1 Timothy 3. 3.
, is acknowledged by Bishop Hall Vind. p. 97.
, though he was a zealous Defender of the Ius Divinum of Episcopacy. Of this
Opinion is Athanasius, Theodoret, Baronius, Ludov. Capellus, Grotius, Hammond,
Lightfoot, Carry, etc.

Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus when the first Epistle was written to him, 2 Timothy 4. 12
how comes he to be absent from Ephesus, when Paul writ the second Epistle to
him? was Timothy a Non-resident Bishop? Paul sends Tychicus to Ephesus with an
Epistle to the Church there, but not a word of Timothy their Bishop in the
whole Epistle, but Tychicus is recommended to them as a faithful Minister in
the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 21, 22. This was after the writing of the first Epistle to
him, when he is supposed to be Bishop there, even when the second Epistle was
written to him, 2 Timothy 4. 12. If any could imagine this Epistle to have found
Timothy in Ephesus, how comes the Apostle to call him away from his Charge? 2 Timothy 4. 9. They that say, it was to receive his dying words, must prove it. The
Apostle gives another reason, 2 Timothy 4. 10, 11. that he had only Luke with him
of all his Companions, and therefore desires him to come to him, and to bring
Mark with him, as being profitable to him for the Ministry. He sends for Titus
to come to him to Nicopolis ( Tit. 3. 12.) from his supposed Bishopric of
Creet, and was he to receive his dying words there also, about fourteen years
before his death? for that Epistle was written in the Year of Christ 55. and
Nero's 1. vid. Lightf. harm. Vol. 1 p. 309. Nay, how comes the Apostle to send
him afterward to Dalmatia? 2 Timothy 4. 10. was he Bishop there also? I question
whether Non-residency was allowed of, much less enjoined to such stated
Church Officers as Timothy and Titus are feigned to be.

It is true, some of the Fathers say, they were Bishops of those places. But
it is considerable that Eusebius says no more, then (...), it is reported that
Timothy was the first Bishop of Ephesus. He does not affirm it. Theodoret calls
him' (...), so he calls Titus, (...), and yet few will take them for real
Apostles. They say also that Peter was Bishop of Rome, yet many of our
Protestant Writers deny it; so does Reynolds against Heart, p. 110, 111 -- 118.
Reynolds against Heart, and Dr. Barrow of the Supremacy. The Fathers and
Councils speak of the Officers of former times, according to the style of their
own.

To conclude; If Timothy and Titus be not Bishops of the English Species, then
there were no such in the Apostles times. That Timothy was not such, we have
proved; and if Timothy was not, no more was Titus, whose power and work was the
same with Timothy's. If the power of Ordination, invested in Timothy at
Ephesus, does not prove him Bishop there, no more does the same power given to
Titus in Creet, Tit. 1. 3. prove him Bishop there.

Timothy and Titus were real Bishops, or fixed Pastors of Ephesus and Creet, it
will be no Argument for Diocesan Bishops, except the Church of Ephesus, and
that of Creet did appear to be of the same extent with our Diocesan Churches,
which can never be proved. Did the Church of Ephesus consist of one hundred or
two hundred Parishes, or particular Congregations, under the conduct of their
proper Presbyters, which were all subject to Timothy, as their Bishop? This
must be proved, or the instance of Timothy's being Bishop of Ephesus will be
impertinent to the present Case. Nay, there are strong presumptions that the
Church of Ephesus consisted of no more Members then could ordinarily meet in
one place. That Church had but one Altar, at which the whole Congregation
ordinarily received the Lord's Supper, in Ignatius his time Ignat. Ep. ad
Ephesians. Voss. Edit. p. 25.
, which was many years after Timothy's death. (...), etc. Give diligence
therefore to assemble together frequently for the Eucharist of God, and for
praise, for when you often come into one place, the powers of Satan are
destroyed, etc. I render (...) into one place, as our English Translators do,
Acts 2. 1. He says also, 'O (...). p. 20.
He therefore that comes not to the same place, is proud and condemns
himself. In his Epistle to the Magnesians, he mentions one Altar, which further
explains his meaning Ignat. ad Mag. p 34.
: (...). Let all of you come together, as into the Temple of God, as unto one
Altar. The meaning of one Altar is plain in ancient Authors. Cyprian calls
separate Communions the setting up Altar contra Altar Cypr. Ep.
.: To be intra Altar, is to be in Church Communion; to be extra Altar, is to
be without.

The Bishop of Salisbury does acknowledge that Ignatius his Bishop was only the
Pastor of a particular Church; his words are these Burn. Vindic. of the Chapter of
Scotland, p. 51.
: By the strain of Ignatius his Epistles, especially that to Smyrna, it would
appear, that there was but one Church, at least but one place, where there was
but one Altar and Communion, in each of these Parishes, [which was the Bishops
whole Charge.]

And if so, then the Church of Ephesus, to whom he directed one of his
Epistles, was of no larger extent, except we imagine it was decreased in
Ignatius's time from what it was in Timothy's days, which is absurd. The
Christians were rather more numerous in the next Age, then they were in the
Apostles time. And yet we find in the beginning of the fourth Century the
Believers, in greater Cities then Ephesus, were no more then could meet in one
place, or in two at the most. For Constantine the Great thought two Temples
sufficient for all the Christians in his Royal City of Constantinople; the one
he called the Temple of the Apostles; Trlp. Hist. lib. 2. c. 18. In Gent. Exam.
p. 399.
Vt doceret Scripturas, Apostolorum doctrinae fundamentum, in Templis
praedicandas esse: the other he called, the Temple of Peace; Quia Concilii
Nicaeni Opera, quod celebrandum curaverat, Ecclesiae pacem restituerat, and
Arrianorum impias controversias compescuerat. Constantius added one more; and
there were but five Temples in that great City, that was little inferior to
Rome, in the days of Justinian. See Gentiletus his Exam. Council. Trid. lib. 5.
sect. 48. Some of our greater Parishes have as many Chapels, or Places of
Public Worship, as there were Temples in Constantinople, which are but a small
part of an English Diocese. But the Learned Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Clarkson, have
so fully proved the English Species of Episcopacy to be destructive of the
Scripture and Primitive Form, that until they be solidly answered, we will take
it for granted, that it is a Humane Creature which grew up as the Man of Sin
did, and owes it is being to the mere favor of Secular Powers, who can as
easily reduce it to it is primitive Nothing.

Some have pretended to make Bishops of the seven Asian Angels, when they have
proved their power of Jurisdiction, and the extent of their Diocesses to be the
same with ours, they shall be heard. The state of Ephesus, one of the seven
Asian Churches, we have seen already, by which we may guess at the rest.

The Church of Smyrna, another of the seven Churches of Asia, consisted of a
single Congregation that ordinarily worshipped and communicated in one place.
Epist. ad Smyr p. 6.
(...). Let all follow the Bishop, as Jesus Christ does the Father, and the
Presbytery as the Apostles, and reverence the Deacons as God's Commandment. Let
none manage any Church matters without the Bishop. And a little after he adds,
(...). Where the Bishop is, there let the Multitude be, even as where Christ
is, there the Catholic Church is; it is not lawful without the Bishop either
to baptize, or to make Love Feasts. Here it is evident, 1. That the Multitude,
which were the Bishops Flock, ordinarily worshipped God together. 2. That they
did this under the conduct of their respective Bishop, who was ordinarily
present with every Church Assembly. 3. That he was the ordinary Administrator
of Baptism to his Flock, which he could not do, had it been as large as our
present Dioceses. 4. That the same Assemblies had a Bishop, Presbyters and
Deacons: For the same Multitude is to follow the same Bishop, Presbyters, and
Deacons; and how could one Parish follow all the Presbyters of all other Parish
Churches of a Diocese whom they never knew? Ignat. ad Polyc. p. 12
Ignatius's Epistle to Polycarp, who was then Bishop of Smyrna, makes it more
evident, that he was Bishop of a single Congregation, (...). Keep frequent
Congregations, inquire after all by name, despise not Menservants and Maid
servants. I leave it to such as are willing to understand the Truth, to
consider how great Polycarp's Church then was, when the Bishop himself was to
look after every one by name, even the Menservants and the Maids.

We find by Ignatius's Epistle to the Philadelphians (another of these
Churches) that the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia had no larger a Diocese
then those of Ephesus and Smyrna Ignat. ad Philadelph. p.40.
: (...). Study therefore to use one Eucharist [or Eucharistical Communion] for
there is one Flesh [or Body] of our Lord Jesus Christ, [which is represented in
the Sacramental Bread] and one Cup [which is Sacramentally given] into the
union of his Blood, one Altar, one Bishop, with the Presbytery and the Deacons
my fellow Servants. Nothing can be more full than this Testimony: They are all
to join in one Assembly for the Eucharist, and there must be but one Altar for
this Communion, and one Bishop, and one Presbytery with the Deacons with him;
and such a Bishop is a Parish Minister or Rector, assisted by his Curates and
Deacons, the latter of which were originally instituted to serve Tables, Acts 6.

II. Tyconius's old Exposition mentioned Austin, has not been yet disproved,
which is this, That by the Angels are meant the whole Churches, and not any
single Persons: Aug. lib. 3. 30. de Doctr. Christian. The whole style of the
Text countenances this Exposition; for as every Message begins with ( To the
Angel) so it ends with ( To the Churches.)

III. In the Contents of our authorized Ministers. By which we may understand
the sense of the Old Church of England, agreeable to many of the Ancients; such
as Aretas, Primasius, Ambrose, Gregory the Great, Bid, Haymo, and many more.

Scripture is it is own best Interpreter; we find there that the Church of
Ephesus, Acts 20.17.28.
over which one of these Angels presided, had several Bishops in it, and all
the other Churches had several Ministers in them, as will be acknowledged by
our Antagonists: Now these other Ministers are included, either under the name
of Candlesticks, and so reckoned among the People, which is absurd; or under
the name of Stars and Angels. Many may be intended by one Angel, as afterward
by one Beast, cap. 13. and one Head, cap. 17. It Is remarkable, that it is
spoken of the Candlesticks, the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches; but
of the Stars it is said indefinitely, Rev. 1.20.
the seven Stars are the Angels (not seven Angels) of the seven Churches.

To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, therefore the Angel was a Bishop, and
had Authority over other Ministers. St. John places the Presbyters next the
Throne of Christ himself, Rev. 5.11.
and the Angels further off at a greater distance; shall we therefore say that
the Presbyters are more honorable then the Bishops? the Inference is much more
natural then the other, if Angels be Bishops, as our Adversaries affirm. 1 Timothy
5.17.
St. Paul prefers the preaching, before the ruling Presbyter.

V. It Is observed by many Chronologers, Timothy was alive when the Epistle to
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus was written, Rev. 2.2
and shall we think that he had left his first love, whom Paul so often
commends for his Zeal and Diligence in the Work of God.

VI. To put this matter out of doubt, John, a Jew, calls the Ministers of
Particular or Parochial Churches, the Angels of the Churches, in the style of
the Jewish Church, who called the Public Minister of every Synagogue (...) the
Angel of the Church. vid. Lights Vol. 2. p. 133.
They called him also (...), or Bishop of the Congregation. Every Synagogue, or
Congregation, had its Bishop, or Angel of the Church. Now the Service and
Worship of the Temple being abolished, as being Ceremonial, God transplanted
the Worship and Public Adoration used in the Synagogues, which was Moral, into
the Christian Church, to wit, the Public Ministry, Public Prayers, reading
God's Word, and Preaching, etc. Hence the names of the Ministers of the Gospel
were the very same, the Angel of the Church, and the Bishop, which belonged to
the Ministers in the Synagogues. We love Bishops so well, that we could wish we
had as many Bishops as there are Parishes in England, as the Jewish Synagogues
had, to which St. John alludes, when he calls them Angels of the Churches.

In sum, If Presbyters be Scripture Bishops, as we have proved, and Diocesan
Bishops have no footing there, as has been evinced, then our Ordinations are
Iure Divino, and therefore valid.

CHAP. III.
Instances of Ordination by Presbyters in Scripture. St. Paul and Barnabas
Ordained by Presbyters. Their Ordination a Pattern to the Gentile Churches,
Acts 13.1, 2, 3. vindicated. Turrianus's Evasion confuted. Timothy Ordained by
Presbyters, 1 Timothy 4.14. explained. The Particles (...) and (...) used
promiscuously.

THAT Ordination of which we have Scripture Examples is valid, Arg. II.
but of Ordination by Presbyters we have Scripture Examples, therefore
Ordination by Presbyters is valid. The Major I hope will not be denied, it
carries its own Evidence with it to such as are willing to be guided by the
practice of Apostolical Churches, which is the first, and best Antiquity. The
Minor I thus prove, St. Paul and Barnabas were Ordained by Presbyters, Acts
13.1, 2, 3. so was Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14.

These two Instances deserve a more particular consideration. Concerning the
first, in Acts 13. these two things are evident: 1. That Luke speaks of
Ordination, he mentions the separating of Paul and Barnabas to a Ministerial
Work, by Fasting and Prayer, with the Laying on of Hands; and what more can be
done in Ordination? It Is true, they had an extraordinary Call before, Gal. 1.1.
yet being now to plant the Gospel among the Gentiles, they enter upon their
Work at the ordinary Door of Ordination. Vol. 1. p. 289.
Dr. Lightfoot thinks it was for this reason, That the Lord hereby might set
down a Platform of Ordaining Ministers to the Church of the Gentiles to future
times.

2. The Ordainers were Prophets and Teachers, Acts 13.1, 2. Now Teachers are
ordinary Presbyters, who are distinguished from Prophets and other
extraordinary Officers, both in 1 Cor. 12.28. and in Ephesians. 4.12. Every Presbyter
is a Teacher by Office. Vid. Sade^l. Oper. p. 600.
Turrianus the Jesuit thinks to avoid the force of this quotation, by affirming
the Prophets mentioned in this Ordination to have been Bishops, and the
Teachers to have been mere Presbyters, and that these Presbyters were Paul and
Barnabas, who were now created Bishops. But this is a most ridiculous evasion.
Was St. Paul, the chief of Apostles, but a mere Presbyter? was he inferior to
Lucius, Niger, and Manaen? Apostles were superior to Prophets, much more to
Teachers, 1 Cor. 12. 28. The Prophets here could not be Bishops, because they
were extraordinary Officers, and there were more then one in this Church, and
in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14.29. Neither is there any ground in the Text
of this distribution, that Teachers should refer to the Ordained, and Prophets
to the Ordainers. This is a mere fiction of the Jesuit to support the Cause of
Prelacy.

If any say, This separation of Paul and Barnabas was not to the Office of the
Ministry, but to a special Exercise of it. I answer, it does not alter the
Case: For here are all the outward Actions of an Ordination properly so called,
Fasting, Prayer, with Imposition of Hands to a Ministerial Work. Now the
Question is, Who have power to perform these Actions* here the Presbyters do
it. They to whom all the outward Actions of Ordination belong, to them the
Ordaining Power belongs, as he that has power to wash a Child with Water in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, has power to Baptize; for what
else is baptizing, but washing with Water in the Name of the Sacred Trinity for
special Dedication to God? He that has power to set apart Bread and Wine for
Sacramental use, has power to Administer the Lord's Supper: So here, they that
have power to dedicate Persons to God for the Work of the Ministry by Fasting,
Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, have power of Ordination. It Is true, a
Lay-Patron may give one power to exercise his Ministry, that cannot give the
Office; but can he do this by repeating all the solemn Acts of Ordination? Can
he use the same form of Ordination with the Ordaining Bishop? Can he lay hands
upon the Person ordained, and by Fasting and Prayer devote him to God in the
Public Congregation? I think none will affirm it. If he cannot invest a Person
by repeating the whole form of Ordination, because he is a Layman, and has
not the Ordaining Power, therefore they that can use the form of Ordination
have power to Ordain. The Bishops would not like it, if all those that are
Ordained by them in Scotland should be declared incapable of Exercising their
Office there, until they were admitted by a Classis of Presbyters with solemn
Imposition of Hands. It would scarce satisfy them to say, That the Presbyters
imposed Hands only to empower the Person in the Exercise of his Office, and not
to give the Office it self, when they performed all the outward Actions of
Ordination, which are the ordinary means of conveying the Office.

I proceed to the second Instance of Ordaining Presbyters mentioned in 1 Timothy
4.14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy,
with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Here Timothy is Ordained by
the Presbytery; nothing can be more express then this Testimony. Two things are
usually objected to this Scripture.

Object. 1. Obj. 1.
By (...) is meant the Office of Presbytery, and not the College of
Presbyters, says Turrianus the Jesuit, who is followed by some Protestants.

I answer; Answ. 1.
The word (...) is never taken in this sense in the New Testament; it always
signifies a Company of Presbyters; see Luke 22.66. Acts 22.5. Presbyterium is
used by Cyprian for a Consistory of Elders, Lib. 2. Ep. 8. and 10. Cornelius,
Bishop of Rome, Cypr. lib. 3. ep. 11.
in an Epistle to Cyprian, says, Omni actu, ad me perlato, placuit contrahi
Presbyterium: Adfuerunt etiam Episcopi quinque, etc. The Office of Presbytery
is expressed by (...).

2. What sense can be made of the Text according to this Interpretation?
Neglect not the gift -- given thee by prophecy, Vid. Camer. Myroth. p. 280.
with the laying on of the hands of the office of Presbytery. Hands belong to
the Persons, and not to the Office. Nor can (...) be the Genitive Case to
(...). Neglect not the gift -- of the office of Presbytery; for (...) and (...)
come between. Thus the Text, M(...). To refer (...) to (...) would invert the
natural order of the words, which is not to be done without evident necessity,
otherwise the Scriptures may be made a Nose of Wax, and the clearest
Expressions wrested to a contrary sense by such Transpositions and Dislocations.

3. But suppose this sense were admitted, and (...) be taken for the Office of
Presbytery, it will not prejudice our Argument; for it will follow, that
Timothy was but a mere Presbyter by Office, and that it belongs to the Office
of a Presbyter to impose Hands for Ordination, because Timothy, a Presbyter,
did so, 1 Timothy 5. 22. So that whether we understand the place of a Bench of
Presbyters Ordaining Timothy; or, of the Office of a Presbyter, into which
Timothy was Ordained, and by virtue of which he had power to Ordain others, it
equally proves our assertion, that mere Presbyters did Ordain.

Object. 2. Obj. 2.
Timothy was Ordained by Paul, with the concurrence of the Presbyters. Inter
Op. Sad. p. 788.
Non excluduntur Presbyteri ab impositione manus approbante, sed ab impositione
manus ordinante, says the Jesuit; who is followed by some of our own; they
say, The efficacy of Timothy's Presbyteratus was in Paul, as in a Bishop (and
therefore he says in 2 Timothy 1.6. (...)) and in the Presbyters by a bare
concurrence, and therefore it is said (...) denotes Authority, and (...) a mere
Instrumentality.

Answ. Answ.
It cannot be denied but Paul laid hands upon Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. but how does
it appear that it was for Ordination? it might be, for any thing appears to the
contrary, for the conferring of the Holy Ghost, which was given by the Laying
on of the Apostles Hands, Acts 8. ^17, 18. But if he laid Hands for Ordination,
it is certain he joined the Presbyters with him, which he had not done, if there
had not been an inherent Power of Ordination in Presbyters as such. The
Apostles did not assume to themselves the sole Power of Ordination, but took
the Presbyters for their Associates in this Action. Paul joins Barnabas with
him, Acts 14.23. who, if he were one of the Seventy Disciples (as Dorotheus
affirms, Doroth. Synopf. Eusebius. lib. 1. c. 12.
with whom agrees Eusebius) then was he of the Order of Presbyters, according
to that Hypothesis that makes Bishops to succeed the twelve Apostles, and
Presbyters the Seventy Disciples, and so we have another Example of a Presbyter
ordaining. The like must be said of Timothy, who laid on Hands in Ephesus, not
without the Presbyters joining with him, who were made Bishops there by the
Holy Ghost, Acts 20.17, 28. He would not assume a greater Power to himself then
Paul did; but Paul joined the Presbyters with him in the Act of Ordination,
therefore Timothy did the like.

Nothing can be gathered from the Particle (...) applied to Paul's Act, and
(...) as applied to the Presbyters Act, for they are used promiscuously in the
New Testament, and the signification of them must be determined by the subject
matter. (...) in 1 Timothy 4.14. respects the moving Cause that encouraged Paul,
with the Presbyters, to lay Hands on Timothy; see 1 Timothy 1.18.

But usually (...) with a Genitive Case signifies an instrumental working, or
efficiency. See Matthew. 8.17. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken (...),
by Esaias the Prophet. We are said to be justified (...), Romans 3.30. It
signifies also a way, or medium, that respects a certain end. See Matthew. 2.12.
and 7.13. and 12.43.

I find (...) and (...) used promiscuously in Acts 15.4, 12. and 14.27. (...)
by them, is rendered (...) in v. 12. and yet the same thing is intended, viz.
what God did by them as Instruments.

Paul's (...), and the Presbyters (...) -- do equally imply an instrumental
efficiency. For all Ordainers are Ministerial Deliverers of Possession, and
none of them principal efficient Donors, Christ is the Authoritative Giver of
the Ministerial Power, by his Law, which is the Fundamentum Iuris. As the
King's Charter to a Corporation determines who shall be capable of being Mayor,
how he shall be chosen, and how invested, here the Mayor's Power is immediately
from the King's Charter, as the efficient constitutive Instrument, and all that
others do is but to determine of the Recipient, and Invest him: so the Lord
Jesus Christ has has in his Law determined the Office of the Ministry, the
qualifications of the Persons, and how they are to be separated for the Work,
all that belongs to the Ordainers is but ministerialty to Invest a capable
Recipient. They are no Efficients of the Power, that is immediately from
Christ's Law, which is the Fountain and Measure of their Power.

Thus the Presbyters, in the purest and first Age of the Church, had the
Ordaining Power, which they kept for a considerable time, as we shall see
^^non, though as the Church degenerated from the first Purity, and the number
of Presbyters increased, one was chosen, as President of the rest, who should
Impose Hands in the Name of ^is Colleagues. Hence the Superior Dignity of
Bishops, who at length ^ubjected not only to their Hands, but ^o their Feet
also, not Presbyters alone, ^ut Sovereign Princes and Emperors, that we may
not forget the Bishop ^f Rome) so that at length the poor ^resbyters were no
more then the Bishops Curates, as our Liturgy distinguishes them, in the
Prayer for Bishops and Curates. The easiest and more honorable Parts of the
Ministerial Work (as they were reckoned) they reserved in their own hands; and
committed the rest to their Presbyters.

CHAP. IV.
Presbyters have power of Ordination, because they have power to Preach,
Baptize, and Administer the Lord's Supper. These are not inferior to
Ordination, proved from the Nature of these Acts, from Christ's Commission,
from the Sense of the Ancients. Object. The Apostles reserved Ordination to
themselves and Successors. Answ. 1. They joined the Presbyters with them. 2.
The Apostles as such had no Successors, proved from the Peculiars of their
Office, from the the Testimonies of Sadeel, Barrow, Lightfoot. Another
Objection answered.

THey who have power to Preach the Gospel, Arg. III.
to Baptize, and Administer the Lord's Supper, have power of Ordination, but
mere Presbyters have power to Preach, Baptize, and Administer the Lord's
Supper, therefore they have power of Ordination.

The Major only requires proof, which I thus prove; Preaching, Baptizing, and
Administering the Lord's Supper are Ministerial Acts not of an inferior Nature
to Ordination, and parium par est ratio. That they are not inferior to
Ordination appears both from the nature of the thing, and from Scripture. It
appears,

Cor. 5.20. And is an Ordainer any thing more? In the Act of Preaching they
represent the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Prophet of the Church, Matthew. 10.
40. and can any thing be more honorable? They are said to be workers together
with God, 2 Cor. 6. 1. and is an Ordainer more then this?

As to Baptism, It Is a solemn dedication of a Person to God; Ordination is no
more; only the former is to Christianity as such, the latter to a particular
work. In this, Baptism has the preference, for it is a Sacramental Dedication,
which Ordination is not.

In the Lord's Supper, the Minister sets apart Bread and Wine, as Symbolical
Representations of Jesus Christ, who is exhibited with all his Benefits to
worthy Receivers. Ierom says of Presbyters, Ad quorum preces, Corpus and
Sanguis Christi conficitur. Now which is greater, to impose Hands, or to make
the Sacramental Body and Blood of Christ? If they have power to consecrate holy
Things, why not holy Persons also?

Paul says, 1 Cor. 1. 17. That Christ did not send him to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel, surely he means one of the highest Ministerial Acts, else he
would have said, Christ sent me, neither to baptize, nor to preach, but to
ordain Ministers. I would fain know, whether Christ did not mention the
chiefest parts of a Ministers work in the Commission given in Matthew. 28. 19,
20. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. If Ordination had been the main
and chiefest part, he would have said, Go, ordain Ministers, preach, and
baptize. Christ's not mentioning it, is an Argument that it is not the
principal part of a Minister's Office, but rather subordinate to preaching and
baptizing, and therefore included here, as the lesser in the greater, though
not expressed. A Commission usually specifies the Principal Acts which a Person
is empowered to do, when others of an inferior Nature may be implied.
Commissions do dot run a minori ad majus, a superior Office may include the
Duties of an Inferior, but not on the contrary. It is the rather to be
presumed Christ would have mentioned the Ordaining Power in the Ministers
Commission, if it had been superior to Preaching and Baptizing, because the
Commission was immediately directed to the Apostles, whose Successors Diocesan
Bishops pretend to be, and from whom they derive the Ordaining Power, as proper
to themselves.

It may be, it will be said, That administering the Lord's Supper is not
mentioned in their Commission, though it be not inferior to Preaching and
Baptizing. True, but the not mentioning of it, is an Argument it is not a
greater Ministerial Act then those that are mentioned, and that it is not to be
Administered by Officers superior to those that Preach and Baptize, but that
the same Persons may Preach, Baptize, and Administer the Lord's Supper. The
same I say of Ordination, it is not being expressed here is a sign it is not
greater then those Ministerial Acts that are mentioned, and that they that have
power to Preach and Baptize, have also to Ordain. Though this Objection be
grounded on a Mistake of the Text, for the Lord's Supper is mentioned in the
following words of the Commission, Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, among which the Lord's Supper is one, Matthew.
26. 26, 27.

3. The Ancients argued from Baptism to Ordination, Lomb. ^. 4. distinct. 25.
as is observed by the Master of the Sentences.

Object. Some may say, The Power of Ordination is denied to Presbyters, not
because Ordination is greater then other Ministerial Acts, but because the
Apostles thought fit to reserve it to themselves, and proper Successors, who
are Diocesan Bishops.

Answ.
Answ. This is to beg the Question. We have proved already that the Apostles
reserved not the Power of Ordination to themselves, but joined the Presbyters
with them. Nor are the Bishops the Apostles Successors as such, for the
Apostles had their Call immediately from Heaven, Gal. 1. 1. had extraordinary
qualifications, could confer the Holy Ghost, were infallibly assisted in their
Ministerial Conduct, and were Universal Officers, none of which can belong to
Diocesan Bishops. The Apostles were not tied to any one Nation, Province, or
City; they were to preach the Gospel to all Nations; but they ordained
Presbyters or Bishops in every Church, Acts 14. 23. or City, Tit. 1. 5. to whom
they committed the ordinary Government of the Church: These were not sent to
preach the Gospel to all NaNations, but to feed the particular Flock, over
which the Holy Ghost made them Bishops, Acts 20. 28. Now these stated
particular, and fixed Church Officers vastly differ from universal, unlimited,
and unfixed Officers. You may as well say, that a petty Constable, whose power
is confined to the narrow limits of a little Village, succeeds the King, who
governs a whole Kingdom. When I see Bishops immediately sent of God, infallibly
assisted by the Holy Ghost, traveling to the remotest Kingdoms to preach the
Gospel in their own Language to the Infidel Nations, and confirming their
Doctrine by undoubted Miracles, I shall believe them to be the Apostles true
Successors in the Apostolical Office.

Our Learned Writers against the Papists do unanimously deny the Apostles, Sad.
contra. Turr. p. 570.
as such, to have any Successors. Nemo sane nisi plane sit (...), Apostolatum
cum Episcopatu confuderit, says the Noble and Learned Sadeel.

Dr. Barrow of Supremacy, p. 120, 121. The Offices of an Apostle and of a
Bishop are not in their nature well consistent, for the Apostleship is an
extraordinary Office, charged with the instruction and government of the whole
World. -- Episcopacy is an ordinary standing Charge affixed to one place -- Now
he that has such a general care can hardly discharge such a particular Office,
Bar. supr. p. 120,121
and he that is fixed to so particular an Attendance, can hardly look well to
so general a Charge. A disparagement to the Apostolical Ministry, for him
[Peter] to take upon him the Bishopric of Rome, as if the King should become
Mayor of London, as if the Bishop of London should be Vicar of Pancras. He
says a little before, St. Peter's being Bishop of Rome, would confound the
Offices which God made distinct; for God did appoint first Apostles, then
Prophets, then Pastors and Teachers; wherefore St. Peter, after he was an
Apostle, could not well become a Bishop, it would be such an irregularity, as
if a Bishop should be made a Deacon. To the same purpose-speaks Dr. Lightfoot,
Lightf. Vol.I. p.187.
who proves by several Arguments, That Apostles were an Order unimitable in the
Church.

Object. The Ordainers gave not the Ordaining Power to Presbyters, therefore it
belongs not to them.

Answ. They are Ordained to the Offfice of the Ministry, of which the Ordaining
Power is a Branch. It Is not the intention of the Ordainer, but the Office as
constituted by Christ, that ^s the measure of the Power. The Ordaining Power is
not mentioned in the Apostles Commission, Matthew. 28. 20. yet it is included in
it. If Presbyters are sent to Preach and Baptize in the words of Christ's
Commission to them, they are sent also to Ordain (as opportunities are offered
to perform that Ministerial Act in a regular manner) for it is included in their
Commission. Popish Ordainers did not intentionally give the Reforming Power to
the first Reformers, yet no Protestant will question but it was annexed to their
Office as Ministers. Now the Office of the Ministry being from Christ, and not
from Man, we must not go to the words of the Ordainer, but to the instituting
Law of Christ, to know what the Office is. As if the City and Recorder should
choose and invest a Lord Mayor, and tell him, Vide Baxter against Dodwel, p.30.
you shall not have all the Power given by the King's Charter, it is a Nullity,
he shall have all the Power that the Charter gives him, by virtue of his
Office.

CHAP. V.
The Ordinations of the greater part of the Reformed Churches are by
Presbyters. Their not having superior Bishops cannot unchurch them; nor is it
a Case of Necessity, as is pretended by some: For, 1. They might have Bishops
if they would. 2. Some of them refused them, when offered. 3. Their Learned
Writers assert an inherent Power in Presbyters to Ordain, and never use this
Plea of Necessity. 4. Their Confessions make all Ministers equal.

THAT Ordination which is the same with the Ordinations in the Reformed
Churches beyond Sea, Arg.IV.
is valid, but such is Ordination by mere Presbyters, Therefore -- If theirs be
null, and the Roman or Popish Ordinations valid, then it is better be of the
Roman Popish Church, then of the Reformed; but the Consequence is absurd.

I know but two things can be replied to this Argument:

1. That the Reformed Churches have no true Ministers, for want of Episcopal
Dodwel and others, who would have us believe the Romish Church to be a true
Church, and receive the Pope as the Patriarch of the West. These Gentlemen have
cast off their Vizard, and give us to know what they would be at. They condemn
the foreign Reformed Churches as no Churches, their Sacraments as no
Sacraments, and consequently no Salvation to be had in their Communion. Like
the Donatists of old, they confine Salvation to their own Party and Way. It Is
unaccountable that any who call themselves Protestants, should unchurch the
greatest and purest part of Reformed Christians in favor of a Despotick
Prelacy, which has no foundation in Scripture, or the best Antiquity. The
being of Ministry and Churches must depend upon a few Men, who look more like
State-Ministers, then Ministers of Christ, and are generally more busy in
managing Intrigues of Government, then in preaching the word in season and out
of season. Can any imagine that such Pastors as rarely preach the Gospel, as
not above once in three years visit their Flock, that have many thousands of
Souls under their charge whose Faces they never saw, that assume to themselves
a Grandeur more agreeable to the Princes of the World, Matthew. 20. 25, 26.
then to the Simplicity and Humility required in the Ministers of the Gospel,
that entangle themselves with the Affairs of this Life, 2 T^m. 2.4. Can. Ap.7.
and 80.
contrary to the Scriptures and the Old Canons: I say, can any imagine such
Pastors to be so necessary to the Church, that there must be neither Ministry,
nor Sacraments, nor Worship of God, nor Salvation without them? O happy Rome! O
miserable Reformed Churches! if the Case be thus.

2. Others that are more moderate, say, The Case of the Reformed Churches is a
Case of Necessity, they have no Bishops, nor can have them. Ordinations by mere
Presbyters may be lawful, where Bishops cannot be had.

I answer, 1 The Case of the foreign Holland, Switzerland, Geneva, etc. where
they have Magistrates of their own. Suppose France, and some other places,
would not have admitted of it, that should have been no bar to the Order, if
they had been desirous of it. The primitive Christians were under Heathen
Magistrates for three hundred years, who were generally professed Enemies to
the Ministry and Churches, yet they wanted no Ministerial Order of Christ's
appointment. Christ never appointed an Order of Ministers in his Church, which
may not be had in the most difficult times. It Is true, if the Civil Magistrate
be against Bishops, it may eclipse their Lordly greatness, but it need not
prejudice their Ius Divinum, if they have any. Why cannot the Apostles
Successors subsist with as little dependence upon Authority, as the Apostles
themselves did? Do Spiritual Men need Carnal Weapons to defend their Order? yet
it cannot be denied, but that even in France the Protestants had their
Immunities, and a Polity of their own, by virtue of the Edict of Nants, which
enabled them, had they pleased, to get Diocesan Bishops. They had their Synods
for Church Government, and Moderators to preside in them; and why not Bishops
also, had they judged them necessary? Nor is it to be supposed that their
French Masters would have liked them the worse, for conforming to their own
Ecclesiastical Government. Thuanus, a moderate Papist, thinks it was an Error
in their Constitution, that they neglected the superior Order of Bishops in
their first Reformation, for the supporting of their interest. The want of them
did not prejudice their Constancy to the Truth, as appears by their late
Sufferings.

Morton, to receive a Clergy by the Ordination of the English Bishops, which
they refused.

Peter Moulin in his Letter to the Bp. of Winchester, excusing himself for not
making the difference betwixt Bishops and Presbyters to be of Divine
appointment; he pleads, That if he had laid the difference on that foundation,
the French Churches would have silenced him.

3. How come the Learned Wri^te of the foreign Churches, that vindicate their
Ordinations against the Papists to forget this Plea of Necessity? They never
say, They would have Bishops, but cannot have them; but they justify their
Ordinations as according to Scripture, and assert an inherent Power in
Presbyters as such to Ordain. This is undeniable to any body that reads their
Dicourses upon this Subject. See Daille, Melancth. loc. com. p. 234.

Musc. loc. com.p.199

Zanch. Tom 7. p.537.

Ravan. in verb. Episcop. Synop. pur Theolog. p.614.


Moulin, Bucer, Voetius, Sadeel, etc. that professedly write of Ordination
against the Papists, besides the vast numbers that treat occasionly of this
Subject in their Common Places, and other Writings, such as Melancthon,
Musculus, Zanchy, Ravanel, the Leyden Professors, etc. who all insist upon the
Right of Presbyters to Ordain. It Is true, of late years some Arts have been
used to pro^ure Letters from some eminent for^eign Divines to condemn the
Noncon^ormists here, without an impartial hear^ng of our Case. That we have
been misrepresented to them, is evident by Dr. Morley's Letter to the famous
Bochart, Boch. Phal. and Cap. addend. p.66.
who vindicates us from the Doctor's Calumny. Some also have o^ late submitted
to Reordination, who are more to be pitied then censured, for they wanted
Bread, and could have no^ Relief without Conforming to the Church of England;
the Ceremonies, i^ seems, being to some Men of more value then the great
Gospel-Duty of Charity. That Charity which ^ King of the Roman Communion
empowered them to receive, though of another Religion, was denied them by
Protestants of the same Religion, ^^ they did not conform to that Hierarchy
which had no power over them, as being Natives of another Kingdom, and no way
subject to our Constitution. See the first Brief for the French Protestants.
Besides, that the French Ministers hold Ordination but a Ceremony and may be
reiterated twenty times ^^ there be occasion; and in their Necessity some of
them have acted according to this Principle.

4. We may judge of the forreig^ Churches by their Confessions, which are the
most Authentic Testimony o^ their sense about Episcopacy. The French
Confession asserts an equality of Power ^n all Pastors. Art. 30.
Credimus omnes Pastores ^bicunque collocati sint, eadem and aequali ^otestate
inter se esse praeditos, sub uno ^llo capite, summoque and solo universali
Episcopo, Jesus Christo. This is the more considerable, because no Man is ^o be
Ordained a Minister, or admitted Elder or Deacon in the French Churches, ^ut he
must subscribe the Public Con^ession of their Faith, and also the
Constitutions agreed on at Paris, commonly known by the name of their
Discipline. See Durel. p. 52. and La Rocque's Conformity of the French
Discipline, cap. 1. art. ^. and cap. 3. art. 1.

The Dutch Confession speaks the ^ame thing. Conf. Belg. Art. 31.
Caeterum ubicunque loco^um sint Verbi Dei Ministri, eandem at^ue aequalem
omnes habent tum potestatem ^um authoritatem, qui sunt aeque omnes Christi
unici illius Vniversalis Episcopi, and Capitis Ecclesiae, Ministri. By read^ng
the Acts of the Synod of Dort, I and that, Session 144. notice was given that
it was the will of the States, that ^he Belgic Confession of Faith should ^e
read and examined by the Synod, the Exteri being also present. Upon the reading
of this 31 Article, that asserts the parity of Ministers, the Bishop of Landaff
in his Name, and the Name of his Brethren, made open Protestation, That whereas
in the Confession there was inserted a strange Conceit of the parity of
Ministers to be instituted by Christ, he declared his own and his Brethrens
utter dissent in that point. No dislike was shown to this Article, asserting
the parity of Ministers, by the Deputies of any other Reformed Church besides
the English, by which we may judge what their Sentiments were in this point. So
that the Reformed Churches do neither need Bishops, nor desire them, for they
make all Ministers equal.

CHAP. V.
Our Ordination better then that of Rome, (which is accounted valid in the
Church of England) because in Roman Ordinations; 1. Their Ordainers are
incapable, as wanting Scriptural and Canonical Qualifications. 2. The manner of
Ordaining grossly Superstitious and Unscriptural. 3. The Ordained not Elected by
the People. Sworn to the Pope. 4. Their Office Idolatrous. Their Ordinations
are by Bishops, ours without, answered.

THAT Ordination which is better then that of the Church of Rome is valid,
Arg.IV.
but Ordination by mere Presbyters is much better then that of the Church of
Rome, Therefore it is valid. The Major will not be denied by the Church of
England, because she owns the Ordination of the Church of Rome, and does not
re-ordain their Priests -- The Minor I prove, Ordination by Presbyters is
better then the Ordinations of Rome, because in the Church of Rome.

I. The Ordainers are incapable, and that upon these Accounts:

(1.) They have not Scriptural Qualifications: Paul's Bishop must be found in
the Faith 1 Tit. 9.
. Popish ordaining Bishops are studious Maintainers of corrupt Doctrine, and
Enemies to the Faith, as is acknowledged by all Orthodox Protestants. Paul's
Bishop must be apt to teach 1 Timothy 3. 2 and 2 Timothy 4.2.
. Popish Bishops are for the most part illiterate unpreaching Prelates, and
justified herein by their own Writers Rhem. Annot. in 1 Timothy 1. 7 --
. Paul's Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife 1 Timothy 3 2.
. Popish Bishops forbid to marry, and yet allow Fornication Vid. Emanuel^a's
Aphor. Epis. 20.
. Paul's Bishop must be a lover of good men Tit. 1.8.
. Popish Prelates are not such, for they mortally hate the sincere Professors
of the Gospel, and are all sworn to contribute their Endeavors for their
Extirpation, under the Notion of Heretics. The words of the Oath are these;
Haereticos, Schismaticos, and Rebels eidem Domino nostro [Papae] vel
Successoribus praedictis pro posse persequar and impugnabo Vid. Pontif. de
Co^sec. Elect. in Episc.
: i.e. I A. B. do swear that I will to the utmost of my endeavor prosecute and
destroy all Heretics, Schismatics, and all other Opposers of our Sovereign
Lord the Pope, and his Successors.

Shall the sworn Enemies of the Reformation be received as Ministers of Christ,
and the Ministers of the Reformation be rejected as no Ministers? Tell it not
in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, lest the uncircumcised
triumph. But I proceed. A Bishop indeed must be a Pattern of Humility and
Self-denial to the Flock Matthew. 20, 25, 26. 1 Pet. 5.3.
. Romish Bishops are Lords over God's Heritage, have Dominion over their Faith,
and bind them to blind Obedience.

Now if the Ordinations of such usurping Monsters as these, that have nothing
but the empty name of Bishops, be valid, as the Church of England says they
are; how much more are the Ordinations of Orthodox faithful Gospel Ministers or
Bishops, to be judged lawful? Can any thing be more absurd then that the
Ministers of Antichrist, should make true Ministers, and the Ministers of
Christ make false Prophets by one and the same Ordaining Act. It Is the received
Doctrine of the Church of England that the Pope is Antichrist. See Homily
against Idolatry, part 3. p. 69. and the sixth part of the Sermon against
Rebellion, p. 316.

(2.) They derive their Power from the Pope, who has no right to the Universal
Headship, either from Scripture or true Antiquity. The very Office of a Pope is
contrary to the Prerogative and Laws of Christ, and consequently is a most
Treasonable Usurpation.

II.
II. The manner of their Ordaining is Unscriptural and Superstitious
Pontifical. Romans
. They ascend to the Priesthood by several Steps or Degrees, which have no
footsteps in the Sacred Writings. They make them

(1.) Ostiarij, or Door-keepers, whose Office is to ring the Bell, to open the
Church-Vestry, and the Priest's Book. Espencaeus Esp. in 1 Timothy p. 226. g.
a Popish Writer, shows out of Chrysostom that it belonged to the Office of a
Deacon, to admit into the Church, and shut out.

Then (2.) they make them Lectores, Readers, whose work is to read and sing the
Lessons, and to bless the Bread and all the first Fruits. In the primitive
Church this was not a distinct Office, for in some places 'twas the Office of a
Deacon, in some, of the Minister, and in some, it belonged to the Bishops to
read the Scriptures, especially on Festivals.

(3.) The next step is that of Exorcists, whose pretended Office is to cast out
Devils, in a feigned imitation of the miraculous Operations of the first Ages
of Christianity. These Sacred Conjurers, who take upon them to dispossess
Devils, are inferior to the very Deacons that serve Tables, and yet equal to
the very Apostles, were they able to perform what they undertake. Though one
would wonder, why the Bishops, the pretended Successors of the Apostles, did
not reserve to themselves the power of casting out unclean Spirits, as well as
that of conferring the H. Spirit, which, as they say, none but themselves can
do. But these Exorcists are Men of that extraordinary power, that they outdo
the very Apostles, for they did not cast out Devils by laying on of Hands, as
these pretend to do.

The Bishop tells them that they are Spirituales Imperatores ad abjiciendos
Daemones de Corporibus obsessis Pontif. de ord. Exorc.
-- i. e. they are Spiritual Governors to cast out Devils, etc. to which
purpose he gives them power of laying Hands super Energumenos sive Baptizatos
sive Catechumenos....

(4.) The next degree is that of the Acolythi Pontif. de ord. Acolyth.
, whose Office is to be Taperbearers, to light Candles, to bring Wine and Water
for the Eucharist. They who were Spiritual Emperors a little before to conquer
Devils, are now degraded, (which yet must be called an advancement) to the mean
occupation of under-Servitors. The badge of their Office is a Candlestick and a
Pot, which are delivered to them by the Bishop. As he delivers the Candlestick,
he says, Accipite cero-ferarium, and sciatis vos ad accendenda Ecclesiae
lumina mancipari.... And as he delivers the Pot, he says, Accipite urceolum ad
suggerendum vinum and aquam in Eucharistiam Sanguinis Christi....

(5.) They climb after this to the degree of Subdeacons Pontif. de ord. Subd.
, whose business is to prepare Water for the Ministry of the Altar, to Minister
to the Deacons, to wash the Palls of the Corporals, to present the Cup and
Paten for the use of their abominable Sacrifice. The Bishop puts a Garment upon
their Heads to signify the Castigation of the Speech, and then puts the
Manipulus upon their left Arm, to signify Good Works, ib. After this he
clothes them with a Coat, to signify Joy and Gladness, ibid. Last of all, he
delivers to them the Book of Epistles to be read for the Living and the Dead,
ibid. The Subdeacons of old were but Letter-Carriers to the Bishops Espen. in
Tim. p. 214.a.
.

(6.) Then they make them Deacons Ib. de Ord. Diac.
, whose Office is to Minister at the Altar, to Baptize and Preach, after the
example of Stephen, as is pretended. The Bishop pretends to give them the Holy
Ghost, clothes them in significant white Garments, and delivers to them the
Book of the Gospels, saying, Accipe potestatem -- i. e. Take power to read the
Gospel in the Church both for the living and the dead.

(7.) From Deacons Pontif. de Ord. Presb.
they ascend to the Order of Priesthood. The Form of making them is very
ridiculous: scarce any footsteps of the Apostolical Practice to be found in it.

The Person to be Ordained presents himself to the Bishop with a multitude of
superstitious Rags, such as the Alb, Cingulum, Stola, the Manipulus, the
Planeta, etc. holding a Candle in his right hand, to signify he must be a
shining Light to the People. Then the Bishop binds the Stole about his neck, to
put him in mind of the Yoke of Christ, ib. After this the Capsula being folded,
is put over his Shoulders to denote Charity, then the Bishop unfolds it again,
and clothes the Priest with it, to signify Innocence, ib. The same white
Garment signifies Charity when it is folded up, and Innocence when it is
unfolded. You must not ask the reason of this different signification, for
profound Mysteries are wrapped up in all the foldings of this sacred Garment,
which is apt to stir up the dull mind of Man to the remembrance of his duty.

When they have adorned them in this beggarly Garment, and made them look
partly like those Priests that served the old Tabernacle, and partly like those
that ministered at Heathen Altars, they anoint their Hands with Oil, greasing
them with the sign of the Cross, and adding these words, Consecrentur.... istae
manus... ut quaecunque benedixerint, benedicantur. The Bishop also shaves their
Heads, saying, Dominus pars haereditatis meae Pontif. de Cler. faciend.
, etc. Their Learned Authors tell us of unaccountable Mysteries that are
contained in this Pagan Ceremony. Lombard says, the shaven Crown signifies
Kingly Dignity Mag. Sent. lib. 4. did. 6.
; Corona regale decus significat. The signification is not very improper, for
they lord it over God's Heritage, and exalt themselves above Kings and Princes.
The same Author adds, That Denudatio Capitis est revelatio mentis; Clericus
enim secretorum Dei non ignarus esse debet.... And no wonder their shaveling
Priests are such great Clerks, since shaving the Pate is the mysterious Path to
Knowledge. He tells us also, ob vitae continentiam caput radebant, ibid. They
shaved themselves for Chastity's sake. The unclean Stories of Monkish Lives are
convincing Evidences of their Mortification.

Optatus Lib. contra Parmen.
reproves the Donatists for their symbolizing with the silly Custom of the
Heathen, in shaving the Heads of their Priests. Docete ubi vobis mandatum est,
capita Sacerdotum radere... cum e contra sint tot Exempla proposita fieri non
debere. This Ceremony is of an Heathen Original, as appears by Minutius Foelix
De Idol. van. p. 61. Oxon. Edit.
, with whom agrees the Council of Eliberis Can. 55.
, who excommunicated such as did so, and after the expiration of two years
received them into Communion, upon supposition they continued in the Faith.

The Council of Trent Anathematizes any that will reject or speak against these
foolish fopperies Sess. 23. de sac. ord. Can. 5.
.

How different is this Form of Ordination from the Scripture-Ordinations?
Ministers in the Apostles times were Ordained by Fasting and Prayer, with
imposition of Hands, without any other Ceremonies that we read of. Let the
World judge, whether our Ordinations, which follow the Scripture Pattern, or
the Romish Ordinations, which are a mere Pageantry, are the better; and if
theirs be admitted as valid, why should ours be condemned?

Shall they who pass under such unscriptural Forms and Shapes of Doorkeepers,
Readers, Exorcists, etc. be accounted Ministers of Christ, and must those who
vary not from the Scriptures in their Ordinations, be reckoned Intruders? Can
any of the sincere Patrons of the Protestant Interest pass such a partial
unjust Censure? Are they true Ministers, who recede from the Apostles practice
as far as the East is from the West, and must those be none who make it their
Rule? Shall those Ordinations which are Humane and Antichristian (and therefore
laid aside in the Church of England) be received, and theirs which are Divine
and Apostolical be rejected? The thing is so very clear to such as are not
wilfully blinded with Prejudice and Interest, that one may justly wonder how it
should ever come into debate.

III. Our Ordinations are better then Rome, if we consider the Persons
ordained. That which we have said concerning the want of Qualifications in the
Ordainers, may be also applied to the ordained in the Roman Communion. Their
Priests are made without the Election of the People; Bellar. de Cler. lib. 1
cap. 7 and 8.
and Bellarmine says that neither their Suffragium, Concilium, or Consensus is
required, which is contrary to Scripture, and Antiquity, Vid. Cypr. Ep. 68.
Eusebius. VI. 10.
as our Protestant Writers have proved against the Papists. See Willet's
Synops. Papismi, 5 Controver. Quest. 2. p. 260...

All the Popish Priests are sworn to observe the Decrees of the Council of
Trent, whereby their Consciences are captivated to all the Idolatries,
Superstitions, and Errors of the Church of Rome; they take also an Oath of
Canonical Obedience to their Bishops, which makes them more the Servants of
Men, then of Crist, 1 Cor. 7.23. Gal. 1. 10. This Oath is forbidden by an old
Council at Chalons; Dictam. est interea de quibusdam fratribus, quod eos quos
ordinaturi sunt, jurare cogant.... quod contra Canones non sint facturi, and
obedientes sint Episcopo qui eos ordinat, and Ecclesiae in qua ordinantur. Quod
juramentum quia periculosum est, omnes und inhibendum statuimus.

The Romish Bishops about the Eleventh Century, obliged all the Bishops at
their Examinations to promise Subjection and Fealty in all things to St. Peter,
and to his Church, to his Vicar, and to his Successors, as appears by the Roman
Order, Tom. 10. Probl. Patr. p. 107.
which in all likelihood was writ about that time, and where is to be seen
amongst the Questions made to the Bishop which was examined, those which regard
Obedience and Fidelity. The form of the Oath may be seen in the Roman
Pontifical.

Dr. Willet makes the Oath of Obedience to the Pope a mark of Antichrist.
Controv. 4. q. 10. p. 233, 234.
If it be bad in the Pope, the chief Bishop, to require such an Oath, it cannot
be good in inferior Bishops, unless they were more infallible then the Head of
their Succession.

The first Instance that I can find of an Oath required by Ecclesiastical
Guides to bind Persons to their Communion, Eccl. Hist. lib. 6. c. 43.
is that of Novatus the Heretic, who swore all his Communicants not to return
to Cornelius. Vide Epist. Cornel. ad Fabium Antioch. praesidem, in Eusebius. This
is much of the same nature with the Oath De jure parendo, administered in
Ecclesiastical Courts to Excommunicated Persons at their Reconciliation.

In short, our Ordinations are better then Popish Ordinations, because our
Candidates are admitted upon sufficient trial of their Qualifications, are not
obtruded upon the People without their choice and consent, and nothing is
required of them but Obedience to the Laws of Christ; all which are otherwise
in the Ordinations of Rome.

viz. the offering up of their Bread-Idol, under the Notion of a Propitiatory
Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead. Aug. Hunn. de Sacr. Ordin. Axiom 65
Forma Sacerdotii haec est (says Hunnaeus) Accipe potestatem offerendi
Sacrificium in Ecclesia pro Vivis and Mortuis, in Nomine Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti. The words of Consecration in the Roman Pontifical are with
this Addition; Pontific. Romans de Ord. Pres.
Accipe potestatem offere Sacrificium Deo, Missasque celebrare. Lib. 4. did.
24. J.
They make the very Essence of the Priestly Office to consist in potestate
placabiles Deo hostias offerendi, as the Master of the Sentences speaks. The
Council of Trent makes Preaching of the Word, which is the first thing in the
Apostles Commission, to be a separable Accident. Si quis dixerit, non esse in
Novo Testamento Sacerdotium visibile, and externum, vel non esse potestatem
aliquam consecrandi and offerendi verum Corpus and Sanguinem Domini, and
peccata remittendi and retinendi; sed officium tantum, and nudum ministerium
praedicandi Evangelium. VEL EOS QVI NON PRAEDICANT, PRORSVS NON ESSE
SACERDOTES, anathema sit.

For these Reasons the Reformed Churches of France did not admit Popish
Priests, Fr. Discipl. cap. 1. art. 2 and 3.
that had forsaken the Roman Communion, into the Ministry, without long and
diligent Inspection and Examination, Vide B^z. contra S^rav.
they must be approved of at least for two years from the time of their
Conversion: nor were they then suffered to exercise as Ministers, until they
submitted to another Ordination; and they were not to receive Imposition of
Hands any more then if they were Strangers, without the advice of Provincial
and National Synods.

Now these Idolatrous Shavelings, whose Ordainers are the Pope's Creatures,
whose Ordination is the product of a profane Invention, and whose work is to
make a Wafer-God: I say, these are taken for true Ministers in the Church of
England, though it be as hard to find the Essentials of the Ministry among
them, as to find a Pearl in a Dunghill. Therefore the Ordination of Presbyters,
now in question, should be admitted for valid, as being more agreeable to the
Scriptures in all the respects mentioned, and not to be justly charged with any
defect in things essential to the Ministry.

Object. Object.
Popish Ordinations are done by Diocesan Bishops, which you have not, therefore
your Ordinations are null.

Answ. Answ.
This Objection has been answered already. It supposes three things which are
notoriously false. The first is, That the sole Power of Ordination was in the
Apostles. 2. That they had Successors in the Apostolica^ Office; both which we
have disproved* And 3dly, it supposes Popish Bishops to be the Apostles
Successors, which sounds harsh in Protestant Ears: Can they be the Apostles
Successors, who have not the Apostolical Doctrine? when they urge this
Succession against the first Reformers, and quote the Fathers, Tertullian,
Irenaeus, etc. who argue from this Topic against the old Heretics, they are
answered by our Protestants Writers, Sa^^^^ de voc. Ministr. p. 545.
that the Ancients spoke not de sola Episcoporum successione, sed de Doctrinae
successione, ac ejus fidei, quam primi Episcopi ab Apostolis acceptam atque
haustam ad posteros continua serie transfudernnt. To the same purpose speak our
Jewel, Whittaker, Reynolds, Willet, etc.

If either of these three Points fail, this Objection is impertinent, how much
more when all the three are precarious. Our Ordinations are in all things
confessedly good, except the concurrence of a Diocesan Bishop; the Popish
Ordinations have nothing to recommend them but the desiled hand of a nominal
Bishop, so that the bare touch of his hand imprints an indelible Character,
where the Spirit of Christ has left no impressions of his Image. This is to
ascribe greater virtue to the Fingers of a Prelate in making Ministers, then to
the Spirit of God. Let a Person Ordained by Presbyters be never so well
qualified, be never so faithful in the discharge of his Office; let another
Person that is Ordained by a Bishop, be never so defective in Qualifications,
suppose a Reading Curate that cannot preach, let him be never so profane in
his Life, yet this Man must pass for a true Minister, because he had the
ineffectual Blessing of a Bishop, and the other a mere Usurper, and all his,
Administrations must be null and void, for want of this Ceremony. Let the
Spirit of God indue a Man with never such excellent Gifts for the Ministry, it
shall be in the power of a Prelate to exclude him, that he shall be no Minister
of Christ, though he devote himself to the Work, and be solemnly set apart for
it: nay more, it will be in his power to make a Minister of another Person,
whom the Holy Ghost never designed for that Office, by any real work of
Sanctification upon his heart, or conferring upon him any tolerable degree of
Minist^rial Abilities. They that can believe such Fancies may please themselves
therewith, Christ gave us another Rule to discern between false and true
Pastors, Matthew. 7. 15, 16 -- 20. Ye shall know them by their fruits; that is,
by their Doctrine and Conversation. The Reformers vindicate their Ministry
against the Papists by this Argument: Christus hanc nobis regulam praef^^verit,
qua possimus falsos a veris Doctoribus discernere, Sad. ubl supra, p. 554.
nempe eos a suis fructibus esse dignoscendos, cur eq non contenti, alias
praeterea temere, and pro arbitrio confingamus? Itaque judicetur tum de
pontificiis, tum etiam de nostris Pastoribus, ex Doctrina quae verus est
fructus, atque etiam, si placet, utrorumque vita in disquisitionem vocetur.
Quod si fiat, certo speramus, Deo favente, nos facile in hac causa fore
superiores. We are very willing to put our Case to the same Issue, to be judged
according to this Rule of Christ, by our Doctrine and Conversation.

CHAP. VI.
Presbyters Power of Ordination proved from their Imposition of Hands in
Ordination, not as bare Approvers. Turrianus, Heylin, J. Tailor, etc. confuted.
Two other Objections answered.

Arg. V.
THose that have power to impose Hands in Ordination have power to Ordain, but
Presbyters have power to impose Hands in Ordination, therefore to Ordain.

The Minor, viz. that Presbyters may impose Hands, will not be denied. It Is
required by the Old Canons Conc. Carth. 4. Can. 3. Vid. Can. Presb. did. 23.
-- Omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt manus suas juxta manum Episcopi super
caput illius Ordinandi Presbyteri.
teneant. Chrysostom was charged in a Libel put in by Isaacius (how justly is
not certain) that he Ordained Ministers without the Concurrence of his
Presbyters: (...) (...). Phot. Biblioth. v (...). p. 27. Edit. Aug. Vindelic.
1601. However, the Presbyters continued to lay Hands with the Bishops, even in
the darkest Ages of the Church, as might be proved by several Instances if
necessity required. But this is so undeniable, that to this day the Presbyters
are admitted to join with the Bishop in imposition of Hands, in the Church of
England. And in the present Church of Rome also, all the Presbyters that are
present are required to lay Hands with the Bishop Pont^f. de Ord. Presb.
.

The Major will be denied (that though they impose Hands they have not the
Ordaining Power) I thus prove it; That which is an Ordaining Act bespeaks an
Ordaining Power; but imposition of Hands in Ordination is an Ordaining Act,
therefore \h. The Major is evident, for Actus praesupponit potentiam. As to the
Minor, If imposing of Hands in Ordination be not Actus ordinans, what is it? I
should be glad to see one Instance given in the Apostles times of Persons
laying on Hands in Ordination, that had no Ordaining Power.

If imposition of Hands in Ordination be no evidence of an Ordaining Power, how
come the Bishops to urge that Scripture (1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no
man) in favor of Timothy's Ordaining Power, and thence to infer he was Bishop
of Ephesus? Timothy might lay Hands for Ordination, and yet have no Ordaining
Power, and so be no Bishop of Ephesus. Thus they unwarily undermine their own
Foundations.

It Is a mere Subterfuge, and indeed such as betrays the Cause, to acknowledge
that Presbyters may perform all the outward Acts of Ordination, but not as
Ordainers. It Is as if one should say, a Presbyter has Power to apply Water to
a Child in Baptism in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, but he has
no power to Baptize. He may set apart Bread and Wine, and distribute it to the
People according to Christ's Institution; but he has no power to Administer
the Lord's Supper.

If Presbyters imposing of Hands signify no Ordaining Power, what does it
signify? Turrianus the Jesuit says it signifies their Approbation of the
Bishops act -- non Excludantur Presbyteri ab impositione manus approbante, sed
ab ordinante. He is followed herein by many of our own. Dr. Heylin Heyl. Hist.
of Ep. p. 162.
says, The Presbyters Hands confer nothing of the power of Order upon the
Party ordained, but only testify their consent unto the business, and
approbation of the man. To the same purpose speaks Dr. I. Tailor Vide his
Episc. asserted.
. But that cannot be the meaning of it; for they could signify their
approbation some other way, without imposition of Hands; their saying Amen to
the Ordination Prayer would be a sufficient expression of their Consent. The
Peoples approbation was required in primitive Ordinations Cypr. Ep. 68.
; who never were admitted to lay Hands with the Bishop. The Consent of the
People was required in the Ordination of Deacons Act. 6.3.
, yet did they not lay Hands on them v. 5, 6.
. If no more be intended by it, then a bare approbation, how come the Bishops
alone to lay Hands upon Deacons without their Presbyters. Hi cum ordinantur
solus Episcopus eis manum imponit Pont^f. de Ord. D^ac.
. But this signification is deserted by a Learned Bishop, who says, I think
rather they dedicate him to God for the Ministry, which is conferred on him by
the Bishop. This specious Evasion is equally disserviceable to the present
Point, with the former. Where in all the New Testament have we any ground for
this distinction? How can it be said that the Ministry is conferred by the
Bishop first, and afterward the Presbyters dedicate the Person to God, when
both Bishops and Presbyters do lay Hands together; Can he be ordained and
dedicated to God as two distinct Acts, the one inferior to the other, and that
in the same moment of time, by the same Ceremony of Imposition of Hands, and by
the same words?

How comes the Bishops Hand to confer the Ministry more then the Presbyters?
not by any inherent virtue in the one more then in the other; not from any
Institution of Christ or his Apostles, appropriating an Ordaining, or Minisher
making Power to the Bishops Hand, and a bare dedication to the Ministry
actually conferred, to the Presbyters Hands.

The Scriptures of the New Testament make no mention of such distinct
significations of that Ceremony, and therefore they cannot be ex instituto; and
it is plain they are not ex natura rei. Might not the Presbyters dedicate the
Person to God without the laying on of Hands? Can there be no dedication to God
without laying Hands on the Persons so dedicated? The whole Church dedicates
him to God by Prayer, and yet don't lay on Hands, so that mere dedication to
God in the Learned Bishop's sense as distinct from Ordination, cannot be the
meaning of this Ceremony.

But, I pray, what is Ordination it self but a dedication of the Person to God
for the Ministry? what more does the Bishop do in conferring the Ministry? He
cannot confer it by a mere Physical Contact, if so, every touch of his Hand on
the Head of a Man, Woman, or Child would make them Ministers. It must be
therefore by a Moral Act that he does it, i. e. by laying on Hands on a fit
Person according to the appointment of God, to dedicate him to God for the
Ministry. The power is immediately from Christ and not from the Bishop: Men do
but open the door, or determine the Person that from Christ shall receive the
power, and then put him solemnly into possession, Acts 20.28. The moderate
asserters of Episcopacy do acknowledge that the Presbyters lay on Hands as
Ordainers So Forbes in his Iren. l. 2. c. 11. p. 163.
: Imponunt manus Presbyteri... tanquam Ordinantes, seu ordinem Conferentes, and
ex potestate ordinandi divinitus accepta gratiam ordinato, hoc adhibito ritu,
apprecantes. With whom agrees the Archbishop of Spalato Spalat. de Rep. Eccl.
II. 2. p. 187.
. Dr. Fulk speaks to the same purpose in his Anti-Rhemish Annotations Fulk in
Tit. 1.. 2.
.

Object. Where do you read that Presbyters did ordain without a Bishop?

Answ. This Objection grants my Argument, that Presbyters have power of
Ordination, but not to be put forth without the Bishop. Admit they have an
inherent Power, and it is all I plead for; I am sure no Law of God restrains the
Exercise of it, while it is managed regularly for the Edification of the
Church. We oppose not any Rules of Order, while the main End is promoted.

The old Canons restrain the Bishop, that he must not Ordain without his
Presbyters Conc. Carth. 4. c. 22.
; we may say as well then, that Bishops have no power to Ordain, because they
were not ordinarily to do it without their Presbyters.

All the Ordinations of Presbyters in the Apostles time, and in the three first
Centuries were done by Presbyters without Bishops of the present Species, i. e.
the sole Governors of 100 or 200 Churches, for there were no such Bishops in
the Primitive Church, as has been proved by several hands Dr. Owen, Mr.
Baxter, Mr. Clarkson.
. The very Office is humane and new. The primitive Bishop was but the chief
Presbyter, who was President for orders sake, but pretended not to be of a
superior Order.

Bishop Usher answered this Objection from the Example of the Church of
Alexandria (as Mr. B. affirms) which shall be considered anon, when we come to
Instances of Ordaining Presbyters in Antiquity.

CHAP. VII.
Among the Jews any one that was Ordained himself might Ordain another, proved
from Dr. Lightfoot, Mr. Seldom, P. Cuneus.

Arg. VI.
IF among the Jews any one that was Ordained himself might Ordain another, then
may Presbyters Ordain Presbyters. But the former is true -- Therefore, etc.

The Consequence of the Major is founded upon that which is acknowledged by
most Learned Men, that the Government of the Christian Church was formed after
the Jewish Pattern.

The Minor I prove from Dr. Lightfoot: Lightfoot Harm. Vol. 1. p. 612.
Thus he; Before they had restrained themselves of their own Liberties, then
the general Rule for Ordinations among them was, (...) every one regularly
Ordained himself, had the power of Ordaining his Disciples, as Ben Maimon
affirms. Mr. Seldom gives many Instances to this purpose out of Gemar. Babylon.
de Synedr. lib. 2. c. 7.. 1. But in the time of Hi^lel they were rest^ain'd
from (...) former Liberty; whether out of V^^^^ration to his House, or whether
from the inconveniency of such common Ordinations, is not certain; and so it
was resolved that none might Ordain without the presence of the Prince of the
Sanhedrin, or a License from him.

Per insigne est, says P. Cunoeus quod R. Maimonides tradidit in Salach.
cunoe. de Rep. Hebr. l. 1. c. 12.
Sanhed. c. 4. Cum enim olim solennem hunc actum pro arbitrio suo omnes
celebrarent, quibus imposita semel manus fuerat, coarctatum esse id jus a
sapientibus, constitutumque ut deinceps nemo illud usurparet, nisi cui id
concessisset divinus senex R. Hillel.

Seldom, De Synedr. c. 14.
says that St. Paul's creating of Presbyters was according to the Custom of
creating Elders, Paul being brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, as his
Disciple. This Gamaliel was Nephew, or Grandchild of Hillel, and Prince of the
Sanhedrin at that time, and therefore no doubt but he had created his Scholar
Paul, a Jewish Elder, before he was a Christian; by virtue of which Ordination
in all likelihood the Jews admitted him to preach in their Synagogues, Acts 9.
20.

Now when Paul became an Apostle, he knew himself and other Apostles to be free
from the new Law, of not making Elders without the license of the Prince of
the Sanhedrin, which was not to be expected in their Case; for this R.
Gamaliel, though otherwise a fair Man, had an inveterate prejudice against the
Christians, and authorized a Prayer against them, under the notion of
Heretics, commanding its constant use in the Synagogues, as Vol. 1. p. 278.
Lightfoot observes out of Maimonides; which Prayer is used among the Jews to
this day, containing bitter Curses and Execrations against the Christians,
Synag. Judaic. c. 5.
as Buxtorf notes.

Hamm. 6 Quer. p. 349.
Dr. Hammond himself grants that the Government of the Church was formed
after the Jewish manner, though he reckons up many Inconveniences which
would follow promiscuous Ordinations.

The Analogy between the Government of the Jewish Synagogues and the Christian
Church seems very evident in the Case of Deacons, who succeed the Jewish (...)
Parnas^n, of which there were two or three in every Synagogue to take care of
the Poor. Vide Lightf. Harm. on Act. 6. and 7.

To sum up this Argument, the Case of Presbyters in point of Ordination, is the
same with that of Jewish (...) or Elders. Every one that was Ordained himself
had originally the Power of Ordaining others, the Exercise of which Power was
afterward restrained by a Canon of that Church: So in the Christian Church, at
first in Scripture times, Presbyters had a common power of Ordination; but
afterward ut schismatum semina evellerentur, the power was by degrees devolved
upon a few chief Presbyters, whom we call Bishops, and the ordinary Presbyters
were restrained by common consent, as Ierom observes in Tit. 1. Hier. in Tit. 1.
and Decr. I. 24.
Panormitan after him.

How well the new Order of superior Bishops has cured the World of Schism,
the Distractions and Confusions of the Church, occasioned by the Pride and
Grandeur of that Order, for above a thousand years together, are Instances to
palpable to be denied.

CHAP. VIII.
Ordination an Act of the Exercise of the Power of the Keys, acknowledged by
Cornelius a Lapide, Chamier, Camero, etc. The Keys of Jurisdiction and Order
given to Presbyters, and consequently Power of Ordination.

THAT Ordination which is performed by Persons who have the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven committed to them, is valid; Arg. VII
but Ordination by Presbyters is performed by Persons who have the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven committed to them, Therefore it is valid.

The Major I prove: Either Ordination is an Act of the Exercise of the Power of
the Keys, or of some other Power, but of no other; If any other, it is either of
a Secular Power, or of an Ecclesiastical; but neither of these: Not an
Ecclesiastical, for there is no Ecclesiastical Power, (at least, which
Ordination can be pretended to belong to) but the Power of the Keys; not of a
Secular Power, for that belongs not to Ministers.

That the Keys do contain in them the Power of Ordination is acknowledged by
Papists and Protestants, particularly by Cornelius a Lapide, Chemnitius, Bucer,
Chamier. Nomine clavium significatur omnis potestas Ecclesiastica, Suppl. Cham.
lib. 4. c. 4.

Traditio Clavium, says Camero, Came. Myroth. p. 40, 41.
Symbolum est potestatis atque auctoritatis collatoe, Isa. 22.22. Rev. 3.7.
Clavium traditione Doctorum apud Iudoeos inauguratio veteri instituto
peragebatur. The Keys delivered to the Jewish Teachers included the power of
Ordination; for, as we observed before, Every one, regularly Ordained himself,
had the power of Ordaining his Disciples, Maimon.

The Minor is in part granted by all, to wit, That Presbyters have the Key of
Doctrine; that they have the Key of Jurisdiction and Order also, as some
distinguish them, I thus prove; They that have the Key of Doctrine have also
the Key of Jurisdiction and Order; but Presbyters have the former, therefore
they have the latter.

The Major I thus prove; Christ gave the Keys together, and did not divide
them, therefore they that have the Key of Doctrine have the Key of Jurisdiction
and Order. To thee I give the Keys, says our Lord, Matthew. 16. 19. Io. 20.23.
He did not give one Key to one, and both to another; he gives no single Key to
any Person, but Keys, and so whatever these Keys serve for. We know no
distribution of the Keys, but what is grounded upon Scripture.

He that has the Keys of a House or Castle delivered to him, has power to
admit or exclude Persons, as he sees cause. Except there be a Limitation in
his Order or Commission, his power extends to all Persons without exception.
Christ here does not limit the power of the Keys; therefore if Presbyters may
admit Church Members into the House of God by Baptism, they may admit
Church Officers by Ordination.

CHAP. IX.
All that have the Power of Order may confer it; acknowledged by Archbishop
Usher and Dr. Fern. Bishops and Presbyter's have the Power of Order equally.
Proved, 1. By the Ancient Fathers. 2. By Schoolmen. Lombard, Bonaventure, etc.
3. By the Canonists, Gratian, Joh. Semeca, etc. 4. By Councils, as that of
Aquisgranum, Hispalis, Constance, Basil. Bishops not expressly determined a
superior Order in the Council of Trent. 5. This is acknowledged by the Old
Church of England, in the Canons of Elfrick, and by J. Wicklef, Lambert the
Martyr, the Provincial Synod of 1537. Cranmer, Juel, Morton, Bilson, etc. This
Truth is owned by the now Bishop of Salisbury, and by the Bishop of Worcester.
Ordination by Presbyters allowed in the Old Church of England. Instances of it.

ORders conferred by such as are in Orders, Arg. VIII.
and have the power of Order equal with the highest Bishop, are valid; but
Orders conferred by Presbyters, are conferred by such as are in Orders, and
have the power of Order equally with the highest Bishop, Therefore Orders
conferred by Presbyters are valid.

As to the Major, it is founded on that Maxim frequently used by Archbishop
Usher, Ordinis est confer* Ordines, a Man that is in Orders, quoad
Presbyteratum, may coeteris paribus confer Orders, it being like Generation, or
Univocal Causation. This Maxim is acknowledged by Dr. H. Fern Fern's Comp.
Disc. p. 115 --
, in his Compendious Discourse, p. 115, 116, 117.

If among the Papists Men of an inferior Order do make the Pope, and among our
selves Bishops do make Archbishops; how much more may Men of the same Order
give what they have, that is, Ordinem Sacerdotii, as the Schoolmen call it.
Why may not Presbyters make Presbyters, as Physicians make Physicians? All
Ranks or Orders of Beings generate their own kind, but the impotent Order of
Presbyters must prove extinct, if the favorable Influences of a superior
Order do not propagate it, by a sort of equivocal Generation. Must Presbyters
be reckoned amongst those Monsters in Nature that cannot perpetuate themselves
by Propagation?

The Minor, That Bishops and Presbyters have the power of Order equally, will
be acknowledged by most Protestants and Papists. The Scripture no where
mentions any distinction of Order among ordinary Ministers. Neither do we read
there but of one kind of Ordination; then certainly there can be but one Order
of Presbyters, or Gospel Ministers, properly so called; for two distinct Orders
cannot be conferred in the same Instant, by the same words, and by the same
actions. Let a Man show me from Scripture, that Timothy or Titus, or any other
were Ordained twice, made first Presbyters, then Bishops, which is absolutely
necessary if they be distinct Characters. This Point of the Identity of Bishops
and Presbyters has the Consent of the Fathers, Schoolmen, Canonists,
Councils, and of the Old Church of England.

(1.) As to the Fathers, Blond. Apol. pro Senten. Hieron.
Blondel in his Apology for Ierom's Opinion, quotes most that are considerable,
who unanimously affirm the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters. The Testimonies
of Clemens Romanus, Polycarp, Irenoeus, Clemens Alexandrin. Ierom, Austin,
Hilarious, Isidore, etc. may be seen at large in the said Learned Author. To
which I could add several more, if it were needful.

(2. The Judgment of the Schoolmen is the same in this Point.

The Master of the Sentences says, Lib. 4. did. 24. J.
Apud veteres iidem Episcopi and Presbyteri fuerunt. He adds, Excellenter
Canones duos tantum sacros Ordines appellari censent, Diaconatus sc. and
Presbyteratus, quia hos solos primitiva Ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de his
solis proeceptum Apostoli habemus.

Bonaventure, in 4 sent. did. 24. q. 1. A. 1. Episcopatus deficit ab Ordine,
etc. includit necessario Ordinem perfectissimum, sc. Sacerdotium. With whom
agree Durand. Dominic. Soto, Aureolus, etc. who all Comment upon Lombard's
Text. See Aquinas's Supplem. quaest. 37. Art. 2. Mr. Fran. Mason in his Defense
of the Ordinations of Ministers beyond the Seas, has more Quotations of
Schoolmen.

(3.) To this Opinion some Canonists subscribe.

Gratian, Did. 60. c^uli ex verb. Papa.
Sacros Ordines dicimus Diaconatu^ and Presbyteratum, hos quidem solos Ecclesia
primitiva habuisse dicitur.

Johannes Se^eca in his Gloss on the Ca^on La^ ^^^unt quidem quod in Ecclesia
prima primitiva* Commune erat Officium Episcoporum and Sacerdotum, and nomina
erant Communia. Did. 95. c. olim. Et Officium erat Commune, sed in secunda
primitiva caeperunt distingui, and Nomina and Officia, etc. Gloss. in Did. 95.
c. Legimus, in verb. postea.

Archbishop Usher appeals to this first primitive Church in Matters of
Doctrine, De Succ. and Stat. Eccl. cap. 1. p. 19.
and why may not we appeal to it in point of Discipline, as well as Doctrine?

See many more Canonists quoted in Mr. Mason, ubi supra.

(4.) Some Councils also attest to this Truth.

The Council of Aix le Chapelle owns the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters;
Conc. Aquisgr. Can. 8.
Sed solum propter authoritatem, summo Sacerdoti Clericorum Ordinatio reservata
est.

To the same purpose speaks the Council of Hispalis, or Sevil. Council. Hispal.
2. Can 7.

In the Councils of Constance and Basil, after long debate, it was concluded
that Presbyters should have decisive Suffrages in Councils, as well as Bishops,
because by the Law of God, Bishops were no more then Presbyters, and it is
expressly given them, Acts 15. 23.

In the Council of Trent, Hist. of the Council of Trent. l. 7. p. 619.
all the Spaniards, with some others, moved that the superiority of Bishops de
jure Divino might be defined; next morning came into the Legates Chamber three
Patriarchs, six Archbishops, and eleven Bishops, with a Request that it might
not be put into the Canon, that the Superiority is de jure Divino, because it
savoured of Ambition, and it was not seemly themselves should give Sentence in
their own Cause; and besides, the greater part would not have it put in. At
length the Opinion of the Spaniards prevailed, and was inserted into the Canon,
though in such ambiguous words as might not offend the other Party. The words
of the Canon are these; Conc. Trid. Sess. 23. Can. 7.
Si quis dixerit, Episcopos non esse Presbyteris superiores, vel non habere
potestatem confirmandi, and ordinandi, vel eam quam habent, illis esse cum
Presbyteris Communem -- anathema sit. This Decision was made, 1. Hist. of the
C. of Trent. ibid. p. 604, 606, 607, and 619.
In opposition to the Lutherans: This Reason was given by the Arch Bishops of
Granata (in the Congregation held October. 13. 1562.) and of Zarah, as also by
the Bishop of Segovia. 2. In favor of the Pope, for they were afraid that if
the Divine Institution and Superiority of Bishops were denied, the Popes triple
Crown would soon fall off his Head. So the Bishop of Segovia; If the power of
the Bishops be weakened, that of the Pope is weakened also. To the same purpose
said the Archbishop of Granata, being assured that if the Bishops Authority
were diminished, the Obedience to the Holy See would decrease also.

The very Council of Trent does not expressly determine Bishops to be a
Superior Order to Presbyters, and the general definition which they make of
their Superiority above Presbyters, and of their sole power of Ordination and
Confirmation, is in opposition to the Protestants, and in favor of the Pope.
Which puts me in mind of a passage in the Council of Constance, where that
blessed Man of God, Mr. John Wickleff was condemned for a Heretic, Error.
Wickleff. 28 in Conc. Constable. Sess. 8
and his Bones ordered to be taken up and burnt. One of the Articles for which
he was condemned, was this, Confirmatio juvenum, Clericorum Ordinatio, locorum
consecratio reservantur Papae and Episcopis propter cupiditatem lucri
temporalis, and honoris.

(5.) This Doctrine has been maintained also by the Church of England, both
Popish and Protestant.

The Judgment of the Church of England in the tims of Popery, we have in the
Canons of Elfrick ad Wolfin Episc. In Spelm. p. 576.
where the Bishop is declared to be of the same Order with the Presbyter. Haud
pluris interest inter Missalem Presbyterum and Episcopum, quam quod Episcopus
constitutus sit ad Ordinationes conferendas, and ad visitandum seu
inspiciendum, curandumque ea quae ad Deum pertinent, quod nimiae crederetur
multitudini, si omnis Presbyter hoc idem faceret. Ambo siquidem unum tenent
eundem Ordinem, quamvis dignior sit illa pars Episcopi.

The ancient Confessors and Martyrs here were of the same mind.

It is said of that eminent Confessor John Wickleff, Catal. Test. Tom. 2.
that tantum duos Ordines Ministrorum esse debere judicavit, viz. Presbyteros
and Diaconos.

John Lambert, a holy Martyr, says, In the primitive Church, Fox's Acts and
Mon.
when Virtue bare (as ancient Doctors do deem, and Scripture in mine Opinion
records the same) most room, there were no more Officers in the Church of
God, then Bishops and Deacons.

The same was the Judgment of Tindal and Bannes.

The Protestant Church of England was of the same mind.

The Institution of a Christian Man, made by the whole Clergy in their
Provincial Synod, Anno 1537. set forth by King and Parliament, and commanded to
be preached to the whole Kingdom, mentions but two Orders, Bishops or
Presbyters, and Deacons. In Novo Testamento nulla mentio facta est aliorum
graduum, aut distinctionum in Ordinibus, sed Diaconorum, vel Ministrorum, and
Presbyterorum, sive Episcorum.

To which agrees the MS. In Dr. Stillingfl. Irenic.
mentioned ^y the now Bishop of Worcester, setting forth the Judgment of
Archbishop Cranmer, That Bishops and Priests were ^ne Office in the beginning
of Christ's Re^igion. The Bishop of St. Asaph, Thirlby, See Dr. Burnet's
Collect. part. 1. p. 228.
Redman, Cox, all employed in that Con^ention were of the same Opinion, that at
first Bishops and Presbyters were ^he same. Redman and Cox expressly ^ite the
Judgment of Ierom with appro^ation.

The Learned Bishop concludes his Discourse of Arch Bishop Cranmer thus; We see
by the Testimony of him who was instrumental in our Reformation, Iren. p.393.
that he owned not Episcopacy as a distinct Order from Presbytery, of Divine
Right; but only as a prudent Constitution of the CIVIL MAGISTRATE, for the
better governing of the Church.

The same Archbishop Cranmer was the first of six and forty, who in the time
of King H. 8. affirmed (in a Book called, The Bishops Book, to be seen in Fox's
Martyrology) that the difference of Bishops and Presbyters was a Device of the
ancient Fathers, and not mentioned in Scripture.

Our Learned Writers against the Papists are of the same mind.

Bishop Jewel in the Defense of his Apology, See part.2. c.3. divis.5. etc. 9.
divis.1.
proves against Harding, that Aerius could not be accounted a Heretic for
holding that Bishops and Presbyters are all one Iure Divino: and ^ting Ierom,
etc. concludes in these words, All these, with many more holy Fathers, together
with the Apostle St Paul, for thus saying, must by Harding advice be held for
Heretics.

The same is affirmed by Bishop Morton in his Cath. Appeal. Vid. Hooker,l.1.
s.10, 16.l.7.s.11.
by Bishop Bilson against Seminaries. Dr. Hall's Apol. and Def. s. 14.
Whittaker Resp. ad Camp. Rations, Dr. Fulk upon Tit. 1. 5. Dean Nowel, Dr.
Stillingfleet Bishop of Worcester, in his Irenic. Dr. Burnet Bishop of
Salisbury, in his Vindication of the Church of Scotland, his words are these: I
acknowledge Bishop and Presbyter to be one and the same Office, and so plead
for no new Office-bearer in the Church -- The first branch of their power is
their Authority to publish the Gospel, to manage the Worship, and to dispense
the Sacraments: and this is all that is of Divine Right in the Ministry, in
which Bishops and Presbyters are equal sharers, p. 331.

The truth is, this Notion of the Ius Divinum of Episcopacy, as a superior
Order, was first promoted in the Church of England by Archbishop Laud. Dr.
Holland, the King's Professor of Divinity in Oxon, was much offended with Dr.
Laud, for asserting it in a Disputation for his Degrees, he checked him
publicly, and told him, He was a Schismatic, and went about to make a
division between the English and other Reformed Churches. This Prelate had
inured his Tongue to say, Ecclesia Romana, and Turba Genevensis.

Cressy, who apostatized to the Romish Church, Exomolog. c.7. p.37.
conceives that the reason why Episcopacy took no firm rooting in the
Consciences of English Subjects before Archbishop Lauds time, was because the
Succession and Authority of Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Orders received
from the Roman Church, was never confidently and generally taught in England to
be of Divine Right. His Disciples since have rectified that Error, by obliging
all the Conforming Ministers to subscribe, That Episcopacy is a distinct Order,
Vid. Pref. to the Book of Ordin.
and that it is manifest in God's Word, that it is so: This goes beyond the
determination of the Council of Trent. And to make the Fabric lasting, which
was built upon this new Foundation, all Ministers must be sworn to support it,
and that they will not remove one Stone out of the Building by any endeavors
to alter the Government, as established in Church and State. The Substance of
this Oath, as it relates to Ecclesiastical Government, is the same with the
etc. Oath, which was imposed in the year 1640. only it includes also the Civil
Government, and requires Passive Obedience and Non-resistance in all Cases
whatever, which rendered it acceptable to the Powers then in being, and gave
them encouragement to trample upon Fundamental Laws and Constitutions, as
presuming upon the security of an Oath, that neither they, nor any commissioned
by them, must be resisted upon any pretense whatsoever.

The Proofs brought for this distinction and superiority of Order are so very
weak, that scarce two of the Asserters of Episcopacy agree in any one of them.
No Scripture, no primitive General Council, no general Consent of primitive
Doctors and Fathers, no not one Father of note in the first Ages, speak
particularly and home to this purpose.

The Point of Reordination began to be urged here in Archbishop Laud's time,
his Influence was such, and the Cause then in hand did work so powerfully upon
good Bishop Hall himself, that he adventured, as Mr. Prin tells us, to
Re-ordain Mr. John Dury, though he had been before Ordained in some Reformed
Church. But from the beginning it was not so. The old Church of England did not
require Reordination, as is now done.

In King Edward the Sixth his time, Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, and P. Fagius
had Ecclesiastical Preferments in the Church of England, but Cranmer, whose
Judgment of Episcopacy we have seen before, never required Reordination of
them. He was most familiar with Martyr, Vid. Buc. script. Angl. p.154.
nether did he censure M. Bucer for writing that Presbyters might Ordain.

John a Lasco, with his Congregation of Germans, was settled in England by
Edward the Sixth's Patent, he to be Super-intendent, and four other Ministers
with him; and though he wrote against some Orders of our Church, Burn. Hisl.
p.154, 197.
was with others called to Reform our Ecclesiastical Laws.

In Queen Elizabeth's time, Ordination by Presbyters was allowed, as appears by
the Statute of Reformation, etc. 13 Eliz. cap. 12. It cannot refer to Popish
Ordinations only, if at all: For, 1. the words are general, Be it enacted --
that every person -- which does or shall pretend to be a Priest, or Minister of
God's holy Word. The Title of Minister of God's holy Word is rarely used among
the Papists, and in common use among the Reformed Churches. The Ministry with
the Papists is a real Priesthood, Conc. Trid. S^ss.23. C^n. 1.
and therefore they call their Presbyters Priests. And it is an old Maxim, Non
est distinguendum ubi Lex non distinguit. 2. The Subscription seems to intend
those that scrupled Traditions and Ceremonies, which the Papists do not. For
the assent and subscription required is, to all the Articles of Religion, which
only concern the Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of
the Sacraments. By this they gave Indulgence to those that were not satisfied
to Subscribe all the Articles absolutely, because the Approbation of the
Homilies, and Book of Consecration were included in them, which are no Articles
of the Catholic Church, but private Articles of the Church of England; as Mr.
T. Rogers observes. Rogers in Art.35, 36.
Therefore the Statute requires Subscription only to the Doctrine of Faith and
of the Sacraments.

By the way, I cannot but take notice of the following Clause in that Statute
-- If any Person Ecclesiastical -- shall advisedly maintain or affirm any
Doctrine directly contrary, or repugnant to any of the said Articles, and being
convented before the Bishop of the Diocese, or the Ordinary, or before the
Queen's Commissioners in Causes Ecclesiastical, shall persist therein, and not
revoke his Error, or after such Revocation eftsoons affirm such untrue
Doctrine; such maintaining, or affirming, or persisting -- shall be just cause
to deprive such Person of his Ecclesiastical Promotions: And it shall be lawful
to the Bishop of the Diocese, or the said Commissioners to deprive such a
Person so persisting -- and upon such Sentence of Deprivation pronounced, he
shall be indeed deprived. Quaere, Whether the Profession of Arminianism be not
directly contrary to the Seventeenth Article of Predestination and Election, to
the Tenth Article of Free Will, and to the Thirteenth of Works preparatory to
Grace? and if so, Whether the Guilty do not deserve Deprivation by this
Statute? The best of it is, they are like to meet with favorable Judges, who
will not be over-strict to mark the Errors of those, who do but write after
the Copy they have set before them. Surely the Case is altered from what it was
formerly: It was Baro's unhappiness that he lived in a peevish Age, for when he
delivered himself unwarily in favor of those Opinions, the Heads of the
University of Cambridge sent up Dr. Whittaker and Dr. Tindal to Archbishop
Whitguift, that by the interposition of his Authority those Errors might be
crushed in the Egg. Hereupon Baro, being obnoxious to this Statute, was
expelled the University, and the Lambeth-Articles were made, which come nothing
short of the Determinations of Dort. But tempora mutantur, nos and mutamur in
illis. But to return from this short digression; some that were Ordained by
Presbyters were admitted to the Public Exercise of their Ministry, and had
Preferment in the Church of England without Reordination in Queen Elizabeth's
time.

Mr. William Whittingham was made Dean of Durham about 1563. though Ordained by
Presbyters only.

Mr. Travers, Ordained by a Presbytery beyond Sea, was Seven years Lecturer in
the Temple, and had the Bishop of London's Letter for it. In his Supplication
to the Council printed at the end of Mr. Hooker's Eccl. Polit. he says, One
reason why he was Suspended by Archbishop Whitgift was because not lawfully
called (in Whitgift's Opinion) to the Ministry, nor allowed to preach according
to the Laws of this Church. But Mr. Hooker in his Answer wholly waves that, and
Replies only to the Contests between them.

The French Church in Thred-needle-street was allowed by the Queen, as also the
Dutch Church. In the Year 1684. a Quo Warranto was brought against them.

In King James the First his time, the like allowance was made unto Ministers
Ordained by Presbyters.

The famous Mr. John Camero, who was Ordained in France, Ioh. Came. (...) Evang.
came hither in the Year 1621. and set up a Divinity-Lecture in a private House
in London ^^ the Permission of King James the (...), and a License from the
then (...) of London.

Before the Consecration of the three Scottish Bishops at London, Andrews
Bishop of Ely said, They must be first Ordained, as having received no
Ordination by a Bishop. Bancroft Archbishop of Canterbury maintained, That
thereof there was no necessity, seeing where Bishops could not be had, the
Ordination^ given by Presbyters must be esteemed lawful, Spotsw. Hist.lib.7.
p.514.
otherwise it might be doubted, if there was any lawful Vocation in most of the
Reformed Churches. This applauded to by the other Bishops, Ely acquiesced, and
the three Bishops were consecrated.

Thus we see the Judgment and Practice of the Old Church of England in King
Edward the Sixth's time, in Queen Elizabeth's, and in King James the First his
time, they required not Reordination, as the New Conformity does since the
Year 1660. They acted from Catholic Principles that comprehended the Foreign
Ordinations, asserting the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters.

Object. Aerius is branded for an Heretic by Austin and Epiphanius, for
affirming Bishops and Presbyters to be the same. So Bishop Hall in his Divine
Right of Episcopacy, Part I. page 64.

Answ. The great mannagers of this Objection are the Papists (as we observed
before) from whom some Defenders of Episcopacy have borrowed it. That Aerius
was a Heretic is past doubt; but he is so called by the Fathers, because he
was an Arian: Epiphanius says, Epiph. Haeres. 75. Aust. de Haer. 53.
he did Arium ipsum dogmatum novitate superare. Austin says, in Arianorum
haeresin lapsus, which is more then a favoring of it, as some interpret their
words. Several of our Learned Writers against Popery have justified him against
the Charge of Heresy, for holding the equality of Bishops and Presbyters.
Chemnit. exam. Conc. Trid. part. 4.

CHAP. X.
Instances of Ordination by Presbyters in the Primitive Church. 1. At
Alexandria. 2. At Scetis by Paphnutius. 3. By the Presbyters mentioned by Leo
the Great. 4. By the Captive Presbyters beyond Isther. 5. By the Boiarii. 6. By
the Presbyters Ordained by Meletius. 7. By the Presbyters mentioned by Hilary
the Deacon. 8. By Andreas Presbyter de Hostia. 9. By the Chorepiscopi. 10. By
the Presbyters at Hy. Objections answered. 11. By the Ancient Waldenses. 12. By
Wickliff's Followers in England. 13. By the Presbyter of Taprobane.

Arg. IX.
THAT Ordination which was valid in the Primitive Church is valid now: But
Ordination by mere Presbyters was valid in the Primitive Church; Therefore it
is valid now.

The Major will be granted. The Minor I prove.

1. The Presbyters of Alexandria made their Bishops for almost two hundred
years together. Ierom Ad Evagr.
having showed at large from the Epistles of Peter, Paul, and John, That
Bishops and Presbyters were the same at first; he adds, Quod autem postea unus
electus est qui caeteris praeponeretur, in Schismatis remedium factum est, ne
unusquisque ad se trahens Christi Ecclesiam, rumperet: Nam and Alexandria a
Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos, Presbyteri semper
unum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant:
quomodo si exercitus Imperatorem faciat, aut Diaconi eligunt ex se quem
industrium noverint, and Archidiaconum vocant.

Note here, 1. That Ierom undertaking to show the Original way of making
Bishops of Alexandria, would leave nothing out that was material in the
Constituting of them.

2. He mentions no other way of Constituting them but this by the Presbyters.

3. He brings this as an Argument of the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters,
that Presbyters at first made Bishops: A Bishop in Ierom's Opinion is that to
the Presbyters, that an Archdeacon is to the Deacons. As an Archdeacon chosen
out of the Deacons is but a Deacon still, though the chief Deacon; so a Bishop
set over Presbyters is but a Presbyter still, though the chief Presbyter. Is
Episcopus qui inter Presbyteros primus. Hilar. in Ambr. in Tit. 3.
The other Comparison of an Army making their General, is not between the power
of a General and that of a Bishop, but it respects only the manner of their
Creation. As a General is made by the consent and choice of an Army, so Bishops
had their first being from the Presbyters consent.

4. He ascribes to the Presbyters the election, the placing him in a higher
degree, and the naming of him a Bishop. Neither do we read of any other
Consecration. Polydor Virgil confesses that anciently in the making of a
Bishop, De Invent. rer. l. 4. c 6.
there were no Ceremonies used, but the People met together to give their
Testimony and Suffrage in their Election, both Ministers and People did pray,
and Presbyters gave Imposition of Hands.

5. He says the Custom was changed from the time of Heraclas and Dionysius.
What Custom? not the Election of a Bishop by Presbyters and People, for that
continued long after: Therefore it must be the Constitution, which afterward
was done by neighboring Bishops in the way of Consecration.

This Testimony of Ierom is seconded by a more full one of Eutychius Patriarch
of Alexandria, who out of the Records and Traditions of that Church, in his
Arabic Originals thereof, says, (according to Selden's Translation in his
Comment. p. 29, 30.) Constituit item Marcus Evangelista, duodecim Presbyteros
cum Hanania, qui semper manerent cum Patriarcha, adeo ut cum vacaret
Patriarchatus eligerent unum e duodecim Presbyteris, cujus capiti reliqui
undecim (...), eumque benedicerent, and Patriarcham eum crearent: and dein
virum aliquem insignem eligerent, eumque Presbyterum secum constituerent, loco
ejus qui sic factus est Patriarcha, ita ut semper extarent duodecim. Neque
desiit Alexandriae ins^^^utum hoc de Presbyteris, ut scilicet Patriarchae
crearentur e Prsebyteris duodecim, usque ad tempora Alexandri Patriarchae
Alexandrini, qui fuit ex numero illo 318. Is autem vetuit, ne deinceps
Patriarcham Presbyteri crearent, and decrevit ut mortuo Patriarcha convenirent
Episcopi qui Patriarcham Ordinarent. Decrevit item ut vacant Patriarchatu,
eligerent sive ex quacunque regione, sive ex duodecim illis Presbyteris, sive
aliis ut res ferebat, virum aliquem eximium, eumque Patriarcham vocarent; atque
ita evanuit institutum illud antiquius, quo creari solitus a Presbyteris
Patriarcha, and successit in locum ejus decretum de Patriarcha ab Episcopis
creando.

Here is a full proof of Presbyters choosing and creating their Bishop, (whom
Eutychius speaking in the language of his Age, calls Patriarch) and that by
Imposition of Hands and Benediction, or Prayer, without any other Consecration,
which Custom continued several Ages, until at last the neighboring Bishops
usurped the power of Consecration, and left the Presbyters neither the Choice
nor the Creation of their Bishop.

Here we have also an Instance of Presbyters making Presbyters; for Eutychius
tells us, That the same Presbyters that made their Bishop, chose and ordained
another person Presbyter in his room; and so constituted both Presbyters and
Bishops for several Ages together.

II. The Bishop of Worcester tells us out of Johannes Cassianus, that about the
Year 390. one Abbot Daniel, inferior to none in the Desert of Scetis,
Stilling. Iren. p. 380.
was made a Deacon, a B. Paphnutio solitudinis ejusdem Presbytero, in tantum
enim virtutibus ejus adgaudebat, ut quem vitae merits sibi and gr^tia parem
noverat, coaequare sibi etiam Sacerdotii honor festinaret; Siquidem nequaquam
ferens in inferiore eum Ministerio diutius immorari, optansque sibimet
successionem dignissimam providere, superstes eum Presbyterij honor provexit.

Here is a Presbyter Ordained by a Presbyter, which we no where read was
pronounced null by Theophilus, then Bishop of Alexandria, or any other of that
time. Had it been either irregular or unusual, doubtless it had been censured.

Possibly the Concession in the Canon Law is grounded upon this Example, Abbas
si est Presbyter confer potest ordinem Clericalem. Decret. Greg. lib. 1. Tit.
14. c. 11. Innocent. 3.

III. Leo Mag. being consulted by Rusticus Narbonensis, about some Presbyters
that took upon them to Ordain as Bishops, resolves the Case thus; Nulla ratio
sinit, nt inter Episcopos habeantur qui nec in Clericis sunt electi, nec a
plebibus expetiti, nec a provincialibus Episcopis cum Metropolitani judicio
consecrati. Vnde cum saepe quaestio de male accepto honor nascatur, quis
ambigat, NEQUAQUAM ISTIS TRIBVENDVM quod non docetur fuisse collatum? Leon:
Epist. 92. ad Rust. Narbon. c. 1.
si qui autem Clerici ab istis Pseudo-episcopis in eis Ecclesiis ordinati sunt,
quae ad proprios Episcopos pertinebant, and Ordinatio ecrum cum consensu and
judicio praesidentium facta est, potest rata haberi, ita ut in ipsis Ecclesiis
perseverent.

Two things are remarkable in this Decision of Leo the Great.

1. They that want the Election of the Clergy, and are not desired by the
People, nor Consecrated by the Bishops of the Province, etc. are
Pseudo-episcopi, false Bishops in Leo's Opinion, which is agreeable to the old
Canons, as we observed before. Our English Bishops want the Election of the
Clergy and People, and therefore their Ordinations have a Canonical nullity in
them. They would have been reckoned but Pseudoepiscopi in Leo's time.

2. The Consent ex post facto of the true Bishops, made the Ordinations of mere
Presbyters lawful, which could not be unless they had an intrinsic power of
Ordination, which was only restrained by the Laws of the Church; for if they
have no power of Ordination, it is impossible they should confer any by their
Ordination. The bare consent of the true Bishops could not have made them
Ministers, if they had not been such before.

IV. The power of Ordination and Government was in the Hands of the Captive
Presbyters under the Seythians beyond 1ster for about Seventy years, from the
Year 260 to the Year 327; Philostorg. lib 2 cap. 5 in B^and. Apol.
the former being the Year of their Captivity under Galienus, the latter of the
Change of the Government under Constantine, when Vrphilas was created Bishop by
Eusebius, and others.

V. The Presbyters of Bavaria Ordained Ministers time out of mind, until at
last Pope Zachary sent one Vivilo to them for their Bishop. It is certain that
when Bonifacius Mogunt* alias Winifrid, visited them, he found no Bishops in
the whole Province but this Vivilo of the Pope's sending not long before;
though the Province be so large that one third part of it now, viz. the
district of Saltsburg, H^yl. Cos^n. l. ^. p. 368.
has an Arch^bishop, who is the most powerful Prelate for Revenue and
Jurisdiction of any in Germany. The Boiarians, who were the ancient Inhabitants
of this Province, were governed by their Presbyters without Bishops, and in all
probability had been so from their first Conversion, which was about 200 years
before. For they were converted to the Christian Faith about the Year 540, and
Vivilo was imposed upon them about the Year 740 by Pope Zachary, who thus
writes to Winifrid, or Wilfred (as some write his Name) Quia indicasti
perrexisse te ad gentem Boiariorum, and invenisse eos extra Ordinem
Ecclesiasticum viventes, dum Episcopos non habebant in Provincia nisi unum,
nomine Vivilo, quem nos ante tempus Ordinavimus, Bonif. Mogunt. Ep. 120. Auct
Bib. Patr. Tom. 2. p. 105.
Presbyteros vero quos ibidem reperisti, si incogniti fuerint Viri illi a
quibus sunt Ordinati, and dubium est eos Episcopos fuisse, an non, qui eos
ordinaverunt -- ab Episcopo suo benedictiones Presbyteratus suscipiant, and
consecrentur, and sic Ministerio suo fungantur. It is no wonder that this Pope
requires Reordination, for now Rome had usurped the Universal Headship, and
assumed a power of Deposing and Setting up of Princes, as this Man did in the
Case of Childerik and Pipin. They that brought Kings and Princes under them,
would much more make Presbyters to depend upon them.

VI. The Council of Nice decreed thus concerning the Presbyters Ordained by
Meletius at Alexandria, etc. Socrat. in Mr. Baxt. of Episc. p. 226.
Hi autem qui Dei gratia and nostris precibus adjuti, ad nullum Schisma
deflexisse comperti sint, sed se intra Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae
fines ab erroris labe vacuos continuerint, authoritatem habeant TVM MINISTROS
ORDINANDI, tum eos qui Clero digni fuerint nominandi, tum denique omnia ex lege
and instituto Ecclesiastico libere exequendi. If any say, that the meaning is,
that these Presbyters shall Ordain and Govern with the Bishops, but not without
them, it is granted; for the Decree refers to instituta Ecclesiastica: But this
shows that Ordination belongs to the Presbyters Office, and consequently it
is no nullity (though an irregularity as to the Canons) when it is done by them
alone.

If it be said, this Condemns Schismatical Ordinations; I answer, Schism, as
such, cannot make Ordination null, though it implies an irregularity, else the
Ordinations of the Schismatical Church of Rome were null, which are counted
valid in England.

Q. 101.
VII. Hilary, or whoever was the Author in Q ex utroque Test. mixtim, affirms,
That in Alexandria and per totum Aegyptum si desit Episcopus, consecrat
Presbyter. It cannot be said that Consecrare here signifies the Consecration of
the Eucharist, for this might be done by the Presbyter, proesente Episcopo. If
it be taken for Confirmation, it does not prejudice our Cause; for the Canon
limits the power of Confirmation, as well as Ordination to the Bishop, as was
also the power of Consecrating Churches, if any should take the word in that
sense.

We may understand the meaning by a parallel place of Hilary in Ambrose,
Comment. in Ephesians. 4.
who thus speaks: Ideo non per omnia convenient scripta Apostoli Ordinationi
quae nunc in Ecclesia est, quia haec inter ipsa primordia sunt scripta; nam and
Timotheum (1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6. Presbyterum a se creatum) Episcopum
vocat, quia primum Presbyteri Episcopi appellabantur, ut recedente uno, sequens
ei succederet. Denique apud Aegyptum Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit
Episcopus. Sed quia caeperunt sequentes Presbyteri indigni inveniri ad primatus
tenendos, immutata est ratio, prospiciente Concilio, ut non Ordo, sed meritum
crearet Episcopum, multorum Sacerdotum judicio constitutum, ne indignus temere
usurparet, and esset multis scandalum.

The same Author says also, Hilar. Diac. in Tim. 3.
in Tim. 3. post Episcopum, Diaconi Ordinem subjicit. Quare, nisi quia Episcopi
and Presbyteri una Ordinatio est? Vterque enim Sacerdos est, sed Episcopus
primus est.

Here note,

1. That the Ordination in Hilary's time did not in all things agree with the
Writings of the Apostle. That he speaks of the Ordination of Ministers is
evident by the following words, Presbyterum a se creatum, etc.

2. At first Presbyters and Bishops were of the same Order and Office, and had
but one Odination. Episcopi and Presbyteri una Ordinatio est, which shows the
meaning of Ordinatio in the former Paragraph. The Bishop in Hilary's time,
which was about the Year 380, under Damasus Hilar. ib.
, was but primus Sacerdos, and not of a superior Order: Peter is called (...),
primus Apostolus, Matthew. 10. 2. and yet Protestants hold all the Apostles to be
equal.

3. De Repub. Eccl. l. 3. c. 3
Spalatensis infers from this quotation, That at the beginning when a Bishop
died, there was not so much as an Election of him that was to succeed (much
less any new Ordination) but the eldest Presbyter came into the room of the
deceased Bishop. See the Preface to Blondel's Apology, p. 11. and 31.

4. There was a Change in the way of choosing their Bishop, ut non ordo, sed
meritum crearet Episcopum; and this was prospiciente Concilio; whether that
Council was the Council of Nice, Can. 4. as Blondel thinks; for it should seem
that before that time neither the Consent of the Bishops of the Province, nor
the Concurrence of three Bishops in Ordination, were accounted necessary for
the making of a Bishop, though it might be the Custom (for the keeping up of
Unity) in some places: Or whether it signifies no more then that which Ierom
calls Concilium Presbyterorum, the Bench of Presbyters, who might make this
Change by general Consent; Multorum Sacerdotum judicio, as Hilarious speaks: Or
whether it were some Council, of which we have no further account in Antiquity,
most of the Records of the three first Centuries being lost Vid. Eusebius. III. 4.
, is not very material. It might be some Provincial Synod, of which there were
several before that of Nice Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. V. 23.
. It is presumption in us that live at this distance, to say there was no such
Council, when an Ancient Writer so positively affirms it. Such a Change there
was, and that by the advice of some Council; they that say there was no such
Council, must disprove it by some positive Authentic Testimony.

5. After this Change the Presbyters chose, and made their Bishop: For so
Hilarious affirms him to be, multorum Sacerdotum judicio constitutum.

6. He adds, that in Egypt Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit
Episcopus. He speaks in the foregoing words of the Identity of Bishops and
Presbyters, and he brings this as a Confirmation of it, that in the absence of
the Bishop they might do those things which Custom had appropriated to the
Bishops. Consignare is some Act of Prerogative that the Bishops challenged to
themselves, which yet in their absence the Presbyters might perform. Whether we
understand it of Ordination, or Confirmation, in which they did Chrysmate
consignare, it is not material, for both were reserved to the Bishop by the
Canons: Though by comparing this with the scope of Hilary's Discoarse, and with
the quotation out of the Questions under Austin's Name -- Si desit Episcopus,
consecrat Presbyter, it should seem evidently meant of Ordination; especially
when we find consignare to be taken for consecrare in several Authors, Arnob.
lib. 3. Cypr. Ep. 2. Tu tantum quem jam Spiritalibus castris coelestis militia
signavit.

VIII. Pelagius the first Bishop of Rome was Ordained by John Bishop of
Perusia, Anastas. de vit. Pontis. p. 53.
Bonus Bishop of Florence, and Andreas Presbyter de Hostia, whereas by the
Canons three Bishops are absolutely necessary for the Ordination of a Bishop:
Either then Pelagius was no Canonical Bishop, and the Succession was
interrupted in the Church of Rome, and consequently the English Bishops have no
Canonical Succession; or else a Presbyter has the same intrinsecal power of
Ordination with a Bishop, but it is only restrained by Ecclesiastical Laws. This
Instance is quoted in Dr. Stillingfl. Iren.

IX. The Chorepiscopi, or Country-Bishops Ordained Presbyters until they were
restrained by a Canon in the Council of Antioch, A. D. 344. Antioch. Conc. Can.
10.
Now these Chorepiscopi were either of the Order of Bishops, or not: If they
were, then it appears that Bishops were made not only in Cities, but in Country
Villages, which were but thinly peopled with Christians, when the Majority were
Heathens, or at least were great numbers. By which we may guess at the bigness
of primitive Diocesses, which were scarce as large as our lesser Parishes. Such
Bishops in the Exercise of that power which Christ gave them, without Canonical
Restraints, we plead for, and earnestly desire. Nay the Chorepiscopi are an
Instance of Bishops without subject Presbyters; they were but Parish-Bishops
under the City-Bishop. Ancyr. Conc. Can. 13.
Sine authoritate literarum ejus in unaquaque Parochia Chorepiscopis non licet
aliquid agere. But if they were not Bishops, then it is undeniable that
Presbyters did Ordain then, without Bishops, and their Ordination was valid,
until they were limited by the Canons. The second Council of Hispalis makes the
Chorepiscopi and Presbyters to be the same Can. 7.
.

As to Bellarmine's conceit of two sorts of Choral Bishops, some mere
Presbyters, Forb's Iren. cap. 11.
others very nominis Episcopi, he is answered at large by Forbes in his Irenic.
c. 11.

X. The Histories of Scotland do tell us that their Churches were governed by
Presbyters without Bishops for above two hundred years, and therefore had no
Ordination but by Presbyters.

Hector Boethius says, Ante Palladium populi Suffragiis ex Monachis and
Culdaeis pontifices assumerentur. Hist. Scot. lib. 7. fol. 28.

De Gest. Scot. l. 2. c. 2
John Major is more express, Prioribus illis temporibus, per Sacerdotes and
Monachos sine Episcopis Scoti in side eruditi sunt.

John Fordon justifies this Custom as agreeable to the primitive Church. Scoti
Chron. l. 3. c. 8.
Ante Palladii adventum habebant Scoti sidei Doctores ac Sacramentorum
Ministratores Presbyteros solummodo vel Monachos, Ritum sequentes Ecclesiae
primitivae. Bishop Usher cites this last with approbation. De primord. Eccl.
Brit. p. 798, 799, 800.

These Authors call the ancient Inhabitants of Scotland by the name they were
known by in their days.

Object. Some to elude these Testimonies, deny that there was any Conversion of
the ancient Inhabitants of that part of Britain, which we now call Scotland,
before Palladius his time, or near it. The South-Picts they would have
converted not till A. D. 432. the North-Picts in the Year 560.

Answ. I deny not but there might be a more general Conversion of that Nation
at those times; the Christian Religion, Bed. Hist. III 4.
which was overgrown with Heathenism, and other Errors, might be revived, and
recovered to its primitive Luster by the preaching of Nennianus and Columba.

Indeed Bid says, Bed. Hist. l. 5. c. 10.
Erat autem Columba primus Doctor fidei Christianoe transmontanis Pictis ad
Aquilonem. He was the first he knew of, who lived two hundred years after the
said Conversion. For he ends his History with the year 766. It is acknowledged
that they were mixed with Scots or Irish at this time, a barbarous People, and
in all likelihood Heathens, who having made themselves Masters of all, must
needs bring Christianity to a low ebb in that Country. The converting of these
to the Christian Faith was the first Conversion that Bid knew of. But that
Christianity was much more early in that Kingdom, is proved by Dr. Cowper,
Comp. 2d days Conference.
a Scotch Bishop. He affirms the Conversion of the North Part of Brittany to be
as early, if not earlier, then the Conversion of the South Part. He proves out
of Dorotheus Synops. and Nicephor. II. 40. that Simon Zelotes preached the
Gospel in Britain, where he was Martyred and Interred. This was An. 44.
Christi. He proves out of Baloeus, Fleming, etc. that Joseph of Arimathea came
into Britain, about the Year 35. He proves out of Theodoret, that Paul after
his Deliverance under Nero, came into Britain. Cent. 1. lib. 1. c. 10. And
then brings in the Papists objecting, What is this to Scotland? He answers?

What Good or Evil especially in Religion has come to the one, has been found
by manifold experience easily derived to the other. He says further, out of
their own Chronicles, That A.D. 124. when K. Lucius embraced the Christian
Faith in the South part of the Isle, in that same year, Donald King of the
North part of it became a Christian, and that when (A. 300.) under Dioclesian
the Church of South Britain was persecuted by his Deputies, many fled to
Crachlint [ or Cratilinth] King of Scots, who did lovingly receive them, and
assigned to them the Isle of Man, and erected there a Temple dedicated to
Christ, called otherwise Sodorensis Ecclesia. He quotes also that known place
of Tertullian, adv. Iud. c. 7, 8. Britannorum loca Romany inaccessa Christo
subdita sunt. Now what part of Britain he means (says the Bishop) your own
Cardinal Baronius will declare unto you -- It Is evident (says Baronius) that
Britannia was divided by a Wall built by Adrian, etc. that part within was
possessed by the Romans, the other without, Britanni libere possederunt, qui
saepe muros illos egressi Romanos praeliis provocarunt. For this cause, says
he, Petrus Cluniacensis vocat Scotos antiquiores Christianos. Cent. 3. c. 3.
and 2. c. 2. Thus far the Bishop.

I would further be resolved in these Queries.

1. When the Fathers mention Joseph of Arimathea, Simeon Zelotes, etc. to have
preached the Gospel in Britain, what reason have we to exclude North-Britain
from partaking in the Blessing? The whole Island, Scotland and England, was
then called Britain. It is most reasonable to think that those Apostles and
Apostolical Men that came into this Land, did cause the joyful sound of the
Gospel to be heard in every part of the Island, North as well as South. When we
consider their Zeal, unwearied Endeavors, together with the wonderful Success
attending their Ministry, it is not likely that Scotland remained long in
Heathenism, after the Conversion of South-Brittain. And can it be imagined that
the Christians of South-Brittain were so cruelly uncharitable as not to
endeavor the propagation of the Gospel among their Countrymen and Neighbors
of North-Britain, especially under King Lucius, in whose time Christianity may
be supposed to be the public Profession of the Land. To this add, that a great
part of that we call Scotland now, belonged then to the Dominions of the
British Kings, who doubtless endeavored the planting of Christianity among all
their Subjects.

2. If the Inhabitants of North-Britain received their first Conversion by Men
sent from Rome, as Bede suggests, Bed. Hist. III. 4.
how comes it to pass that for so long a time after, they kept their Easter
after the Eastern manner, and not after the Roman? When the Saxon-Roman-Bishops
imposed Conformity in this particular, they opposed them for a long time, Bed.
ib.25
and Bishop Colman (who came from Scotland) left his Charge, rather then
Conform, about the Year 664.

The Picts and Britains were as rigid Nonconformists as he in this Point, and
are termed by Wilfride, at a public Disputation, obstinationis eorum accomplices
Bed. ib. c. 25.
. Their Bishop Dagamus refused all Communion with the Roman Bishops, Bed. II. 4.
and would not as much as eat with them in the same House.

As the Roman Bishops were growing in greatness, and arriving toward the
Perfection of the Man of Sin, they sent their Bishops to most Nations, to bring
them to a dependence upon them; so they did send Palladius to Ireland, Nynias
to Scotland, Bed. Hist. I 27.
Austin to England, Vivilo to the Boiarians, as we observed before.

Bid himself acknowledges that the first Bishop the Scots had was Palladius,
though they were Christians before; Bed. I. 13.
Palladius ad Scotos in Christum credentes a Pontifice Romanae Ecclesiae
Celestino primus mittitur Episcopus. He did not make them Christians, but found
them so.

It is objected further, out of Bid, That Britain in Palladius's time had such
Bishops as were in all other parts of the Roman Empire.

Eccl. Hist. III. 21.
Answ. Bid acknowledges that the British and Scotch Bishops were many of them
Ordained only by one Bishop. They were not then such Bishops as were in all
other parts of the Roman Empire; for in other parts of the Empire they were
Ordained by three Bishops, according to the fourth Canon of the Council of
Nice. It Is an evidence that they thought themselves not obliged by General
Councils.

But suppose there were such Bishops here, as were in all other parts of the
Roman Empire, as it is not very unlikely but the Church Government of Britain,
being a Province of that Empire, might be in some degree modelled according to
the Forms used in other parts of the Empire. The Hierarchy in the Churches of
that Empire had its Pattern from the Heathen. The Heathen had their Sacerdotes,
and over them their Pontifices maximos Ar^ob. cont. Gent. Lib. V.
.

In every Province, one chief Priest had the Supreme Power, to whom all the
other Priests were subject. And these were chosen ex hominibus qui in negotiis
Civilibus, and rebus publicis erant illustrissimi Eusebius. VIII 15. and IX. 4.
. See the Epistle of Julian to Arsacius, Chief-Priest of Galatia, in Sozom. V.
16. Here is a President for Bishops intermedling in State Affairs.

The Office of these Chief-Priests was to Ordain and Govern the inferior
Priests. Iul. Ep. ibid.


The Master of the Sentences ingenuously confesses that the distinction of
Bishops, Metropolitans, Archbishops, was borrowed of the Gentiles. Thus he:

Ordo Episcoporum quadripartitus est, Lib. 4. did 25. m.
scil. in Patriarchis, Archiepiscopis, Metropolitanis and Episcopis -- horum
autem discretio a Gentilibus introducta videtur, qui suos Flamines, alios
simpliciter flamines, alios Archi-flamines, alios Protoflamines appellabant.

That the Ecclesiastical Government of Britain was built upon the Ruins of the
Pagan Hierarchy is expressly affirmed by Ponticus Virunnius. He tells us, That
there were in Britain before Christianity 28 Flamens, and three Arch-Flamens.
In the room of the Flamens were set up Bishops, and in the room of the
Arch-Flamens Archbishops. The Seat of the Arch-Flamens were London, York, and
Caerleon upon Vsk. To these three Metropolitans were subject 28 Bishops.
Fuerunt in Britannia octo and viginti Flamines, nec non and tres Archi
flamines, quorum potestati coeteri judices morum atque phanatici
submittebantur.... ubi. erant Flamines, Eiscopos, ubi autem Archi-flamines,
Archi-episcopos posuerunt, mira sanctitate, and incredibili devotione. Seeds
autem Archi-flaminum (quae fuit antiquissima religio) in tribus nobilioribus
Civitatibus fuerant P. Virunn. Hist. Brit. lib. 4 p. 32.
; Lundoniis, viz. atque Eboraci, and in Vrbe Legionum super Oscam fluvium --
His igitur tribus Metropolitanis, evacuata superstitione, 28. Episcopi
subduntur.

The description that Caesar gives of the Government of the ancient Druids,
something agrees with this of Ponticus Virunnius. C^^^r says concerning the
Druids of France, That they managed all the Pagan Devotions, under the Conduct
of one Chief President, whose Authority was Supreme: when he died, another was
chosen to succeed him. Illi rebus divinis intersunt, Sacrificia publica ac
privata procurant, religiones interpretantur -- His autem omnibus Druidibus
praeest unus, Caesar de B^ll. Gall. lib. 6.
qui summam inter eos habet auctoritatem. Hoc mortuo, si quis ex reliquis
excellit dignitate, succedit; at si sunt plures pares, suffragio Druidum
adlegitur. He adds, That this Discipline was found in Britain; Disciplina in
Britannia reperta, atque in Galliam translata esse existimatur; and nunc qui
diligentius eam rem cognoscere volunt, plerumque illo, discendi causa
proficiscuntur.

Having proved that Christianity was in the North part of Britain before
Palladius's time, and vindicated Boethius and Fordon, I proceed to give an
Instance of Presbyters Ordaining in Scotland.

Segenius a Presbyter and Abbot of Hy, together with the other Presbyters of
the Monastery Ordained Bishop Aidan. The Presbyters of Hy also Ordained Finan
as Successor to -- Et ipsum esse dignum Episcopatu, ipsum ad erudiendos
incredulos. and indoctos mitti debere decernunt, -- sicque illum ordinantes ad
praedicandum miserant -- successit vero ei in Episcopatu Finan, and ipse illo
ab Hy Scotorum insula, ac Monasterio destinatus. Bid Hist. III. 5. 15.
Aidan.

To this Quotation it is said by some, that Aidan was ordained by Bishops, which
they would' thus prove: There was always one Bishop in Hy Monastery, as Bishop
Usher tells us out of the Ulster Annals; and another person Ordained perhaps
only by the Bishop of Hy, who was returned back from Northumbria. Then at least
there were present two Bishops for Aidan's Ordination.

Answ. 1. We have no Author near that time that says there was a Bishop
constantly resident at Hy, which our Adversaries think a good Argument against
the Scottish Historians. As to the Annals of Vlster, we leave them for
Apocryphal, as not being attested by any Author of that Age.

2. But suppose there were a Bishop resident at Hy, he was subject to the
Abbot, who was the only Church-Governour of the Island, and the Provinces about
Habere solet ipsa Insula rectorem semper Abbatem Preshyterum, Cujus Iuri and
omnis Provincia, and ipsi etiam Episcopi, ordine inusitato debeant esse
subjecti, juxta Exemplum Primi Doctoris illius, qui non Episcopus, sed
Presbyter extitit, and Monachus. Bed. Hist. III. 4.
. The Monastery was not only exempted from the Government of the Bishops, which
is usual, but the Bishops of the Province were subject to the Abbot, and
therefore the parallel Instance of Oxford being under the Jurisdiction of the
Chancellor, and not of the Bishop of the place (which is urged by some) is not
to the point, for the Bishop is not subject to the Vice Chancellor, as the
Bishops were to the Abbot of Hy. The Bishop of Oxford has a Jurisdiction over
all that have a Parochial Cure in the University, versity, who swear Canonical
Obedience to him, which cannot be said of the Bishops under the Jurisdiction at
Hy?

3. The second Bishop said to be at Hy, when Aidan was Ordained, cannot be
produced out of Bid. It does not appear that he was Ordained Bishop. Hist.
III. 5.
Bid calls him only Sacerdotem, a Priest. Or if he was, how will it appear
that he was Ordained by the Bishop of Hy?

Ordained perhaps only by the Bishop of Hy, says the Learned Historian: Here
is a plain begging of the Question; It is taken for granted that this Man was
Ordained by the Bishop of Hy, which we deny, and which Bid no where affirms.
Finan's Ordination was by the Seniores and their Abbot, Bed. Hist. III. 5.
as Bede says, and therefore his Predecessor had no other.

It Is objected further, That Finan must needs be Ordained by Bishops, because
there were three Bishops at the Ordination of Cedd. This deserves to be taken
notice of by our Aversaries, and considered in other places, where Bid speaks
of Scottish Ordinations.

I answer we have taken notice of it, and find it does not at all concern the
thing in question. For Cedd's Ordination was at Lindis-farn in England, out of
the Liberties of the Abbots of Hy. Let one Example be produced of Ordination by
Bishops, within the district of Hy, and 'twill be something to the purpose,
which I have not yet met with.

Bid speaking of the British Bishops, calls them Presbyters or Teachers
Interea Augustinus adjutorio tisus Edilberthi Regis Convocavit ad suum
Colloquium Episcopos sive Doctores, maximae and proximae Britonum Provincia,
etc.
: so that it is uncertain what sort of Bishops the old Britains had.

'Twas many years after Cedd's time, before the British Churches would submit
to the Roman Yoke of Discipline; when they had thoroughly imbibed the Romish
Modes and Customs, then at a Synod held at Celichyth, A. D. 816. 'twas decreed,
That none of the Scottish Nation should be permitted to use the sacred Ministry
among us.

It Is argued further against the Scotch Ordinations, that they must needs be
Episcopal, because the Romans did not dislike the Orders, that they found in
the British Church.

Answ.
If by the British Church be meant the Church of South Britain, it is not to the
purpose, as we observed before, but if the Orders conferred in the Monastery of
Hy be intended, the Romans were not so ignorant of the Privileges of Abbots,
as to dislike their Ordinations, which to this day are allowed by the Canons of
that Church Abbas si est Presbyter confer potest Ordinem Clericalem. Decr.
Greg.
.

XI. The ancient Waldenses had their Ministers Ordained by Presbyters without
Bishops. They maintain all Ministers to be in a state of parity, and their
Presbyters imposed Hands for Ordination Perr. Hist. of Waldens. lib. 1. C. 13.
p. 62. ibid. cap. 10. p. 53. vid. part. 3. l. 2. c. 2. p. 57...
. These were the Fathers and famous Predecessors of the Protestants, who bore
the heat of the day. They had the honor to be first Witnesses against
Antichrist, and are to this day, as the Bishop of Salisbury calls them, The
purest Remains of primitive Christianity.

From them the Fratres Bohemi had their Succession of Ministers, for they sent
Michael Zambergius, and two more, for Ordination to the poor Waldenses (who
never had a Bishop among them, but in Title only) In compliance with their
desires, two of their Titular Bishops, with some Presbyters that had not so
much as the Titles of Bishops, made Zambergius, and his two Colleagues, Bishops,
giving them power of Ordination Vid. Hist. of Bohem.
. We dislike not, that for Orders sake, the Exercise of this Power should be
ordinarily restrained to the graver Ministers, provided they assume it not as
proper to themselves by a Divine Right, nor clog it with unscriptural
Impositions.

XII. Wickliffs followers here in England held and practiced Ordination by mere
Presbyters, and least any should think they did so of necessity, for want of
Bishops, it is to be noted, that they did it upon this Principle, that all
Ministers of Christ have equal power Lolardi sequaces. Johannis Wickliff, pir
idem tempus in errorem suum plurimos seduxerunt, and tantam praesumpserunt
audaciam, ut eorum Presbyteri more Pontificum, novos crearent Pontificos,
asserentes (ut frequenter supra retulimus) quemlibet Sacerdotem tantam
consecutum potestatem ligandi atque solvendi and caetera Ecclesiastica
Ministrandi, quantam ipse Papa dat vel dare polest. Exercuerunt autem istam
persidiam in Diaecesi Sarum, Walf. Hist. Ang. ad A. D. 1389. p. 339.
, as the Popish Historian says, who complains how all parts of England were
full of those People, and that the Prelates knew of these things, but none were
forward to prosecute the Guilty, except the Bishop of Norwich Audiverunt,
viderunt, atque seiverunt haec universa pontifices, sed abierunt alius, in
villans suam, etc. This was in King Richard the Second's time.


XIII. In the Island of Taprobane, or Zeilan, as it is now called, there was a
Church of Christians governed by a Presbyter and his Deacon, without any
Superior Bishop, to which he or his Flock was subject. This Island is above
two thousand Miles in compass N. Lloyd Georg. Dict.
, a Province big enough for a Bishop, yet had none in Justin the Emperor's
time, which was about the Year 520, but was under the Legi insignem relationem
Cosmae Monachi Indicopleustae de Taprobana Insula, quae nunc Zeilan, olim
Seiladiva dicebatur, ubi Iustini Imperatoris aetate Ecclesiam Christianorum,
Presbyter in Perside Ordinatus una cum suo Diacono regebat, says L. Holsten.
de Minist. Confirm. p. 39.
Jurisdiction of a Presbyter, Ordained in Persia, who in all likelihood
Ordained his Successor, and would not be at the trouble of sending for one to
very remote Countries.

By this Passage it appears that Bishops were not thought Essential to
Churches, no not in the sixth Age, and that mere Presbyters have power of
Jurisdiction, and consequently of Ordination.

The Fathers in the second Council of Carthage, A. D. 428. did observe, that
until that time, some Dioceses never had any Bishops at all, and thereupon
Ordained they should have none for the future Placet uc Dioceses quae nunquam
Episcopos acceperunt, non habeant. Con.Carth. 2. c. 5.
. They would never have made such a Canon, had they concluded the Government by
Bishops to be Iure Divino.

CHAP. XI.
Objections against Ordinations by Presbyters answered. 1. That it is against
the Canons. So is Episcopal Ordination. 2. It destroys the Line of Succession,
answered in Seven Particulars. 3. The Case of Ischyras considered. A Passage in
Jerome explained.

I Will briefly reflect upon the most material Objections that are made against
the Ordination I plead for.

Object. 1. Ordination by Presbyters without Bishops is condemned by the Old
Canons.

Answ. 1. Many things are reserved to the Bishops by the Old Canons merely to
support their Grandeur. Romans Conc. Can. 5. Carth. 2. Can. 2.
For this reason the Consecration of Churches, the Erecting of Altars, the
making of Chrysm, the Reconciling of Penitents, the Vailing of Nuns, etc. were
appropriated to the Bishops. All this is ingeniously acknowledged by the
Council of Hispalis -- Let the Presbyters know that the power of Ordaining
Presbyters and Deacons is forbidden them by the Apostolical See, by virtue of
novel Ecclesiastical Constitutions Novellis and Ecclesiasticis regulis sibi
prohibita noverine -- Presbyterorum Consecratio, etc.
. They add, that this was done to bear up the dignity of the Bishops Vt per hoc
and discretio graduum, and dignigatis fastigium summi Pontificis demonstretur.
Conc. Hisp. 2. Can. 7.
.

For the same reason the Chorepiscopi, or Country Bishops, were restrained from
Ordaining in the Council of Antioch Quamvis ut Episcopi consecrati sunt, etc.
-- nec Presbyterum nec Diaconum audeant Ordinare praeter Civitatis Episcopum.
Council. Antioch. Can. 10. A.D. 3^4.
.

For the same reason 'twas decreed in the Council of Sardis, A. D. 347. That no
Village or lesser Town must have a Bishop, ne vilescat nomen Episcopi.

2. Episcopal Ordinations also, as they are now managed, will prove Nullities
by the Old Canons.

The Ancient Canons, called the Apostles, which are confirmed by the sixth
General Council at Can. 2.
Constantinople, do depose all Bishops that are chosen by the Civil Magistrate.

Can. 29. Can. 29. in Conc. Collect. Reg. Par. 1644. (...).
If any Bishop obtains a Church by means of the Secular Powers, let him be
deposed, and separated from Communion with all his Adherents.

This Canon is revived by the second Council of Nice Can. 3.
, which the Greeks call the Seventh General Council.

All our English Bishops are chosen by the Magistrate, and not by other
Bishops, or the Presbyters and People of their Diocese. The King's Writ of
Conge d'Eslier to the Dean and Chapter to choose their Bishop, is only matter
of form, for the King chooses properly, and the Dean and Chapter cannot reject
the Person whom he recommends: nor are they the just Representatives of the
Clergy and People of the Diocese, whose Suffrages were required of old in the
designation of a Bishop Cypr. Ep. 68.
.

Can. 6. Forbids Bishops to intermeddle with Secular Affairs upon pain of
Deprivatiion. Can. 6. (...).
Let not a Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon, assume worldly Cares: and if he does,
let him be deposed. Bishops at this time were not Judges in Civil Matters, nor
Ministers of State, as being a thing inconsistent with their Office, 2 Timothy 2.4.

Can. 80. adds, Can. 80 -- (...)
A Bishop must not engage in Public Administrations, that he may give himself
to the Work of the Ministry; Let him resolvedly decline these, or be Deposed;
for no Man can serve two Masters.

The Church of England does not observe the Canons of the first General
Councils, which some Laud against Fisher, p. 360.
would have us believe are the measures of her Reformation next the Scripture.

The fourth Canon of the Council of Nice requires the Ordination of a Bishop to
be, Nic Council. Can. 4 -- (...).
by all the Bishops of the Province, at least by three, with the Consent of the
absent Bishops expressed in writing. I never knew the Consent of all the
Bishops of the Province required, much less expressed in Writing, before the
Consecration of English Bishops.

Can. 5. -- (...)
Can. 5. Requires Provincial Councils twice a year. This is not observed.

Can. 6. (...)
Can. 6. and 7th, establish the Rights and Privileges of Metropolitans.

Quaere, Whether Austin the Monk, whom the Pope made Archbishop of Canterbury,
did not wrongfully invade the Rights of the British Bishops (over whom Pope
Gregory could give him no just Power, notwithstanding his pretended Grant,
mentioned by Eccl. Hist. I. 29.
Bid) which are not restored to this day: and if so, whether this does not
make a Canonical Nullity in the whole Succession of English Bishops, who derive
their Line from that usurping Prelate.

Can. 15 and 16th, Can. 16. (...)
forbids Ministers to remove from the Church in which they were Ordained.

I might mention several other Canons in this Council, which are not observed,
as the third, the eleventh, the fourteenth, (which in the Greek is the
eighteenth) the nineteenth and Can. 20. (...)
twentieth, which forbids kneeling upon the Lord's days.

No more are the Canons of the Great Council of Chalcedon observed.

Can. 3. forbids Ministers to take Farms or Stewardships, and to intermeddle
with Secular Affairs.

Can. 7. Can. 7. (...)
is against the Clergies meddling with Military Affairs, or receiving Secular
Honors, upon pain of Excommunication. Booted Prelates and Spiritual Lords
would have looked strange in this Age.

One of the Methods which Julian the Apostate used to corrupt the Clergy was to
make Senators and Ministers of State of them Alia insuper dolo malo induxit,
nam and in Cleri Ordin^m cooptatos, Senatorum munere, and Ministerio perverse
fungi jassit. Niceph Eccl. Hist. XIII.
. That Politic Enemy of Christianity knew well enough how inconsistent worldly
Greatness and Dominion would be with that humble Mortification, and vigorous
Application which the Gospel requires. He that had been a Nazian. Orat. in Iul.
Imp.
READER in the Church before he came to the Empire, could not be ignorant of
that Precept of our Savior to his Apostles, Matthew. 20. 25, 26. The Princes of
the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, but it shall not be so among you.

Can. 10. Can. 10. -- (...)
Deposes all obstinate Pluralists.

This Canon, if executed, would bear hard upon our Gigantick Pluralists, that
heap Pelion upon Ossa, Steeple upon Steeple, as if they would mount to Heaven
from the Pinnacle of Ecclesiastical Promotions.

I only produce these Canons ad hominem, to show how unreasonable it is to urge
old Canons against Ordinations by Presbyters, when they may be equally urged
against Episcopal Ordinations.

We judge it more ingenuous to disown their Authority over us, as being made by
such as had no power to give Universal Laws to the Church, then pretend
Submission to them, as they do, who act in open Contradiction to them. If then
it be a Crime not to observe the Canons, let them that are without Canonical
Guilt cast the first Stone.

Object. 2. Your Ordinations are not by such Diocesans as have uninterrupted
Succession down from the Apostles.

Answ. 1. This is the triumphing Argument of the Papists against the first
Reformers. They peremptorily deny the validity of their Ordinations, because
they wanted this Succession. It is urged by Bellarmine, De Sacram. Ordinis.
cap. 2. and by Gretzer against Luther, Ep. Dedic. praefix. Operibus ejus.

The same Argument is used by Parsons, the supposed Author of the Three
Conversions of England, part 2. cap. 10. and by Stapleton, Rel. cap. 1. q. 4.
art. 2. as also by Arnoux the Jesuit in Moulin's Buckler, p. 274, 275. Turrian
the Jesuit writ a great Book de Ordinationibus Ministrorum Ecclesiae, against
the Ordinations in Protestant Churches. The Sum of all his Arguments is this of
the Succession, which we find gathered up in this Syllogism by M. Sadeel, Sad.
Oper. p. 594.
All lawful Ordinations depend upon an Ordinary Succession of Bishops, under
the Roman Pontiff, the visible Head of the whole Church: but no Protestant
Ordinations are such; therefore no Protestant Ordinations are lawful, but they
are void, null, and merely Laic. This Argument is exactly the same that is used
against our Ordinations; but with this Addition, That the Pope is put at the
top of the Line of Succession, which adds no great Reputation to it.

2. This Argument of the Succession is at large refuted by our Prosestant
Writers. Sad. de legit. vocat. Ministr. p. 545 --
Sadeel calls it, praecipuum adversariorum Argumentum; he challenges them to
produce some Scripture to confirm it by. Several Testimonies of the Ancients
are cited by him, that the Succession they plead for is a Succession of
Doctrine, and not of Persons; which Succession of Doctrine failing in the
Romish Church, the other Succession of Persons is a mere useless Carcass. These
offensive Carcasses of Popish Bishops are animated by some to propagate a
Generation of immortal Successors.

He further proves, that the Ordinary Succession of Ministers may be
interrupted by Scripture-Examples; P. 551, 552
as when the Priesthood was taken away from the House of Ely, to whom a Promise
of perpetual Succession was made, 1 Samuel 2. 30. And under the Kings of Israel,
God raised up Elijah to preach Repentance to them, though he was not ex
Sacerdotum Ordine. Nay, Christ himself coming to reform his Church, chose unto
himself Apostles, not from the Priests, but from other Families. He did not
observe the Ordinary Succession in the Reformation of the Church.

To which I may add, That the Roman Governors set up and deposed what High
Priests they pleased in the Jewish Church, without regard to Lineal Succession.
Antiq. XV. 3, 6, 7, 8.
Josephus gives many Instances of this kind; Vide lib. 15. c. 2. If ever an
uninterrupted Succession were necessary to the being of a Church, it must be in
the Jewish Priesthood, which was entailed upon one Family; but the Church
remained a true Church, though the regular Succession was destroyed.

To the same effect speaks holy Mr. Bradford, the Martyr, to Dr. Harpsfield;
You shall not find, Fox's Acts and Mon. A.D. 1555.
says he, in all the Scripture, this your essential part of Succession of
Bishops. In Christ's Church Antichrist will sit.

Dr. Fulk says, Fulk on Ephesians. Sect. 4.
If the Truth of Doctrine be necessary to prove a true Church, the Scriptures
are sufficient to prove a true Church with lawful Succession also.

Dr. Field is of the same Judgment in this Point. Field of the Church, II. 6.
and III. 39.

Mr. Perkins distinguishes of a threefold Succession. The first of Persons and
Doctrines, in the primitive Church. The second of Persons alone, among Infidels
and Heretics. The third of Doctrine alone. And thus our Ministers, says he,
succeed the Apostles; and this is sufficient. For this Rule must be remembered,
Perk. Vol. 2 p. 171 --
that the power of the Keys, that of Order and Jurisdiction, is tied by God,
and annexed in the New Testament to Doctrine.

Dr. White largely confutes this pretended Succession in his defense of the way
to the true Church Cap. 59. p. 554, 557.
. So does his Brother Mr. Francis White Orthod. Faith, p. 120-155.
.

Thus we see the vanity of this pretended Succession, who they be that maintain
it, and who are the Opposers of it. It Is one of the Pillars of the Popish
Church, which supports that tottering Fabric.

The Arguments against our Ordination must needs be very defective, when no
other can be found, but those which the Jesuits urge against all Protestant
Ordinations. It Is an ill Cause that must be defended by Weapons borrowed out of
their Tents. Is there no Sword in Israel that you go to the Philistines to
sharpen your Goads?

3. The violent Assertors and Defendants of this Opinion, little consider that
by this Hypothesis there can be no true Ministers in the Church of England; for
it is certain the Chain of Succession pleaded for, has been broken again and
again. One Nullity makes a breach in the whole Chain. All our Bishops, as such,
derive their Succession from Rome. Now if we can find any Interruption in the
Succession of Bishops there, it Nullifies all the Administrations of those that
depend upon them. If the Pope succeeds Peter, as Darkness does Light; if he who
calls himself Christ's Vicar, proves to be the Antichrist; if many Popes were
Heretics, Sodomites, Idolaters, Conjurers, Whoremongers, Murderers, etc. as
some of their own Authors affirm; if there were two or three Popes at a time,
and if they were rather Apostatical then Apostolical for fifty years together,
as their own Baronius confesses, what becomes of the pretended Line of
Succession? If none of these things can infringe it, what can? We may as
rationally affirm that a Dog may generate a Man, as that the Man of God may be
the Offspring of the Man of Sin. I doubt not but Christ had his Ministers in
the darkest Ages of the Church, but not by virtue of this Succession in debate.

4. Nay, this Principle destroys all Churches in the World. For there is no
Church this day can produce such a Testimonial of Succession, as has met with
no Canonical Interruption. They that bid fairest for it, are the Greek
Churches, Vide Cathol. Trad. Q 4.
the Latin, and the African Churches; and all of them derive the Succession
from the same Source, making Peter the Head of it. The Greeks produce a large
Catalogue of Patriarchs proceeding from Peter, until the time of Neophytus, who
not many years ago held the Sea at Constantinople. The Christians of Africa,
especially the Habassines, who are the most considerable among them, derive
their Succession from the Patriarch of Alexandria, and he from Mark and Peter.
The Western Churches also derive the Succession from the same Spring. Thus we
have the most considerable Sects of Christians in the World, deriving their
Claim from one and the same Apostle. All would be reputed the Offspring of the
Chief Apostle, and glory in their Relation to him. It seems Paul, the Great
Apostle of the Gentiles, who labored more abundantly then all the rest, either
left no Successor behind him, or no Body knows what is become of him? Sic vos
non vobis, etc.

Peter the Apostle of the Circumcision, must be the Universal Head of all the
Gentile-Churches; and Paul, with the rest of the Apostles, must be written
Childless, or be the Progenitors of such an Offspring that is long ago
extinct, or so very obscure, that their Names are written in the Dust.

But how comes Peter to Canton his Bishopric into three Parts, and to leave
three Successors behind him? By the same Rule, every Bishop must have more
Successors then one, three at least, and each of them as many, and so forward
until Bishoprics be crumbled into Parochial Churches; and the Patrimony of
Peter, by an Apostolical Gavel kind, be equally divided between his Parochial
Successors.

But the unhappiness of it is, the three Patriarchal Successors cannot agree
about the divided Inheritance. The eldest Brother (for so the Pope of Rome
reckons himself) Condemns the two others as spurious, and Claims to himself the
Universal Inheritance. His Advocate De Not. Eccl. cap. 8.
Bellarmine expressly affirms, Non posse ostendi in Ecclesia Graeca
Successionem. He adds, We see that the other Apostolic Sees are decayed and
failed; viz. those of Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, wherein after that
those places were taken away from the Romans by the Persians and Saracens
(since which time there are nine hundred years past) there has been no
Succession, and if there were any, the same was very obscure. Stapl. Doctr.
Princip. l.13 c.6.
Stapleton also says of the Greek Church. That she has no Legitimate
Succession.

The Greek Churches on the other hand condemn the Roman Succession. Primi qui
serio primatum Romanum Pontificis oppugnarunt videntur fuisse Graeci, says
Praef. ad Lib. de Pontifice.
Bellarmine.

Barlaam, the Monk, thus attacks the Roman Succession: What Law, Quaenam Lex
solum jubet inter caeteros Romanum Episcopum hujus Successorem appellari..: De
Princip. Cap. 3. in Bibl. Patr.
says he, obliges us to reckon the Bishop of Rome Peter's only Successor,
that must rule all the rest? and why may not the Bishop of Alexandria be
accouted Peter's Successor, and so challenge the Supremacy; for as Clemens was
made Bishop of Rome, so was Mark the Evangelist Bishop of Alexandria.

He strikes at the Head of the Succession, and denies Peter to have been Bishop
of Rome Barl. ib.
, as many of our Protestant Writers have done Func. Com. in Chron. ad An. 44.
. If therefore a Man would know the true Church by Personal Succession, it is
difficult to know what part to take, especially considering that of all the
pretended Successions, the Roman (from which the English Prelacy derives it
self) is most suspicious, as being often interrupted by Simony, Heresy, and
Schism. Pope Eugenius the Fourth was deposed by the General Council of Basil,
and pronounced Heretic and Schismatic, with all his Adherents; yet he retains
the Papal Authority against the Judgment of that Council; Cardinals and Bishops
were Instituted by him.

5. By this Principle no Man can know himself to be a Minister of Christ. Can
any Man know that all the Predecessors of that Bishop that Ordained him were
Canonical Bishops? that none of them came in by Simony, or erred in the
Fundamentals, so as to be guilty of Heresy? that none of them lost their
Authority by involving themselves in Secular and Public Administrations Can.
Ap. 80.
, or by neglecting to instruct their Flocks Can. 57.
, or by being Ordained by a Bishop without the reach of his own Jurisdiction
Can. 36. Constable. 1. Can. 3.
? These things make Canonical Nullities. Can any Man know, who was the Bishop
that was the Root of his Succession? A great part of the Christian World is
uncertain what Apostles did first Convert their particular Countries, which
were it known, would not yet resolve the Point. Conscience will not be
satisfied, with saying, Let others disprove my Succession. It must have
positive Grounds of Satisfaction, that I am a true Minister of Christ. So that
this Notion serves only to perplex Ministers and People, with insuperable
difficulties about their acceptance with God, and to leave Christianity it self
upon such precarious Foundations, as will be, in the power of every Critic in
Church History to shake, if not to overturn.

How is it possible, That plain illiterate People should know this Succession,
which is learnt only by reading of the Greek and Latin Fathers, the length and
obscurity of which wearieth the wisest Men, and which oftentimes contradict
themselves. Ought not the Consciences of the meanest to be satisfied in the
Call of their Ministers? Must they act in a Matter of so great importance by an
Implicit Faith? What Rule shall they judge by? not by the Line of Succession;
that will but lead them into an inextricable Labyrinth. Our Savior has left
us a better Rule, By their Fruits ye shall know them.

6. Let it be further considered, That the Catalogues that are brought by some
of the Ancients, of the Successors of the Apostles, were made by Conjecture
Eusebius. Ec. Hist. l.3.c.4
. Nor is this Succession so evident and convincing in all places, as it ought
to be, to demonstrate the thing intended. A List would be expected of
Apostolical Successors, not only in the Great Patriarchal Churches, but in all
others planted by the Apostles, Vide Dr. Still. Iren.
as Philippi, Corinth, Caesarea, and in all the Seven Churches of Asia, (and
not only at Ephesus) which has not been yet produced. Though in the Patriarchal
Churches the beginning of the Line is as obscure as the Head of Nilus. At Rome,
it is not certain whether Linus, Cletus, Anacletus, or Clemens are to be
reckoned first. And as for Antioch, it is far from being agreed, whether Peter,
Euodius, or Ignatius succeeded Peter or Paul, or the one and the other Paul. At
Alexandria, where the Succession seems to run clearest, the Original of the
Power is imputed to the Choice of Presbyters, and to no Divine Institution, as
we observed already.

7. If there were any certainty in this Succession, the Fathers ascribe it to
Presbyters, as much as to Bishops. Ad Magn. p. 33. Voss. Edit.
Ignatius says concerning them, (...) -- That the Presbyters succeeded in the
place of the Bench of the Apostles.

Irenaeus affirms the same -- Cum autem ad eam iterum Traditionem, quae est ab
Apostolis, quae per Successionem Presbyteriorum in Ecclesiis custoditur,
provocamus eos qui adversantur Traditioni; dicent se non solum Presbyteris,
Advers. haer.l.3.c.2
sed etiam Apostolis existentes sapientiores, etc. Though the truth is, when
the Fathers insist upon the Succession of Bishops or Presbyters, they are not
to be understood of the Succession of Persons, but principally of the
Succession of Doctrine, which the first Bishops or Pastors of Churches kept
inviolable, as received from the Apostles. Otherwise, the Succession of Persons
without the Orthodox Doctrine, is no note of a true Church, as among the
Arians, where they had a Succession of Bishops, and yet no true Church.
Nazianz. in laud. Athan.
Pietatis successio proprie successio aestimanda est, namque qui eandem fidei
Doctrinam ejusdem quoque Throni particeps est; qui autem Contrariam fidem
amplectitur, adversarius in Throno etiam Censeri debet: Atque haec quidem
nomen, illa vero rem ipsam and veritatem habet successionis. Now the Succession
of true Doctrine being wanting in the Popish Church, the other of Persons is an
empty Name to circumvent the Simple.

Object. 3. Ischyras was Deposed because he was Ordained by Colluthus a
Presbyter of Alexandria. Thus Bishop Hall in his Divine Right of Episcopacy, p.
91, 92. and Bilson's Perpetual Government, cap. 13.

Answ. Colluthus Ordained as a pretended Bishop, constituted by Meletius Arch
Bishop of Thebais, Athanas. Apol. 2.
and therefore was commanded by the Alexandrian Council to be a Presbyter, as
he had been formerly. Ischyras's Ordination was declared void, as being not
acknowledged by them that were reported to be the Authors; himself also is
reckoned by Austin amongst the Heretics, and his Ordination was a notorious
breach of the Canons; it was sine titulo, extra fines, and nulli vicinorum
nota; all which Circumstances make it uncanonical.

Dr. Field says, Dr. Field. de Eccles. III.39.
That when Presbyters Ordinations were accounted void, it is to be understood
acoording to the rigor of Canons in use in their Age; which appears (says he)
by this, that Ordinations, sine Titulo, were null. Conc. Chalc. Can. 6.

The Reverend Author of the Naked Naked Truth, p. 45
Truth thus Answers Bishop Hall's Objection about Colluthus and Ischyras.

I am sorry, says he, so good a Man had no better proof for his intended
purpose. It seems he quite forgot how that the famous Council of Ni^e made a
Canon, wherein they declare that if any Bishop should Ordain any of the Clergy
belonging to another Bishops Diocese without his consent, their Ordination
should be null. You see then the irregular Ordination of a Bishop, is as null
as the irregular Ordination of a Presbyter: therefore the irregular Bishop, and
the irregular Presbyter, are of the same Order, of the same Authority, neither
able to Ordain.

Object. 4. It is objected out of Ierom, Quid facit Episcopus quod non facit
Presbyter, excepta Ordinatione?

Answ. Ierom speaks of Canonical Restraints, and not of Scriptural: for the
design of his Discourse is to prove the identity of Bishops and Presbyters, and
having brought many Arguments from Scripture to prove it, he confirms it, by
asking this Question, What does a Bishop more then a Presbyter, except
Ordination? plainly intimating that this could not advance him to a superior
Order, the Bishop and Presbyter being originally the same. As if he would say,
The Presbyters perform the most transcendent Acts of Religion, they are
Ambassadors for Christ, to preach the Gospel, they administer Baptism and the
Lord's Supper; and what does a Bishop more then these, except Ordination* which
being no Sacrament, is inferior in dignity to the other mentioned Acts, and
therefore cannot elevate them to a higher degree. A Canonical Restraint cannot
prejudice their inherent Power.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Salusbury at the Rising Sun in Cornhil.
PRactical Reflections on the late Earthquakes in Iamaica, England, Sicily,
Malta, Anno 1692. with a particular Historical Account of those, and diverse
other Earthquakes, by John Shower.

Earthquakes explained and Practically improved, occasioned by the late
Earthquakes on Sept. 18. 1692. in London, and many other Parts in England and
beyond Sea, by Tho. Doolittle M.A.

The Duty and Blessing of a Tender Conscience plainly stated, and earnestly
recommended to all that regard Acceptance with God, and the Prosperity of their
Souls, by T. Cruso.

The Christian Laver; or a Discourse opening the Nature of Participation with,
and demonstrating the Necessity of Purification by Christ, by T. Cruso.

Four Sermons on several Occasions, by T. Cruso.

Barbarian Cruelty; being a true History of the distressed Condition of the
Christian Captives under the Tyrany of Mully Ishmael Emperor of Morocco, etc.
by Francis Brooks.

The Mirror of Divine Love unvailed in a Paraphrase on the Song of Solomon, by
Robert Flemming V. D. M.


