

OVID's EPISTLES, TRANSLATED BY SEVERAL HANDS.

Vel tibi composiT ^ cantetur Epistola voce:
Ignotum hoc aliis ille novavit opus.
Ovid. LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Sign of the Judges Head in
Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street. 1680.

THE PREFACE TO OVID's EPISTLES.
THe Life of Ovid being already written in our Language before the Translation
of his Metamorphoses, I will not presume so far upon my self, to think I can
add any thing to Mr. Sandys his undertaking. The English Reader may there be
satisfied, that he flourished in the Reign of Augustus Caesar, that he was
Extracted from an Ancient Family of Roman Knights; that he was born to the
Inheritance of a Splendid Fortune, that he was designed to the Study of the
Law; and had made considerable progress in it, before he quitted that
Profession, for this of Poetry, to which he was more naturally formed. The
Cause of his Banishment is unknown; because he was himself unwilling further to
provoke the Emperor, by ascribing it to any other reason, than what was
pretended by Augustus, which was the Lasciviousness of his Elegies, and his Art
of Love. It Is true they are not to be Excused in the severity of Manners, as
being able to Corrupt a larger Empire, if there were any, than that of Rome;
yet this may be said in behalf of Ovid, that no man has ever treated the
Passion of Love with so much Delicacy of Thought, and of Expression, or
searched into the nature of it more Philosophically than he. And the Emperor
who Condemned him, had as little reason as another man to punish that fault
with so much severity, if at least he were the Author of a certain Epigram,
which is ascribed to him, relating to the Cause of the first Civil War betwixt
himself and Mark Anthony the Triumvir, which is more fulsome than any pas^age I
have met with in our Poet. To pass by the naked Familiarity of his Expressions
to Horace, which are cited in that Authors Life, I need only mention one
notorious Act of his in taking Livia to his Bed, when she was not only Married,
but with Child by her Husband, then living. But Deeds, it seems, may be
Justified by Arbitrary Power, when words are questioned in a Poet. There is
another ghess of the Grammarians, as far from truth as the first from Reason;
they will have him Banished for ome favors, which they say he received from
Julia, the Daughter of Augustus, whom they think he Celebrates under the Name
of Corinna in his Elegies: but he who will observe the Verses which are made to
that Mistress, may gather from the whole Contexture of them, that Corinna was
not a Woman of the highest Quality: If Julia were then Married to Agrippa, why
should our Poet make his Petition to Isis, for her safe Delivery, and
afterward, Condole her Miscarriage; which for ought he knew might be by her
own Husband? Or indeed how durst he be so bold to make the least discovery of
such a Crime, which was no less than Capital, especially Committed against a
Person of Agrippa's Rank? Or if it were before her Marriage, he would surely
have been more discreet, than to have published an Accident, which must have
been fatal to them both. But what most Confirms me against this Opinion is,
that Ovid himself complains that the true Person of Corinna was found out by
the Fame of his Verses to her: which if it had been Julia, he durst not have
owned; and besides, an immediate punishment m^st have followed. He seems
himself more truly to have touched at the Cause of his Exile in those obscure
Verses, Cur aliquid vidi, cur ^oxia Lumina f^ci? etc. Namely, that he had
either seen, or was Conscious to somewhat, which had procured him his disgrace.
But neither am I satisfied that this was the Incest of the Emperor with his
own Daughter* For Augustus was of a Nature too vindicative to have contented
himself with so small a Revenge, or so unsafe to himself, as that of simple
Banishment, and would certainly have secured his Crimes from public notice by
the death of him who was witness to them. Neither have Histories given us any
sight into such an Action of this Emperor: nor would he (the greatest
Politician of his time,) in all probability, have managed his Crimes with so
little secrecy, as not to shun the Observation of any man. It seems more
probable that Ovid was either the Confident of some other passion, or that he
had stumbled by some inadvertency upon the privacies of Livia, and seen her in
a Bath: For the words Nudam sine vest Dianam, agree better with Livia, who had
the Fame of Chastity, than with either of the Julias, who were both noted of
Incontinency. The first Verses which were made by him in his Youth, and recited
publicly, according to the Custom were, as he himself assures us to Corinna:
his Banishment happened not till the Age of fifty; from which it may be
deduced, with probability enough, that the love of Corinna, did not occasion
it: Nay he tells us plainly, that his offense was that of Error only, not of
wickedness: and in the same paper of Verses also, that the cause was
notoriously known at Rome, though it be left so obscure to after Ages.

But to leave Conjectures on a Subject so uncertain, and to write somewhat more
Authentic of this Poet: That he frequented the Court of Augustus, and was well
received in it, is most undoubted: all his Poems bear the Character of a Court,
and appear to be written as the French call it Cavalierement: Add to this, that
the Titles of many of his Elegies, and more of his Letters in his Banishment,
are addressed to persons well known to us, even at this distance, to have been
considerable in that Court.

Nor was his acquaintance less with the famous Poets of his Age, than with the
Noblemen and Ladies; he tells you himself, in a particular Account of his own
Life, that Macer, Horace, Tibullus, Propertius, and many others of them were
his familiar Friends, and that some of them communicated their Writings to him:
but that he had only seen Virgil.

If the Imitation of Nature be the business of a Poet, I know no Author who
can justly be compared with ours, especially in the Description of the
Passions. And to prove this, I shall need no other Judges than the generality
of his Readers: for all Passions being inborn with us, we are almost equally
Judges when we are concerned in the representation of them: Now I will appeal
to any man who has read this Poet, whether he find not the natural Emotion of
the same Passion in himself, which the Poet describes in his feigned Persons?
His thoughts which are the Pictures and results of those Passions, are
generally such as naturally arise from those disorderly Motions of our Spirits.
Yet, not to speak too partially in his behalf, I will confess that the
Copiousness of his Wit was such, that he often writ too pointedly for his
Subject, and made his persons speak more Eloquently than the violence of their
Passion would admit: so that he is frequently witty out of season: leaving the
Imitation of Nature, and the cooler dictates of his Judgment, for the false
applause of Fancy. Yet he seems to have found out this Imperfection in his
riper age: for why else should he complain that his Metamorphosis was left
unfinished? Nothing sure can be added to the Wit of that Poem, or of the rest:
but many things ought to have been retrenched; which I suppose would have been
the business of his Age, if his Misfortunes had not come too fast upon him. But
take him uncorrected as he is transmitted to us, and it must be acknowledged in
spite of his Dutch Friends, the Commentators, even of Julius Scaliger himself,
that Seneca's Censure will stand good against him; Nescivit quod been cessit
relinquere: he never knew how to give over, when he had done well: but
continually varying the same sense an hundred ways, and taking up in another
place, what he had more than enough inculcated before, he sometimes cloys his
Readers instead of satisfying them: and gives occasion to his Translators, who
dare not Cover him, to blush at the nakedness of their Father. This then is the
Allay of Ovids writing, which is sufficiently recompensed by his other
Excellencys; nay this very fault is not without it is Beauties: for the most
severe Censor cannot but be pleased with the prodigality of his wit, though at
the same time he could have wished, that the Master of it had been a better
Menager. Every thing which he does, becomes him, and if sometimes he appear too
gay, yet there is a secret gracefulness of youth, which accompanies his
Writings, though the staydness and sobriety of Age be wanting. In the most
material part, which is the Conduct, it is certain that he seldom has
miscarried: for if his Elegies be compared with those of Tibullus, and
Propertius his Contemporaries, it will be found that those Poets seldom
designed before they writ; And though the Language of Tibullus be more
polished, and the Learning of Propertius, especially in his Fourth Book, more
set out to ostentation: Yet their common practice, was to look no further
before them than the next Line: whence it will inevitably follow, that they can
drive to no certain point, but ramble from one Subject to another, and conclude
with some what which is not of a piece with their beginning: Purpureus late qui
splendeat, unus and alter Assuitur pannus: As Horace says, though the Verses
are golden, they are but patched into the Garment. But our Poet has always the
Goal in his Eye, which directs him in his Race; some Beautiful design, which he
first establishes, and then contrives the means, which will naturally conduct
it to his end. This will be Evident to Judicious Readers in this work of his
Epistles, of which somewhat, at least in general, will be expected.

The Title of them in our late Editions is Epistolae Heroidum, The Letters of
the Heroines. But Heinsius has Judged more truly, that the Inscription of our
Author was barely, Epistles; which he concludes from his cited Verses, where
Ovid asserts this work as his own Invention, and not borrowed from the Greeks,
whom (as the Masters of their Learning,) the Romans usually did imitate. But it
appears not from their writers, that any of the Grecians ever touched upon this
way, which our Poet therefore justly has vindicated to himself. I quarrel not
at the word Heroidum, because it is used by Ovid in his Art of Love: Jupiter ad
veteres supplex Heroidas ibat. But sure he could not be guilty of such an
Oversight, to call his Work by the Name of Heroines, when there are diverse men
or Heroes, as Namely Paris, Leander, and Acontius, joined in it. Except
Sabinus, who writ some Answers to Ovids Letters, (Quam celer e toto rediit meus
orb Sabinus,) I remember not any of the Romans who have treated this Subject,
save only Propertius, and that but once, in his Epistle of Arethusa to Lycotas,
which is written so near the Style of Ovid, that it seems to be but an
Imitation, and therefore ought not to defraud our Poet of the Glory of his
Invention.

Concerning this work of the Epistles, I shall content my self to observe these
few particulars. First, that they are generally granted to be the most perfect
piece of Ovid, and that the Style of them is tenderly passionate and Courtly;
two properties well agreeing with the Persons which were Heroines, and Lovers.
Yet where the Characters were lower, as in Oenone, and Hero, he has kept close
to Nature in drawing his Images after a Country Life, though perhaps he has
Romaniz'd his Grecian Dames too much, and made them speak sometimes as if they
had been born in the City of Rome, and under the Empire of Augustus. There
seems to be no great variety in the particular Subjects which he has chosen:
most of the Epistles being written from Ladies who were forsaken by their
Lovers: which is the reason that many of the same thoughts come back upon us in
diverse Letters: But of the general Character of Women which is Modesty, he has
taken a most becoming care; for his amorous Expressions go no further than
virtue may allow, and therefore may be read, as he intended them, by Matrons
without a blush.

Thus much concerning the Poet: whom you find translated by diverse hands, that
you may at least have that variety in the English, which the Subject denied to
the Author of the Latin. It remains that I should say somewhat of Poetical
Translations in general, and give my Opinion (with submission to better
Judgments) which way of Version seems to me most proper.

All Translation I suppose may be reduced to these three heads.

First, that of Metaphrase, or turning an Author word by word, and Line by
Line, from one Language into another. Thus, or near this manner, was Horace his
Art of Poetry translated by Ben. Johnson. The second way is that of Paraphrase,
or Translation with Latitude, where the Author is kept in view by the
Translator, so as never to be lost, but his words are not so strictly followed
as his sense, and that too is admitted to be amplyfied, but not altered. Such
is Mr. Wal^ers Translation of Virgils Fourth Aeneid. The Third way is that of
Imitation, where the Translator (if now he has not lost that Name) assumes the
liberty not only to vary from the words and sense, but to forsake them^both as
he sees occasion: and taking only some general hints from the Original, to run
division on the groundwork, as he pleases. Such is Mr. Cowleys practice in
turning two Odes of Pindar, and one of Horace into English.

Concerning the first of these Methods, our Master Horace has given us this
Caution, Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere, fidus
Interpres --
Nor word for word too faithfully translate. As the Earl of Roscommon has
excellently rendered it. Too faithfully is indeed pedantically: it is a faith
like that which proceeds from Superstition, blind and Zealous: Take it in the
Expression of Sir John Denham, to Sir Rich Fanshaw, on his Version of the
Pastor Fido. That servile path, thou nobly do decline,
Of tracing word by word and Line by Line;
A new and nobler way thou do pursue,
To make Translations, and Translators too:
They but preserve the Ashes, thou the Flame,
True to his Sense, but truer to his Fame.


It Is almost impossible to Translate verbally, and well, at the same time; For
the Latin, (a most severe and Compendious Language) often expresses that in one
word, which either the Barbarity, or the narrowness of modern Tongues cannot
supply it more. It Is frequent also that the Conceit is couched in some
Expression, which will be lost in English. Atque ijdem Venti vela fidemque
ferent. what Poet of our Nation is so happy as to express this thought
Literally in English, and to strike Wit or almost Sense out of it?

In short the Verbal Copyer is encumbered with so many difficulties at once,
that he can never disintangle himself from all. He is to consider at the same
time the thought of his Author, and his words, and to find out the Counterpart
to each in another Language: and besides this he is to confine himself to the
compass of Numbers, and the Slavery of Rhyme. It Is much like dancing on Ropes
with fettered Legs: A man may shun a f^ll by using Caution, but the
gracefulness of Motion is not to be expected: and when we have said the best of
it, it is but a foolish Task; for no sober man would put himself into a danger
for the Applause of scaping without breaking his Neck. We see Ben. Johnson
could not avoid obscurity in his literal Translation of Horace, attempted in
the same compass of Lines: nay Horace himself could ^earce have done it to a
Greek Poet* Brevis esse laboro, obscurus ^io. either perspicuity or
gracefulness will frequently ^e wanting. Horace has indeed avoided both these
Rocks in his Translation of the three first Lines of Homers Odysses, which he
has Contracted into two. Dic mihi Musa Virum captae post tempora Trojae
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and urbes.
Muse, speak the man, who since the Siege of Troy, Earl of Rosc.

So many Towns, such Change of Manners saw.


But then the sufferings of Ulysses, which are a Considerable part of that
Sentence are omitted. (...)

The Consideration of these difficulties, in a servile, literal Translation,
not long since made two of our famous Wits, Sir John Denham, and Mr. Cowley to
contrive another way of turning Authors into our Tongue, called by the latter
of them, Imitation As they were Friends, I suppose they Communicated their
thoughts on this Subject to e^ch other, and therefore their reasons for it are
little different: though the practice of one is much more moderate. I take
Imitation of an Author in their sense to be an Endeavor of a later Poet to
write like one who has written before him on the same Subject: that is, not to
Translate his words, or to be Confined to his Sense, but only to set him as a
Pattern, and to write, as he supposes, that Author would have done, had he
lived in our Age, and in our Country. Yet I dare not say that either of them
have carried this libertine way of rendering Authors (as Mr. Cowley calls it)
so far as my Definition reaches. For in the Pindarick Odes, the Customs and
Ceremonies of Ancient Greece are still preserved: but I know not what mischief
may arise hereafter from the Example of such an Innovation, when writers of
unequal parts to him, shall imitate so bold an undertaking, to add and to
diminish what we please, which is the way avowed by him, ought only to be
granted to Mr. Cowley, and that too only in his Translation of Pindar, because
he alone was able to make him amends, by giving him better of his own, when
ever he refused his Authors thoughts. Pindar is generally known to be a dark
writer, to want Connection, (I mean as to our understanding) to ^oar out of
sight, and leave his Reader at a Gaze: So wild and ungovernable a Poet cannot
be Translated literally, his Genius is too strong to bear a Chain, and Sampson
like he shakes it off: A Genius so Elevated and unconfined as Mr. Cowley's, was
but necessary to make Pindar speak English, and that was to be performed by no
other way than Imitation. But if Virgil or Ovid, ^or any regular intelligible
Authors be thus used, ^tis no longer to be called their work, when neither the
thoughts nor words are drawn from the Original: but instead of them there is
something new produced, which is almost the creation of another hand. By this
way it is true, somewhat that is Excellent may be invented perhaps more Exellent
than the first design, though Virgil must be still excepted, when that perhaps
takes plac^ Let he who is inquisitive to know an Authors thoughts will be
disapointed in his expectation. And it is not always that a man will be
contented to have a Present made him, when he expects the payment of a Debt. To
state it fairly, Imitation of an Author is the most advantageous way for a
Translator to show himself, but the greatest wrong which can be done to the
Memory and Reputation of the dead. Sir John Denham (who advised more Liberty
than he took himself,) gives this Reason for his Innovation, in his admirable
Preface before the Translation of the second Aeneid: Poetry is of so subtila
Spirit, that in pouring out of one Language into another, it will ^ll
Evaporate; and if a new Spirit be not added in the transfusion, there will
remain nothing but a Caput Mortuum. I confess this Argument holds good against
a litteral Translation, but who defends it? Imitation and verbal Version are in
my Opinion the two Extremes, which ought to be avoided: and therefore when I
have proposed the mean betwixt them, it will be seen how far his Argument will
reach.

No man is capable of Translating Poetry, who besides a Genius to that Art, is
not a Master both of his Authors Language, and of his own: Nor must we
understand the Language only of the Poet, but his particular turn of Thoughts,
and of Expression, which are the Characters that distinguish, (...) When we are
come thus far it is time to look into our selves to conform our (...) to his, to
give his thought either the same turn if our tongue will bear it, or if not, to
vary but the dress, not to alter or destroy the substance. The like Care must
be taken of the more outward Ornaments, the Words: when they appear (which is
but seldom) literally graceful, it were an injury to the Author that they
should be changed: But since every Language is so full of its own proprieties,
that what is Beautiful in one, is often Barbarous, nay sometimes Nonsense in
another, it would be unreasonable to limit a Translator to the narrow compass
of his Authors words: it is enough if he choose out some Expression which does
not vitiate the Sense. I suppose he may stretch his Chain to such a Latitude,
but by innovation of thoughts, methinks he breaks it. By this means the Spirit
of an Author may be transfused, and yet not lost: and thus it is plain that the
reason alleged by Sir. John Denham, ha^ no farther force than to Expression:
for thought, if it be Translated truly, cannot be lost in another Language, but
the words that convey it to our apprehension (which are the Image and Ornament
of that thought) may be so ill chosen as to make it appear in an unhandsome
dress, and rob it of its native Luster. There is therefore a Liberty to be
allowed for the Expression, neither is* it necessary that Words, and Lines
should be confined to the measure of their Original. The (...) of an Author,
generally speaking, is to be Sacred and inviolable. If the Fancy of Ovid be
luxuriant, it is his Character ot be so, and if I retrench it, he is no longer
Ovid. It will be replied that he receives advantage by this lopping of his
superfluous branches, but I rejoyn that a Translator has no such Right: when a
Painter Copies form the life, I suppose he has no privilege to alter Features,
and Lineaments, under pretense that his Picture will look better: perhaps the
Face which he has drawn would be more Exact, if the Eyes, or Nose were altered,
but it is his business to make it resemble the Original. In two Cases only there
may a seeming difficulty arise, that is, if the thought be notoriously trivial
or dishonest; But he same Answer will serve for both, that then they ought not
to be Translated. Et quae --
Desperes tractata nitescere posse, relinquas.


Thus I have ventured to give my Opinion on this Subject against the Authority
of two great men, but I hope without offense to either of their Memories, for I
both loved them living, and reverence them now they are dead. But if after what
I have urged, it be thought by better Judges that the praise of a Translation
Consists in adding new Beauties to the piece, thereby to recompense the loss
which it sustains by change of Language, I shall be willing to be taught
better, and to recant. In the mean time it seems to me, that the true reason
why we have so few Versions which are tolerable, is not from the too close
persuing of the Authors Sense: but because there are so few who have all the
Talents which are requisite for Translation: and that there is so little praise
and so small Encouragement for so considerable a part of Learning.

To apply in short, what has been said, to this present work, the Reader will
here find most of the Translations, with some little Latitude or variation from
the Authors Sense: That of Oenone to Paris is in Mr. Cowleys way of Imitation
only. I was desired to say that the Author who is of the Fair Sex, understood
not Latin. But if she do not, I am afraid she has given us occasion to be
ashamed who do.

For my own part I am ready to acknowledge that I have transgressed the Rules
which I have given; and taken more liberty than a just Translation will allow.
But so many Gentlemen whose Wit and Learning are well known, being Joined in
it, I doubt not but that their Excellencies will make you ample Satisfaction
for my Errors.

J. Dryden.
The TABLE.
1. SAppho to Phaon. By Sir Carr Scrope. Page 1 2. Ganace to Macareus. Mr.
Dryden. 8 3. Phillis to Demophoon. Mr. Pooley. 18 4. Hypermnestra to Linus. Mr.
Wright. 31 5. Ariadne to Theseus. 39 6. Hermione to Orestes. Mr. Pulteney. 50
7. Leander to Hero. By Mr. Tate. 59. 68 8. Hero to Leander By Mr. Tate. 59. 68
9. Laodamia to Protesilaus. Mr. Flatman. 76 10. Phillis to Demophoon. Mr.
Floyd. 87 11. Oenone to Paris. Mrs. Behn. 97 12. Paris to Helen. Mr. Duke. 117
13. Helen to Paris. Ld. Mulgrave. and Mr. Dryden. 153 14. Penelope to Ulysses.
Mr. Rymer. 169 15. Hipsiphyle to Jason. Mr. Settle. 177 16. Medea to Jason. Mr.
Tate. 189 17. Phaedra to Hyppolitus, Mr. Otway. 203 18. Dido to Aeneas. Mr.
Dryden. 215 19. The same by another Hand. 228 20. Briseis to Achilles. Mr.
Caryl. 239 21. Deianira to Hercules. 251 22. Acontius to Cydippe. Mr. Duke. 260
23. Cydippe to Acontius. Mr. Butler. 274
SAPHO to PHAON:
BY THE HONORABLE Sir CARR. SCROPE, BARONET.
The ARGUMENT.
^he Poetess Sapho forsaken by her Lover Phaon (who was gone from Lesbos to
Sicily) and resolved, in Despair, to Drown her self, writes this Letter to him
before she Dies.

WHile Ph^on to the flaming Aetna flies
Consumed with no less Fires poor Sapho dies.
^urn, I burn, like kindled Fields of Corn,
^hen by the driving Winds the flames are born.
My Muse and Lute can now no longer please,
They are the Employments of a mind at ease.
Wandering from thought to thought I sit alone
All day, and my once dear Companions shun.
In vain the Lesbian Maids claim each a part,
Where thou alone have taken up all the heart.
Ah lovely Youth! how can thou cruel prove,
When blooming years and beauty bid thee love?
If none but equal Charms thy heart can bind,
Then to thy self alone thou must be kind.
Yet worthless as I am, there was a time
When Phaon thought me worthy his Esteem.
A thousand tender things to mind I call,
For they who truly Love remember all.
Delighted with the Music of my Tongue,
Upon my words with silent Joy he hung,
And snatching Kisses, stopped me as I sung.
Kisses, whose melting touch, his Soul did move,
The earnest of the coming joys of Love.
Then tender words, short sighs, and thousand charms
Of wanton Arts endeared me to his Arms;
Till both expiring with tumultuous Joys,
A gentle faintness did our Limbs surprise.
Beware, Sicilian Ladies, Ah! beware
How you receive my faithless Wanderer.
You too will be abused, if you believe
The flattering words that he so well can give.
Loose to the Winds I let my flowing Hair,
No more with fragrant scents perfume the Air,
But all my Dress discovers wild Despair.
For whom alas! should now my Art be shown?
The only Man I cared to please is gone.
Oh let me once more see those Eyes of thine,
Thy Love I ask not, do but suffer mine.
Thou might at least have taken thy last farewell,
And feigned a sorrow which thou did not feel.
No kind remembering Pledge was asked by thee,
And nothing left but Injuries with me.
Witness ye Gods, with what a Death-like cold
My heart was seized when first thy flight was told.
Speechless and stupid for a while I lay,
And neither words, nor tears could find their way.
But when my swelling Passion forced a vent,
With Hair disheveled, Clothes in pieces rent;
Like some sad Mother through the Streets I run,
Who to his Grave attends her only Son.
Exposed to all the World my self I see,
Forgetting Virtue, Fame, and all but thee;
So ill alas! do Love and Shame agree!
It Is thou alone that art my constant care,
In pleasing Dreams thou comfort'st my Despair;
And make the night, that does thy form convey,
Welcome to me above the fairest day.
Then 'spight of absence I thy Love enjoy,
In close embraces locked, methinks, we lie;
Thy tender words I hear, thy Kisses feel,
With all the Joys that shame forbids to tell.
But when I waking miss thee from my bed,
And all my pleasing Images are fled;
The dear deluding Vision to retain,
I lay me down, and try to sleep again.
Soon as I rise, I haunt the Caves and Groves
(Those conscious scenes of our once happy loves)
There like some frantic Bacchanal I walk,
And to my self with sad distraction talk.
Then big with grief I throw me on the ground,
And view the melancholy Grotto round;
Whose hanging roof of Moss and craggy Stone
Delights my eyes above the brightest Throne.
But when I spy the bank, whose grassy bed
Retains the print our weary bodies made,
On thy forsaken side I lay me down,
And with a shower of tears the place I drown.
The Trees are withered all since thou art gone,
As if for thee they put their Mourning on.
No warbling Bird does now with Music fill
The Woods, except the mournful Philomel.
With hers my dismal Notes all night agree,
Of Tereus she complains, and I of thee.
Ungentle Youth! did thou but see me mourn,
Hard as thou art, thou would, thou would return.
My constant falling tears the Paper stain,
And my weak hand can scarce direct my Pen.
Oh could thy eyes but reach my dreadful slate,
As now I stand prepared for sudden Fate,
Thou could not see this naked breast of mine
Dashed against Rocks, rather than joined to thine.
Peace, Sapho, peace! thou send'st thy fruitless cries
To one more hard than rocks, more deaf than seas.
The flying Winds bear thy Complaints away,
But none will ever back his Sails convey.
No longer then thy hopeless Love attend,
But let thy Life here with thy Letter end.
CANACE to MACAREUS:
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
The ARGUMENT.
Macareus and Canace Son and Daughter to Aeolus, God of the Winds, loved each
other Incestuously: Canace was delivered of a Son, and committed him to her
Nurse, to be secretly conveyed away. The Infant crying out, by that means was
discovered to Aeolus* who enraged at the wickedness of his Children, commanded
the Babe to be exposed to Wild Beasts on the Mountains: and, withal, sent a
Sword to Canace, with this Message, That her Crimes would instruct her how to
use it. With this Sword she slew her self: but before she died, she writ the
following Letter to her Brother Macareus, who had taken Sanctuary in the Temple
of Apollo.

IF streaming blood my fatal Letter stain,
Imagine, er'e you read, the Writer slain:
One hand the Sword, and one the Pen employs,
And in my lap the ready paper lies.
Think in this posture thou behold'st me Write:
In this my cruel Father would delight.
O were he present, that his eyes and hands
Might see and urge the death which he commands,
Than all his raging Winds more dreadful, he
Unmoved, without a tear, my wounds would see.
jove justly placed him on a stormy Throne,
His Peoples temper is so like his own.
The North and South, and each contending blast
Are underneath his wide Dominion cast:
Those he can rule; but his tempestuous mind
Is, like his airy Kingdom, unconfined.
Ah! what avail my Kindred Gods above,
That in their number I can reckon jove!
What help will all my heavenly friends afford,
When to my breast I lift the pointed Sword?
That hour which joined us came before its time,
In death we had been one without a crime:
Why did thy flames beyond a Brothers move?
Why loved I thee with more than Sisters love?
For I loved too; and knowing not my wound,
A secret pleasure in thy Kisses found:
My Cheeks no longer did their color boast,
My Food grew loathsome, and my strength I lost:
Still er'e I spoke, a sigh would stop my tongue;
Short were my slumbers, and my nights were long.
I knew not from my love these griefs did grow,
Yet was, alas, the thing I did not know.
My wily Nurse by long experience found,
And first discovered to my Soul its wound.
It Is Love, said she; and then my down-cast eyes,
And guilty dumbness, witnessed my surprise.
Forced at the last, my shameful pain I tell:
And, oh, what followed we both know too well!
'When half denying, more than half content,
'Embraces warmed me to a full consent:
Then with Tumultuous Joys my Heart did beat,
And guilt that made them anxious, made them great.
But now my swelling womb heaved up my breast,
And rising weight my sinking Limbs oppressed.
What Herbs, what Plants, did not my Nurse produce
To make Abortion by their powerful Juice?
What Medicines tried we not to thee unknown?
Our first crime common; this was mine alone.
But the strong Child, secure in his dark Cell,
With Natures vigor did our arts repel.
And now the pale-faced Empress of the Night
Nine times had filled her Orb with borrowed light:
Not knowing 'twas my Labor, I complain
Of sudden shootings, and of grinding pain:
My throws came thicker, and my cries increast,
Which with her hand the conscious Nurse suppressed:
To that unhappy fortune was I come,
Pain urged my clamours; but fear kept me dumb.
With inward struggling I restrained my cries;
And drunk the tears that trickled from my eyes.
Death was in sight, Lucina gave no aid;
And even my dying had my guilt betrayed.
Thou came; and in thy Countenance sat Despair:
Rent were thy Garments all, and torn thy Hair:
Yet, feigning comfort which thou could not give,
(Pressed in thy Arms, and whispering me to live)
For both our sakes, (said thou) preserve thy life;
Live, my dear Sister, and my dearer Wife.
Raised by that name, with my last pangs I strove:
Such power have words, when spoke by those we love.
The Babe, as if he heard what thou had sworn,
With hasty joy sprung forward to be born.
What helps it to have weathered out one Storm?
Fear of our Father does another form.
High in his Hall, rocked in a Chair of State,
The King with his tempestuous Council sat:
Through this large Room our only passage lay,
By which we could the newborn Babe convey.
Swathed, in her lap, the bold Nurse bore him out;
With Olive branches covered round about:
And, mutt'ring prayers, as holy Rites she meant,
Through the divided Crowd, unquestioned, went.
Just at the door the unhappy Infant cried:
The Grandsire heard him, and the theft he spied.
Swift as a Whirlwind to the Nurse he flies;
And deafs his stormy Subjects with his cries.
With one fierce puff, he blows the leaves away:
Exposed the self-discover'd Infant lay.
^he noise reached me, and my presaging mind
^oo soon its own approaching woes divined.
Not Ships at Sea with winds are shaken more,
Nor Seas themselves, when angry Tempests roar
Than I, when my loud Fathers voice I hear:
The Bed beneath me trembled with my fear.
He rushed upon me, and divulged my stain;
Scarce from my Murder could his hands refrain.
I only answered him with silent tears;
They flowed; my tongue was frozen up with fears
His little Grandchild he commands away,
To Mountain Wolves, and every Bird of prey.
The Babe cried out, as if he understood,
And begged his pardon with what voice he could.
By what expressions can my grief be shown?
(Yet you may guess my anguish by your own)
To see my bowels, and what yet was worse,
Your bowels too, condemned to such a Curse!
Out went the King; my voice its freedom found,
My breasts I beat, my blubbered Cheeks I wound.
And now appeared the Messenger of death,
Sad were his Looks, and scarce he drew his Breath,
To say, Your Father sends you -- (with that word
His trembling hands presented me a Sword:)
Your Father sends you this: and lets you know
That your own Crimes the use of it will show.
Too well I know the sense those words impart:
His Present shall be treasured in my heart.
Are these the Nuptial Gifts a Bride receives?
And this the fatal Dower a Father gives?
Thou God of Marriage shun thy own disgrace;
And take thy Torch from this detested place:
^nstead of that, let Furies light their brands;
and Fire my pile with their infernal hands.
With happier fortune may my Sisters wed;
^arn'd by the dire Example of the dead.
For thee, poor Babe, what Crime could they pretend?
How could thy Infant innocence offend?
A guilt there was; but oh that guilt was mine!
Thou suffer'st for a sin that was not thine.
Thy Mothers grief and Crime! but just enjoyed,
Shown to my sight, and born to be destroyed!
Unhappy Offspring of my teeming Womb!
Dragged headlong from thy Cradle to thy Tomb!
Thy unoffending life I could not save,
Nor weeping could I follow to thy Grave!
Nor on thy Tomb could offer my shorn Hair;
Nor show the grief which tender Mothers bear.
Yet long thou shall not from my Arms be lost,
For soon I will o're-take thy Infant Ghost.
But thou, my Love, and now my Love's Despair,
Perform his Funerals with paternal care.
^is scattered Limbs with my dead body burn;
and once more join us in the pious Urn.
^f on my wounded breast thou drop'st a tear,
^hink for whose sake my breast that wound did bear;
and faithfully my last desires fulfill,
^s I perform my cruel Fathers will.
PHILLIS to DEMOPHOON:
BY Mr. ED. POLEY.
The ARGUMENT.
Demophoon who was Son to Theseus and Phaedra, in returning from the Trojan War
into his own Country, was by a Tempest driven upon the Coasts of Thrace; where
Phillis, who was then Queen of Thrace, entertained him, and Married him. When
he had staid with her some time, he heard that Menestheus was dead (who after
he had Conquered Theseus, had Usurped the Government of Athens) and under
pretense of settling his own Affairs, he went to Athens, and promised the Queen,
that he would come back again in a Mo^th. When he had been gone four Months,
and that she had heard no News of him, she writes him this Letter.

You Have gone beyond your time, and ought to give*
So kind a Wife as Phillis leave to grieve.
You promised me you would no longer stay,
Then till the first full Moon should light your way.
Thrice did it since its borrowed light renew,
And thrice has changed, but not so much as you.
Did you the Days, and Hours, and Minutes tell,
As Phillis does, and they that love so well,
You Would say, 'twere time to weep; your sorrows too
Would justify those Tears she sheds for you.
Still did I hope, and thought you would still be here;
We hardly can believe those things we fear,
Now it is too plain, and spite of Love and you,
^must both fear it, and believe it too.
^ow often did I deceive my self, and swore,
^saw your Ship just making to the Shore?
^hen Cursed those Friends I thought had caused your stay,
^ould you were half so innocent as they.
^^metimes I feared, by foaming billows ^ost,
^ou might be Shipwrack'd while you sought the Coast;
And grieved to have injured whom I thought so true,
I begged that pardon, I Would refused to you.
Then, cruel Man! did I the Gods Implore
To let you live, though I never saw you more.
When I a favorable Gale espied,
He comes, if he is alive, he comes, I cried.
And thus my love still sought some new pretense,
And I grew Eloquent in your defense.
Yet thou avoid'st me still, nor do I see
Those promises thou made to Heaven and me.
'But thy false Vows, alas! were all but Wind,
'Thy vows and wishes made the gale more kind;
'They ^ill'd your Sails, and you were forced away,
'By the same wishes, which you made to stay.
What have I done, but loved to an excess?
You Would not been guilty had I loved you l^ss.
My only Crime is, loving you too well,
But sure some Merit in that Crime does dwell.
Where Is now your Faith? and where is the Love you bore?
Where are the Gods by whom you falsely swore?
Where Is Hymen too, who joined our tender years?
^e bid me Love, and banished all my Fears.
^ou swore by the swelling billows of the Main,
which often you would tried, and would yet trust again,
^ather than stay with me, though much more kind,
and constant too, than are the Seas or Wind.
^ou swore by the Mighty Ruler of the Flood,
^he heavenly Author of your Royal Blood;
If er'e a God had any thing to do
(...) one so ^alse, and so unkind as you.
^ou swore by Venus, and the fatal steel
^f those proud Darts, which too too much I feel;
and by great Juno, whose resistless Art
^ave thee my Hand, when I had given my Heart.
Thou swor'st so much, that if each God should be
Just, to revenge his injured self and me;
Such numerous mischiefs on thy head would fall,
Thou Would not have room enough to bear them all.
Distracted I, as if I'ad feared your stay,
Repaired your Ships to hurry you away.
What haste you wanted, my cursed care supplied,
Oars to your Sails, and Current to your Tide.
Thus was I falsely by my self betrayed,
And perish by the wounds my hands have made.
I foolishly believed all the Oaths you swore,
The Race you boasted, and the Gods you bore.
Who could have thought such gentle words er'e hung
Upon a treacherous, deluding Tongue?
I saw your tears, and I believed them all,
Can they lie too, and are they taught to fall?
What needed all that numerous Perjury?
One was enough to her that loved like me.
I Am not ashamed I did your Ships receive,
And your own wants did carefully relieve;
Those Debts I ought you on a nobler score,
But then, it is true, I should have done no more.
All I repent, is that I basely strove
To Increase your welcome by a Nuptial Love.
That night that ushered in the unhappy day,
Which did me to your guilty Love betray;
I wish that fatal Night had been my last;
Then I had died, but then I had been Chaste.
^ hoped you were, 'cause I deserved you, True,
^s it a Crime to wish what is our due?
It Is sure no mighty Glory to deceive
^ tender Maid, so willing to believe.
^y weakness does but heighten your offenc^,
^ou kindly should have spared my innocence.
^ou've gained a Maid that loved you, and may't be
^our greatest Prise, and only Victory.
May your proud Statue raised by this success,
Shame your great Father, 'cause his Crimes were less.
And when late story shall of Tyrants tell,
And by whom Scyron, and Procrustes fell;
The Centaurs flight, the Thebans Overthrow,
Who 'twas durst force the dismal Shades below;
Then for your Honor shall at last be said,
Here Is He, who by a wretched wile betrayed
A Loving, Innocent, Believing Maid.
Of all those Acts we in your Father knew,
His Treachery alone remains in you.
What only can excuse the Ills you do,
You both Inherit, and Admire it too.
He Ariadne did betray, but she
Enjoys a Husband mightier far than He.
But the scorned Thracians my Embraces shun,
'Cause I from them into thy Arms did run.
Let her, they cry, to learned Greece be gone,
We'll find a Monarch to supply the Throne.
Thus all we do depends on an ill Fate,
Which does for ever on the unhappy wait;
But may that Fate all his best thoughts attend,
Who Judges others Actions by the end.
For should thou ever bless these Seas again,
They Would praise that Love, of which they now complain.
Then would they say, What could she better do
Both for her self, and for her Kingdom too?
But I have erred, and you are for ever fled,
Forget'st my Empire, and forget'st my Bed.
Methinks, I see thee still, Demophoon,
Thy Sails all hoisted, ready to be gone.
When boldly thou did my soft Limbs embrace,
And with long Kisses dwelt'st upon my Face;
Drowned in my Tears, and in your own you lay,
And cursed the Winds that hastn'd you away.
Then parting cried (methinks I hear thee still)
Phillis I Will come, you may be sure I will.
Can I expect that thou wilt er'e see this Shore,
Who leftst it that thou never might see me more?
And yet I beg you would come too, that you may
Be only guilty in too long a stay.
What do I ask? thou by new Charms possessed,
Forget'st my kindness on another Breast;
'And better to complete the Treachery,
'Swear'st all those Oaths, which thou have broke to me.
And have (false Man) perhaps forgot my Name,
And ask'st too, who I am, and whence I came?
But that thou better may remember me,
Know, thou ungrateful man, that, I am she,
Who when thou would wandered all the Ocean over,
Harbored thy Ships, and welcomed thee to Shore.
Thy Coffers still replenished from my own,
And to that height a Prodigal was grown,
I gave thee all thou ask'dst, and gave so fast,
I gave my self into thy power at last;
I gave my Scepter, and my Crown to Thee,
A weight too heavy to be born by me.
Where Haemus does his shady head display,
And gentle Heber cuts his Sacred way,
So great's the Empire, and so wide the Land,
Scarce to be governed by a Woman's hand,
She whom Fate would not suffer to be chaste,
Whose Nupt'als with a Funeral Pomp were graced;
Shril cries disturbed us midst our swiftest joys,
And our drawn curtains trembled with the noise,
Then close to thee I clung, all drowned in tears,
And sought my shelter where I Would found my fears.
And now while others drown their care in sleep,
^ run toth' barren Shore, and Rocks to weep,
And view with longing eyes the spac'ous Deep,
All Day and Night I the winds course survey,
Impatient till I find it blows this way,
And when afar, a coming Sail I view,
I thank my Stars, and I conclude it is you.
Then with strange have I run my Love to meet,
Nor can the flowing Waters stop my Feet.
When near, I grow more fearful than before,
A sudden trembling seizes me all over.
And leaves my body breathless on the Shore.
Hard by, where two huge Mountains guard the way,
There lies a fearful, solitary Bay.
Often I Have resolved, while on this place I Have stood,
To throw my self into the raging Flood,
Wild with Despair, and I will do it still,
Since you continue thus to use me ill.
And when the kinder Waves shall waft me over,
May thou behold my Body on the Shore
Unburied lie; and though thy Cruelty
Harder than Stone, or than thy self should be,
Yet shall thou cry, astonished with the show,
Phillis, I was not to be followed so.
Raging with Poisons would I often expire,
And quench my own by a much happier Fire.
Then to revenge the loss of all my Rest,
Would stab thy Image in my tortured Breast.
Or by a Knot (more welcome far to me
Than that, false Man, which I have tied with thee,)
Strangle that Neck, where those false Arms of thine
With treacherous kindness used so often to twine.
And as becomes a poor unhappy Wife,
Repair my ruined Honor with my Life.
When we can once with our hard Fate comply,
It Is easy then to choose the way to die.
Then on my Tomb shall the proud Cause be read,
And thy sad Crime still live, when I am dead!
Poor Phillis died, by him she loved oppressed,
The truest Mistress, by the falsest Guest.
He was the cruel cause of all her woe,
But her own hand performed the fatal Blow.
HYPERMNESTRA TO LINUS.
BY Mr. WRIGHT.
The ARGUMENT.
Danaus, King of Argos, had by several Wives Fifty Daughters, his Brother
Aegiptus as many Sons. Danaus refusing to Marry his D^ughters to his Brothers
Sons, was at last compelled by an Army. In revenge, he commands his Daughters
each to Murder her Husband on the Wedding Night. All obeyed but Hypermnestra,
who assisted her Husband Linus to escape, for which being afterward imprisoned
and put in Irons, she writes this Epistle.

To that dear Brother who alone survives lives,
Of Fifty, late, whose love betrayed their
Writes she that suffers in her Lords defense;
Unhappy Wife whose Crime's her Innocence!
For saving him I loved, I Am guilty called:
Had I been truly so, I Would been extolled.
Let me be guilty still, since this they say
Is Guilt, I glory thus to disobey.
Torments nor Death shall draw me to repent:
Though against me they use that Instrument
From which I saved a Husbands dearer life,
And with one Sword kill Linus in his Wife;
Yet will I never repent for b^ing true,
Or blush to have loved: that let my Sisters do:
Such shame, and such repentance is their due.
I Am seized with terror while I but relate,
And shun remembrance of a Crime I hate*
The frightful memory of that dire night
En^rvates so my hand I scarce can write.
How er'e I Will try. With Ceremony gay,
Just at the fall of Night, and rise of Day,
The wicked Sisters were in triumph led,
And I among 'em, to the Nuptial Bed.
The Marriage Lights as funeral Lamps appear,
And threatening Omens met us every where.
Hymen they call: Hymen neglects their Cries:
Nay Juno too from her own Argos flies.
Now come the Bridegrooms, high with wine, to find
Something with us more loved than Wine, behind.
^ull of impatient Love, careless, and brave,
^hey seize the Bed, not seeing there a Grave.
What followed shame forbids me to express;
^ut who so ignorant as not to guess?
^ow their tired Senses they to sleep commit,
^ sleep as still as Death; ah, too like it!
^^was then methought I heard their groans that dyed;
^las! 'twas more than thought! I terrified
^ay trembling, cold, and without power to move,
(...) that dear Bed which you had made me love.
While you in the soft Bonds of Sleep lay fast,
Charm^d with the joys of love, then newly past:
Fearing to disobey, I rise at last.
Witness sweet heavens, how tender was the strife
Betwixt the name of Daughter and a Wife.
Thrice over your breast, which did so lately join
In such an Ecstasy of love to mine,
I raised the pointed Steel to pierce that part,
But ah! the attempt struck nearer my own heart.
My Soul divided thus, these words, among
A thousand sighs, fell softly from my tongue.
'Dost thou not heed a Fathers awful will?
'Dost thou not fear his power? On then, and kill*
'How can I kill when I consider who?
'Can I think death? against a Lover too?
'What has my Sex with Blood and Arms to do?
'Fye, thou art now by Love to Shame betrayed:
'Thy Sister-Brides by this have all obeyed.
'With Shame their Courage and their Duty see:
'If not a Daughter, yet a Sister be.
'No, I will never strike: If one must dye
'Linus shall live, and my death his supply.
'What has he done, or I, what greater ill?
'For him to dye, and I, much worse, to kill?
'Were he as guilty as my Father would
'Present him, why must I be stained with blood?
'Poinards and Swords ill with my Sex agree:
'Soft Looks, and Sighs of Love, our weapons be.
As I lamented thus, the tears apace
Dropped from my pitying eyes, on thy loved face.
While you, with kind and amorous Dreams possessed,
Threw carelessly your dear arm over my breast,
There thinking to repeat Joys lately known,
Your hand upon my Sword was almost thrown.
'Twas time to call, nor longer I forbore,
Dreading the Days approach, my Fathers more.
Wake Linus, wake, I cried; O quickly wake,
Or sleep for ever here; Th'alarm you take,
Start up: ask twenty questions in one breath:
To all I answer thus -- Delay is death;
Fly while it is dark, and escape eternal night.
While it was dark you made a happy flight:
I stayed to meet the terrors of the Light.
With day my Father comes, the dead to view;
And finds the dismal Sum one short, by you.
Enraged to see his treachery betrayed,
By his command I Am thus in Fetters laid.
Is this reward due to my Love from Fate?
Ah, wretched flame! Passion unfortunate!
Since Io suffered under Juno's Rage,
Nothing that Rivaled Goddess can assuage.
The Unhappy Mistress of the mighty Jove
Changed to a Cow, a form un^pt for Love,
Views in her Fathers streams her heads array,
Sees her own horns, and frighted, starts away.
When she would speak, she lows: and equal ^ears
From her own self surprise her eyes and ears.
In vain to loose the frightful shape she tries,
For Io follows still where Io flies.
In vain she wanders over Lands and S^as;
Can she find Cure whose self is the Disease?
Sadly severe the change in her appeared,
Whose Beauty Jove and loved, and Juno feared.
Grass and the Springs her food and drink supply;
Her only Lodging's the unsheltring Sky.
What need I urge Antiquity? my fate
Is a fresh instance of the Goddess hate*
A double stock of Tears by me are spilt
Both for my Brothers death, and Sis^ers guilt.
Yet, as if that were small, these Chains arrive,
'Cause I, alone, am guiltless, you alive.
But, my dear Lord, if any thought you have
Or of the Love, or of the life I gave:
If any memory with you does last.
Or of the Pleasures, or the Dangers past,
Now, Linus, now some help to her afford
Who wants the Liberty she gave her Lord.
If life forsake me e're I you can see,
And death, before my Linus, set me free,
Yet my unhappy Earth from hence remove;
And give those Obsequies are due to Love.
When I Am interred I know some tears will fall:
Then let this little Epitaph be all.
Here lies a Love Complete, tho hapless wife,
Who caught the Death aimed at her husbands life.
Here I must rest my hand, tho much remains,
It Is quite disabled with the weight of Chains.
ARIADNE TO THESEUS.
The ARGUMENT.
Minos, King of Creet, by a sharp War, compelled the Athenians, (who had
treacherously slain his Son Androgeos,) to send yearly seven young men, and as
many Virgins to be devoured by the Minotaure; a Monster begotten by a Bull upon
his wife Pasiphae, while he was engaged in that War. The Chance at last fell
up on Theseus to be sent among those youths; who, by the Instructions of
Ariadne, escaped out of the Labyrinth, after he had killed the Minotaure, and,
together with her, fled to the Isle of Naxos. But, being commanded by Bacchus,
he forsook her, while she slept. When she awaked and found herself deserted,
she writes this Letter.

THan savage Beasts more fierce, more to be feared;
Exposed by Thee, by Them I yet am spared!
These Lines from that unhappy Shore I write
Where you forsook me in your faithless flight;
And the most tender Lover did betray,
While locked in sleep, and in your Arms she lay.
When Morning-dew on all the Fields did fall,
And Birds with early Songs for day did call;
Then I, half sleeping, stretched me toward your place,
And sought to press you with a new embrace:
Often sought to press you close, but still in vain;
My folding Arms came empty back again.
Startled, I rose, and found that you were gone,
Then on my widowed Bed fell raging down:
Beat the fond Breast, where, spite of me, you dwell,
And tore that hair, which you once liked so well.
^y the Moons light I the wide Shore did view,
(...) ^ll was Desert, and no sight of you.
Then every way, with Loves mad have I fly,
But ill my feet with my desires comply;
Weary they sink in the deep yielding Sands,
Refusing to obey such wild Commands.
To all the shore of Theseus I complain,
The Hills and Rocks send back that Name again.
Often they repeat aloud the mournful noise,
And kindly aid a hoarse and dying voice.
Tho faint yet still impatient, next I try
To climb a rough steep Mountain which was nigh:
(My furious Love unusual strength supplied:)
From thence, casting my eyes on every ^ide,
^ar off the flying Vessel I espied.
^n your swelled Sayls the wanton winds did play;
(They Court you since they see you false as they.)
^ saw, or fancied that I saw you there,
And my chill Veins froze up with cold despair.
Thus did I languish, till returning Rage
In new extremes did my fired Soul engage.
Theseus, I cry, perfidious Theseus stay!
(But you are deaf, deaf as the Winds, or Sea!)
Stay your false flight, and let your Vessel bear
Hence the whole number which she landed here!
In loud and doleful shrieks I tell the rest,
And with fresh Fury wound my hated Breast.
Then all my shining Ornaments I tear,
And with stretched Arms wave them in open Air,
That you might see her whom you could not hear.
But when out of my sight the Vessel flew,
And the Horizon shut me from the view;
From my sad eyes, what floods of tears did fall!
(Till then Rage would not let me weep at all.)
Still let them weep, for, loosing sight of you,
It Is the whole business which they ought to do.
Like Bacchus raving Priests sometimes I go:
With such wild have, with hair disheveled so.
Then on some craggy Rock sit silent down,
As cold, unmoved, and senseless as the Stone.
To our once happy Bed I often fly:
(No more the place of mutual Love and Joy.)
See where my much loved Theseus once was laid,
And kiss the print which his dear Body made.
Here we both lay, I cry, false Bed restore
My Theseus, kind and faithful as before,
I brought him here, here lost him while I slept.
How well, false Bed, you have my Lover k^pt!
Alone and helpless in this Desert place
The steps of Man, or Beast I cannot trace.
On every side the foaming Billows beat,
But no kind Ship does offer a retreat.
And should the Gods send me some lucky Sail,
^alm S^as, good Pilots, and a prosperous Gale*
Yet then my Native Soil I durst not see,
But a sad Exile must for ever be.
From all ^rete hundred Cities I am cursed:
From that famed Isle where Infant Jove was nursed.
Crete I betrayed for you, and, what is more dear,
Betrayed my Father, who that Crown does wear:
When to your hands the fatal Clew I gave,
Which through the winding Lab'rinth led you safe.
Then how you loved, how eagerly embraced,
How o^t you swore, by all your dangers past,
That with my life your love should ever last!
Ah, perjured Theseus, I thy love survive,
If one forsaken and exposed does live.
Had you slain me, as you my Brother slew,
You'ad then absolved your self from every Vow.
Now both my present Grief denies me Rest,
And all, that a wild Fancy can suggest
(...) ^^ead^ul Ills to come, distracts my Br^ast.
Before my eyes a thousand deaths appear,
I live, yet suffer all the deaths I fear.
Sometimes I think that Lions there do go,
And scarce dare trust my sight that it is not so.
^magine that fierce Wolves are howling there,
And at the imagined Noise shrink up with fear.
^hen think what Monsters from the Sea may rise,
Or fancy bloody Swords before my eyes.
But most I dread to be a Captive made,
and see these hands in servile works employed.
Unworthy my Extraction from a Line
On one side Royal, and on both Divine:
and, (which my Indignation more would move,)
^nworthy her whom Theseus once did love.
If toward the Sea I look, or toward the Land,
^bjects of horror still before me stand.
or dare I look toward Heaven, or hope to find
^^d from those Gods who changed my Theseus's mind.
If Beasts alone within this Island stay,
Behold me left to them a helpless Prey!
If Men dwell here, they must be Savage too,
This Soil, this Heaven made gentle Theseus so.
Would Athens never had my Brother slain,
Nor for his paid so many lives again.
Would thy strong Arm had never given the wound,
Which struck the doubtful Monster to the ground*
Nor I had given the guiding Thread to Thee,
Which, to my own destruction, set Thee free.
Let the unknowing World thy Conquest praise,
It does not Ariad^es wonder raise:
So hard a Heart, unarmed, might safely scorn
The strength and sharpness of the Monsters horn
(...) Flint or Steel could be secure of wound,
No room for fear could in that Breast be found.
C^rst be the sleep which sealed these eyes so fast
(...), that begun, it did not ever last!
For ever cursed be that officious Wind,
Which filled thy Sayls, and in my ruin joined!
Cursed hand which me, and which my Brother killed!
(With what Misfortunes our sad House 't has filled!)
And cursed the Tongue, which, with soft words, betrayed,
And empty Vows, a poor believing Maid!
Sleep, and the Winds against me had combined
In vain, if perjured Theseus had not joined.
Poor Ariadne, thou must perish here,
Breath out thy Soul in strange and hated Air,
Nor see thy pitying Mother shed one Tear:
Want a kind hand which thy fixed eyes may close,
And thy stiff Limbs may decently compose.
Thy Carcass to the Birds must be a Prey.
Thus Theseus all thy Kindness does repay!
Mean while to Athens your swift Ship does run;
There tell the wondering Crowd what you have done.
How the mixed Prodigy you did subdue,
The Beast and Man how with one stroke you slew.
Describe the Labyrinth, and how, taught by me,
You escaped from all those perplexed Mazes free.
Tell, in return, what generous things you have done:
Such Gratitude will all your Triumphs Crown!
Sprung sure from Rocks, and not of human Race!
Thy Cruelty does thy great Line disgrace.
Yet could thou see, as barbarous as thou art,
These dismal looks, sure they would touch thy heart.
You cannot see, yet think you saw me now
Fixed to some Rock, as if I there did grow,
And trembling at the Waves which roll below.
Look on my torn, and my disordred hairs,
Look on my Rob^ wet through with showers of tears.
With the cold blasts see my wole body shakes,
And my numm'd hand unequal Letters makes.
I do not urge my hated Merit now,
But yield, this once, that you do nothing ow.
I neither saved your Life, nor set you free;
Yet therefore must you force this death on Me?
Ah! see this wounded Breast worn out with sighs,
And these faint Arms stretched to the seas and ski^s.
See these few hairs yet spared by Grief and Rage,
Some Pity let these flowing Tears engage.
Turn back, and, if I Am dead when you return,
Yet lay my Ashes in their peaceful Urn.
HERMIONE TO ORESTES.
The ARGUMENT.
Hermione, the Daughter of Menelaus and Helena, was by Tyndarus her Grandfather
(to whom Menelaus had committed the government of his House when he went to
Troy) contracted to Orestes. Her Father Menelaus, not knowing thereof, had
betrothed her to Pyrrhus* the Son of Achilles, who returning from the Trojan
Wars, stole her away. Whereupon she writes to Orestes as follows.

THis, dear Orestes, this with health to you,
From her that was your Wife and Cousin too;
Your Cousin still, but oh! that dearer Name
Of Wife another now does falsely claim.
What Woman can, I have already done,
yet I Am confined by rough Achilles's Son.
With much of Pain, and all the Art I knew,
I strove to shun him, yet all would not do.
Stand off said I, foul Ravisher, take heed,
My injured Husband will revenge this deed;
Yet he more deaf then angry Tempests are,
To his loathed Chamber dragged me by the hair.
Had Troy still stood, had every Grecian Dame
Become a Prey to the haughty Victors flame,
What could I more have suffered then I do?
Far more then poor Andromache e're knew.
But oh my Dear! if, as I have for thee,
Thou have a tender care, or thought for me,
Come bravely on, and as robbed Tigers bold.
Snatch me half murdered from this Monsters hold
Can you pursue each petty Rober's life,
And yet thus tamely loose a Ravished wife?
Think how my Father Menelaus raged
For his lost Queen, think what a War he waged,
When powerful Greece was in his Cause engaged.
Had he sat quietly, and nothing tried,
As once she was, she would still been Paris Bride.
Prepare no Fleet, you will no Forces need,
By you, and only you, I would be freed.
Not but wronged Marriage is a Cause alone
Sufficient for the engaging World to own.
Sprung from the Royal Pelopean line,
You are no less by Blood then Marriage mine.
These double Ties a double Love persuade,
And each sufficient to deserve your Aid.
I to your Arms was by my Guardian given,
The only Bliss I would have begged from Heaven.
But that unknown (O my unhappy Fate!)
My Father gave me to the Man I hate.
Just were those Infant Vows to you I made,
But this last Act had all those Vows betrayed.
Too well he knows what it is to be in Love,
How can he then my Passion disapprove?
Since Love himself has felt, he will, nay must
Allow this Passion in his Daughter just.
My Fate resembles my wronged Father's Case,
And Pyrrhus is that Thief that Paris was.
Let my proud Jailer the brave deeds run over,
Count all the Laurels his great Parents wore,
Whatever his could, yours greater did, and more.
Let him claim Kindred with some God above,
You are descended from the Mighty Jove.
Brave as you are, I wish 'twere understood
By something else, then by Aegysthus Blood;
Yet you are innocent, Fate drew the Sword,
And a religious Duty gave the word.
With this the Tyrant does my Lord disgrace,
And what is still worse, dares do it to my Face:
Whilst burst with Envy, I am forced to be
Racked, and tormented with his Blasphemy.
Shall my Orestes be abused, and I
As one that is unconcer'nd sit careless by?
No, though disabled, and of Arms bereft,
Yet as a Woman, I have one way left,
Tears I can shed, such as will yield relief
To my sick Mind, choakt with excess of grief;
For when the big-charg'd Storm has lost its power,
It sighs it self into a silent shower.
This I can do, whilst by each other pressed
The dewy Pearls run ^rickling over my breast.
But how should I this fatal woe escape?
All our whole Race was subject to a Rape:
I need not tell, how in soft Feathers dressed,
The wanton God his softer Nymph possessed;
How through the deep in unknown ships conveyed
Hippodame was from her Friends betrayed;
How the fair Tyndaris by force detained,
By the Amyclaean brethren was regained.
How afterward by all the Grecian Power
She was brought back from the Idaean shore.
I scarce remember that sad day, and yet,
Young as I was, I do remember it.
Her Brothers wept, her Sister to remove
Her Fears, called on the Gods, and her own Jove.
Mother, said I, in a weak mournful Tone,
Will you be gone, and leave me here alone?
When you are gone, why should I stay behind?
All this I spoke, but spoke it to the wind.
Now like the rest of my cursed Pedigree,
By this loathed Wretch I am detained from Thee.
The brave Achilles would have blamed his Son,
Nor, had he lived, would this have e're been done.
He never had thought it lawful to divide
Those two, whom Marriage had so firmly tied.
What is it, ye Gods, that thus provokes your hate,
Or what cursed Star rules my unhappy Fate?
Why am I plagued by your injurious power,
Robbed of my Parents in a tender hour?
He to the war, she with her Lover ^led,
Though living both, yet both to me were dead.
No babbling words half framed upon thy tongue
Lulled me to soft repose when I was young.
Your tender neck was never embraced by me,
Nor sat I ever smiling on your knee,
You never tended me, nor was I led
By thee (dear Mother) to my Marriage Bed*
At your return, I saw, but knew you not,
So sure my Mothers Face I had forgot.
I gazed, and gazed, but knew no Feature there,
Yet though^ 'twas you, 'cause so Divinely fair.
Such was our Ignorance, even you alas!
Asked your own Daughter, where your Daughter was
Thou, my Orestes, were my sole delight,
Yet thee too I must loose, unless you fight.
Pyrrhus withholds me from thy Arms, that is all
Hermione has gained by Iliums fall.
Soon as the early Harbinger of day
Guilds the glad Orb with his Resplendent Ray;
My Grief's made gentler by the approaching light,
And some pain seems to vanish with the night;
But when a Darkness over the Earth is spread,
And I return all pensive to my Bed,
Tears from my Eyes, as streams from Fountains flow,
I shun this Husband, as I Would shun a Foe.
Often grown unmindful through distractive Cares,
I Have str^tcht my Arms, and touched him unawares;
Strait then I check the wandering Sense, and sly
To the Bed's utmost limits, yet I lie
Restless even there, and think I Am still too nigh.
Often I for Pyrrhus have Orestes said,
But blessed the Error which my Tongue had made.
Now by that Royal God whose Frown can make
The Vassal Globe of his Creation shake,
The Almighty Sire of our unhappy Race,
And by the Scared Urn that does embrace
Thy Father's dust, whose once loud blood may boast,
Thou in repose have laid his sleeping Ghost;
I Will either live my dear Orestes's Wife,
Or to untimely Fate resign my Life.
LEANDER TO HERO
BY Mr. TATE.
The ARGUMENT.
^eander accustomed nightly to swim over the Hellespont to visit Hero
(Priestess of Venus Temple) being at last hindered by Storms from his wonted
course, sends her the following Epistle.

REceive this Letter from Leander, fraught
With Service, which he rather would have brought.
Read with a smile, -- and yet, if thou would crown
My wiser wishes, read them with a frown.
That Anger from thy Kindness will proceed,
'Cause of Leander thou can only read.
The Seas rage high, and scarce could we prevail
With the most daring Mariner to fail.
Embarked at last, and sculking in the Hold,
My stealth is to my jealous Parents told,
As much too timorous they, as I too bold,
I writ, since writing was my sole relief,
And over the dewy sheets thus breathed my grief.
Blessed Letter, go, my tenderest thoughts convey
To her warm Lip thy Signets she will lay;
And with a Kiss dissolve thy Seals away.
Sev'n tedious nights guiltless of sleep I Have stood,
Sighed with the winds, and murmured with the flood;
Then climbing the outmost Clifts her Coast to view,
My Tears, like Glasses, the Object nearer drew:
By th'adverse winds and waves detained on shore,
My thoughts run all our former Pleasures ore,
And in soft Scenes of Fancy re-enjoy
The bliss that did our Infant Loves employ.
'Twas night (a Curse on the Impert'nent light
That pried and marred the Pleasures of that night)
When first I swam the Ford; while Cynthia's beams
looked pale, and trembled for me in the streams.
My drooping Arms, in hopes they shall at length
Embrace thy neck, feel fresh supplies of strength.
The wondering Waves to their new Fury yield,
Not Tryton's faster plow the liquid Field.
Soon on the Temples Spire your Torch I spied, Fixed like a Star my watery Course
to guide;
Which Planet-like, shoots vigor through my veins;
The warmth of my Immortal Love sustains
^n the cold Flood, Life's perishing remains.
But now the gentlest Star that blessed my way,
Your bright self on the Turret I survey.
Then with redoubled strokes the Waves divide,
And by my Hero am at last descried:
Scarce could your careful Confident restrain,
But you would plunge, and meet me in the Main^
And made so far your kind Endeavors good,
That Ankle deep on the Fords brink you stood;
And seemed the new risen Venus of the Flood.
The shore now gained, to your dear Arms I flew,
All dropping as I was with briny Dew;
Nor proved for that a more unwelcome Guest;
Your warm lip to my bloodless cheek you pressed,
Nor felt my Locks distilling on your Breast.
Your hasty Robes are over my shoulders thrown,
To shroud my shivering Limbs you stripped your own^
Forgetting how your too officious Care,
Left Thee (my tenderest part) exposed to Air.
The night, and we are conscious to the rest,
Delights that ought not, cannot be expressed.
We knew short space was to our pleasures set,
And therefore loved not at the common rate.
But the utmost Fury of your Flames employed,
The Minutes flew less fast then we enjoyed.
With such dispatch that nights dear joys we wrought,
To recollect would make an Age of thought.
At length the sickning Stars began t'expire,
And ^ with them am summoned to retire.
Con^us'dly then we our Love-task dispatched,
^en thousand kisses in a Minute snatched.
^our Women chid that I so long delayed
^ou pressed me close, then asked me why I staid.
^y stay you first reproved, and then my have,
^or cried Farewell; till you had claspt me fast.
Day broke e're we our Amorous strife could end,
Then fighing I to the cold Beach descend.
Trust me, the Sea from your dear Coasts seem steep,
And all the way methinks I climb the deep.
But when revisiting your shores, I seem
Descending still, and rather fall then swim.
I loath my Native Soil, and only prize
That Region where my Loves dear Treasure lies.
Why is not Sestos to Abydus joined?
Since we united are in heart and mind.
The same our hopes, our fears, and our desires,
Love is our Life, and one Love both inspires.
But ah! what Mis'ries on that Love attend,
Whose Joys on humerous Seas and Winds depend^
I by their quarrel loose, forced to delay
My tender Visit, till they end the Fray.
When first I crossed the Gulf, the Dolphins gaz'd^
The Sea-Nymphs fled, the Trytons were amazed
But now no more I seem a Prodigy,
But pass for an Inhabitant of the Sea.
And since my passage is by Storms withstood,
I Am nightly mist by the Brothers of the Flood.
Often have I cursed the tedious way, but oh!
I wish in vain that tedious passage now.
Yield me again, kind Floods, my tiresome way,
'Twas never half so tiresome as my Stay.
Must then my Halcion Love all Winter sleep,
And never launch forth into a troubled Deep?
Must I desist my Homage to perform,
And sculk at home for every peevish Storm?
If thus the Summer Gusts detain my course,
How shall I through the Winter Surges force?
Absence even then I shall not long sustain,
^ut boldly plunge into the raging Main:
and if the swelling Floods not soon assuage,
^le make my boasting good, and dare their rage.
My ventrous escape shall in your Arms be blessed,
Or if I Am lost, my Anxious Love finds rest.
The Waves at least will do my Corpse the grace
To waft it to my wonted landing place:
Or of its own accord the Amorous Clay,
Will thither float, nor loose so known a way!
I guess your Kindness will even then perform,
To the cold Trunk, what you were wont when Warm;
Your self dismantling you will shroud me ore,
And grieve to find your Bosoms warmth no more
Have power, my vital Spirits to restore.
If this sad Fancy discompose thy Breast,
Think 'twas but fancy, and resume thy rest.
Invoke the Watery Powers (thy Prayers are Charms)
T'asswage the Storm, and yield me to thy Arms.
But when to your dear Mansion I arrive,
Loose every Wind, and let the Tempest drive.
'Twill give my stay pretense, nor can you chide,
Whilst Thunder pleads so loudly on my side.
'Till then permit this Letter to supply
The Author's place, and in thy Bosom lie.
Lodged in thy Breast, my Passion 'twill impart,
And whisper its soft Message to thy Heart.
HERO's ANSWER TO LEANDER.
BY The Same Hand.
WIth such delight I read your Letter over,
Your Presence only could have given me more.
Excuse my Passion if it soar above
Your thought; no Man can judge of Woman's love.
With Business you, or Pleasures may sustain
The Pangs of Absence, and divert the Pain.
The Hills, the Vales, the Woods, and streams are stored
With Game, and Profit with Delight afford.
Whilst Gins for Beasts, and Snares for Fowl you set,
You smile, and your own amorous Chains forget.
Ten thousand helps besides effect your Cure,
Whilst Women's sole Relief is to endure.
Or, with my Confident I hold discourse,
Debating what should interrupt your Course:
Or viewing from aloft the troubled Tide,
Mix in the Fray, and with the Tempest chide*
Or in the Storms least Interval suspect
Your stay, and almost charge you with neglect.
I seek your footsteps on the Sands in vain,
The Sands no more confess thee than the Main.
I watch the arriving Barks, and never fail
T'enquire of you, and write by every Sail.
Still as the setting Sun restores the Night,
(The Light to me more welcome than* the Night,)
I fix my flaming Torch to guide my Love,
Nor shines there any friendlier Star above.
Then with my Work or Book the time I cheat,
And 'midst the Task Leander's Name repeat.
My wedded Thoughts no other Theme pursue,
I talk a hundred things -- but all of you.
What think thou, Nurse, does my Leander come?
Or waits he till his Parents sleep at home?
For he is forced to steal his Passage there,
As nightly we by stealth admit him here.
Think Thou that now he strips him in the Bay,
Or is already plunged, and on his way?
Whilst she poor Soul with tedious watching spent,
Makes half Replies, and Nodding gives Assent.
Yet cannot I the smallest pause allow,
But cry, he is launch't forth for ^ertain now.
Then every Moment through the Window peep,
With greedy Eyes examine all the Deep;
And whisper to the Floods a tender Prayer
In your behalf, as if I 'spy'd you there.
Or to beguile my Griefs my Ear incline,
And take each gentle Breezes Voice for Thine:
At last surpised with sleep in Dreams I gain
That Bliss for which I wak't so long in vain.
To shroud you then my shoulders I divest,
And clasp you shivering to my warmer Breast;
A Lover need not be informed the Rest.
These Pleasures often my slumbering thoughts employ,
But still they are Dreams, and yield no solid Joy.
Though never so lively the fruition be,
To fill my Bliss I must have very Thee.
At present I confess the Seas are rough,
But were last Night composed, and calm enough*
Why did you then my longing hopes delay?
Why disappoint me with a total stay?
Is it your Fear that makes my Wishes vain?
When rougher, you have often engaged the Main;
If it be Fear, that friendly Fear retain.
Nor visit me till you securely may;
Your danger would afflict me more than stay.
Dread every Gust that blows, But oh! my Mind
Misgives, least you prove various as that Wind.
If e're you change, your Error secret keep,
And in blessed Ignorance permit me sleep.
Not that I am informed you are changed at all,
But absent Lovers fear what e're may fall.
Detained by the Floods, your stay I will not blame;
But less I dread the Floods than some new Flame.
Be hushed ye Winds, ye raging Billows sleep,
And yield my Love safe passage through the deep.
Blessed sign, the Taper sparkles whilst I pray,
A Guest in the Flame! Leander's on his way!
Our Household Altar yields propitious signs,
From which my Nurse your swift approach divines.
The Crickets too of your arrival warn,
And say our number shall increase e're Morn.
Come gentle Youth, and with thy presence make,
The glad Conjecture true; the Day will break,
And mar our bliss, prevent the hastening Morn;
To me and Loves forsaken Joys return.
My Bed without Thee will afford no Rest,
There is no Pillow like Leander's Breast.
Do thou suspect the time will be too short?
Or want thou strength th'adventure to support?
If this detain thee, Oh! no longer stay,
I Will plunge and meet Thee in the Flood half way.
Thus in the verdant Waves our Flames shall meet,
And danger make the soft Embrace more sweet.
Our Love's our own, which yet we take by stealth,
Like Midnight Misers from their hidden Wealth.
'Twixt Decency, and Love unhappy made,
Whilst Fame forbids what our Desires persuade.
How art Thou nightly snatched from me away?
To dare the Flood when Sailors keep the Bay.
Yet be advised thou Conqueror of the Tide,
Nor in thy youthful Strength so much conside.
Think not thine Arms can more than Oars prevail
Nor dare to Swim when Pilots fear to Sail.
With much Regret I cautiously persuade,
And almost wish my Counsel disobeyed.
Yet when to the rough Main my Eyes I turn,
Methinks I never can enough forewarn.
Nor does my last Nights Vision less affright,
(Though expiated with many a Sacred Rite,)
A sporting Dolphin, whilst the Flood retired,
Lay hid in the Ooze, and on the Beach expired.
What er'e the Dream portend, as yet reside
In the safe Port, nor trust the inconstant Tide.
The Storm (too fierce to last) will soon decay,
Then with redoubled speed redeem your stay.
Till then, these sheets some pleasure may impart,
They bring what most you prize, your Hero's heart.
LAODAMIA TO PROTESILAUS.
BY THO. FLATMAN Esquire
The ARGUMENT.
Protesilaus lying Windbound at Aulis, in the Grecian Fleet, designed for the
^rojan War, his Wife Laodamia sends this following Epistle to Him.

HEalth to the gentle Man of War, and may
What Laodamia sends, the Gods convey.
The Wind that still in Aulis holds my Dear,
Why was it not so cross to keep Him here?
Let the Wind raise an Hurricane at Sea,
Were he but safe and warm ashore with me.
Ten thousand kisses I had more to give him,
Ten thousand cautions, and soft words to leave him:
In have he left me, summoned by the Wind,
(The Wind to barbarous Mariners only kind).
The Seaman's pleasure, is the Lover's pain,
( Protesilaus from my bosom taken!)
As from my faultring tongue half speeches fell,
(Scarce could I speak that wounding word Farewell,
A merry Gale (at Sea they call it so)
Filled every Sail with joy, my breast with woe,
There went my dear Protesilaus --
While I could see Thee, full of eager pain,
My greedy eyes epicuriz'd on Thine,
When Thee no more, but thy spread Say^s I view,
^look't, and looked, till I had lost them too;
But when nor Thee, nor them I could descry,
And all was Sea that came within my ey,
They say (for I have quite forgot) they say
I strait grew pale, and fainted quite away;
Compassionate Iphiclus, and the good old man*
My Mother too to my assistance ran;
In have cold water on my face they threw,
And brought me to my self with much ado,
They meant it well, to me it seemed not so,
Much kinder had they been to let me go;
My anguish with my Soul together came,
And in my heart burst out the former flame:
Since which, my uncomb'd locks unheeded flow
Undrest, forlorn, I care not how I go;
Inspired with wine, thus Bacchus frolique rout
Staggered of old, and straggled all about.
Put on, Put on, the happy Ladies say,
Thy Royal Robes fair Laodamia.
Alas! before Troy's Walls my Dear does lie,
What pleasure can I take in Tyrian die?
Shall Curles adorn my head, an Helmet thine?
^^in bright Tissues, thou in Armor shine?
Rather with studied negligence I Will be
^s ill, if not disguised worse than Thee.
O Paris! raised by ruins! may thou prove
^s fatal in thy War, as in thy Love!
^^that the Grecian Dame had been less fair,
^r thou less lovely had appeared to Her!
(...) Menelaus! timely cease to strive,
^ith how much blood will thou thy loss retrieve?
^om me, ye Gods, avert your heavy doom,
^^d bring my Dear, laden with Laurels home:
^t my heart fails me, when I think of War,
^e sad reflection costs me many a tear:
^remble when I hear the very name
^ every place where thou shall fight for fame;
Besides the adventurous Ravisher well knew
The safest Arts his Villainy to pursue;
In noble dress he did her heart surprise,
With gold he dazzled her unguarded Eyes,
He backed his Rape with Ships and armed Men,
Thus stormed, thus took the beauteous Fortress in.
Against the power of Love and force of Arms
There Is no security in the brightest Charms.
Hector I fear, much do I Hector fear,
A man (they say) experienced in War,
My Dear, if thou have any love for me,
Of that same Hector prithee mindful be,
Fly him be sure, and every other Foe,
Least each of them should prove an Hector too.
Remember, when for fight thou shall prepare,
Thy Laodamia charge'd thee, Have a care,
For what wounds thou receiv'st, are given to her.
If by thy valor Troy must ruined be,
May not the ruin leave one scar on thee;
Sharer in the honor from the danger free!
Let Menelaus fight, and force his way
Through the false Ravisher's Troops to his Helena.
Great be his Victory, as his Cause is good,
May he swim to her in his Enemies blood,
Thy Case is different, -- may thou live to see
(Dearest) no other Combatant but me!
Ye generous Trojans, turn your Swords away
from his dear Breast, find out a nobler prey,
Why should you harmless Laodamia slay?
My poor good natured Man did never know
What'tis to fight, or how to face a Foe;
^et in Love's Field what wonders can he do?
^reat is his Prowess and his Fortune too;
^et them go fight, who know not how to woo.
Now I must own, I feared to let thee go,
My trembling lips had almost told thee so.
When from thy Father's House thou did withdraw,
Thy fatal stumble at the door I saw,
I saw it, sighed, and prayed the sign might be
Of thy return a happy Prophecy!
I cannot but acquaint thee with my fear,
Be not too brave, -- Remember, -- Have a care,
And all my dreads will vanish into Air.
Among the Grecians some one must be found
That first shall set his foot on Trojan ground;
Unhappy she that shall his loss bewail,
Grant, O ye Gods, thy courage then may fail.
Of all the Ships, be thine the very last,
Thou the last man that lands; there needs no haste^
To meet a potent, and a treacherous foe;
Thou Wilt land I fear too soon, though never so slow.
At thy return ply every Sail and Oar,
And nimbly leap on thy deserted shore.
All the day long, and all the lonely night
Black thoughts of thee my anxious Soul affright*
Darkness, to other women's pleasures kind,
Augments, like Hell, the torments of my mind.
I court even Dreams, on my forsaken Bed,
false Joys must serve, since all my true are fled.
What Is that same aerie Phantom so like thee!
What wailings do I hear, what paleness see?
I wake, and hugg my self, 'its but a Dream --
The Grecian Altars know I feed their flame,
The want of hallowed Wine my tears supply,
Which make the sacred fire burn bright and high.
When shall I clasp thee in these Arms of mine,
These longing Arms, and lie dissolved in thine?
When shall I have thee by thy self alone,
To learn the wondrous Actions thou have done?
Which when in rapturous words thou have begun
With many, and many a kiss, prithee tell on,
Such interruptions graceful pauses are,
A Kiss in Story 's but an Halt in War.
But, when I think of Troy, of winds and waves,
I fear the pleasent dream my hope deceives:
Contrary winds in Port detain thee too,
In spite of wind and tide why would thou go?
Thus, to thy country thou would hardly come,
In spite of wind and tide thou went from home.
To his own City Neptune stops the way,
Revere the Omen, and the God's obey.
Return ye furious Grecians, homeward fly,
Your stay is not of Chance, but Destiny:
How can your Arms expect desired success,
That thus contend for an Adulteress?
But, let not me forespeak you, no, -- set Sail,
And Heaven befriend you with a prosperous gale;
Ye Trojans! with regret methinks I see
Your first encounter with your Enemy;
I see fair Helen put on all her Charms,
To buckle on her lusty Bridegroom's Arms;
She gives him Arms, and kisses she receives,
(I hate the transports each to other gives).
She leads him forth, and she commands him come
Safely victorious, and triumphant home,
And he (no doubt) will make no nice delay,
But diligently do whatever she say;
Now he returns! -- see with what amorous speed
She takes the ponderous Helmet from his head,
And courts the weary Champion to her bed.
We women, too too credulous alas!
Think what we fear, will surely come to pass.
Yet, while before the Leagure thou do lie,
Thy Picture is some pleasure to my Eye,
That, I caress in words most kind and free,
And lodge it on my Breast, as I would Thee;
There must be something in It more than Art,
'Twere very Thee, could it thy mind impart;
I kiss the pretty Idol, and complain,
As if (like Thee)'twould answer me again.
By our Loves Vows, which most relgious are,
By thy beloved Head, and those gray Hairs
Which Time may on it Snow, in future years,
I come, where're thy Fate shall bid Thee go,
Eternal Partner of thy weal and woe,
So Thou but live, though all the God's say No.
Farewell, -- but prithee very careful be
Of thy beloved Self (I mean) of me.
PHILLIS to DEMOPHOON.
BY Mr. ED. FLOYD.
The ARGUMENT.
Demophoon, the Son of Theseus and Phaedra' returning from the Trojan Wars, was
by adverse Winds driv's on the Thracian shore, where he was royally
entertained, and received into familiarity by Phillis Daughter of Lycurgus and
Crustumena, King and Queen of Thrace: with whom, after he had a while remained,
hearing of the death of Mnestheus (the Deposer of his Father) he went to take
possession of his own Realm of Athens, yet with earnest protestations of
returning within the space of one month. But being detained past the appointed
time by the distractions his people were under, he gave occasion to Phillis
(impatient of delays) to write him this Epistle.

PHillis (who entertained thy Love and Thee,
Faithless Demophoon) blames thy Perjury:
How when withpain we parted did thou mourn,
And seem'dst to live alone for thy return!
How did thou limit my distress, and swear
Within one month thy speedy presence here!
Yet now four Moons are wearied out, and see
Thee still regardless of thy Vows and me.
Had thou a tender sense to know the pain
Of absent Lovers, who expect in vain,
Thou would not call me hasty, nor upbraid
These humble murmurs of a wife betrayed.
We Are slow in our believing Ills, for I
Flattered my self that yet I should not dye:
My self I Have often deluded, -- thought thee kind --
-- Thy Ship returning with a prosperous wind:
Theseus I Have cursed, and yet unjustly him,
For thou perhaps art Author of thy Crime.
The dangerous shoals of Hebrus made me mourn,
As fancying thee exposed in thy return.
Often for thy health I Have sought the Gods by prayer,
And Incense burnt to place thee in their care.
When e're the Wind stood fair, I fancied straight
Thy sudden presence or thy certain fate.
Then have I studied reasons for thy stay,
And urged my wit to savor thy delay:
Yet do not thou the sense of Vows retain,
To Gods, and me, made equally in vain.
Thy strictest Vows did mix with common Air,
Nor does thy tardy Fleet the fault repair.
Thy absence fully does my Crime reprove,
And seems designed to pay so cheap a Love.
My only fault was loving easily,
And yet that fault claims gratitude in Thee.
Where Is now thy faith, -- thy supplyant hands, and where
The God profaned by thy fallacious prayer?
Where Is Hymen now that should our hearts unite,
Bless and secure our conjugal delight?
First, by the Sea thou swor'st thy meaning just,
The Sea that then thou were about to trust:
Thou swor'st by thy prentended Grandsire's name
The God that does rebellious storms reclaim:
By Venus and by Love's Artillery,
The Instruments of mighty woes to me:
By Juno, who of marriage Vows takes care,
And Ceres, who the hallowed Torch does bear:
Should these wronged Powers be just, could thou
withstand
The angry stroke of an Almighty hand?
Thy Ships I did repair, thy Sails improve,
And strengthened the deserter of my Love.
I gave thee Oars as Instruments of speed,
And sharpened all the darts by which I bleed.
Thy Words, -- Thy Kindred Gods -- whatever was feigned,
With Joy I heard, with Faith I entertained:
Viewed with regard thy false commanded tears,
Thy artful sorrow, and thy seeming fears.
Thy Arts of Love to me thou might have spared,
For I was too unhappily prepared.
Nor should I grieve to have well treated Thee,
And limited my hospitality,
But to admit thee loosely to my breast,
Is Treason, fatal to my present rest.
Ah! had I died before that evening came,
I then had died in peace, secure of fame.
Yielding I hoped thy gratitude might move,
And showing mine, deserve thy utmost love.
But it is inglorious thus to have betrayed
(All pittiless) a frail believing Maid:
A Maid that loved thee thou have robbed of fame*
And may no greater honor reach thy name.
In Athens when thy Statue shall be placed
Near thy great Father with his Trophies graced:
When Scyron and Procrustes shall be read,
Scinis and Minotaure in triumph lead:
Thebes quite reduced, the Centaure's overcome,
Hell stormed, and the black King disturbed at home,
Thy hated Image thus inscribed shall End, --
-- He who betrayed his Mistress and his Friend.
Of all thy mighty Father has achieved,
Thou like that Ariadne was deceived:
What he repented, thou do still admire,
And only to his treachery art Heir:
(unenvied) she enjoys a nobler Mate,
And drawn by harnessed Tygres, rides in state.
The Thracian's, whom I scorned, now* shun my bed,
As one by strange polluted hands misled:
Says one, let learned Athens be her place,
Some nobler Hand shall govern warlike Thrace.
The End proves all -- and may he never hit
His rash presage, who dares condemn thee yet,
For should thou now return, each will conclude
I studied with my own my Country's good:
I Have failed, alas! Thou no review do make
Or of my Palace or the Crystal Lake.
My eyes retain thy graceful Image, when
With mournful Bows thou bad'st me hope again,
Thou did embrace me, and with such delay,
That long breathed kisses seemed to mean thy stay;
Thou did exchange, and mix our tears, and swear
The Wind was inauspicious, when 'twas fair;
When our divorce thou could no more decline,
Thou said, Expect me -- Phillis, I am thine:
Him I expect, who meant to come no more,
And Ships no more designed to touch this shore:
Yet still I hope -- ah! come, though past thy time,
That thy delay may be thy only Crime.
Some wanton Maid (perhaps) seduces Thee,
And buys thy love with cheap discourse of me.
Thou can not be unmindful who I am,
Consult thy self for my neglected name;
Phillis thy Constant, hospitable Friend,
Who did her harbor and assistance lend:
Love, Empire, All submitted to thy will,
Who gave thee much, and wished to give thee still;
Lycurgus's Land surrendered to thy sway,
And to thy Hand its Scepter did convey,
As far as Rhodope and Haemus go,
And the soft streams of sacred Hebrus flow;
Thee my last blushes blessed, thy loves long toils
Rewarded with my conquered Virging Spoils.
The howling Fiends and ominous Birds of Night
With dismal notes performed each Nuptial Rite:
With her curled Snakes the fierce Alecto Came,
To light our Tapers with infernal flame.
On Rocks I walk -- and over the barren Sand,
Far as my Eyes can reach the spacious Strand;
Look out all hours to see what Wind stands fair,
By Earths cold damp untir'd, or Heavens bleake air;
When any distant Sail I chance to spy,
I fancy thy loose Streamers drawing nigh;
Launched into Sea, the tardy Gales I chide,
And to meet thee I stem the impetuous Tide;
When their approach declares my hopes are vain,
I fainting crave the assistance of my Train.
Above the Bay, which the spent Billows blocks,
And form's a Precipice of pendent Rocks,
Thence my despair presented me a grave,
And naught but thy return my life shall save.
May some kind Wave to thy own Shore convey,
And at thy feet thy floating Phillis lay,
Thy melting heart this dismal sound will groan,
In these Embraces joined, we meet too soon --
Often have I thirsted for a poisonous draught,
As often a death from some kind Poniard sought;
Often round that neck a silken Twine I cast,
Which once thy dear per^idious Arms embraced.
By death I Will heal my present Infamy,
But stay to choose the speediest way to dye.
This sad ^hort Epitaph shall speak my doom,
And fix my mournful story on my Tomb,
This Monument did false Demophoon build,
With the cold Ashes of his Mistress filled;
He was the cause, and hers the hand that killed.
A PARAPHRASE ON OENONE to PARIS.
BY Mrs. A. BEHN.
The ARGUMENT.
Hecuba being with Child of Paris, dreamt she was delivered of a Firebrand,
Priam consulting the Prophets, was answered the Child should be the Cause of
the Destruction of Troy, wherefore Priam commanded it should be delivered to
wild Beasts as soon as born; but Hecuba conveys it secretly to Mount Ida, there
to be fostered by the Shepherds, where he falls in love with the Nymph Oenone,
but at length being known and owned, he sayls into Greece, and carries Helen to
Troy, which Oenone hearing, writes him this Epistle.

TO thee, dear Paris, Lord of my Desires,
Once tender Partner of my softest Fires;
To thee I write, mine, whilst a Shepherds Swain,
But now a Prince, that Title you disdain.
Oh fatal pomp, that could so soon divide
What Love, and all our Vows so firmly tied!
What God our Loves industrious to prevent,
Cursed thee with power, and ruined my Content?
Greatness which does at best but ill agree
With Love, such Distance sets 'twixt Thee and Me.
Whilst thou a Prince, and I a Shepherdess,
My raging Passion can have no redress.
Would God, when first I saw thee, thou had been.
This Great, this Cruel, Celebrated thing.
That without hope I might have gazed and bowed,
And mixed my Adoration with the Crowd;
Unwounded then I had escaped those Eyes,
Those lovely Authors of my Miseries.
Not that less Charms their fatal power had dressed,
But Fear and Awe my Love had then suppressed:
My unambitious Heart no Flame had known,
But what Devotion pays to Gods alone.
I might have wondered, and have wished that He,
Whom Heaven should make me love, might look
like Thee.
More in a silly Nymph had been a sin,
This had the height of my presumption been.
But thou a Flock did feed on Ida's Plain,
And had no Title, but The lovely Swain.
A Title! which more Virgin Hearts has won,
Then that of being owned King Priam's Son.
Whilst me a harmless Neighboring Cottager
You saw, and did above the rest preser.
You saw! and at first sight you loved me too,
Nor could I hide the wounds received from you.
Me all the Village Herdsmen strove to gain,
For me the Shepherds sighed and su'd in vain,
Thou had my heart, and they my cold disdain.
Not all their Offerings, Garlands, and first born
Of their loved Ewes, could bribe my Native scorn.
My Love, like hidden Treasure long concealed,
Could only where 'twas destined, be revealed.
And yet how long my Maiden blushes strove
Not to betray the easy new born Love.
But at thy sight the kindling Fire would rife,
And I, unskil'd, declare it at my Eyes.
But oh the Joy! the mighty Ecstasy
Possessed thy Soul at this Discovery.
Speechless, and panting at my feet you lay,
And short-breathed Sighs told what you could not say.
A thousand times my hand with Kisses pressed,
And looked such Darts, as none could e're resist.
Silent we gazed, and as my Eyes met thine,
New Joy filled theirs, new Love and shame filled mine!
You saw the Fears my kind disorder shows,
And broke your Silence with a thousand Vows!
Heavens, how you swore! by every Power Divine
You would be ever true! be ever mine:
Each God, a sacred witness you invoke,
And wished their Curse when e're these Vows you broke.
Quick to my Heart the perjured Accents ran,
Which I took in, believed, and was undone.
"Vows are Loves poisoned Arrows, and the heart
So wounded, rarely finds a Cure in Art.
At least this heart which Fate has destined yours,
This heart unpractic'd in Loves mystic powers,
For I am soft, and young as April Flowers.
Now uncontrolled we meet, uncheck't improve
Each happier Minute in new Joys of Love!
Soft were our hours! and lavishly the Day
We gave entirely up to Love, and Play.
Often to the cooling Groves, our Flocks we led,
And seated on some shaded, flowery Bed;
Watched the united Wantons as they fed.
And all the Day my listening Soul I hung,
Upon the charming Music of thy Tongue,
And never thought the blessed hours too long.
No Swain, no God like thee could ever move,
Or had so soft an Art in whispering Love,
No wonder that thou were Allied to Jove.
And when you pip'd, or sung, or danced, or spoke,
The God appeared in every Grace, and Look.
Pride of the Swains, and Glory of the Shades,
The Grief, and Joy of all the Lovesick Maids.
Thus whilst all hearts you ruled without Control,
I reigned the absolute Monarch of your Soul.
Each Beach my Name yet bears, carved out by thee,
Paris, and his Oenone fill each Tree;
And as they grow the Letters larger spread,
Grow still! a witness of my Wrongs when dead!
Close by a silent silver Brook there grows
A Poplar, under whose dear gloomy Boughs
A thousand times we have exchanged our Vows!
Oh may thou grow! to an endless date of Years!
Who on thy Bark this fatal Record bears;
When Paris to Oenone proves untrue,
Back Xanthus Streams shall to their Fountains ^low.
Turn! turn! your Tide, back to your Fountains run!
The perjured Swain from all his Faith is gone!
Cursed be that day, may Fate point out the hour,
As Ominous in his black Calendar;
When Venus, Pallas, and the Wife of Jove
Descended to thee in the Myrtle Grove,
In shining Chariots drawn by winged Clouds:
Naked they came, no Veil their Beauty shrouds;
But every Charm, and Grace exposed to view,
Left Heaven to be surveyed, and judged by you.
To bribe thy voice, Juno would Crowns bestow,
Pallas more gratefully would dress thy Brow
With Wreaths of Wit! Venus proposed the choice
Of all the fairest Greeks! and had thy Voice.
Crowns, and more glorious Wreaths thou did despise,
And promised Beauty more than Empire prize!
This when you told, Gods! what a killing fear
Did over all my shivering Limbs appear?
And I presaged some ominous Change was near!
The Blushes left my Cheeks, from every part
The Blood ran swift to guard my fainting heart.
You in my Eyes the glimmering Light perceived
Of parting Life, and on my pale Lips breathed
Such Vows, as all my Terrors undeceived.
But soon the envying Gods disturbed our Joys,
Declare thee Great! and all my Bliss destroys!
And now the Fleet is Anchored in the Bay
That must to Troy the glorious Youth convey.
Heavens! how you looked! and what a Godlike Grace
At their first Homage beautified your Face!
Yet this no Wonder, or Amazement brought,
You still a Monarch were in Soul, and thought!
Nor could I tell which most the Sight augments,
Your Joys of Power, or parting Discontents.
You kissed the Tears which down my Cheeks did glide,
And mingled yours with the ^oft falling Tide,
And 'twixt your Sighs a thousand times you said
Cease my Oenone! Cease my charming Maid!
If Paris lives his Native Troy to see,
My lovely Nymph, thou shall a Princess be!
But my Prophetic Fear no Faith allows,
My breaking Heart resisted all thy Vows.
Ah must we part, I cried! those killing words
No further Language to my Grief affords.
Trembling, I fell upon thy panting Breast
Which was with equal Love, and Grief oppressed,
Whilst sighs and looks, all dying spoke the rest,
About thy Neck my feeble Arms I cast,
Not Vines, nor Ivy circle Elms so fast.
To stay, what dear Excuses did thou frame,
And fanciedst Tempests when the Seas were calm?
How often the Winds contrary feigned to be,
When they alas were only so to me!
How often new Vows of lasting Faith you swore,
And 'twixt your Kisses all the old run over?
But now the wisely Grave, who Love despise,
(Themselves past hope) do busily advise,
Whisper Renown, and Glory in thy Ear,
Language which Lovers fright, and Swains never hear.
For Troy they cry! these Shepherds Weeds lay down,
Change Crooks for Scepters! Garlands for a Crown!
'But sure that Crown does far less easy sit,
'Than Wreaths of Flowers, less innocent and sweet.
'Nor can thy Beds of State so grateful be,
'As those of Moss, and new fallen Leaves with me!
Now toward the Beach we go, and all the way
The Groves, the Fern, dark Woods, and Springs survey;
That were so often conscious to the Rites
Of sacred Love, in our dear stolen Delights.
With Eyes all languishing, each place you view,
And sighing cry, Adieu, dear Shades, Adieu!
Then 'twas thy Soul even doubted which to do,
Refuse a Crown, or those dear Shades forgo!
Glory and Love! the great dispute persu'd,
But the false Idol soon the God subdued.
And now on Board you go, and all the Sails
Are loosned, to receive the flying Gales.
Whilst I half dead on the forsaken Strand,
Beheld thee sighing on the Deck to stand,
Wafting a thousand Kisses from thy Hand.
And whilst I could the lessening Vessel see,
I gazed, and sent a thousand Sighs to thee!
And all the Sea-born Neriads implor^
Quick to return thee to our Rustic shore.
Now like a Ghost I glide through every Grove,
Silent, and sad as Death, about I rove,
And visit all our Treasuries of Love!
This Shade the account of thousand Joys does hide,
As many more this murmuring Rivers side,
Where the dear Grass, as sacred, does retain
The print, where thee and I so often have lain.
Upon this Oak thy Pipe, and Garland's placed,
That Sycamore is with thy Sheephook grac'^^
Here feed thy Flocks, once loved though now thy scorh;
Like me forsaken, and like me forlorn!
A Rock there is, from whence I could survey
From far the bluish Shore, and distant Sea,
Whose hanging top with toy1 I climb each day,
With greedy View the prospect I run over,
To see what wished for Ships approach our shore.
One day all hopeless on its point I stood,
And saw a Vessel bounding over the Flood,
And as it nearer drew, I could discern
Rich Purple Sayls, Silk Cords, and Golden Stern;
Upon the Deck a Canopy was spread
Of Antique work in Gold and Silver made.
Which mixed with Sunbeams dazzling Light displayed.
But oh! beneath this glorious Scene of State
(Cursed be the sight) a fatal Beauty sat.
And fondly you were on her Bosom laid,
Whilst with your perjured Lips her Fingers played;
Wantonly curled and dally'd with that hair,
Of which, as sacred Charms, I Bracelets wear.
Oh! had thou seen me then in that mad state
So ruined, so designed for Death and Fate,
Fixed on a Rock, whose horrid Precipice
In hollow Murmurs wars with Angry Seas;
Whilst the bleak Winds alost my Garments bear,
Ruffling my careless and disheveled hair,
I looked like the sad Statue of Despair.
With out-stretch'd voice I cried, and all around
The Rocks and Hills my dire complaints resound,
I rend my Garments, tear my flattering Face,
Whose false deluding Charms my Ruin was.
Mad as the Seas in Storms, I breath Despair,
Or Winds let loose in unresisting Air.
Raging and Frantic through the Woods I fly,
And Paris! lovely, faithless, Paris; cry.
But when the Ecchos sound thy Name again.
I change to new variety of Pain.
For that dear Name such tenderness inspires,
As turns all Passion to Loves softer Fires:
With tears I fall to kind Complaints again,
So Tempests are allayed by Showers of Rain.
Say, lovely Youth, why would thou thus betray
My easy Faith, and lead my heart astray?
It might some humble Shepherds Choice have been,
Had I that Tongue never heard, those Eyes never seen.
And in some homely Cott, in low Repose,
Lived undisturbed with broken Vows and Oaths:
All day by shaded Springs my Flocks have kept,
And in some honest Arms at Night have slept.
Then unupbraided with my wrongs thou would been
Safe in the Joys of the fair Grecian Queen^
What Stars do rule the Great? no sooner you
Became a Prince, but you were Perjured too.
Are Crowns and Falsehoods then consistant things?
And must they all be faithless who are Kings?
The Gods be praised that I was humbly born,
Even though it renders me my Paris scorn.
And I had rather this way wretched prove,
Than be a Queen and faithless in my Love.
Not my fair Rival would I wish to be,
To come profaned by others Joys to thee.
Aspotless Maid into thy Arms I brought,
Untouched in Fame, even Innocent in thought.
Whilst she with Love has treated many a Guest,
And brings thee but the leavings of a Feast:
With Theseus from her Country made Escape,
Whilst she miscalled the willing Flight, a Rape.
So now from Atreus Son, with thee is fled,
And still the Rape hides the Adult' rous Deed.
And is it thus Great Ladies keep entire
That Virtue they so boast, and you admire?
Is this a Trick of Courts, can Ravishment
Serve for a poor Evasion of Consent?
Hard shift to save that Honor prized so high,
Whilst the mean Fraud's the greater Infamy.
How much more happy are we Rural Maids,
Who know no other Palaces than Shades?
Who want no Titles to enslave the Crowd,
Least they should babble all our Crimes aloud.
No Arts our good to show, our Ills to hide,
Nor know to cover faults of Love with Pride.
I loved, and all Loves Dictates did pursue,
And never thought it could be Sin with you.
To Gods, and Men, I did my Love proclaim
For one soft hour with thee, my charming Swain,
Would Recompense an Age to come of Shame,
Could it as well but satisfy my Fame.
But oh! those tender hours are fled and lost,
And I no more of Fame, or Thee can boast!
'Twas thou were Honor, Glory, all to me:
Till Swains had learned the Vice of Perjury,
No yielding Maids were charged with Infamy.
It Is false and broken Vows make Love a Sin,
Had thou been true, We innocent had been.
But thou less faith than Autumn leaves do show,
Which every Blast bears from their native Bough.
Less Weight, less Constancy, in thee is born
Than in the slender mildew'd Ears of Corn.
Often when you Garlands wove to deck my hair,
Where mystic Pinks, and Dazies mingled were,
You swore 'twas ^itter Diadems to bear:
And when with eager Kisses pressed my hand,
Have said, How well a Scepter 'two^'d command!
And if I danced upon the Flowery Green,
Wi^h charming, wishing Eyes survey my Miene,
And cry! the Gods designed thee for a Queen!
Why then for Helen do thou me forsake?
Can a poor empty Name such difference make?
Besides, if Love can be a Sin thine's one,
Since Helen does to Menelaus belong.
Be Just, restore her back, She Is none of thine,
And, charming Paris, thou art only mine.
^Tis no Ambitious Flame that makes me sue
To be again beloved, and blessed with you;
No vain desire of being Allied t'a King,
Love is the only Dowry I can bring,
And tender Love is all I ask again.
Whilst on her dangerous Smiles fierce War must wait
With Fire and Vengeance at your Palace gate,
Rouse your soft Slumbers with their rough Alarms,
And rudely snatch you from her faithless Arms:
Turn then ^air Fugitive, e're it is too late,
E're thy mistaken Love procures thy Fate;
E're a wronged Husband dos thy Death design,
And pierce that dear, that faithless Heart of thine.
PARIS TO HELENA.
BY Mr. RICHARD DVKE.
The ARGUMENT.
Paris having sailed to Sparta for the obtaining of Helen, whom Venus had
promised him as the reward of his adjudging the prize of Beauty to her, was
nobly there entertained by Menelaus, Helens Husband; but he being called away
to Crete, to take possession of what was left him by his Grandfather Atreus,
commends his Guest to the care of his Wife. In his absence Paris courts her,
and writes to her the following Epistle.

ALL health, fair Nymph, thy Paris sends to thee,
Tho You, and only You can give it me*
Shall I then speak? or is it needless grown
To tell a Passion that it self has shown?
Does not my Love it self too open lay,
And all I think in all I do betray?
If not, oh! may it still in secret lie,
Till time with our kind wishes shall comply,
Till all our joys may to us come sincere,
Nor loose their price by the allay of fear.
In vain I strive; who can that fire conceal
Which does it self by its own Light reveal?
But if you needs would hear my trembling tongue
Speak what my actions have declared so long,
I Love you have there the word that does impart
The truest Message from my bleeding heart.
Forgive me, Madam, that I thus confess
To you, my fair Physician, my Disease,
And wi^h such looks this Suppliant paper grace,
As best become the Beauties of that face.
May that smooth brow no angry wrinkle wear,
But be your looks as kind as they are fair.
Some pleasure it is to think these Lines shall find
An Entertainment at your hands so kind,
For this creates a hope that I too may
Received by You as happy be as they.
Ah! may that hope be true! nor I complain
That Venus promised you to me in vain.
For know, lest you through Ignorance offend
The Gods, it is Heaven that me does hither send.
None of the meanest of the Powers Divine
That first inspired, still favors my design.
Great is the prize I seek, I must confess,
But neither is my due or merit less:
Venus has promised she would you assign,
Fair as her self, to be for ever mine.
Guided by her, my Troy I left for thee,
Nor feared the dangers of the faithless Sea,
She with a kind and an auspicious gale
Drove the good Ship, and stretched out every Sail.
For she who sprung out of the teeming deep,
Still over the Main does her wide Empire keep.
Still may she keep it, and as she with ease
Allays the wrath of the most angry Seas,
So may she give my stormy mind some rest,
And calm the raging Tempest of my breast,
And bring home all my sighs and all my vows
To their wished harbor and desired repose.
Hither my ^lames I brought, not ^ound'em here,
I my whole course by their kind Light did steer.
For I by no mistake or storm was tossed
Against my will upon this happy Coast.
Nor as a Merchant did I plow the Main
To venture Life, like sordid Fools, for gain.
No; may the Gods preserve my present store,
And only give me you to make it more.
Nor to admire the place came I so far;
I have Towns richer than your Cities are.
It Is you I seek, to me from Venus due,
You were my wish, before your Charms I knew*
Bright Images of you my mind did draw
Long e're my Eyes the lovely Object saw.
Nor wonder that with the swift winged dart
At such a distance you could wound my heart:
So Fate ordained, and lest you fight with Fate,
Hear and believe the truth I shall relate.
Now in my Mothers Womb shut up I lay,
Her fatal burden longing for the day,
When she in a mysterious Dream was told*
Her teeming Womb a burning Torch did hold;
Frighted she rises, and her Vision she
To Priam tells, and to his Prophets He;
They sing that I all Troy should set on fire,
But sure Fate meant the flames of my desire.
For fear of this among the Swains exposed,
My native greatness every thing disclosed.
Beauty and strength and courage joined in one,
Through all disguise spoke me a Monarchs Son.
A place there is in Ida's thickest Grove
With Oaks and Firr-trees shaded all above,
The grass here grows untoucht by bleating flocks,
Or Mountain Goat, or the laborious Ox,
From hence Troys Towers magnificence and pride,
Leaning against an aged Oak, I spied.
When straight methought I heard the trembling ground
With the strange noise of trampling feet refound.
In the same instant Jove's great Messenger,
On all his Wings born through the yielding Air,
Lighting before my wondering Eyes did stand,
His golden Rod shone in his sacred Hand:
With him three charming Goddesses there came,
Juno and Pallas, and the Cyprian Dame.
With an unusual fear I stood amazed,
Till thus the God my sinking Courage raised;
Fear not; Thou art Jove's substitute below,
The prize of heavenly beauty to bestow;
Contending Goddesses appeal to you,
Decide their strife; He spoke, and up he flew.
Then bolder grown, I throw my fears away,
And every one with curious eyes survey,
Each of 'em merited the Victory,
And I their doubtful Judge was grieved to see
That one must have it, when deserved by three.
But yet that one there was which most prevailed,
And with more powerful Charms my heart assailed.
Ah! would you know who thus my breast could move?
Who could it be but the fair Que^n of Love?
With mighty Bribes they all for Conquest strive,
Juno will Empires, Pallas Valor give,
Whilst I stand doubting which I should prefer,
Empire's soft ease, or glorious toyls of War;
But Venus gently smild, and thus she spoke,
They Are dangerous gifts, O do not, do not take!
I Will make Thee Love's immortal pleasures know,
And Joys that in full tides for ever flow.
For, if you judge the Conquest to be mine,
Fair Leda's fairer Daughter shall be thine.
She spoke; and I gave her the conquest, due
Both to her Beauty and her gift of You.
Mean while (my angry Stars more gentle grown)
I am acknowledged Royal Priam's Son,
All the glad Court all Troy does celebrate
With a new Festival my change of Fate,
And as I now languish and dye for thee,
So did the Beauties of all Troy for me.
You in full power over a heart do reign,
For which a thousand Virgins sighed in vain:
Nor did Queens only fly to my embrace,
But Nymphs of form, divine, and heavenly race:
I all their Loves with cold disdain represt,
Since hopes of you first fired my longing breast.
Your charming form all day my fancy drew,
And when night came, my dreams were all of you.
What pleasures then must you your self impart,
Whose shadows only so surpised my heart?
And oh! how did I burn approaching nigh'er,
That was so scorched by so remote a fire!
For now no longer could my hopes resrain
From seeking their wished Object through the main.
I fell the stately Pine, and every Tree
That best was fit to cut the yielding Sea,
Fetched from Gargarian Hills tall Firs I cleave,
And Ida naked to the Winds I leave,
Stiff Oaks I bend, and solid Planks I form,
And every Ship with well-knit rib^ I arm,
To the tall Mast I Sails and Streamers join,
And the gay Poops with painted Gods do shine.
But on my Ship does only Venus stand
With little Cupid smiling in her hand,
Guide of the way she did her self command.
My Fleet thus rigged, and all my thoughts on thee
I long to plow the vast Aegean Sea,
My anxious Parents my desires withstand,
And both with pious tears my stay command:
Cassandra too, with loose disheveled hair,
Just as our hasty Ships to sail prepare,
Full of Prophetic fury cries aloud,
O whether steers my Brother through the flood?
Little, ah! little do thou know or heed
To what a raging fire these waters lead.
True were her fears, and in my breast I feel
The scorching flames her Fury did foretell.
Yet out I sail, and favored by the Wind,
On your blessed Shore my wished for haven find;
Your Husband then, so Heaven, kind Heaven ordains,
In his own house his Rival entertains.
Shows me whatever in Sparta does delight
The curious Travelers enquiring sight:
But I, who only longed to gaze on you,
Could taste no pleasure in the idle show.
But at thy sight; oh! where was then my heart!
Out from my breast it gave a sudden start,
Sprung forth and met half way the fatal dart.
Such or less charming was the Queen of Love,
When with her rival Goddesses she strove.
But, Fairest, had You came among the three,
Even she, the prize must have resigned to thee.
Your Beauty is the only Theme of Fame,
And all the world sounds with fair Helens name
Nor lives there she whom pride it self can raise
To claim with you an equal share of praise:
Do I speak false? rather Report does so,
Detracting from you in a praise too low.
More here I find than that could ever tell,
So much your Beauty does your Fame excel.
Well then might Theseus, he who all things knew,
Think none was worthy of his Theft but you;
I this bold theft admire; but wonder more
He ever would so dear a prize restore:
Ah! would these hands have ever let you go?
Or could I live and be divorc't from you?
No, sooner I with life it self could part,
Than e're see you torn from my bleeding heart.
But could I do as he, and give you back,
Yet sure some taste of Love I first would take,
Would first in all your blooming excellence
And Virgin sweets feast my luxurious Sense;
Or if you would not let that treasure go,
Kisses at least you should, you would bestow,
And let me smell the slow'r as it did grow.
Come then into my longing arm^, and try
My lasting, fixed, Eternal constancy,
Which never till my funeral pile shall wast;
My present fire shall mingle with my last.
Scepters and Crowns for you I did disdain,
With which great Juno tempted me in vain.
And when bright Pallas did her bribes prepare,
One soft embrace from you I did prefer
To Courage, Strength, and all the Pomp of War.
Nor shall I ever think my choice was ill,
My judgment's settled and approves it still,
Do you but grant my Hopes may prove as true
As they were placed above all things but you.
I am, as well as you, of Heavenly race,
Nor will my Birth your mighty line disgrace.
Pleias and Jove, our noble Lineage Head,
And them a race of God-like Kings Succeed.
All Asia's Scepters to my Father bow,
And half the spacious East his power allow;
There you shall see the Houses rooft with Gold,
And Temples glorious as the Gods they hold.
Troy you shall see, and divine Walls admire,
Built to the consort of Apollo's Lyre.
What need I the vast flood of people tell
That over its wide banks does almost swell?
You shall gay troops of Phrygian Matrons meet,
And Trojan Wives shining in every street.
How often then will you your self confess
The emptiness and poverty of Greece?
How often will you say, one Palace there
Contains more wealth than do whole Cities here?
I speak not this your Sparta to disgrace,
For wheresoever your Life began its race
Must be to me the happyest dearest place.
Yet Sparta's poor; and you that should be dressed
In all the riches of the shining East,
Should understand How ill that sordid place
Suits with the beauty of your charming face.
That face with costly dress and rich attire
Should shine, and make the gazing world admire
When you the Habit of my Trojans see,
What, think you, must that of their Ladies be?
Oh! then be kind, fair Spartan, nor disdain
A Trojan in your Bed to entertain.
He was a Trojan, and of our great line,
That to the Gods does mix immortal Wine;
Tithonus too, whom to her rosy bed
The Goddess of the Morning blushing led;
So was Anchises of our Trojan race,
Yet Venus self to his desired embrace
With all her train of little Loves did fly,
And in His arms learnt for a while to die.
Nor do I think that Menelaus can
Compared with Me, appear the greater Man.
I Am sure my Father never made the Sun
With frighted Steeds from His dire banquet run:
No Grandfather of mine is staind with blood,
Or with his crime names the Myrtoan flood.
None of our race does in the Stygian Lake
Sna^ch at those Apples he wants power to take.
But stay; since You with such a Husband join,
Your Father Jove is forced to grace his Line.
He (Gods!) a wretch unworthy of those charms,
Does all the Night lie melting in your arms,
Does every minute to new joys improve,
And riots in the luscious sweets of Love.
I but at Table one short view can gain,
And that too, only to increase my pain:
O may such Feasts my worst of Foes attend,
As often I at your spread table find.
I loath my food when my tormented eye
Sees his rude hand in your soft bosom lie.
I burst with envy when I him behold
Your tender limbs in his loose robe enfold.
When he your lips with melting kisses sealed,
Before my eyes I the large goblet held.
When you with him in strict embraces close,
My hated meat to my dried palate grows.
Often have I sighed, then sighed again to see
That sigh with scornful smiles repaid by thee.
Often I with Wine would quench my hot desire,
In vain; for so I added fire to fire.
Often have I turned away my Head in vain
You straight recalled my longing eyes again.
What shall I do? your sports with grief I see,
But it is a greater, not to look on Thee.
With all my Art I strive my flames to hide,
But through the thin disguise they are descried.
Too well alas! my wounds to you are known.
And O that they were so to you alone!
How o^t turn I my weeping eyes away
Lest he the cause should ask, and I betray?
What tales of Love tell I when warmed with Wine,
To your dear face applying every line,
In borrowed names I my own passion show,
They the feigned Lovers are, but I the true.
Sometimes more freedom in discourse to gain,
For my excuse I drunkenness would feign.
Once I remember your loose Garment fell,
And did your naked, swelling breasts reveal,
Breasts white as snow, or the false down of Jove,
When to your Mother the kind Swan made Love!
Whilst with the sight surpised I gazing stand,
The cup I held, dropped from my careless hand.
If you your young Hermione but kiss,
Straight from her lips I snatch the envied bliss*
Sometimes supinely laid, Love Songs I sing
And wa^^led kisses from my fingers fling.
Your women to my aid I try to move
With all the powerful Rhetoric of Love,
But they alas! speak nothing but despair,
And in the midst leave my neglected prayer.
Oh! that by some great prize you might be won,
And your possession might the Victor Crown:
As Pelops his Hippodamia won,
Then had you seen what I for you had done.
But now I Have nothing left to do but pray,
And my self prostrate at your feet to lay.
O Thou, thy houses Glory, brighter far
Than thy two shining Brothers friendly Star!
O worthy of the bed of Heavens great King,
If ought so fair but from himself could spring*
Either with thee I back to Troy will fly,
Or here a wretched banished Lover die.
With no slight wound my tender breast dossmart,
My bones and marrow feel the piercing dart;
I find my Sister true did Prophecy,
I with a Heavenly Dart should wounded die;
Despise not then a Love by Heaven designed,
So may the Gods still to your Vows be kind.
Much I could say, but what, will best be known
In your apartment when we are alone.
You blush and with a superstitious dread
Fear to defile the Sacred Marriage Bed:
Ah! Helen, can you then so simple be,
To think such Beauty can from faults be free?
Or change that face, or you must needs be kind,
Beauty and Virtue seldom have been joined.
Jove and bright Venus do our thefts approve,
Such thefts as these gave you your Father Jove,
And if in you ought of your Parents last,
Can Jove and Leda's Daughter well be chaste?
Yet then be chaste when we to Troy shall go;
(For she who sins with one alone, is so.)
But let us now enjoy that pleasing sin,
Then Marry and be innocent again.
Even your own Husband does the same persuade,
Silent Himself, yet all His actions plead:
For me they plead, and he, good man, because
He Will spoil no sport, officiously withdraws.
Had he no other time to visit Crete?
Oh! How prodigious is a Husbands Wit!
He went, and as he went He cried, My Dear,
Instead of me, you of our Guest take care.
But you forget your Lords Command I see,
Nor take you any care of Love or me.
And think you such a thing as He does know
The treasure that he holds in holding you?
No, did he understand but half your charms;
He durst not trust 'em in a strangers arms.
If neither his nor my request can move,
We Are forced by Opportunity to Love;
We should be fools, even greater fools than He,
Should so secure a time unactive be.
Alone these tedious winter nights you lie
In a cold widowed bed, and so do I.
Let mutual joys, our willing bodies join,
That happy night shall the mid day out shine.
Then will I swear by all the Powers above,
And in their awful presence seal my Love.
Then if my wishes may aspire so High,
I with our flight shall win you to comply;
But if nice Honor little scruples frame,
The force I Will use shall vindicate your same.
Of Theseus and your Brothers I can learn,
No precedents so nearly you concern:
You Theseus, they Leucippus Daughter stole,
I Will be the fourth in the illustrious roll.
Well manned, well armed for you my Fleet does stay,
And waiting winds murmur at our delay.
Through Troys thronged Streets you shall in triumph go,
Adored as some new Goddess here below.
Where 'ere you tread, Spices and Gums shall smoke*
And Victims fall beneath the fatal stroke.
My Father, Mother, all the joyful Court,
All Troy to you with presents shall resort.
Alas! it is nothing what I yet have said,
What there you will find, shall what I write exc^eed.
Nor fear, lest War pursue our hasty flight,
And angry Greece should all her force unite.
What ravished Maid did ever Wars regain?
Vain the attempt, and fear of it as vain.
The Thracians Orithya stole from far,
Yet Thrace near heard the noise of following War.
Jason too stole away the Colchian Maid,
Yet Colchos did not Thessaly invade.
He who stole you, stole Ariadne too,
Yet Minos did not with all Crete puruse.
Fear in these cases than the danger's more,
And when the threatening tempest once is over,
Our shame's then greater than our fear before.
But say from Greece a threatened War pursue,
Know I have strength and wounding weapons too.
In Men and Horse more numerous than Greece
Our Empire is, nor in it is compass less.
Nor does your Husband Paris ought excel
In generous courage or in Martial skill.
Even but a Boy from my slain Foes I gained
My stolen Heard, and a new Name attained;
Even then or'come by me I could produce
Deiphobus and great Ilioneus.
Nor hand to hand more to be feared am I,
Than when from far my certain Arrows fly.
You for his Youth can no such actions feign,
Nor can he e're my envied skill attain.
But could he, Hector's your security,
And he alone an Army is to me.
You know me not, nor the hid Prowess find
Of Him that Heaven has for your bed designed.
Either no War from Greece shall follow thee,
Or if it does, shall be repelled by me.
Nor think I fear to fight for such a Wife,
That prize would give the Coward's courage life.
All after ages shall your fame admire,
If you alone set the whole world on fire.
To Sea, to Sea, while all the Gods are kind,
And all I promise, you in Troy shall find.
HELEN TO PARIS.
By the Right Honorable the Earl of MULGRAVE AND Mr. DRYDEN.
The ARGUMENT.
Helen, having received the foregoing Epistle from Paris, returns the following
Answer: wherein she seems at first to chide him for his Presumption in Writing,
as he had done, which could only proceed from his low Opinion of her Virtue;
then owns her self to be sensible of the Passion, which he had expressed for
her, tho she much suspect his Constancy; and at last discovers her Inclinations
to be favorable to him. The whole Letter showing the extreme artifice of
Womankind.

WHen loose Epistles violate Chaste Eyes,
She half Consents, who silently denies:
How dares a Stranger with designs so vain,
Marriage and Hospitable Rights Profane?
Was it for this, your Fate did shelter find
From swelling Seas and every faithless wind?
(For tho a distant Country brought you forth,
Your usage here was equal to your worth.)
Does this deserve to be rewarded so?
Did you come here a Stranger, or a Foe?
Your partial Judgment may perhaps complain;
And think me barbarous for my just disdain;
Ill-bred then let me be, but not unchaste,
Nor my clear fame with any spot defaced:
Tho in my face there is no affected Frown,
Nor in my Carriage a feigned niceness shown,
I keep my Honor still without a stain,
Nor has my Love made any Coxcomb vain.
Your Boldness I with admiration see;
What hope had you to gain a Queen like me?
Because a Hero forced me once away,
Am I thought fit to be a second prey?
Had I been won, I had deserved your blame,
But sure my part was nothing but the shame:
Yet the base theft to him no fruit did bear,
I escaped unhurt by any thing but fear.
Rude force might some unwilling Kisses gain,
But that was all he ever could obtain.
You on such terms would nere have let me go,
Were he like you, we had not parted so.
Untouched the Youth restored me to my Friends,
And modest usage made me some amends;
It Is virtue to repent a vicious deed;
Did he repent that Paris might succeed?
Sure it is some Fate that sets me above wrongs,
Yet still exposes me to busy tongues.
I Will not complain, for whose's displeased with Love,
If it sincere, discreet, and Constant prove?
But that I fear; not that I think you base,
Or doubt the blooming beauties of my face?
But all your Sex is subject to deceive,
And ours alas, too willing to believe.
Yet others yield: and Love o'recomes the best,
But why should I not shine above the rest?
Fair Leda's Story seems at first to be
A fit example ready found for me;
But she was Cousen'd by a borrowed shape,
And under harmless Feathers felt a Rape:
If I should yield, what Reason could I use?
By what mistake the Loving Crime excuse?
Her fault was in her powerful Lover lost,
But of what Jupiter have I to boast?
Tho you to Heroes, and to Kings succeed,
Our Famous Race does no addition need,
And great Alliances but useless prove
To one that is come her self from mighty Jove.
Go then and boast in some less haughty place,
Your Phrygian Blood, and Priam's Ancient race,
Which I would show I valued, if I durst;
You are the fifth from Jove, but I the first,
The Crown of Troy is powerful I confess,
But I have reason to think ours no less.
Your Letter filled with promises of all,
That Men can good, or Women pleasant call,
Gives expectation such an ample field,
As would move Goddesses themselves to yield.
But if I e're offend great Juno's Laws,
Your self shall be the Dear, the only Cause;
Either my Honor I Will to death maintain,
Or follow you, without mean thoughts of Gain.
Not that so fair a Present I despise,
We like the Gift, when we the giver prize.
But it is your Love moves me, which made you take,
Such pains, and run such hazards for my sake;
I have perceived (though I dissembled too)
A Thousand things that Love has made you do;
Your eager Eyes would almost dazzle mine,
In which (wild man) your wanton thoughts would shine.
Sometimes you would sigh, sometimes disordered stand,
And with unusual ardor, press my hand;
Contrive just after me to take the Glass,
Nor would you let the least occasion pass,
Which often I feared, I did not mind alone,
And blushing sat for things which you have done;
Then murmured to my self, he will for my sake
Do any thing, I hope 'twas no mistake:
Often have I read within this pleasing Grove,
Under my Name those Charming words, I Love,
I frowning, seemed not to believe your Flame,
But now, alas, am come to write the same.
If I were capable to do amiss,
I could not but be sensible of this.
For oh! your Face has such peculiar charms,
That who can hold from flying to your arms?
But what I never can have without offense,
May some blessed Maid possess with innocence.
Pleasure may tempt, but virtue more should move,
O Learn of me to want the thing you Love.
What you desire is sought by all mankind:
As you have eyes, so others are not blind.
Like you they see, like you my charms adore,
They wish not less, but you dare venture more:
Oh! had you then upon our Coasts been brought,
My Virgin Love, when thousand Rivals sought,
You had I seen, you should have had my voice;
Nor could my Husband justly blame my Choice,
For both our hopes, alas you come to late!
Another now is Master of my Fate.
More to my wish I could have lived with you,
And yet my present lot can undergo.
Cease to solicit a weak Woman's will,
And urge not her you Love, to so much ill.
But let me live contented as I may,
And make not my unspotted fame your prey.
Some Right you claim, since naked to your eyes
Three Goddesses disputed Beauties prize;
One offered Valor, to'ther Crowns, but she
Obtained her Cause, who smiling promised me.
But first I am not of belief so light,
To think such Nymphs would show you such a sight.
Yet granting this, the other part is feigned:
A Bribe so mean, your sentence had not gained.
With partial eyes I should my self regard,
To think that Venus made me her reward:
I humbly am content with human praise;
A Goddesse's applause would envy raise:
But be it as you say, for it is confessed,
The Men who flatter highest, please us best.
That I suspect it, ought not to displease;
For Miracles are not believed with ease.
One joy I have, that I have Venus voice;
A greater yet, that you confirmed her Choice;
That proffered Laurels, promised Sov'raignty,
Juno and Pallas you contemned for me.
Am I your Empire then, and your renown?
What heart of Rock but must by this be won?
And yet bear witness, O you Powr's above,
How rude I am in all the Arts of Love!
My hand is yet untaught to write to men;
This is the Essay of my unpracticed pen:
Happy those Nymphs, whom use has perfect made:
I think all Crime, and tremble at a shade.
Even while I write, my fearful conscious eyes
Look often back, misdoubting a surprise.
For now the Rumor spreads among the Crowd,
At Court in whispers, but in Town aloud:
Dissemble you, what er'e you hear them say:
To leave off Loving were your better way,
Yet if you will dissemble it, you may.
Love secretly: the absence of my Lord,
More freedom gives, but does not all afford:
Long is his Journey, long will be his stay;
Called by affairs of Consequence away.
To go or not when unresolved he stood,
I bid him make what swift return he could:
Then Kissing me, he said I recommend
All to thy Care, but most my Trojan Friend.
I smiled at what he innocently said,
And only answered, you shall be obeyed.
Propitious winds have born him far from hence,
But let not this secure your confidence.
Absent he is, yet absent he Commands,
You know the Proverb, Princes have long hands.
My Fame's my burden, for the more I Am praised;
A juster ground of jealousy is raised.
Were I less fair, I might have been more blessed:
Great Beauty through great danger is possessed.
To leave me here his venture was not hard,
Because he thought my virtue was my Guard.
He feared my Face, but trusted to my Life,
The Beauty doubted, but believed the Wife:
You bid me use the occasion while I can,
Put in our hands by the good easy man.
I would, and yet I doubt, 'twixt Love and fear;
One draws me from you, and one brings me near.
Our flames are mutual: and my Husband's gone,
The nights are long; I fear to lie alone.
One House contains us, and weak Walls divide.
And you 're too pressing to be long denied:
Let me not live, but every thing conspires,
To join our Loves, and yet my fear retires.
You Court with words, when you should force employ,
As Rape is requisite to shamefaced joy.
Indulgent to the wrongs which we receive,
Our Sex can suffer what we dare not give.
What have I said! for both of us 'twere best,
Our kindling fires, if each of us suppressed.
The Faith of Strangers is too prone to change,
And like themselves their wandering Passions range.
Hipsypile, and the fond Minoian Maid,
Were both by trusting of their Ghests betrayed.
How can I doubt that other men deceive,
When you your self did fair Oenone leave?
But lest I should upbraid your treachery,
You make a merit of that Crime to me:
Yet grant you were to faithful Love inclined,
Your weary Trojans wait but for a wind.
Should you prevail while I assign the night,
Your Sails are hoysted, and you take your flight:
Some bawling Mariner our Love destroys,
And breaks a sunder our unfinished joys.
But I with you may leave the Spartan Port,
To view the Trojan Wealth, and Priam's Court.
Shown while I see, I shall expose my Fame:
And fill a foreign Country with my shame.
In Asia what reception shall I find?
And what dishonor leave in Greece behind?
What will your Brothers, Priam, Hecuba,
And what will all your modest Matrons say?
Even you, when on this action you reflect,
My future Conduct justly may suspect:
And what er'e Stranger Lands upon your Coast,
Conclude me, by your own example, lost.
I from your rage, a Strumpet's Name shall hear,
While you forget, what part in it you bear.
You my Crimes Author, will my Crime upbraid:
Deep under ground, Oh let me first be laid!
You boast the Pomp and Plenty of your Land,
And promise all shall be at my Command;
Your Trojan Wealth, believe me, I despise;
My own poor Nat^ive Land has dearer ties.
Should I be injured on your Phrygian Shore,
What help of Kindred could I there implore?
Medea was by Iasons flattery won:
I may like her believe and be undon.
Plain honest hearts, like mine, suspect no cheat;
And Love contributes to its own deceit.
The Ships about whose sides loud Tempests roar,
With gentle Winds were wafted from the Shore.
Your teeming Mother dreamt a flaming Brand
Sprung from her Womb consumed the Trojan Land.
To second this, old Prophecies conspire,
That Ilium shall be burnt with Grecian fire:
Both give me fear, nor is it much allai'd,
That Venus is obliged our Loves to aid.
For they who lost their Cause, revenge will take,
And for one Friend two Enemies you make.
Nor can I doubt, but should I follow you,
The Sword would soon our fatal Crime pursue:
A wrong so great my Husband's rage would rouse,
And my Relations would his Cause espouse.
You boast your Strength and Courage, but alas!
Your words receive small credit from your Face.
Let Heroes in the Dusty field delight,
Those Limbs were fashioned for another fight.
Bid Hector sally from the Walls of Troy,
A sweter quarrel should your arms employ.
Yet fears like these, should not my mind perplex,
Were I as wise as many of my Sex.
But time and you, may bolder thoughts inspire;
And I perhaps may yield to your desire.
You last demand a private Conference,
These are your words, but I can ghess your sense.
Your unripe hopes their harvest must attend:
Be Ruled by me, and time may be your friend.
This is enough to let you understand,
For now my Pen has tired my tender hand:
My Woman Knows the secret of my heart,
And may hereafter better news impart.
PENELOPE TO ULYSSES.
BY Mr. RYMER.
The ARGUMENT.
The Rape of Helen having carried all the Grecian Princes to the Siege of Troy;
Ulysses amongst the rest, there signalized his manhood, and prudence
particularly. But the siege at an end, and he not returning with the other
Captains, Penelope sends this Letter in quest of him* She had rendered her self
as deservedly famous on her part by resisting all the while the importunity of
her Suitors with an unusual constancy, and fidelity. She complains to Ulysses
of their carriage, she likewise tells him her apprehensions and fears for him
during the War, and since, acquaints him with the ill posture of his Family
through his absence, and desires him to hasten home as the only means to set
all right again.

To your Penelope at length break home,
Send no excuse, nor stay to write, but come.
Our trouble long, Troy, does not hold you now;
Nor twenty Troy's were worth all this ado.
Would some just storm and raging Seas had drowned
The Ru^^ian, when for Lacedemon bound;
I should not then of tedious days complain,
Nor cold a nights and comfortless have lay'n:
Nor should this pains to pass the evenings take,
And work, and weave even till my fingers ache.
I always feared worse dangers than the true,
(As always Love unquiet fears pursue)
Fancied thee by fierce Trojans compast round,
And Hector's name still struck me to the ground.
When told of Nestors Son, by Hector slain,
Straight Nestors Son roused all my fears again.
When for his sham how dear Patroclus paid;
I wept to find that wit no better sped.
Tlepolemus by Trojan javelin killed,
Through all my veins an icy terror thrilled.
Whatever Greeks miscarried in the fray,
I fainted, and sell (well nigh) dead as they.
Heaven for chaste Love has better sat in store,
My Husband lives, and Troy is now no more.
Our Captains well returned, each Altar flames,
And Temples all Barbarian Booty crams;
For their safe Loves the women Offerings bring,
And Trojan Fates by ours defeated sing.
All stand amazed to hear both old and young,
And list^^ing wives upon their Husbands hung.
Some on the Table draw each bloody fight,
And spilling Wine the whole sad Iliad write.
This Simois, that the Sigean Land,
And there did Priams lofty Palace stand.
Here skulkt Ulysses, there Achilles dared,
There Hector torn, the foaming Horses scared.
All did Old Nestor to your Son explain;
To seek you sent, who told me all again.
Your Sword how Dolon, no, nor Rhesus escaped,
Banter'd the one, this taken as he napp'd.
Foolhardy you, and us remembering ill,
Nightly amidst those Thracian Tents to steal,
There numbers slay, one only ayding thee,
Thou have been wise, and would have thought on me.
Still pant I, told, how all in triumph brave,
Round your friends Camp those Thracian Steeds you drove.
But what avails it me that Troy did yield,
And by your Prowess, the Town is now a Field?
As when Troy stood, I still remain alone,
The effect continues, though the cause is gone.
To others sac'kt, to only me upheld,
Even whilst it lies by Greek abiders tilled.
(...) Priams Towers now lofty corn appears,
And Phrygian blood a ponderous harvest rears.
No House remains, naught of a Trojan found,
Unless you dig their bones from under ground.
Where art thou Conqueror? what detains thee now?
Or may not I your new Atchiev'ments know?
What ever Skipper hither come a shore,
For thee I ask, and ask him ore and ore;
Nor parts he, till I scrible half a Sheet,
To give thee, should you ever chance to meet.
We sent to Pylos Nestors ancient seat,
From Pylos we no certain tidings gat:
^o Sparta sent, the Spartans nothing know,
What course you Steer, nor where you wander now.
Would those same God-built Walls were standing still,
Now I repent that ere I wisht'em ill
Then where thou fought'st I surely should have learned,
Nor save for War, the common grievance, mourned.
Now, what I know not, all I madly fear,
And a wide field lies open to my care.
By Sea, or Land whatever dangers sway,
Those I suspect the Causes of your stay.
Whilst thus I simply muse, who knows your mind,
Perhaps abroad some other Love you find:
Perhaps to her your dowdy Wife define,
Who knows no more, so that her Cupboards shine.
No; vanish jealous thoughts nor fright me more,
He would be with me, were it in his power.
My Sire would force me from my Widows Bed,
Blames my delay, and chides, and shakes his head,
Let him chide on, yours still, yours only, I
Penelope Ulysses Wise will die.
Yet by my Chaste desires, and virtue bent,
His temper does a little now relent.
From Crete, and Samos, Rhodes, and Zant set out,
To Court me come a wild unruly rout;
Who Revel in your house without control,
And eat, and wast your means, our blood and soul
Of Medon, Polybus, Pisander, fell
Eurymachus, alas why should I tell?
With many more, you (sadly out o'th 'way)
Feed here, and on your substance let 'um prey.
The Beggar Irus, and that Goat-heard Clown,
Melanchius range and rummage up and down.
So kept your house, such stout defenders we,
A helpless Wife, old Man, and little Boy.
Whom late by trech'ry we had well nigh lost,
Against all our minds as he to Pylos crossed.
But Heavens preserve him till he die in course,
Having first closed mine eyes, and also yours.
Thus the old Nurse, the Hind, and Hogheard pray;
True Servants all, and faithful in their way.
Disarmed by age, Laertes is not fit,
Amidst these Bullies to maintain your right.
Age, if he lives, Telemachus may bring
To strength, but yet he needs his Fathers wing.
I, what am I? alas my help is small,
Come you the strength and safety of us all.
So may your Son in virtuous Arts increase,
So may the Old Laertes die in peace.
Who in my Bloom did at your parting mourn,
I withered grow, in waiting your return.
HYPSIPYLE to JASON.
BY Mr. SETTLE.
The ARGUMENT.
The Desire of gaining the Golden Fleece, put Jason upon a Voyage to Cholchos.
In his passage, he stopped at the Island of Lemnos, of which place Hypsipyle was
then Queen, famed for her pious saving of her Father Thoas, in a general
Massacre of the Men there by the Women of that Country. Her Entertainment of
Jason so kind, as induced him to stay there two years, at the end of which he
left the Island, and the Queen, (then big with Child;) and after a thousand
Vows of Constancy, and a speedy return, persues his first intended Voyage, and
arrives at Cholchos, where Aeta was King. Medea his Daughter falls deeply in
Love with Jason, and by her Charms be gained the Golden Fleece; with which and
Medea, he secretly saild home to Thessaly. Hypsipyle hearing of his Landing
with her more happy Rival Medea, writes him this Epistle.

LAden, they say with Iasons Golden Prize,
Proud Argo in Thessalia's Harbor lies.
I would congratulate your safe return;
But from your pen I should that safety learn.
When from my slighted Coast you bore away,
Spite of the winds; you showed less Faith, than They.
If It was too much to enjoy my dearest Lord,
Sure I deserved one Line, one tender word.
Why did Fame first, and not their Conqueror, show,
How Wars Fierce God saw his tamed Bulls at Plough.
How th'Earthborn Warriors rose, and how they fell
By their own Swords, without your Conquering steel.
How in your Charms the fettered Dragon lay,
Whilst your bold hand bore the curld Gold away.
When doubtful Tongues shall Iasons wonders tell,
Would I could say, see here is my Oracle.
But though unkind Loves silence I deplore,
Your heart still mine, I would desire no more.
But ah, that hope is vain; -- a Witch destroys
My fancied pleasures, and my promised Joys.
Would I could say (but, oh, Loves fear's too strong!)
Would I could say I guiltless Jason wrong.
Lately a Guest came from the Hemonian Land:
My door scarce reached, with transport I demand
How fares my Jason? His sad look he bore,
Fixed with an ominous silence on the floor.
My Robes I tore, and thus, with Horror, cried,
Lives he! or with one wound both hearts must bleed?
He lives, said he, to which I made him swear:
He swore by Heaven, yet I retained my Fear.
My sense returned to ask your Deeds, he said,
That the yoked Bulls of Mars in Chains you led.
The Snakes own Teeth a crop of Heroes bore,
Whilst a rough native case their Limbs huskt over.
And by their own Intestine Fury slain;
One Days short Age compleats their active Reign.
Again I ask, does my dear Jason live?
Such Ebbs and Flows Loves fears and hopes do give.
He fatally proceeds, and with much Art,
Would hide, yet shows the falseness of your heart.
Ah, where is your Nuptial Faith, that flattering style,
Loves Torch more fit to light my Funeral pile!
I have no lawless plea to Iasons Love;
Juno, and Hymen our just Chaplets wove:
Ah no! not these mild Gods: Erynnis hand,
At our cursed Rites held her infernal Brand.
Why to my Lemnos did your Vessel steer?
Or why fond fool, did I admit you here?
Here no bright Ram with golden glory shone,
Nor was my Lemnos the Aetean Throne.
At first -- (but Fates all faint Resolves withstand)
I thought to expel you with a Female hand.
The Lemnian Ladies are in Arms well skilled:
Their Guard had been my Life's securest shield.
But in my City, Roof, my soul received,
For two blessed years my darling Jason lived.
Forced the third Summer to a sad Farewell,
Mixed with his Tears these parting Accents fell.
Do not at our divided Fates repine,
Thine I depart, to return ever Thine.
May our yet unborn pledge live long, to prove
The object of its Rival Parents Love,
'Twixt sighs and Tears, through those false gales did pour
These falser shours, till grief could speak no more.
You were the last the fatal Argo reached,
Whose swelling Sails the or^hasty winds had stretched.
The furrowing Keel the Seas green surface plough'd:
You to the Shore, toth' Seas I gazing bowed,
In have I ran to an adjacent Towr:
My Tears ore all my face and bosom shower.
There my wet Eyes my wafted soul pursue,
And even beyond their natural optics flew.
A thousand Vows for your return I made,
You are returned, and they should now be paid.
My Vows for cursed Medeas Triumphs pay!
My Heart to Grief, my Love to Rage gives way.
Shall I deck Temples, and make Altars shine,
For that false man that lives, but lives not mine!
I never was secure. 'Twas my long dread,
You by your Fathers choice a Greek might wed.
To no Greek Bride, t'an unexpected Foe,
My wounds, I to a Barbarian Harlot owe:
One who by Spells, and Herbs does hearts surprise;
Nor are her slaves the Trophies of her Eyes.
She from her course the struggling Moon would hold,
The Sun himself, in Magic shades infold.
She curbs the Waves, and stops the rapid Floods,
And from their seats removes whole Rocks and Woods.
With her dishevelled Hair the wandering Hag
Does half-burnt Bones from their warm Ashes drag.
In moulten wax, though absent, kills by Art,
Armed with her Needle, goars a tortured Heart.
Nay, what Desert and Form should only move,
By Philters she secures her Iasons Love.
How can you dote on such Infernal Charms,
And sleep securely in a Sirens Arms?
You, as the Bulls, she does to' her Yoke subdue,
And as she tamed the Dragons, Conquers you.
Though your great Deeds, and no less Race you boast,
Linkt to that Fiend your sullied Fame is lost.
Nay by the censuring World it is justly thought,
Your Conquests by her Sorceries were wrought;
And the Phryxean Ram's Triumphant Oar,
They say, not Jason, but Medea bore.
This Northren Bride your Parents disapprove:
Consult your Duty in your Nobler Love.
Let some wild Scythian her loathed bed possess,
A Mistress only fit for Savages.
Jason more false, more changeable than wind,
Have Vows no weight, and Oaths no power to bind?
Mine you departed; ah, return mine too,
Let my kind Arms their long lost Scenes renew.
If high Birth, and great Names your Heart can turn,
Know, I 'm the Royal Thoas Daughter born.
Bacchus my Grandsire is, whose Bride divine,
All lesser Constellations does out shine.
My Dower These and my Fertile Lemnos make,
All these, and me thy Equal Title take.
Nay I Am a Mother: a kind Father be,
And soften all the pains I Have born for thee.
Yes Heaven with Twins has blessed our Genial Bed;
And would you in their Looks their Father read,
His treacherous smiles they are too young to wear,
In all things else you will find your picture there;
I'had sent those Envoys in these Letters stead,
Both for their own and Mothers wrongs to plead.
Had not their Stepdames Murders bid them stay,
Too dear a Treasure for that Monsters prey.
Would her deaf Rage that rent her Brother's Bones,
Spare my young blood, or hear their tenderer Groans?
Yet in your Arms this dearer Traitress lies;
Above my truth, you this false Poysoner prize.
This mean Adultrate wretch was basely kind;
Loves Sacred Lamp our chaste embraces joined.
Her Father she betrayed, mine lives by me,
I Lemnos Pride, she Colchos Infamy.
And thus her guilt my Piety outvies,
Whilst with her Crimes her Dower your Heart she buys.
False man, I blame, not wonder at the Rage
Of The Lemnian Dames: Wrongs do all Arms engage.
Suppose in vengeance to your Guilt, just Heaven
Had on my Shore the perjured Jason driven;
Whilst I with my young Twins to meet you came,
And made you call on Rocks to hide your shame.
How could you look upon my Sons and Me?
Traitor, what Pains, what Death too bad for Thee?
Perhaps indeed I Jason had not hurt,
But it is my mercy more than his Desert:
The Harlots blood had sprinkled all the Place,
Dash't in your faithless, and once charming Face.
I to Medea, should Medea prove,
And if Jove hears the prayers of injured Love,
May that loathed Hag that has my Bed enjoyed;
Be by my Fate, and her own Arts destroyed.
Like Me a Mother, and a Wife forlorn,
(...) from her Ravished Lord, and Children torn.
May her ill gotten Trophies never last,
But round the World be the hunted Monster chased.
Those Dooms her Sire, and murdered Brother met,
May she to her Husband and her Sons repeat.
Driven from the World, let her attempt the skies,
Till in Despair by her own hand she dies.
Thus wronged Thoantias prays, your Lives cursed Remnant lead,
An Execrable Pair in a Detested Bed.
MEDEA TO JASON.
BY Mr. TATE.
The ARGUMENT.
Jason arrives with his Companions at Cho'chos where the Golden Fleece was
kept, which before he can obtain, he is to undertake several Adventures; first
to yoke the Wild Bulls, then to sow the Serpents Teeth, from whence should
instantly rise an Army, with which he must encounter; and lastly, to make his
passage by the Dragon that never slept. In order to this, he solicits Medea
Daughter to the King, and skilful in Charms, by whose assistance (on Promise of
Love) he gains the Prize. Then flies with her; the King pursues them, Medea
kills her little Brother, scatters his Limbs, and whilst the King stays to
gather them up, escapes with her Lover into Thessaly; where she restores
decrepit Aeson to his Youth. On the same promise persuades Pelias his Daughters
to let out their Fathers Blood, but deceitfully leaves them Guilty of
Parricide. For this and other Crimes, Jason casts her off: Marries Creusa
Daughter to Creon King of Corinth, on which the enraged Medea, according to the
various Transports of her Passion, writes this complaining, soothing and
menacing Epistle.

YEt I found leisure, though a Queen, to free
By Magic Arts thy Grecian Friends, and Thee:
The Fates should then have finished with my Reign,
The Life that since was one continued Pain.
Who would have dreamt the Youth of distant Greece,
Should e're have sailed to seize the Phrygian Fleece!
That the Argo should in View of Cholchos Ride!
A Greecian Army stem the Phasian Tide!
Why were those snares, thy Locks, so tempting made!
A Tongue so False, so powerful to persuade!
No doubt but He that had so rashly sought
Our Shore, with the fierce Bulls unspell'd had fought,
And fondly too the Arms-bearing Seed had sown,
'Till by the Crop the Tiller were orethrown.
How many Frauds had then expired with Thee!
As many killing griefs removed from me!
It Is some Relief when ill returns are made,
With Favors done, the Ungrateful to upbraid;
This Triumph will afford some little Ease,
False Jason leaves me This --
When first your doubtful Vessel reached our Port,
And you had Entrance to my Fathers Court:
There was I then, what now your new Bride's here,
My Royal Father might with here is compare.
With Princely Pomp was your arrival graced,
The meanest Greek on Tyrian Beds we placed.
Then first I gazed my Liberty away!
And date my Ruin from that fatal day!
Fate pusht me on, and with your Charms combined;
I viewed your sparkling Eyes 'till I was blind.
You soon perceived, for who could ever hide
A flame that by its own Light is descried?
But now thy Task's proposed, and thou must tame
The Bulls with brazen Hoofs, and Breath of Flame.
With these the fatal field thou art to Plow*
From whence a sudden Host of Foes must grow.
Those dangers past, still to the golden Prey
The baleful fiery Dragon guards the Way.
Thus spoke the King; your Knights start from the Feast,
And even your cheeks a pale despair confessed.
Where then was your adored Creusa's Dower?
And where her Father Creon's boasted Power?
Sad went thou forth; my pitying Eyes pursue,
I sighed, and after sent a soft Adieu!
In restless Tears I spent that tedious night,
Presenting still thy dangers to my sight;
The Savage Bulls and more the Savage Host,
But the horrid Serpent did afright me most!
Thus tossed with Fear and Love, (Fear swelled the Flame)
My Sister early to my Apartment came;
Sad and dejected she surpised me There,
With Eyes distilling and dishevelled Hair,
On your behalf she sought me, nor could crave
My Aid for you, so freely as I gave!
A Grove there is, an awful gloomy shade,
Too close for even the Sun himself to invade;
These Woods with great Diana's Fane we graced,
In The midst the Goddess on high Tripods placed.
There (if that place you can remember yet,
Who have forgotten Me) 'twas there we met.
Then thus in soft deluding sounds you said --
" Take pity on our sufferings, Royal Maid!
" Rest pleased, Thou have the Power to Kill; but give
" Proofs of Diviner Might, and make us Live!
" By our distresses (which thy Art alone,
" Has Power to succor), By the all-seeing Sun,
" By the Chaste Deity that Governs Here,
" And what ere else you Sacred hold or Dear,
" Take pity on our Youth, and bind us still
" Eternal servants to Medea's Will!
" And if a Strangers Form can touch your mind,
" (If such blessed Fate was ere for me designed!)
" This Flesh to Dust dissolve, this Spirit to Air,
" When I think any but Medea Fair.
" Be Conscious Juno, witness to my Vow,
" And this dread Goddess at whose Shrine we Bow.
Your Charming Tongue stopped here, and left the rest,
To be by yet more powerful Tears expressed.
I yield -- and by my Art instruct you now,
To yoke the Brass-hooft Bulls, and make 'em Plow,
Then with a daring Hand you sow the Field,
That for an Harvest does an Army yield;
Even I looked pale, that gave the powerful Charms,
To see the wondrous Crop of shining Arms!
Till the Earth-born Brothers in fierce battle joined,
Their sudden Lives more suddenly resigned:
The Serpent next, a yet more dangerous toil,
With scaly Bosom Plows the yielding Soil,
Oreshades the Field with vast expanded wings,
And brandishes in Air his threatening Stings!
Where was Creusa at this needful Hour? (Dowr?
Where then were her famed Charms and matchless Dowr?
Medea, that Medea that is now
Despised, thought Poor, held guilty too by You,
'Twas she that Charmed the wakeful Dragons sight,
Gave you the Fleece, and then secured your Flight:
To merit you what could I more have done?
My Father I betray, my Country shun,
And all the Hazards of an Exile run!
Though, whilst I yield me thus a Robbers Prize,
My tender Mother in my Absence dies,
And at her Feet my breathless Sister lies.
Why left I not my Brother too? -- cold fear
Arrests my Hand, and I must finish Here!
This Hand that tore the Infant in our Flight,
What then it dared to Act, dreads now to Write.
To the rough Seas undaunted I repair,
For after Guilt, what can a Woman Fear?
Why escaped our Crimes those Seas? we should have died;
For falsehood Thou, and I for Parricide.
The justling Isles should there have dashtour Bones,
And hung us piecemeal on the ragged stones;
Or Scylla gorged us in her ravenous Den,
Wronged Scylla thus should use ungrateful Men!
Charybdis too should in our Fate have shared,
Nor ought of our sad wreck her Whirlpool spared.
Yet safe we reach your Shore; the Phrygian Fleece
Is made an Offering to the Gods of Greece.
The Pelian Daughters pious Bloody Deed
I pass, that rashly made their Father bleed;
Your safety 'twas that drew me to this Fraud,
The Guilt that Others Blame, you should Applaud!
But stead of Thanks, your Court I am Forbid:
Your self forbad me, faithless Jason did!
With none but my Two Infants I depart,
And Iason's Form that nere forsakes my Heart;
At length thy Rev'ling Nuptial Songs surprise
My wounded Ear, thy Nuptial Torch my Eyes.
The Rabble shout, the Clamor nearer drew,
And as it came more near, more dreadful grew:
My Servants weep in corners and refuse
The ungrateful task of such unwelcome News!
I yet forbear to enquire, tho still my Breast
The dreadful Apprehensions did suggest.
My youngest Bo^ now from the Window spied
The coming Pomp, and jocund thus he cried,
"Look, Mother, look! see where my Father Rides,
"With shining Reins his golden Chariot Guides:
At this, my pale forsaken Breast I tore,
Norspar'd the Face whose Beauties charm no more
Alas! what did I spare, scarce could I spare
My Honor, scarcely thee, could scarce forbear
To force my Passage to thy Chariot now,
And tear the Garland from thy perjured Brow.
Offended Father, now thy griefs discharge!
My Brothers Blood is now revenged at large.
The man (for whom I fled and injured Thee!
Whose Love sole comfort of my Flight could be)
The ungrateful Man has now forsaken Me!
I tamed the Bulls, and could the Serpent bind,
But for perfidious Love no spell can find:
The Dragons baleful Fires my Arts suppressed,
But not the Flames that rage within my breast.
In Love my powerfull'st Herbs are useless made,
In vain is Hecat summoned to my Aid;
I sigh the Day, the Night in watches spend,
No slumbers on my careful brows descend:
With Poppies juice in vain my Eyes I steep,
And try the Charm that made the Dragon sleep.
I only reap no Profit from my Charms!
They saved, but saved Thee for my Rivals Arms!
There, 'cause you know the Theme will grateful be,
Perhaps you are so Unjust to'exclaim on me!
To tax my Manners, Rally on my Face,
And make the Adultress sport with my disgrace!
Laugh on Proud Dame; but know thy Fate is nigh,
When thou shall yet more wretched be than I!
When wronged Medea unrevenged sits still,
Sword, Flame, and Poison, have forgot to Kill.
If Prayers the flinty Iason's breast can move,
My just Complaint will sure successful prove.
Stretched at thy Feet a suppliant Princess see;
Such was thy Posture, when she Pitty'd Thee,
And tho a Wife's discarded Title fail,
My Infants still are Thine, let them prevail!
So much they are Thine, so much thy Likeness bear,
Each Look I cast, is followed by a Tear.
Now by the Gods, by all our past Delights,
By those dear Pledges of our amorous Nights,
Restore me to thy Love; I claim my Due,
Be to my Merit, and thy Promise True.
I ask Thee not what I performed for Thee,
To set me from fierce Bulls and Serpents Free;
I only crave thy Love, thy Love restore,
For which I Have done so much, and suffered more.
Do Thou demand a Dower? -- 'twas paid that day
When thou did bear the Golden Fleece away:
The Life's my Dower, and thy dear Followers health,
The Youth of Greece; weigh these with Creon's wealth.
To Me thou ow'st that thou art Creon's Heir,
That now thou liv'st to call Creusa, Fair!
You Have wronged me All, and on you All -- but hold,
I form Revenge too mighty to be told!
My thoughts are now toth' utmost Ruin bent!
Perhaps I shall the fatal Rage repent,
But on -- for I (what e're the mischief be)
Shall less Repent than that I trusted Thee!
The God alone that Rages in my Breast,
Can see the dark revenge my thoughts suggest;
I only know 'twill soon effected be,
And when it comes, be Vast and Worthy Me.
PHAEDRA TO HIPPOLYTUS.
BY Mr. OTWAY.
The ARGUMENT.
Theseus, the Son of Aegeus, having slain the Minotaur, promised to Ariadne the
Daughter of Minos and Pasiphae, for the assistance which she gave him, to carry
her home with him, and make her his Wife: so together with her Sister Phaedra,
they went on Board and sailed to Chios, where being warned by Bacchus, he left
Ariadne, and Married her Sister Phaedra, who afterward in Theseus her Husbands
Absence, fell in Love with Hippolytus her Son in Law, who had Vowed Caelibacy,
and was a Hunter: wherefore since she could not conveniently otherwise; she
chose by this Epistle to give him an Account of her Passion.

IF You Are unkind, I never shall health Enjoy;
Yet much I wish to thee, my Lovely Boy:
Read this and reading how my soul is seized,
Rather than not be with my ruin pleased:
Thus secrets safe to farthest Shoars may move;
By Letters Foes converse and learn to Love.
Thrice my sad tale, as I to tell it tried,
Upon my faultring Tongue abortive died:
Long shame prevailed, nor could be conquered quite,
But what I blushed to speak, Love made me write.
It Is dangerous to resist the power of Love,
The Gods obey him, and he is King above:
He cleared the doubts that did my mind confound,
And promised me to bring Thee hither bound:
Oh may he come, and in that breast of thine
Fix a kind Dart, and make it flame like mine!
Yet of my Wedlock Vows I Will loose no care,
Search back through all my fame, Thou Wilt find it fair*
But Love long breeding, to worst pain does turn;
Outward unharm'd, within, within I burn!
As the Young Bull or Courser yet untamed,
When Yok't or Bridled first, are pinch't and maimed;
So my unpractic't heart in Love can find
No rest, the unwonted weight so toyls my mind.
When young, loves pangs by Arts we may remove,
But in our riper years with rage we Love.
To thee I yield then all my dear Renown,
And prithee let us together be undone.
Who would not pluck the new blown blushing Rose,
Or the ripe Fruit that Courts him as it grows?
But if my Virtue hitherto has gained
Esteem for spotless, shall it now be stained?
Oh in thy Love I shall no hazard run;
It Is not a sin, but when it is coursely done.
And now should Juno yield her Jove to me,
I Would quit that Jove, Hippolytus, for Thee:
Believe me too with strange desires I change,
Amongst Wild Beasts I long with Thee to range,
To thy Delights and Delia I Incline,
Make her my Goddess too, because she is thine:
I long to know the Woods, to drive the Deer,
And over the Mountains tops my Hounds to cheer,
Shaking my Dart, then, the Chase ended, lie
Stretched on the grass, and would not Thou be by?
O^t in light Chariots I with pleasure ride,
And love my self the furious Steeds to guide.
Now like a Bacchanal more wild I stray,
Or Old Cybele's Priests, as mad as They
When under Ida's Hill They Offerings pay:
Even mad as those the Deities of Night
And Water, Fauns and Dryards do afright:
But still each little Interval I gain,
Easily find it is Love breeds all my pain:
Sure on our Race Love like a Fate does fall,
And Venus will have Tribute of us all.
Jove loved Europa, whence my Father came,
And to a Bull transformed, Enjoyed the Dame:
She, like my Mother, languisht to obtain,
And filled her Womb with shame as well as pain:
The faithless Theseus by my Sisters Aid
The Monster slew, and a safe Conquest made:
Now in that Family my right to save,
I am at last on the same terms a slave:
'Twas fatal to my Sister and to me,
She loved thy Father, but my choice was thee.
Let Monuments of Triumph then be shown
For two unhappy Nymphs by you undone.
When first our Vows were at Eleusis paid,
Would I had in a Cretan Grave been laid;
'Twas there Thou did a perfect Conquest gain,
Whilst Loves fierce Feavor raged in every vein;
White was thy Robe, a Garland decked thy Head,
A modest blush thy comely face orespread,
That face which may be terrible in Arms,
But Graceful seemed to me, and full of Charms:
I Love the man whose fashion's least his care,
And hate my Sexes Coxcombs fine and fair;
For whilst thus plain thy careless Locks let fly,
The unpolish't form is Beauty in my Eye:
If thou but ride, or shake the trembling Dart,
I fix my Eyes, and wonder at thy Art:
To see thee poise the Iav'lin, moves delight,
And all thou do is lovely in my sight:
But to the Woods thy cruelty resign,
Nor treat it with so poor a life as mine:
Must cold Diana be adored alone?
Must she have all thy Vows, and Venus none?
That pleasure palls if it is Enjoyed too long,
Love makes the weary firm, the feeble strong.
For Cyntbia's sake unbend and ease thy Bow;
Else to thy Arm 'twill weak and useless grow.
Famous was Cephalus in Wood and Plain,
And by him many a Boar and Pard was slain,
Yet to Aurora's Love he did incline;
Who wisely left Old Age for Youth like Thine.
Under the spreading shades her Amorous Boy
The fair Adonis Venus could enjoy,
Atlanta's Love too Meleager sought,
And to her Tribute paid of all he caught;
Be Thou and I the next blessed Sylvan pair:
Where Love's a Stranger Woods but Deserts are.
With Thee through dangerous ways unknown before,
I Will rove and fearless face the dreadful Boar.
Between two Seas a little Isthmus lies,
Where on each side the beating Billows rise,
There in Trazena I thy Love will meet,
More blessed and pleased than in my Native Crete.
As we could wish, Old Theseus is away
At Thessaly, where always let him stay
With his Perithous, whom well I see
Preferred above Hippolytus or me.
Nor has he only thus expressed his hate;
We both have suffered wrongs of mighty weight:
My Brother first he cruelly did slay
^hen from my Sister falsely ran away;
And left exposed to every Beast a prey.
A Warlike Queen to thee thy Being gave,
A Mother worthy of a Son so brave,
From cruel Theseus yet her death did find,
Nor though she gave him Thee, could make him kind.
Unwedded too he murdered her in spite,
To Bastardize and Rob thee of thy Right:
And if to wrong thee more, two Sons Iv'e brought,
Believe it his, and none of Phaedra's fault:
Rather thou fairest Thing the Earth contains,
I wish at first 'had died of Mothers pains:
How can thou reverence then thy Fathers Bed,
From which himself so Abjectly is fled?
The thought afrights not me, but me enflames;
Mother and son are notions, very Names
Of worn out Piety, in fashion Then
When Old dull Saturn Ruled the Race of men:
But braver Jove taught pleasure was no sin,
And with his Sister did himself begin.
Nearness of Blood, and Kindred best we prove,
When we express it in the closest Love.
Nor need we fear our Fault should be revealed;
'Twill under near Relation be concealed,
And all who hear our Loves, with praise shall Crown
A Mothers kindness to a grateful Son.
No need at Midnight in the dark to stray,
T'unlock the Gates, and cry, my Love, this way,
No busy Spies our pleasures to betray.
But in one house, as heretofore, we will live,
In public, kisses take; in public, give:
Though in my Bed You Are seen, 'twill gain Applause
From all, whilst none have sense to ghess the Cause:
Only make have, and let this League be signed;
So may my Tyrant Love to thee be kind.
For this I am an humble Suppliant grown;
Now where are all my boasts of Greatness gone?
I swore I never would yield, resolved to ^ight,
Deceived by Love that is seldom in the right,
Now on my own, I crawl to clasp thy knees;
What Is Decent no true Lover cares or sees:
Shame, like a beaten Soldier, leaves the place,
But Beauties blushes still are in my face.
For give this fond Confession which I make,
And then some pity on my sufferings take.
What though midst Seas my Fathers Empire lies?
Though my Great Grandsire Thunder from the skies?
What though my Fathers Sire in Beams dressed gay
Drives round the burning Chariot of the day?
Their Honor all in me to Love's a slave,
Then though thou will not me, their Honor save:
Jove's Famous Island Crete in Dower I Will bring,
And there shall my Hippolytus be King:
For Venus sake then hear and grant my prayer,
So may Thou never love a scornful fair;
In Fields so may Diana grace Thee still,
And every Wood afford thee Game to kill;
So may the Mountain Gods and Satyrs all
Be kind, so may the Boar before Thee fall,
So may the water-Nymphs in heat of day,
Though Thou their Sex despise, they thirst allay.
Millions of tears to these my prayrs I join,
Which as Thou read'st with those dear eyes of Thine,
Think that thou see the streams that flow from mine.
DIDO to AENEAS.
BY Mr. DRYDEN.
The ARGUMENT.
Aeneas, the Son of Venus and Anchises, having at the Destruction of Troy,
saved his Gods, his Father and Son Ascanius from the Fire, put to Sea with
twenty Sail of Ships, and having bin long tossed with Tempests, was at last cast
upon the Shore of Lybia, where Queen Dido, (flying from the Cruelty of
Pigmalion her Brother, who had Killed her Husband Sichaeus,) had lately built
Carthage. She entertained Aeneas and his Fleet with great civility, fell
passionately in Love with him, and in the end denied him not the last Favors.
But Mercury admonishing Aeneas to go in search of Italy, (a Kingdom promised to
him by the Gods,) he readily prepared to Obey him. Dido soon perceived it, and
having in vain tried all other means to engage him to stay, at last in Despair,
writes to him as follows.

SO, on Maeander's banks, when death is nigh,
The mournful Swan sings her own Elegy.
Not that I hope, (for oh, that hope were vain!)
By words your lost affection to regain;
But having lost what ere was worth my care,
Why should I fear to loose a dying prayer?
It Is then resolved poor Dido must be left,
Of Life, of Honor, and of Love bereft!
While you, with loosened Sails and Vows, prepar*
To seek a Land that flies the Searchers care.
Nor can my rising Towers your flight restrain,
Nor my new Empire, offered you in vain.
Built Walls you shun, unbuilt you seek; that Land*
Is yet to Conquer; but you this Command.
Suppose you Landed where your wish designed,
Think what Reception Forreiners would find.
What People is so void of common sense,
To Vote Succession from a Native Prince.
Yet there new Scepters and new Loves you seek*
New Vows to plight, and plighted Vows to break*
When will your Towers the height of Carthage know?
Or when, your eyes discern such crowds below?
If such a Town and Subjects you could see,
Still would you want a Wife who loved like me.
For, oh, I burn, like fires with incense bright;
Not holy Tapers flame with purer light:
Aeneas is my thoughts perpetual Theme:
Their daily longing, and their nightly dream.
Yet he ungreateful and obdurate still:
Fool that I am to place my heart so ill!
My self I cannot to my self restore:
Still I complain, and still I love him more.
Have pity, Cupid, on my bleeding heart;
And pierce thy Brothers with an equal dart.
I rave: nor can thou Venus' offspring be,
Love's Mother could not bear a Son like Thee.
From hardened Oak, or from a Rocks cold womb,
At least thou art from some sierce Tygress come,
Or, on rough Seas, from their foundation torn,
Got by the winds, and in a Tempest born:
Like that which now thy trembling Sailors fear:
Like that, whose rage should still detain thee here.
Behold how high the Foamy Billows ride!
The winds and waves are on the juster side.
To Winter weather, and a stormy Sea,
I Will owe what rather I would owe to thee.
Death thou deserve from Heavens avenging Laws;
But I Am unwilling to become the cause.
To shun my Love, if thou will seek thy Fate,
It Is a dear purchase, and a costly hate.
Stay but a little, till the Tempest cease;
And the loud winds are lulled into a peace.
May all thy rage, like theirs, unconstant prove!
And so it will, if there be power in Love.
Know thou not yet what dangers Ships sustain,
So often wracked, how dare thou tempt the Main?
Which, were it smooth; were every wave asleep,
Ten thousand forms of death are in the deep.
In that abyss the Gods their vengance store,
For broken Vows of those who falsely swore.
There winged storms on Sea-born Venus wait,
To vindicate the Justice of her State.
Thus, I to Thee the means of safety show:
And lost my self, would still preserve my Foe.
False as thou art, I not thy death design:
O rather live to be the cause of mine!
Should some avenging storm thy Vessel tear,
(But Heaven forbid my words should Omen bear,)
Then, in thy face thy perjured Vows would fly;
And my wronged Ghost be present to thy eye.
With threatening looks, think thou beholdst me stare,
Gasping my mouth, and clotted all my hair.
Then should fork'd Lightning and red Thunder fall,
What coud'st thou say, but I deserved 'em all?
Lest this should happen, make not have away.
To shun the danger will be worth thy stay.
Have pity on thy Son, if not on me:
My death alone is guilt enough for thee.
What has his Youth, what have thy Gods deserved,
To sink in Seas, who were from fires preserved?
But neither Gods nor Parent did thou bear,
(Smooth stories all, to please a Woman's ear.)
False was the tale of thy Romantic life;
Nor yet am I thy first deluded wife.
Left to pursuing Foes Creusa stayed,
By thee, base man, forsaken and betrayed.
This, whenthou told'st me, struck my tender heart,
That such requital followed such desert.
Nor doubt I but the Gods, for crimes like these,
Sev'n Winters kept thee wandering on the Seas.
Thy starved Companions, cast a Shore, I fed,
Thy self admitted to my Crown and Bed.
To harbor Strangers, succor the distressed,
Was kind enough; but oh too kind the rest!
Cursed be the Cave which first my ruin brought:
Where, from the storm, we common shelter sought!
A dreadful howling echoed round the place,
The Mountain Nymphs, thought I, my Nuptials grace.
I thought so then, but now too late I know
The Furies yell'd my Funerals from below.
O Chastity and violated Fame,
Exact your dues to my dead Husbands name!
By Death redeem my reputation lost;
And to his Arms restore my guilty Ghost.
Close by my Palace, in a Gloomy Grove,
Is rais'd^a Chapel to my murdered Love.
There, wreathed with boughs and wool his Statue stands,
The pious Monument of Artful hands:
Last night, methought, he called me from the dome,
And thrice with hollow voice, cried, Dido, come.
She comes: thy Wife thy lawful summons hears:
But comes more slowly, clogged with conscious fears.
Forgive the wrong I offered to thy bed,
Strong were his charms, who my weak faith misled.
His Goddess Mother, and his aged Sire,
Born on his back, did to my Fall conspire.
O such he was, and is, that were he true,
Without a blush I might his Love pursue.
But cruel Stars my birth day did attend:
And as my Fortune opened, it must end.
My plighted Lord was at the Altar slain,
Whose wealth was made my bloody Brothers gain:
Friendless, and followed by the Murd'rers hate,
To foreign Countrey's I removed my Fate;
And here, a suppliant, from the Natives hands,
I bought the ground on which my City stands.
With all the Coast that stretches to the Sea;
Even to the friendly Port that sheltred Thee:
Then raised these Walls, which mount into the Air,
At once my Neighbors wonder, and their fear.
For now they Arm; and round me Leagues are made
My scarce Established Empire to invade.
To Man my new built Walls I must prepare,
An helpless Woman and unskilled in War.
Yet thousand Rivals to my Love pretend;
And for my Person, would my Crown Defend*
Whose jarring Votes in one complaint agree,
That each unjustly is disdained for Thee.
To proud Hyarbas give me up a prey;
(For that must follow, if thou go away.)
Or to my Husbands Murderer leave my life;
That to the Husband he may add the Wife.
Go then; since no complaints can move thy mind:
Go perjured man, but leave thy Gods behind.
Touch not those Gods by whom thou art for sworn;
Who will in impious hands no more be born.
Thy Sacrilegious worship they disdain,
And rather would the Grecian fires sustain.
Perhaps my greatest shame is still to come;
And part of thee lies hid within my womb.
The Babe unborn must perish by thy hate,
And perish guiltless in his Mothers Fate.
Some God, thou say, thy Voyage does command:
Would the same God had barred thee from my Land.
The same, I doubt not, thy departure Steers,
Who kept thee out at Sea so many years.
Where thy long labors were a price so great,
As thou to purchase Troy would not repeat.
But Tyber now thou seek'st; to be at best
When there arrived, a poor precarious Ghest.
Yet it deludes thy search: perhaps it will
To thy Old Age lie undiscovered still.
A ready Crown and Wealth in Dower I bring;
And without Conquering here thou art a King.
Here thou to Carthage may transfer thy Troy;
Here young Ascanius may his Arms emply:
And, while we live secure in soft repose,
Bring many Laurells home from Conquered Foes.
By Cupids Arrows, I adjure thee, stay;
By all the Gods, Companions of thy way.
So may they Trojans, who are yet alive
Live still, and with no future Fortune strive:
So may thy Youthful Son old age attain,
And thy dead Fathers Bones in peace remain,
As thou have pity on unhappy me,
Who know no Crime but too much Love of thee.
I am not born from fierce Achilles 'Line:
Nor did my Parents against Troy combine.
To be thy Wife, if I unworthy prove,
By some inferior name admit my Love.
To be secured of still possessing thee,
What wou'd^ do, and what would I not be!
(...) Coasts their certain seasons know,
(...) free from Tempests Passengers may go.
But now with Northern Blasts the Billows roar,
And drive the floating Sea-weed to the Shore.
Leave to my care the time to Sail away;
When safe, I will not suffer thee to stay.
Thy weary Men would be with ease content;
Their Sails are tattered, and their Masts are spent:
If by no merit I thy mind can move,
What thou deny'st my merit, give my Love.
Stay, till I learn my loss to undergo;
And give me time to struggle with my woe.
If not; know this, I will not suffer long;
My life's too loathsome, and my love too strong.
Death holds my pen, and dictates what I say,
While cross my lap thy Trojan Sword I lay.
My tears flow down; the sharp edge cuts their flood,
And drinks my sorrows, that must drink my blood.
How wellthy gift does with my Fate agree!
My Funeral pomp is cheaply made by thee.
To no new wounds my bosom I display:
The Sword but enters where Love made the way.
But thou, dear Sister, and yet dearer friend,
Shall my cold Ashesto their Urn attend.
Sichaeus Wife let not the Marble boast,
I lost that Title when my Fame I lost
This short Inscription only let it bear,
"Unhappy Dido lies in quiet here.
"The cause of death, and Sword by which she died,
"Aeneas gave: the rest her arm supplied.
The foregoing EPISTLE OF DIDO TO AENEAS.
By Sir C. S.
SO in unwonted Notes, when sure to die,
The mournful Swan sings her own Elegy.
I do not hope by this to change my Fate,
Since Heaven and You are both resolved to Hate.
Robbed of my Honor, it is no wonder now
That you disdain me when I meanly sue;
Deaf to my Prayr's that you resolve to go,
And leave the unhappy you have rendered so.
You and your Love, the Winds away must bear,
Forgot is all that you so often did swear:
With cruel have to distant Lands you Fly,
Yet know not whose they are, nor where they lie.
On Carthage and its rising Walls you frown,
And shun a Scepter, which is now your own;
All you have gained, you proudly do contemn,
And fondly seek a fancied Diadem.
And should you reach at last this promised Land,
Who Will give its Power into a Strangers hand?
Another easy Dido do you seek?
And new Occasions new made Vows to break?
When can you Walls like ours of Carthage build,
And see your Streets with crowds of Subjects filled?
But tho all this Succeeded to your Mind,
So true a Wife no search could ever find.
Scorched up with Loves fierce fire my Life does wast
Like Incense on the flaming Altar cast,
All day Aeneas walks before my sight,
In all my Dreams I see him every night:
But see him still Ungrateful as before,
And such as, if I could, I should abhor.
But the strong Flame burns on against my will,
I call (...) Love the Traitor still.
(...) Love, Thee all the World Adore!
And shall thy Son slight thy Almighty Power?
His Brothers stubborn soul let Cupid move,
Teach me to Hate, or him to Merit Love!
But the Impostor his high Birth did feign,
(Tho to that Tale his Face did Credit gain,)
He was not born of Venus, who could prove
So Cruel, and so Faithless in his Love.
From Rocks or Mountains he derived his Birth!
Fierce Wolves or Savage Tigers brought him forth!
Or else he sprung from the Tempestuous Main,
To which so eagerly he flies again.
How dreadful the contending Waves appear!
These Winter storms by force would keep you here.
The Storms are kinder and the Winds more true!
Let me ow Them, what I would ow to You.
You Will show your Hatred at too dear a rate,
If to fly me, you run on certain Fate.
Stay only till these raging Tempests cease,
And breeding Halcyons all my Fears release.
Then you perhaps may change your cruel Mind,
And will learn Pity from the Sea and Wind.
Are you not warned by all youv'e felt and seen?
And will you Tempt the Faithless Floods again?
Tho 'twere calm now, it would not long be so,
Think, to what distant Countries you would go.
There Is not one God who will that Vessel bless,
Which Lies, and Frauds, and Perjuries oppress.
The Sea let every faithless Lover fear,
The Queen of Love Rose thence, and Governs there.
Still the dear Cause of all my Ills I love,
And my last words Heaven for your safety move;
That your false Flight may not as Fatal be
To You, as your Dissembled Love to me.
But in the Storm, when the huge Billows roll,
(Th'unlucky Omen may kind Heaven control,)
Think what Distracted Thoughts will fill your soul.
You Will then remember every broken Vow,
With Horror think on Murdered Dido too.
My Ghost all Pale and Ghastly shall be there,
With Mortal wounds still bleeding I Will appear.
Then you will own what to such Crimes is due,
And think each Flash of Lightning aimed at you.
Your Cruel Flight till the next Calm delay,
Your quiet passage will reward your stay.
I beg not for my self, but do not join
The Guilt of your Ascanius Death to mine.
What has your Son, what have your Gods (...)?
For a worse Fate were they from Flames (...)?
But sure you neither saved them from the Fire,
Nor on your shoulders bore your Aged Sire;
But did Contrive that Story, to Deceive
A Queen, so fond, so willing to Believe.
Your ready Tongue told many a pleasing lie,
Nor did it practice first these cheats on me.
You by like Arts did fair Creusa gain,
And then forsook her with a like Disdain.
I Have wept to hear you tell that Ladies Fate,
My self now justly more unfortunate.
*It Is to Revenge these Crimes the Gods Engage,
And make you Wander out your wretched Age.
A Shipwrack'd wretch I kindly did receive,
My Wealth and Crown to hands unknown did give.
Had I stopped there, I had been free from shame,
And had not stained my clear and spotless Fame,
Heaven to betray my Honor did Comply,
When Thunder and black Clouds filled all the Sky,
And made us to the fatal shelter fly.
The Furies howled, and dire Presages gave,
And shrieking Nymphs forsook the guilty Cave.
I cannot live, that Crime torments me so,
Yet full of shame to my Sichaeus go.
In a fair Temple built by skilful hands,
A Sacred Image of Sichaeus stands;
With snowy Fleeces dressed, and Garlands Crowned,
From thence of late Iv'e heard a dismal sound!
Four times he called me with a hollow Voice,
My loosn'd Joints still tremble at the Noise!
My dearest Lord your Summons I obey,
It Is shame to meet you makes this short delay.
Yet such a Tempter might the Crime excuse,
His Heavenly Race, and all his Solemn Vows!
The best of Fathers, the most Pious Son!
Who could suspect he, who such things had done,
So well had Acted all the parts of Life,
Could have betrayed a Princess and a Wife?
Had he not wanted Faith, your self must own
He had Deserved to fill my Bed and Throne.
In my first Youth what Cares disturbed my Peace!
And my Misfortunes with my Years increase!
My Husbands Blood was by my Brother spilt,
And still his Wealth Rewards the prosperous Guilt:
Through ways unknown a dangerous flight I take,
His Ashes and my Native Soil forsake;
Here sheltred from my Brothers Cruelty,
I bought this Kingdom, which I gave to Thee.
My City did in Glory daily rise,
Which all my Neighbors saw with envious Eyes.
And Force against unfinished Walls prepare,
Threatening a helpless Woman with a War.
Those many Kings, who did my Bed desire,
Now to revenge their slighted Love conspire.
Go on, my People are at your Command,
Give me up bound to some fierce Rivals hand:
Assist my Cruel Brothers black Design,
Drunk with Sichaeus Blood, he thirsts for min^.
But then pretend to Piety no more,
The False, and Perjured, all the Gods abhor.
Even those you snatched from Troys devouring Flame,
Are grieved that from such hands their safety came.
A growing Infant in my Womb you leave,
Of your w^ole self, you cannot me bereave.
You kill not Dido only, if you go,
The Guiltless and unborn you Murder too.
With me a new unknown Ascanius dies,
Though deaf to mine, yet think you hear his Cries.
But it is the God Commands, and you Obey,
Ah! would that He who now forbids your stay,
Had never led your shattered Fleet this way!
And now this God Commands you out again
TO endure another Winter on the Main!
Scarce Troy restored to all her Ancient State,
Were worth the seeking at so dear a Rate.
Cease then through such vast Dangers to pursue
A Place, which, but in Dreams, you never knew.
In search of which, you your best years may wast,
And come a Stranger there, and Old at last.
See at your Feet a willing People lies,
And do not offered Wealth, and Power despise.
Fix here the Relics of unhappy Troy,
And in soft Peace, all you have saved, enjoy.
But if new Dangers your Great Soul Desires,
If Thirst of Fame your Sons young Breast inspires,
You Will frequent Trials here for Valor find,
Our Neighbors are as rough as we are kind.
By your dear Fathers Soul I beg your stay,
By the kind Gods who hither blessed your way,
And by your Brothers Darts, which all Obey.
So may white Conquest on your Troops attend,
And all your long Misfortunes here take end.
So with his Years may your Sons hopes increase,
So may A^chises Ashes rest in Peace.
Some Pity let a suppliant Princess move,
Whose only fault was an Excess of Love.
I am not sprung from any Grecian Race,
None of my Blood did your Loved Troy deface.
Yet if your Pride think such a Wife a shame,
I Will Sacrifice my Honor to my Flame,
And meet your Love by a less Glorious name.
I know the dangers of this stormy Coast,
How many Ships have on our Shelves been lost.
These winds have driven the floating Sea weed so,
That your entangled Vessel cannot go.
Do not attempt to put to Sea in vain,
Till happier Gales have cleared your way again.
Trust Me to watch the Calming of the Sea,
You shall not then, tho you desired it, stay.
Besides your weary Seamen rest desire,
And your torn Fleet now rigging does require.
By all I suffer, all I Have done for you,
Some little respite to my Love allow.
Time and calm Thoughts may teach me how to bear,
That loss, which now alas it is death to hear.
But you resolve to force me to my Grave,
And are not far from all that you would have.
Your Sword before me, whilst I write, does lie,
And, by it, if I write in vain, I die.
Already stained with many a falling Tear,
It shortly shall another Color wear.
You never could an apter present make,
'Twill soon, the Life you have made uneasy, take.
But this poor Breast has felt your Wounds before,
Slain by your Love, your Steel has now no Power.
Dear Guilty Sister, do not you deny
The last kind Office to my Memory;
But do not on my Funeral Marble Join
Much wronged Sichaeus Sacred Name with mine.
"Of false Aeneas let the Stone complain,
"That Dido could not bear his fierce Disdain,
"But by his Sword, and her own hand was slain.
BRISEIS to ACHILLES.
BY JOHN CARYL Esquire
The ARGUMENT.
In the War of Troy, Achilles having taken and Sacked Chrynesium, a Town in the
Lyrnesian Country, amongst his other Booty, he took two very fair Women,
Chryseis, and Briseis: Chryseis he Presented to King Agamemnon, and Briseis he
reserved for himself. Agamemnon after some time was forced by the Oracle to
restore Chryseis to her Father, who was one of the Priests of Apollo; whereupon
the King by violence took away Briseis from Achilles; at which Achilles
incenst, left the Camp of the Grecians, and prepared to Sail home; in whose
absence the Trojans prevailing upon the Grecians, Agamemnon was compelled to
send Ulysses, and others to offer him rich Presents, and Briseis: that he would
return again to the Army: But Achilles with disdain rejected them all. This
Letter therefore is written by Briseis, to move him, that he would receive her,
and return to the Grecian Camp.

CAptive Briseis in a aforaign Tongue
More by her blots, than words, set's forth her wrong
And yet these blots, which by my tears are made,
Above all words, or writing should persuade.
Subjects (I know) must not their Lords accuse;
Yet prayers and tears we lawfully may use.
When ravished from your Arms, I was the prey
Of Agamemnons arbitrary sway;
(...), you must at last have left the Field,
(...), you too soon did yield.
(...) Glory it must needs disgrace,
(...) Summons to yield up the place.
(...) Enemies themselves, no less than I,
^tood wondering at their easy Victory:
I saw their lips in whispers softly move,
Is this the Man so famed for Arms, and Love?
Alas! A^hilles, it is not so, we part
From what we love, and what is near our heart,
No healing kisses to my grief you gave;
You turned me off, an unregarded Slave.
Was it your Rage, that did your Love suppress?
Ah, love Briseis more, and hate A^rides less!
He is not born of a true Hero's Race,
Who lets his Fury of his Love take place:
Tigers, and Wolves can fight: Love is the Test,
Distinguishing the Hero from the Beast.
Alas! when I was from your bosom forced,
I felt my body from my soul divorced;
A deadly paleness overspread my face;
Sleep left my eyes, and to my tears gave place:
I tore my hair, and did my death decree:
Ah! learn to part with what you love, from me.
A bold escape I often did essay,
But Greeks, and Trojans too, blocked up the way:
Yet tho a tender Maid could not break throw,
Methinks, Achilles should not be so slow;
Achilles, once the Thunderbolt of War,
The hope of Conquering Greece, and Troy's despair,
Me in his Rivals Arms can he behold?
And is his Courage with his Love grown cold?
But I confess, that my neglected Charms
Did not deserve the Conquest of your Arms;
Therefore the Gods did by an easier way
Our wrongs atone, and Damages repay:
Ajax with Phoenix, and Ulysses bring
Humble submissions from their haughty King:
The Royal Penitent rich Presents sends,
The strongest Cement to piece broken Friends:
When Prayers well seconded with Gifts are sent,
Both Mortal, and Immortal Powers relent:
Twenty bright Vessels of Corinthian Brass,
Their Sculpture did the costly Mine surpass;
Seven Chairs of State of the same Art, and Mould,
And twice five Talents of persuasive Gold.
Twelve fiery Steeds of the Epirian breed,
Matchless they are for beauty, and for speed;
Six Lesbian Maids (but these I well could spare)
Their Island Sacked, these were the General's share;
And last a Bride, (ah! telle'm I am thine)
At your own choice out of the Royal Line:
With these they offer me: But, might I choose,
You should take me, and all their gifts refuse:
But me, and those you sullenly reject;
What have I done, to merit this neglect?
Is it that You, and Fortune jointly vow,
Whom you make wretched, still to keep them so?
Your Arms my Country did in ashes lay.
My House destroy, Brothers, and Husband slay:
It had been kindness to have killed me too,
Rather than kill me with unkindness now.
With Vows as faithless, as your Mother Sea,
You loudly promised, that you would to me,
Country, and Brothers, and a Husband be.
And is it thus, that you perform your Vow,
Even with a Dowry to reject me too?
Nay, Fame reports that with the next fair wind,
Leaving your Honor, Faith, and me behind,
You quit our Coasts: Before that fatal hour,
May Thunder strike me, or kind Earth devour!
I all things, but your absence, can endure!
That Is a disease, which Death must only cure.
If to Achaia you will needs return,
Leaving all Greece your sullen rage to mourn,
Place me but in the number of your train,
And I no servile Office will disdain:
If I Am denied the Honor of your Bed,
Let me at least be, as your Captive led:
Rather, than banished from your Family
I will endure another Wife to see;
A Wife, to make the great Aeacian Line,
Like Starry Heaven, as numerously shine;
That so your spreading Progeny may prove
Worthy of Thetis, and their Grandsire Jove.
Let me on her an humble Handmaid, wait;
On her, because to you she does relate.
I fear (I know not why) that she may be,
Than to her other Maids, more harsh to me:
But you are bound to guard your Conquered Slave,
And to maintain the Articles you gave:
Yet should you yield to her imperious sway,
Do what you will, but turn me not away.
But why should you depart? The King repents;
The Grecian Army wants you in their Tents:
You conquer all; Conquer your Passion too;
Or else with Hector, you will Greece undo.
Take Arms ( Aeacides) but first take me,
Your juster Rage let routed Trojans see.
For me begun, for me your anger end;
The fault I caused, let me have power to mend.
In this to me you may with Honor yield,
Ruled by his Wife, Oenides took the Field.
His Mothers Sacred Curses him disarmed;
But by his Wive's more powerful Spells uncharm'd,
His Armor once put off, he buckles on,
And fights and Conquers for his Calidon:
That happy Wife prevailed, why should not I?
But you that Title, and my Power deny:
Title and Power, and all ambitious strife.
Of being called your Mistress, or your Wife,
I quietly lay down; but I must have
This Claim allowed, to be your faithful Slave.
I by those dread, ill-cover'd Ashes swear,
(Alas their Tomb Lyrnesian Ruins are)
Of my dead Spouse, and by each Sacred Ghost
Of my three Brothers, honorably lost,
Who for, and with their Country bravely fell;
By all, that is awful both in Heaven, and Hell.
And last of all by thine own Head, and mine,
Whom Love, though parted now, did sometimes join,
That I preserve my Faith entire, and chaste;
That I no foraign love, or pleasure taste;
That no aspersion can my Honor touch;
O! that Achilles too could say as much!
Some think he mourns for me; But others say,
In Loves soft joys he melts his hours away;
That some new Mistress with Circean Charms
^as locked him up in her lascivious arms,
And so transformed from what he was before,
That he will fight for Greece or Me no more.
The Trumpet now to the soft Lute must yield,
To Midnight Revels, Marches in the Field.
He whom of late Greece, as her Mars, adored,
He, on whose Massy Spear, and glittering Sword
The Fates, and Death did wait, that mighty Man
Now weilds a Busk, and brandisheth a Fan.
Avert it Heaven! can he be only brave
To wast my Country, not his own to save?
And when his Arms my Family mowed down,
Lost he his sting, and so became a Drone?
Ah! cure these fears; and let me have the Pride,
To see your Javelin fixed in Hector's side.
O! that the Grecians would send me to try,
If I could make your stubborn heart comply:
Few words I Would use, all should be sighs, and tears,
And looks, and kisses, mixed with hopes, and fears:
My Love like lightning throw my Eyes should fly,
And thaw the Ice, which round your heart does lie:
Sometimes my Arms about your neck I Would throw;
And then embrace your knees, and humbly bow:
There is more Eloquence in tears, and kisses,
Than in the smooth Harangues of fly Ulysses:
That noisie Rhetoric of a twanging tongue,
Serves but to lug the heavy Crowd along:
But Souls with Souls speak only by the Eye,
And at those Windows one another spy:
Thus, then your Mother Sea rai^'d with the wind
More fierce, I would compose your stormy mind;
And my Love shining on my tears, that flow,
Should make a Rainbow, and fair weather show.
So dreams my Love. Ah! come, that I may try,
If I can turn my Dream to Prophecy:
So may your Pyrrbus live to equalize
His Grandsire's years, his Fathers Victories.
Let me no longer pined in absence lie;
Rather than live without you, let me d^e:
My heart's already cold, and Death does spread
His livid paleness over my lively red.
My life hangs only on the slender hope,
That your reviving Love your rage will stop.
If that should fail, let me not linger on,
But let that Sword (to mine ah! too well known)
Me to my Brothers, and my Husband send;
Your hand began, your hand the work must end.
But why such Cruelty? come then, and save
Afflicted Greece, and me your humble Slave.
How much more decently might you employ
Your ill-spent Rage against Neptunian Troy!
Then furl your Sails, once more your Anchors cast;
Leave not your Country, nor your Honor blast.
But go, or stay; with you I ought to move,
Made yours by Right of War, and Right of Love.
DEIANIRA TO HERCULES.
The ARGUMENT.
Deianira having heard that Hercules was fallen in Love with Iole a Captive;
and at the same time that he was dying by a poisoned Shirt she had presented
him with, and had been told would recover a lost affection: betwixt disdain and
anger for the first, and grief and despair for the latter, she writes the
following Lines to her Husband.

I Am pleased with the success your Valor gave*
But grieve the Victor is his Captives slave.
This unexpected News soon flew to me,
And with your former Life does ill agree*
Continual Action, nor yet Juno's Hate,
Never hurt whom Iole does Captivate*
Eurystheus this, this did Jove's Wife design,
Laugh at your weakness, and these tears of mine;
But Jupiter hoped better things, when he
To make this Hero, made one night of three.
Venus has hurt you more by her soft Charms,
Than angry Juno that Employs your Arms;
She by depressing you, raised you the more,
The other treads on you, whom you adore.
You'vefreed the World from troublers of mankind,
All things submit to your Heroic mind:
You make the Seas secure, the Earth have rest,
Your mighty Name fills both the East and West.
Heaven, that must bear you, You did bear before*
When weary Atlas did your aid Implore.
Yet for all this, the greater is your shame,
If with mean Acts you stain your Glorious Name.
You killed two Serpents with your Infant hand,
Which then deserved Jove's Scepterto Command.
Your last deeds differ from your first success,
The Infant makes the Man appear the less.
No Savage Beasts, nor feircer Enemies,
Could Conquer him, whom Love does now surprise.
Some think my Marriage a great Happiness,
Being Jove's Daughter, Wife of Hercules;
But as Extremes do very ill agree,
The Greatness of my Husband lessens me:
This seeming Honor gives a mortal wound:
Amongst our Equals Happiness is found:
At home in quiet they their Lives enjoy;
Tumults, and Wars, do all his hours employ:
This Absence makes me so unfortunate,
I buy your Glory at too dear a rate.
I weary Heaven with Vows and Sacrifice,
Least you should fall by Beasts, or Enemies.
When you assault a Lion, or Wild Boar,
You hazard much, but I still hazard more.
Srange Dreams and Visions set before mine Eyes,
The dangers that attend your Victories.
Unhappy I to vain Reports give Ear,
Then vainly hope, and then as vainly fear.
Your absent Mother blushes she pleased Jove,
Amphitryos absent, and the Son you love.
I see Erystheus has contrived your Fate,
And will make use of Juno's restless hat^.
This I could bear, did you love none but me,
But you are Amorous of all you see.
Yet Omph^le does now enrage me more,
Than all the Beauties you admired before.
Meanders Streams have seen those shoulders wear
Rich Chains, that Heaven as a small weight did bear.
But were you not ashamed to b^hold
Those Arms weighed down with Jewels, and with Gold,
That made the firce Nemean Lion die,
And wore his Skin to show the Victory?
When like a Woman you did dress your hair,
Laurel had been for you a fitter wear.
As Wanton Maids, you thought it was no shame
To wear a Sash to please your haughty Dame.
Fierce D^omedes was not in your mind,
That fed his bloody Horses with mankind:
Did but Busiris see this strange disguise,
The conquered would the Conqueror despise.
Anteus would retreive his Captive State,
And scorn a Victor so Effeminate.
Among the Grecian Virgins you sit down,
And spin, and tremble at a Woman's ^rown;
A Distaffe, not a Scepter fills that Hand,
That Conquered all things, and did all Command.
Then in her presence you do trembling stand,
And fear a blow as death, from her fair hand:
And to regai^ her Favor you reveal
Those glorioous Actions you should then conceal.
How you that strange and fruitful Serpent slew,
That by his wounds more fierce and stronger grew.
How when you fought, you never lost the field,
But made great Kings and cruel Monsters yield.
And can you boast or think of things so great,
Now you wear Silks, and are with Jewels set?
These Actions and that Garb do disagree,
So soft a dress does give your tongue the lie.
Your Mistress too puts on your Conquering Arms,
And makes you stoop to her more powerful Charms.
She wears your Robes to show her Victory,
And is, what you once thought your self to be.
Your glorious Conquest, and Illustrious Fame,
Give her Renown, but you Eternal Shame.
All is to her, by whom you are conquered, due;
Go now and brag of what remains to you.
Is It not a shame, that her soft Arms should bear
The Lions rugged Skin you once did wear?
These Spoils are not the Lions but your own,
The Beast you Conquered, you she Overcome.
She takes your Club up in her feeble hand,
And in her Glass she learns how to Command.
All this I heard: yet I could not believe
The sad report, which causes me to griev^
Your Iole is brought before my face,
I must be Witness of my own disgrace.
Whilst I reflect on my unhappy Fate,
She makes her Entry in the Town in State.
Not as a Captive with her hair unbound,
Nor her dejected Eyes ^ixt on the Ground;
But covered over with Jewels, and with Gold,
As Phrygia once did Hercules behold;
And salutes all with as much Majesty,
As if her Father had the Victory.
Perhaps to leave me is designed by you,
True to your Mistress, to your Wife untrue.
You Will be Divorc't from me, and Marry her,
The Conquered must obey the Conqueror.
This fear torments me more than all the rest,
And as a Dagger, wounds my troubled Breast.
^ kn^w the time when you did love me more,
Than any she whom you do now adore.
But oh! as I am writing, the news flies,
That by a poisoned Shirt my Husband dies.
What have I done, whither has Love drove me?
Is Love the Author of such cruelty?
Shall my dear Hercules endure this pain,
And I, the unhappy Cause, alive remain?
My Title to him, by my Death I Will prove,
And surely Death's an Argument of Love.
Meleager will a Sister find in me:
Shall Deianira be afraid to die?
Unhappy House! Usurpers fill the Throne,
Whilst the true Sovereign is esteemed by none.
One Brother wastes his Life in foreign Lands,
The other perished by his Mothers hands,
Who on her self revenged the Crime: Then why
Should Deianira be afraid to die?
Only this thing I beg with my last breath,
Not to believe that I designed your death.
As soon as you struck Nessus with your Dart,
His blood, he said, would Charm a straying heart.
In it I dipped the Shirt, 'twas but to try:
O Deianira make, make have to die*
Adieu my Father, Sister too adieu!
Adieu my Country, and my Brother too!
Farewell this light, the last that I shall see,
Hyllus farewell, my Dear I come to Thee.
ACONTIUS TO CYDIPPE.
BY Mr. R. DVKE.
The ARGUMENT.
Acontius in the Temple of Diana at Delos, (famous for there sort of the most
Beautiful Virgins of all Greece) fell in Love with Cydippe, a Lady of Quality
much above his own; not daring therefore to Court her openly, he found this
device to obtain her: He writes upon the fairest Apple that could be procured,
a couple of Verses to this effect, I swear by chaste Diana, I will be
In Sacred Wedlock ever Joined to Thee.
and throws it at the feet of the young Lady. She suspecting not the deceit
takes it up, and reads it, and therein promises her self in Marriage to
Acontius; there being a Law there in force, that whatever any person should
swear in the Temple of Diana of Delos, should stand good and be inviolably
observed. But her Father not knowing what had past, and having not long after
promised her to another, just as the Solemnities of Marriage were to be
performed, she was taken with a sudden and violent Feavour, which Acontius
endeavors to persuade her was sent from Diana, as a punishment of the breach
of the Vow made in her presence. And this, with the rest of the Arguments which
on such an occasion would occur to a Lover, is the Subject of the following
Epistle.

REad boldly this; here you shall Swear no more,
For that is enough which you have Sworn before.
Read it; so may that violent Disease,
Which thy dear body, but my soul does seize,
Forget its too long practiced Cruelty,
And health to you restore, and you to me.
Why do you blush? for blush you do, I fear,
As when you first did in the Temple Swear:
Truth to your plighted Faith is all I claim;
And truth can never be the cause of shame.
Shame lives with guilt, but you your virtue prove
In favoring mine, for mine is a Husbands love.
Ah! to your self those binding words repeat
That once your wishing Eyes ev'nlong'd to meet,
When The Apple brought 'em dancing to your feet.
There you will find the Solemn Vow you made,
Which, if your health, or mine can ought persuade,
You to perform should rather mindful be,
Than great Diana to rev^^ge on Thee.
My fears for you increase with my desire,
And Hope blows that already raging fire;
For hope you gave; nor can you this deny,
For the great Goddess of the Fane was by;
She was, and heard, and from her hallowed Shrine
A sudden kind Auspicious light did shine.
Her Statue seemed to nod its awful head,
And give its glad consent to what you said;
Now, if you please, accuse my prosperous cheat,
Yet still confess 'twas Love that taught me it.
In that deceit what did I else design,
But with your own consent to make you mine?
What you my Crime, I call my Innocence,
Since Loving you has been my sole offense.
Nor nature gave me, nor has practice taught
The Nets with which young Virgins hearts are caught.
You my accuser taught me to deceive,
And Love, with you, did his assistance give;
For Love stood by, and smiling bad me write
The cunning words he did himself indite:
Again, you see I write by his Command,
He guides my Pen, and rules my willing hand,
Again such kind, such loving words I send,
As makes me fear that I again offend.
Yet if my Love's my Crime, I must confess,
Great is my Guilt, but never shall be less.
Oh that I thus might ever guilty prove,
In finding out new paths to reach thy Love.
A thousand ways to that steep Mountain lead,
Tho hard to find, and difficult to tread.
All these will I find out and break through all,
For with my Flames compared, the danger's small.
The Gods alone know what the end will be,
Yet if we Mortals any thing foresee,
One way or other you must yield to me.
If all my Arts should fail, to Arms I Will fly,
And snatch by force what you my Prayers deny:
I all those Heroes mighty Acts applaud,
Who first have led me this Illustrious Road*
I too^ but hold, death the reward will be,
Death be it then --
For to loose you is more than death to me.
Were you less fair, I Would use the vulgar way
Of tedious Courtship, and of dull delay.
But thy bright form kindles more eager fires,
And something wondrous, as it self, Inspires;
Those Eyes that all the Heavenly lights outshine,
(Which Oh! may thou behold, and love in mine)
Those snowy Arms, which on my neck should fall,
If you the Vows you made, regard at all,
That modest sweetness, and becoming Grace,
That paints with living red your blushing face,
Those feet with which they only can compare,
That through the Silver flood bright Thetis bear:
Do all conspire my madness to excite,
With all the rest that is denied to ^ight.
Which could I praise, alike I then were blessed,
And all the storms of my vexed soul at rest.
No wonder then if with such Beauty fired,
I of your Love the Sacred pledge desired.
Rage now and be as angry as you will,
Your very frowns all other smiles excel;
But give me leave that anger to appease,
By my submission, that my Love did raise.
Your pardon prostrate at your feet I Will crave,
The humble posture of your guilty Slave.
With falling tears your fiery rage I Will cool,
And lay the rising tempest of your soul.
Why in my absence are you thu^ severe?
Summoned at your Tribunal to appear,
For all my Crimes, I Would gladly suffer there,
With pride whatever you inflict receive,
And love the wounds those hands vouchsafe to give.
Your Fetters too -- But they alas are vain,
For Love has bound me, and I hug my Chain.
Your hardest Laws with patience I Will obey,
Till you your self at last relent and say,
When all my sufferings you with pity see,
He that can love so well, is worthy me.
But if all this should unsuccessful prove,
Diana claims for me your promised love.
O may my fears be false! yet she delights
In just revenge of her abused Rites,
I Dread to hide, what yet to speak I dread,
Least you should think that for my self I plead.
Yet out it must, -- it is this, It Is surely this,
That is the fuel to your hot disease:
When waiting Hymen at your Porch attends,
Her fatal Messenger the Goddess sends.
And when you would to his kind call consent,
This Feavour does your perjury prevent.
Forbear, forbear thus to provoke her rage,
Which you so easily may yet aswage.
Forbear to make that lovely charming face
The prey to every envious disease:
Preserve those looks to be enjoyed by me,
Which none should ever but with wonder see:
Let that fresh color to your cheeks return,
Whose glowing flame did all beholders burn.
But let on him, the unhappy cause of all
The ills that from Diana's anger fall,
No greater torments light than those I feel,
When you my dearest, tendrest part are ill.
For oh! with what dire Tortures am I wrackt,
Whom different griefs successively distract!
Sometimes my grief from this does higher grow,
To think that I have caused so much to you.
Then, great Diana's witness, how I pray,
That all our Crimes on me alone she would lay!
Sometimes to your loved doors disguised I come,
And all around 'em up and down I roam.
Till I your Woman coming from you spy,
With looks dejected, and a weeping eye.
With silent steps, like some sad Ghost I steal
Close up to her, and urge her to reveal
More than new questions suffer her to tell:
How you had slept, what diet you had used?
And often the vain Phisicians art accused.
He every hour (Oh, were I blessed as he!)
Does all the turns of your Distemper see;
Why sit not I by your Bed side all day,
My mournful head in your warm bosom lay,
Till with my tears the inward fires decay?
Why press not I your melting hand in mine,
And from your pulse of my own health divine?
But oh! these wishes all are vain; and He
Whom most I fear, may now sit close by Thee,
Forgetful as thou art of Heaven and me.
He that loved hand does press, and often does feign
Some new excuse to seel thy beating vein.
Then his bold hand up to your arm does slide,
And in your panting Breast it self does hide;
Kisses sometimes he snatches too from Thee,
For his officious care too great a Fee.
Robber, who gave Thee leave to taste that lip,
And the ripe harvest of my kisses reap?
For they are mine, so is that bosom too,
Which false as it is, shall never harbor You.
Take, take away those thy Adulterous hands,
^ or know another Lord that breast Commands.
It Is true, Her Father promised her to Thee,
But Heaven and she first gave her self to me.
And you in Justice therefore should decline
Your claim to that which is already mine.
This is the man, Cydippe, that excites
Dianas rage, to vindicate her Rites.
Command him then not to approach thy door,
This done, the danger of your death is over.
For fear not, Beauteous Maid, but keep thy Vow,
Which great Diana heard, and did allow.
And she who took it, will thy health restore,
And be propitious as she was before.
" It Is not the steam of a slain Heifers blood,
" Than can allay the anger of a God.
" It Is truth, and Justice to our Vows, appease
" Their angry Deities, and without these,
" No ^laughter'd Breast their fury can divert;
" For that is a Sacrifice without a Heart.
Some, bitter Potions patiently endure,
And kiss the wounding Lance that works their cure;
You have no need these cruel cures to feel,
Shun being perjured only, and be well.
Why let you still your pious Parents weep,
Whom you in ignorance of your promise keep?
Oh! to your Mother all our Story tell,
And the whole progress of our Love reveal:
Tell Her how first at great Dianas Shrine,
I fixed my eyes, my wondering eyes on thine.
How like the Statues there, I stood amazed,
Whilst on thy face intemp'rately I gazed.
She will her self when you my tale repeat,
Smile, and approve the Amorous deceit.
Marry, she will say, whom Heaven commends to thee,
He who has pleased Diana, pleases me.
But should she ask from what descent I came,
My Country, and my Parents, and my name,
Tell her that none of these deserve my shame.
Had you not sworn, you such a one might choose;
But were he worse, now sworn, you cannot refuse.
This in my dreams Diana Bad me write,
And when I waked, sent Cupid to indite:
Obey 'em both, for one has wounded me,
Which wound if you with eyes of pity see,
She too will soon relent that wounded Thee.
Then to our joys with eager have we'll move,
As full of Beauty you, as I of Love.
To the great Temple we'll in Triumph go,
And with our Offerings at the Altar Bow.
A Golden Image there I Will Consecrate,
Of the false Apples innocent deceit;
And write below the happy Verse that came,
The Messenger of my successful flame;
"Let all the World this from Acontius know,
"Cydippe has been faithful to her Vow.
More I could write, but since thy illness reigns,
And wracks thy tender limbs with sharpest pains,
My Pen falls down for fear, lest this might be
Although for me too little, yet too much for Thee.
CYDIPPE Her ANSWER To ACONTIUS.
By Mr. BVTLER.
IN silent Fear I read your Letter ore;
Least I should Swear as I had done before!
Nor had I read, but that I feared t'engage
By my neglect the pevish Goddess Rage:
In vain I deck her Shrine, her Rites attend,
The partial Goddess still remains your Friend.
A Virgin rather should a Virgin Aid,
But where I seek Relief I am betrayed!
I languish, and the Cause of my Disease
As yet lies hid, no Medicine gives me Ease.
In how much pain do I this Letter write!
To my weak Hand my sicklier Thoughts indite:
What anxious fear alas afflicts me too,
Least any but my trusty Nurse should know!
To gain me time to write, the door she keeps,
And whispering tells the Visitants, She Sleeps.
Worse Ills I could not for your sake sustain,
Tho you had merit equal to my Pain.
Your Love betrays, my Beauty proves my Snare,
I had been happy had I seemed less Fair:
Whilst with your Rival you contend to raise
My Beauty's Fame, I perish by your Praise:
Whilst neither will admit the others Claim,
The Chase is hindered, and both miss the Game.
My Nuptial day draws on, my Parents press
The Sacred Rights, my blooming years no less.
But whilst glad Hymen at my door attends,
Grim Death waits near to force me from his Hands.
Some call my Sickness Chance, and some pretend
The Gods this Let to cross my Nuptials send;
Whilst by severer Censure you are ghest,
By Philtra's, to have wrought upon my Breast.
If then your love such mischief can create,
What Misery is reserved for her you Hate!
Would I to Delos nere had found the way,
At least not found it on that fatal Day!
When in our Port our Anchors first we weighed,
The unwilling Vessel still in the Harbor staid;
Twice did cross winds beat back our flagging Sails,
Said I, cross winds? no! those were prosperous Gales!
Those winds alone blew fair, that back conveyed
Our Ship, and those that often our Passage stayed.
Yet I to see sam'd Delos am in pain,
And fondly of each hindering blast complain.
By Tenos Isle, and Mycone we Steered,
At last fair Delos winding Clifts appeared;
And much I fear left now the Fairy Shore,
Should vanish, as it is said to have done before.
At night we Land, soon as the day returned
My platted Tresses are with Gemms adorned.
Then to attend the Sacred Rites we go,
And pious Incense on each Altar throw,
My Parents there at their Devotion stay;
My Nurse and I through all the Temple stray:
We view each Court, and each, fresh wonder brings;
Pictures, and Statues, Gifts of Ancient Kings.
But whilst into these Rarities I pried,
I am my self by ^ly Acontius spied.
Thence to the inmost Temple we remove,
The place that should a Sanctuary prove.
Yet there I find the Apple with this Rhyme --
Ah! me, I Would like to have Sworn the second time!
The Name of Wedlock I no sooner read,
But through my Cheeks a troubled blush was spread.
Why did Thou Cheat an unsuspecting Maid?
I should have been entreated, not betrayed:
Is then the Goddess bound to take thy part?
And ratify an Oath without the Heart?
The Will Consents, but that was Absent There;
I read indeed the Oath, but did not Swear.
Yet cannot I deny that I suspect
Dianas Rage this Sickness does inflict;
Glad Hymen thrice did to our Courts repair,
Thrice frighted fled to find Death planted there.
Thin Cov'rings on my Feverish Limbs are spread,
My Parents mourn me as already Dead.
What have I done to merit this distress,
That read but words whose fraud I could not ghess!
Do Thou, even Thou from whom my sufferings spring,
To Appease the Goddess Rage thine Offerings bring.
When will those Hands that writ the fatal Rhyme,
Bear Incense to remove my Pain, thy Crime!
Nor think that thy rich Rival though allowed
To Visit, is of greater Favors proud.
By me he sits, but still just distance keeps,
Restless as I, Talks seldom, often weeps:
Blushing he takes a Kiss, and leaves a Tear,
And once his Courage served to Cry -- My Dear.
But from his Arms still by Degrees I creep,
And to prevent Discourse pretend to sleep.
He finds, but would his sense o'th flight disguise,
He checks his Tongue, butchides me with his Eyes.
With grief he wastes, and I with Feavours pine,
It Is we that suffer, but the Offense was Thine.
You write for leave to come and see me Here,
Yet know your former Visit cost me Dear.
Why would thou hither come, thou can but see
The double Trophies of thy Cruelty.
My flesh consumed, my Cheeks of bloodless Hue,
Such as I once did in thy Apple view,
Should see me now thou would repent thy cheat,
Nor think me worth such exquisite Deceit.
To Delos back with greater have would go,
And beg the Goddess to release my Vow,
On new designs thy fancy would employ,
Contrive new Oaths the former to destroy.
No Means have been omitted to procure
My health, but still my Feav'rish Fits endure.
We asked the Oracle what caused my Pains?
The Oracle of broken Vows complains!
The Gods themselves on your behalf declare:
What have thou done to merit this their Care?
But so it is -- and I at last incline,
Since that Thou art their Choice, to make Thee Mine.
Already to my Mother I Have declared,
How by your Cunning I have been ensnared.
I Have done, and what I have already said,
I fear is more than will become a Maid.
My Thoughts are now confused, and can indite
No more, my feeble hand no more can write.
Nor need I more subscribe, but this, Be True!
And (since it must be so) my Dear Adieu.
FINIS.

