OVIDS HEROICAL Epistles. Englished by W. S. Veniam pro laud peto -- nun^
^itibus Mutarae quaero Tristi^ The ^th. Edytion:


London printed for W: Gilbertson, at the Bible in Gilt-spurstr^^ 6.6^.

OVID'S HEROICAL Epistles. Englished by W.S.

Veniam pro laud peto,
-- nunc mitibus
Mutare Quaero Tristia.
LONDON, Printed for William Gilbertson, at the sign of the Bible without
Newgate in Giltspur-street, 1663.

TO THE VIRTUOUS LADIES, AND GENTLEWOMEN OF ENGLAND.
YOur beauties (Ladies and Gentlewomen) are but types and shadows of the beauty
of your virtuous mind, which is discerned by Noble and Courteous actions. I
may therefore presume that Ovid's Heroical Epistles, chiefly translated for
your sakes, shall find a gentle acceptance, suitable to your Heroical
dispositions, for Courtesy and Ingenuity are the companions of Gentility. But
those who claim this Title, and are degraded of it by their own vicious
qualities, Ovid disclaims them. Virtue is an invisible gift, which is not
discerned by the outward habit, but by speech and action, and a certain
delectation in virtue, as Modesty, Temperance, and especially courtesy; to
which Ovid does appeal. For when Rome knew him famous, he was esteemed of Love
and Ladies, so that he was fain to shadow the ambitious love of the Emperors
daughter toward him under the vail of Corynna, but the Emperor saw through
it, and banished him. Besides, these Epistles, in regard of their subject, have
just relation to you, Ladies and Gentlewomen, being the complaint of Ladies and
Gentlewomen for the absence of their Lovers; And that their sorrow may be more
sensible, there is a Table prefixed, and adjoining to the book, presenting the
several Pictures of the Arguments of the Epistles. So much concerning the work,
and the Author Ovid, now you expect a complement for the Dedication.

Ladies and Gentlewomen, since this book of Ovid's which most Gentlemen could
read before in Latin, is for your sakes come forth in English, it does at first
address it self a Suitor, to woo your acceptance, that it may kiss your hands,
and afterward have the lines thereof in reading sweetened by the odor of your
breath, while the dead letters formed into words by your divided lips, may
receive new life by your passionate expression, and the words married in that
Ruby-coloured Temple, may thus happily united, multiply your contentment. And
in a word let this be.

A Servant with you to the Lady Virtue. Wye Saltonstall.

TO THE VIRTUOUS LADIES, AND GENTLEWOMEN OF GREAT BRITAIN.
OF all the Poets, that in verse did reign
As Monarchs, none could equal Ovid's strain,
Especially in the affairs of Love,
Ovid the Master of that Art did prove:
His fancies were so pleasing and so sweet,
That Love did wish no other winding sheet,
If he had mortal been, for he would die
To live again in his sweet Poesy.
When he intended to inflame the mind,
Or show how Lovers proved too unkind,
As in these Epistles, where Ladies bemoan
Themselves, when their unkind lovers were gone;
He does so mournfully express their passion,
In such a loving, and a lively fashion,
That reading them grief will not let you speak,
Until imprisoned tears from your eyes break;
Such passions in his Letters do appear,
That every word will make you drop a tear.
But you fair Gentlewomen of this Isle,
He would have you to glance one gentle smile
On his Epistles, styled Heroical,
Because by Lords and Ladies written all.
You know that Love is the Hearts pleasant tamer,
Whose motto is this, Omnia vincit Amor;
For he can with his lighted Torch inflame
As Soon the Lord and Lady, as the Swain.
If then you hope to be happy in Love,
If other sorrows may your pity move,
If you the complaints of fair Ladies tender,
Which English does for your contentment render
Unto your view, let these Epistles here,
Enjoy your beauteous favor, shining clear
On Ovid, beloved by the Emperors daughter,
For which by Caesar he was banished after;
Yet this his comfort was in Banishment,
His Love, and Lines, did yield your sex content.
Let English Gentlewomen as kind appear
To Ovid, as the Roman Ladies were.
So wishes, Wye Saltonstall.

THE INDEX.
A
ABydos a City in Asia, Ep. 17. Achelou^; a river of Etolia, 9. Achilles son of
Peleus and Thetis, Ep. 3. Acontius, signifies an Arrow, Ep. 19, 20. Acteon
beheld Diana bathing her self, and was transformed into a Stag, Ep. 20. Aetna,
a burning Mountain, Ep. 21. Adonis the son of Cinyras, Ep 4. Aegypt^s brother
to Belus, Ep. 14. Aeneas son to Anchises and Venus, Ep. 7. Aeolus King of the
winds, E. 10 Aeth^a, Ep. 16. Agamemnon Prince of the Grecians, Ep. 3. Ajax, Ep.
3. Alcions, Sea Birds, Ep. 17. Alecto, one of the Furies, Ep. 3. Androgeus,
Minos son, Ep. 10. Andromache, Hectors wife, E. 5. Antilochus, Ep. 1. Apollo
god of Poetry, Physi^k, and Music, Ep. 5, 6. Ariad^e Ep. 10. Ariadnes Crown, a
Constellation, Ep. 17. Ascanius son to Aeneas, Ep. 7. Athens a famous
University, Ep. 2. Atias, a Mountain, Ep. 10. Atreus son to Pelops, Ep 10.
Aurora, or the morning, Ep. 4.
B
BRiseis a captive Virgin taken by Achilles, Ep. 3.
C
CAcus a Giant, Ep. 9. Canace Sister to Macareus, Ep. 11. Carthage, a City of
Lybia. E. 7. Cassandra, a Prophetess who foretold the destruction of Troy, Ep.
15. Cephalus signifies the head, E. 4. Cerberus, Porter of hell, Ep. 9, 10.
Ceres, Goddess of corn and Plenty, Ep. 2. Cary^dis, a rocky gulf, Ep. 12.
Colchos, where the Golden Fleece was kept, Ep. 6. Corinth, a City Ep. 12.
Clymene, waiting maid to Helena, Ep. 16. Crete, an Island, Ep. 16. Cynthia, or
the Moon, Ep. 17.
D
DEdalus who made himself and his son Icarus wings to fly withal, Ep. 17.
Daphne turned into a Lawrell-tree, Epist. 21. Deianira, Daughter to Oenus King
of Caledon, Ep. 9. Deiphobus, or fearing the gods, Epist. 5. Delos an Island,
it signifies manifest or clear, from (...) or (...). Deucalion, who with his
Wife Pyrrha survived after the general Deluge, Ep. 2. Demophoon, signifies a
light to the people by his exemplary Virtues, Ep. 2. Diana, called Lucina, Ep.
19. Dido, signifies to fear, Ep. 7. Dolon, Ep. 1.
E
ELisa, or Dido, Epist. 7. Elysian, Elysium was a feigned place of joy for the
dead, E. 3. Endymion was beloved of the Moon, Ep. 17. Eurystheus King of the
Mycemans, Ep. 9. Erynnis, a Fury. Europa, signifies fair faced, from whom the
chiefest part of the world is called Europa, Ep. 4.
H
HEmeus, a Mountain of Thrace, Ep. 2. Hector, the valiantest of all the
Trojans, Ep. 1. Helena, wife to Menelaus, Ep. 5. Helespont, or the Sea wherein
Hell was drowned, Ep. 8, 7. Hercules begot by Jupiter in three nights on
Alcmena in the shape of Amphytrio, Ep. 9. Hermione, Epist. 8. Hydra, a monster
whose fruitful heads would grow as they were lopped off, Ep. 9. Hero, or a
Noble Heroical Lady, Ep. 17. Hymen, the god of marriage, Ep. 2. Hypermnestra,
Wife to Linus, Ep. 14. Hyppolitus was torn in pieces by his horses, Ep. 7.
Hypsiphile Queen of Lemnos, Ep. 6.
I
JAson son to Eson, Ep. 6. Icareus Penelopes father, Icarus 17. Idean, or
Trojan, Ep. 9. Iole Hercules's Mistress, Ep. 9. Is^hmus, a neck of Land joining
two Continents together, having the Sea beating on both sides, Ep. 4. Juno,
Jupiters Queen, Ep. 5.
L
LAcedaemon, a City in Greece Ep. 15. Laertes, Ep. 1. Laodamia, Ep. 13. Leander
signifies a Lion-hearted man, Ep. 17. Linus, husband to Hyperranestra, Ep. 14.
Lucina, the goddess of Childbirth, Ep. 5.
M
MAcareus brother to Canace, Ep. 11. Meander, a crooked winding River, Ep. 7.
Medea, a sorceress beloved by Jason, Ep. 12. Menelaus signifies the envy or
scorn of the people, he was Helenas husband, Ep. 5. Minotaure, a monster which
by Daedalus Art Pasiphae had by a Bull, while Minos was at the Athenian wars,
hence it was called a Minotauru, Ep. 10.
N
NEctar, the drink of the Gods, Ep. 15. Neptune, the god of the Sea, Ep. 2.
Nereides, Sea Nymphs, Ep. 5. Nestor lived three ages, Ep. 1. Nylus, a River of
Egypt, Ep. 14.
O
OEchalia, a City, Ep. 9. Oenone, a Nymph, Ep. 5. Orestes son to Agamemnon, and
Clytemaestra, Ep. 8. Orubya, beloved of Boreas, Ep. 17.
P
PAllas, the goddess of wisdom, Ep. 4. Paris, son to Priam, and Hecuba, Ep.
5.15. Pernassus, the Muses mountain, Ep. 19. Pasiphae, a lustful wanton woman,
Ep. 4. Pa^roclus, signifies the honor of his Father, he was son to Menaetius,
and having put on Achilles Armor, was slain in fight by Hector, E. 3.
Penelope, Ulysses wife, Ep. 1. Pirithous, a faithful friend to These^s, Ep. 4.
Phaedra, sister to Ariadne, daughter to Minos, Ep. 4. Phyllis, from (...)
leaves, or from Phylla, signifying in Greek an Almond tree, E. 2. Phaon, a fair
young man, E. 21. Pyrrha Deucalions wife, Ep. 21. Polyphemus, Ep. 1. Sab a
Giant Pygmalion brother to Dido, Ep. 7. Protesilaus, signifies the chief among
the people; he landing first on the Trojans ground, was slain by Hector, Ep.
10. Pylos, a City in Messenia where Neleus Nestors Father reigned, Ep. 1.
Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, Ep. 3.8.
R
RHodope, a Mountain of Thrace, Ep. 2.
S
SAppho, a wanton witty woman, Ep. 27. Scylla, a rocky gulf, Ep. 12. Sestos, a
City in Europe, Ep. 17. Simoeis, a Trojan River, Ep. 1.7. Sparta a City of
Greece, E. 15. Sych^us, Hercules Priest, and Dido's husband, Ep. 7.
T
TAntalus, who stood in Hell to the chin in water, yet could not drink, Ep. 15.
Telemachus, Ulysses son. Ep. 1. Theseus, son of AEgeus, Ep. 2. Thetis, Queen of
the Sea, E. 19. Tisiphone, one of the Furies, Ep. 2. Tlepolemus, Ep. 1. Tybris,
a River of Italy* Tyresias, a Prophet, who told Juno that feminine pleasure
exceeded masculine in acts of Venus, Ep. 1. Sab.
V
Ulysses, a valiant Grecian, Ep. 17.
Z
ZOne, or girdle, because the brides girdle was untied by the bridegroom, on
her wedding night, Ep. 2.
Carmen instar mill
blande laudantium
In laudem Authoris carmen non desit Amici:
Hoc opus Anthorem laudat, hic Author opus.
This Author needs not owe any friend
For Verses in his praise:
The Author does his work commend,
And his work gives him Bays.
OVID'S EPISTLES. LIB. I.

The Argument of the first Epistle.
WHen the Grecians went with a great Army to Troy, to revenge the rape of
Helena. Ulysses the son of L^^rtes and Anticlea, took such delight in his young
wife Penelope, that he counterfeited himself mad, thereby ^o enjoy her, and
absent himself from the wars. But Palamedes discovering his purpose, he was
compelled to go with the rest in the Trojan vo^age. Where he ^ought many brave
combats, and after the destruction of Troy, which had been ten years besieged,
intending to return to his own Country, he took ship with other Grecian
Princes, but through Minerva's displeasure, they were scattered and divided by
such a violent tempest, that Ulysses wandered ten years more before he returned.
So that his wife Penelope, having lived chastely in his absence, and not knowing
what hindered his coming home, writes this Epistle unto him, wherein she
persuades him by many reasons to return to his own Country.

PENELOPE to ULYSSES.
MY dear Ulysses, thy Penelope
Does send this Letter to complain of thee,
Who do so long from me unkindly stay:
Write nothing back, but come thy self away.
For Troy now level with the ground is laid,
Which was envied by every Grecian maid;
Yet neither Troy, nor Priams wealth could be
^orth half so much, as thy good company.
O! I could wish that Paris had been drowned,
When his ship was to Lacedemon bound.
Then had not I lain cold in bed alone,
Nor yet complained that time runs slowly on;
Nor yet to pass away the winters night
Had I sat spinning then by candle light,
Fore-casting in what dangers thou might be,
And such as were not like to trouble thee,
Thinking on perils more than ever were,
For love is always full of careful fear.
The Trojans now, thought I, do thee assail.
At Hectors name my cheeks with fear grew pale:
And when I heard Antilochus was slam,
By Hector then my fears renewed again.
And hearing how that Patroclus clad
In Achilles armor, such ill fortune had,
That Hector slew him in that false disguise,
The sad report drew tears out of mine eyes.
Or when I of ^Ilepolem^s did hear,
Who with his blood bedewed Sarpedons spear,
Tlepolemus death does then my cares renew,
And I began straight way to think of you.
And lastly, if I heard abroad by fame,
That any of the Grecian side were slain,
My heart for fear of thee was far more cold
Than any Ice, when such bad news was told.
But the just Gods to us more kind do prove,
And more indulgent to our chaster love.
For stately Troy is unto ashes burned;
But my Ulysses lives, though not returned,
The Grecian Captains are come home again,
The Altars do with joyful ncense flame;
And all the Barbarous spoils which they did take,
Unto our Country gods they consecrate.
The love of wives is to their husbands shown
By gifts, which for their safe returning home,
Unto the Gods with grateful minds they b^^ng,
While their husbands songs of Troy's destruct^on sing,
Old men, and trembling maids do both desire,
To hear the tale of Troy, which they admire,
And wives do hearken with a kind of joy
To their husbands talking of the siege of Troy.
And some now do upon their table draw,
The picture of those fierce wars which they saw:
And with a little wine before poured down,
Can lively paint the model of Troy town.
Here Simo^s ^loud, here is the Sigean land,
And here did Priams lofty Palace stand.
Here did Achi^les pitch his glittering tents,
And here Ulysses kept his regiments.
Here in this place did valiant Hector fall,
Whose body was dragged round about the wall
Of Troy, to show the enemies despite:
Putting the framing Horses in a fright.
For whatsoever in those wars was done,
Old Nestor did relate unto thy son,
Whom I had sent forth to enquire of thee,
And he did bring home all this news to me:
Bringing me tidings how Dolon by name,
And Rhesus by thy sword at once were slain.
While the one of them in his dead sleep was killed,
And the others blood by treachery was spilled,
And thou amongst thy other bold attempts
By night did set upon the Thracian Tents.
Slaying so many men; how could thou be
So adventurous if thou had remembered me;
And of thy other victories I did hear,
My heart did burn within my breast for fear,
But what although thy valor did confound
Troy; and did race the walls unto the ground*
Shall I, as if Troy were besieged, still be
A widow wanting thy sweet company*
That Troy does stand I only find alone,
Others rejoice that it is overthrown.
Whose fruitful fields the conquering Grecians now,
Do with the Trojan Oxen daily plough.
For now ripe corn does grow where Troy once stood,
And all the ground is fat with Trojan blood.
The crooked plough does graze as it goes by
Upon men's bones, which there half buried lie;
So that they plough up bones as well as land,
And grass does grow where houses once did stand.
Yet having wasted Troy, thou keep'st away,
Nor do I know what moves thee to stay,
Nor can by any means learn in what part
Of all the world (thou most unkindest) art.
If any ship unto our shore does come,
Then to enquire of thee I straight do run;
And to the ship-master a Letter give,
To deliver unto thee if thou do live:
Charging if that it be his chance to see
Ulysses, he should give it unto thee.
I sent to Pylos, where Nestor did reign,
But I from Pylos heard no news again:
I sent unto the Spartans, who could tell
No tidings of thee, or where thou did dwell,
O would that Troy were standing now again,
For whose destruction I did pray in vain!
If thou were at the wars, I should know where
Thou were, and of thy safety stand in fear.
And other women might with me complain,
Because their Husbands came not home again.
To grieved minds this may some comfort be,
To have companions in adversity.
I know not what to fear, yet all things fear;
My cares and sorrows never greater were.
Thinking what dangers by sea and land may
Enforce thee against thy will from me to stay.
While thus my fond affection does excuse thee,
Perhaps thou in requital do abuse me.
For I do fear thy fancy loves to rove,
And that thou have some sweetheart thou do love
In foreign Countries; nay, and it may be
That thou do woo her by disgracing me,
Telling her that thy Wif's a Country Ione,
That knows only how to spin at home.
But of my hard belief I do repent,
I hope thou art not willingly absent.
My father Icarus would not have me stay
A widow still; but chideth my delay:
But let him chide, Penel^pe will be
A constant wife Ulysses unto thee.
But though I do by fair entreaty still
Prevail so much that I do change his will,
Or alter it, so that he^s not inclined
To use a Fathers power to force my mind;
The Du^^chians, and the Samians come to woo me,
And the Z^^yn^h^an^ often come unto me;
And of foreign suitors such a wanton crew
Do haunt me, that I know not what to do.
Who in thy Palace do most freely reign,
Wasting those goods, which thou before did gain.
P^sandrus, Polybus, and Medon too,
Eurymachus, and Antinous come to woo
Me, and in thy absence do, consume and eat
That estate thou did gain by blood and sweat:
Poor Irus and Melanthius that does seed
His sheep, are suitors too, and hope to speed.
And all thy household here does but consist
Of three, that are too weak for to resist;
Namely ^^aerte^, who is spent and done,
Thy wife, and young cl^mach^s thy Son,
Whom I had almost lost, while that he went,
To the City Pyl^s without our consent.
And when the ^ates our time of death assign,
May his hand close up both thy eyes and mine;
Our Oxe-herd, Swine-herd, and our old Nurse, are
All of one mind, and do make the same prayer:
And how can old Laertes power restrain
Those wanton Saiters which at home do reign.
Telemachus in time will grow more strong,
His Father now should keep him from all wrong.
I have no strength to drive these Suitors hence,
Then come thou home, and be thy own defense.
Think on thy son to whom thou should impart
Instruction, that may season his young heart.
Think on Laertes, come and close his eyes,
Who in his old age even bedridden lies.
And think on me, for when thou wentst from home,
Full young was I, but now an old wife grown.
The Argument of the second Epistle.
DEmophoon, the son of Theseus and Phaedra, returning home from the Trojan
wars, was driven by a tempest into Thrace, where Phyllis the daughter of
Lycurgus and C^ustumena, being then Queen of Thrace, gave him courteous
entertainment, both at board and bed; but when he had staid a while with her,
as soon as he heard that M^ne^^hous was dead, who had expulst his Father
Theseus out of the City of Athens, And assumed the government to himself, he
being desirous to regain his Kingdom, desired leave of Phyllis to go and settle
his affairs, promising her within one month to return again: and so having
made ready his ships, he sails to Athens, and ta^ries there. Whereupon after
four months were past, Phyllis writes this Epistle, persuading him to be
faithful unto her, and to remember her kindness, and his own promise, which if
he neglects to do, she threatens to kill her self, and so revenge the violation
of her Maiden chastity.

PHYLLIS to DEMOPHOON.
PHyllis that did so kindly entertain
Thee, O Demophoon, must of thee complain:
Before the Moons sharp horns were once grown round,
Thou did promise to land on the Thracian ground;
But now four Moons are changed, four months are past,
And yet thy ship is not returned at last:
If thou do count the time, which we that are
In love do strictly reckon with great care;
Thou having broke thy promise needs must say,
That my complaint comes not before the day.
My fears were slow, for we do slowly give
Credence to those things we would not believe.
Which made me for thy sake even falsely fain,
That the North Wind drove back thy sails again,
Sometimes I feared lest that in Hebrus sound
Thy ship might in those shallow waves be drowned,
Often I besought the gods for thy return,
And on their Altars did sweet incense burn.
When the wind stood fair, I said unto my self,
Sure he will come now if he be in health.
My faithful love was witty to invent
Something that might still hinder thy intent.
But yet thou stayest, nor can thy promise move
Thee to return, nor yet our former love.
But I perceive, Demophoon, by thy stay,
One wind did drive thy ship and faith away.
Thy Ship returns not, which makes me complain,
That all thy faithful promises were vain.
What have I done? Alas I rashly loved thee!
And yet this fault to pity might have moved thee.
I entertained thee, this was all my fault,
Yet this offense might have been kindness thought.
Where is thy faith, thy hand which thou did give me,
And oaths thou sworest to make me believe thee?
Swearing by Hymen that thou would not tarry,
But come again and thy poor Phyllis marry.
And by the rugged Sea have often swore,
Which thou both have and wilt sail often over*
And by Neptune thy great Uncle, who with ease
Can calm the raging of the angry seas:
By Juno who in marriages delights:
And by torch-bearing Ceres mystic rites.
Should all these Gods revenge thy perjuries,
Which are high treasons to their Majesty's;
And should all punish thee with one consent,
Thou could not sure endure their punishment.
To rig and mend thy Ships I care did take,
And in requital thou did me forsake,
I gave thee opportunity to run
Away, it is I that have my self undone.
I did believe thy fair and gentle words,
Of which the falsest heart most store affords,
And because thou did come of a good descent,
I did believe thou had a good intent.
I did believe thy tears: and had thou taught
Thy tears to be as false as was thy thought?
O yes, thy tears would slow with cunning Art,
When thou did bid them to disguise thy heart.
Thy vows and promises I did believe,
And any of those shows might me deceive.
Nor am I grieved because I entertained thee,
Such kindness showed to thee could not have shamed me.
But I repent, because to add more height
Unto thy entertainment, I one night
Did suffer thee to come into my Bed,
Where thou did rob me of my Maidenhead*
Would I had died before that fatal night
Wherein I yielded thee so much delight.
For if I had not thus my self betrayed,
Then Phyllis might have lived and died a Maid.
But I did hope that thou more constant were,
"That hope is just which springs from desert.
For I did know I had deserved thy love,
Which made me hope that thou would faithful prove.
It is no glory to deceive a Maid,
Since she deserves pity that is betrayed
By her kind heart, and has too soon believed,
For thus poor Phyllis was by thee deceived,
And instead of other praises may they say,
That this was he that did a Maid betray;
When thy statue shall be in the City placed
With thy fathers, which is with high titles graced,
When they shall read how valiant Theseus slew
Those cruel thieves, and also did subdue
The Minotaure, and did the Theb^n^^ tame,
And Centaures that by him were also slain:
And lastly, when the Inscription shall relate
How he went to Hell and knocked at Pl^to's gate;
This title shall ye on thy statue read,
"This man deceived his love, and from her sled.
In this thy Father thou do imitate,
That he fair Ariadne did forsake;
What he alone excused as a sin,
That act thou only do admire in him;
Showing thy self in this to be his son,
That thou like him, have a young maid undon.
But she is happily to Ba^chus married,
And in his Chariot, drawn with Tigers, carried:
The Thracians do my marriage bed contemn,
Because I loved a stranger more then them:
And some perhaps will say in my disgrace,
Let her go to Athens, that most learned place;
Since she so kind has to a stranger been,
The warlike Thracians will have a new Queen.
The end does prove the action, but yet may
^e want success, that thinks so, I say:
That measures actions not from the intent,
But counts them good, that have a good event.
For if Demophoon would again return,
Then they would honor me whom now they scorn.
"Unfortunate actions do our credit stain,
I am faulty, because thou do not come again.
Methinks I see, how when thou leftst our Court,
Thy ship being ready to forsake our Port;
Thy loving arms about my neck were spread,
Making my lips with tedious kisses red.
I wept, and when thou saw those tears of mine,
Thou also wept'st and mingled'st them with thine.
And then thou seem'dst, with a treacherous mind
Sorry because thou had so fair a wind.
And at the last, when thou must needs depart,
Then said farewell fair Phyllis my Sweetheart.
For when one month is come unto an end,
Look for Demophoon thy faithful friend.
^hy should I look for thy return in vain,
Who had no purpose to return again;
Yet I*le look for thy coming back how ever,
For it is better to come late, than never.
But I do fear thou have a new Sweetheart,
One that does alienate from me thy heart,
That thou forgotten Phyll^s do not know
Wo's me, if Phyllis be forgotten so;
Who did Demophoon kindly entertain,
When forced by storms he to our Harbor came?
Whose necessities with treasure I supplied,
And gave him many royal gifts beside.
My Kingdom unto thee I did submit,
Thinking a woman could not govern it*
Even all those goodly Lands I offered thee,
'Twixt Haemeus and the shady Rhodope.
Besides, thou did my Virgin Zone untie;
And violate my chaste Virginity.
And at our marriage the fatal Owl
Did sing, while mad Tisiphone did howl:
Alecto with her snaky hair was there;
The Candles did like funeral-lights appear.
Ost sadly to some rock I go, whose height
May make me to see far at sea outright.
If it be day, or if the Stars do shine,
I look still how the wind stands at that time,
If a far off a ship I chance to see,
I straight do hope that it thy ship may be.
And then in have upon the sands I run
So far, that I unto the Sea-waves come.
But when I have at length my error found,
Amongst my maids I fall down in a swound;
There is a hollow Bay bent like a bow,
Whose rocky sides into the sea far go;
To cast my self from hence is my intent,
Since to deceive me thou art falsely bent.
For when thou see my body like a wrack
Cast on thy shore, I know thou will look back
On the sad sight, and though thy heart could be
More hard than Adamant, thou will pity me.
Sometimes I could drink poison, or afford
To stab my tender breast with a sharp sword,
Or put a halter 'bout my neck, which often
Thou have embraced with thy arms more soft.
For I Will revenge my loss of Chastity,
Though I am doubtful yet what death to die.
And to declare my death from thee did come,
These lines shall be engraved upon my tomb.
Phyllis that did Demophoon entertain,
Was by his unkindness, and her own hand slain.

The Argument of the third Epistle.
THe Grecians being arrived at Ph^ygia, began to take the Cities near Troy,
especially those opposite to the I Will Lesbos. ^chilles the Son of Peleus and
Thetis, invaded both the Cilicians with Thebans* and Lyrnessa besieged and took
the Town Chyrness^^s, and brought away two fair Virgins, Astinoe, the Daughter
of Chryses, called afterward by their Fathers names. Chryses, he bestows on
Prince Agamemnon, but keeps Bris^is to himself. But Agam^mnon being commanded
by the Oracle to restore Chryses to her Father, took Briseis from Achilles:
Who taking it as an indignity, absents himself from the wars: no entreaty can
prevail to make him fight against Troy. Agamemnon sends him Briseis again with
gifts, he sleights them both. Briseis thereupon in this Epistle complains of
his too violent anger, entreats him to sight against the Trojans, to accept
Agamemnons offer, and receive her again.

BRISEIS to ACHILLES.
THis Letter Bris^is unto thee does send,
Which I perhaps in Greek have rudely penned.
My tears did make those blots which thou do see,
And yet these weeping blots may speak for me.
If a Captive may with modesty complain
Of thee, my Lord, do not my suit disdain.
Unto Agamemnon thou did me resign,
And yet alas this was no fault of thine!
When that Euribates and Talthibins came
To fetch me, whom thou durst not then detain.
They wondered that thou could so soon deliver
Me to the Kings use, if thou lov'dst me ever.
Thou might have seemed loath for to depart,
And have bestowed one kiss on thy Sweetheart.
But yet I wept a pace, my hair I tore,
As if I were a Captive made once more.
I often thought to steal away to thee,
But then I feared the Trojan enemy:
Lest being surpised by them in my attempt,
They should to Pria^s daughters me present.
But thou will say thou could not me detain;
But yet thou might have fetched me back again.
Patroclus then did speak thus in my ear;
Why do thou weep? thou shall not stay long there.
Nay, thou will not receive me now again,
And much less fetch her whom thou do disdain,
Ajax and Phoenix both did come to thee,
Thy friend and cozen by consanguinity.
And Ulysses, who with gifts and prayers did woo thee,
To receive thy Briseis when they brought me to thee.
And for a present twenty basins brought,
With seven three-footed tables carved and wrought:
To these ten Talents of gold added were,
And twelve brave Steeds that were trained up to war,
And many Captive maids, who with one look
Could take the Conquerers that had them took:
And a fair Virgin that thy wife might be;
But sure thou needst no other wise but me.
From Agamemnon would thou me redeem,
That to receive these gifts so nice do seem?
Achilles, how have I moved thy neglect?
Why do thou now unkindly me reject?
"Or is its fortunes custom still to frown
"On those, who by misfortune are cast down?
I saw thee when thou did Lyrnessus take,
And of thy Briseis did a captive make.
I saw how many of my kindred were
Slain by thy valiant hand, and did lie there
Planting for life, till their fresh wounds had bled
So much, that all the earth was painted red.
Yet when I lost those friends, I got another;
Thou art my Lord, my Husband, and my Brother.
And by thy Mother Queen of the salt Flood
Thou sworest all should turn unto my good,
Binding thy self with promises, that I
Should be most happy in captivity.
But now both me, and those gifts which are sent thee,
Thou do refuse, for neither can content thee.
And I hear to morrow by the break of day,
Thou meanest to take ship and sail away.
When I did hear the news, my heart did fail,
And presently my bloodless cheeks grew pale,
But will thou go from me my Dear, and leave me?
Unto whose custody will thou bequeath me?
May I be laid into the earths cold bed;
Or may the flaming thunder strike me dead;
Ere I behold the ship, cutting her way
Through the green waves while I am lest to stay:
If thou intendest to return again,
Take me along, who no great burden am;
I Will follow thee and serve thee all my life
As a poor Captive, not as thy dear wife.
I can inure my hands to labor hard;
And I can be content to spin or card.
One of the fairest Maids that Greece ere bred
Shall be thy wife, and warm thy nuptial-bed;
My humble thoughts do not so high aspire,
To be thy servant is all I desire.
I Will sit and spin until my task be done:
And until all my Flax to thread be spun.
Yet suffer not thy wife, I pray, to chide me,
Because I love thee, she will not abide me.
And do not suffer her to tear my hair;
Think how of Briseis thou did once take care;
Nay though thou suffer her my hair to tear,
Do not despise me, this is all my fear.
What would thou have? Agamemnon does repent;
And Greece for wronging thee is penitent.
Subdue thy self, and now let him that has
Conquered so many, conquer his own wrath:
Why do thou let the coward Hector wast
And spoil the Grecians? take thou arms at last.
Achilles take thy arms, but first me take:
Then crush those fellows, and force them to quake.
For my sake thou were angry and offended,
For me thy wrath began, in me let it be ended,
It Is no disgrace unto my suit to yield,
Octines did go unto the field
Persuaded by his wife, though he laid by
His arms, and to aid his Country did deny,
She did persuade her valiant husband straight,
But my words have, alas! no power, nor weight,
I dare not call my self thy wife, for I
Have lived with thee in Captivity;
Though my Lord has often called his handmaid
Unto his bed, and I have him obeyed,
I do remember that a captive Maid
Did call me Mistress unto whom I said,
Lay not the weight of scorn on misery,
That title suits not with Captivity.
For by my fathers ashes I do swear,
Of whom a reverend memory I bear;
By my three brothers souls, whose blood was spilled
For their Country, and in its defense were killed:
By my lips, and by those soft lips of thine
Which we did often times together join;
And by thy sword I swear, since I went from thee,
That Agamemnon never lay with me.
But for thy honesty thou dare not swear,
If I should put thee to thy oath, I fear.
The Grecians think with sorrow thou art pined,
But thou have music to refresh thy mind;
While thy Sweetheart does clasp thee in her arms,
Making her moistened kisses powerful charms
To stay thee there, which makes thee loath to fight;
Love and sweet music, yield thee more delight.
It is the safer course in bed being laid,
To sport thy self with some young fearful Maid;
Or when with those joys thou art tired too much,
To give thy Thracian Lyre a gentle touch;
Then to hold Buckler or sharp-pointed Spear,
Or on thy head a weighty Helmet wear;
Yet in brave actions thou did once delight,
And to win glory only thou would fight.
Did thou love war till I was captive made?
And is thy Valor since that time decayed?
The gods forbid, I hope to see thy Spear
Wound valiant Hector, who does no man fear.
Let the Grecians send me to my Lord to plead
Their cause with kisses, I can intercede
More powerfully than Phoenix or Ulysses,
There is a sweeter eloquence in kisses.
If I incircle thee within mine arms,
My close embraces are like powerful charms;
My naked breasts being in thy view laid open,
Will soon persuade thee, though no word be spoken.
If thou were like the sea, void of compassion,
My silent tears would move commiseration.
As thou desire thy fathers length of days,
Or to see Pyrrbus crowned with wreaths of Bays.
Achill^s take thy Briseis once again;
Have pity on that grief which I sustain.
If thy love be turned to hate, yet do not flout me,
Kill me outright, who cannot live without thee
Nay, thou do kill me, for my strength does fade,
My beauty and fresh color is decayed.
Yet I do hope thou will thy Briseis take,
And this hope makes me live, even for thy sake.
But if my hopes of thee do sail, then I
To meet my brother and husband will dye.
Yet when others shall perchance read my sad story,
To kill a woman will yield thee no glory.
Yet let no other kill me, thy weapon can
Kill me as soon as any other man.
Let thy sword give me such a wound, that I
May bleed with pleasure, and so bleeding die.
Let thy sword send me to Elysian rest,
Which might have wounded Hectors valiant breast.
But let me live if thou art pleased so,
Thy love does ask what thou grant'st to thy foe,
And rather kill thy Trojan foes than I
Express thy valor on thy enemy.
And whether thou intend'st to go or stay,
Command me as my Lord to come away.

The Argument of the fourth Epistle.
THeseus the son of Aegens having slain the Minotaure, brought away by ship
Ariadna daughter to Minos and Pasiphae, to whom for helping him in killing the
Minotaure, he had promised marriage, and her sister Ph^dra. But admonished by
Bacchus, he leaves Ariadna in the Isle Nax^s or Chios, and marries Phaedra, who
in Theseus absence falls in love with her son in Law Hippolytus, Theseus son by
Hippolito an Am^zon. He being a Bachelour, and much addicted to hunting, she
having no opportunity to speak to him, discovers he love by this Epistle;
wherein cunningly wooing and persuading him to love her, and lest it might seem
dishonesty in a mother to solicit her son in law, she begins with an
Insinuation.

PHAEDRA to HIPPOLYTUS.
PH^edra unto Hippolytus sends health,
Which unless thou giv'st me, I must want my self:
Yet read it, for a Letter cannot fright thee,
There may be something in it may delight thee,
For these dumb Messengers sent out of hand,
Do carry secrets both by sea and land.
The foe will read a letter, though it be
Sent to him from his utter enemy.
Thrice I began my mind to thee to break,
Thrice I grew dumb, so that I could not speak,
There is a kind of modesty in love,
Which hinders those that honest suits do move.
And love has given command that every lover
Should write that which he blusheth to discover.
Then to contemn loves power it is not safe,
Who over all the gods dominion has.
It Is dangerous to resist the power of love,
Who rules over all the gods above.
Love bid me write, I followed his direction,
Who told me that my lines should win affection.
O! since I love thee, may my love again
Raise in thy breast another mutual flame.
That love which has been a long time delayed,
At last grows violent, and must be obeyed:
I feel a fire, a fire within my heart,
And the blind wound of love does rage and smart.
As tender Heyfers cannot brook the yoke,
Nor the wild Colt, that is not backed nor broak,
Endure the bridle, so loves yoke I find
Is heavy to an unexperienced mind.
When it is their art, and they can easily do it,
That from their youth have been trained up unto it;
She that has let her time run out at wast,
Her love is violence when she loves at last,
The forbidden fruits of love I keep for thee,
In tasting them let us both guilty be.
It is some happiness to pluck and cull
Fruit from a tree, Whose boughs with fruit are full;
Or from the bush to gather the first Rose;
I am the tree and bush where loves fruit grows:
Yet hitherto my fame was never blotted;
But for white chastity I have been noted;
And I am glad that I my love have placed
On one by whom I cannot be disgraced.
Adultery in her is a base fact,
That with some base fellow does commit the act.
But should Juno grant me her Jupiter,
In love I would Hippolytus prefer.
And since I loved thee, I do now embrace
Those sports which thou ^ost love; to hunt and chase
Wild savage beasts, for I would gladly be
A Huntress to enjoy thy company.
And now like thee, no Goddess I do know,
But chaste Diana with her bended bow.
I love the woods, and take delight to set
The toils, and chase the Deer into the net.
And I do take delight to hoop and hollow,
And cheer the dogs, while they the chase do follow.
To cast a dart I now am cunning grown.
Sometimes upon the grass I lie along,
Sometimes for pleasure I a Chariot drive,
Reyning the horse that with the bridle strive.
Sometime like those mad Bacchie I do run,
Who pipe when they to the Idian hill do come;
Or like those that have seen the horned fawns,
And Dryads lightly tripping over the lawns.
In such a frantic fit they say I am,
When love torm^nts me with his raging flame;
And this same love of mine perhaps may be
By fate entailed upon one family,
For it is given to us in love to fall;
And Venus takes a tribute of us all.
For first, great Jupiter did rarely gull
Europa with the false shape of a Bull.
My mother Pasiphae in a Cow of wood
The leaping of a lustful Bull withstood.
My sister likewise to false Theseus gave
A Clew of silk, and so his life did save,
Who through the winding labyrinth was led
By the direction of this slender thread.
And now like Mino's stock, even I
Love as the rest did, in extremity.
It fortunes that our love thus cross should be,
Thy father loved my sister, I love thee.
Thus Theseus and Hippolytus his son
Do glory that their love has overcome
Two sisters, but I would we had remained
At home, when we came to thy fathers land.
For then especially thy presence moved me,
And from that time I ever since have loved thee.
My eye conveyed unto my heart delight,
To like of thee, for thou were clothed in white.
A flowery garland did thy soft hair crown,
And thy complexion was a lovely brown.
Which some for a stern visage had mis^ook;
But Phaedra thought thou had a manly look.
For young men should not be like women dressed,
A careless dressing, does become them best;
Thy ste^nness, and loose flowing of thy hair,
And dusty countenance most graceful were.
While thy curveting Steed did bound and fling,
I admired to see thee ride him in the ring;
If with thy strong arm thou did toss the pike,
Thy nimble strength I did approve and like.
Or, if thou took'st thy Javelin in thy hand,
Me thought thou did in comely posture stand,
For all thy actions yielded me delight,
And did appear most graceful in my sight.
Of the woods wildness do not then partake,
Nor suffer me to perish for thy sake.
For why should thou in hunting spend thy leisure?
And no delight on Venus sweeter pleasure?
There Is nothing can endure without due rest,
By which our wearied bodies are refresht.
And thou might imitate thy Diana's bow,
Which if too often bended, weak will grow.
Cephalus was a Woodman, man of great fame,
And many wild beasts by his hand were slain,
Yet with Aurora he did fall in love,
Her blushing beauty did his fancy move:
While from her aged husbands bed she rose,
And wisely to young Cephalus straight goes.
Venus and young Ado^^s often would lie
Together on the grass most wantonly.
And underneath some tree in the hot weather,
They would ^e kissing in the shade together.
Atal^nta did O^^ides fancy move,
And gave her wild beasts skins to show his love,
And therefore why may thou not fancy me,
^ah without love the woods unpleasant be,
For I will follow thee over the rocky cliff,
And never fear the boars sharp fanged teeth;
Two seas the narrow Illhmus do oppose,
The raging waves on both sides of it flows.
Together thee and I will gove^n here
The Kingdom, than my Country far more dear:
My husband Theseus has long absent been,
He Is with his friend Perithous it does seem.
Theseus (unless we will the truth deny)
Does love Perithous more then thee or I.
It Is his unkindness that he stays so long,
But he has done us both far greater wrong.
With his great Club he did my brother shy,
And left my sister to wild beasts a prey.
Thy mother was a warlike Amazon,
Deserving favor for thy sake her son:
Yet cruel Theseus killed her with his sword,
Who did to him so brave a son afford;
Nor would he marry her; for he did aim
That as a bastard thou should never reign;
And many children he on me begot,
Whose untimely death not I but he did plot;
Would I had died in labor, ere that I
Had wronged thee by a second Progeny.
Why should thou reverence thy fathers bed,
Which he does shun, and now away is fled?
If a mother be to love her son inclined,
Why should vain names fright thy courageous mind
Such strict preciseness former times became,
When good old Saturn on the earth did reign.
But Saturn's dead, his laws are cancelled now;
Jove rules, then follow what Jove does allow;
For Jove all sort of pleasure does permit,
Sister may marry if they think it fit,
With their own brothers, Venus bonds does tie
The knot more close of consanguinity.
Besides, who can our stolen joys discover?
With a fair outside we our fault may color:
If our embraces were discerned by some,
They would say that mother surely loves her son.
Thou need'st not come by night, no doors are barred
And shut on me, thy passage is not hard.
One house as it did once, may us contain,
Thou often have kissed me, and shall kiss again,
Thou shall be safe with me, nay, were thou seen
Within my bed, such faults have smothered been.
Then come with speed to ease my troubled mind,
And may love always prove to thee more kind,
Thus I most humbly do entreat and sue,
Pride and great words become not those that woo^.
Thus I most humbly beg of thee alone,
Alas! my pride and my great words are gone:
To my desi^es long time I would not yield;
But yet at last affection won the field.
And as a Captive at thy royal feet
Thy mother begs; Love knows not what is meet.
Shame has forsook his Colors in my cheek
It is confessed, yet grant that love I seek.
Though Minos be my father. who keeps under
His power the seas, and that darteth thunder
Be my Grandfather; and he be a kin
To me, that has his forehead circled in
With many a clear beam, a sharp pointed ray,
And drives the purple Chariot of the day,
Love makes a servant of Nobility.
Then for my Ancestors even pity me.
Nay Cree^, Jove's Island, shall my Dowry be,
And all my Court ( Hippolytus) shall serve thee.
My mother softened a Bulls stern breast,
And will thou be more cruel then a beast?
For love-sake love me, who have thus complained,
So may thou love and never be disdained:
So may the Queen of Forests help thee still,
So may the Woods yield game for thee to kill.
May Fawns and Satyrs help thee every where,
So may thou wound the Boar with thy sharp spear.
So may the Nymphs give thee water to slake
Thy burning thirst, though thou do Maidens hate.
Tears with my prayers I mingle, read my prayers,
And imagine that you do behold my tears.

The Argument of the first Epistle.
HEcuba Daughter to Cisseus, and wise to Priam being with child, dreamt that
she was delivered of a flaming Firebrand, that let all T^oy on fire. Priam
troubled in mind, consults With the Oracle, receives answer, that his son
should be the destruction of his Country, and therefore as soon as he was born,
commands his death. But his Mother Hecuba sends her son Paris secretly to the
Kings shepherds. They-keep him, till being grown a Young man, he fancied the
Nymph Oenone, and married her. But when Ju^o, Pallas, and Venus contended about
the golden Apple, which had this inscription, DETUR PULCHRIORI, Let it be given
to the fairest* Jupiter made Paris their Judge. To whom Juno promised a
Kingdom, Pallas Wisdom, Venus Pleasure, and the fairest of Women; but he gave
sentence for Venus. Afterward being known by his Father, and received into
favor, he failed to Sparta, whence he took ^elen wife to Menelaus, and brought
her to Troy. Oenone hearing thereof, complains in this Epistle of his
unfaithfulness; persuading him to feud back Helen to Greece, and receive her
again.

OENONE to PARIS.
UNto my Paris, for though thou art not mine,
Thou art my Paris, because I am thine,
A Nymph does send from the Idaean Hill
These following words, which do this paper ^ill.
Read it, if that thy new wife will permit,
My letter is not in a strange hand writ.
Oenone through the Phrygian woods well known,
Complains of wrong, that thou to her have done,
What god has used his power to cross our love?
What fault of mine has made thee faithless prove?
With deserved sufferings I could be content;
But not with undeserved punishment.
What I deserve, most patient I could bear,
But undeserved punishments heavy are.
Thou were not then of such great dignity,
When a young Nymph did first marry thee;
Though now forsooth, thou Priam's son art proved,
Thou were a servant first, when first we loved:
And while our sheep did graze, we both have laid
Under some tree together in the shade;
Whose boughs like a green Canopie were spread,
While the soft grass did yield us a green bed:
And when the dew did fall, we often lay
In a poor Cottage, upon straw or hay.
I showed thee both, what Lawns and Forests were
Likely to yield much store of game, and where
The wild beasts did in secret caves abide,
And their young ones in the hollow Rocks did hide.
To set thy Toils with thee I often have gone,
After the Hounds I over the hills have run.
My name on every Beech-tree I do find.
Thou had engraved Oenone on their rind,
And as the body of the tree does, so
The letters of my name do greater grow.
Close by a River (I remember it)
These lines are on an Alder fairly writ;
And may the Alder flourish still and spread,
Because these lines may on the bark be read;
When Paris does to Oenone false become,
Xanthus unto his spring does backward run,
Xanthus run back, thy course now backward take,
For Paris does his Oenone forsake.
That day did unto me most fatal prove;
That day began the winter of thy love,
When Venus, Juno, and fair Pallas came
Naked before thee, and did not disdain
To choose thee for their Judge, when thou had told
The story to me, my faint heart grew cold,
Of the experienced I did counsel take,
They did resolve me, thou would me forsake.
For thou did build new ships without delay,
And did send forth a Fleet to sea straightway.
Yet thou did weep at thy departure hence;
Do not deny it, it was no offense:
For by my love thy credit is not stained,
But of loving Helen thou may be ashamed,
Thou wept'st, and also at that very time
Thou saw me weep, my tears dropping with thine.
And as the Vine about the Elm does wind,
So thy arms were about my neck entwinde.
When thou complaind'st because the winds cross were,
The Sailers laughed, because the wind stood fair.
Thou did kiss me often, when thou did depart,
And thou were loath to say, Farewell, Sweetheart*
At last, a gentle gale of wind did blow,
So that thy ship from land did slowly go.
I looking after thee, long time did stand
Weeping, and shedding tears on the dry sand.
And to the green Nereides I did pray,
Thy voyage might be speedy without stay:
For me it was too speedy, since that I
Sustain the loss of thy false love thereby.
To Thessaly my Prayers have brought thee safe,
And for a Whore my prayer prevailed has.
There is a Mountain that to sea does look,
Which beating of the foaming waves can brook:
From hence when I beheld thy ship was coming*
Into the sea I presently was running;
But standing still, at length I might discern
A purple flag, which waved on the stern;
Then whether it were thy ship I did doubt,
Because such colors thou did not put out.
But when thy ship to shore did nearer stand,
And a fair gale did bring it close to land,
A woman's face I straightway did behold,
Which made my heart to tremble, and wax cold.
And while I stood doting there, I might epsy
Thy sweet heart, that did on thy bosom lie.
O then I wept, my breast I struck, and beat
And tore my cheeks* that with my tears were wet;
Filling the Mountain Ida with my cries;
And there I did bewail my miseries.
May ^elena at last so weep, so grieve,
When thou do falsely her forsake and leave:
And may she that this wrong to me does offer,
Be wronged in the like kind, and like wrong suffer.
When thou were poor, and led'st a Shepherds life,
None but Oenone was thy loving wife.
It Is not thy wealth, nor state that I admire;
Nor to be Priams daughter do I desire.
Yet Priam, nor his Hecuba, need disdain
Me for their daughter since I worthy am.
I am fit to be a Princess, to command,
A royal Scepter would become my hand,
Despise me not, because that I with thee
Have lain under some shady Beechen-tree.
For I am fitter for thy Royal bed,
When it with purple Quilts is covered.
Lastly, my love is safest, since for me
No wars shall follow, nor no Fleet shall be
Sent forth; but if thou Helena do take,
She shall by force of arms be fetched back.
Blood is the portion which thou shall obtain,
If thou do marry with this stately Dame.
Ask Hector and Deiphobus, if she
Should not unto the Greeks restored be;
Ask Priam, and Antenor wise and grave,
Who by their age much deep experience have,
For to perform a beauteous rape before
Thy Country, must be bad and base all over;
Since to defend a bad cause is a shame,
Her Husband shall just wars against thee maintain,
Nor think that Helena faithful will become,
Who was so quickly wooed, so quickly won.
As Menelaus grieves, because that she
Has with a stranger, by adultery
Wronged the chaste rites of the Nuptial bed,
And let a stranger so adhorn his head:
So thou will then confess, no art, or cost,
Can purchase honesty, that once is lost.
She that is bad once, will in bad persever,
And being bad once will be bad for ever.
As she loves thee, so she before did love
M^nelaus, unto whom she false did prove.
Thou might have been more faithful unto me,
As thy brother was to fair Andromache.
But thou art lighter than dry leaves, which be
By every wanton wind blown off the tree:
Or like the waving corn, which every whiff
Of wind does bend, until it grow more stiff.
Thy Cosen once (for I remember't well)
With dishevelled hair did thus my fate foretell;
What do thou Oenone? why do thou sow
The barren sands? Or why do thou thus go
About to plough the shore? it is in vain;
Such fruitless tillage can yield thee no gain.
A Gre^ian Maid is coming that shall be
Fatal unto thy Country, and to thee.
And may the ship be drowned in the salt stood,
Whose sad arrival shall cost so much blood.
When she had said thus, straight my flaxen hair
Began to heave, and stand upright for fear.
Alas, thou were too true a Prophetess,
For she is come, and does my place possess!
Yet she is but a fair adulteress,
Who with a strangers love was so soon took;
And for his sake her Country has forsook.
Besides, one Theseus (though I know not whom)
Brought her out of the Country long agon.
And can thou think an amarous young man
Would send her a pure Virgin back again?
If thou would know how I these truths discry,
It is my love, love does in all things pry.
If thou call'st her fault a rape, yet that name
May seem to hide her fault, but not her shame.
Since she so often from her Country went,
'Twas not by violence, but by her consent.
Though by deceit thou me instructed have,
Yet Oeno^e still remains chaste.
I hid me in the woods, while the wanton rout
Of nimble Satyrs sought to find me out:
And horned Fawnes with wreaths of sharp Pine crowned
Over the Mountain Ida sought me round.
For great Apollo that protecteth Troy,
The spoils of my virginity did enjoy,
By force against my will; for which disgrace
I tore my guiltless hair, and scratcht my face;
Yet neither precious stones could me entice,
Not gold; for I set on my self no price.
She that has wit, and ingenuity,
Seems for gifts to sell virginity,
Apollo thought me worthy to impart
To me the skill of Physic, and his Art:
The virtue of all Herbs he did reveal
To me, and showed what Herbs have power to heal.
Yet wo's me, that no powerful Herb is found,
That can recure loves inward bleeding wound.
Since great Apollo who did first invent
The art of Physic, yet for my sake went
And kept Admetus Oxen; for the slame
Of my love turned him to a Shepherd Swain:
Though Apollo's art, nor Herbs, cannot relieve me;
Yet thou can help me and some comfort give me;
Thou can, O then have pity on a Maid:
For me the Grecians shall not thee invade.
As from my blooming years, and childish time
I have been, so let me still remain thine:
Oenone.

The Argument of the sixth Epistle.
THe O^acle had told Pelias the son of Neptune, that he should be near his
death, when, as he was sacrificing to his Father, one should come to him with
one foot naked, and bare. As he was performing his yearly sacrifice, Jason son
to Aeson, and his Nephew having left one of his shoos sticking in the mud of
the River Anaurus, hasting to the sacrifice, meets with him on foot naked.
Pelias remembering the Oracle, persuades Jason to go to Colchos to fetch the
golden Fleece, hoping his destruction by the impossibility of the attempt. But
courageous Jason willingly undertook the Voyage, and so accompanied with many
Grecian Nobles, he set forth in the ship Argo from Pegasus a Haven of Thessaly,
and sailed to the Isle Lemnos: where when the Women consented to kill all the
Men on one night, Hypsiphile who had only preserved her father Thoas alive,
then reigned, and at board and bed kindly entertained Jason. But after two
years, the time and importunity of his company urging him to proceed in his
intended attempt he leaves Hypsiphile with child, and sails to Colchos; where
by Medea's art having charmed the Dragon fast asleep, and overcome the fierce
Bulls, he brought away the golden Fleece and Medea. Hypsiphile being grieved
that Medea was preferred before her, in this Epistle gratulates Jasons return,
rails on Medeas cruelty and witchcraft, to make her contemptible; and lastly,
curses both Jason and Medea.

HYPSIPHILE to JASON.
TO Thessaly thou art returned again,
Rich in the golden Fleece, which thou did gain.
I am glad you are well, yet it were better
If I had heard of thy health by thy Letter.
It may be that the wind did not stand fair,
That to my Kingdom thou could not repair;
And yet although contrary winds stood cross,
To venture a letter had been no loss.
Hyp^^phile had deserved thy salutations,
Sent in a Letter of kind commendations.
I heard not by thy letters, but by fame,
That thou did Mars his sacred Oxen tame;
And how the Dragons teeth being sowed, did bring
Forth armed men, which from the earth did spring,
In whose blood thou did not thy hand imbrew,
For those sons of earth one another slew.
And from the watchful Dragon, while he slept,
Thou took'st the golden Fleece which he had kept.
What sudden joy had I conceived at it,
If thou this joyful news to me had writ!
Of thy unkindness why do I complain?
I fear thou do my former love disdain.
A barbarous Enchauntress thou have brought,
And her more worthy of thy love have thought;
Love soon believes; yet I wish, I may be
Censured for rashness in accusing thee.
From Thessaly a stranger came of late;
And as soon as he was come to my gate,
I asked him how my Jason did, and staid
Looking down to the ground, no answer made.
Straightway into a passion I did break,
Tearing my garments, and thus I did speak;
Tell me if that my Jason live, that I,
If he be dead, may follow him and die.
He lives, says he: and yet through loving fear
I scarce believed him, though that he did swear.
But when my doubtful mind his words believed,
I asked what valiant deeds thou had achieved?
And he related the whole story how
Thou made the brazen-footed Oxen plough,
How from the Dragons teeth on the earth sowd,
A harvest of brave armed soldiers growd;
Which earth-sprung men did straightway fall at jars,
And slew each other in their civil wars:
And that thou kildst the Dragon: when I heard
These deeds of thine, again I grew affeard;
Again I asked him, if Jason did live,
His word^ through fear, I hardly could believe;
Yet by the carriage of his speech I found,
That thy unkindness had given me a wound.
Where are thy promises? those marriage bands,
Which once did join our loving hearts and hands?
Or where is Hymen's torch that burnt so bright!
Fitter to have been a sad funeral light.
I was no whore; Juno and Hymen too
At our glad Nuptials themselves did show.
Not Juno, nor Hymen, when we did marry,
But Erinnys did the fatal torches carry.
The Thessalians and Minyans strangers were
To me; and why did Typhis put in here
His Ship? Here is no wealthy Ram does bear
A golden fleece upon his back, nor here
Does old Aeto's fair lofty Palace stand.
This Lemnia is a little small Island;
I had resolved (but fate did it withstand)
To drive thee from hence with a Feminine band.
Though Lemnian women had their husbands killed,
I thought it was pity thy blood should be spilled.
Thy first sight in me such a liking bred,
Then I entertained thee at board and bed.
And thou two Summers with me stayd'st here,
And while two winters also passed were.
And the third year, when thou did sail away,
With weeping tears unto me thou did say,
Hypsiphile, though I am forced to go
And leave thee here, yet I would have thee know,
That till I do return again, I Will be
Always a faithful Husband unto thee.
And may that prosper which is in thy womb,
To make me a glad Parent when I come;
Then down thy face thy cunning tears did fall,
The ^^st for grief thou could not speak at all.
Of all thy company thou wentst last of all
Aboard the ship which thou did Argo call:
Away it flies, when once the hollow sail
Was driven forward with a lusty gale;
And while thy ship the blew waves passed over,
I looked unto the sea, thou to the shore.
And then unto my Turret I did go,
While tears did down my cheeks and bosom flow:
I looked through my tears and they did seem,
As if they watery perspectives had been:
For through them me thought that I could view
Things farther off than I was wont to do.
Then I made vows, and I did chastely pray,
For thy return which vows I now should pay.
But shall I pay vows for Medea's good?
Love mixed with anger does enrage my blood.
Because I have lost Jason that does live,
Shall I Sacrifices on the Altar give?
I must confess I always was afraid
Lest thou should marry some young Grecian Maid.
I feared the Grecian Maids; but thou have brought
A barbarous Harlot of whom I never thought:
She cannot please thee with her beauteous look,
With her charms and skill in herbs thou art took.
For from the Sphere she can call down the Moon,
And hide in clouds the Horses of the Sun;
She can make Rivers stay their has^y course,
And make green woods and stones remove by force.
Unto the graves with loosened hair she comes,
And out of the warm ashes gathers bones.
When she would bewitch another, she does ^rame
In wax his p^cture, and to increase his pain
In the heart of it small needles does stick,
Which makes his own heart to ache and prick.
And by her cursed charms she can force love,
Which beauty and fair virtue ought to move.
How can thou then embrace her with delight?
Or sleep securely by her in the night?
But as she did with charms the Dragon quell,
And Bulls, so she has charmed thee with a Spell;
Besides of glory she will have a share,
Out of those deeds by thee performed were.
And some of Pelias side will think each deed
Of thine, did from the force of charms proceed;
And that though Jason sailed unto Greece,
Medea brought away the golden Fleece.
Thy father and thy mother both are wroth,
That thou should bring a wife out of the North.
A husband for her may at home be found,
Or else where Tanais does Scythia bound.
But Jason is more fickle than the wind,
And in his words no constancy I find.
As thou went forth, why did not come again?
Coming and going I thy wife remain.
If Nobility of birth can thee content,
King Thoas is my father by descent;
Bacchus my Uncle is, whose wifes crown shines
With stars enlightening all the lesser signs.
And faithful Lemnos shall my Dowry be,
Which thou might have, if that thou would have me.
Jason for my delivery may be glad
Of that sweet burden which by him I had;
For Lucina unto me so kind has been,
That I two children unto thee did bring.
They are most like to thee in outward show,
Yet they their fathers falsehood do not know:
These young Ambassadors I to thee had s^nt,
But their step mother h^ndered my intent;
I feared fierce Medea, whose hands be
Ready to act all kind of villainy.
She that her brothers limbs could piecemeal tear,
Would she have pity on my children dear?
And yet her charms have madly blinded thee,
To prefer her before Hypsiphile.
She was an adultress when first she knew thee;
I by chaste marriage was given to thee.
She betrayed her father, I saved mine from death;
She forsook Colchos, but me Lemnos has.
And though her dowry be her wickedness,
From me she got my Husband nevertheless.
Jason, I blame the Lemnian women's act,
Yet wronged sorrow thrust us on each fact.
Tell me, suppose c^oss winds by chance had droven
Thee, and thy company into my Haven;
If with my children I had come to meet thee,
With curses might not I most justly greet thee?
How could thou look upon my babes or me?
What death deserve thou for thy treachery?
To preserve thee it had my mercy been,
And sure I had, though thou unworthy seem.
And with the harlots blood I would not fail,
To fill my cheeks, which her charms have made pale.
Medea to Medea I would be,
And furiously revenge my injury.
If great Jupiter will my prayer receive,
Like to Hypsiphile, so may she grieve.
And since she like a Succubus me wrongs,
May she know what unto my grief belongs.
And as I am of my husband bereft,
May she be a widow with two children left;
As to her b^other, and her father she
Was cruel, may she to her husband be.
And may she wander, over earth, sea, and air
A hatred murdress, hopeless, poor, and bare.
Having lost my Husband thus I pray beside,
May he live accursed with his wicked Bride.

The Argument of the seventh Epistle.
AFter the destruction of Troy, Aeneas the son of Anchises and Venus, taking
his Penates or household gods with him, goes to sea with twenty ships. Through
tempestuous weather at sea, he is driven to Lybia where Dido (as Virgil has
fained) Daughter to Belus, and wife to Sichaus Hercules Priest, leaving Tire,
for the cruel avarice of her brother Pigmalion, who had unawares killed her
husband for his wealth, and built the new City Carthage: she most magnificently
entertained Aeneas and his companions, loved him, and enjoyed him but when
Mercury admonisht him to depart for Italy, which country the Oracle had
promised him: Dido, having in vain endeavored by entreaty to divert him from
his purpose, and stay his journey, being sick to death, writes unto him,
accusing him as the cause of her death.

DIDO to AENEAS.
AS the Swan by Maeanders fords does lie
In the moist weeds, and sings before she die:
So I not hoping to persuade thy stay,
Since one that will not hear me I do pray.
Having lost my credit and virginity,
To lose a few words a small loss will be;
For thy poor Dido thou mean to forsake,
And unto sea wilt a new voyage make.
Aeneas, thou will needs depart from me,
To find strange Kingdoms out in Italy.
Thou car'st not for new Carthage, or my Land,
Whose Scepter I have given into thy hand.
Thou shun'st my Country which might be thy own,
And seek'st a Country unto thee unknown;
Which if thou find out, thou can not gain;
For who will suffer a stranger to reign?
Thou seek another Dido whom in love
Thou may deceive and false unto her prove;
Or when like unto Carthage can thou build
A City, that does store of people yield?
If all things happen to thee prosperously,
Where will thou find so kind a wife as I?
Like a wax taper I burn with desire,
Or like sweet incense in the funeral fire;
And still I wish, Aeneas would but stay,
Aeneas I do think on night and day.
He careless of my love, and gifts does seem,
Had I been wise, I had not cared for him.
Yet I cannot hate Aeneas, although he
Does plot some unkind dealing against me.
Of thy unfaithfulness I do complain,
Having complained, I love thee more again.
Spare me, O Venus, since thou art his mother;
Help me, O Cupid, since thou art his brother;
Soften his heart, that he may milder prove,
And be a soldier in the tents of love.
And since to love him I think it no shame,
O may he love me with a mutual flame!
Thou art some false Aeneas I do find,
Thou do not bear thy mothers gentle mind.
Stones, Rocks, and Oaks are hard like to thy breast,
More merciless than any salvage beast,
Or than the seas, which winds do now incense,
Yet with contrary winds thou would go hence:
Winter to stay thy journey hence assayes,
Look how the Eastern winds the waves do raise!
Then to the winds let me beholding be,
Though for thy stay, I had rather owe to thee.
But I see rugged seas, and blustering wind
More just and gentle are, than thy false mind,
To untimely death I would not have thee come,
(Although deserved) while thou from me^ do run.
Is thy life so cheap, or hatred such at most,
That thou will leave me, though thy life it cost?
The winds, and waves, their fury will appease,
When Tri^on drives his blew steeds over the seas.
Would thy affections would change with the wind!
They will, if thou bear not a cruel mind.
Had thou not known the Seas, what would thou do?
Since having tried it, thou will trust it too.
Though to weigh Anchor the smooth sea persuade thee;
Yet in the Ocean dangers may invade thee.
The sea does favor no unfaithful men,
But for unfaithfulness does punish them.
Specially such as do their sweet-hearts wrong,
Since naked Venus from the green sea sprung.
I take care for him, that would me forsake,
And am afraid the sea should thee shipwreck.
Live, for bad fame is worse then death can be,
When the world shall say that thou have killed me.
Suppose a storm at sea should thee assail;
Would not thy courage then begin to quail?
Thy false oaths then would come into my mind,
And Dido whom thou killd'st by being unkind,
My bloody shape would hideously appear
Before thy eyes, with loose long-spreading hair*
Then thou would say, this thundering storm is sent
Justly, for my deserved punishment.
Until thou may go safely, do but stay;
It would comfort me, if thou would delay
Thy voyage; spare Ascanius thy son,
Though I by thee to untimely death do come.
What have Ascanius, or those gods deserved
Drowning, which were by thee from fire preserved?
But though thou bragd'st to me; yet I do fear,
Thy gods and father thou did never bear
Upon thy shoulders, through the flaming fire;
But I am jealous that thou were a liar;
For I am not the first, whom thou did wrong,
Or first deceive with thy alluring tongue.
Ascanius mother too by thee was left,
And thy unkindness her of life bereft.
Thou told'st me so much, which I now believe,
And the sad story made my heart to grieve;
And that the gods do hate thee it appears,
Who had wandered by Sea and Land seven years;
Droven by storms I did thee entertain,
And gave thee all, ere I scarce knew thy name;
And would that I had only been content
To have entertained thee, and no further went.
For I should happy be if Fame would die,
And never tell how I with thee did lie.
That day was fatal, when a shower us drove
To meet together in a silent Cave.
Me thought I heard the Nymphs begin to howl,
The Furies at that present time, did scowle.
Now thou do punish me for Sichaeus sake,
To whom my faith I then did violate.
And sure my ghost will even blush for shame,
When after death we two do meet again.
Sichaeus Statue in a sacred place
Stands covered with leaves, and a woollen case:
From whence me thought a hollow voice did say,
And sometimes call Elisa Come away.
I come, and yet the fault that I have done
Is the cause that I am so slow to come.
Pardon me, since that no base fellow wrought
My ruin, and this may excuse my fault.
Since he from Venus and Anchises came,
I hop^d that he faithful would remain.
And though I erred, I had a good intent;
Of his falsehood, not my error I repent;
But as at first, so now at last I find,
"That fortune still does prove to me unkind,
My brother at the sacred Altar killed
My husband, and his blood for wealth he spilled,
And after like a banished creature I
From my own Country was enforced to fly.
Scaping my brother, strangers here received me,
And bought this land which I would have given thee:
And built this City, compassing it withal,
Even round about with a defensive wall.
Then sudden wars did me straightway invade,
Before that I the City gates had made:
And many suitors did of me approve,
Who all did come to woo, and win my love.
Now to Iarbas I yield me up at leisure,
Since thou have obtained of me thy own pleasure.
My brother in my blood desires to stain
His hand, by whom my husband first was slain.
Aeneas, do not thou presume to touch
The Altars of those gods, who would too much
By thy presumptuous prayers be profaned,
"Lift not unto the gods an impure hand;
For if to worship them thou should aspire,
They would be sorry that they escaped the fire.
And that I am with Child too it may be,
And that the fruits of love now grow in me.
And as thou have the mother first undone,
So to untim^ly death my babe shall come.
So that Ascanius his unborn brother
Shall die, like an unripe fruit in his mother.
But Mercury for staying here has chid thee,
I would he had for coming too forbid thee.
And I do with the Trojans had never found,
Nor landed on the Carthaginian ground.
Tossed with contrary winds, thou have long time
Soug^t that land which Apollo did assign.
To return to Troy thou would not take such pain,
If Hector lived, and Troy did stand again,
Thou seek not Simoeis, but swift Tybris River,
And shall be a stranger when thou come thither;
Which thou shall not discover, nor behold,
Until perhaps thou art in years grown old.
But rather take this Kingdom, and the wealth
Of Pigmalion, as a dowry to my self.
Let ancient Troy in Carthage now remain,
Take thou the Royal Scepter and here reign.
If thou, or else thy young son Iulus are,
Desiro^s to get honor by the war;
Here thou shall find a foe to overcome,
For sometimes the red colors and the drum
Do banish peace, therefore I entreat of thee
As thou love thy Countries gods, and company,
Spare me; I beg it by thy brothers darts,
Young Cupid that does wound all mortal hearts.
So may thy Trojans still victorious be,
And Troys destruction end thy misery.
So may Ascanius in his youth be blessed,
So may Anchises bones still softly rest.
Though I offer thee my self, do not reject me;
What is my fault, but that I do affect thee?
I am not come of the Mycenian blood,
By friends, or father, thou art not withstood.
Or if to call me wife thou do disdain,
Call me thy Hostess, I will take that name.
Or with any other name thou shall assign,
I am content, so Dido may be thine.
I know the seas, that beat the Afric shore,
At certain seasons may be passed over;
When the wind stands fair, thou will sail away,
Now thy ships in the weedy heaven stay.
The time of thy departure let me know,
I Will not stay thee, if thou desir'st to go.
But yet thy company desire some rest,
To rig, and trim thy torn ships were best.
O! if I have deserved any way
Of thee, I beg of thee a while to stay,
Until the sea grow calm, and till my love
By use of time more temperate do prove,
That I may learn, by length of time to be
Valiant, in suffering of adversity.
If not, to kill my self is my intent,
If to be cruel to me thou art bent.
For I do wish, thou could behold or see,
In what sad posture I do write to thee.
One hand to write unto thee does afford,
The other hand does hold thy Trojan sword:
And down my cheeks the trickling tears do slide
On the sword, which shall with my blood be died.
It was thy fatal gift, and it may be
To send me to my grave, thou gav'st it me;
And though this first do wound my outward part,
Yet cruel love long since did wound my heart.
O sister Anna, thou that counselld'st me
To yield to love, shall now my funeral see.
On th'urne, to which my ashes they commit,
Elisa wife to Sichaeus shall be writ.
And these two verses shall engraven be
Upon the marble that does cover me;
Aeneas did to me my death afford,
For Dido killed her self with his own sword.

The Argument of the eighth Epistle.
HErmion^ the daughter of M^nelaus and Helena, was by Tyndarus her Grandfather
by the mothers side, to whom Menelaus had committed the government of his
house, while he went to Troy, betroathed to Oristes, the son of Agamemnon and
Clytemnestra. Her father Menelaus not knowing thereof, had betroathed her to
Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, who at last returned from the Trojan wars, stole
away Hermione. But she ha^ing Pyrrhus, and loving Orestes, admonishes him by
this Letter, that she might be easily taken from Pyrrhus; and she obtained her
desire. For Orestes being freed from his madness, for murdering Aegysthus and
his mother, he slew Pyrrhus in Apollo's Temple, and took her again.

HERMIONE to ORESTES.
HErmione writes to him that was of late
Her husband, now another wife by fate.
Pyrrhus, Achilles stout son takes delight
To keep me from thee against law and right.
I did strive with him, but my force did fail,
A woman's strength could not against him prevail.
Pyrrhus, quoth I, what do thou do? ere long,
My Lord on thee will surely revenge this wrong.
But of Orestes name he would not hear,
But dragged me home even by my loosened hair.
Should the barbarous foe Lacedemon take,
He could but thus of me a captive make.
And conquering Greece used not Andromache,
When they set fire of Troy, as he used me.
But Orestes if thou art touched with this despite,
Then fetch me back again, I am thy right.
To fetch thy stolen cattle thou will go,
Why then to fetch thy wife art thou so slow?
By thy father why do not example take?
Who by a just war did his wife fetch back.
Had he led in his Court an idle life,
Thy mother then had been young Paris wife.
If thou do come, thou needst not to provide
A fleet, or store of Soldiers beside;
Yet so I might be fetched back again,
A husband for his wife may war maintain.
And Atreus was Uncle unto either,
So that thou art my husband and my brother.
O! husband then, and brother, help thou me,
For these two names implore some help of thee.
My grandfather Tyndarus, grave in his life,
Delivered me unto thee as thy wife.
My father unto Pyrrhus promised me,
But my grandfather would dispose of me.
When I married thee, I did to none belong,
If Pyrrhus marry me, he does thee wrong.
My father will let us love, and enjoy,
For he was wounded by the winged boy,
And will permit us to love one another,
In the like sort as he did love my mother.
As he my mothers husband was, thou art
My husband, Pyrrhus plays Paris part.
Though he boast deeds were by his father done,
Thy father by his actions fame has won.
Achilles did for a common soldier stand,
But Agamemnon Captains did command.
Pelops, and his father thy Ancestors were,
Thou art but five descents from Jupiter.
Nor did thou courage want, though thou did kill
Thy father; and his precious blood did spill;
Would thy valor had been happilier employed,
Though he were unwillingly by thee destroyed.
For thou Aegystus kill'dst unluckily,
And did fulfill thy hapless fate thereby.
When Achilles urges this one fault of thine,
And before me does make it a great crime:
My blushing color, and my heart does rise,
And my old love revives, and glowing lies
Within my breast, if that Orestes be
By any one accused to Hermione.
For then I have no strength in any part,
As if a sword were thrust into my heart,
I weep, and then my tears my anger show
Which like two Rivers down my bosom flow.
Plenty of tears I only have, which rise,
Wetting my cheeks from the springs of my eyes.
And this sad fate, which happens unto me,
Has been the fortune of our family.
I need not tell how Jupiter became,
To deceive us, a fair and milk-white Swan.
Ho^ Hippodamia in a strangers Chariot,
Over the Hellespont was swiftly carried.
My mother Hellen, in Paris took delight,
For whom the Grecians ten whole years did fight.
My Grandfather, my Sister and each brother
Began to weep, for the loss of my mother;
And Leda did her earnest prayers prefer
Unto the gods, and to her Jupiter;
While I did tear my hair and to her cried,
Mother, must I without you here abide?
And lest that I should not be thought to be
Of Peleus most unhappy progeny;
My mother being with Paris gone away,
I unto Pyrrhus was soon made a prey.
If Achilles had escaped Apollo's bow,
He would have then condemned his son, I know.
He knew by Brise^ loss, which he could not brook,
That from their husbands wives should not be took,
Why are the gods thus cruel unto me!
What sad star ruled at my Nativity?
For in my younger years I was berest
Of my mother and was of my father left,
Who went unto the wars, yet ne'retheless
Although they lived, yet I was Parentless,
Nor could delight my mother, as you see
Children will do, with stammering flattery;
Nor round about her neck my weak arms clap,
While she would fondly set me on her lap.
Nor did she teach me how to dress my head,
Nor did she bring me to my marriage bed.
For when she did return (truth I Will not smother)
I did not know her then to be my mother.
I knew that she was Helen by her beauty,
She knew not me when as I did my duty.
Amongst all these miseries I most happy am,
That Orestes for my husband I did gain.
Yet he, alas, shall from me taken be,
Unless he do fight for himself and me:
Pyrrhus has took me, and does me enjoy,
This is all I got by the fall of Troy.
Yet while the Sun with his bright rays does shine,
My sorrows are more gentle all that time.
But when at night with grief I go to bed,
And on my pillow rest my weary head;
The tears, when I should entertain soft sleep,
Spring in my eyes, and I begin to weep;
And from my husbands side as far off lie,
As if he were to me an enemy.
Sometimes through grief forgetting where I am,
I have touched some part of Pyrrhus, and again
I have plucked back my hand; for I did grutch,
That I his body with my hand should touch.
Such was my hatred, that I did esteem
My hands by touching him, had polluted been.
And it does often chance that I do call
Pyrrhus, Orestes, and it does befall
I love my error, as a sigh of luck,
When I have thy name, for his name mistook,
By Jupiter, from whom our house did rise,
Who rules both the Sea, the Land, and skies,
I pray, by thy Fathers, and thy Uncles bones,
Which do rest underneath their marble stones,
That I may presently resign my life,
Or else may be once more Orestes wife.

The Argument of the ninth Epistle.
JVpiter having joined three nights in one, begot Hercules on Alemena, in the
shape of her husband Amphytrio; Eurystheus King of the Mycenians, by Junoes
subtilty persuades him to attempt difficult labors, so to endanger his life.
Yet he by strength and policy, always got the victory; and to obtain Deianira
for his Wife, Achelous a River of Aetolia, after many changes of shapes, he
overthrew in the figure of a Bull; yet though he overcame many Monsters, he was
overcome by love. For Eurythus, King of Oechalia denying him his daughter Iole,
formerly promised unto him, he took his City, s^ew Eurythus and obtained Iole,
with whose love he was so blinded, that at her command he laid by his Lions
Skin and Club, and put^ (...) on Women's clothes, sat and spun amongst her
Maids; and was a^ subject to Iole, as he had been to Omphale Queen of Lydia, on
whom he begot Lamus. His wife Deianira Daughter of Oenus King of Calydon,
understanding of his base and servile dotage, writes to him, and says before
him his former worthy acts, that this present disgrace by comparison with them,
might appear more to the life. But as she was writing she understood of
Hercules suffering, by the shirt she had sent him dipped in the blood of the
Centaure Nessus, to retain him from wandering affection (sor so had Nessus
persuaded her, whom in passing over the River Evenus, Hercules flew with a
poisoned arrow) being much grieved hereat, she clears her self that she did not
thereby intend his destruction, but the regaining of his love, and concludes
with a T^agical resolution.

DEIANIRA to HERCULES.
I Am glad thou Occhalia have won,
For husbands honor does the wife become.
But I am sorry that a Captives beauteous look
Should take the conqueror, that has her took.
When Fame the sad report at first did bring
To the Greek Cities on her nimble wing;
Me thought this action was not of the color
Of those brave deeds, which show thy glory fuller;
Whom Juno, nor her labors ever broke,
Iole made him yield unto her yoke.
Euryslheus is glad, and Jupiters wife,
To see this action blot thy fair spent life:
Nor can I think three nights were joined in one
At thy begetting or conception.
Venus is worse then Juno thy step-dame,
For by oppressing thee she raised thy fame.
But Venus makes thee basely think it meet,
To put thy humble neck beneath her feet.
The world, environed round with the blew seas,
Was settled by thy conquering hand in peace,
By which both sea and land enjoy sweet rest,
Thy fame is spread abroad from East to West.
Hercules strength, and Atl^ss'es were even,
Fos Hercules and Atlas bore up heaven.
But if with lust thy former deeds thou stain,
Thy glory turns to thy great shame.
In thy Cradle thou were like unto thy father,
When thou did strangle two Snakes joined together.
Thy childhood and thy man hood I do see,
But far unlike, and far most different be.
Thy beginning was far better than thy end,
The last act of thy life does most offend.
Wild beasts, and chemies thou could overcome,
But love the victory over thee has won.
Some think I am well married, because I am
Wife to great Hercules; that very name
Is happiness; besides my father-in law
Is Jove, whose thunder keeps the world in awe.
But I am over-matched with thee now,
Unequal Oxen aukwardly do plough.
Thy honor like a burden I do carry,
"She Is fitly matc^t, that does her equal marry.
For Hercules is abs^nt from me still,
While he fierce monsters and wild beasts does kill,
Thus widowed, I offer sacrifice,
Lest thou should be slain by thy enemies.
Me thinks I see how thou do take delight,
With Serpents, Boars, and Lions still to fight:
Strange visions in my sleep to me appear,
And my dreams often put me in fear.
Sometimes I do believe the common fame,
Sometimes I hope, sometimes I fear again,
My mother is from home, and does complain,
Because her beauty did a god inflame.
Amphytrio thy own father is from home,
And little Hillus also thy young son.
I only do perceive Eurystheus has
Made thee a sacrifice to Juno's wrath.
To perform labors he did thee persuade,
Which done, the goddess wrath is not allayed.
And to increase my grief thou do approve
A captive maid, who is become thy love.
I will not mention how thou did dally
With Auge in the sweet Parthenian valley.
Or how the Nymph Ormenes was defiled,
And wantonly by thee was got with child:
Nor will I urge it as a fault, not I,
Thou did with Thespius fifty daughters lie.
That which grieves me was thy adultery,
Which thou committedst with thy Omphale,
And on her did beget a bastard son,
To whom I must a mother-in-law become.
The winding River which they call Maeander,
Who in his turning banks about does wander,
Has seen when Hercules a fine chain wore
On those shoulders which heavens weight once bore.
Did thou not blush to wear a golden twist?
Or bracelet made of pearl about thy wrist?
Or that a golden bracelet should contain
Thy brawny arms which had so stoutly slain
The Nemean Lion, whose rough shaggy hide
Thou did wear on thy shoulder and left side?
Nay besides this thou did descend to wear
A Coif, or Kerchiffe on thy stubborn hair.
It were more sit thy Temples had been crowned,
With victorious wreaths, than with a fillet bound.
Yet as if thou were some young girl, thou have
Worn Omphale's girdle round about thy wast.
Thou thought not of fiery Diomede as then,
Who fed his horses with the flesh of men.
Had Bustris seen thee dressed thus, he would be
Ashamed that he had been overcome by thee.
Anteus may knock off his bolts, and chain,
And set his neck at liberty again.
For what captive is there with patience can
Suffer under such an effeminate man?
Besides, amongst the Grecian Maids ('it is said)
That thou did sit, and spin, and were afraid,
Lest thy mistress Omphale, when she espied thee,
Idle by chance, should frown on thee, and chide thee.
And thy victorious hands did not then scorn
To spin, which once such labors did perform.
For thou did draw the thread with thy huge thumb,
And gav'st account at night what thou have spun.
Sometimes as thou sat'st spinning, thou have broke
With boyslerous handling, both thy wheel and rock:
And like a poor unhappy wretch, it is said,
That of thy mistress thou were so afraid,
That if she chid thee, thou would trembling stand,
For fear of swaddling with a Holly wand;
And to win favor, thou would often tell
Of thy labors, which thou ought to conceal:
Discoursing unto her how thou had won
Much honor, by those deeds which thou had done;
How in thy childhood thou did boldly tear
The Hydra's speckled jaws, which hideous were;
How thou did kill the Erimambean Boar,
Which on the ground lay weltring in his goar.
And then of Diomedes did relate,
Who nailed the heads of men upon his gate,
Fatting his pampered Horses with their flesh,
Until thou did his cruelty suppress;
And how thou had the monster Cacus stain,
That kept his flocks upon the hills of Spain;
And of three-headed Cerberus thou did tell,
Who by his snaky hair thou drag'dst from hell:
And how the Hydra by thy hand was slain,
Whose heads being lopt off would grow forth again.
And of Anteus, whom thou crushed to death
Between thy arms, and did squeeze out his breath,
And how the Centaures thou subdu'st by force
That were half men, and half like to a Horse.
When thou were in soft silken robes arrai'd,
To tell these stories were not thou dismayed?
Did thou think whilst thou did thy labors tell,
That a woman's habit did become thee well?
While Omphale has took thy Lions skin
Away from thee, and dressed her self therein,
To boast now of thy valor it is vain,
For Omphale in thy stead plays the man:
For she in valor does exceed thee far,
Since she has conquered the conqueror;
And by subjecting thee, she now has won
The glory, which did unto thee belong.
O shame to think! the skin which thou did rea^
Off the Lions ribs, thy Omphale does wear;
Thou art deceived, it is not the Lions spoil;
Thou foil'dst the Lion, she thy self does foil;
And she that only knows how to spin,
To wear thy weapons also does begin.
She takes the conquering Club into her hand,
And afterward before her glass will stand,
Viewing her self, to see what she has done,
If that her husbands weapons her become.
I could not believe, when I heard it said,
The sad report unto my heart convei'd
Much grief; but now my wretched eyes beheld
The Harlot Iole, that thy courage quelled.
Such are my wrongs, that I must need reveal
My grief and sorrow I cannot conceal.
Thou broughtst her through the City in despite,
Because I should behold the hated sight;
Not like a Captive, with her hair unbound,
And a dejected look fixed on the ground;
But of rich cloth of gold her garments were,
Such as thy self in Ph^ygia did wear
She in her passage graciously did look
On the people as if she had Hercules took;
As if her father lived and did command
Oechalia, which was raised by thy hand.
Deianira it may be thou will forsake,
And of thy former whore a wife wilt make;
So that Hymen shall both join the heart and hands
Of Hercules and Iole in his bands.
When in my mind these passages I behold,
My hands and limbs with fear grow stiff and cold.
In me thou formerly did take delight,
And for my sake two several times did fight;
Plucking off Achelous horn, who after
Did hide his head in his own muddy water.
And Nessus was slain by the poisoned head
Of thy arrow, whose blood died the River red.
But O alas! I heard abroad by same,
Thou art tormented with much grief and pain,
By the shirt dipped in his blood, which I sent thee,
But yet indeed no harm at all I meant thee.
If it be so, then what am I become?
What is it that my furious love has done?
O Deianira straight resolve to die,
So end at once thy grief and misery.
Shall this same poison^d shirt tear off his skin?
And will thou live that has the causer bin
Of all his torment? No, though not my life,
My death shall show that I was Hercules wife.
And, Meleager, I will show thereby
My self thy sister, I Am resolved to die.
O unhappy fate! Oe^^us royal throne
(My Father who is very aged grown)
Agri^is has, Tydeus in foreign land
Does wander still, and in the fatal brand
Meleag^r perished, and my mother killed
Her self, and with her hand her own blood spilled.
Then why does D^ianira doubt to die?
And so conclude this wicked Tragedy?
Yet this one suit to thee I only move;
And beg this of thee for our former love;
That thou would not believe, or think I meant
To procure thy death, by that gift I sent.
For when the cruel Centaure bleeding lay
With thy arrow in his breast, he then did say,
This blood, if thou the virtue of it prove,
Will cause affection, and procure true love.
But now his treachery I have understood;
For I dipped a shirt into his poisoned blood;
And sent it, which has caused thy misery;
O Deianira straight resolve to die.
Farewell my Father, George too farewell,
Farewell my brother and Country where I dwell.
And I do bid farewell to the daylight,
Of which my eyes shall never more have sight.
Farewell to Hyllus my young little son,
Farewell my husband; Death, I come, I come.

The Argument of the tenth Epistle.
MInos the son of Jupiter and Europa, because the Athenians ha^ treacherously
slain his son Androg^us, enforced them by a sharp war to send him every year
as a tribute, seven young Men, and as many young Virgins to be devoured by the
Minataure, which by Dadalus Art Pasiphas had by a Bull, while her husband Minos
was at the Athenian wars. The lot falling on Thes^us, he was sent amongst the
rest; but Ariadne instructed him how to kill the Minataure, and return again
out of the Labyrinth, as Catullus says, Errabunda r^gens tenui vestigia filo.
Guiding his steps, which she led,
By a Clew of slender thread.


Afterward Theseus departing from Creete with Ariadne and Phadra, he arrived at
the Isle Nanos, where Bacchus admonished him to leave Ariadne, and he
accordingly lef^ her when she was fast asleep: As Soon as she awaked, she writ
this Letter, complaining of Theseus cruelty and ingratitude, and in a pitiful
manner entreats him to come back again, and take her into his ship.

ARIADNE to THESEUS.
I Have found all kinds of beasts much more mild
And gentle than thy self, who have beguiled
My trust: for it had been more safe for me,
To have believed a salvage beast, than thee.
This letter, Theseus, from thence does come,
Where thou did leave me, and away did run;
When I was fast asleep, then thou did leave me,
Watching that opportunity to deceive me:
It was at that time when the heavens strew
Upon the earth their sweet and pearly dew.
And the first waking birds did now begin,
In the cool boughs to tune their notes and sing:
I being half asleep and half awake,
Yet so much knowledge had, that for thy sake,
With my hand I felt about thy warm place,
Thinking indeed my Theseus to embrace:
I felt about the bed, but he was gone,
I felt about again, but there was none.
Then with my wretched hand I struck my breast,
And tore my loosened hair, that was undrest.
The Moon shined bright so that I looked over
To the sea-ward, but saw nothing but the shore;
Now here, and there confusedly I ran,
The heavy sand did my swift feet detain:
At last ^ called Theseus on the shore;
The hollow Rocks thy Name did back restore;
The echo called as many times as I,
And seemed to help me in my misery.
There was a Mountain topt with some few bushes,
Under whose rocky sides the Sea still rushes:
On it I clamber'd up, love gave me strength,
Whence I could see far unto sea at length:
From hence (for I the winds did cruel find)
Disc^rn'd a ship that sailed with the North wind;
I saw it, or I thought I did behold
I^, which did make my heart half dead, and cold:
Yet sorrow would not suffer me to lie
Long in this Trance, but coming out often I
Cried out, O Theseus! whither do thou run?
Return, O Theseus, and to me back come.
Turn back thy ship again for to take me,
Thou want one yet of thy company.
Thus did I cry, and strike my breast betwixt,
While blows and words were both together mixed.
Though thou could not hear me, yet I did stand
Spreading my arms abroad upon the land,
That thou might see me; and a white flag hung
To make thee see me, who from me did run.
Thy ship at last did sail quite out of my sight,
And then the tears ran down my cheeks outright.
For how could my sad eyes but choose to weep,
After thy sails out of my sight did sl^p?
Abroad I wandered with loose flowing hair,
Like women that by Bacchus enraged are.
Sometimes I looking unto sea would sit
On a stone, as void as the stone of wit:
Then to the bed I walked, where he had lain,
Which never should receive us more again;
And it a pleasure unto me did seem,
To touch the warm place where thy limbs had been:
And in the very place I down would lie,
With weeping tears, and thus begin to cry:
Sweet bed, we both have lain on thee together,
As two lay down, two should have risen together.
But I on this forsaken Isle am left,
Of men and all humanity bereft.
The sea encompasseth this Island round,
No ship or Pilot from this Isle is bound.
Suppose I could a ship and wind command,
I dare not sail back to my Fathers land.
Though my ship through the smooth sea did glide on,
And winds stood fair, I am banished from home,
And from Creet, that a hundred Cities had,
Where Jove was nursed when he was a lad.
I betrayed my Father by that plot I framed,
And Country, where he long uprightly reignd.
And lest thou in the Labyrinth had died,
Gave thee a Clue of thread thy steps to guide.
By those past dangers thou did swear to me,
That thou, while I did live would constant be.
I live, and find thee false, if it may be said
She lives, that by a false man is betrayed
Would thy Club had killed me, as't did my brother,
Then in my death thou all my wrongs might smother.
Now I conceive what I must suffer here,
And what I may endure, does urge my fear.
A thousand shapes of death methinks I see,
The fear or death is worse then death can be,
Now lest some Wolf should come, I am in fear,
Who with his greedy teeth my limbs should tear:
Perhaps this land does yellow Lions breed,
And cruel Tigers from this Isle proceed.
Perhaps great sea-calves on the shore abide,
Or else the sword may pierce my tender side.
Or like a Captive I may be enchain'd,
And unto servile labor be constrained;
Whose Father Minos was, and whose Mother
Was Phoeb^s daughter, which I need not smother.
And that which rather should remembered be,
That I was once betrothed unto thee.
If I look to the shore, the land or sea,
The sea and land do seem to threaten me.
If to heaven, to the gods I dare not pray,
But I am left unto the wild beasts a prey.
The men that here inhabit I distrust,
Being deceived by thee my fears are just.
I wish now that Androgeus did live,
Whose death occasion of that tax did give.
I wish, O Theseus, thy Club had not slain
The monster, half a beast, and half a man.
Would I had not given thee a Clew of thread,
By which thy steps in coming back were led.
I wonder not thou got'st the victory,
Or that th^s Cret^^ beast was slain by thee.
Thou had an iron breast, which was so armed,
So that thou could not by his horns be harmed.
Sure an obdurate Adamant was i'nt,
And Theseus was all over as hard as flint.
O cruel sleep! why did I slumbering lie?
Would I had slept unto eternity.
O cruel winds! why did ye stand so fair,
As if ye did desire to breed my care?
O cruel hand of thine! which has slain me,
And my poor brother by infidelity.
My sleep, the wind, and thou, did all conspire,
And to betray a maid did all desire.
Now at my death my mother shall not weep,
Nor close mine eyes up in eternal sleep.
My hapless ghost shall wander in the air,
To embalme my body no friend shall care.
Sea-Vultures shall upon my carcass light,
For I shall have at all no funeral Rite.
But unto Athens when thou art come home,
Then thou sitting upon thy royal Throne,
Shall tell how thou the Minotaure did slay,
Out of the Labyrinth ^^nding the right way;
And tell amongst thy acts, how thou have left
Me on this Island, of all help bereft.
Aegeus, nor yet Aethra cannot be
Thy Parents, Rocks were Parents unto thee.
If from thy ships decks thou had spied me,
My sad looks unto pity had moved thee
Think now thou see me standing on a Rock,
Whose chalky sides the beating waves do mock.
See how my hair is over my shoulders spread,
My garments wet with tears, that I have shed.
And how my body trembling too and fro,
Like shaking corn, which the North wind does bl^w;
Or like some miss-shap'd Letter I do stand,
That has been written by a trembling hand.
To urge my merit I dare not presume,
"No thanks are due to service that is done.
Yet there is no reason thou should punish me
With death, because from death I saved thee.
To thee my hands I heave up and do spread,
Which with beating my breast are wearied.
I entreat thee by my hair, which I do spread,
And by my tears for thy unkindness shed,
Turn back thy ship. O Theseus, for my sake;
Though I am dead, my carcass with thee take*

The Argument of the eleventh Epistle.
MAcareus and Canace, the son and daughter of Aeolus, King of the winds, did
love one another, and thinking to color over their incestuous fault with
natural affection. Canace brought forth a son, and sending it out of the Court
to be nu^st abroad, the unhappy infant ^ryed, and so discovered it self to his
Grandfather, who incensed with his childrens wickedness, commanded the innocent
infant to be cast forth unto Dogges^ and by one of his guard sent a sword to
Canace, as a silent remembrance of her desert, wherewith she killed her self,
Yet before her death, she declares by this Epistle to Macareus, who was fled
into the Temple of Apollo, her own misfortune: entreating him to gather up the
childs bones, and lay them with hers in the same Urne or funeral Pitcher.

CANACE to MACAREUS.
IF blotted Letters may be understood,
Receive this Letter blotted with my blood.
My right hand holds a pen, my left a sword,
My p^per lies before me on the board.
Thus Canace does to her brother write,
This posture yields my father much delight:
Who I do wish would a spectator be,
As he is Author of my Tragedy.
Who fiercer then winds blowing from the East,
With dry cheeks would behold my wounded breast.
For since to rule the winds he has commission,
He Is of his subjects cruel disposition.
Over the Northern, and South winds he reigns;
The wings of the East and West winds he restrains.
And yet although the winds he does command,
His sudden anger he cannot withstand.
The Kingdom of the winds he can restrain,
"But over his own vices cannot reign.
For what although my Ancestors have been
Unto the gods and Jupiter akin?
Now in my fearful hand I hold a sword,
That fatal gift, which must my death afford.
O Macar^us, would that I had died,
Before we were in close embraces tied.
More then a sister ought* I did affect thee,
More then a brother ought thou did respect me.
For I did feel, how Cupid with his dart
(Of whom I often had heard) did wound my heart.
My color straightway did wax green and pale,
My stomach to my meat began to fail.
I could not sleep, the night did seem a year,
I often sighed, when no body did hear.
Yet why I sighed, I no cause could show;
I loved, and yet what love was did not know.
My old Nurse found out how my pulse did move,
And she first told me that I was in love:
But when I blushed with a down-cast look,
Which silent signs she for confession took.
But now the burden of my swelling womb
Grew heavy, being to full ripeness come.
What herbs and medicines did not she, and I
Use, to enforce abortive delivery,
Concealed from thee? Yet Art could not prevail,
The quickened child grew strong, our Art did fail.
And now nine Moons were fully gone and past,
The tenth in her bright Chariot made great have.
I know not whence my sudden gripes did grow:
Nor what pains belonged to childbirth did know:
I cried out, but my Nurse my words did stay,
And stopped my mouth, as I there crying lay.
What shall I do? gripes force me to complain;
But my Nurse, and fear of crying-out restrain.
So that I did suppress my groans, and cries,
And drunk the tears that flowed down from my eyes.
While thus Lucina did deny her aid,
Fearing my fault in death should be betrayed.
Thou by my side most lovingly did lie,
Tearing thy hair to see my misery;
And with kind words thy sister thou did cherish,
Praying that two might not at one time perish.
And thou did put me still in hope of life,
Saying dear sister thou shall be my wife.
These words revived me, when I was half dead,
So that I presently was brought to bed.
Thou did rejoice, but fear did me afright,
To hide it from my father Aeolus sight.
The careful Nurse the new born child did hide
In Olive boughs, with swaddling vine leaves tied:
And so a solemn sacrifice did fain;
The people and my father believed the same.
Being near the gate, the child that straight did cry,
To his grandfather was betrayed thereby;
Aeolus tearing forth the child, discries
Their cunning and pretended sacrifice.
As the sea trembles when light winds do blow,
Or as an Aspen leaf shakes to and fro,
Even so my pale and trembling limbs did make
The bed whereon I lay begin to shake.
He comes to me, my fault he does proclaim,
And he could scarce from striking me contain.
I could do nothing else but blush, and weep,
My tongue tied up with fear did silent keep.
He commanded my s^n should be straightway
Cast forth, and made to beasts and birds a prey.
And then it cried, so that you would have thought,
His crying had his Grandfather besought
To pity him: what grief it was to me,
Dear brother, you may guess, when I did see,
When ^ saw my ch^lde ca^ried to the Wood,
To feed the mountain Wolves, that live by blood.
When thus my child unto the woods was sent,
My father out of my bedchamber went.
Then I did beat my tender breast at last,
And tore my cheeks, his sentence being past.
When straightway one of my Fathers Guard came in,
And with a sad look did this message bring;
Aeolus sends this sword, and does desire
Thee use it, as thy merit does require.
His will (quoth I) be done, I Will use his sword,
My Fathers gift shall my sad death afford.
O Father, shall this sword the portion be,
And dowry which you mean to give to me?
O Hymen put out thy deceived light,
And nimbly now betake thy self to fight:
Ye Furies bring your smoaky Torches all,
To light the wood at my sad funeral.
O sisters, may you far more happ'ly marry
Than I, that by my own fault did miscarry.
Yet what could be my newborn babes offense,
Which might his Grandfather so much incense?
Of death, alas, he could not worthy be:
For my offense, he is punished for me.
O Son! thou breed'st thy mother much annoy,
No sooner bred, but beasts do thee destroy.
O Son the pledge of my unhappy love,
One day thy day of birth and death does prove.
I had not time t'imbalme thee with my tears,
Nor in thy funeral fire to throw thy hairs;
To give thee one cold kiss I had no power,
For the wild greedy beasts did thee devour.
But I sweet child, will straightway die with thee,
I will not long a childless Parent be.
And thou, O brother, since it is in vain
For me to hope to see thee once again;
Gather the small remainder, which the wild
And salvage beast have left of thy young child.
And with his mothers bones, let them have room,
Within one ^^ne, or in one narrow Tomb.
Weep at my funeral; who can reprove thee,
For showing love to her that once did love thee?
And here at last I do entreat thee still,
To perform thy unhappy sisters will;
For I will kill my self without delay,
And so my fathers hard command obey.

The Argument of the twelfth Epistle.
JAson being a lusly comely young man: as soon as he arrived at Colchos, Medea
the Daughter of Aeta King of Colchos, and Hecate, fancied and entertained him;
and upon promise of marriage, instructed him how he should obtain the beauty he
desired. Having gotten the golden Fleece, he fled away with Medea. Her father
Aeta pursuing after them, she tears in pieces her brother Absy^tus limbs, whom
she had taken with her, thereby to stay her father while he gathered up his
Sons bones. And so at length safely arriving in Thessaly, Jason renewed his
Father Aesons age, by Medeas help, who also made Pelias Daughters kill their
Father. For pretending that she would make him young, as she had done Aeson,
she persuaded his Daughters, with a knife to let out all his old black blood,
that she might infuse new fresh blood instead thereof. His Daughters having
done so, Pelias straightway dyed; Jason hereupon, or for some other cause,
repudiates Medea, and marries Creusa the daughter of Creon King of Corinth;
Medea herewith enraged Writes to Jason, expostulating with him of his
ingratitude, and threatens speedy revenge, unless he receive her again.

MEDEA to JASON.
AT that time Queen of Corinth I did reign,
When thou did seek by my art help to gain.
I wish my thread of life, which then was ^pun
By the three sisters, had been cut and done;
Then might Medea have died innocent;
My life since then has been a punishment.
Woe's me that ere the lusty youth of Greece
Sailed hither, for to fetch the golden Fleece.
Would Colchos never had their Argos seen,
Would the Grecians never on our shore had been:
Why was I with thy lovely brown hair took?
Or with thy tempting tongue and comely look?
Or at least when thy ship came to our shore,
Bringing thy self, with gallants many more,
I might have let thee run and found a death
By those fiery Oxen with their flaming breath*
I might have suffered thee to sow that seed,
Whence armed men did spring up and proceed,
That the sower might by his own tillage die,
When each ear of co^^e did prove an enemy.
They had preven^ed then thy tre^chery,
And kept me both from grie' and misery.
To upbraid thy ingratitude pleases me,
In this alone I can triumph over thee.
For when thy ship arrived at the shore
Of Colch^s, where it n^re had been before.
O then Med^a was beloved there
Of thee, as thy new wife's beloved here.
My father was as rich as hers, he reigned
Over Corinth, which 'twixt two Seas is contained.
My father possessed all the Land which lay
Between Pon^us and snowy ^cythi^.
My father did thy Grecians entertain,
Affording lodging to thee and thy train,
I saw thee then, then did of thee enquire,
And then thy love did s^t my heart on fire,
I saw thee, and that sight to love did turn,
While my heart did like a great Taper burn.
Thy beauty drew me to my destined fate,
And thy fair eyes my eyes did captivate
Which thou percevid'st, for who can love conceal?
Whose glowing flame does it own self reveal
My father then commanded thee to yoke
Those Oxen that were to the plough never broak
For they were Mars his Oxen, whose horns were
Sharp, and their breath did like a flame appear.
They had brass hoo^^, and nostrils armed with brass,
Blackt with the breath that through them did pass.
And thou were bid to sow in the large field
That seed which did an armed ^eo ^e yield.
Which sprung up, would assail thee straight again;
Thou for thy harvest such a cr^p should gain
And thy last labor was to charm a sleep
The Dragon, that the golden ^eece did keep.
When Aeet^s said thus, you all st^aight rose,
And every one much coffeehouse shows.
So that you did your purple seats forsake,
And then the Table they away did take.
Great Creens daughter thou did now contemn,
And C^^^sas dowry could not help thee then.
Sadly thou did depart, and discontent,
yet my weeping eyes on thee still were bent,
And as thou w^ntst away this one word sell,
In a so^t murmr from my tongue; Farewell.
And when I went to bed. I never slept,
Wounded with love, all nigh^ I grieved and wept.
The fie^ce Bulls were alwa^es before my eyes.
And the Armed m^n which from the earth did rise;
And then the watchful Dragon did affright
My senses, and was still before my sight.
Thus love, and fear, my breast at once did trouble,
My love of thee did make my fear to double.
At last it chanced that early in the morning,
My loving sister came and found me mourning,
And lying on my face, with all my hair
Loose spread, the pillow wet with many a tear,
She and two sisters more did me invade,
With fair entreaties, for to help and aid
Jason, and his Thes^alians, who did want
My assistance, I in love their suit did grant.
There is a wood so dark with thick-leav'd trees,
That the bright Sun but seldom through it sees:
There does a Chapel of Diana's stand,
Whose golden statue there was rudely framed.
I know not whether this place is by thee
Forgotten, as thou have forgotten me.
We being thither come, thou then did break
Thy mind to me, and thus beganst to speak.
My life and fortunes are at thy command,
My life and death are both within thy hand.
you may let me perish if so be you will,
But it is more noble to preserve then kill.
Then by my present sorrows I entreat,
Which you can ease, if you the word would speak.
By thy kindred, and uncle Phoebus, who
Sees all things that on earth we mortals do.
By Diana's triple-sace, and sacred rites,
And Gods wherein this Nation delights.
O Virgin have some pity at this time
On me, and make me so for ever thine.
And though I cannot hope the gods should be
So kind and favorable unto me;
yet if you would be p^eased now to take
A T^essalian, and him a husband make.
Then I do promise, I will faithful be,
And vow, that I will marry none but thee.
Let Juno be a witness to my vow,
And Di^na in whose Temp^e we are now.
Thou took'st me by the hand, those words of thine
A maidens fancy did straight way in^^ine.
For such thy langu^ge was, as soon did move
My honest heart to entertain thy love.
By thy deceitful tears I was betrayed,
For they had ^ower to betray a Maid.
So that the ^ulls, whose breath like flames did smoa^^
I taught thee how to tame, and how to yoke.
And thou did sow the Dragons teeth for seed,
Whence armed ^^n did spring up and proceed.
I, that did give thee those securing ^^arms,
Grew pale to see those new-s^^ung men in arms.
When straight those earth-bred brethren there in ^^ght,
Did s^ay each other in a bloody fight*
The watchful Dragon now the earth did sweep,
While he upon his scaly breast did creep.
Where was the Dowry of thy royal wife?
Or King of Corinth? could they save thy life?
No it was I, that now am thus rejected,
And as a poor Enchantresse disrespected.
I charm^d the Dragons flaming eyes asleep,
That thou might get the Fleece which he did keep.
My Father I betrayed and I forsook,
My Country, and with thee a voyage took.
Though my life a sad banishment should be,
I was content to wander still with thee.
Thou of my Maidenhead did me deceive.
Who my Mother and my Sister both did leave.
Yet I ^e^t not my Brother; at that name,
Me thinks my pen stands still for very shame;
I fear to write that, which I di^ not fear
To do, 'twas I that did in pieces tear,
Thy scattered ^imbs, and when I had done so,
Guilty of thy blood, unto Sea did go.
And would the gods had drowned us in the sea,
Thou for decei^, I for ^redulity.
I would out ship, as it along had past,
Our joined bodies on some rock and dashed.
Or b^eaking Scyll^ had devou^ed us then,
S^ylla should punish such ungrateful men.
I wi^h C^arybdi^ had then pleased been,
With his round whirling waves to suck us in.
But thou in safety art to Thess^ly come,
Offering the go'den-^leece which thou have won,
Unto the gods. What should I mention
Pe^ias Daughters, whose intention
I wronged and made their virgin hand^ to kill
Their aged Father and his blood to spill?
Though oaths blame me, thou must praise me needs,
Since from my love of thee my guilt proceeds.
yet thou have cast me off now ne re the le^^e,
O I want words, that may my grief express!
When thou did bid me go, I did obey
Thy cruel doom, and forthwith went away
With my two Children, forth along went I,
And love, which always bears me company.
But when I did of thy late marriage hear,
Where Hymen's Torches burnt bright and clear;
And that new music, with new marriage ^ongs
Proclaimed your wedding, and thy unkind wrongs;
I fear, d, and yet could not the news believe,
yet a sad coldness to my breast did cleave.
But when I heard them to Hymen cry,
The more they cried, more was my misery.
My servants wept, and yet they hid their tears,
To bring this sad news to me each one fears.
And I do wish I had not known it still,
But yet my mind did prophecy some ill.
When my young Son, desirous for to see
Some novelty, as children use to be,
Standing at the door, did begin to cry,
Come Mother, see my Father passing by:
My father Jason, who in pomp does ride
In's Chariot, with his new married Bride;
Then I did beat my breast, my clothes I rent,
To tear my cheeks, my fing^rs then were bent.
My mind did urge me to revenge my wrong,
And thrust my self among the Bridal throng.
And having snatched thy garland from thy head,
My arms about thy middle to have spread;
And took possession of that at that time,
And to the people cried aloud, He Is mine.
Father rejoice, Colchians now be glad,
My brothers ghost has these infernals had,
For now I am ^orsaken, left, and crossed,
My Country, House, and kingdom I have lost:
Nay, I have ^ost my Husband too, and he
Was a kingdom of contentment unto me.
I that both D^agons, and wild Bulls could tame,
Yet by one ^^n am conquered again.
I that could quench hot fire with learned charms,
Cannot quen^^ the fire of love which my breast warmes
My charms and Art, and Potions do deceive me
And Ae^ates witchcrafts: cannot now relieve me.
Me thinks that I do hate the days for light,
And sorrow makes me lie awake all night,
And seldom is my miserable breast
With any quiet gentle sleep refresht.
I made the Dragon ^^st a^leep to fall,
But Art has on my self no power at all.
A whore embraces him, whom I preserved*
She reaps the fruit of that, which I de^erv'd,
And perhaps, whilst thou striv^st to please the ear
O^ thy Bride, who thy boasting tales does here
With admiration, thou do then disgrace,
Either my behavior, or homely face.
While out of foolish pride she laughs at me,
And does rejoice at my de^ormity.
Let her laugh and lie down upon her quilt,
She shall weep, when she has my anger felt.
M^dea will by sword, or poison be
Revenged on her hated enemy.
But if unto my prayers thou would attend,
Unto entreaties I would now descend.
I will a suppliant become to thee
Even at thy ^ee^, as thou have been to me.
If thou will not pity me, for my own sake,
Yet on my children some compassion take,
Their stepmother will most unkindly use them,
Nay, and perha^s most cruelly abuse them.
For they too much, alas, resemble thee,
In them thy living picture I can see.
And since they are of thee a living Type,
When I behold them, I am weeping ^ipe.
I entreat thee by the gods and ^^e Sun
My Uncle, and by that which I have done
For thy sake, and by my two Children dear,
Which the pledges of our true affection were;
Return to my bed, who left all for thee,
Be constant as thou did promise to me.
Against fierce Bulls thy aid I do not seek,
Or to charm the watchful Dragon fast asleep.
Thee I desire, whom I deserved have,
By Children hade by thee, thee I do crave.
If thou desirst a Dowry, I did yield
A Dowry which was told out in the field,
Which I did make thee pl^ugh, while thou did stay
Only to bear the Golden Fleece away.
My Dowry was the Golden Ram, which had
This Golden Fleece, and was so richly clad.
This was my Dowry, and should I ask thee
To restore it back, thou would deny it me.
My Dowry was the preserving thy self,
Can Creons Daughter bring thee so much wealth?
That thou do live and have another Bride,
It was my gift, else thou had surely died
And it was I, that gave thee life to be
Thus thanklesse, and ungrateful unto me.
I will revenge -- yet what does it pertain
Unto revenge, if I my wrath proclaim?
And tell what punishments on you shall light?
"The closest anger does most deadly strike.
I will follow as my rage does le^d me on.
Though I repent the a^t when it is done.
For I repent that I should e're preserve
A man that does so ill of me deserve.
The winged God has seen from the bl^w sky
My wrongs, my sorrows, and my injury.
And with a rage he has inspir d my heart
To plot, and act e're long some Tragic part.

The Argument of the thirteenth Epistle.
PRotesilaus the Son of Iphyclus sailing, as Homer reports with forty ships
to Troy, was shut up with the rest of the Grecians, in Aulo a Haven of Boeotia,
which when his Wife Laodami^, the Daughter of Acas^us and Laodathea understood,
she dearly loving her Husband, and being troubled much with dreams' w^it this
Epistle unto him: and admonished him to remember the Oracle, and abstain from
the wars. For the Or^cle had given this answer to the Greci^ns, that h^
should peri^h, that first went a ^hore, and set foot upon the Troj^n ground:
B^t couragio^s Protes^la^i was the first that landed and was slain by Hector.

LAODAMIA to PROTESILAUS.
LAodam^a does to thee send health,
Wishing that she might come to thee her self.
I hear that tho^ in Aulus art wind-bound,
Would I had of the winds such favor found,
To resist thy going hence, and hinder it,
Then for the Sea to grow rough it was fit.
Then I had kissd thee oftener, and at large
Had spoken more and given thee thy charge.
But when the wind stood fair, thou could not stay,
For it did drive thy swelling sails away.
Thy Mariners had what they did require,
It was not I, that did this wind desire.
The wind that for the Mariners stood fair,
Stood cross for thee, and I, that lovers were.
And me from Protesilaus did divide
while we were both in sweet embraces tied.
My broken words short of my meaning fell,
I scarce had time to speak this word, farewell.
For the North wind thy h^llovv sails did stretch,
And from me did Protesilaus fetch.
I looked as long as I thy ship could see,
And I did send a long look after thee.
When thou were out of sight, yet I could see
Thy ship, and to behold it pleased me:
But when both thee, and thy swift sailing ship,
Out of my sight did both together slip.
A sudden darkness in my eyes I found,
And presently I fell down in a swound.
So that my mother and old Acastus too,
Although much diligence they both did show,
Could ^etch me back to life, although at last,
Cold water they into my ^ace did cast.
T^eir needless love was thus expressed, but I
Am sorry that they did not let me dye:
For when my senses did return again,
My love returned too with a new flame;
And chaste affection could not spare my breast;
'Those who do love, must never hope to rest.
Now I took no delight to dress my hair,
Nor to wear rich apparel took I care.
And as those women Bacchus has inspired
With a touch of his Viny staff, and fired
Their bosoms, that they run now here, now there;
Such did I in my furious rage appear,
The talkin wives of Phylace did come
To comfort me, and thus their speech begun.
L^od^^ia courage take, put on
Such royal robes as may your birth become.
Alas! shall I in purple robes delight,
While that my Husband at Troy's wall does fight*
Shall I my hair in curious manner dre^se,
While a weighty Helmet does his hair press?
Shall I in new apparel gay appear,
While my Lord does a Coat of Armor wear?
While thou art at the wars, like one forlorn
In careles^e habit I at home will mourn
O Paris, thou that wast born to destroy
With thy fresh beauty the old City Troy*
As thou were a wonton guest, may thou be
A coward, and a milk sop enemy.
Would Helena had not unto thee seemed
So fair, nor she thy beauty so esteemed.
O Menelaus, thou with earnest strife
Do labor to regain again thy wife.
Woe's me, I fear thy sad revenge will make
Many eyes weep, and many ^earts to ache.
The gods from all ill fortune us defend,
That my returning Husband may commend
His arms to Iu^i^u^: but when I muse
Or think upon the wa^s, I cannot choose
But weep, and down my cheeks the tears do run,
Like snow when it is me ted by the Sun.
When of Iliu^ or Te^^^o; I hear,
Those names do put me in a sudden fear.
When of Si^^ois and Xanthus I have heard.
Or Id^, these strange names makes me afeard*
Nor had Paris stole Helen, if at length
He meant to resign her, he knew his strength,
For she did come in royal robes of Gold,
Adorned with Jewels, glorious to behold.
And with a warlike ^^e^t to Troy she came,
The Trojans showed their great strength by her train.
And as Hele^ was f^tched by this Fleet,
So I fear it should with the Gr^cians meet.
There is one Hect^r of whom I do hear,
A valiant man, and him I greatly fear.
For Paris said that He^^o^ should affright
the Grecians, and begin the bloody fight.
If I be she whom thou do love most dear,
Take heed of Hector, him I only fear.
His name does fill my thought with much unrest,
And is engraved upon my troubled breast.
And as thou shunnest hi^, so also shun
Others, for many H^^^o^s thither come.
And as often as thou do prepare to fight,
Say to thy self the^^ words which I do write:
Laodamia charg,d me care to take,
And keep my se^fe from danger for her sake.
If the Grecians raze T^o^ unto the ground,
May thou come from the fiege with never a wound.
Let Menelaus with the Tro^ans fight,
And take from Paris Helena, his right.
And when he charge on the enemy,
Let his good cause give him the victory
It behooved Menelaus with stout blows
To fetch his wife from the insulting foes;
But thy case unto his is far unlike,
And therefore I do wish thee so to fight,
That when the wars are done thou may return,
And in my loving bosom lie full warm.
You Trojans I entreat you to spare one
Of all those enemies against you come;
For every drop of b'ood that does proceed
From his veins, from my veins does also bleed.
Protesilaus no strong blows can strike
With his dra^n sword, nor stand the Push of Pike;
Let Menelaus fight whom rage does move,
Let others fight, set Protesilaus love.
For I must needs confess I had a mind
To have called him back, but no strength could find,
For my tongue stopped, before the words were spoken,
And my speech broke off, which was but a bad token.
And at the threshold of thy fathers gate
Thy foot did stumble, and did trip thereat,
Which has been always counted for a sign,
Whereby we may of some ill luck divine.
Which when I did behold I was afraid,
And thus unto my self in secret said:
I hope the stumbling of his foo^ shall be,
A sign, my Husband shall return to me.
These things unto thee I do now relate,
That I thy courage may thereby abate.
And I do wish, that I at last may find,
The fears are vain, which now molest my mind.
Besides the Oracles say, he who shall
Land first upon the Trojan ground, shall fall
First by the sword unhappy sure is she,
That by the wars shall the first widow be.
Heaven defend thee, that thou may not show
Thy valor, lest thy valor I do rue.
Let thy ship be the last to shore does stand,
Let thy ship be the last does come to land.
Of all that goes on shore be thou the last,
Unto thy Fathers land thou do not have.
But when thou come back, then do not fail
To use thy Oats, and clap on all thy sail.
Then make thou have to come out of thy ship,
And on the welcome shore most nimbly skip.
When Phoebus lies hid or s^ines most bright,
I think upon thee both by day and night.
yet more on thee by night than day, for night
Is the sweet time, that yeildeth Mai^s delight.
For then they lie within their Sweet-hearts arm,
Who with their close embraces keep them warm;
While in my widows bed I lie at pleasure,
VVanting true joy, I think on former leisure
And then a d^eam does yield me some delight,
Sometimes again my dreams do me affright.
Methinks I see thee with a visage pale.
Telling to me a sad and mournful tale.
Then waking out of my black dream, I rise,
And ^or thy safety offer sacrisice
With Frankincense, which I with tears b^dew,
So that in burning, it does brighter show.
As when we pour oil to a dying flame,
It does begin to rise, and blaze again.
O when will that most happy season come?
That I shall embrace thee at coming home,
With such a sweet excess of joy, till I
Languish with pleasure, and embracing dye.
When will thou tell me, when we are a bed,
How ma^y thou in war have conquered?
And in the amidst of thy sweet story leave,
To kiss me, and a kiss from me receive;
While that a kiss is the full point to stay
Thy speech, refreshed by this sweet delay.
But when I think of Troy, the seas and wind,
Then fear does drive all hope out of my mind.
And I do fear, because thy ships are s^ag'd
By winds, as if to slay thee they assayed
Who will sail with cross wind to his own land?
Tho^ from thy Country sail'st, when winds withstand.
N^ptune will not permit you ^or to come
Unto his ^ity, and therefore come home.
Spare going ( Grecians) the winds do ^orbid,
And some divine power in the wind is hid,
By these wars you seek only to regain
An adulteress, O tu^n your ships again.
But why should I recall thee back thus now
Let calm winds smooth again the Seas rough brow
I envy now the Trojan Dames, who shall
With grief behold their husbands funeral.
On her husbands head the new married Bride
Shall put a Helmet, and when she has tied
His arn our close unto him, and does mak^
Him ready, she a kiss from him shall take:
Such duti^ul employment is a bliss,
Her service is rewarded with a kiss.
And being armed comp^eatly, then at large
She may give to him a most loving charge:
Charging him as he tendreth her love,
To return, and offer his arms to Jove.
And he obeying her command will be
Care^ull to fig^t abroad more warily.
And when he comes home, she will unlace
His ^elmet, and him in her arms embrace.
To me in absence, fear does sorrow bring,
And I conceive the worst of every thing.
yet while that thou unto the wars art gone,
I have thy P^cture made in wax at home.
And fondly unto it I often talk,
And do emb^ace it, as by it I walk.
Thy shape in it so lively does appear,
Could it speak, it Prot^silaus were.
On it I look, and oft^n it behold,
And for thy sake do in my arms enfold;
And to ^hy Picture often I complain,
As if thy Picture could reply again.
By ^hee in whom my Soul alone delights,
By our tr^e love, and equal marriage rites
And by thy life which I do wish you may
B^ing back, although t^y ^air be turned gray?
I vow if thou please to send to me,
I will obey, and straig^t way come to thee,
For whether thou do^^ chance to live or die,
In life or death j^le bear thee company.
Of my Letter this shall the conclusion be,
Take care o^ thy se^f if t^ou car'st for me.

The Argument of the fourteenth Epistle.
DAnaus the Son of Belus, had by several Wives fifty Daughters unto whom his
brother Aegyptus desired to marry his fifty Sons, but Danus having been
informed by the Oracle, that he should dye by the hands of a Son in Law, to
avoid that' danger he takes ship, and sails to Argos, Aegyptus being angry
because he had despised his offer, sent his Sons with an Army to besiege him
charging them not to return until they had slain Danaus, or matryed his
Daughters. He enforced by siege yields up his Daughters, where with the Sword
which their father had given them, according tr his command, at night when the
young men warmed with wine and jollity were fallen fast asleep, every one
killed her husband, except Hyper^^estra only, who out of Compassion spread and
preserved her husband Linus, whom Eusebius called Linceus advising him to
return to his father Aegyptus and discovered the conspiracy. ^ut her Father
Danaus perceiving that all his Daughters had executed his will with bloody
obedience, excepting Hyper^nestra, he commanded her to be kept in Prison.
Whereupon in this Epistle she entreats her Uncle and Husband Linus, whom she
had prefer^ed, either to help her, and free her from her Captivity or (...) she
dye to see her honorably buried. But at last Linus killed D^nus: and set her
at liberty.

HYPERMNESTRA to LINUS.
Hypermnestra sends to thee who do remain
Of many brothers by their own Wives slain.
I for thy sake am in close prison pent,
And for saving thee do endure punishment.
I am guilty because I did spare thy blood,
"A pros^erous wickedness is counted good,
yet I repent not, since that I had rather
Keep my father from blood, than please my father.
Though my father in that sacred fire may,
Burn me, which we touched on our wedding day,
Or with tho'e Torches he may burn my face,
Wh'ch on our wedding day did b^ightly blaze.
Or although he do kill me with that sword,
Because to kill thee I could not afford.
He shall not make me say, that I repent
Of a good work, it is not my intent
I am grieved for my sisters cruel fact,
"For sad repentance follows a bad act.
The sad remembrance of that bloody night,
Makes my heart and hand tremble while I write.
My husband could not by my hand have died
Which shakes, while I this murder would describe,
yet I will try, it was about twilight,
Which ends day, and does begin the night,
When as we fifty sisters were brought all,
With royal s^ate into the Cast^e hall.
Whereas Egyptus, without dread or fear,
Received us for his Daughters who arrived were.
The flaming Tapers shined like stars in Heaven,
And sweet incense unto the fire was given.
The common people did on Hymen cry,
But from this ^ata^l marriage he did fly,
And Juno did from her own City run,
Fair Argos that she might this wedding shun,
And now the young men's drunken heads were bound
About with flowers, and with Garlands crowned.
The Bridemen with great joy, dreading no danger,
Did bring them to their fatal Brida^l chamber,
And laid their heavy bodies on the bed,
On which they were like funeral hearses spread
They being now with wine and sleep oppressed,
And all the City quiet and at rest,
Me thought the groans of dying men I heard,
And so it was whereat I grew afeard
So that my warm blood and my color fled,
And left my body cold upon the bed,
As soft and gentle western wines do make
The Corn to move and Aspi^e leaves to shake
So I trembled, while thou laidst at that time
Entranced with drinking sleep-pro^uring wine.
Thinking to obey my fathers sad command
I sat up, and took the sword in my hand;
The truth I speak, three times I raised the sword
To strike, and yet ^o strike my hand abhorred
My fat^e^s c^mmand did my courage whet;
So that his sword, unto thy throat I set,
But fear and love would ^ot let me proceed,
My chaste hand would not act that tragic deed
Then ost my hair I tore the flaxen wealth,
And softly thus did reason with thy self:
Hyperma^stra, thou have a cruel father,
Therefore obey his commands the rather,
Take courage, and obey thy fathers will,
And boldly with the rest thy Husband kill.
yet since I am a young maid, my hands be
Unfit to act a bloody Tragedy.
yet imitate thy sisters now again:
Who have by this time a l^t^eir husbands slain:
yet i^ this ^ and a murder could commit,
To stain it with my own blood it were fit.
D^ they d^s^rve death, because they possess
Our fa^her's ki^gdo^? which yet ne'rethelesse,
Some strangers might from him away have carried,
As dowries given them when we were married.
Though they deserve death, what shall we do less,
If we commit this deed of wickedness?
Maids do not love a sword, or kil^ing tool,
My fingers fitter are to spin soft wool,
Having thus complain'^, my tears began to ri^e.
And dr^pped on thy body from my eyes.
And while thy arms abo^^ me thou did out,
Thy hand though with the sword had almost put.
And left my father should surprise and take thee,
With these words I did suddenly awake thee.
Rise L^nus who do now alone survive,
Of all thy brethren none are left a^ive:
Make have, I say, be^ake thy self to flight,
Make haste, or else thou will be slain to night,
Awaked from sleep, thou did amazed stand,
To see the glittering sword shine in my hand;
And I did wish thee for to fly away
By night and save thy self, while I did stay.
In the morning when ^anaus came to view
His sons, which his most bloody daughters slew
He saw them laid in deaths eternal slumber,
Yet one was wanting to make up the number:
And angry, that so little blood was spilled,
Because I my Husband had not killed;
My father without any love or care,
Dragged me along even by my flaxen hair.
And straight way did command I should be cast
Into prison, this was my reward at last.
For Juno still on us does bend her brow,
Since Juno still on us does bend her brow,
Since I^ was transformed into a Cow.
yet punishment enough by her was born,
When Juno did her to a Cow transform.
When she that was so fair could not in height
Of pleasure yield great Jupiter delight,
On the bank of the River Inachus now,
She stood, clothed in the shape of a white Cow.
While in her fathers stream both clear and cold,
The shadow of her horns she did behold;
And lowed aloud, when she to speak assai'd.
Her shape and voice did make her both a^raid
Why do thou fly from thy own self alas,
Or admire thy shape in that watery glass?
Thus she that was great Jupiters chief Lasfe,
Is enforc^d to feed on dry leaves and grass.
Thou drink'st spring water, and art in amaze
When on thy shadow tho^ do look and gaze.
And of those spreading horns which thou do bear
Upon thy head, thou seem to stand in fear
And she whose beauty Jupiter did wound,
Now lies every night on the bare ground,
Over hills and rivers thou abroad do stray,
Over seas and countries thou do find thy way.
And yet O Io thou can not escape,
Or changing places, change thy outward shape.
Thy self does always bear thee company;
Where Nilus seven streams to the sea run,
There she unto her former shape did come
But why should I such ancient tales relate;
I have cause to complain of my own fate.
My Father and my Uncle do wage war,
And we out of our kingdom banished are;
And he our royal Scepter now does sway,
While miserable we like pilgrims stray:
Of fifty brethren thou alone art left,
For their deaths, and my sisters I have wept.
My sisters and my brothers both slain were,
For whose sakes, I cannot choose but shed a tear.
And because thou in safety do survive
To be tormented I am kept alive.
What punishment shall they expect that be
Guilty; when they for goodness condemn me
And I must die, because I would not spill
My brothers blood, and cruelly him kill.
If therefore thou respectest me thy wife.
Or love me, because I saved thy life;
Help me, or if I die, I thee desire,
To lay my body on the funeral fire.
E^balm my boness with thy moist tears, aed then
S^e that thou carefully do bury them.
And let this Epitaph be engraved on
My Sepulcher, or on my Marble-stone,
" Hype^^uestra here underneath does lie,
"That was i^l rewarded for her piety.
"For she most like unto a faithful wife,
"Did lose her own to save her husbands life.
My trembling hand is tired with the weight
Of Chains, or else I would more largely write.

The Argument of the fifteenth Epistle.
PAris, otherwise called Alexander, sailing to Lacedemon to fetch Helena, which
Venus had promised him, was honorably received by Menelaus, but Menelaus and
Menos kindred going to Greece, to divide Acreus his wealth, left Paris at home,
charging his wife to use him with as much respect as himself. But Paris
improving the opportunity, began to woo and court Holena to gain her love. In
this Epistle he artificially discovers his affection, and with amourous
boasting iudeavours to insinuate into her affection. And because he knew that
women love to hear their birth and beauty praised, Paris endeavors by flattery
to gain her favor, urging her praises, and striving to disgrace her husband.
And at last persuades her to go with him to Troy where he would keep her by
force.

PARIS to HELENA.
PAris sweet Helen, wishes health to thee,
That health which you can only give to me.
Shall I speak, or need no: I my flame reveal?
you know I love you, nor can I conceal
My love which I could wish might hidden be,
Till time did give the opportunity,
Without all fear most freely to discover,
My self to be your faithful constant Lover.
But yet who can the fire of love conceal?
Which by its own light does it self reveal.
yet if thou look that I my grief should name,
Then know I love thee, these lines show my flame.
And I entreat you to have pity on me,
Because my present sufferings proceed from thee.
With a frowning countenance read not the rest,
But such as may become thy beauty best.
Thy receipt of thy Letters joyeth me,
And cherish hope that I at last shall be
Received into thy favor which I wish,
That Venus may her promise keep in this.
For Loves fair Mother first persuaded me,
To take this journey, in hope to gain thee;
And lest thou should through ignorance offend,
By divine appointment I came to this end.
Venus persuaded me to undertake
This journey, which she would propitious make.
For since that Venus promised me, that you
Should be my wife, I challenge it as due.
For her persuasions made me to take ship
From Troy, and unto Lacedemon ship.
And she did make the wind most fair to stand,
She that is sprung from the se^ might it command
And as she smoothed the sea, and ca'm'd the wind,
So may she make thy breast most soft and kind.
I did not find love here, I broug^t the flame,
With me, and to obtain thy love I came.
By wandering storms I was not hither drove
My ship was guided hither by true love.
Nor came I hither like a merchant man,
I have wealth enough, the gods it maintain.
Nor yet the Grecian Cities here to view,
For richer in my kingdom I can show.
It Is thee I ask, It Is thee I only crave,
Whom Venus promised me that I should have.
I asked thee of her when I did not know the,
She promis^d that she would on me bestow thee,
For of thy beauty I had heard by fame,
Before mine eye had e're beheld the same.
yet it is no wonder, if that Cup^^s Bow,
With feathered arrows makes me cry Amo:
Since by unchanged fates it is so ordained,
Then do not thou their hidden will withstand.
And that you may believe it is my fate,
Receive the truth, which I will here relate.
When that my mother was with child,
And daily did expect delivery,
She dreamed, for in her dream it so did seem,
That of a fire brand she had delivered been.
She rises, and to P^^am does unfold
Her dream, which he unto his Prophets told.
Who straight foretold that Paris should dest^oy,
And like a kindled brand set fire on Troy.
But I do think they rather might divine,
That brand did signify this love of mi^e.
And though I like a Shepherds son was bred,
My shape* and spirit soon discovered
That I had not been born the son of e'arth,
But that I claimed Nobility by birth.
In the Troy valleys there is a place,
Which many trees with a co^d shade do grace.
Wherein no Sheep do feed nor any Ox.
Nor Goats, that love to climb upon high Rocks.
Here looking toward Troy, and to the Sea,
I stood and leaned my self against a tree.
The truth I tell, me thought the earth then shook,
As if oppressed with some heavy foot,
And presently swift Mercury from the skies,
Descended down and stood before mine eyes,
And therefore what I saw I may unfold,
The God had in his hand a rod of Gold.
And three goddesses, Venu^, Juno, Pallas,
Did set their tender feet udon the grass
Th^n cold amazement stiffned my long hair,
But winged Mercury bid me not to fear.
"Thou art, says he, c^osen to judge and end
"The matter, 'twixt these goddesses, who contend
"About their beauty, say they, which* shall be
"Accounted the most beautiful of three
This message I from Iupite^ do bring,
Which having said, he from the earth did spring,
And through the air did a quick passage make,
And by his words I did more courrge take.
So that my mind more fortified grew,
And dreadlesse I each one of them did view,
Who unto me so beautiful did appear,
I could not judge which of them fairest were,
yet one of them my fancy did approve,
Her beauty showed she was the Queen of Love,
But they con^ending which should fa^^est be,
Did all with most ^ich gifts solicit me.
Juno did fairly promise I should be,
A mighty Monarch, P^^los promised me
Learning so that a doubt did now arise,
Whether I would choose to be g^ea or wise.
But Venus smiling then, Paris, says she,
Those gifts of theirs but glorious t^oubles be
I Will give thee Helena thou shall hereafter
In thy arms embrace Le^^^ fair daughter.
Thus both her gift, and beauty conquered me,
So that to her I gave the victory.
And afterward my fate so kind was grown,
That now to be the Kings son I was known,
At my insta^ment all the Courts did joy,
Kept in a yearly festival in Troy
And as I loved I was beloved of many,
But for thy sake I would not match with any.
Kings and ^ukes daughters did of me approve,
And fairest Nymphs with me did fall in love,
yet all of them were but despis^d of me,
After I had this hope of marrying thee.
Day and n^ght in my mind I thee did keep,
And thinking on thee I should fall asl^ep
How comely would thy presence sure have been
Whose beauty wounded me a though unseen;
I was en^^amed with a strange desire,
Burning when I was absent from the fire.
My hopes I could no longer now contain,
But to sea put forth, my wish to obtain;
And now the losty Phrygian Pines I felled,
And ^^ees for building ships most fitting held.
The (...) of Garga^u^, and Ida did yield,
Gre^^ (...) of trees, wherewith I ships did build.
I bu^lt their decks, and lined the ships side
With planks of Oak, which might a storm abide;
And did rig, and tackle them beside.
With ropes, and sails which to the yards were tied,
And I did set on the stern of the ship,
The Image of those Gods which did it keep,
And on my own ship I did make them paint
Venus and Cupid tha^ it might not want
Her safe protection, who had promised me,
By her assistance I should marry thee.
Soon as my fleet was builded thus and framed,
To sea I presantly resolved to stand
My father and Mother, when I did require
Their leave to go, would not gran my desire,
Or license me, and therefore to have staid
My intended journey, both of them astai'd.
My Sister Cassan^ra with loosned hair,
When as my Ships even weighing anchor were,
Said, whither go thou; thou shall bring again,
By crossing the seas, a destroying flame
The truth she said; for I have found a fire,
Love has enflamed my soft breast with desire,
A fair wind from the Port my sails did drive,
And I in Helena Country did arrive,
Where thy Husband did me much kindness show:
And sure the gods decreed it should be so.
He showed me all that worthy was of sight
In Lacedemon to breed me delight.
But there was nothing that my fancy took,
But only thee and thy sweet beauteous ^ook:
For when I saw thee I was even amazed.
My heart was wounded while on thee I gazed,
For I remember Venus was like thee,
When she would have her beauty judged by me.
And if thou had contended with her, I
Had surely given thee the victory.
For the report of thee ^abroad was blown,
Thy beauty was in every Country known.
For through all Nations where the Sun does rise,
Thy beauty only bear away the prize.
Believe me, fame did not report so much
As thou deserv^st, thy beauty seems such,
That T^es^s did not thy love disdain,
And to steal thee away did think it no shame?
When su^ting to the Lacedemonian fashion,
Thou did sport with the young men of thy Nation,
In steal^ng thee I like his just desire,
But ^ow he could restore thee I admire.
For such a beauteous prey had sure deserved,
To have been kept and constantly preserved.
For before thou should been took from my bed.
Before I would loose thee, I would loose my head.
^las, could I have ceer so forgone thee.
O while I liv^d have let thee been took from me?
Yet if I must restore thee needs at last,
I would have ye^ presumed to touch, and ^ast
The gold^n apples of thy Virgin tree?
And not send thee back with Virginity,
Or if that I had spared thy Virgin treasures
I would have ^i^ed some other pleasures.
Then g^ant thy love to Paris, who will be,
While I live most constant unto thee.
I will be constant to your own desire,
My love and life shall both at once expire.
Before great kingdoms I preserved thee,
Which royal Juno promised unto me.
And learning, Pallas gift, I did refuse,
And to enjoy thy sweet self I did choose.
When Lun^, Venus, and fair Pa^la^ too,
Their naked bodies unto me did show;
And in the Idean valleys did not grudge,
In case of beauty to make me their Judge,
yet I do not repent of my election,
My mind is constant to my first affection.
I beseech thee let not my hope prove vain,
Who spared no labor in hope thee to gain.
Beneath your self you need not to decline,
your bi^th is noble, so is also mine,
So that if we do match, you cannot fail
Beneath your birth, or be di^grac'd at all.
For if you search into my pedigree,
Jove and Al^ctra are of kin to me,
And my father Priam does the Scepter sway,
Of the great'st kingdom in all Asia
Many Cities and sait Houses thou shall see,
And Temples suiting ^he gods Majesty.
Thou shall ^ee Troy, with Towers encompassed round,
Whose walls Ap^llo Harp at first did found.
Besides there are such store of people there,
The Land the people cannot hardly bear,
Great troops of Trojans Matrons thou shall meet
And store of Troi^n wives in every street.
The poverty of G^eece thou will then pity,
When thou see one house as rich as a City.
yet Sp^^ta I cannot contemn with scorn,
Because thou in that happy Land were born.
But S^a^ta is poor, and cannot afford thee
Dressings, which with thy beauty may agree.
That face of thine ought not to be content
With some common, but a curious ornament,
And it is fit, thou should the old lay by,
And every day wear some fresh rarity.
When the habit of the Trojans you do see,
You may think women's habits richer be.
Then Hele-grant me love not disdain,
A Trojan, who thy favor would obtain,
He was a Trojan from our blood descended,
Who with this Heavenly office was befriended.
To fill I^ve Cup, and with water allay
The strength of his Nectar and Ambrosia.
A Trojan in Aurora took delight,
Who does begin the day, conclude the night
Anc^i^es was descended to from Troy,
Whom the Queen of Love desired to enjoy,
And did descend in the Id^an Valley,
In amorous ways to sport with him and dally
I am a ^roian too, and if in truth,
You should compare my beauty and my youth
With Menelaus; I suppose that he,
Should not in your choice be preser'd to me,
By ma^ching with me, thou shall not be kin
To such as bloody At^^us has bin,
Who with the flesh of men his Horses fed,
From which sight the Suns frighted Horses fled.
My Grandfather did not his Brother kill,
As M^nelaus Grandfather, who did spill
Myrti^^s blood, who being murdered so,
He into the Myrtoan-sea did throw.
Nor yet our great Grandfather catches after,
(Like unto Tantalus in the Stygian water)
Apples and water, which are both so nigh
His ^ips, and yet from his touched lips do fly,
yet if from them thou have desc^nded been,
Jove would me wish to be to thee a kin.
yet unworthy Menelaus takes delight
In thee, and does enjoy thee every night:
I scarcely can behold thee at the Table,
And there to look on thee I am not a^le:
For at that very time I observe and find
Many things, that do much offend my mind.
For when the banquet is brought in then I
Do wish my room unto my enemy.
For it does grieve me when I do behold,
How with his arms he does thy neck infold.
And I could blush, when he before my face
Does thy small wast so clownishly embrace.
And it did break my hear^ when I did see,
How he would cast his furred gown over thee.
And when that he would give thee kisses soft,
I put the cup before my eyes full often.
His close imbr^ces I did never brook,
For I beheld them with a dwon cast look.
My meat, as if within thy mouth it grew,
I most u^willingly did seem to chew.
And I sighed often which when thou did see,
Thou oftentimes would smile, and laugh at me.
Then I would strive to quench my flame with wine,
But love through drunkenness most clear does shine.
When I looked away, lest I more should see,
Thy beauty made me look again on thee.
It greived me to look on my disgrace,
But greiv^d me more not to look on thy face;
And I d^^ strive my passion for to hide,
But oh, dessembled love is soonest spied.
I do not flatter thee, thou do^st perceive
That I did love thee, nor could I deceive:
Thou discern'st my love, which I wish may be
Known to thy self alone, and none but thee.
When tears did spring, I turned away my head,
Lest Men^laus should ask why I them shed.
How o^t have I told fained tales of love?
Hoping I might thereby your favor move,
Under a fained name hoping to move you,
But it was I indeed did truly love you.
And that I might my mind more freely speak,
A wanton drunkenness I would counterfeit
I remember once thy bosom open lay,
And to my view thy white breasts did betray;
Thy fair breasts which were far more white in show,
Than purest milk, or the new fallen Snow;
Or whiter than that Swans fair downy feather,
When Jupiter and Leda lay together.
When I beheld them, I was so amazed,
My Ring fell from my finger as I gazed.
When thou kissed'st thy Daughter, I Would not miss
To take thy kiss off With another kiss.
And sometimes I some ancient song Would sing,
Of those that heretofore had Lovers been.
Sometimes by secret signs my love was shown,
And by a nod or wink I made it known.
Then to Clynihino and Eth^a I did show.
My grief, and both of them began to woo.
Thy waiti^g maids who when I had begun
They both did leave me before I had done.
And I do wish the gods had been so bent,
To have made thee prize of a Turnament.
That he that got the victory might bear thee
Out of the field, and he that won thee wear thee*
As Hippom^nes fair Atalanta won.
Who all her former suitors had outrun.
Thou in the Ph^ygian Cities shall be seen,
Like Hippodamia brought in like a Queen
By Pelops, and as stout A^cides brake
Achelous horns for Deianira's sake;
So by some valient adventure, I
Would win thee by some act of ^ivalry.
But now I can but beg of thy sweet beauty,
And at thy feet prostrate my self in duty.
O thou that art thy brothers only glory,
To whom even J^ve himself could not be sorry
To be a husband, if so be yon were
Not by birth descended from Jupiter.
Either I will return to Troy with thee,
Or here in thy Laconia buried be.
Loves arrow has so wounded my soft breast,
That it unto the very bone has peire'd.
My sister truly propheci^d of me,
That with loves ar^ow I should wounded be.
Then since (sweet H^l^^) it is ordain^d by fate,
That I should love thee, pity my estate
Do not contemn my love, but my ^u^t hear,
So may the gods attend unto thy prayer.
If thou will let me lie with thee to night,
More I could say that should breed thy delight.
To wrong thy husband so, art thou ashamed;
Or that thy marriage bed should be so stained?
O Helen; thou a country con^cience have;
"Do thou imagine to be fair and chaste?
Either change thy b^auty o^ more loving be,
"For beauty is a foe to Chastity.
Venus does love Loves ^^ol en fruit to gather.
And Jupiter scapes did make him t^y father.
Then how can thou be chaste, if thou take after
Jupiter and Leda? Thou art they daughter.
May thou be ch^st when thou to Troy art brought,
And for thy rape may I be held in fault.
Let Us not offend, and after mend our life,
When as Venus promised, thou art my wife.
Beside^, thy husbands actions do commend
The same to thee, who that he might be-friend
His guest, absents himself, to give us leisure,
And opportunity to enjoy pleasure.
To go to Cre^te he thought it time most fit,
O he is a Man of a honorable wit;
Which at his departure was well expressed,
When he bid thee use well his Trojan guest.
Thy absent husbands will thou do neglect,
Thou take no care of me, nor me affect,
Being so senseless, think thou that he
Can prize thy beauty or else value thee?
He cannot, for if he had known the danger;
He had not bid thee be kind to a stranger.
Although my words nor love cannot move thee
Let us improve this opportunity.
Then thy husband our selves shall show more folly,
If we loose time through bashful melancholy;
To be thy paramour he offered me,
Make use then of his weak simplicity.
For thou do lie alone, and so do I,
'^were better if we did together lie.
Let us enjoy our selves, for I do say,
"Midnights sport yields more pleasure than the day,
Then thou shall have fair promises of me,
And I will bind my self to marry thee.
For I do vow, if that thou can believe me,
For one nights lodging i^le a Kingdom give thee:
And if thou can^st but so belei^ing be,
Unto my Kingdom thou shall go with me.
That thou followed'st me it shall not be thought,
For I alone will bear the blame, and fault.
As Thes^us did, my actions shall be such,
And his example may thee nearly touch.
For Theseus did carry thee away,
Castor and Pollux so did also stray.
And I will be the fourth my love's as ample
To thee, and I will follow their example.
My Trojan Fleet for thee does ready stay,
And when you please, we soon may sail away.
Thou in Troy City shall live as a Queen,
Adored as if thou had some goddess been.
And wheresoever thou do please to be,
The people shall offer sacrifice to thee.
Thy kindred, and the Trojans shall present
Gifts unto thee, with humble complement.
I cannot here describe thy happiness,
Far above that my Letter does express.
Let not the fear of Wars thy thoughts amaze,
Or that all Greece will straight great forces raise
To fetch thee back; who have they fetched again?
Believe me, those fears are but fond, and vain.
The Thracians Orythia took away,
Yet no wars after troub'ed Thracia.
I^son from Colchos brought away Medea,
And yet no wars did wast Thessalia.
Phaedra and Ariadne stolen were
By Theseus, yet Minos made no war.
"Dangers may seem far greater than they are,
"And fear may be without all ground of fear.
Suppose too (if you please) wars should ensue,
yet I by force their forces could subdue.
My Country can to yours yield equal forces,
For it has store of men and store of horses.
Nor can your husband Menela^ show
More valiant courage, than Paris can do.
For when I was but a young stripling, I
Did rescue our flocks from the Enemy;
Who did intend to drive away them al^,
VVhereon they did me Alexander call.
And of Ilio^eus, and Deiphobus I,
When I was young did get the victory.
And as in single combat I played my part,
So with my bow I could hit any mark.
And I know M^n^lau was not such
A forward youth, nor could he do so much.
Besides, Hect^r's my Brother, who may stand
In account of Soldiers, for a whole band
My strength, and forces are unknown to thee,
Nor know thou what a husband I shall be.
And therefore, either no wars shall ensue,
Or Trojan forces shall the Greek^ subdue.
Yet I could be ^ontent ^or such a wife
"To fight: there is credit in a noble strife.
Besides if all the world should fight for thee,
Thou shall be famous to posterity:
Sweet Hele^ then consent to go with me,
what I have promised shall performed be.

The Argument of the sixteenth Epistle.
HElena having read Paris his Epistle; in her answer seems at first offended,
and chides him, and for modesties sake objects against his persuasions, proving
them idle, but so that she rather gives, then takes away encouragement from him
to proceed in his suit, thereby showing a woman's crafty wit, according to that
of Ovid, in his Art of Love:

(...) tri^tis,
Quaeque rogat, ne se sollicitare velis,
Quod rogat illatimet! quod non rogat optat ut i^stes,
In sequere, etc.
At first pehaps her Letter will be sour,
And on thy hop^s her paper seem to lowre;
In which she will conjure thee to be mute,
And charge thee to forbear thy hated suit.
Tush, what she most forwarnes, she most desires,
In frosty woods are hid the hottest fires.
At last she seems to consent to Paris desire, advising him as a more safe and
honest course, not to write his desire, but impart his mind to her
waiting-maids Clymene and Athra, he dealing with them, so far prevailed, that
he brought both Helena and them to Troy.

HELENA'S Answer to PARIS.
SInce thy wanton ^etter did my eyes infect
When I did read it, why should I neglect
To answer it? Since to answer it can be
No breach of chastity at all in me.
What b^ldnesse was it in thee, thus to break
All Laws of hospitatlity and to speak
Thus by your Letter thereby for to move
My affection and solicit me for love.
Did thou on purpose sail into our Port?
That thou might woo me, and with fair words court,
And had not we power to avoid this danger?
And shut our Palace ga^e against a stranger?
Who do requite our love with injury?
Did thou come as a gue^^, or enemy?
I know my just complaint will seem to thee,
To proceed from rudeness, and rustic^ty,
Let me seem rude, so I preserve my ^ame,
And keep my honor free from spot or slain.
Although my countenance be not sad or sour,
Though with bent brows I do not sit and lowre:
yet I have kept my clear fame without spot,
No man has in my Tables found a blot.
So that I wonder whence thy encouragement
Proceeds, that thou should my love attempt:
Because once Theseus stole me as a prey,
Shall I the Second time be stolen away?
It had been my fault had I given consent,
But being stolen against my will I went.
And yet he gathered not my Virgin slower,
He used no violence, though I was in his power:
Some kisses only he did striving gain,
But no more kindness could from me obtain.
Such is thy wantonness, thou would not be
Like him content alone with kissing me.
He brought me back untoucht, his modesty
Seemed to excuse his former injury;
And plainly it appeared, that the young man
For stealing me grew penetent again.
But Paris comes when Theseus is fallen off,
That Helen may be still the worlds scoff.
yet with a Lover who can be offended?
If thy love prove true as thou have pretended?
This I do doubt, although I do not fear,
My beauty can command love any where.
But because women should not soon believe men,
For men with flattering words do often deceive them.
Though other Wives offend, and that a fair one
Is seldom chaste, yet I will be that rare one.
Because thou think my mother did offend,
By her example you think me to bend.
My Mother was deceived; Jove to her came
In the shape of a milk-white feathered Swan.
If I offend it is not my ignorance,
For no mistake can shadow my offense.
And yet her error may be happy thought,
For to offend with greatness is no fault.
But I should not be happy, if I err,
Since I should not offend with Jupiter.
Of royal kindred thou do boast to me,
But Io^e'^ the fountain of Nobility.
Nay though from Jupiter thy self does spring,
And P^lops, and Atreus be to thee a kin;
Jupiter's my Father, who himself did cover
With a Swans feathers, and deceived my Mother.
Go reckon now thy Pedigree of thy Nation,
And talk of Pri^m and La^med^^.
Whom I do reverence, yet thou shall be
Removed from Jupiter to the fifth degree;
And I but one; and albeit that Troy
Be a great, land, such is this we enjoy.
Though it for wealth, and store of men excel,
The land is barbourous, where thou do dwell.
yet thy Letter promises such gifts to me,
That goddesses might therewith ^empted be.
But if I may with modesty thus speak,
Thy self, and not thy gifts may fancy take.
For either I Will keep my integrity,
Or for thy love, not gifts I Will go with thee.
Though I despise them nor, if e're I take
Those gifts, it shall be for the givers sake.
For when thy gifts have no power to mo^e me,
I do esteem this more that thou do love me
And that thou shoul'dst a painful voyage take
Through the rough Seas, and all even for thy sake.
And I do mark thy carriage at the Table,
Although I to dissemble it am able.
Sometimes thou wantonly wilt on me glance,
And put me almost out of countenance,
Sometimes thou ^gh^st and then the cup do take,
And to drink where I did drink, do pleasure take.
And so sometimes with thy fingers, or a wink,
Thou closely wou^d^st express what thou did think.
And I confess I have blush't many times,
For fear my husband should discern thy signs.
And oftentimes unto my self I said,
If he were shamless he would be dismayed.
And on the Table thou have many a time
Fashon'd and drawn forth with a little wine
Those letters, which my name did plainly show,
And underneath them thou have writ, Amo.
I looked on it, but seemed not to believe thee,
But now this word Amo does also give me.
By these allurments thou my heart might bend:
If that I would have yielded to offend.
I must confess thou ha^^ a beauteous face
Might win a Maid to yield to thy embrace.
Let some one rather honestly enjoy thee,
Then that a strangers love should so destroy me.
To resist the power of beauty learn by me,
Virtue abstains from things which pleasing be.
By how many young men have I wooed been?
That beauty Paris sees others have seen.
Thou art more bold, but they as much did see,
Nor have more courage, but less modesty.
I would thy ship had then arrived here,
When a thousand youths for my love Suitors were.
For before a thousand I had preferred thee,
Nay even my husband must have pardoned me.
But thou have stayed too long, and have so trifle'd
That all my Virgin joys are gone and rifled.
Thou were too flow, therefore suppress thy flame.
What thou defir'st another does obtain.
Though to have been thy Wife I do wish still,
Mene^a^^ enjoyes me, not against my will.
Cease with fair words to mollify my breast,
If you love me let it be so expressed
Let me live as fortune has allotted me,
Do not seek to corrupt my chastity.
But Venus promised thee in the Idean wood,
When three naked goddesses before thee stood:
One promised a Kingdom unto thee,
The Other that thou in wars should prosperous be.
But Venu^, who was the third in this strife,
Did promise Helena should be thy wife.
I scarce believe the goddesses would be
In a case of beauty judged so by thee.
Were the first true, the latter part is sain'd,
That she gave thee me, for Judgment obtained.
I do not think my beauty such that she
Could think to bribe thy judgment by that fee.
I am content that men may beauty prize,
That beauty V^n^s praises, she envies.
There Is no assurance in a strangers love,
As they do wander, so their love does rove.
And when you hope to find most constancy,
Their love does cool, and they away do fly.
Wi^nesse Ariadne and Hipsiphile,
Who^e lawless ove procured their misery.
And it is said, thou did Oenon wrong,
Forsaking her, whom thou had^st loved so long.
This by thy self cannot denied be,
For know I took care to enquire of thee.
Besides if thou had a desire to prove
Constant in thy affection and true love;
yet thou would^st be compell^d at ^^^st to sail,
And with thy Trojans thou away would sail.
For if the wished night appointed were,
Thou would be gone, if that the wind stood fair.
And when our pleasures grew unto the height,
Thou would be gone, if that the wind stood right:
So by a fair wind I should be bereft
Of joys even in the midst imperfect left.
Or as thou perswad'st shall I follow thee
To Troy, and so great Priams Daughter be.
yet I do not so much contemn swift fame,
That I would stick disgrace upon thy name.
What would Priam, and his Wife think of me
With His Daughters, and thy brothers which may be?
What might Sparta, and Greece of Helen say?
Or what might Troy report, and Asia?
And how can thou hope I should faithful prove?
And not to others, as to thee g^ant love
So that if a st^angers ship do arrive here,
It will procure in thee a jealous fear.
And in thy rage call me adulteress,
When thou art guilty of my wickedness.
Thou that did cause my fault wilt me upbraid,
O may I first into my g^ave be laid;
But I shall have Troys wealth, go rich and brave,
And more then thou can promise I shall have.
Tissue, and Cloth of gold they shall present me,
And store of gold shall for a gift be sent me.
yet pardon me, those gifts cannot inflame me,
I know not how thy Land would entertain me,
If in the Trojan Land I should wronged be,
How could my brother, or father help me?
False Jason with fair promi^es beguild
Med^a, Who afterward exiled.
Her Father Eetes was not there, to whom,
When she was scorned by Ja^on, she might come.
Nor her Mother Ipsea to whom she
Might return, nor her sister Chal^io^e.
I fear not this, was not Me^ea afraid.
"For those who mean best, soonest are be^rai'd,
Ships in the harbor do in safety ride.
But are tossed at Sea, and do storms abi^e.
And that same firebrand too affrighteth me,
Of which thy mother dremt, and thought that she
Had been deliver^d: and besides too I
Do fear Cass^ndra's dismal prophecy?
Who did foretell, as truth did her inspire,
The Greeks should wast the City T^oy with fire.
And besides, as fair Venus favors thee,
Because thy judgment gave her the victory;
I fear the other goddesses do grudge
At thee, because thou did against them judge.
And I do know that wars may follow after,
Our fatal love shall be revenged with slaughter.
Yet to allow her praise I am content,
Why should I question that which she has meant?
yet for my ^ow belief be not thou grieved.
For such good matters hardly are believed.
First I am glad that Ven^s did regard me,
Secondly, that with me she did reward thee.
And that Helen, when you of her beauty heard,
Was before Pallas and Juno's gifts preferred.
Am I both Wisdom, and Kingdom to thee?
Since thou ^ov'st me, should I no kindness show thee?
I^me not so cruel, yet cannot incline
To love him who I fear cannot be mine.
For suppose I to Sea would go with thee,
To steal hence I have no opportunity.
In love's thef^s I am ignorant and rude,
Heavens knows my husband I did never delude:
And in a Letter thus my mind to show,
Is a task, I before did never do.
They are happy that do use it every day,
To offend it is hard to f^nd the way.
A kind of painful fear restrains me,
And how they look on us methinks I see.
Of the grumbling people I am much afraid,
For Aethra told me long since what they said.
But take no notice, nor do thou desist,
I know you can di^emble if you list
Then sport and spare not, but let us be wary,
"And if not chaste, let us at least be c^ary.
For though that Menelaus absent be,
I must di^creetly use my liberty.
For though he is on earnest business gone,
And for this journey had occasion;
I took occasion thus my love to show,
Make have to return, Sweet heart, if you go.
And he straightway to recompense my wish
Of his return gave me a joyful kiss.
Charging me that my care should be expressed
In looking to his house, and Troj^n guest.
I smiled, and to him could say naught at all,
I strived, to refrain laughing with, I shall.
So with a prosperious wind he sailed to C^eet,
Yet to do, what thou do list, is not meet.
I Am kept in his absence with guard most strong,
"Do thou not know the hands of Kings are long?
Besides, thou wrong'st us both in praising me,
For when he hears it he will jealous be.
The fame of beauty makes me suspected,
I would I had the same of it negle^^ed
Though to leave us together he thought fit,
To my own keeping he did me commit
"He knew there could no better guardian be,
"To keep me chaste than my own honesty.
He feared my beauty, but my chastity
Did take away that idle jealousy.
To make use of time thou advisest me,
Since his absence gives opportunity.
I must confess I have a good mind to it,
But am yet unresolved, and fear to do it.
Be^ides you know my husband is from home,
And you without a wife do lie alone;
The nights are long and while we sit together
In one house, we may talk unto each other.
And woe is me! when we are both alone,
I know thou have a fair alluring tongue
Thus every circumstance seems to invite me,
And nothing but a bashful fear does fright me.
Since persuasions do no good, leave that course
And make me leave this bashfullnesse by force.
Such force would seem a welcome injury,
And I would fain be thus compelled by thee.
yet let me rather my new love restrain,
A little wat^r quenc^es a young flame.
Did not ^he stout inhabitants of Thessalia
F^ght with the Centaures for Hippod^mia?
And do thou not think Menelaus has,
And Tyndarus as violent a wrath?
A though of valor thou do boast to me,
Thy words and amorous face does not agree.
Thou art not fit for M^rs, nor for the field,
But for V^nus combats, which do pleasures yield.
Let valient hardy men of wars approve,
But Paris follow thou the wars of love.
Let Hector fight for thee, whom thou do pra^se,
The gentle wars of love shall give thee bays.
And in these wars it is wisdom for to fight,
And any Maid that is wise will take delight.
Not upon idle points of modesty ^^and,
I may perhaps in time give thee my hand.
But it is your desire, that you and I
Should meet, I know what you do mean thereby.
Thus far this guilty Letter has revealed
A piece of my mind the rest is concealed.
By Clymena and Aethra we may further
Make known our minds, more fully to each other*
For these two Maidens in such matters be
Companions, and Counselors to me.

The A^gument of the sev^nte^nth Epistle.
THe Sea of Hellespont being seven furlongs over, and as Pli^y witnesses
dividing Europe from Asia, had on the one side Sectos in Europe where Hero
lived, and Abydo^ in Asia where L^and^r dwelled, being two opposite Cities.
Leander of Ab^do^ being deeply in love with Hero of Se^tos, did use to swim by
night unto her over the Hellespont* but being hindered by the tempestuous
roughness of the Sea, after seven days were past, he sent this Letter to his
sweet heart Hero, by an adventerous ship mast^r that put ^ort^ to Sea in the
storm Wherein he shows first that his love is firm, and constant. Afterward
he complains that the roughness of the Sea should hinder him from swiming to
her. Lastly, he promises her that he will ^^^t^re to come, and expose himself
to the dangers of the Sea. rather than to want the sight of her, or h^^ sweet
company. Whence M^rtial thus of him signifies.

C^m (...) a^da^ Leander amore^,
Et fissus tumidujam premeretur aqui^;
Sie miser Instantes affatus dicitar ^ndas;
Parcite dum propero, m^rg^^e dum recto.
While bo^^ Leander to his Sweet heart (...)*
And swelling waves did beat his weary limbs.
To the billows that beats him so,
It Is said that thus he ^pake;
Spare me while I to Hero go,
Drown me where I come back.
LEANDER to HERO
THy love Leander wishes thee all hea^th,
( Hero) which I had rather being my self*
For if the rough Seas had more calmer been,
From Abydos to Sestos I would swim.
(...) the fates smile upon our love then, I
Do know, thou will read my lines willingly.
This paper-messenger may welcome be,
(...) thou had rather have my company.
But the fates frown, and will not suffer me,
(As I was used) to swim unto thee.
The sky is black, the seas are rough, alas,
^o that no ship or Bark from home dare pass.
(...) one bold Ship-master went from our Haven*
To whom this present Letter I have given.
And had come with him, but the ^^ydi^us stayed
Upon their watch-towers, while the Anchor way'd*
For presently they would have me descri'd,
And discerned our love, which we seek to hide.
Forth with this Letter I did write, and so
I said unto it, happy Letter go;
This is thy happiness, thou must understand,
That H^ro shall receive thee with her hand.
And perhaps thou shall kiss her rosy lips,
While with her teeth the Seal she open rips.
Having spoken these words, then my right hand after
Did write these words upon this silent Paper.
But I do wish, that my right hand might be
Not used in writing, but to swim to thee:
It is more fit to swim yet I can write
My mind with ease and happily indite,
Seven nights are past which seem to me a year
Since first the Seas with storms enraged were.
These nights seemed long to me, I could not sleep,
To think the Sea should still his roughness keep.
Those Torches which on thy Tower burning be
I saw, or else I thought that I did see.
Thric^e I put off my clothes, and did begin
Three times to make trial if I could swim.
But swelling seas did my desire oppose,
Whose rising billows over my face o'rt flows.
But Bor^as, who art the fiercest wind,
Why thus to cross me, do^st thou bend thy mind?
Thou do not storm against the Seas but me.
Had thou not been in love what woulst thou be?
Though thou art cold, ye^ once thou d^d'st approve
Ori^^^, who did warm thy heart with love.
And would ^ave vexed, if with Orithya fair
Thy passage had been hindered through the air.
O spare me then, and calm thy blustering wind,
Even so may^t thou from Aro^us favor find.
But I perceive he murmers at my prayer,
And still the seas are rough and stormy are,
I wish that Daedalus would give w^ngs to m^
Through the Icar^^n seas not far off be,
Where Icaru^ did fall when he did proffer
To fly too high, let me the same chance suffer
While flying hrough the air to thee I come,
As through the wa^er I have often swom.
But since both wind, and seas deny to me
My passage, think how I fi^^t came to thee.
It was at that time when night does begin,
(The remembrance of past pleasures, pleasure bring)
When I who was Amans, which we translate
A Lover stole out of my Fathers Gate,
And having put off all my clothes straightway,
My arms through the moi^^ seas cut their way,
The Moon did yield a glimmering light to me,
Which all the way did bear me company.
I looking on her, said, some ^avour have
Toward me, and think upon the Latmian Cave.
O favor me! for thy End^m^^ns sake,
Prosper this stolen journey which I take.
A mortals love made thee come from thy Sphere,
And she I love is like a goddess fair.
For none unless that she a goddess be,
Can be so virtuous, and so fair as she.
Nay none but Venus, or thy self can be
So fair, view her, if you will not credit me:
For as thy silver beams do shin more br^ght
Than lesser streams, which yield a dimmer light:
Even so of all fair ones she is rarest,
And Cynthia cannot doubt but she is the fairest.
When I th^se words, or else the like had said,
My passage through the Sea by night I made.
The Moon^ bright beams were in the water seen,
And 'twas as light as if it day had been.
No noise nor voice unto my ears did come,
But the murmur^ of the water when I swom.
Only the A^cyons for loved ^eyx sake,
Seemed by night a sweet complaint to make.
But when my Arms to grow tired did Begin
Unto the top of the waves I did spring.
But when I saw thy Torch O then quoth I,
Where that fire blazeth, my fair love does lie.
For that same shore, said I, does her contain,
Who is my goddess, my fire and my flame.
These words to my Arms did such strength restore,
Me thought the Sea grew ca^mer then before*
The coldness of the waves, I seemed to scorn,
For love did keep my amorous heart still warm.
The nearer I came to the shore, I find
The greater courage and mo^e strength of mind.
But when I could by thee discerned be,
Thou gav'st me courage by looking on me.
T^en to please thee, my Mistress I begin
To spread my arms abroad, and strongly swim.
Thy Nurse from leap^ng down could scarce stay thee*
This without flattery I did also see,
And though she did restrain thee, thou did come
Down to the sho^e and to the wav^s did run.
And to embrace and kiss me did begin,
"^he gods to get such kisses sure would swim.
And thy own garments thou would put on me,
Drying my hair which had been wet at Sea.
What past besides, the Tower, and we do know.
And Torch, which through the sea my way did show.
The joys of that night we no more can count
Then d^ops of water in the Hellespont.
And because we had so little time for pleasure,
We used our time, and did not wast our leisure.
But when Aurora rose from Ti^bons bed,
And the morning star showed his glistering head,
Th^n we did kiss in have, and kiss again,
And that the night was past we did complain.
When thy Nurse did me of the ^ime in^o^m,
Then from thy Tower, I to the shore return.
With tears we parted, and then I beg'n,
Back through the Hellespont again to ^wim.
And while I swom, I should look back on thee,
As far as I could the (sweet Hero) see.
And if you will believe me, when I do come
Hither unto thee, then me thought I swom.
But when from thee again I return^d back,
I seemed like one that had suffered ship wrack,
To my home I went unwillingly again,
My City against my will does me contain.
Alas! why should we be by seas disjoined?
Since that love has united us in mind
Since we bear such affection to each other,
Why should not we in one land dwell together?
In Sest^s, or Abydos dwell with me,
T^y country pleases me, as mine does thee.
Why should the rough seas thus perplex our minds?
Why should we be parted by cruel winds?
The Dolphins with our love acquainted grow.
The fish by often swiming does me know.
And through the water I have worn a path,
Like to those wheel-ruts which a high way has,
I complain that I to such shifts was put.
But now the winds that passage have up shut.
The Hellespont is rough, the waves go high.
So that ships scarce in Ha^bour safe do lie.
And I believe the sea her name first found
From the Virgin Hell, who was in it drowned.
This sea shall by her death infamous be,
Her name does show her guilt, though she spare me*
I envy Jason, who did sail to Gre^c^,
And fetch away from thence the golden Fleece.
In his ship called the Ram, yet I desire
No ship of his, this is all I require;
That the waters of the Hellespont would be
So gentle to permit me swim to thee.
I want no art to swim, give leave to me.
And both the ship and Pilot I will be.
I will not sail by the great or lesser bear,
For by such common stars love cannot steare.
Let others on Andromedes star look,
Or ^adnes Crown to Heaven took;
Nor yet Calist^^ stars which do shine e'ear
In the Polar Circle, which they call the Bear.
These stars wh^c^ by the gods were stellifi^d,
In my doubtful passage shall not be my g^ide
But I have a more brighter star than these,
My love will guide me through the darkest seas,
Often when my arms g^ew tired with weariness,
That they cannot cut their ways t^rough the se^s,
When I do tell them, that to quit their pain,
They should embrace he, they would then again,
To enjoy their prize, with such a fresh strength swim,
Like a swift Horse that does to ru^ begin.
Thou art my star and I will follow thee,
Rather then all those stars in Heaven be.
Thou, thou art far more worthy for to shine
A star in Heaven, yet stay on ear^h thy time.
Or if thou will needs go, then show to me
The way to Heaven, that I may follow thee,
Thou a^t here yet I the way to thee cannot find,
The roughness of the seas perplex my mind.
What though the Ocean do not us two part?
This narrow Sea keeps me from thee sweetheart.
If I should in some distant Country be,
It would cut off all hope of seeing thee.
But now I am inflamed with more desire,
And burn the more the nearer to the fire.
And though the thing I wish for absent be,
yet I do ^ope for that I cannot see.
That which I love I almost seem to touch,
Which makes me weep to think my hopes are such,
I catch at Apples which from me do fl^
Like ^ant^lus; or the stream which glides by.
Shall I then n^ve^ be possessed of thee,
Until the winds and sea so pleased be?
When wind and water fickle be, shall I
Upon the vvind and water still rely?
Shall I be hindered by the raging seas?
The Goats, Boot, or the Plejades?
If I have any courage, thou shall see,
Love shall embolden me to swim to thee*
And if I promise, I will come awa^,
And perform promise wit^out all delay.
If seas continue still their raging anger,
I Will try to swim to thee in despite of danger;
Either my bold attempt shall ^appy prove,
Or death shall give an end unto my love.
Yet do I wish my bo^y may be driven,
Like to a wrack to thy beloved haven.
Then thou will weep on it, and say 'was I
Was the occasion, that this man did dye
I know when thou have in my L^tter sound
This word of death, thou will hate the sad sound.
Fear not; but that the sea may now inclin^
To calmnesse, join your prayers I pray with mine.
If it were calm until I did swim thither,
Arrived again let it be blustering weather,
In the Ha^bour of thy Castle I Will abide,
And in thy chamber at safe Anchor ride.
Let blustering Bo^^as strongly there enclose me,
I delight ^o stay there though he oppose me.
For then I will be woa^y, and most slack
To venture to return, or to swim back.
On the deaf billows i will not rail in vain,
Nor on the rough and raging sea complain.
The winds and thy embraces should keep me
Wind-bound, and love-bound, still to stay with thee.
Yet soon as the sea permits i will begin
To use my arms, and unto thee i will swim.
And ^e thou careful to put sorth a light
Upon thy turrer, to direct my sight.
Until then let my Letter lodge this night
With thee, as Ha^binger of my delight.
Which though it go before me, I do pray,
That I may ^ollo^ it without delay.

The Argument of the eighteenth Epistle.
HEre having received Leanders Letter answers it with many e^pressions of a
mutual affection, and invites him to ha^ten his coming, that she might enjoy
his company: sometimes accusing his slacknesse, thereby to she^ the ^incerity
and integrity of her own love, sometimes inve^ghing against the Sea: sometimes
fearing lest be loved some other; then recanting that suspicion ascribing it to
the custom of Lovers who are apt to suspicion. L^stly, sh^e perswade^ him not
to expose himself to the mercy of the S^^ until it grow calm.

HERO to LEANDER
THat health Lean^er which thou sent'st in word,
Come and more real^y to me afford.
For our joys are deferred by thy stay,
And my love grows impatient of delay.
Our love is equal, but I am the weaker,
For men are o^ a stout and stronger nature.
Maids have a tender body and so^t mind,
If thou do stay, I shall with grief be p^n'd.
You m^n cans^end the tedious time and leisure,
In hunting or some other country pleasure.
Or sometimes you can go unto the Court,
Or in riding, or, tilting take your sport.
you often Hawk, and Angle many a time,
And spend some hou^s in drinking of rich wine.
But unto me love does a torment prove,
I have no busine^s here to do, but love.
Thou only art a pleasure unto me,
I love thee more than can believed be.
For either with my Nurse I talk of thee,
Wondering what stays thy coming unto me,
Or looking to the Sea, sometimes I chide
The sea, 'cause it does still so rough abide.
or when I see the sea is calmer grown,
I think that when thou mai'st thou will not come.
While I complain, sad tears spring in my eyes,
Which with a trembling hand my old Nurse dryes.
Then I do look if any print rema^n.
of thy foot-steeps, which the sands yet retain.
And oftentimes I enquire if any be
Bound to Abydos, so to write to thee.
And I do kiss thy clothes thou did leave here
When thou did swim the Hellespont without fear*
When day is done and the more friendly night
With spang'ed stars has put the day to flight.
Then I set out a light for a landmark
Upon my Tower, to guide thee in the dark.
And then sometimes with spinning I assay,
To pass the time which runs so slow away.
And that I may the tedious hours beguile,
I talk of my L^^nder all the while.
And to my ^urse I speak thus, do not thou
Think that my joy and love is coming now;
Or think thou that his friends watch him, that he
Is hindered so from coming unto me?
Do thou (...) think that he even now begins
To put off his clothes, and anoint his limbs*
yes says my old Nur^e, who did strive to keep
Time with her head while she did nodding sleep.
And senseless of all love, cared not though I
Did want thy kisses, and sweet company.
Then I should say to her a little after,
Now I do think ^e's in swiming through the water.
And having drawn my thread forth I would say,
Now I do think he is in the middle way.
Then I looked forth, and fea^fully d^d pray
The w'nd would favor thee upon the way;
Sometimes I listened unto every voice;
Thinking thou were come, if I heard a noise.
Thus I would spend most of the night, till sleep
Upon my weary eyes by stealth did creep.
And sometimes thou sleep'st with me in my dre^m,
And art come, though ^o come thou do not m^an.
And now methinks that in my dream I see
Thee swmming, now thou art embracing me.
And now to cloth thy wet limbs I do strive;
And in my warm bosom do thee revive.
And other things I dream of which must be
Concealed at this time for modesty.
For that which in the doing p^eas'd us well,
yet being done it is a sh^me to tell.
But woe is me, these pleasures are soon done,
For when thy dream does vanish, thou are gone.
O let us at the length more firmly meet.
That our joys may be real and mo^e sweet.
Why have I lain so many nights from thee?
And why do^^ thou delay to swim to me?
Though the Seas yet for swiming unfit are,
yet yester night the winds more calmer were?
And why did thou then fear to come to me*
Why did not use that oppor^unity
Though you have another season, yet at least
Because this was the first this was the best.
The ficle sea does quickly change her face,
But thou can swim it in a little space,
And suppose winds and storms should keep thee here,
While I embrace thee, thou needst nothing fear:
Then I would have the winds blow high enough,
And I would pray the seas might still be rough.
But why do thou the winds and Seas now fear,
Which formerly by thee despised were?
For I remember thou did swim to me,
When the Seas were as rough as now they be:
When I did wish thee not so rash to be,
Lest thy rashness should make me weep ^or thee.
But where is all thy courage now become?
Who through the Hellespont have often swom.
Yet do not thou such rash adventures make
But when the sea is calm thy journey take.
If thou do love me still, as thou do write,
And that our flame of love burns clear and bright:
I fear not winds so much that cross my mind
As that thy love should prove sicle as wind.
Or that thou think me unworthy to enter
Such dangers, and for my sake to adventure.
And sometimes I am very much afraid,
Lest thou of Abydos scorn'st a Sest^n maid.
But it would g^^eve me more then all the rest,
If thou should love another Sweetheart best;
Or if some Harlots arms should thee Embrace,
While that her new love does the old displace.
O may I dye before that I do see
My self in such a manner wronged by thee.
yet do I not write this, because that I
From thee, or fame, have cause of jealousy.
yet still I fear (who can securely love?)
For absence does often suspicion move.
Those lovers are happy that present are,
And know when to be Jealous, when not to fear.
We vainly fear, and slight true injuries,
And nourish in our breast fond jealousies
O would st thou come, or else would I might find
No woman hinders thee but the fierce wind.
Which when I know, believe me I shall die
With gri^f to think upon thy injury
For if that thou h^dst a desire to send
Me to my grave, thou might before offend.
But thou will not offend, my fears are vain,
I know the winters storms do thee detain.
VVoe's me! the billows do go rough and high,
And obscure clouds do darken all the sky.
Or Helles Mother makes the sea waves weep,
While they her Daughters obsequies do keep.
Or Iun^ her step mot^er now does please,
Changed to a goddess, ^hu^ to vex the seas.
This ^ea unto young maids u^kind does prove;
It drowned Hell^ and does c^osse my love.
If Neptune his own love had call d to mind,
Our love had not been c^ost so by the wnd.
It is no fable that thou did approve
Of fair Amy^nons, and her did love.
Alcyone, and Ceyce th Sweet hearts were,
And M^dusa before she had snaky hair.
Laodice and Celaeno Plejades,
And many I have read of besides these.
O N^ptun^ thou these Sweet-hearts had in store,
As Poets do report, and many more.
Since thou so often the forc^ of love did prove*
Why still from comm^ng do thou stay my love?
Spare us, let storms rage in the Ocean wide,
The Sea dot^ two parts of the world divide.
For thee to toss great ships it is most meet,
Or express thy rage in scattering a Fleet.
To distu^b these seas can no glory be,
Or to hinder a young man would swim to me.
For know Leande^ nobly is descended,
Not from Ulysses ill of thee befriended.
Preserve us both, for while that he does swim;
"He Is in the water, but my life's in him.
But now my candle (by whose watchful light
As it stood by me, I these lines did write)
began to sparkle at that very time,
Which he did take to be a happy sign.
And my Nurse put wine to it, to maintain
The Lamp^, and cherish the reviving flame.
Says she, here will be strangers I do think
To morrow and with these words she does drink.
Leander come, and let our number be
Increased, for I do love thy company.
Leander unto thy own love return,
For why should I still lie alone, and mourn?
Thou have no cause thus fearful still to be,
Venus will calm the sea, and favor thee.
Sometimes to wade through the sea I begin,
But this sea has to women fatal bin.
For Jason over it in safety came,
But a woman give to these seas their name.
If thou fear thou should want strength to perform
This double labor; to come, and return:
Let us in the midst of the sea both meet,
And with a kiss each other kindly greet.
Then to our Cities both return again,
This would some comfort be, though it were vain.
I would that we had no regard of Fame,
Which makes us love in secret, nor of shame.
"For love and fearfullnesse do ill agree;
That persuades to pleasure, this to modesty.
When that young Jason did to Colchos come,
He bore away Medea with him soon.
Soon as Pa^is to Lacedemon came,
He straight returned with his prey again.
Thou come to me, but leavest me behind,
And swim'st when ships can scarce a passage find.
But my Lean^er have a care hereafter,
Not only to despise, but fear the water.
Strong ships unto the sea are made a scorn,
Think st thou thy arms can more than Oars perform?
The Mariners ( L^ander) fear to swim*
Till they are forced, when they have ship-wrackt bin.
VVo's me, I pe^swade against that I require,
Let not my words discourage thee I desire.
With thy arms (wim through the seas, which being done,
Embrace me with those ^rms when thou art come.
But as often as I to the blew seas look,
My heart is with a sudden cold fear struck.
And I am troubled with my last nights dream,
Though I sacrific^d against that it did mean
About morning, when the Candle sleepy grew
And win^'d, when dreams most usually are true;
Out of my crowsie fingers sell my thread,
And on my pillow I did rest my head
When in my dream I thought that I had seen
A Dolphin, that on the rough waves did swim.
Which the waves cast up on the shore, and left
Upon the boiling sands, of life be^est.
I know not what this might presage, or mean,
Stay till the Sea be calm, slight not my dream;
If thou will not spare thy self, spare t^ou me,
My life and happiness consists in thee.
I hope the rough seas will grow calm, then stay
And through the calm seas cut thy gentle way.
And till then, since thou can not swim, nor come,
Let this Letter make the time not seem long.

The Argument of the nineteenth Epistle.
AContius going to Diana's sacrifice, which were celebrated by Virgins in
Delos, the chiefest I stand of all the Cycledes in the Aegean sea, fell in love
with Cyd^^pe a noble Maid: but he in regard of the inequality of his birth, not
da^ing to solicit her love, did cunningly write on a fair Apple these two
verses.

Iuro ti^i sane per mystica sacra Diana,
Me tibi ven^u^am comitem, spon^amque ^uturam.
By Diana's sacred rites I sw^ar to thee,
Thy loving Confort and Wife I will be.
And so he cast the Apple at the Maids feet; who ignorant of his cunning,
reading it at unawars, she promi^ed that she would be wife to (...). For it wa^
a law, that was spoken before the gods in the ^emp^e of Diana should be
^atified. So that Acontius endeavo^rs in this E^stle to persuade her, that
Diana had insl^cted sickness on her, because she had violated her promise made
in the goddesses presenc^. And to allure her to his d^stres, his Exordium
endeavors to make her c^n^ident to read without any suspicion of deceit, like
the former. Afterward he strives to make her husband contemptible in her sight,
persuading her that he was the cause of all her sickness.

ACONTIUS to CYDIPPE.
BE not af^raid, since that thou shall not swear,
^s thou did before to thy Lover, here;
For thou did swear enough at that same time,
When thou did p^omise that thou would be mine.
R^ad it; and so may the sic^ness leave thee,
And p^ins, which also are a pain to me.
For why should t^y ingenuous cheeks be spread,
As in (...), ^emple with blushing red.
Since to perform thy prom^se I do move thee,
And not loosely but as a husband love thee.
For i^ (...) words 'thou would^ but call to mind,
VVhic^ I did write upon the Apples rind;
And cast, before thee, being read by thee,
In ^eading it ^h^u did promise to me,
Even that which I do now of thee desire,
My words and faith do not at onc^ expire.
When Diana deprived thee first of health,
I feared it; Virgin think upon thy self.
And now I fear the same, for now at length
The flame o^ love in me ha^h gotten strength.
My strong affection does ^ne^ease, and grow,
Encouraged by that hope which you did show.
Thou gav'st me hope, from thee it did proceed,
Diana is a witness to thy deed.
For thou did swear by Diana's majesty,
Acom^^^ I do mean to marry thee.
And to these words which from thy mouth then went,
Diana bowed in token of consent.
If thou do urge, thou went de^eiv'd by me,
The deceit came from love, my love from thee.
Seeking thereby to thee to be united,
That should win favor, wherewith thou art frighted.
I Am not so crafty by nature or use,
Thy beauty does this craftiness infuse.
Ingenious love, and not my art first joined
Those words which thee to me did firmly bind.
For love this cunning trick to me disclosed
And words of marriage into lines composed.
yet let this Act of mine deceitful prove,
If it be deceit to get what we love.
And now I write, for favor I intrear,
Complain of this, if this be a cecei^.
If loving thee, an injury I do thee,
Though thou forbid me, I will love and woe thee.
Some have by force their Sweet-hearts away brought,
To write a Letter, shall it be a fault?
Since that a Letter a new knot does tie
Of that promised love between thee and I.
Though thou art coy to me, yet I shall make thee
More kind, and I do know that I shall t^ke thee.
For albeit thou escape out of this net,
Thou shall not escape all those which love can set.
And if that gentle means, and art do fail,
Then force against thy coinesle shall prevail.
I do not hold that Paris was in fault,
or those who their desires by force have sought.
And so will I: although that death should be
His sad reward, that ventures to steal thee.
Were thou less fair, my suit would be more cold,
But now thy beauteous face does make me bold.
My flame of love proceeds from thy fair eyes,
Which do out shine the bright stars in the skies.
And from thy white neck, which thy brown hair graces,
And from thy arms fit only for embraces.
Thy modest countenance also takes me
Where silent beauties sweetly placed be.
Thy feet like ivory are so pure and white,
That Thetis, I suppose, has not the like.
I were happy, if I might praise the rest,
Thy parts summed up together would be best.
It is no wonder since thou art so fair,
If by thy own words I did thee ensnare.
For if thou should confess thy self to be
Taken by my deceit and treachery;
Let me bea^ the envy of it, and blame,
So that I may the fruits of love obtain.
Achilles did by force fair Bris^^s take,
yet she loved him, and would not him forsake.
F^nd fault with what thou will and angry be,
So that in danger I may enjoy thee.
I that have moved your anger, will appease you,
And if you give me leave, I Will strive to please you.
For I will stand before you, and there weep,
While my tears with my words due time shall keep
And like some servant that correction fears,
I hold my hands up, and beg with my tears.
Assume your right, I Am a ^^ave to your b^auty,
Be you my Mistress, and teach me my duty.
Although that you should stri^e me, and should tear
In an imperious manner my long hair.
I Will suffer all, and only afraid be,
Left you should hurt your ^and with striking me.
Thou needst not ^etter me with iron chains,
"He serves willingly whom love constrains.
When thou have satisfied thy wrath on me,
Thou will then say; how pat^ent is he?
And noting my patience say, since I see
That he can serve so well, he shall serve me.
I know thou do condemn me in absence,
And my good cause does want a just defense.
That only which I on the Apple writ
Is my offense, yet love ndited it.
Besi^es Dia^a should not mocked be,
Keep thy promise with her, though not with me.
She sa^ the blush, ^hen as thou art deceived.
And she did hea^ those words which thou did read.
And who can be more violent than she,
To those that do profane her Majesty.
Who more angry than Al^h^^ with her son,
M^re ^e^ce then was the Boar of Calydon.
She made ^cteon^ hounds their Master hunt,
As he with them to chase wild beasts was wont
She did N^^b^ to a stone transform
Which in Bythinia stands, and seems to mourn.
Cyd^pp^, I dare not speak truth to thee,
Let my admonishment seem false to be.
yet I must speak, her wrath inflicts on thee
This sickness, when that thou should married be.
From perjury she would have thee keep thy self
"By sickness she would bring thy mind to health.
And when to break thy vow thou would begin,
She keeps thee from committing of that sin.
Then do not thou Di^^^ more incense,
She may be brought to remit thy offense,
That so thy fever may not quite destroy
Thy beauty saved, that I may it enjoy.
Preserve that beauty, which my love first bred,
Where snowy whiteness shaddoweth the re^,
May those would cro^^e our love, endure that pain,
Which I while thou art sick do now sustain.
I would not have thee sick, nor married be,
I know not which of the^e would most grieve me.
Som^times it grie^eth me, that I should grieve thee,
And that I did so cunningly deceive thee.
For my mistris's ^erjury, O punish me,
ye gods; from punishment let her be free.
And sometimes I occasion take to go
By the door, that I may know how you do.
And in a secret manner enquiring keep
Of your maid, how you cat, and take your sleep.
I would I h^d been a Physician bred,
To feel thy pulse, and sit upon thy bed.
And woe is me, that I must absent be*
While that my rival is perhaps with th^e.
He holds thy hand, and sits on thy beds side,
Who is by all the gods, and me envied.
And while that he t^y beating pulse does try,
Thy white arm he does often touch thereby.
He handles thee, and then perhaps a kiss,
Rewards his service with to^ great a blis^e.
Who has permitted thee to reap my crop?
And take away the fruits of all my hope?
Her self, and Kisses thou must understand
Are mine by promise, then take off thy hand.
Take of^ thy hand, for she my own shall be,
Unless thou will commit adultery.
Some other Maiden choose that yet is free,
For of her tenemen I must Landlord be.
Thou may believe our covenants if not m^,
To show they are firm let her read them to thee,
Therefore thou have no right, I say to thee,
Unto her marriage bed, it is kept for me.
Though her Father to thee dip her assign,
Yet thy right cannot be so good as mine.
Her Fathes did betroth her unto thee,
But she her self did give her self to me.
He promised before men she should be thine,
She promised before Diana she would be mine.
He breaks his word, she violates her oath,
And do thou dote which is the worst of both?
Lastly consider, what the event may be,
For he is in health, but sick in bed is she.
In our contentions too much ods there are,
Thy hope is not like mine, nor yet thy fear.
Thy love is not so dangerous but I
If I should suffer a repulse must dye.
Perhaps that hereafter thou will approve her,
But it is I that now do clearly love her.
Therefore in justice, that same love of thine
Unto my love all title should resign.
Since for thy love he unjustly does contend,
Cydippe why do I this Letter send?
Diana for his sake does thee afflict,
Forbid him then thy house, if thou have wit.
And for his sake this sickness light on thee,
May he that causes it, so punished be.
For if thou will his fained love reject,
And not love whom the goddess does not respect.
Thou shall then presently regain thy health,
When thou art well, I shall be well my self.
Fear not sweet Maid, thou shall have thy health now;
If to the goddess thou will keep thy vow.
"The heavenly powers our sacrifices scorn,
"Unless we faithfully our vows perform
Yet some do lancing suffer for healths sake,
And some for health do bitter potions take.
But if thou keep thy self from perjury',
Thou shall preserve thy heal^h, thy says, and me.
Thy former fa^^t may yet a pardon find,
Through ignorance, or fo^getfulnesse of mind.
Thy si^kne^^e and my words admonish thee,
"For know the gods cannot deceived be.
Yet should^st thou escape this sickness, being a Maid,
Being ma^ried, thou will need Di^n^'s aid.
Having heard thy promise she will ask thee
If I the father of thy burden be.
If thou do^st vow, yet she will not believe,
If t^ou swear'st she knows it is but to deceive.
For thee, not for thy self this care I take,
And my mind is thus trouble^ for thy sake.
Let not ^hy Pa^en^s for thy s^ckne^^e w^ep;
Or why do thou in ^gnorance them keep?
Though to thy Mother thou do all relate,
Cy^i^^^, thou need'st not to blush thereat.
Tell her ^ow I did first behold thy eyes,
While thou did to Diana sac^ifice
And at the first side if thou ma^ked'st me,
I stood and gazed with fixed eyes on thee.
And while I wondering stood m^ cloak often fell
From my shoulder, which passion seemed to tell,
And after that an Apple I did fit,
Wherein most cunningly these words I writ.
Which in Diana's pres^nce read by thee,
Thou did bind thy self then to marry me.
That she the Tenor of the words may know,
As thou read'st them once, read them to her so.
Then she will say forthwith, pray marry me
Him, whom the goddess has allotted thee.
Since that Diana is pleased, choose no other,
For the goddess will be to thee a mother.
And tell he^ if she ask thee, who I am,
The goddess choice can be to thee no shame.
In ^aea where Corycian Nymphs have,
In Parnassus hill an old famous Cave.
I was born, and (it birth be not contemned)
From no base Parantage I did descend.
I have wealth, and my life from spot is free,
And there is none whom I love more than thee.
Had thou not swo^n, yet thou need'st must like
Such a husband, and I such a wife would seek.
Diana in a dream bid me to write
These lines, and waking love bid me indite.
And ^s loves arrow now has wo^nded me,
Take heed Diana's arrow wound not thee.
At once have pity on me, and thy sel^,
At once thou may restore us both to health;
Which if thou g^ant, when the Trumpets procla^m,
Diana's solemn sacra^ice again,
I Will offer a golden Apple and on it
These two verses shall be most fairly w^it.
Ac^ntius th^s Apple offered to testi^y.
The gods the words writ in it did ratify.
Lest a longer Letter try t^ee being weak.
I have but one word more to write, or speak.
And in the usual way as all can tell
I will conclude my letter here; Farewell.

The Argument of the twentieth Epistle.
WHen Cydippe understood that offended Diana had inflicted this Fever on her,
she condescended to Acontius desire against her parents will, rather than to
endure the torment of her sickness. First s^e answers, that she durst not ^ead
his Epistle aloud, lest he should be deceived with the fallacy of an oath, as
she was in reading the lines writ on the Apple. Then amplifying the deceit of
that Apple, she ^ovies against Acontius.

CYDIPPE to ACONTIUS.
IN silence I thy Letter read, for fear
Lest unawares I by the gods should swear.
I think, again thou would have cosened me,
But that I have promised my self to thee.
I read it, lest if I unkind should seem,
Diana should have more offended been.
Though to Diana I do incense offer,
yet she defends that wrong which thou did proffer.
And if I may give credit unto thee,
For thy sake ^he with sickness visits me.
Unto H^ppolytus she was not so kind,
For at her hand more favor thou do find.
A Virgin of a Virgin should take care,
Altho^gh I have not long to live I fear.
I am sick, yet the causes of my grief,
Physicians know not, nor can yield releif.
How sick am I, while I these lines do writ*
I sc^rce can (...) within my bed upwright.
I fear lest any but my Nurse should find.
That we by Letters do exchange our mind.
To visitants, while she the door does keep,
(To give me time to write) she says I sleep.
When this color the matter cannot hide,
Lest by sleeping too long truth be discri'd.
If some ^ome, who to deny it is unfitting,
She gives me then a famed sign by spitting.
Then I break off, and lest it should be spied,
In my trembling bosom the Letter hide.
When they are gone, then I do write again,
Thus in the midst of pains, I take great pain,
Which did thou deserve, I could undertake,
Then thou deserve, I Will do more for thy sake.
For thy sake, I this sickness do sustain,
And for thy imposture thus punished am,
And thus my beauty which did please thy sight,
Has hurt thy self, by yiedling thee delight.
If I had appeared deformed unto thee*
No sickness had procured my misery.
Praise is my ruin, and while you both woe me
It Is my own beauty that does thus undo me.
And while both will not yield, both will be mine,
you hinder his desire, he hinders thine.
I am like a ship the wind drives amain
To Sea, but st^ong tides drive it back again.
My marriage day which my Parents would see
Is at hand, but a fever troubles me.
And while the thought of martiage does me mock,
Death even at my door begins to knock.
Which though I am not guilty makes me fear,
So^e of the gods with me offended are.
Some think my sickness has but cau^ual been,
Or the Gods would not have me marry him.
And that thou may no: think fame does detect thee,
For poisoning of my self they do suspect me,
The cause is hide, but yet my grief lies open,
you do contend, but I with grief am broken.
Tell me and do not unkindly reject me
What is thy hate, if thy love does afflict me?
If such thy love be, love thy enemy,
But I entreat thee that thou would spare me.
What hope to obtain my love can thou cherish,
When thou do let me by a fever perish?
If to Diana thou do pray in vain
Why do thou ^oast what thou can not obtain?
Either thou can not Diana pacify;
If thou can, but are unmindfull of me,
I would that I ^ad Delos never known,
At least, at that time had not to it gone.
My ship unhappily did sail that day,
And through the blew seas cut her fatal way.
Unluckily out of my house I did slip,
When I did go aboard my fainted ship.
Twice the winds ^o our sails contrary were,
yet now I think on it the winds did stand fair;
It was a fair wind that did drive me back,
That my unhappy journey I might slack.
Would it had been contrary to my mind,
But it is folly to complain against the wind.
For famous Delos I desire to see,
Me thought my ship sailed slowly under me.
I^^id the Oars because that they did fail,
And we thought they put out too little sail.
Having passed Tenos, and Andros, the white
Cliffes of fair Delos came within my sight.
And to the Is^e I said, why do me shun?
Do still store in the Sea, alas thou have done!
I landed when the Sun had run his course,
And began to unyoak his purple horse.
Next day when in the East they harnes'd were,
My mother bid me comb and dress my hair.
She gave me Rings, my hair with gold she dressed,
And put on me apparel of the best.
To the gods of the Island we did dispense,
Our gui^ts, and offered yellow frankincense.
And while my Mother bedewing with blood
The smoking Altar, sacraficing stood;
My ca^efull Nurse led me another way,
While she, and I through sacred places stray.
We walk about while we admired there
The gifts of Kings, and Images there were.
We admired Apollos Altar, and the tree
That helped Lat^na in child- delivery.
And all that had in Delos famous been,
We saw, and more than yet has mentioned been.
And here Acontius thou do cast a look
On me, conceiving I might be soon took.
I returned to Diana's Temple that has
Fair steps, and what place ought to be more safe
Thou threw'st an Apple for me with this verse,
Which I was ready again to rehearse;
My Nurse took't up, and wondering, wished me
To read it, so I read thy treachery.
When to this word of marriage I came,
I felt that both my cheeks did blush for shame.
And when my eyes had served thy turn to read
These lines, I looked down, and hung my head.
But ye^ what glory have thou got the^eby*
To deceive a Maid is no victory.
I stood not with my Axe and bucler there,
As P^ath^silea did at Troy appear.
No gold belt from me thou did bear away,
Like that was taken from Hy^poll^ta
Then why should thou rejoice to ^ave betrayed
By thy deceitful w^rds a harmless Maid?
An Apple deceived A^alanta and Cy^ippe:
Thou shall another Hippo^enes be
But if that wanton Boy did thee inflame,
Whose quiver (thou say) does Loves shasts contain;
Why did thou not in honest sort come to me?
And not strive to deceive me, but to woe me.
Why did thou not by words thy worth express,
To gain my love, while thou did love profess;
Why did thou seek to compel, not persuade
My love? by promises on thy part made.
What does my former oath now profit thee?
Though I called Diana it to testify.
It is the mind that swears but my tongue went,
And swore this oath without my minds consent.
"An oath should be took with a knowing mind,
"Therefore a rash oath has no power to bind.
If willingly I promised unto thee
Marriage, thou might then seek it now of me.
But if those words I un^wars did speak,
Thou stand'st on words that are but vain and weak.
I did not swear, therefore thou can not be,
By reading those words, a husband unto me.
If such false oa^hs to bind effectual were,
To grow rich in short time thou need'st not fear.
For all the Kings in the world may resign
Their right unto thee by reading a line,
Thou art greater then Diana believe me,
If in thy words so great a power there be.
yet though my oath, and thy love here I flight*
And have strongly pleaded, my case is right.
yet I confess I fear Diana's wrath,
Who now I doubt thus me afflicted has.
For as often, as I do intend to marry,
I do fall sick, and so am sorc'd to tarry.
Thrice Hymen now unto my bedside came,
And finding me sick, he went back again.
And with his tired hand he scarce could light
His Torch, or make it to burn clear, and bright.
Sometimes with powders he perfumes his hair,
While he his yellow saffron robe does wear.
But when unto my chamber he does come,
And beholds rears, and weeping he is gone.
He pluck's the Garland from his shineing hair,
And tears the flowers in it placed were.
Such mourning does with him so ill agree,
That his blushing cheeks red as his robe be.
While a hot fever now tormenteth me,
So that I think the bed-cloaths heavy be.
I see my parents for me weep and rage,
Who am now nearer death then marriage.
O D^an^! that do wear thy painted quiv^r.
Help me now by Apolle's skill thy brot^er.
Since he can cure the sick, then why should I
To thy disgrace, without thy he^p nere dye?
VVh^n thou d^dst bathe thy self I never mistaked
Like rash Act^on who beheld thee naked.
On thy altars I have often sacrificed,
T^y mother was not by my mother despised.
This only was my fault, that I had read
A perjured verse, and ^as ^^^reby deceived.
T^erefore Ac^^t us for my sake now bring
To Diana's alter thy own offering
If that the goddess be offended with me,
Then to be thine, why does the hinder me?
For if that she do take away my life,
Thou can not hope that I should be thy wi^e.
He that should be my Husband, does not stand
By my bed, and lift me up with his hand.
He sits indeed on my beds side, but he
Attempts no action of immodesty.
And knows not what to think of me at all,
When without cause teers from my eyes do fall.
He seldom does a kiss to me impart,
And with a fearful voice calls me Sweetheart.
I wonder my disdain he has not spied,
For when he comes I turn on my left fide.
I will not speak, but sleep I counterfeit,
And pu^l my hand back, when he would take it.
Then does he fetch a deep sigh, because I
Am offended with him, he knows not why.
When as in truth, if I should speak my mind,
(Cause in ^y sufferings thou do pleasure find)
Thou do deserve our ange^, who did set
Thy cunning toyl^^, to catch me in thy net,
Why do thou write thou would ^ain visit me?
Since in thy absence thou have wounded me.
Why thou art called Acontius, I have found,
Cause like an arrow thou far off do wound.
That wound is not yet healed which no dar^,
But these words I read, gave unto my heart.
Why should thou come and here behold me lie
The wretched Trophy of thy victory?
For now my bloudlesse color does quite fail*
And I am like t^y Apple wan and pale.
My white cheeks are not lightly stained with red,
Like spored marble newly polished.
But like the color of a silver Cup,
When with cold water it is filled up.
^f thou saw me, I should not seem the same,
As when by Art thou sought'st my love to gain.
My promise thou would willingly remit,
And ask the goddess to be freed from it.
And thou will send me then another line,
That I may swe^r that I shall never be th^^e.
Yet prethe^ come, since thou desir'st the same,
And see if thou can know me now again.
Though ( Acontiu^) thy breast like Iron be,
Thou would pray the goddess to pardon me.
yet I would have thee know, we asked Appollo,
To regain health what course I ought to follow.
And as fame does repo^^, he answered, I
Was punished for my infidelity.
And thus the gods in Oracle answered me,
Who to thy desires favorable be.
Whence comes it, but because these cunning Letters
In the Apple writ make the gods thy debtors?
Since thou do rule the gods, thou must rule me,
And therefore willingly I yield to thee.
I told my mother how I had betrayed
My self to thee, at which she was dismayed.
you must contrive the rest; for I have done
Already, I fear, more then does become
A Virgin, since in this Letter you see,
I freely do unfold my mind to thee.
Now my weak joynt^ (...) weary of enditing,
And my sick hand is tired wi^h long writing.
So hoping that we shall together meet,
My Letter with a farewell does thee greet.

The Argument of the one and twentieth Epistle.
PHaon being sometimes a ^oatman^ Venus came unto him, and desired to be
carried over the water gratis, which he did, not knowing her to be a goddess,
whereupon she gave him a box of ointment, wherewith anointing himself, he
became so beautiful, that all the women in the Isle Lesbes were in love with
him, and especially Sappho did impatiently affect him. But when Phaon went to
Sicily. Sappho out of the heat of her love, and fear of his disdain,
desperately resolved to throw her self into the Sea* from Lucas a Prom^utorie
of Spire. B^t yet unconstant to her first resolve, ^he endeavors by this
Epistle to recall him back, and gain his love of which she formerly despaired,
and to win him to a dislike of his present estate and manner of life. Lastly,
she uses all Arguments that might move him to pity. And in this Epistle Ovid
has most lively expressed the soft and amorous affections of love.

SAPHO to PHAON.
SOon as thou do behold my studious hand,
^hence the Letter comes do thou understand?
Or unless in it thou S^ph^es name read,
Do thou not know from whence it does proceed?
Thou may wonder why I in this verse write
Since I in Lyrick numbers do delight.
The weeping Elegy will fitting prove
To suit unto our sad, and mournful love.
But in light Lyrick verses there appears
No doleful harmony, that mry su^e tears.
For as a field of corn on fire, whose flame
The Eastern wind does blow up, and maintain,
Does burn apace, being fanned by the wind,
Even so the flame of love does fire my mind.
Though Pha^n live near Aet^a far from me,
My flames of love hotter than E^na be.
So that ve^se^ to my harp I cannot set,
"A quiet mind does verses best beget.
The Dryad's do not help me at this time,
Nor Lesbian, nor Pierian Muses nine.
I hate, Amythone, and Cyd^us white,
And Athis is not pleasant in m^ sight.
And many others that were ^ov'd of me,
But now I have placed all my love on thee.
Thy youthful years to pleasure do invite,
Thy tempting beauty ha^h betra^'d my sight.
Take a quiver, and thou wi^t App^l^^ be;
Take Horns, and Bacch^s will be like to thee.
P^oe^us loved Daphne, B^cchus, Aria^n^,
Yet in the Lyrick verse no knowledge had she.
But the Muses dictate unto me smooth rhymes.
So that the world knows my name and lin^s.
Nor has Aceus for the harp more praise,
Though he by higher subjects gets his Bays.
"If nature beauty unto me deny,
"My wit the want o^ be^uty does supp'y.
Though low of stature yet my fame is tall,
And high, for through the world it is known to all.
Though for my beauty I have no renown,
P^rs^us loved Cep^e^a, that was brown.
White Doves do often pair with spoted Doves,
And the g^een Parret the black Turtle loves.
If thou will have a love as fair as thee,
Thou must have none, for none ^o fair can be*
yet once my face did fair to thee appear,
And that my speec^ became me, thou did swear.
And thou would kiss me while that I did sing,
(For Lovers do remember every thing)
My kisses, and each part thou did approve,
But specialy when I did write of love;
Then I did please thee with my wanton strain,
With witty words, and with my amorous vain*
But now the Maids of S^cily do please thee,
Would I might L^sb^s change for Sic^ly.
But take heed Me^^ensian ^ow you do
Receive this wanderer least you do it rue.
Least by his ^^attering tongue you be b^trai'd,
What he says to you, he has to me said.
O Venus help me now in my distress,
Fair goddess, favor now thy Poetesse.
Will fortune always be to me unkind?
And will she never change her froward mind?
For I knew sorrow soon, even when that I
Was six years old, my father first did dye.
The love of a whore my brothero're-came,
On whom he spent his wealth, and lost his fame.
Being grown poor then unto Sea he went,
To get by piracy what he had spent.
And because I did blame his courses, he
My honest counsel scorned, and hate^ me.
And as if these griefs we^e to light for me,
you know that I have faulty been with thee.
And of thee at last I must make complaint,
Because that I thy company do want.
In thy absence I do not dress my hair,
Nor on my fingers any rings do wear.
A poor and homely weed I do assume,
Arabian myrrh does not my hair perfume.
Though I did dress my self for to please thee,
yet in thy absence why should I dress me*
Nature has given me a heart so soft,
Tha^ love does with his arrow wound it often.
For I am still in love, and I do see,
That I must always thus in love still be.
The fatal sisters at my birth decreed
To spin my life forth with an amorous thread.
Or else my studies are the cause of it,
Thalia has given me a wanton wit.
Nor can it in love seem so strange a case,
That I'should love thy young effeminate face.
Lest Aurora should love thee I was afraid,
And so she had but Ceph^^us her staid.
If Phoebe should behold thee, she e're long
Would love thee more then her E^d^m^on.
And beauteous Venus long ago had carried
T^ee unto heaven in her Ivory Chariot,
But that the goddess wi^ely did foresee,
That Ma^^ himself would fall in love with thee.
Such was thy beauty, and thy comely grace,
For in thy youth thou had a Virgins face
Return to me, thou sweetest flower of beauty,
For to love thee, I know it is my duty.
I do not here entreat thee to love me,
But that thou would permit me to love thee,
And while I write, I weep even for thy sake,
And all those blots thou see, my tears did make.
Though thou resolvest to go, yet modesty
Might have enforced thee, to take leave of me.
At thy departure thou did not kiss me,
I feared that I should forsaken be.
I had no pledges of thy love, for I
Have nothing of thine but thy injury.
This only charge I would have g^ven to thee,
That thou would not be unmindfull of me.
I swear unto thee, by ^his love of mine,
And by my goddesses the muses nine.
When they did tell me that thou had took ship,
A long time I could neither speak, nor weep.
My heart grew cold, my silent grief was dumb,
Wanting both tears to vent it self, and tongue,
But when my sorrows I more lively felt,
I tore my hair my tears began to melt.
So that to weep I presently begun,
Like Mothers at the burial of a son.
My brother laughed, and while that he did walk
And strut by me, he thus began to ta^k.
Alas; why does my loving sister grieve,
Thou have no cause, thy Da^g^ter is alive.
Thus love and shame together ill agree,
For I had put off now al^ modesty.
And in such manner I abroad did rove,
That the people thereby discerned my love.
O Ph^^n, I do dream of thee always,
Dreams makes the night more pleas^nt than the days.
Dreams make thee present though thou absent art,
But they weak shadows of true joys impart.
Sometimes I t^ink that thou embracest me,
And ^ometimes I think ^ha^ I ^mbrace thee.
That thou do kiss me, then I do believe,
With such kisses as thou do use to give.
And sometimes in my dream to thee I speak,
As if my tongue and senses were awa^e.
I cannot tell ^he ^est with modesty,
For methinks I enjoy thy campany.
But when the sun does ri^e and break the day,
I am sad, because my dreams pass away.
I Am angry that my fancy is no stronger.
And that my pleasant dream should last no longer.
Then to the woods and caves I straight way hie.
Wherein I enjoyed thy sweet company
As if the woods and caves wou^d comfort me,
Since they witnesses of our pleasure be.
Like one were mad, or enchanted I ^^ye,
W^ile my hair does over my shoulders loose lie.
Methinks the mossie caves do seem as fair,
As those which built of costly Marble are.
I love the vvood, under whose leavie shade,
We oftentimes have both together laid.
But the vvood seems upleasant unto me,
As if it mourned for thy company.
And I have often gone unto that place,
Where we have lain together in the grass;
And laid me down again, and with the showers
Of tears have watered the smiling flowers.
The leavelesse trees to mourn do begin,
And all the sweet ^irds have left off to sing.
Only the Nightingale with mournful song,
In sadest notes bewailes her former wrong,
She laments those sad wrongs she did sustain;
Of thy forsaking me I do complain.
If she sung not, nor I complained of thee,
The wood more silent than the night would be*
There is a Fountain that^s as clear as glass,
So that some thought a deity in it was;
Over which a great tree does extend his boughs,
And soft green grass even round about it grows.
I being weary, by chance I lay down here,
And a Nayad which did to me appear,
Standing before me thus to speak began,
Because thou love, and are not loved again?
To Leucas go, if that thou will have case,
A pro^ontory that o're-looks the Seas.
Hence Deucalign for Pyrrh^ love
Did throw himself down, and as it did prove,
He had no hurt, but being d^enched in
These seas, his love to cool did straight begin.
The virtue in this place remains, make have,
And from this rock thy self down quicly cast.
Thus having said, she vanished and my fears
Increast, my eyes did overflow with tears.
Fair N^mph I promise thee that I will go,
Enraged with love unto that rock you show
Perhaps the light air in her arms will bear me,
I cannot be worse, than why should danger fear me?
O love! with thy wings let me be sustained,
Lest for my death Leuc^dian seas be blamed.
Then unto Phoebus I Will my Harp resign,
And underneath it write this double line;
Sappho O Phoebus offers unto thee,
Her Harp, which thou love, and was loved by me.
If Phaon to return to me would please,
What need I go to the Actaean Seas?
Thou can ^^ me more good, thee I will follow,
Thy beauty is such thou art my Apollo.
Or can thou harder then a hard Rock be,
And to die in my misery suffer me?
It were far better sure that I should join,
In close embraces, my fair breast with thine;
That breast, O Phaon, which thou did often praise,
And which did seem so witty many ways.
Now I would fain be eloquent, but while
I strive to write in a more elegant style;
My art does fail, for grief my wit has spent?
So that my letter is not eloquent.
My former vein of writing verse is done,
My jocund Harp is now grown mute and dumb.
ye L^sbian Nymphs that marriage do desire,
ye Nymphs so called from the Lesbyan Lyre.
ye L^sbian Nymphs whose love advanced by same,
Come not to hear my Harp, or Lyrick strai^.
For that sweet vein I had in former time,
My P^aon took away who is not mine.
If you send him back, I should regain it,
He is my Genious that does give me wit.
But why with prayers seek I to persuade?
Can his heard heart with prayers be soft made?
No, it does grow more stiff, and I do find
That all my words are but like empty wind.
But I do wish the winds would bring thee back:
Why to return again, art thou so slack?
I have long looked for thee, then come away,
Why do thou thus torment me with delay?
Weigh but thy Anchor, Ven^s will befrie^d thee
With a good voyage, and a fair wind lend thee,
Cupid to steer thy ship too will not fail,
And he will put out, and take in each sail,
But if thou forsake Lesbian Sappho, I
Have not deserved of thee such cruelty;
And by this Letter I would have thee know,
That I my self into the Sea will throw.
Three responsive Epistles of the Poet Aulus Sabinus in answer to

The Argument of Sabines first Epistle.
Ulysses having read Pe^^lopes Epistle, answers to all objections, and
relates his many troubles which he had valiently endured Tyrosias and Pallas
having instructed him in future events, he prophesies unto her that he will
come home to Ithaca in the babit of a beggar. He comes home so disguised, that
Penelopes wooe^s supposing him a beggar offer him many affronts. B^t his son
Telemachus and two servants helping him, he fell upon them, and slew them all.
At l^st his ^on T^begonus, whom he had by Circe, flew him with a po^soned Arrow

ULISSES to PENELOPE.
Unfortunate ^lisses has from thee,
Received thy Letter dear Pen lope.
The sight of thy hand and seal, were to me
A kind of comfort in my misery.
Thou do accuse me, that I am to slack
In returning and coming to thee back.
I had rather thou should estem me slow,
Then that I should let thee my troubles know.
Greece knew my love unto thee, when I had
For thy love counterfeited my self mad.
For such was then the sorce of my affection,
That I did counterfeit a feigned distraction,
Thou would not have me write, but come away;
I make have but cross winds do make me stay.
Troy with the Grecian Maids hate, is defaced,
I am not there, for Troy is burnt and razed.
Deiphobus, ^sius: Hector, all slain are,
And all the rest of whom thou standst in fear.
I escaped the ^bracia^ bands when I had slain
^besus, and to my Tents returned again.
And besides out of Pallas Temple I
Did take the fatal palm of victory.
I was in the (...) when (...)
Troj^^^ burn the Horse, yet not (...).
Burn it; for in this wooden horse, quoth she,
The cunning Grecians here enclosed be.
Therefore if you do not this horse destroy,
It shall be the destruction of Troy.
Achill^s rites of sepult^re did lack,
Till I brought him to Thetis on my back.
The Grecians did my labor so regard,
I had Achille^ armor for reward.
yet I have lost all, for the se^ has swallowed
My ships, and all the company me ^follow'd.
Only that constant love I owe to thee,
Continues with me in adversity.
Scylla and Charybdis could not cast away
My love to thee, which still does with me stay.
Spite of Antiph^tes my love endured,
And though the cunning Sirens me allured.
And Circe, nor Calypso could not charm me,
Thy love against their Sorceries did arm me.
Both promi^'d that they could immortal make
Me, that I should not fear the Stygian Lake.
For thy sake I their offer did withstand,
And have suffered so much by Sea and Land.
Perhaps when thou these women's names do find
In my Letter, it will trouble thy mind.
And of C^r^e and ^alypso to hear,
Perhaps thou will be struck into a fear.
When I in thy letter Anc^nu^ red,
Polybu and Medon, they my fear bred.
Since thou so many youthful Suitors have,
How could I think that thou remainost chaft.
Could thy delight in they tear blubbered face?
Do not thy tears thy beauty yet debas?
And it seems thou have given consent to marry,
But thy unthriving web does make them tarry.
For that which thou have in the day time spun,
thou unweav'st at night, so it is never done.
Thy Art is good which does successful prove,
To delude their purpose, delay their love.
O Polyphemus; I do wish that I
Had died in thy Cave free from misery.
Would I had been by the T^ra^ians slain,
When my ships unto Imarus first came.
Wou d cruel Pl^to then had satisfied
His wrath on me, I would that I had died,
When I de cended to the Stygian Lake,
From thence in sa^ety I returned back.
For though in thy Letters no dread appear,
I saw my mothers thin ghost walking there.
She told me how at home all matters be,
And to shun my embraces thrice fled me.
I saw Protesilaus, who fate-contemn^ng,
With his death gave the Trojan wars beginning.
And his wife Leoda^i^, who did dye
That she might bea^ her h^sband company.
I saw Agame^ on whose wounds ble^ding were,
So that the sight made me ^et fall a tear.
He had no hurt at Troy, and also past
The Eubaean Promontory, yet at last
Having a thousand wounds g^ven him, he dies
Even then when he to Jove did sacrisice.
Thus H^lena the Grecians ruin bred,
While she to Troy a stranger fo lowed.
Besides, what profit was it unto me,
Cassa^dra were captives and Andromeche?
I could have chosen H^cu^a for my wife,
Think not that with a who e I spend my life.
For I brought H^cub^ aboard my ship,
But she out of her former shape did ^^ip.
For into a Bitch she was straight transformed,
And her complaints were into barking turned.
Thetis grew angry at these Progedies,
And enraged, Aeosus made a storm to rise;
So that with wind and waves our ships did strive,
Which tempest round about the world did drive.
But if Tyresias truly foretold me
A prosperous ^ate after adversity;
Having endured so much by land and sea,
I hope my fortunes will more kinder be.
Now Pallas does protect us from all dangers,
And guides us in our journey amongst strangers*
Since Tr^yes destruction I have Pallas s^en
Of late so that her anger spent does seem.
And wha^soever Ajax did commit,
The Grecians now are punished for it.
Nor was Tydides too excused from danger*
For he like us about the world does wander.
Nor Teucer that from Telamon first sprung,
Nor he that with a thousand ships did come.
Men^laus was happy, for having got
His wife, he need fear no unhappy lot.
Though the winds or seas did your journey stay,
Your love was not hindered by that delay.
The winds nor waves did not hinder your bliss,
But when you list you could embrace and kiss.
And had I so enjoyed thy company,
No evil chance could then betide to me.
But since Telemachus is well I hear,
My present troubles I more lightly bear.
I blame thy love in sending him to sea,
Through Sparte, and in Py^on to seek me,
I needs mu^t blame thy love in doing it,
While to the Sea thou did my Son commit.
But fortune may at last yet prove my friend,
And all my troubles may have a fair end.
A Prophet told me, dear wife, we should meet,
And with embraces should each other greet.
But ^ will come di^guis'd so to be known
Unto no other ^ut thy self alone.
In a b^ggers habit ^'le disguised be,
Conceal thy joy, and knowledge then of me.
I Will show no outward violence when I come
For so Apol^^s Priest unto me sung.
But I Will revenge my self even at that time
When thy woo^rs are banqueting with wine.
While beggars raiment does Vlesses cover.
And then at last my self I will discover.
While at Vlesses they shall all admire.
That th^s day would come soon I do desire.
That we may both d^er wife, renew our love,
And I to thee may a kind husband prove.

The Argument of Sabines se^ond E^i^tle.
DEmophoon in this Epistle endeavors by diverse Arguments to excuse his,
unfaithful neglect of returning to Phylles according to his promise. Alleging
that his friends were offended with him sot staying so long with her in Thrace,
and also the importune unseasonablenesse of the weather for sailing, promising
howsoever at length to return to Phillis. He performed his promise, but Phyllis
impatient of delay, ^ad strangled her self before he came, and by the mercy of
the gods was changed into a leafelesse Almond tree, which Demophoon embracing,
it put forth leaves as if it had been sensible of his return. Which is feigned,
because Phyllis signifies in Greek an Almonde tree, so expressing the name of
Phyllis. Because when Zephyrus or the West wind blows from Afri^a into
Thrace, this ^ree flourishes, for Zephyrus signifies as much as (...), that
is, The life cherisher* which gave occasion to this fiction, that Phyllis
transformed into a Tree, seemed to rejoice, and flourish, at the return of her
Lover.

DEMOPHOON to PHILIS.
FRom his own Country to Phyllis his friend,
D^mopho^n does this his Letter send.
Ev^n thy ^emo^h^o^ that does still love thee,
My fortunes changed, but not my constancy.
Theseus who^e name thou have no cause to fear,
Thy flame of love for his sake worthy were.
Menestheus drove out of his royal state,
And the old Tyrant is now dead of late.
He that the Amazons had overcome,
And unto Hercul^s was companion.
He that did Min^s son in law become,
When he the Minotaure had overthrown*
He did accuse me because I did stay,
Trifling so long with thee in Thra^ia
For while the love of Phyllis did detain thee.
And that a fo^reign beauty did inflame thee.
Time with a nimble pace did slip away;
And sad accidents happened by thy delay.
Which had been all prevented, had thou come
Or had thou made them void, when they were^d
When thou did Phyllis kingdom love, for she
Th^n a who^e kingdom was dearer to thee.
From At^amas I this some chiding have,
And old Ethra who is half within her grave.
Since Theseus is not their to close their eyes,
The fault on me for staying with thee lies.
I confess they both to me often cried,
When my ship did in Thracian waters ride.
The win^s stand fair Demophoon, why do stay?
Go home Demophoon without delay.
From thy beloved Phyllis example take,
She loves thee, yet her home she will not forsake.
She desires not to bear thee company,
But to return again entreats thee.
I with a silent patience heard them chide,
But their desire I in my thoughts denied.
I thought I could not embrace thee enough,
And I was glad to see the sea grow rough.
Before my father I will this confess,
"He that loves worthily may it profess.
For since such store of worth remains in thee,
If I do love thee it no shame can be.
And I do know that Phyllis cannot say,
I proved unkin'd, when I did sail away.
For when the day came that I must take ship;
I weept, and comforted thee who did weep.
Thou did grant me a ship of Thracia,
While Phyllis love made me the time delay.
Besides my father Theseus does retain
Ariadnes love and cherishes that flame;
When he looks toward heaven many times,
See how my love (says he) in heaven shines.
Though Bacchus to forsake her did commen^ him,
The world for forsaking her, has blamed him.
So am I perjured thought for my delay,
Though Phyllis know not the cause of my stay.
This may assure thee I will come again,
Because my breast does burn with no new flame.
Phyllis, has not report to thee made known,
What dismal troubles are sprung up at home?
Since for my fathers death I a mourner am,
Whose death includes more grief then I can name,
My brother Hyppolli^us deserves a tear.
Whom his own horses did in pieces tear.
These fatal causes might excuse my stay,
yet after a while I will come away.
I will but lay my F^t^er in the grave,
For it is fit he should worthy burial have.
Grant me but ^ime and I will constant be,
Thy Country ^eilds most safety unto me*
To those that since the fall of Troy did wander
By land and sea, and padst through much danger,
T^^^ce hat^ been kind, and I unto this Land
By tempest drove, was kindly entertained.
If that thy love to me remain the same,
Who in my royal Palace now do reign.
And art not Angry with my parents fate,
Or with D^mophoon most unfortunate.
Suppose that unto me thou had been married
When at the siege of Troy ten years I tarried.
Penel^pe through all the world is famed
Because that she her chastity maintained.
For she with witty Ar^, did always w^ave
An unthriving web, sui^ers to deceive.
For she by night did it in pieces pull,
Resolving the un^wisted threads to woll.
Do (...) the Thracia^s will not marry thee,
Or will thou marry any one but me?
Have thou a heart with any one to join
Thy hand, unless thy hand do join with mine;
HOw will thou blush then, and how will thou grieve,
When a far off thou shall my fails perceive;
Thou will condemn thy self, and ^ay alas;
I see Demophoon most faitful was
D^mop^o^n is returned, and for my sake,
A dangerous voyage he by sea did make
I that for breach of faith him rashly blamed,
Have broke my faith, while I of him complained.
But Philli^ I had rather thou should marry,
Then that thou should some other way miscarry.
Why do thou threaten thou will make away
Thy self? the gods may hear when thou do pray.
Though thou do blame me for inconstancy,
Add not affliction to my misery.
Though T^eseus Ariadn^ did forsa^e,
Where he wild beasts a prey of her might ma^e;
Yet my desert has not been such, that I
Should be accused of inconstancy,
This Letter may the winds wi^^ out all fail
Bring safe to t^ee, which used to drive my fail,
Persuade thy self, I fain would come away,
But that I have just cause a while to stay.

The Argument of Sabines third Epistle.
THis responsive Epistle written by Paris is not difficult, for the Argument is
taken out of Oenones Epistle. Paris having violated the rites of marriage, by
repudiating his wife, and marrying Helena first confesses to Oenone the injury
he had done her. After ward excusing himself, he transfereth the blame on
Cupid, whose power Lovers cannon r^sist, and on the fate who had destinated
Helena to him unknown. But it is reported that Oenone did love Paris so dearly,
that he being brought to her wounded by Phyloctetes with one of Hercules
arrows, she embraced his body, and embal^^eing it with tears dyed over him,
and so they were both buried in Cebri^ a Trojan City.

PARIS to OENONE.
Nymph, I confess that I fit words do want,
To write an answer to thy just complaint*
I s^ek for words, but yet I cannot find,
Words, that my aptly suite unto my mind.
I confes^e against thee I have offended,
yet H^lens love ma^es me I cannot mend it.
I Will condemn my self, but what does it avail;
The power of love makes a bad cause prevail
For though thou should condemn me, and my cause,
yet Cup^d means to ^ry me by his laws.
And if by his laws we will judged be,
It seems another has more right to me.
Thou went my first love I con^esse in truth,
And I married thee in my flower of youth.
Of my father P^iam I was not proud,
As thou do write, but unto thee I bowed.
I did not think H^ctor should prove my brother,
When thee and I did keep our flocks together.
I knew not my mother Queen H^cu^e
Whose Daughter thou most worthy art to be,
But love, I see, is not guided by reason,
Consider with thy self at this same season
For thou complain'st that I have wro^ged thee,
And yet thou writest that thou love me.
And though the S^yres and the Fawn^s do move thee,
yet thou ^emainest constant still unto me
Bendes, this love is fatal unto me,
My Sister Cassandra did it foresee;
Before that I had heard of Hel^ens name,
Whose beauty through all Greece was known by ^ame.
I have told all unless it be that wound,
Of love which I have by ^er beauty found.
Nay those wounds I will open, and from you
To gain some help, I will both beg and sue.
My life and death are both within thy hand,
you have conquered me, I Am at your command.
yet I remember that when you heard me,
^elate to you her di^mal prophecy.
While I did tell thee, thou did weep upon me,
VVi^hing the go is would turn that sad fate upon me.
That thou (...) g^t'st have no cause to accuse
When that O (...) does (...) lose.
Love blinded me that I could not believe thee,
And loving thee does make me now deceive thee.
Love powerful is, and when he list can turn
Io^^ to a bull, or to a Bird tranforme.
Such beauty all the world should not contain,
As H^l^n, who is born to be my flame
Since Jupiter to disguise his loose escape
Did transform himself unto a ^wans shape;
And Io^^ also descended from his Tower,
To court fair Da^^e in a golden shower.
Sometimes himself he to an Eagle turned,
And sometimes to a white Bull has transformed.
And who would think that H^r^ules would spin,
yet love of D^ian^ra compelled him.
And he wore her l^ght Pe^ticoate it is said,
While his love with his Lions skin was clad.
So I remember love compelled thee,
(The more's my fault) that thou pre^erredst me,
Before Apollos love, and from him fled,
Because thou would possess my marriage bed.
Yet I excelled not Pl^oebus, but the dart
Of Love did so enforce thy gentle heart.
yet this may unto thee some comfort prove,
That she is no base Harlo^ whom I love,
For she whom I before thee do prefer
By birth is ^escended from Iupi^^r.
yet her birth does not enamored make me,
But it is her matchl^sse beauty that does take me.
O my Oenon^! I do wish it still,
I had not been on the Idaean Hill
A judge of beauty, Pallas now does grudge.
And June, because against them I did judge.
And because I did lovely Venus praise,
And for her beauty gave to her the Bays.
She that can raise loves flame up in another,
She that rules Cupid, and is his own Mother,
yet she could not avoid her own Sons shaft
And Bow, where with he wounded others often.
For V^lcan took fair Venus close in bed
With M^rs, which by the gods was witnessed.
And Mars again she afterward for^ook,
And for her Paramour Anchises took.
For with Anchises she in love would be,
And did revenge his sloth in venery.
If Venus thus did in af^ection rove,
Why may not she make Paris change his love?
Menelaus with her fair face was took,
I loved her, before on her I did lo^k.
Though wars ensue, if I do her enjoy,
And a thousand ships fetch her back from Troy;
I do not fear the war is just and right,
If all the world should for her beauty fight.
Although the armed Grecians ready be,
To fetch her back, I Will keep her here with me.
If thou have any hope to change my mind,
To use thy charms why art t^ou not inclined?
Since in Apollo's Arts thou art well seen,
And to Hecates skill have used been.
Thou can cloud the day, and stars shinning clear,
And make the Moon forsake her silver sphere;
And by thy charms, while I did Oxen keep.
Fierce Lions gent^y wa^k't among the sheep.
Thou did make Xanthus, and Sim^e^s flow
Unto their springs, and back again to go.
And charm'dst other Rivers, when, thou did see,
They thirsted after thy Virginini^y.
Oenone, let thy charms effectual prove,
To change my affection, or quench thy love.
Books Printed for William Gilbertson, the sign of the Bible in
Gilt-spur-stree without N^wgate.
THe Faithful Analist or an Epitome of the English History, giving a true
account of the Affairs of this Nation, from the building of the Tower of London
in the days of William the Conqueror; to the Restoring of our Gracious King
Charles the Second, where in all things remarkable both by Sea and Land, from
the year, 1069. to the year. 1660 are truly and exactly represented.

The Rich Cabinet; with variety of Inventions: unlocked and opened, for the
recreation of Ingenious spirits at their vacant hours; also variety of
Recreative fireworks; both for Land, Air, and Water, whereunto is added Diverse
Experiments, in Drawing, Painting, Arethmetick, etc.

The History of Parismus, and Parismenos.

The History of Ornatus and Artesia.

The History of Dr. John Faustus. the first and second part.

The History of the Gentle Craft. the second part showing what famous men have
been Shoo-makers

Justin in Lattin. Also Justin in English. Translated out of the four and forty
books of Trogus Pompelus containing the Affairs of all ages and Countries both
in peace and war from the beginning of the world till the time of the Roman
Emperors togather with an Epitome of the lives and Manners, Fitting to be used
in Schools for the benefit of youth.

The Government of Cattle by Leonard Mascall Chief Farier to King James.

The Surveyors Perambulator, A new book of Surveying of Land.

PLAYS.
Ignoramus. Dr. Faustus. The Valiant Welchman. Fair EM the Millers Daughter of
Manchester. GUY of Warmick Lady Alymony. The Merry Devil of Edmonton. The
Shoe-makers. Holiday, or the Gentle-Craft.
FINIS.

