Fig: 1. The Plant in Leaf, Flower and Fruit of Tea


AN ESSAY UPON THE NATURE and QUALITIES OF TEA. Wherein are shown, I. The Soil
and Climate where it grows. II. The various Kinds of it. III. The Rules for
Choosing what is best. IV. The Means of Preserving it. V. The several Virtues
for which it is famed.


By J. OVINGTON, M. A. Chaplain to His Majesty.

THEA est de coelo missa terrae progenies, Divini nominis aemula herba.

Peclin. de usu Theae. LONDON: Printed by and for R. Roberts, 1699.

TO The Right Honorable THE Countess of GRANTHAM.
MADAM,
IT IS from Your innate Goodness only, and that condescending Temper which is so
remarkable in You, that this Foreign Leaf dares presume to court Your Favor,
and hope for a welcome Entertainment. For where can a Stranger, that was always
bred among a People the most polite of any in the World, expect a kind
Reception with more Assurance, than from a Person, whose Conversation is
adorned with all that Civility that even China it self can boast of? And
therefore while it gains Your Countenance, 'twill find it self as happy here,
as if it still had stayed at home; nay, rather with Advantage to have changed
its delightful native Soil, while it is under the more pleasant Influences of
Your Protection.

But though the Name of a Person, Madam, so Eminent as You are, both upon the
Account of Your Illustrious ORMOND Family, and those particular Accomplishments
which give You so distinguishing a Character, were enough to recommend this
healthful Herb to any that were in the least acquainted with either of them;
yet is it not it self destitute of some peculiar Virtues, which may justly
claim a very favorable Encouragement from us.

For it is generally acknowledged to be both Pleasant and Medicinal, at once to
delight the Palate and correct the Disease, and to heal the Distemper without
giving any Disturbance to the Stomach.

And certainly were the Custom of Drinking it as Universal here, as it is in
the Eastern Countries, we should quickly find that Men might be cheerful with
Sobriety, and witty without the Danger of losing their Senses; and that they
might even double the Days of their natural Life, by converting it all into
Enjoyment, exempt from several painful and acute Diseases, occasioned very
often by a pernicious Excess of inflaming Liquors, which render it rather a
Burden, than a Blessing to us.

But in pity, Madam, to this tender Leaf, I must cease from Panegyric, lest it
should create a Satyr, and the innocent Praises of it be echoed back in sharp
Invectives. For since its Constitution is so nice and delicate, as to be
injured even by common Air, it will never be able to withstand the Malignity of
an envious Breath, unless Your Honor and Goodness interpose, which are so
conspicuous, that Malice it self would blush to fix an Imputation upon them.

And from these Excellencies of Yours, which are the Crown and Ornament of
Nobility, the Author hopes to find Your Pardon in the present Dedication; and
that the Greatness of Your Mind will at this time show it self in Your
Indulgence to,

Madam, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, I. Ovington.

AN ESSAY UPON THE Nature and Qualities OF TEA.

THough the Use of Tea has for many Years past been highly approved of in the
Empires of China and Japan, which are at present the chief Kingdoms that
cherish this celebrated Leaf; yet since the Europeans by their frequent
Navigations have opened a freer Trade and Commerce to those Parts, and have
thereby been better acquainted with the Genius of those People, and their
Manner of Life, they have thereby taken occasion to inform us, among other
things, with the singular Esteem which those Eastern Nations harbor for it,
and of what daily Use it is among them. Whereupon this Western World has been
induced of late to encourage the Importation of it, The Reasons of the
Importation.
and make some Experiments of its admirable Effects, either out of Curiosity,
because of its Novelty; or out of Pleasure of gratifying the Palate; or because
of some Medicinal Virtues, with which it is pregnant. And since the Drinking of
it has of late obtained here so universally, as to be affected both by the
Scholar and the Tradesman, to become both a private Regale at Court, and to be
made use of in places of public Entertainment, which has greatly raised the
Character, and gained it a singular Repute; it might not be amiss therefore to
draw up a short Account of its Nature and Qualities, to satisfy such as are its
curious Admirers with the Knowledge of its Use. I will here discourse therefore
of the Climate and Soil this Herb grows in, and its various Kinds; of the
Method of choosing what is best, and the means of preserving it; and the several
Virtues for which it is famed: With an Answer to one Objection or two which are
sometimes urged against it.

That which in England is called Tea, The Name of it.
is in some other places pronounced Thee, especially in the Province of Fokien,
which lies in China between 25 and 30 degrees. of Latitude. But there, they say,
the word is corrupted; for such as pretend to the genuine and primitive
Pronunciation of it, will have it termed, according to the Mandarin Language,
The Mandarins are the great Men in China.
Tcha, and some Tsia. But how different soever the Name of it may be, the thing
it self is universally agreed in.

This Tea is a Leaf which grows upon a Shrub in China and Japan, The Tree of
Tea described.
not exceeding either in Height or Breadth our Rose or Goosberry-Bushes in
Europe. The Branches of which, from the Root to the Top, are clothed with
abundance of tender Leaves of different Magnitude, though of the same Form and
Shape. For Coronius, who lived several years in the Empire of Japan, assures
us, That upon the same Tree are Leaves of five different Proportions, the
largest of which resemble our Garden Balm, and grow toward the Root; and as
they rise in Height, their Size decreases; but the smallest bear the largest
Price. The Seed of it is round and black, which in three years time after it is
sown, produces new Plants. But the Flowers of it, which are all white, are of
no Esteem; the main Virtue is lodged in the Leaves. When the Flowers however
are new and fresh, they yield a very pleasant Smell; but in time, as I have
seen them, they grow yellow; and being put into Water, turn it brown. They
consist of five whitish or palish Leaves, with many Chives in the middle of the
Flower.

The Shrub it self is of a strong and hardy Constitution, is proof against
Storms, and receives no Damage by Snow or Hail, and lives and thrives in those
very Climates, the sharpness of whose Air might seem pernicious, if not fatal
to its tender Leaf; for the Winter in England, in some places where it grows,
is not more cold. The stony Soils are apt in China to produce the choicest Tea,
though for the most part it is planted there in the Valleys, and in light
ground. And might it therefore be convenient to have it brought hither, there
is nothing in the Nature either of our Ground or Air that seem to contradict
its Increase among us; Especially if sufficient Care were taken for the safe
and cautious Transportation of the Seed or Branches, and in their Growth they
were exposed, with the best Advantage, to the Sun. Though the Art here used for
raising of it has not yet answered Expectation. But whether this proceeds from
the Envy of the Chinese, who are said to boil the Seed, lest it should be
planted any-where else; or from the Age of it, or untimely Collection of it, or
the immoderate Heat of the Sun, and variety of Weathers in a long Voyage, it is
uncertain.

The Spring is reputed the most proper Season for gathering the Leaves, The
Season for gathering it.
because it is this time only of the year that renders them most soft and
delicate, juicy and tender; which gives the Water wherein they are infused both
a more pleasant Flavor to gratify the Smell, and a Taste more agreeable to the
Palate. And certainly it is none of the meanest Signs of the remarkable
Ingenuity of the Chinese, to prepare the Leaves with so much Art to make them
still continue green, notwithstanding all the Length of Time they have been
dried. Which, I think, is not very usual with our dried Herbs in Europe.

In China are several sorts of Tea, The several sorts of it.
which are unknown to us in Europe, some of which are very cheap; but others
are so highly valuable and much esteemed, that a single Catte is looked upon as
a Present fit for a Mandarin. A Catte is about 20 Ounces. A Mandarin is a great
Man in China.
For so vastly different is the Price, that one single Pound of that Tea which
is cultivated for the Emperor, for the Nobility, and Lords of the Court, is
sold for more than One hundred times as much of another sort. And in Japan,
that which is prepared for the Grandees there, is both planted in the most
refined Earth, and carefully defended from all Injuries of the Air, from all
excessive Colds and Heats, and every thing that may be apt to offend the tender
Leaf. And as at home they commonly affect the Entertainment of a numerous
Multitude of Servants, and a stately Furniture of Instruments for the
Preparation of their Tea in the greatest Magnificence and Splendour; so they
want not abroad such as are purposely employed to husband it with the utmost
Care and Diligence, as well as with a peculiar Art. But that which is generally
brought into Europe, is known only by these three distinct Names.

The first Sort is Bohe, or, Bohe.
as the Chinese have it, Voui, which is a little Leaf inclining to black, and
generally tinges the Water brown, or of a reddish Color. Those in China that
are sick, or are very careful of preserving their Health, if they are weak,
confine themselves only to this kind of Tea, This kind of Tea is of a healing
Quality.
to which they are willing to ascribe a peculiar Virtue both for healing and
preventing a Disease, and extol it as a mighty Friend to Nature when it is
grown faint and languishing. The Taste of it, when it is very true and genuine,
is delicious and pleasant, and the weakest Stomach is able to bear it. This
kind of Tea therefore is both in Color and in Nature different from the other
two, and very useful to such as are wasting and consumptive, and excels the
others in its healing balsamic Quality, and particularly in improving by
Length of Time, which is very pernicious to the rest, for it generally grows
better the longer it is kept.

The second Sort is Singlo, Singlo.
or Soumlo with the Chinese; of which there are several kinds, according to the
place of Growth, the manner of preparing it, and the Nature of the Tea. But
that which is imported hither is of two sorts, both equally good. One of them
is a narrow and long Leaf. The other smaller, and of a bluish green Color,
which tastes very crisp when it is chaw'd, and afterward looks green upon the
Hand, and infuses a pale Greenness into the Water. The Flavor of it is fresh
and fine, lively and pleasant. It Is strong, and will endure the Change of Water
three or four times. This Tea is brought over in round Totaneg Canisters pasted
over with Paper, Totaneg is a sort of Metal brought from China.
A Canister contains between 50 and 70 l.
and enclosed in a wooden Tub, containing the Quantity of half a Pecul. A Pecul
is 132 l.
And that you may more plainly discern whether all of it be new or no, these
two things may be observed. Means to know the best Tea.
First, Examine the Leaves to see whether all or most of them are green; if
not, but that some of them are turned brown, or look decayed, then may you
guess that the Tea is not the finest, but is growing old, and will impair in
Virtue daily. Secondly, Let the Liquor, into which the Tea has been infused,
stand in a Cup for the space of a whole Night; if after this you perceive that
it still continues green, the Goodness of it seems unquestionable; but as it
abates of this Color, so, you may conclude, it has abated of its Perfection,
and wants something of its Excellence and Strength. For the fragrant Smell, the
green Color, and the bitterish sweet Taste, are the distinguishing Characters
of the Goodness of this kind of Tea.

The third Sort is Bing, Bing.
or Imperial Tea, according to the Epithet given it by the English, and by the
Dutch, Keisar. This is a large loose Leaf, and therefore takes up more Room,
proportionable to the weight of it, than any other Tea, because it is more open
and spungy. The finest Sort of it looks both green to the Eye, and is crisp in
the Mouth, and the Smell of it is very pleasant, which inhances the Price of it
here in England; and it is highly esteemed likewise in China, being sold there
at three times the Price of the other two. But it generally is of diverse
Colors, as yellow, green, etc. and is reputed weak, spending it self quickly
in the Infusion, and only tinctures the Water with any Spirit twice, because it
is not put in weight for weight with other Tea. This likewise, as the others,
is Imported in large thick Totaneg Canisters included in wooden Tubs, or in
Baskets made of small Bamboe Canes.

These are those several sorts of Tea, to some one of which all that is
transported hither is commonly reduced; and in describing this Variety, and the
different Properties of each of them, some Directions have been given for
distinguishing what is choice and good, from what is mean and refuse; which
Instruction I shall pursue, with one Remark more, a little further.

It Is necessary for all such as travel to China, nicely to understand the
Nature of the Goods there, if they intend to escape the Cheats and Frauds, and
to trade therein with Advantage. For such is the Subtilty of the Chinese in
their Trade, and so artificial are they in their Traffic, and so mightily
intent upon their Gain, that they falsify every thing they sell, if it is
capable of Sophistication; and he must be very quick and expert indeed, that
has wit enough to escape in all things their Impositions. This they formerly
practiced even in their Sale of Tea, though the Advantage of it was
inconsiderable. For with it they sometimes mixed some other Herbs of less value,
to swell the Parcel, and increase the Gain, and with this artificial Mixture
they cunningly disposed of it. But the Prudence and Caution of the Europeans
prevent at present all the fraudulent Attempts of this Nature. And yet such is
the peculiar Talent of the Chinese in the Management of this Art, that the
Discovery of them in one Trick, is only the quickening their Invention of
another; and he that has thought himself wise in timely preventing of a small
Cheat, has found afterward how weak he was, when by this means he only tempted
them to over-wit him in a greater. And though it is possible to fix their
Honesty for some time in that particular wherein the fraud has been found out,
yet will their inherent Pravity soon exert it self in something else, and make
them knavish by Transmutation. Which occasions the wary English and Dutch
Merchants in their Trading for Tea to open many times both the Top, the Middle,
and the Bottom of the Canisters, to prevent the Cheat of courser Tea which has
been sometimes privately put into one place, sometimes into another.

The Method the Chinese use in preparing of Tea, The Method of preparing Tea.
to make it dry and crisp, is, as some affirm, to put it in Ovens, or in Kilns,
or to expose it to the Sun; or as others say, by frying it twice or oftener in a
Pan; and as often as it is taken off the Fire, it is rolled with the Hand upon
a Table till it curls. By this means the Leaves contract such a Dryness and
Hardness, as inables them to retain their Virtue for many years.

Though the Tree of Tea is fortified by Nature against rigid Colds, against
Storms and bad Weather, and is able to subsist and flourish even upon stony
Ground; yet the Leaf of it, when once it is prepared for Use, is of a Temper
quite different; it is delicate and tender, injured by the Breath, and damaged
by the very common Air. Rules for pre^rving it.
And therefore the Chinese knowing how subject it is to Decay, and how easily
it is tainted, carefully provide against these Dangers, by keeping of it very
close, and at a Distance from all strong Smells, whether they be pleasant
Flavors, or foetid Scents: for both of these are equally pernicious, and
destructive of the natural Smell. And those that would secure it from such
Disasters, must see that it be guarded from those Enemies, must look that it be
kept from any strong Odor that would affect it, and shut it up securely from
the ambient Air. Totaneg is a sort of Metal brought from China.
For which End the great Canisters are necessary for a large Quantity, and the
Totaneg, or Pewter, or Tin Pots for a small, whether it be sent into the
Country, or designed to be kept at home; and none of it should be left exposed,
as little as may be, from such a Cover: But yet it is observed, that those that
endeavor to preserve the Spirit and Verdure of it longest, and with least
Damage, dispose of it commonly in large Tubs, which contain many Pounds, by the
Bulk of which the Strength of it is increased against all harmful Impressions
from without, and the Virtue of it is maintained more entirely within. And
hence it is, that as in Wine, so in Tea, the choicest commonly is in the
Middle. And that Canister, whose outside Tea may prove but ordinary, as being
nearest the Air and Danger, may yet upon a deeper search be found to contain
what is far more valuable: For Age, Air, and Damp, inevitably destroy these
Sorts of Tea, which is quite out of its Element either in a moist or an open
place.

Having thus far discoursed of the various Kinds of this foreign Leaf, and the
Season wherein it should be gathered, of the Method of making choice of the
best, and the Means whereby it is preserved; the Reader now will expect to hear
something of its Qualifications, The Qualities of Tea.
and what the Virtues of it are, that have raised it to this general eminent
Esteem. And if we may believe those persons who have been most conversant with
this healthful Liquor, and received it so long in the Nature of their common
Drink, we must needs entertain some Esteem for its Excellence, and harbor a
valuable Opinion of it. Medicinal against the Gout and Stone.
For the Gout and Stone, those painful Diseases which so frequently torment the
Europeans, are scarce known in China, and among those most Eastern Asiaticks,
the Happiness of which they commonly ascribe to the constant Use of this Liquor
among them. The Privilege of which they reckon upon as a special Blessing to
those Nations, especially when attended with such remarkable Effects. And if
the intolerable Pains of these Distempers are caused by an acrimonious Juice,
and some ferment that is saline, this Liquor is said to mitigate the Salt,
disturb the Tartar, and dissolve its gravelly Particles, when it is much and
often drunk. For since it is an Acid that coagulates the Blood, and afterward
precipitates the grosser Parts of it into Gravel; this Liquor, as some imagine,
mightily corrects the Acid, and prevents the Precipitation. And though the
Seeds of these Diseases, if they are Hereditary or Chronical, cannot easily be
removed, yet may they in some measure, by a daily Use of this excellent Drink,
be much diminished, or at least be kept from an Increase; Especially if it be
drunk in such a Quantity, and at such convenient Times, when the Stomach is
rather empty than over-charg'd. For then is a Passage easily made, and with
greater Freedom both to the Veins, and to the Reins. For a Medicine so very
weak and light as this, cannot readily conquer those Obstructions that oppose
it, nor make its way through them with Facility. And several Examples might be
produced, I question not, among our selves, to confirm the Subserviency of this
Leaf to these great and noble Ends.

Nor are the Tartars, who are now Masters of this large and flourishing Empire
of China, insensible of the Benefit of this Infusion, A Help to Digestion.
or Strangers to the Virtue and Usefulness of it. For whereas these persons are
by Nature very hardy, and have so far improved this Hardiness by Custom, that
raw Horse flesh is their ordinary Food; and this they eat, and digest with the
same Facility, as we do Beef that is boiled or roasted. Now hereupon however it
sometimes happens that their Stomachs are oppressed with Crudities, and
mightily weakened through Indigestion; to cure which, they readily apply
themselves to Tea, without consulting any other Physic; and in this they find
so much Relief, and their Appetites are so effectually strengthened, that they
soon recover their Digestive Faculty again, and remove the languid
Indisposition. But the Leaf which is most powerful upon this occasion is very
harsh, course and unpleasant, and only grows in the Northern Province of Xensi,
most of which lies between 35 and 40 degrees. of Latitude. Which Courseness renders
it far more agreeable to the strong Constitution of the stout and robust Tartar,
than to that of the delicate and soft Chinese. And that this is a Virtue very
remarkable in Tea, it seems from hence very probable, in that the Liquor
impregnated with its Particles will soften Flesh, Le Compte, p. 221. and
renders hard Meats tender, whereby we may judge that it hastens Dissolution,
and thereupon facilitates Digestion. Besides, the soft pointed Volatile Salt
wherewith it abounds, and the hot Water wherein it is infused, do mightily
repair the natural Fluidity of the Juices of the Body, and by a gentle
Astriction agreeably fortify the Tone of the Bowels, and of a weak Stomach;
vide Peclini de Potu Theae Dialogum, p. 41. And if this therefore be a Quality
inherent in this Liquor, to strengthen a faint Appetite, and correct the
nauseous Humors that offend the Stomach, it must needs in some measure happily
contribute to the Health of some weak and feeble Constitutions, and likewise
throw off abundance of those Crudities created in the Body through Excess. And
by this means, that the Vigor of the Appetite is regained, the Sweetness of the
Blood may be preserved, and the Sharpness that is in it be abated; whereby this
China Drink may prove a friendly Remedy against the Scurvy, A Remedy for the
Scurvy.
that Northern popular Disease, and become as valuable a Blessing to us, as it
is unto the Tartars, who fall into the same Distemper with us, upon the very
same Account, of a gross and high Feeding.

The last Remark which I shall make of this innocent lovely Liquor, is the
Advantage which it has over Wine, It prevails over the Fumes of Wine.
and the Ascendant which it gains over the powerful Juice of the Grape, which
so frequently betrays Men into so much Mischief, and so many Follies. For this
admirable Tea endeavors to reconcile Men to Sobriety, when their Brains are
overcast with the Fumes of Intemperance, and disordered with Excess of
Drinking; by driving away the superfluous Humors that cloud the Rational
Faculty, and disturb the Powers of the Mind. And therefore all those persons
who have by this means lost their Senses, and have passed the Bounds of
Moderation, ought presently to water their Veins with this Liquor, and refresh
themselves with its sober Draughts, if they are willing to recollect their
roving Thoughts, and be Masters of their Faculties again. For this is none of
its meanest Triumphs, that it is able to subdue this conquering Liquor, that has
foiled so many wise and powerful; that it is an Anti Circe, can countercharm
the enchanted Cup, and change the Beast into a Man. Vertiginem capitisque
dolorem (praesertim a crapula ortum) mitigatten Rhyne. p. 15. And that it is
not altogether destitute of this remarkable Faculty of suppressing Vapors in
the Brain, seems not improbable from what is observed of it in China. For when
any one there is unfortunately seized by a Vertigo, It Cures the Vertigo.
through a Redundance of Humors toward the Head; the Use of this Liquor is
often a kind Relief to this Distemper, by obstructing the Passage of the Steam
from the Stomach and lower Parts. Because the thick Vapors that continually
ascend, being the Cause of this Disturbance, whenever they are checked and
controlled in their Passage by the lively Spirit of Tea, the Megrim sensibly
abates. For Tea has none of that fiery Spirit that inflames the Blood, and
disorders the Phantisms of the Brain, and is the proper Vice of Wine; it is
quick indeed, and active as that Liquor, but happily destitute of all the
intoxicating Quality. It comforts the Brain.
It nimbly ascends into the Brain, but then it is with a candid Design of
purifying and of quickening it, not immediately to render it muddy, sluggish
and confused. And upon this score it justly claims an Interest and Share in the
Affections of all Men of fanciful and sprightly Thoughts, of all that would
animate their Faculties without Disturbance, and maintain their Idea lively and
bright, in that it actuates and quickens the drowsy Thoughts, adds a kind of
new Soul to the Fancy, and gives fresh Vigor and Force to the wearied
Invention. As some ingenious Persons in this Kingdom by frequent Experience can
testify.

And if Ingenuity may be allowed to have a Vote here, I can produce that which
is unquestionable in the Testimony of Mr. Waller, whose Character of this Herb
may be seen in these Verses.

Of TEA, commended by Her Majesty.
VEnus her Myrtle, Phoebus hat his Bays;
TEA both excels, which she vouchsafes to praise.
The best of Queens, and best of Herbs we owe,
To that bold Nation, which the way did show
To the fair Region, where the Sun does rise;
Whose rich Productions we so justly prize.
The Muses friend, TEA, does our Fancy aid;
Repress those Vapors which the Head invade:
And keeps that Palace of the Soul serene,
Fit on her Birthday to salute the Queen.
And from this eminent Property which it has of animating the Faculties, And
keeps Men waking.
and keeping up the Vigor of the Spirits, arises that other remarkable Power
which it gains over Sleep and Drowziness, and the natural Inclination of the
Body to Rest. So that a few Cups of this excellent Liquor will soon rowze the
cloudy Vapors that be night the Brain, and drive away all Mists from the Eyes.
It Is a kind of another Phoebus to the Soul, both for inspiring and inlightning
it; and in spite of all the Darkness of the Night, and all the Heaviness of
the Mind, 'twill brighten and animate the Thoughts, and expel those Mists of
Humors that dull and darken Meditation. Acbording to Dr. Chamberlayn's Account
in his Treatise of Tea; When I have been, says he, compelled to sit up all
Night about some extraordinary Business, I needed to do no more than to take
some of this Tea, when I perceived my self beginning to sleep, and I could
easily watch all Night without winking; and in the Morning I was as fresh as if
I had slept my ordinary time; this I could do once a week without any trouble.
And this certainly must gain it a mighty Veneration from all those Sons of the
Muses, who labor in the Night, and are desirous to keep their Memories fresh,
and their Senses waking; and endeavor to prolong those Hours that are devoted
to studious Thoughts, in Strength and Clearness of Understanding; Because at
such times in the Use of this sprightly Liquor, they perceive a speedy Remedy
against their natural Weariness and Stupidity.

And that the several Virtues which are here ascribed to this delicate Leaf are
not merely Notional, or of bare Conjecture, the Testimonies of several eminent
Authors might be produced, such as Ray's Histor. Plant. Olaus Wormius in
Musaeo, p. 165. Tulpius Observat. 1. 4. cap. ult. etc. But the account of one
of them only shall be at present sufficient. The Learned Michael Etmuller,
Professor of Physic at Lipsick, in the third Edition of his Notes on
Schroder's Pharmacy, published by his Scholar Dr. John Caspar of Westphalia,
gives an account of the Herb Tcha, or Tea, to this purpose; It powerfully
corrects Indigestions and Crudities, so as that the very Chinese use this Drink
to strengthen the first Digestion, and to purify the Mass of Blood by a Flux of
Urine. Whence it is that they rarely labor under the Hypocondriack Passion,
descended from a depraved Stomach: for Tcha' s Aromatic Virtue takes away all
acid Crudities. Besides, it is a very famous Cephalic, adds a wonderful
Strength to the Animal Spirits, and by that means opposes the Megrim, and
admirably comforts the Memory, and other Faculties of the Soul. Moreover, it
drives away Drowziness, and keeps a man awake without Weariness.

It is a most noble Antinephritick and Antipodagrick; whereupon they that take
this Drink, are not subject to the Stone and Gravel, while it partly throws it
out, and partly destroys the preternatural Acid in the Stomach and Guts, and
likewise in the Blood, (volatilizing it, if coagulated by an Acid) in which
Respect it preserves both from the Stone and Gout, whereby the Chinese and
Japanese are rarely, if ever, infested with them. All which admirable Effects,
and much more, are confirmed by the most famous Wilhelmus ten Rhyne, Physician,
Botanist, and Chemist to the Emperor of Japan, in his Discourse De Frutice
Thee; Who there affirms too, that it both prevails against the Dropsy, and is
an Antidote extraordinary against the Weakness of the Sight.

But notwithstanding all this Authority, this Leaf has formerly been subject to
Reproach and Cavil. And it were a happy Leaf indeed were it altogether
Objection free, and out of the Reach of Enmity and Contradiction. But however,
this Happiness it has, That herein it shares Fate with all things that are
excellent, which are often aspersed even for their Innocence, Two Objections
answered.
and in that respect owe all their Misery to their Perfection. That which was
wont to be argued in Disparagement of that general Credit which this Drink by
its Merits has obtained, was, That it was a Parent to the Cholick and Diabetes,
though it was very useful upon other accounts; and that it unhappily caused
these Diseases among us. But notwithstanding that it is very well known, that
these are no upstart Distempers here, but challenge a Standing of ancient Date;
yet were they the necessary Consequence of the Use of this modern Liquor in
England, all the Eastern Nations, especially China, India, and Japan, must
needs be sorely afflicted with them; and therefore instead of encouraging as
they do, must rather renounce their beloved Drink, unless they are more
enamored with it, than with their Health. And yet we never hear that these
Diseases are complained of there, though this Liquor is as familiarly used by
them, as Small Beer is with us; and that not only by the Natives, but by
several Europeans, who are nevertheless altogether Strangers to the Painfulness
of those Maladies. If the Diabetes derives it self from this Fountain, how
comes it to pass then, that among all the numerous Admirers of Tea, so very few
labor under that Distemper? And as to the Cholick, many skilful Practitioners
in Physic do observe, that several Persons of inferior Note in England, whose
Fortunes never raised them to the Character of being Tea-drinkers, are more
disturbed with that Distemper, than such as plentifully drink it daily.

Yet some will urge, That although these Virtues which I have mentioned may be
fairly attributed to this China Liquor, yet are they sometimes obstructed by
the Use of that Sugar which is commonly mixed with it. And this indeed, I must
confess, may somewhat abate the Efficacy of it in some Operations; yet this
Advantage it produces, in benefiting of the Lungs and Reins; to which it is a
mighty Friend.

And yet after all, though these rare and excellent Qualities have long been
observable in Tea, yet must we not imagine that they always meet with the same
Effect indifferently in all Persons, or that they universally prevail. For
either the Height of a Distemper, or the long Continuance of it; either the
Constitution of the Person, or some certain occult Indisposition may avert the
Efficacy, and obstruct or delay the desired Success. It may either be drunk
without Advice, or at unseasonable Times; either the Water, or the Tea, may be
bad; and if the Physic it self be sickly, we cannot easily expect much Health
by it.

FINIS.

