coat of arms of the City of LondonThe Oath of every Freeman of the City of
London.
YOU shall Swear, that you shall be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of
England; and in order thereunto, You shall be obedient to the just and good
Government of this City of London: You shall to the best of your power maintain
and preserve the Peace, and all the due Franchises thereof; and according to
your knowledge and ability, do and perform all such other acts and (...)s as
do belong to a Freeman of (...)ud City.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to this Honorable City.

coat of arms of the City of LondonInstructions for every Freeman of the City
of LONDON.
YE shall be obedient to the Mayor and Ministers of this City. The Franchises
and Customs thereof ye shall mantain, and this City keep harmless in that
that in you is. Ye shall be contributary to all manner of charges within this
City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions, Tares, Tallages, Lot, and Scot, and
to all other charges, bearing your part as a Freeman ought to do. Ye shall
color no Foreign goods, under, or in your name, whereby his Highness the
Lord Protector of the Comonwealth of England Scotland and Ireland and the
dominions thereof, or this City, might, or may lose their Customs or
advantages. Ye shall know no Forreigner to buy or sell any Merchandise, with
any other Forreigner within this City or Franchise thereof, but ye shall warn
the Chamberlain thereof, or some Minister of the Chamber. Ye shall implead or
sue no Freeman out of this City, whiles ye may have right and law within the
same City. Ye shall take none Apprentice, but if he be Freeborn, (that is to
say) no bondmans son, nor the child of any Alien, and for no less term then
for Seven years without fraud or deceit: and within the first year ye shall
cause him to be enrolled, or else pay such fine as shall be reasonably imposed
upon you for omitting the same. And after his terms end, within convenient time
(being required) ye shall make him Free of this City, if he have well and truly
served you. Ye shall also keep the public Peace in your own person. Ye shall
know no gatherings, nor conspiraciess made against the public Peace but ye
shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to your power. All these points and
articles ye shall well and truly keep, according to the laws and customs of
this City, to your power.


