Eshcol: A Cluster of the fruit of Canaan; brought to the Borders, for the
encouragement of the Saints, traveling thitherward, with their faces toward
Syon.

OR. Rules of direction, for the walking of the Saints in Fellowship, according
to the order of the Gospel.

Collected and explained for the use of the Church at Coggeshall,

By John Owen their Pastor.

For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. 1 Pet. 2. 15. LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens,
and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign of the gilded Lion in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1648.

An advertisement to the Reader.
THERE are (Christian Reader) certain principles in Church affairs, generally
consented unto by all men, aiming at reformation; however diversified among
themselves by singular persuasions, or distinguished by imposed and assumed
names and Titles; Some of these, though not here mentioned, are the bottom and
foundation of this following collection of rules for our walking in the
fellowship of the Gospel: amongst which, these four are the principal:

First, That particular Congregations or Assemblies of believers, gathered into
one body, for a participation of the ordinances of Jesus Christ, under officers
of their own, are of Divine institution.

Secondly, That every faithful person is bound by virtue of positive precepts,
to join himself to some such single Congregation, having the notes and marks
whereby a true Church may be known and discerned.

Thirdly, That every man's own voluntary consent, and submission* to the
ordinances of Christ in that Church whereunto he is joined, is required for his
union therewith, and fellowship therein.

Fourthly, That all believers of one place, are bound to join themselves in one
Congregation, unless through their being too numerous, they are by common
consent distinguished into more: which order cannot be disturbed without the
guilt of Schism.

These principles, evident in the Scripture, clear in themselves, and owned in
the main by all pretending to regular Church-reformation, were supposed and
taken for granted, at the collection of these ensuing rules.

The Apostolical direction and precept in such cases is, that whereunto we
have attained, we should walk according to the same rule; unto whose
performance the promise annexed is, that if any one be otherwise minded, God
will also reveal that unto him. The remaining differences about Church Order
and Discipline, are for continuance so Ancient, and by the disputes of men,
made so involved and intricate; the parties at variance so prejudiced and
engaged, that although all things of concernment appear to me, as to others,
both consenting with me, and dissenting from me, clear in the Scriptures; yet I
have little hopes of the accomplishment of the promise in revelation of the
truth, as yet contested about in men differently minded; until the obedience
of walking sutably and answerably to the same rules agreed on, be more
sincerely accomplished.

This persuasion is the more firmly fixed on me every day, because I see men,
for the most part, to spend their strength and time, more in the opposing of
those things wherein others differ from them, then in the practice of those
which by themselves and others are owned, as of the most necessary concernment;
so that, though the Lord has enabled me with some pains and difficulty, to
compose an Irenicum in the Theory of Ecclesiastical Discipline; yet persuaded
by my own judgment, I willingly lay it aside, lest it should provewith others,
a wandering Raven, and choose rather to send forth this Dove, to direct the poor
of the flock in the practice of those Christian duties, which are answerable to
the rules by all agreed upon, aiming in the first place at the edification of
the flock committed to my own care; and in the next, to allure all lovers of
Christ in sincerity, to walk in those ways which are attended with mercy and
peace, not wanting a promise of the revelation of hidden truths; and in this I
am fully resolved, that the practice of any one duty here mentioned, by any one
soul before neglected, shall be an abundant recompense for the publishing my
name with these papers, savouring so little of those ornaments of Art or
Learning, which in things that come to public view, men desire to hold out.

Imprimatur,

Ja: Cranford.
December. 30. 1647.
Rules of walking in fellowship, with reference to Pastor.
RULE I.
THe word and all ordinances dispensed in the administration to him committed,
by virtue of Ministerial authority, are to be submitted unto, with ready
obedience in the Lord.

1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of God.

2 Cor. 5. 18, 20. God has committed unto us the Ministry of reconciliation:
now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, 2
Cor. 4. 7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the
power may be of God, and not of us; See 2 Cor. 6. 1.

Gal. 4. 14. You received me as an Angel of God, even as Jesus Christ,

2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. and if any man obey not our words, note that man, and have no
company with him.

Heb 13. 7. Remember them that have the rule over you, who have spoken to you
the word of God: V. 13. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

EXPLICATION I.
THere is a twofold power for the dispensing of the Word, 1. (...), or
ability. 2. (...) authority: the first with the attending qualifications
mentioned and recounted, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8. and many
other places, is required to be previously in those, as bestowed on them, who
are to be called to office of ministration, and may be in several degrees and
measures in such as are never set apart thereunto, who thereby are warranted to
declare the Gospel, 1 In cases of necessity. Touching these cases, see my
Treatise of the Duty of Pastor* and people distinguished.
2 Occasionally. 3 Desired by the Church, and not otherwise solemnly.


The second, or authority proper to them who orderly are set apart thereunto,
arises from

1. Christ's institution of the office, Ephesians. 4. 11.

2. Gods designation of the person, Mat. 9. 38.

3. The Churches acceptance, election, submission, Gal. 4. 14. Acts 14. 23. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. which does not give them dominion over the faith of
believers, 2 Cor. 1. 24. nor make them Lords over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
but entrusts them with a stewardly power in the house of God, 1 Cor. 4. 12.
that is, the peculiar flock over which, in particular, they are made overseers:
Acts 20. 28. of whom the Word is to be received,

1 As the truth of God, as also from all others speaking according to
Gospel Order in his name.

2 As the truth held out with ministerial authority to them in particular,
according to the institution of Christ, which in other is not so.

Motives to the observance of this rule, are;

1. The name wherein they speak and administer, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

2. The work which they do, 1 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 16.

3. The return that they make. Heb. 13. 17.

4. The account that the Lord has of them in his employment, Matthew. 10. 40,
41, 42. Luke 10. 16.

RULE II.
HIs conversation is to be observed, and diligently followed, so far as he
walks in the steps of Jesus Christ.

1 Cor. 4. 16. I beseech you be followers of me, Chapter 11. 1. Be ye followers of
me, even as I also am of Christ.

Heb. 13. 7. Remember them who have spoken unto you the Word of God, whose
faith follow, considering the end of their conversation.

2 These. 3. 7. For your selves know how you ought to follow us, for we behaved
not our selves disorderly among you.

Phil. 3. 17. Brethren be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so
as you have us for an example.

1 Timothy 4. 12. Be you an example of the believers in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.

L Pet. 5. 3. Be ensamples to the flock.

EXPLICAT. II.
THat an exemplar conversation was ever required in the dispensers of holy
things, both in the Old Testament and New, is apparent: the glorious vestment
of the old ministering Priests, Vrim and Thummim, with many other ornaments,
though primitively typical of Jesus Christ, yet did not obscurely set out the
purity and holiness required in the administrators themselves, Zech. 3. 4. in
the new, The shining of their lights in all good works, Matthew. 5. 16. is
eminently exacted: and this not only, that no offense be taken at the ways of
God, and his worship by them administered, as has fallen out in the Old
Testament, Jam. 2. 17. and in the New, Phil. 3. 18, 19. but also those who are
without may be convinced. 1 Timothy 3. 7: and the Churches directed in the
practice of all the will and mind of God by them revealed; as in the places
cited, a Pastor should be vocal, Sermons must be practiced as well as
preached; Though Noah's Workmen built the Arc, yet themselves were drowned;
God will not accept of the tongue where the Devil has the soul. Jesus did do
and teach, Acts 1. 1. If a man teach uprightly, and walk crookedly, more will
fall down in the night of his life, then he built in the day of his Doctrine.

RULE III.
PRayer and supplications are continually to be in his behalf, for assistance
in the Work committed to him.

Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. Pray always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit,
for me, that utterance may be given me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to
make known the mystery of the Gospel, for which I am an Ambassador. 2 These. 3.
1, 2. Brethren pray for us, that the word of the Lord may run and be glorified,
and that we may be delivered from the hands of unreasonable and wicked men. 1
These. 5. 25. Col. 4. 3. Praying also for us, that God would open unto us a door
of utterance, to speak the mystery of Christ, Heb. 13. 18.

Act. 12. 5. Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him,
Heb. 13. 7.

EXPLICAT. III.
THE greatness of the work, for which who is sufficient? 2 Cor. 2. 16. The
strength of the opposition, which who almost can resist? Which are incumbent
on, and maintained against the Ministers of the Gospel, call aloud for the most
effectual daily concurrence of the Saints, for their supportment, and that
love, thank fullness, and justice, do almost extort deserved prayers. That
these are to be for assistance, encouragement, abilities, success,
deliverance, and protection is proved in the Rule.

Motives.

1. The word will doubtless be effectual, when ability for its administration
is a return of prayers, Acts 10. 30, 31.

2. The Ministers failing is the peoples punishment, Acts 8. 11. Isa. 30. 20.

3. His prayers are continually for the Church.

4. That for which he stands in so much need of prayers, is the Saints good,
and not peculiarly his own. Help him who carries the burden, 1 Timothy 3. 8.
Phil. 2. 17. Col. 1. 24.

RULE IV.
REverentiall estimation of him with submission unto him for his works sake.

1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God.

1 These. 5. 12. And we beseech you Brethren, to know them which labor among
you and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, ver. 13. And to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake.

1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine.

1 Pet. 5. 5. Submit your selves to the Elders.

Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves.

EXPLICAT. IV.
THE respect and estimation here required, is civil, the motive sacred; honor
and reverence is due only to eminency in some kind or other; prelation is Gods
stamp upon any person, this is given to Pastors, by their employment; proved by
their Titles,; they are called Angels, Revel. 1. 20. Heb. 12. 22. Bishops or
Overseers, Ezekiel. 3. 17. Acts 20. 28. They are the Lords Bishops.

2 Cor. 5. 20. Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Titus 1. 7. Men of God. 1 Samuel 2. 27. 1 Timothy 6. 11. Rulers, Heb. 13. 7, 17. Lights, Mat. 5. 14. Salt, Math. 5. 13.
Fathers, 1 Cor. 4. 15. And by many more such like terms are they described; if
under these notions they honor God as they ought, God will also honor them as
he has promised: And his people are in conscience to esteem them highly for
their works sake; but if any of them be fallen Angels, throwndown Stars,
negligent Bishops, treacherous Ambassadors, Lordly-revelling-Stewards,
Tyrannical or foolish Rulers, blind guids, unsavory Salt, insatiate dogs, the
Lord and his people shall abhor them, and cut them off in a month, Zech. 11.
8.

RULE V.
MAintenance for them and their Families, by the administration of earthly
things, suitable to the state and condition of the Churches, is required for
their Pastors.

1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Let the Elders who rule well be counted worthy of double
honor, especially they who Labor in the word and doctrine. For the Scripture
says, thou shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the corn, for the
laborer is worthy of his reward.

Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that
teaches in all good things: verse. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
what a man sows, that shall he reap.

1 Cor. 9. 7. Who goes a warfare at any time at his own charges? Who planteth
a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? verse 9. It is written in the Law of Moses,
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn; does
God take care for Oxen? verse. 10. Or says he it altogether for our sakes; for
our sakes no doubt, this is written, that he that ploweth should plowe in hope,
and he which thresheth in hope, should be made partaker of his hope, verse. 11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall
reap your carnal things? verse. 13. Do not you know, that they which minister
about holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and they that wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar, verse. 14. Even so has the Lord appointed,
that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, Matthew. 10. 9, 10.
Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses; Nor scrip for your
journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves: for the Workman is
worthy of his meat.

Add to these and the like places, the Analogy of the Primitive allowance in
the Church of the Jews.

EXPLIC. V.
IT is a promise to the Church under the Gospel, that Kings should be her
nursing Fathers, and Queens her nursing Mothers, Isa. 49. 23. To such it
belongs principally to provide food and protection for those committed to them;
the fruit of this promise the Churches in many ages enjoyed: Laws by supreme
and Kingly power have been enacted; giving portions and granting privileges to
Churches and their Pastors. It is so in many places, in the days wherein we
live; on this ground where equitable and righteous Laws have allowed a
supportment in earthly things, to the Pastors of Churches, arising from such as
may receive spiritual benefit by their labor in the Gospel; it is thankfully
to be accepted and embraced, as an issue of Gods providence for the good of
his. Besides, our Savior warranteth his Disciples to take and eat of their
things, by their consent, to whomsoever the word is preached, Luk 10. 8. But it
is not always thus, these things may sometimes fail; wherefore the continual
care, and frequently the burden, or rather labor of love in providing for the
Pastors, lies, as in the Rule, upon the Churches themselves, which they are to
do in such a manner as is suitable to the condition wherein they are, and the
increase given them of God. This the whole in general, and each Member in
particular is obliged unto; for which they have as Motives,

1. Gods appointment, as in the Text cited.

2. The necessity of it; how shall he go on warfare, if he be troubled about
the necessities of this life: They are to give themselves wholly to the Work of
the Ministry, 1 Timothy 4. 15.

Other works had need to be done for them.

3 The equity of the duty; our Savior and the Apostles plead it out from
grounds of equity and justice, Matthew. 10. 10. 1 Cor. 9. 10. Allowing
proportionable rectitude in the way of recompense, to the wages of the Laborer,
which to detain is a crying sin, Iam. 5. 4.

RULE VI.
ADhering to him, and abiding by him in all trials and persecutions for the
Word.

2 Timothy 4. 16. At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook
me, I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge.

2 Timothy 1. 16. The Lord show mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chains. V. 17. But when he was in Rome,
he sought me out very diligently, and found me. V. 18. The Lord grant unto him,
that he may find mercy in that day; and in how many things he ministered to me
at Ephesus, thou know very well

EXPLIC. VI.
A Common cause should be carried on by common assistance; that which
concerns all should be supported by all; when persecution arises for the
words sake, generally it begins with the leaders; the common way to scatter the
sheep, is by smiting the shepherds. The best of them is but a brier, and who
will leave their Pastor in such briers? It is for the Churches sake he is
reviled and persecuted, and therefore it is the Churches duty to share with
him, and help bear his burden. All the fault in scattering Congregations, has
not been in Ministers: The people stood not by them in their trial; the Lord
lay it not to their charge. The Captain is betrayed, and forced to mean
conditions with his Enemy, who going on, with assurance of being followed by
his Soldiers, looking back in the entrance of danger, he finds them all run
away; in England usually, no sooner had Episcopal persecution laid hold of a
Minister, but the people willingly received another: perhaps a Wolf instead of
a Shepherd; should ^ wife forsake her husband because he is come in trouble
for her sake? Would not such a thing be called villainy? Is the crime of a
back-slider in spiritual things less? Surely whilst a Pastor lives, if he
suffer for the truth, the Church cannot desert him, nor cease the performance
of all required duties, without horrid Apostasy.

RULE VII.
GAthering together in the Assembly upon his appointment, with theirs, joined
with him.

Acts 14. 27. When they were come, and had gathered the Church together.

These are the Heads wherein the Churches duty consists toward him or them,
that are set over it in the Lord; by all means giving them encouragement to the
work, saying also unto them, take heed to the Ministry you have received, that
you fulfill it in the Lord, Col. 4. 17. For what concerns other Officers, may
easily be deduced hence by analogy and proportion.

Rules to be observed by those who walk in fellowship, and considered to
stirre-up their remembrance in things of mutual duty one toward another,
which consists in,
RULE I.
AFfectionate love in all things to one another, like that which Christ bare to
his Church.

Jo. 15. 12. This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you.

Jo: 13. 34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I
have loved you, that ye also love one another. V. 35. By this shall all men
know, that you are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another.

Romans 13. 8. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another, he that loves
another fulfilleth the law.

Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us.

1 These. 3. 12. The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward
another.

1 Thessalonians. 4. 9. Your selves are taught of God to love one another.

1 Pet. 1. 22. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through
the spirit, unto unfaigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one another,
with a pure heart fervently.

1 Jo: 4. 21. And this commandment we have from him, that he who loves God,
do love his brother also.

Romans 12. 10. Be kindly affectioned one to another in brotherly love.

EXPLIC. I.
LOve is the fountain of all duties, the substance of all rules, that concern
the Saints; the endless bond of communion; the fulfilling of the Law; the
advancement of the honor of the Lord Jesus, and the glory of the Gospel. The
primitive Christians had a proverbiall speech, received, as they said, from
Christ; never rejoice but when thou see thy brother in love; and it was
common among the Heathens concerning them; see how they love one another, from
their readiness for the accomplishment of that royal precept of laying down
their lives for the brethren; its the fountain-rule, scope, aim, and fruit of
Gospel-communion: and of no one thing of present performance, is the doctrine
of the Lord Jesus more eximious, and eminent above all other directions then in
this, of mutual, intense, affectionate love amongst his followers, for which
he gives them innumerable precepts, exhortations, and motives, but above all
his own heavenly example: to treat of love in its causes, nature, subject,
fruits, effects, tendency, eminency, and exaltation, would not suit with
present intention; only it may be plainly affirmed, that if there were no cause
besides, of reformation and walking in fellowship, but this one, that thereby
the possession and practice of this grace, shamefully to the dishonor of Christ
and his Gospel lost amongst those who call themselves Christians; it were
abundantly enough to give encouragement for the undertaking of it,
notwithstanding any oppositions; now this love is a spiritual grace* wrought
by the Holy Ghost, Gal* 5. 22. in the hearts of believers, 1* Pet. 1. 22.
whereby their souls are carried out: 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8. to the good of the
children of God, as such, Phil. 5. Ephesians. 1. 15. Heb. 13. 11. uniting the heart
unto the object so beloved, attended with joy, delight and complacency in their
good: Motives unto love are proposed from,

1. The example and command of God and Christ.

2. From the nature, use, and end of love it self.

3. From the state and condition of the persons to be beloved, and that so
variously, as they are too long for the present to be insisted on.

Love, which is the bond of commuuion, makes out it self, and is peculiarly
exercised in these things following;

II. RULE.
Continual prayer for the prosperous state of the Church, in Gods protection
toward it.

Psa. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
thee.

Phil. 1. 4. Always in every prayer of mine for you all, making request with
joy, ver. 5. For your fellowship in the Gospel from the first day until now.

Romans 1. 9. Without ceasing I make mention of you all in my prayer.

Acts 12. 5. Peter was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of
the Church unto God for him.

Isa. 62. 6. Ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence: ver. 7. And
give him no rest till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the
earth.

Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit,
and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints.

Col. 4. 12. Epaphras who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you,
always laboring fervently for you in prayers, that you may stand perfect and
complete in all the will of God.

EXPLIC. II.
PRayer, as it is the great engine whereby to prevail with the Almighty, Is.
45. 11. so it is the sure refuge of the Saints at all times, both in their own
behalf, Psalm. 61. 2. and also of others, Acts 12. 5. It is a benefit which the
poorest believer may bestow, and the greatest Potentate has no power to
refuse; this is the beaten way of the souls communion with God, for which the
Saints have many gracious promises of assistance, Zech. 12. 10. Romans 8. 26.
innumerable precepts for performance, Matthew. 7. 7. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 8.
with encouragements thereunto, Ja: 1. 5. Luke 11. 9. with precious promises of
acceptance, Matthew. 21. 22. Jo. 16. 24. Psalm. 51. 15. By all which, and diverse
other ways, The Lord has abundantly testified his delight in this sacrifice
of his people; now as the Saints are bound to pray for all men, of what sort
soever, 1 Timothy* 2. 1, 2. unless they are such as sin unto death. 1 Jo. 5. 16.
yea for their persecuters, Matthew. 5. 44. and them that hold them in bondage,
Jer. 29. 7. so most especially for all Saints, Phil. 1. 4. and peculiarly for
those with whom they are in fellowship, Col. 4. 12. The Lord having promised,
that upon every dwelling place, and all the assemblies of Mount Syon, that
there shall be a cloud of smoke by day, and a shining of a flaming fire by
night, Isa. 4. 5. it is every ones duty to pray for its accomplishment; he is
not worthy of the privileges of the Church, who continues not in prayer, for a
defense upon that glory: prayer then for the good, prosperity, flourishing,
peace, increase, edification, and protection of the Church, is a duty every day
required of all the members thereof;

1. Estimation of the Ordinances.

2. Concernment of Gods glory.

3. The honor of Jesus Christ.

4. Our own benefit, and spiritual interest.

With the fourth, expresseness of the command, are sufficient Motives hereunto.

III RULE.
EArnest striving and contending in all lawful ways, by doing and suffering
for the purity of the ordinances, honor, liberty and privileges of the
Congregation, being jointly assistant against opposers, and common adversaries.

Jude 3. And exhort you, that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which
was once delivered to the Saints.

Heb. 12. 3. For consider him that endured such contradictions of sinners
against himself, lest ye he wearied, and faint in your minds. V. 4. ye have not
resisted unto blood, striving against sin.

1 Jo. 3. 16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life
for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.

Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

V. 13. For Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty.

1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men.

Cant. 6. 4. Thou art beautiful O my love, terrible as an Army with banners.

1 Pet. 3. 15. be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you
a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.

EXPLIC. III.
THe former Rule concerned our dealing with God, in the behalf of the Church;
This our dealing with men, to the right performance hereof many things are
required; as

1. Diligent laboring in the Word, with fervent prayer, to acquaint our selves
with the mind and will of God, concerning the way of worship which we profess,
and the rules of walking, which we desire to practice, that so we may be able
to give an account to humble enquirers, and stop the mouths of stubborn
opposers; according to our knowledge, such will be our valuation of the
ordinances we enjoy: a man will not contend unless he knows his title.

2. An estimation of all the aspersions cast on, and injuries done to the Church
to be Christ's, and also our own; Christ wounded through the sides of his
servants, and his ways; and if we are of his, though the blow light not
immediately on us, we are not without pain: all such reproaches and rebukes
fall on us.

3. Just vindication of the Church against calumnies, and false imputations;
who can endure to hear his parents in the flesh falsely traduced? And shall we
be senseless of her reproaches who bears us unto Christ?

4. Joint refusal of subjection, with all Gospel-opposition to any persons or
things; who contrary to, or besides the word, under what name soever, do labor
for power over the Church, to the abridging of it, of any of those liberties
and privileges, which it claims as part of the purchase of Christ; to them
that would enthrall us, we are not to give place, no not for an hour.

RULE IV.
SEdulous care and endeavoring for the preservation of Unity, both in
particular and in general.

Philip. 2 1. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies; ver. 2.
Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind* verse. 3. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory,
but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better then themselves.

Ephesians. 4. 3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of
peace. verse. 4. There is one body and one spirit, etc.

1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment.

2 Cor. 13. 11. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace,
and the God of love and peace shall be with (...).

Romans 14. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another.

Romans 15. 5. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be
like-minded one toward another, etc.

1 Cor. 6. 5. Is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst you, no not one
that shall be able to judge between his brethren, but brother goes to law with
brother; Now therefore there is utterly a fault among you.

Acts 4. 32. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart and one
soul.

EXPLIC. IV.
VNnion is the main aim and most proper fruit of love, neither is there any
thing, or duty, of the Saints in the Gospel, pressed with more earnestness,
and vehemence of exhortation, then this. Now Unity is threefold, First, purely
spiritual, by the participation of the same Spirit of Grace; Communication in
the same Christ, one head to all. This we have with all the Saints in the
world, in what condition soever they be; yea, with those that are departed,
Sitting down in the Kingdom of Heaven, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
Secondly, Ecclesiastical or Church Communion; in the participation of
Ordinances, according to the order of the Gospel: This is a fruit and branch of
the former; opposed to Schism, Divisions, Rents, evil surmisings,
self-practises, causlesse differences in judgment in spiritual things
concerning the Kingdom of Christ, with whatsoever else goes off from
closeness of affection, oneness of mind, consent in judgment to the form of
wholesome words, conformity of practice to the Rule; and this is that which in
the Churches, and among them, is so earnestly pressed, commanded, desired, as
the glory of Christ, the honor of the Gospel, the joy and Crown of the Saints.
Thirdly, Civil Unity, or an agreement in things of this life, not contending
with them, nor about them, every one seeking the welfare of each other.
Striving is unseemly for Brethren; why should they contend about the world, who
shall jointly judge the world?

Motives to the preservation of both these, are

1. The remarkable earnestness of Christ and his Apostles in their prayers
for, and precepts of this duty.

2. The certain dishonor to the Lord Jesus, scandal to the Gospel, (...)he to
the Churches, shame and sorrow to the Saints, that the neglect of it is
accompanied withal, Gal. ^. 15.

3. The gracious issues, and sweet heavenly consolation, which attends a
right observance of them.

4. The many fearful aggravations wherewith the sin of renting the Body of
Christ, is attended.

5. The sad contempt and profanation of Ordinances; which want of this has
brought upon many Churches; For a right performance of this duty, we must,

1. Labor by Prayer and Faith, to have our hearts and spirits thoroughly
seasoned with that affectionate love, which our first Rule requires.

2. Carefully to observe in our selves or others, the first beginnings of
strife, which are as the letting out of waters, and if not prevented will make
a breach, like the Sea.

3. Sedulously to apply our selves to the removal of the first appearance of
divisions; and in case of not prevailing, to consult the Church.

4. Daily to strike at the root of all dissension, by laboring for Universal
conformity to Jesus Christ.

V. RULE.
SEparation and sequestration from the world and men of the world, with always
of false worship, until we be apparently a people dwelling alone, not wicked
among the Nations.

Numb, 23. 9. Lo the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among
the Nations.

John 15. 19. Ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you.

2 Cor. 6. 14. Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers, for what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? ver. 15. And what concord has Christ with Belial; or what part has
he that believes with an Infidel; and what agreement has the Temple of God
with Idols, for ye are the Temple of the living God? v. 17. Wherefore come out
from among them, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you: ver. 19. and will be a Father unto you, and you shall be my sons
and daughters, says tbe Lord Almighty.

Ephesians. 5. 8. Walk as children of light. v. 11. And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness.

2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; from
such turn away.

Hosea 4. 15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and
come not ye to Gilgal, ueither go ye up to Beth-aven.

Revel. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye partake not of her plagues.

Prove. 14. 7. Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not
in him the lips of knowledge.

EXPLIC. V.
SEparation generally hears ill in the world; and yet there is a separation
suitable to the mind of God: he that will not separate from world, and
false-worship, is a Separate from Christ.

Now the separation here commanded from any persons, is not in respect of
natural affections, nor spiritual care of the good of their souls, Rom, 9. 3.
nor yet in respect of duties of Relation, 1 Cor. 7. 13. nor yet in offices of
love and civil converse, 1 Cor. 5. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 12. much less in not
seeking their good and prosperity, 1 Timothy 2. 1. or not communicating good
things unto them, Gal. 6. 10. or living profitably and peaceably with them,
Romans 12. 18. but in 1. Manner of walking and conversation, Romans 12. 2. Ephesians.
4. 17, 18, 19. 2. Delightful converse and familiarity where enmity and
opposition appears, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10* 11. 3. In way of
worship, and ordinances of fellowship, Rev. 18. 4. not running out into the
same compass of excess and riot, with them, in anything; for these 3. and the
like commands and discoveries of the will of God, are most express: as in the
places annexed to the Rule; necessity abundantly urgent; spiritual profit and
edification, no less requiring it: causeless separation from established
Churches, walking according to the order of the Gospel, (though perhaps,
failing in the practice of some things of small concernment) is no small sin:
but separation from the sinful practices, and disorderly walkings, and false
unwarranted ways of worship in any, is to fulfill the precept of not partaking
in other men's sins; to delight in the company, fellowship, society, and
converse of unsavory disorderly persons, proclaims a spirit not indeared to
Christ.

Let Motives hereunto, be,

1. Gods command.

2. Our own preservation from sin, and protection from punishment; that with
others we be not infected and plagued.

3. Christ's delight in the purity of his ordinances.

4. His distinguishing love to his Saints; provided, that in the practice of
this Rule, abundance of meekness, patience, gentleness, wisdom and tenderness
be exercised; let no offense be given justly to any.

RULE VI.
FRequent spiritual communication, for edification according to gifts received.

Mal, 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and
the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before
him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name.

Job 2. 11. Now when Jobs three friends heard al of this evil that was come
upon him, they ^ame every one from his own place, for they had made an
appointment together, to come to mourn with him, and to comfort him.

Ephesians. 4. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may administer grace to the
hearers.

Col. 4. 6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that you
may know how to to answer every man.

Ephesians. 5. 4. Neither filthiness nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not
convenient, but rather giving of thanks.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one
another, as also ye do.

Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day, lest any of
you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

Jude 20. Building up your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy
Ghost.

Heb. 10. 24, 25. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and good
works: Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together us is the manner of
some; but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as you see the day
approaching.

Acts 18. 23. Whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him unto
them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly.

1 Cor. 12. 9. For the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal.

EXPLIC. VI.
THat men not solemnly called and set apart to the office of public teaching,
may yet be endued with useful gifts for edification, was before declared; the
not using of such gifts, in an orderly way, according to the rule and custom
of the Churches, is to napkin up the talent given to trade and profit withal;
that every man ought to labor, that he may walk and dwell in knowledge, in his
family, none doubts; that we should also labor to do so in the Church or
Family of God, is no less apparent.

This the Scriptutes annexed to the rule declared, which in an especial manner
hold out prayer, exhortation, instruction from the Word, and consolation; now
the performance of this duty of mutual edification, is incumbent to the Saints
diverse ways;

1. Ordinarily, Ephesians. 4. 29. chap. 5. 3, 4. Heb. 3. 13. believers in their
ordinary daily converse, ought to be continually making mention of the Lord;
with savoury discourses tending to edification, and not upon foolish, light,
frothy speeches that are not convenient.

2. Occasionally, Luke 24. 14. Mal. 3. 1. 6. if any thing of weight and
concernment to the Church, be brought forth by providence; a spiritual
improvement of it, by a due consideration amongst believers, is required.

3. By assembling of more together by appointment, for prayer and instruction
from the Word, Acts 18. 23. Acts 12. 12. Job 2. 11. Ephesians. 5. 19. James 5. 16.
Jude 20. 1 Thessalonians. 15. 14. This being a special ordinance and appointment of
God, for the increasing of knowledge, love, charity, experience, and the
improving of gifts received; every one contributing to the building of the
Tabernacle; let then all vain communication be far away: The time is short and
the days are evil; let it suffice us, that we have neglected so many precious
opportunities, of growing in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and doing
good to one another: let the remainder of our few and evil days be spent in
living to him who dyed for us; be not conformed to this world, nor the men
thereof.

RULE VII.
MUtually to bear with each others infirmities, weakness, tenderness,
failings, in meekness, patience, pity, and with assistance.

Ephesians. 4. 32. Be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another;
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

Matthew. 18. 21. Then came Peter to him, and said, how often shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him. 22. Jesus said unto him, I say not unto thee
seven times, but until seventy times seven.

Mark. 11. 25. And when you stand praying, forgive, if you have ought against
any, that your Father which is also in Heaven may forgive youy our trespasses.
v. 26. And if you do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in Heaven,
forgive you your trespasses.

Romans 14. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way; seever. 3. 4.

Romans 15. 1. We then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please our selves. v. 2. let every one please his neighbor for
the good of edification.

1 Cor. 13. 4. Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth not,
charity is not rash, it is not puffed up: ver. 5. Does not behave it self
unseemly, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil: ver. 6. Rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in the truth: v. 7. Bears all things, believes all
things, hops all things, endures all things.

Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if a man be taken in a fault, ye which are spiritual
restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, v. 2* considering thy self, lest
thou also be tempted.

Col. 3. 12. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved (bowels of
mercies, kindness, humblensse of mind, meekness, long-suffering, verse* 13.
Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel
against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. verse. 14. And above all
these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfection.

EXPLIC. VII.
IT is the glory of God, to cover a matter, Prove. 25. 2. free pardon is the
substance of the Gospel; the work of God in perfection, Esa. 55. proposed to us
for imitation, Matthew. 18. 26, 27, 28. Whilst me are clothed with flesh, we do
all things imperfectly; freedom from failings is a fruit of glory; we see here
darkly as in a glass; know but in part, in many things we offend all: who
knows how often; mutual failings to be born with, offenses to be pardoned,
weakness to be supported, may mind us in these pence, of the Talents forgiven
us: Let him that is without fault throw stones at others; Some men rejoice in
others failings; they are malicious and fail more in that sinful joy, then
their brethren in that which they rejoice at. Some are angry at weaknesses and
infirmities; They are proud and conceited; not considering that they themselves
also are in the flesh. Some delight to dwell always upon a frailty; they
deserve to find no charity in the like kind: For injuries, who almost can bear
until seven times? Peter thought it much. Some more study revenge then
pardon; some pretend to forgive, but yet every slight offense makes a continued
alienation of affections, and separation of converse; Some will carry a smooth
face over a rough heart. Christ is in none of these ways; they have no savor
of the Gospel; Meekness, patience, forbearance and forgiveness, hidding,
covering, removing of offenses, are the footsteps of Christ; see thou thy
Brother fail, pity him; does he continue in it, earnestly pray for him,
admonish him; Cannot another sin, but you must sin too? If you be angry,
vexed, rejoiced, alienated from, you are partner with him in evil, instead of
helping him; Suppose thy God should be angry every time thou give cause, and
strike every time thou provokest him? When thy Brother offends thee, do but
stay thy heart, until thou have taken a faithful view of the patience, and
forbearance of God toward thee; and then consider his command to thee, to go
and do likewise: Let then all tenderness of affection, and bowels of
compassion toward one another, be put on amongst us, as becomes Saints. Let
pity, not envy; mercy, not malice; patience, not passion; Christ, not flesh;
Grace, not; nature pardon, not spite or revenge, be our guides and companions
in our conversations.

Motives hereunto are,

1. Gods infinite Mercy, Patience, Forbearance; Long-suffering, and free Grace
toward us, sparing, pardoning, pitying, bearing with us, in innumerable,
daily, hourly failings and provocations; especially all this being proposed for
our imitation, in our measure, Matthew. 10. 28. 24.

2. The goodness, unwearied and unchangeable love of the Lord Jesus Christ,
putting in every day for us; not ceasing to plead in our behalf,
notwithstanding our continual backsliding, 1 John 2. 1. ^.

3. The experience which our own hearts have of the need, wherein we stand of
others patience, forbearance and pardon, Eccles. 7. 20, 22.

4. The strictness of the command, with the threatenings attending its
nonperformance.

5. The great glory of the Gospel, which is in the walking of the Brethren with
a right foot, as to this Rule.

RULE. VIII.
TEnder and affectionate participation with one another, in their several
states and conditions, bearing each others burdens.

Gal. 6. 2. Bear you one another burdens, and so fulfill you the law of
Christ,

Heb. 13. 3. Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them, and them that
are in adversity, as being your selves also in the body.

1 Cor. 12. 25. That there should be no schism in the body, but that the
members should have the same care one for another. verse. 26. And whether one
member suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one member be honored, all
the members rejoice with it.

2 Cor. 11. 29 Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?

James 1. 21. Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this,
To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, etc.

Matthew. 25. 35. I was an hungered and ye gave me meat: I was a thirst, and ye
gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked and ye clothed me: I
was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. verse. 40.
For inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me.

2 Timothy 1. 16. The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he often
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. verse. 17. But when he was in
Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me.

Acts 20. 35. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to
support the weak, etc.

EXPLIC. VIII.
THe former Rule concerned the carriage and frame of our spirits toward our
Brethren in their failings, This in their miseries and afflictions; In this
also, conformity to Christ is required, who in all the afflictions of his people
is afflicted, Esa. 63. 9. and persacnted in their distresses, Act. 9. 4. could
we bring up our spiritual union, to hold any proportion with the mutual union
of many members in one body, to which it is frequently compared; this duty
would be excellently performed: no man ever yet hated his own flesh; if one
member be in pain, the rest have little comfort or ease; it is a rotten member
which is not affected with the anguish of its companions; they are marked
particularly for destruction, who in the midst of plentiful enjoyments, forget
the miseries of their brethren, Amos 6. 6. if we could not feel the weight of
our brethrens afflictions, burdens, and sorrow; it is a righteous thing that
our own should be doubled; the desolations of the Church makes Nehemiah grow
pale in the Court of a great King, Neh. 1. 10. he who is not concerned in the
troubles, sorrows, visitations, wants, poverties, persecutions of the Saints,
and so far as to pity their wound dings, to feel their strokes, to refresh
their spirits, help bear their burdens upon their own shoulders, can never
assure themselves, that they are united to the head of those Saints; now to a
right performance of this duty, and in the discharge of it, are required;

1. A due valuation, strong desire, and high esteem of the Churches prosperity
in every member of it, Psalm. 122. 6.

2. Bowels of compassion, as a fruit of love, to be sensible of, and intimately
moved for, the several burdens of the Saints, Col. 3. 19.

3. Courage and boldness, to own them without shame in all conditions, 2 Timothy
1. 16, 17.

4. Personal visitations in sicknesses, troubles, and restraints, to advise,
comfort and refresh them, Matthew. 25. 36.

5. Suitable supportment by administration of spiritual, or temporal
assistances, to the condition wherein* they are. The Motives are the same as to
the former rule.

RULE IX.
FRee contribution, and communication of temporal things, to them that are
poor indeed, suitable to their necessities, wants, and afflictions.

1 John 3. 17. Who so has the worlds goods, and sees his Brother have need,
and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him. V. 18. My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue,
but in deed, and in truth.

1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given
order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye; Upon the first day of the
week, let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him.

2 Cor. 9. 5, 6. Let your gift be ready as a matter of bounty not
covetousness; he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly: ver. 7. Every
man, according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly,
or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver; so the whole 8 and 9. chap.
of this Epistle.

Romans 12. 13. Distributing to the necessity of the Saints, given to hospitality.

Gal. 6. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith.

1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that be rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives
us all things richly to enjoy. ver. 18. That they do good, that they be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, ver. 19. Laying up in
store for themselves, a good foundation against the time to come.

Heb. 13. 16. To do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.

Levit. 25. 35. And if thy Brother be waxen poor, or fallen into decay with
thee, then thou shall receive him.

Matthew. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you, from the foundation of the world. verse. 35. For I was an hungered, and ye
gave me meat, thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me
in. verse. 36. Naked and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in
prison, and ye came unto me. verse. 40. Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye
have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren ye have done it unto me.

EXPLIC. IX.
THE having of poor always amongst us, and of us, according to our Saviors
prediction, Matthew. 26. 11* and the promise of God, Deuteronomy. 15. 11. serves for the
trial of themselves and others, of their own content, with Christ alone, with
submission to the all-disposing* Sovereignty of God; of others, how freely they
can part for Christ's sake, with those things wherewith their hand is filled:
when God gave Manna, for food unto his people, every one had an equal share,
Exodus 16. 18. and he that gathered much, had had nothing over, and he that
gathered little, had no lack, 2 Cor. 8. 15. This distribution in equality, was
again for the necessity of the Church, reduced into practice, in the days of
the Apostles, Acts 14. 35. of the total sum of the possessions of believers,
distribution was made to every man according to his need.

That every man by the ordinance and appointment of God, has a peculiar right
to the use and disposal of the earthly things wherewith he is in particular
entrusted, is unquestionable: The very precept for free distribution, and
communication, are enough to prove it; but that these things are altogether
given to men, for themselves and their own use, is denied; friends are to be
made of Mammon. Christ needs in some, what he bestows on others; if he has
given thee thine own, and thy brothers portion also to keep, will thou be false
to thy trust, and defraud thy Brother? Christ being rich, became poor for our
sakes; if he make us rich, it is that we my feed the poor for his sake; neither
does this duty lie only (though chiefly) on those who are greatly increased;
those who have nothing but their labor, should spare out of that for those who
cannot work, Ephesians. 4. 28. The two Mites are required as well as accepted. Now
the relief of the poor Brethren in the Church, has a twofold Rule,

First, Their necessity.

Secondly, Others abilities.

Unto these two must assistance be proportioned; provided, that those which are
poor walk suitably to their condition, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10, 11. And as we ought to
relieve men in their poverty, so we ought, by all lawful means, to prevent
their being poor; to keep a man from falling, is an equal mercy to the
helping of him up when he is down.

Motives to this duty are;

1. The love of God unto us, 1 John 3. 14.

2. The glory of the Gospel exceedingly exalted thereby, Titus 3. 8. 15. Matthew.
5. 6.

3. The Union whereunto we are brought in Christ; with the common inheritance
promised to us all.

4. The testimony of the Lord Jesus, witnessing what is done in this kind, to
be done unto himself, Matthew. 25. 35, 36, 37.

5. The promise annexed to it, Eccles. 11. 1. Prove. 19. 17. Deuteronomy. 15. 10. Ma.
10 4. 2.

The way whereby it is to be done, is by appointing some, Acts 6. to take what
is voluntarily distributed by the brethren, according as God has blessed them;
on the first day of the week, 1 Cor. 16. 1. and to distribute to the necessity
of the Saints, according to the advice of the Church.

RULE X.
TO mark diligently, and avoid carefully, all causes and Causers of Divisions;
especially to shunn Seducers, false-Teachers, and Brochers of Heresies and
Errors, contrary to the form of wholesome words.

Romans 16. 17, 18. Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions
and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them:
For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own belly, and by
good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

Matthew. 24. 4. Jesus said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you: verse.
5. For many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ,: and shall deceive
many. verse. 23. Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or
there: believe it not. verse. 24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets and shall show great signs and wonders: insomuch that (if it were
possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. verse. 25. Behold I have told you
before.

1 Timothy 6. 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to godliness: verse. 4. He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions, and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings: verse. 5. Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute, of the truth: From such withdraw thy self.

2 Timothy 2. 16. But shun profane and vain bablings, for they will increase to
more ungodliness. verse. 17. And their word will eat, as does a canker.

Titus 3. 9. But avoid foolish questions and genealogies, and contentions, and
strivings about the Law; for they are unprofitable and vain. verse. 10. A man
that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject: verse. 11.
Knowing that he that is such, is subverted, and sins, being condemned of
himself.

1 John 2. 18. Little Children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that
Antichrist shall come, even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we know
that it is the last times. verse. 19. They went out from us* but they were not
of us: for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us:
but they went out, that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of
us.

1 John 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirit? whether
they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

2 John 10. If there be any that come unto you, and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into your houses, neither bid him God speed: ver. 11. For he
that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

Acts 20. 29. For I know this, that after my departing, shall grievous Wolves
enter in among you; not sparing the flock, ver. 30. Also of your own selves,
shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them:
ver. 31. Therefore watch.

Rev. 2. 14. I have a few things against thee, because thou have there, them
that hold the doctrine of Balaam, ver. 15. So have thou also them, that hold
the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. ver. 16. Repent, or else I
shall come to thee quickly, and will fight against thee with the sword of my
mouth.

EXPLIC. X.
THE former part of this rule was something, spoken to rule 4th. If the
preservation of amity ought to be our aim, then certainly the causes and
Causers of Division, ought to be avoided; From such turn away. There is a
generation of men, whose tongues seem to be acted by the Devil; James calls
it, Set on fire of hell, Chap. 3. 6. As though they were the mere offspring of
Serpents, they delight in nothing but in the fire of contention; disputing,
quarreling, backbiting, endless strivings, are that they live upon. Note such
men and avoid them; Generally they are men of private Interests, fleshly ends,
high conceits, and proud spirits; from such turn away: So the latter part of
the Rule in particular, concerning Seducers; That a judgment of discerning by
the spirit, rests in the Church, and the several Members thereof, is apparent,
1 John 2. 27. 1 Cor. 2. 15. Esa. 8. 28. To the exercise of this they are
commanded, 1 John 4. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 15. So its commended, Acts 17. 11. And
hereunto encouraged, Philip. 1. 9, 10. Heb. 5. 14. If the blind lead the blind,
both will into the ditch: That gold may be suspected, which would not be tried.
Christians must choose the good, and refuse the evil. If their Teachers could
excuse them, if they lead them aside, they might well require blind submission
from them. Now that the Brethren may exercise this duty aright, and perform
obedience to this Rule, it is required,

1. That they get their senses exercised in the word, to discern good and
evil, Heb. 5, 14. Especially, that they get from the Scripture a form of
wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. of the main Truths of the Gospel, and
fundamental Articles of Religion; So that upon the first apprehension of the
contrary, they may turn away from him that brings it, and not bid them God
speed, 2 Epist. John verse. 10.

2 To be sure to attend and hearken to nothing, but what comes to them in the
way of God: Some men, yea very many in our days, have such itching ears after
novelty, that they run greedily after every one that lies in wait to deceive,
with cunning entising words; to make out some new pretended revelations, and
this from a pretended liberty, yea, duty of trying all things; little
considering that God will have his own work done, only in his own way; How
they come it makes not, so they may be heard: Now whereas most of the Seducers
and false Prophets of our days, are men apparently out of Gods way, leaving
their own callings, to come without a call, ordinary or extraordinary, without
providence or promise; none can put himself upon hearing of them, without
tempting God, with whom it is just and righteous, to deliver them up to the
efficacy of Error, that they may believe the lies they hear. Attend only then
to, and try only that which comes in the way of God, to others bid not God
speed.

3. To be always ready furnished with, and to bear in mind the Characters,
which the Holy Ghost has given us, in the word, of Seducers; which are indeed
the very same, whereby poor unstable souls are seduced by them; As first, that
they should come in sheep-cloathing, goodly pretenses of innocence and
holiness. Secondly, with good words and fair speeches, Romans 16. 17, 18. Smooth
as butter and oil. Thirdly, answering men's lusts in their Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.
3. Bringing Doctrines suitable to some beloved lusts of men; especially a broad
and easy way of salvation. Fourthly, pretenses of glorious discoveries and
revelations, Matthew. 24. 24. 2 These. 2. 2. Now I dare appeal to any, whether
these Characters and Signs, which the Holy Ghost has given us of Seducers,
have not bin the very means, whereby men have bin seduced. Let then the
Brethren be acquainted with these things, that they be not prevailed against.

4 Utterly reject and separate from such as have had means of conviction and
admonition, Titus 3. 10.

5. Not to receive any without testimony from some of the brethrens of known
integrity in the Churches; such is the misery of our days, that men will run
to hear those, that they know not from whence they come, nor what they are;
the laudable practice of the first Churches, to give testimonials to them that
were to pass from one place to another, 1 Cor. 16. 3. and not to receive any
without them, Acts 9. 26. is quite laid aside.

6. To walk orderly, not attending to the doctrine of any, not known to, and
approved by the Churches.

7. To remove far away all delight in novelties, disputes, janglings,
contentions about words not tending to godliness, which usually are beginnings
of fearful apostacies, Tit. 3. 9. 2 Timothy 4. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4, 5.

RULE XI.
CHeerfully to undergo the lot and portion of the whole Church in prosperity
and affliction, and not to draw back upon any occasion whatever.

Math. 13. 20. But he thta receives the seed into stony places, the same is he
that hears the Word, and anon with joy receives it, ver. 21. Yet has he not
root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation or persecution
arises because of the word, by and by he is offended.

Heb. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering,
for he is faithful that promises. ver. 24. And let us consider one another, to
provoke unto love and to good works, v. 25. Not forsaking the assembling our
selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so
much the more, as you see the day approaching. ver. 32. But call to remembrance
the former days, in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a great fight
of affliction. v. 33. Partly while ye were made a gazing stock both by
reproaches and afflictions, and partly whilst ye became companions of them
that were so used. ver. 34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took
joyfully the spoiling of your goods: knowing in in your selves, that ye have in
Heaven an enduring substance: ver. 35. Cast not away therefore your confidence,
which has great recompense of reward. ver. 36, For ye have need of patience,
that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promises. ver.
37. For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not
tarry. ver. 38. Now the just shall live by faith, but if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him. ver. 39. But we are not of them which draw
back to perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the font.

2 Timothy 4. 10. For Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present world.
ver. 16. At my first answer, no man stood with me, but all men forsook me; I
pray God that it be not laid unto their charge.

EXPLIC. XI.
Backsliding from the practice of any way of Christ, or use of any ordinances,
taken up upon conviction of his Institution, is in no small degree an Apostasy
from Christ himself.

Apostacy, in what degree soever, is attended with all that aggravation, which
a renuntiation of a tasted sweetness and goodness from God for transitory
things, can lay upon it; seldom it is that back-sliders are without pretenses
commonly of what they forsake; in respect of what they pretend to retain: they
say, as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little one? But yet we see (without exception)
that such things universally tend to more ungodliness: Every unrecovered step
backward, from any way of Christ, makes a discovery of falsenesse in the
heart, what ever former pretenses have been.

They who, for Motives of any sort from things that are seen, which are but
temporal, will seek for, or embrace being presented, colors or pretenses for
declining from any Gospel-duty, will not want them for the residue, if they
should be called thereunto.

The beginnings of great evils are to be resisted: that the neglect of the duty
whereof we treat, which is always accompanied with contempt of the communion
of Saints, has been a main cause of the great dishonor and confusion
whereunto most Churches in the world are fallen, was in part touched before; it
being a righteous thing with God, to suffer the sons of men to wax vain in
their imaginations; in whom, neither the love of Christ, nor terror of the
Lord, can prevail against the fear of men.

Let this then, with the danger and abomination of backsliding, take such an
impression on the hearts of the Saints, that with full purpose of heart, they
might cleave unto the Lord, follow hard after him, in all his ordinances; that
if persecution arise, they may cheerfully follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes; and by their close adhering one to another, receive such mutual
assistance and supportment, as that their joint praisers may prevail with the
goodness of God, and their joint sufferings overcome the wickedness of men.

Now to a close adhering to the Church wherein we walk in fellowship, in all
conditions whatsoever, without dismission attained upon just and equitable
grounds, for the embracing of Communion in some other Churches.

Motives are;

First, The eminency and excellency of the ordinances enjoyed.

Secondly, The danger of backsliding, and evidence of unsoundnesse in every
degree thereof.

Thirdly, The scandal, confusion, and disorder of the Churches, by neglect
thereof.

RULE. XII.
IN Church affairs to make no difference of persons, but to condescend to the
meanest persons and services, for the use of the Brethren.

James 2. 1. My Brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord
of glory, with respect of persons. ver. 2. For if there come one unto your
assemblies, a man with a gold ring in goodly apparel, and there come in also
a poor man in vile raiment; ver. 3. And ye have respect to him that wears
the gay clothing, and say unto him, sit thou here in a good place: and say to
the poor man, stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool: ver. 4. Are
ye not then partial in your selves, and are become Judges of evil thoughts?
ver. 5. Hearken my beloved Brethren; Has not God chosen the poor of this
world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to
them that love him? ver. 6. But ye have despised the poor, etc.

Matthew. 20. 26. But it shall not be so amongst you, but whosoever will be great
amongst you, let him be your Minister. verse. 27. And whosoever will be chief
among you, let him be your servant.

Romans 12. 16. Be of the same mind one toward another; mind not high things,
but condescend to men of low estate; be not wise in your own conceits.

John 13. 12. So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments,
and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you?
verse. 13. Ye call me Master, and Lord, and ye say well; For so I am. verse. 14.
If I then, your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash
one another feet. verse. 15. For I have given you an example, that ye should do
even as I have done* verse. 16. Verily; verily, I say unto you, The servant is
not greater then his Lord, neither he that is sent, greater then him that sent
him.

EXPLIC. XII.
Where the Lord has not distinguished, neither ought we; in Jesus Christ,
there is neither rich, nor poor; high, nor low; but a new creature: generally,
God has chosen the poor of this world to confound the mighty.

Experience shows us, that not many great, not many wise, not many mighty
after the flesh, are partakers of the heavenly calling; not that the Gospel of
Christ does any way oppose, or sever; those many differences and distinctions
among the sons of men, caused by power, authority, relation, enjoyment of
earthly blessings, gifts, age, or any other emminency whatsoever, according to
the institution and appointment of God, with all that respect, reverence, duty,
obedience, and subjection due unto persons in those distinctions; much less,
pull up the ancient bounds of propriety, and interest in earthly things; but
only declares, that in things purely spiritual, these outward things, which
for the most part, happen alike unto all, are of no value or esteem; men in the
Church are considered as Saints, and not as great, or rich; all are equal, all
are naked before God.

Free Grace is the only distinguisher, all being Brethren in the same Family,
Servants of the same Master; employed about the same work; acted by the same
precious Faith, enjoying the same purchased Privileges; expecting the same
recompense of Reward, and eternal abode: Whence should any difference arise?
Let then the Greatest account it their greatest honor, to perform the meanest
necessary service to the meanest of the Saints; a community in all spiritual
advantages, should give equality in spiritual affairs; Not he that is
richest, not he that is poorest, but he that is humblest, is excepted before
the Lord.

Motives hereunto, are

1. Christ's example.

2. Scripture-precepts.

3. Gods not accepting persons.

4. Joint participation of the same common Faith, Hope, etc.

5. The unprofitablenesse of all causes of outward differences in things of God.

RULE XIII.
IF any be in distress, persecution or affliction, the whole Church is to be
humbled, and to be earnest in prayer in their behalf.

Acts 12. 5. Peter therefore was kept in prison, but prayers was made withont
ceasing unto God for him. verse. 7. And behold, the Angel of the Lord came upon
him, and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and
raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly; And his chains fell off from his
hands. verse. 12. And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of
Mary the Mother of John, whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered
together praying.

Romans 12. 15. Rejoce with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.

1 Cor. 12. 26. And whether one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it,
or one Member be honored, all the Members rejoice with it. verse. 27. Now ye are
the Body of Christ, and Members in particular.

2 These. 3* 2. Pray for us Brethren, that we may be delivered from unreasonable
and wicked men.

EXPLIC. XIII.
THis duty being in general made out from, and included in other former rules,
we shall need to speak* the less into it; especially, seeing that upon
consideration and supposition of our fellow-Membership, it is no more then very
Nature requires and calls for. God delights, as in the thankful prraises,
so in the fervent prayers of his Churches; Therefore he variously calls them
by several dispensations to the performance of these duties: Now this
ofttimes, to spare the whole Church, he does by the afflictions of some one or
other of the Members thereof; Knowing that, that near relation, which by his
institution and Spirit is between them, will make the distress common, and
their prayers closely combined. Spiritual union is more noble and excellent
then natural; And yet in this it were monstrous, that either any Member in
particular, or the whole in general, should not both snffer with, and care for
the distress of every part and Member. That Member is rotten and to be cut
off, for fear of infecting the body, which feels not the pain of its
associates: If then any Member of the Church, do lie under the immediate
afflicting hand of God, or the persecuting rage of man, it is the duty of every
fellow-Member, and of the Church in general, to be sensible of, and account
themselves so sharers therein, as to be instant with God by earnest
supplication, and helpful to them by suitable assistance, that their spiritual
concernment in that affliction, may be apparent; and that because, First, the
will of God is thereby fulfilled. Secondly, The glory of the Gospel is thereby
exalted. Thirdly, preservation and deliverance to the whole Church procured.
Fourthly, conformity with Christ's sufferings in his Saints attained. Fifthly,
an inestimable benefit of Church Fellowship enjoyed, etc.

RULE XIV.
VIgilant watchfulness over each others conversation, attended with mutual
admonition, in case of disorderly walking; with rendering an account to the
Church, if the party offending, be not prevailed with.

Matthew. 18. 15. If thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him
his fault, between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have gained
thy Brother: ver. 16. But if he will not hear, then take with thee one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be
established: ver. 17. and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the
Church.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them who are unruly.

Heb. 3. 12. Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God. ver. 13. But exhort one another
daily, whilst it is called to day; lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin.

Heb. 10. 24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to
good works, exhorting one another, and so much the more, because you see the
day approaching.

Heb. 12. 13. Make strait paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be
turned out of the way, but rather let it be healed. ver. 15. Looking
diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of
bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled: ver. 17.
Lest there be any fornicator, or profane person among you, like Esau, who for
one morsel of bread, sold his birth-rigbt.

Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. Yet account him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

Romans 15. 14. And I my self also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye
also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish
one another.

James 5. 19. Brethren, if any of you do err from the faith, and one convert
him, let him know, that he which converteth a sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved stiffeneth his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.

EXPLIC. XIV.
THere is a threefold duty included in this rule, the maine whereof, and here
chiefly intended, is that of Admonition; whereunto the first is previous and
conducing; the latter, in some cases consequent, and attending Christians
conversation; whether you consider the glory of God, and the Gospel, therein
concerned; or the bonds of relation, with those mutnall endearments wherein
they stand engaged; and obligations that are upon them for the general good,
and spiritual edification one of another, ought to be watched, marked, and
considered by each other: not that we should curiously pry into one another
failings; much less maliciously search into doubtful unknown things; for the
trouble, or disparagement of our brethren; both which are contrary to that
love; which thinks not evil, but covers a multitude of faults, but only
out of a sense of the glory of God, the honor of the Gospel, and care of each
others souls; to observe their walking, that what is exemplary therein, may be
followed; what fails may be directed; what is a miss may be reproved, that
in all things God may be glorified, and Christ exalted.

Now admonition is twofold; 1. Authoritative, by the way of power; 2.
Fraternal, by the way of love. The 1. again is twofold; 1. Doctrinall by the
way of teaching. 2. Disciplinary, which belongs to the whole Church; Of these
we do not treat. The latter also is twofold; Hortatory, to encourage unto
good; and Monitory, to reprove that which is amiss: It is this last which is
peculiarly aimed at, and intended in the rule. This then we assert, as the duty
of every Churchmember toward them with whom he walks in fellowship; to
admonish any from the Word, whom they perceive not walking in any thing with a
right foot, as becomes the Gospel, thereby to recover his soul to the right
way; that much caution and wisdom, tenderness and moderation is required in
the persons performing this duty; for want whereof, it often degenerates from a
peaceable remedy of evil, into fuel for strife and debate. Let them then, who
are called to perform this duty, diligently consider these things; 1. That in
the whole action he transgress not that rule of charity which we have, 1 Cor.
13. 7. Gal. 6. 2. 2. Let him have peace at home, by an assurance of constant
laboring to cast out all beams and moates from his own eye, Mat. 7. 5. 3. Let
him so perform it, that it may evidently appear, that he has no other aim,
but the glory of God, and the good of his brother reproved; all envy and
rejoicing in evil being far away. 4. Let him be sure to draw his admonitions
from the Word, that the authority of God may appear therein, and without a Word
let him not presume to speak. 5. Let all circumstances attending, time, place,
persons, and the like, be duly weighed, that all provocation in the least
manner, may be fully avoided. 6. Let it be considered as an ordinance,
whereunto Christ has an especial regard. 7. Let him carefully distinguish
between personal injuries unto himself, whose mention must have far more of
forgiveness, then reproof, and other offenses tending to public scandal.
Lastly, Let self-examination concerning the same or the like miscarriage,
always accompany the brotherly admonition.

These and the like things being duly weighed, let every brother, with
Christian courage, admonish from the Word, every one whom he judges to walk
disorderly in any particular whatsoever; not to suffer sin upon him, being
ready to receive content and satisfaction, upon just defense, or promised
amendment: and without this, in case of just offense, a man cannot be freed
from the guilt of other men's sins. Let also the person admonished, with all
Christian patience, accept of the admonition, without any more regret of
spirit, then he would have against him who should break the weapon wherewith he
was in danger to be slain: Considering,

1. The authority of him who has appointed it.

2. The privilege and mercy he enjoys by such a spiritual prevention of such
a danger, or cur of such an evil, which perhaps himself did not discern.

3. The dreadful judgments which are every where threatened to dispisers of
reproofs, Prove. 29 ^. and so thankfully accept just admonition from the meanest
in the Congregation.

For the last, or repairing unto the Church in case of not prevailing by
private admonition; our Savior has so plainly laid down both the manner and
end of proceeding in Matthew. 18. that it needs no explanation; only I shall
observe, that by Church there, ver. 17. cannot be understood the Elders of the
Church alone, but rather the whole Congregation; for if the offended brother
should take with him two or three of the Elders unto the offender (as he may)
then were they the Church, and the Church should be told of the offense before
the reproof has been managed by two or three, which is contrary to the rule.

RULE XV.
EXemplary walking in all holiness, and godliness of conversation, to the
glory of the Gospel, edification of the Church, and conviction of them which
are without.

Psalm. 24. 3. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, or who shall stand in
his holy place? He that has clean hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift
up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully.

Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. ver. 20. For I say, unto
you, except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

Matthew. 21. 19. And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found
nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, let no fruit grow on thee
hence forward for ever, etc.

2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God.

2 Timothy 2. 19. And let every one that names the Name of Christ, depart from
iniquity. Tit. 2. 11, 12. For the grace of God that brings salvation, has
appeared unto all men; teaching us, that denying ungodlynesse and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.
ver. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Ephesians. 4.
21, 22, 23. If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taugt him, as the
truth is in Jesus, That ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old
man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; And be renewed in the
spirit of your mind. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. Likewise ye wives, be in subjection to
your own husbands, that if any obey not the Word, they also may without the
word be won by the conversation of the wives; While they behold your chaste
conversation coupled with fear. Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. See then
that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise; Redeeming the time,
because the days are evil. 2 Samuel 12. 14. Howbeit because by this deed thou
have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child
also, that is borne unto thee, shall surely die.

EXPLIC. XV.
HOliness becomes the house of the Lord for ever, without it none shall see
God: Christ died to wash his Church, to present it before his Father without
spot or blemish, to purchase unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. It is the Kingdom of God within us, and by which it appears unto all,
that we are the Children of the Kingdom. Let this then this be the great
discriminating of the Church, from the world, that they are a holy, humble,
self-denying people: Our Master is holy, his Doctrine and Worship holy; Let us
strive that our hearts may also be holy.

This is our wisdom toward them that are without, whereby they may be
gained, or convinced; this is the means whereby we build up one another most
effectually. Examples are a sharper way of instruction then Precepts; Loose
walking causing the Name of God to be blaspemed, the little ones of Christ to
be offended, and his enemies to rejoice, is attended with most dreadful woe^
both, that all who are called to an holy profession, and do enjoy holy
Ordinances, did shine also in holiness of conversation, that those who accuse
them as evil doers, might have their mouths stopped, and their hearts filled with
shame, to the glory of the Gospel. To this general head belongs that wise
walking in all patience, meekness, and long-suffering toward those that are
without, until they evidently appear to be fighters against God; when they are
to be prayed for. Hither also might be referred the patience of the Saints in
all tribulations, sufferings, and persecutions for the Name of Christ.

Motives for the exercise of universal holiness in acts internal and
external, private and public; personal, and of all relations, are,

1. The utter unsufficiency of the most precious Ordinances, for any communion
with God, without it.

2. The miserable issue of deceived souls, with their barren empty,
fruitless Faith.

3. The glory of the Gospel, when the power thereof has an evident impression
on the hearts, thoughts, words, actions and lives of Professors.

4. Scandal of the Gospel, the advantage of its adversaries, the shame of the
Church, and fierce wrath of God, following the unsuteable walking of the
professors.

5. The sweet reward which the practice of holiness brings along with it,
even in this life* with that eternal weight of glory, whereunto it leads
hereafter; unto which, the holy Son of God bring us all, through the sprinkling
of his most holy blood.

And these are some of those Rules, whose practice is required from the
persons, and adorneth the profession of those who have obtained this grace, to
walk together in Fellowship, according to the Rule of the Gospel; Toward
others also ought they, with several limitations, and in the full latitude
toward the Brethren of the Congregations in commrnion with them.

FINIS.

