coat of arms (of Henry Oxinden?) crown surmounted by animal portrait of Henry
Oxinden (Oxenden) of Barham Hen Oxinden de Barham
Non est mortale quod opto. 1647.



CHARLES TRIUMPHANT, etc.

This is that CHARLES, who did from CHARLES proceed, Who shall in Greatness
CHARLES the Great exceed.

CAROLUS e CAROLO descendens, erit CAROLO magno major.

wreath

LONDON, Printed in the year, MDCLX.

TO THE KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS, His best Vicegerent CHARLES II. Who
shall be greater than CHARLES the GREAT;
The Author wishes All the Blessedness, and Glory; All the Love, and Power;
All the Majesty and Dominion that an earthly God is capable of.

Rex si me Argligenis vatibus inseres,
Sublimi feriam sidera vertice.
Hor. Car. lib. 1. od. 1 Great KING if you will be pleased to grace
Me in your heart with a near place
The world to come shall see
My head shall reach Heavens lofty Sphere,
And as the stars I will shine there,
Such shall my Glory be.
THE AUTHORS OPINION.
THE Choristers of Heaven rejoice and sing:
Beholding now the Triumphs of our King.
And he who grieves this blessed sight to see,
Must either Devil or grand Rebel be;
Ah! curst's that soul can be an Heraclite,
At the rejoicing of the Sons of Light.
THE Author TO THE READER.
REader I here have set before thine eyes
A heavenly Image in Triumphant wise,
The sacred Offspring of thy Lord and King:
Let now thy heart a peal to heaven ring
At this so glorious a sight: for why?
In viewing him thou view'st a Deity.
THE AVTHORS HYMN.
O Let us now rejoice and sing
Praises unto our Lord,
Because he has restored our King
Even of his own accord.
How great his Kingdom to us is
In doing of the same!
O let us evermore for this
Extol his Holy Name.
And let us thanks unto him give
For all his Mercies tried,
And pray that long our CHARLES may live
Who us indemnifi'd.
And in the fire did cast the rod,
His mercies bearing sway,
For this praise we the Lord our God,
Praise we the Lord I say.
BEhold a Triumph which no servants scoff
Can possibly eclipse, or e're put off.
For CHARLES his chariot shall triumphing run,
Coeval with the horses of the Sun,
And loyal acclamations likewise make
Royal hearts dance, but hearts of Rebels quake.
Jo. Hobart Of Quarrington in Mersham in Kent.

ON CHARLES Triumphant, A POEM, Dedicated to His Majesty by H. Oxinden Esquire
Most gracious Sovereign,
AFter the Countries well meant dusty greets,
Turning the deserts in your road to streets;
And pu^^ past^ gladness of the gaudy town,
Where some joys were heard in some swalow'd down,
Besides the shouts of the converted Host,
Guarding before the Crown upon a Post:
With Catsdung throngs of Courtiers 'bout the Throne,
Crowding for places till they left you none:
View this Aeschylian Authors loyal strain,
Such Gratulations spend, and last again;
Born without pangs, Offspring of Ecstasy,
Since you transported was, why may not He?
Rapt with a Sovereign influence, 'bove those
Whose thanks are healths profound, and shallow prose.
Yet if your smiles infuse not vital mirth,
'Twill prove abortive, or Saguntine birth;
Which come your Holocaust, if now it dies,
And if it stands, your living sacrifice:
First fruits from him, whose All for Charles is bred;
He that presents the feet, dares stake the head.
H. B.

On the most ingenuous Author of Charles Triumphant.
THE splendid Triumphs of the Town and Court
Ambitious are to be great Charles his sport;
Arches advanced be to raise his Name
Above the Clouds, till they obscure their frame;
But this high Author only can advance
His fame beyond the power of force or chance;
And by the verdure of Poetic Bay
Make his whole life a Coronation day:
Others dread King may crown your head with gold,
This golden Verse preserves from growing old
Your eviternal praise; and in this thing
By b'ing his Subject, you are more his King.
Thomas Williams.

TO HIS Most Honored, because most faithful friend (the Author) upon his
Triumphant Poem.
APollo's darling, for thy due renown
It Is just thy Royal verses wear a Crown:
My Muse is dumb, whilst thine sublimely sings
The best of Poets to the best of KINGS.
AUGUSTUS smiles, CAESAR accepts a mite,
^ow VIRGIL'S Genius does English write.
^et common Poets prattle common things,
Whilst Monarchs triumph on thy Muses wings;
^ing noth' but Kings, thou can not higher rise:
^t is not meet Joves bird should stoop at flies:
Nature and Art being married in Thee,
Muses conserve their true Posterity.
Heavens me defend from being thine Enemy,
(...) would not be laid forth before I die:
Who willingly would meet his Death, his Hearse,
His Funeral in thy Triumphant Verse?
TO HIS Much esteemed Friend and ever honored Patron, Henry Oxinden Esquire upon
his most incomparable Poem, CHAPTER TRI.
Lately you wrote against our Hydra-state
As a Sharp Satyrist: and Englands fate
You did bewail, and wisely did presage
If Charles were absent in that direful age
Religion would expire; her end was nigh;
So you prepared for her an Elegy:
But now your verses in another strain
Do run, and sing Triumphant Job again;
Since which you once resolved to set by
All verse, and take your leave of Poetry,
But God would not permit your Muse to cease
In so much blessed and Halcyon times as these;
When Britain does possess within her Sphere
Her wished long expected Jupiter
Our blessed Sovereign who in the space
Of twelve years finished his wandering race,
And now no longer shall a Planet be,
But a Star fixed, or Stationary.
Surely those Gods who caused the Star to shine
At Charles His birth, to show he was divine,
The very same sent Phoebus down to enspire
Your mind, and kindle a poetic fire
At your books birth, where you so sweetly sing
The famous Acts of your most valiant King:
In strains so ravishing, as might provoke
The much amazed, and famous Royal Oak,
To follow you, as Orpheus once did make
The Trees to dance, and mighty Mountains shake
The same to the Authors Momus.
If Mists arise, and seem to cloud thy praise,
Think it not strange, Phoebus cannot choose but raise
Such envious vapors, therefore murmur not,
Such a black cloud is but your Beauty-spot.
This is your glory, for not only you,
But Sol himself wears these black patches too.
J. W.

Lib. 1.
I.
Lo I! who once had Helicon giv'en 'ore,
And thought to climb Parnassus Hill no more
I who the Funeral in forty nine
Sang of Religion, and did then divine
Until King CHARLES came it would never have
A total resurrection from the grave.
I who at that time earnestly did pray
That Christ might to his Kingdoms lead the way,
And also wished, and that with good intent,
A speedy end to the long Parliment.
And I the man who did in fifty one
extol Iobs' patience unto Heavens throne.
(The very Type of our Great Martyr slain
And his dear Son, rightly our Sovereign.)
And I who 'yerst my fancy to delight
OXINDENORUM series did write,
And did decypher blessed Elizas bliss
Triumphant (would God I were where she is)
And I who lately in my Image Royal
Extolled a Noble Soul for being Loyal.
And therein Monarchy did justly own,
Of Goverments the best of all that's known:
And (...) ^^e very same who Nol, and's Nose,
(...) Rump, and all King CHALS his mortal foes
Admired alike; I, even I who have
Wondered who was of these the greater Knave,
Will to my paper once more set my pen,
And welcome home the best of Kings and Men;
His Enemies disclaim, his Glory sing,
For it is my duty he is my Sovereign King.
II.
And since, great CHARLES, I who thy subject am,
Have chosen thee the miror of all fame,
I Will scorn assistance from the Muses Hill,
And pray great Jove himself to guide my quill;
For whilst I of a God sing, I defy
All help beneath that of a Diety.
Great Father Jove send from the Emperial Pole
A heavenly spright into my loyal soul,
For now Divinities my Theme, even He
Whom God himself has said a God to be.
III.
GREATFR then CHARLES the great thou shall be; I
Aver it; for the Prophet would not ly,
Who said a CHARLES, should from a CHARLES proceed
Who should in Greatness CHARLES the Great exceed
Great PRINCE this all men say is meant of Thee,
The Peoples speech is Gods own speech say we.
Surely Thou art already such an One
As I the like on earth acknowledge none;
Thy Splendor's such, as Traytorous is that eye
which spies not in Thee supreme Majesty.
Phoebus himself's eclypsed by thy Rays,
O object worthy of the Angels praise!
The Cherubins and Seraphins on High
Are fitter far to speak thy worth then I,
So that I doubt 'twill be in me too great
Presumption of so high a King to treat,
And doubt like Phaeton whilst I a pitch
Too high do soar, may fall down in 'the ditch:
How ere I must proceed, doubts get ye gone,
For I feel Jove himself me spurring on.
IIII.
Creat CHARLES at whose blessed birth Heaven did bring forth
A Star foreshewing thy transcendent worth.
Which added luster unto Titans light,
More rare, more wonderful then he ats hight,
How can I choose but thee admire, and love,
Being the offspring, and increase of Jove?
Tell me ye whole Chaldaean race, what e're
Ye be, if that ye can, why then, and there
It gloriously appeared, if not to show
A God on Earth was born to us below?
One that should us from Tyrants woes deliver,
Cut off the entaile of the Beast and Oliver,
Did not the star which did in the East appear
Full fi^teen hundred fifty and nine year
Now past, to the world betoken some such thing,
Then being born a Savior and a King?
Both Saviors; with reverence, here is the odds
CHARLES is of men, CHRIST both of men an GODS.
V.
CHARLES bodies, CHRIST souls, CHARLES in time, but CHRIST
For ever saves, and is of Kings the highest.
He CHARLES his Savior is, as it is well known,
And CHARLES him for his Savior does own.
Ye Epicurean wits, who do surmize
Your selves to be so mystically wise,
Fancying Religion to be like the Law
Mere policy to keep bad men in awe:
And think there is no such thing as providence;
Come, and sit down by me, and learn from hence;
Even from the Preservation of one,
And he a King, that now sits on is throne,
That God above who in the Heaven is
Has an especial care of all are his.
Witness thee Scotland when as Thou did bring
Into a Labyrinth thy sacred King.
And who but God did help him safe thereout?
'Twas, He was He that did it, without doubt.
Witness thee Wor'ster likewise; where though he
Did show admired Magnanimity,
And all the Caesar's since the world begun
Surpast in what was fitting to be done;
Yet being overpow'red ten to one,
And most of's men of war slain, others gone,
Also on every side with dangers clos'ed,
In humane sense to noth, but death exposed,
His Horse twice underneath him deadly shot,
And the sad battle lasting over-hot;
when lo! behold a Troop of Angels were
Sent by our God, to be his Lifeguard there,
And safely thence convey Him in despite
of Cromwels fury, or the Devils might.
VI.
'Twas God did put it in his mind to change
His royal Robes for those that were more strange
For such an High, and Mighty Prince to wear
As He was, and to cut off all his hair,
Whereby he could pass better undescri'd,
And so himself, might in himself best hide:
Thus He to Foes a dark cloud did appear,
But to his truly friends a light most clear.
I say it was his God who did cause this
(By his own Genius) Metamorphosis.
VII.
Who was it great KING that made Jove's own dear Tree
To lure thee to it, and therein safe to be?
O sacred Tree? which did at once enshrine
Three Kingdoms well fare, and a Power divine!
Surely when He was in Thee, thou did hold
Such worth as Mortal man cannot unfold;
Nay which of all the Angels can declare
The heavenly thoughts contained then in thy
The Oracle at Delphos never spoke
Such truth, as He, when there He silence brake, Sphere?
witness be Thou great Arbiter, above,
Who did Him hear, and his Supporter prove.
VIII.
'Twas thou who sa'vdst our King, and made a Lane
For his escape when CHARLES was in the wane,
A lovely Lane, whose close Maeanders were
So dark as none but friends could find him there?
Sweet Madam Lane how much I have admired
The holy wiles wherewith thou was it enspired?
When as the Happiness of Kingdoms three
Solely, and wholly trusted was with thee;
Nver! ah never since Eve first did sin
Did any woman threads so finely spinne,
Which though in have, and danger they were drawn
No fault could yet be found in all the Lane.
XI.
It was the Providence of GOD on high
(Whose name be praised to all Eternity)
Which did contrive ways (O how strange, and rare,
How deep! how high, how vast his councels are!)
In order to our Kings escape, and made
The Sun to be preserved by the shade,
Poor subjects now the Instruments to save
A mighty King from foes, from Death and Grave.
Who says that Miracles are ceased, since
His safeties one, and must our thoughts convince?
Not only many men, but women too
The huge, and mighty load did undergo
Of locking up a Secret in their breast,
Such as by no means ought to be confessed,
Women I say locked up safe in their breast
A secret by no means to be confessed!
A secret which temptations of Gold,
Or threats of punishments could not unfold,
A secret which most would have groaned under
And often to be delivered burst asunder.
But GOD did hinder these from letting fall
Such words as might their royal Guest enthrall;
And did preserve him since in Spain and France.
And the Low Countries to his own advance.
Oh may, great Prince, the Lord whose mighty arm
Upheld thee then, still keep thee from all harm.
X
It Is Thee, Great Charles, I speak of, thee for whom
I have so long prayed, let thy Kingdoms come:
All which thy Kingdoms now are come to Thee,
(Thanks be to God) and thou to them all three.
The art come to them, and sure the Angels, they,
Even Gods own Host Thee guarded by the way.
And doubtless he is an Atheist who not sings
Beholding Thee brought home on Angels wings.
No Sadduce but would confess the same,
Had he our Charles seen then, when thus he came:
No Sceptick ought to doubt of this, and I
Think, to gainsay it, comes near Blasphemy.
O how those Angels at their Office joyed,
In which the Lord of Hosts had them employed!
And to behold those who had sinners been,
Even Rebels late now turned from their sin;
There is no doubt, those Messengers of Light
Who do rejoice when men turn to the right,
But that they did triumph when our King came,
For unsquar'd hearts he then put into frame:
So that at's landing I may boldly say
Both men, and Angels kept a holy day.
XI.
Hail CHARLES! who came so well attended, hail
To whom GOD Neptune did his Trident veil,
And his dear Amphitrite gladly bring
All her fair Nymphs to view so great a King:
No wonder then that calm the waters were
Since Neptune Master CHARLES himself was there.
Besides the Sea-GOD had the winds commanded
Not to be boistrous till his guest was landed;
And had a mind to see's own daughters dance
Before the true, and la lawful Heir of France;
The same who rules great Brittanie, and with all
Ireland, those Seas the narrow Seas we call,
Whose moveing Castles make the Ocean tremble,
And some of its great Borderers dissemble.
Witness thee Holand, and the rest; but I
Now leave you strinking sail to's Mijesty.
XII.
Hail CHARLES once more of whom the Sea-Gods care
So great was, that He in his arms you bare,
And in whose presence so much mirth did pass
As after times will doubt how great it was.
Some say the waters smiled for joy, cause they
Your comp'ny had, 'this merry month of May,
And some affirm the fish your health did quaffe,
Whilst the sea Goddesses did sing, and laugh;
Some Fish did half above the waters rise,
Offering themselves to you a sacrifice;
Others as sure to leap for joy were seen,
As if that they had there transported been,
And certain it is, some wondered to see
The very ship that held your Majesty,
And well may this be true, fith I do know
Some men as well as Fishes that did so.
O famous ship which did three Kingdoms hold!
This Argo's glory who can well unfold?
O ship whose precious lading sure was such
As that all India was not worth so much:
O ship deserving highly to be graced
And amongst the Stars in Heaven to be placed;
Since it has brought of Mortals all, the flower
Unto the British shore, in a good hour,
Which some Fish following would not give over
Unltil they saw you safe arrived at Dover.
XIII.
Now might Pythagoras have hea'rd if e're
The pleasant Music of each heavenly Sphere,
And I my self, had I above them been,
Jove's Choristers for joy triumphing seen;
Yea some have thought that the damned Spir'ts below
Had intermission of their torments now,
And Heraclitus though he n'ere before
Was seen to laugh, might have laughed on this score,
But certain it is some persons I did view
who were so glad, as they themselves not knew.
XIV.
Some in their thoughts so rapt now up on high
As with their heads they touched che lofty sky
Some knew not whether on the Earth they went,
Or their feet trod upon the Firmament.
Other some could not possibly refrain
Aloud by words their gladness to explain.
Some hollowed as if that they had meant
The air to cleave, and clouds asunder rent
By their exceeding noise, which was so great
As it did reach up to Olympus seat;
Nor is it a wonder this was done by men
Since conduits French, and Spanish uttered then.
XV.
But O how Neptune foamed for anger, when
He saw that you would part, and how He then
Roared for grief, when you were near the shore,
Fearing He might not see you any more;
And when he saw that you would from him go,
He bad the rising billows answer No,
And so they did, which many an one did hear
Who to your landing place were very near,
And for a need the truth thereof can swear,
For they did see the same when they were there.
Lib. 2.
I.
And did the King at Dover land? then O
You Dubrians thank him for doing so,
Thank Him for ever for the great renown
His Majesty did bring unto your Town;
Now may't be said whilst Sol his course shall run
Here landed CHARLES our King, St. CHARLES his son.
Fame will ride Post proclaming the world over
That CHARLES the Martyrs son did land at Dover.
What land so barbarous as will not hear
In short time now of famous Dover Peer?
And what brave Soul who is at's own command
Will not come see the place where CHARLES did land?
O sacred Place! (and be it in the Annals put)
That had the honor first to to kiss his foot:
All ye that see it revetently bow,
And with devout affection Kiss it now;
Fond Pilgrims who St. Thomas footsteps kiss,
Behold King Charles's holyer then his!
(I mean the footsteps of St. Tom a Becket
Who in the World did once make heavy racket,
CHARL'S footsteps are divine, and who shall trace
His steps, he does to heaven bend his race
Much surely are we bounden to our King,
Who leads the way which does to Heaven bring.
II.
CHARLES did at Dover land; a happy day
^or ^s it was the twenthy sixth of May,
The one thousandth year six hundred and threescore
Of CHRST our SAVIOR, when he came over;
A day and year not e're to be forgot,
He is a Rebel sanctifies it not:
The Sun did then put on his brightest Rays,
And with brave Monck attend him on his ways,
Now with all Christendom might Kent alone
Have surely stood in competition:
Sole Kent all Christendom then need not fear
When our most High, and Mighty CHARLES is there,
What named I CHARLES? that very name does spell
Deliverance, if we observe it well:
Could have delivered us but He alone,
None could have tied the hearts of men but He
In Millions of knots of amity.
Hen'ry the Roses, James two Kingdoms joined,
But CHARLES was He three Kingdoms that entwined
And O how mightily all things rejoiced
As soon as our Kings landing safe was noys'd!
As if they had esteemed it high Treason
To have done otherwise in such a season:
The Bells 'ore-joy'd were heard this Psalm to sing
Over, and over often, God save the King:
The Churches they stood still; and it is well
They did so, Lambert once had rung their knell,
The Orthodoxe Divines did joy (and pray)
Their joys were Orthodoxe, as well as they:
They gave God thanks their Sovereign was r^turn^^
(And well they might, their livings were adjou^n^^
until his coming:) and the Guns great sou^^
Drowned all, and made brains to their King tu^^ roun^
Such as before not much inclined were
To do so, yet they did it, He being there.
III.
Nature was now beheld in her best dress
To welcome home so longed-for a Guest,
I saw the trees clad in a green attire,
And some for joy even up to heaven aspire:
I saw the Earth with flowers her self adorn,
(Never more fine before since I was borne,)
And in her lap the Lilly, and the Rose,
Isreal's brav'st King came short of those,
(In all his Royalty he nere alas!
As they were then (I know it) so clothed was.)
I saw the very Beasts towered Him make have
Fearing, it seems, which of them should come la^^
This is most certain I can boldly say,
Some Horses which to Dover came that day,
Together with their Riders can explain
This Truth of mine, should I be thought to feign.
And why may this unlikely seem to be,
Since some the very stones themselves did see
Move CHARLS-ward on the beach; this is most true
Many an honest man had hem in view.
But that which seemth yet to some more strange
Is, that some Rebels then were seen the change
To ring, (for joy of's landing) yet it is so,
God moved their hearts to what their wills said no.
IV.
But what I now shall witness will appear
Less disputable, since it is so clear.
I saw bright Phoebus with a cheerful eye
Humbly salute his sacred Majesty,
His earnestness was such to kiss his hand,
As Monk his own self could not him withstand,
True it is the great Commander did desire,
To keep him off, but he grew hot as fire
By the repulse; he would not be said no;
For why? he knew't his duty to do so:
And therefore he this took so much amiss,
As when Monk bowed his Sovereigns hand to kiss;
He in revenge of the offered disgrace
With red hot beams did fly into his face,
But when as Phoebus saw 'twas Monk did stand
Between them, he was friends and kissed his hand, wise
Even as he did his sacred Majesty's:
More needs not here, few words are best to the
V.
But then how joyful the good General was
To see his Sovereign in so good a Case,
Cheerful, and well arrived; without control
It cannot be expressed by any Soul,
Surely his heart did in his body dance
To a great hight, even in the sight of France.
The sight of France which truly I do know
Unto my King obedience to owe,
Make, make them pay't, O mighty Man of war,
The name of Moncks enough all France to scare,
Thou that have here three Nations conquered soon
Surely may a l c mode quick conquer one;
And do thou banish those base Knaves from thence
Who banished CHARLES, what ever was their pretense
Increase of honor shall thy Temples Crown,
And Albemarle be ever in renown.
VI.
Befooled and Mazerin'd France repent, repent,
Who twice did send our Prince to banishment,
Our Phaenix Prince extracted from the sum
Of the blessed ashes of true Martyrdom;
By my consent thy Antic modes we will banish,
And drink no other wine but what is Spaish.
Nor will we though some Prote'stants now stick
To love the faithful Spanish Catholic,
For their great Charity did reach from Spain
Past Faith and Hope, ev'en unto Charles his waine;
Heaven notice takes thereof, and has set down
So good a work, and ecchos its renown.
VII.
Would GOD I had the whole world in a string
That I might now present it to my King,
Yet had I so I really believe
Like Alexander, I should sadly grieve
Because there were no more worlds, whereof I
Might make a present to his Majesty.
Ah! how it sadds me that it should be true
Some yet should think much to pay him his due,
When all they have too little for him is.
For they being Traitors all they have is his,
It Is his by right, what ever they possess,
And all true Cavelleers believe no less.
VIII
Brave Cavalleers, the expectations which,
At your Kings landing did your hearts enrich:
And the great hopes and joys you did surround,
I Will leave it unto Fame her self to sound;
Who commonly although she do report
Actions at large, in this she must come short.
For let her speak the utmost that she can,
She cannot speak out the thoughts of many a man,
Who thither came; nor more than she can mine,
Whose heart to him 'bove E la does incline.
Heaven knows my heart, He knows I wish t'endear Him,
So much to me, as he might place me near Him;
Then should I think my self with God to be,
For where King CHARLES is, sure enough is He.
IX.
From- Dover my dear Prince of high renown
Was pleased to bend his march to Barham Dawn,
Attended by a noble train of those,
Whose chief delight themselves was to expose
To any danger, or do any thing,
Wherein they might show duty to their King,
Some of them were of that same golden number
Who many nights did neither sleep, nor slumber,
For very grief ofs Majesty's hard case,
To think how he from's Kingdoms banished was,
And they together with him, and the reason
Forsooth must be cause he committed Treason;
A King act Treason? Ye why not? just so
Heaven may turn Traitor to the Earth below,
Divinity it self accused be
For strange Rebellion against Humanity,
This this a lass was the pretented cause,
But sure it is that the intended was
Unto this cursed end, that they themselves
Who banished him (Hobgoblings, Furies, Elves,)
Might play their frantic tricks, and dance the rounds
Whilst He was sure enough without their bounds:
And that they might his Treasure, and his Lands
His Forts and castles keep in their own hands.
Lord God of Heaven, was ever the like known,
As what has been in this age of our own?
Let all the Histories are penned be viewed,
If one can match our case, I will be Hugh'd,
And with old Oliver, and Bradshaw dwell,
And I do think I had as good b'in Hell.
X.
But stay in following these wee'r gone so far!
Out of the way, as lets see where we are,
(The Lord have mercy on us) Hell well nigh,
Where Oliver and Bradshaw I epsy,
And Hugh likewise, O how my heart does burn
Into the way I strayed from, to return.
My meaning is toward Barham Down, where I
With mine own eyes beheld his Majesty,
In tranced I did see this blessed sight.
When Paul-like I was ravished with delight,
At his right hand the Duke of York did ride,
And Gloucester Duke close by his brothers side,
(Brave Souls! whose fame surmounted has the Stars
As they have Merc'ry, and the God of wars.)
At's left great Monck with reverence did attend him,
And ready was, and willing to defend Him
If any need had been, but thee was none,
Charles had been safe, had he been here alone.
XI.
But O how many Noble souls were there,
To see their longed for Sun, shine in his sphere,
And the bright morning Star which did fore run
The fair, and glorious rising of that Sun
Leading wise men unto their King, good Lord
Thou know, who there thy presence did afford!
This, This was at sweet Barham Down, the Down
Which after times shall er'e have in renown:
It will not need be now for me to say
That here 'twas Caesar did bis Host array,
Tush, this is nothing to the glory which
Our King bestow^d, whose sight did it enrich,
For why? hereof great Barham Down since boasts
When CHARLES was there, were many Lords of Hosts.
XII.
Rejoice ye men of Barham for the honor
Your King, and Nobles then bestowed upon Her,
For here the Royal meeting was, 'twas here
Where a God did in humane shape appear,
And reconcile himself to man'y of those
Who had of late been his degenerate foes:
Five thousand and six hundred years and more
By seven it is (I surely know) before
The world was made, since which there has not been
Any Sight here so glorious to be seen;
Great King I thank thee, cause Thou did appear,
And honor that same place which I live near.
XIII.
Welcome great Prince, whose presence now we see
Makes us once more good Christians to be,
Alas! before unto us thou did come,
It Is said we were no part of Christendom;
Thou have R'eligion raised, Gods fair daughter,
Of which most talked of, though but few sought after:
We fore thy coming could not find her out
She was so foully mangled by the rout,
And in a monstrous hurry (O sad story;)
Was made away with by the Directory
In a Scotch mist, and buried in the City
Of factious London, ah the mores the pity!
XIV.
Welcome great Prince, and all thy Subjects Royal
Who are come with Thee, and continued loyal;
Our sin the cause was that ye banished were,
For we, alas! moved too much out of square,
And now good Prince we will mend our lives by Thine,
You b'ing a sacred Pattern shall be mine,
Such had been great King David, and his son
Had both their virtues in one current run
Unmixt with vice; and such had Adam been
Had He held out a stranger unto sin.
XV.
Thrice welcome great Prince to thy Kingdoms three,
Whose whole Well-being rests so much in thee;
Thou art beloved both of God and man,
To this both heaven and earth bear witness can;
And since that thy great GOD, who is the King
Of Kings and Lords, who rules every thing,
Loves thee so well, and makes all hearts to love thee,
And has placed none except himself above thee.
Surely we honor ought thy sacred name,
And to the throne of Jove extol thy Fame
Make thee our Center, and draw every line
Of love unto it, 'cause thou art divine
XVI.
You are divine, and in you is the sum
Of all that is good in Kings through Christendom,
The several virtues which do make them be
Accounted royal, all abound in Thee
Unmixed with their vices: Your heart wears
The Spanish wisdom, but its pride forbears,
The French activity you own and love,
But of their fickleness do not approve.
The like may said be of the rest, but I
Cannot delineate the Cosmography
Of your endowments, which such are, that all
May you le Grand Charles, and le boon Charles call
Round Hypocrites themselves this truth confess
In heart, what ere their lying tongues express.
XVII.
You are divine, and all your words are true
As Oracles, your actions Laws renew;
Your Prudence, and your valor both excel,
And Temperance and Justice in you dwell;
Your other virtues, too, so many are
That they the stars surpass in number far:
And true it is I the Stars do finite know
To be; but, Sir, your virtues are not so.
May King and Angels on you wait, all who
Highly admire your words and actions too.
XVIII.
You are divine above all earthly things,
Descended from more then a hundred Kings,
Hence in your veins, the quintessence does flow
Of the best blood of all the gods below.
You are divine much after Gods own heart,
To whom he has vouchsafed to impart
So many specral graces, as if He
Had you intended a Monopoly.
You are divine, intuitively such
As from Gods Angel does not differ much,
Whereby you in your self a Council are,
Such as excells all earthly Councils far.
You are divine, and on you all may see
(Who are not blind) such beams of Majesty
Darted from Heaven, as do plainly make
You of Gods image royal to partake.
You are divine, and only him are under
Who made of noth', and fills the world with wonder.
Princely's your port! Imperial is your face!
Sacred your eyes, and heavenly is your Grace!
You are divine by Father and by Mother,
A pair, such as the world cannot show another:
He the worlds mirror is, and so is she,
The like are you unto Eternity.
Pardon great Prince this my attempt to speak
Of your perfections since my skills so weak
That it of them (alas!) comes shorter far
Then the earth is distant from a fixed star.
And O dear ( Mary, mother of my King,
And God, pray speak my pardon for this thing.
(Hail Mary full of Grace, the Lord with thee
Be with, thou amongst women blessed be;
And blessed be the fruit of thy chaste womb,
The King of Triumphs, Heir of Martyrdom,
Thus royal souls do pray with one accord
Through Jesus CHRIST our only saving Lord.
LIB. 3.
I.
Now call I Heaven above, and Earth below
To witness whether I say truth or no;
Before our Kings return mnay soar neck
Was vex't with tumors, which no Art could check,
Which he has cured, even with a touch,
Nol or the Rump could not do half so much,
The cures they did, they did them with a string,
With Sword and Pistol, or with some such thing.
They killed, not cured; they saved never an One,
CHARLES cures many, but he kills none:
His very presence only has abated,
Over three whole Nations swellings so dilated,
As some thought them incurable, and I
Know that the cure for man was much too high.
All ye that scruple to believe, until
Your sight convince your Reason against your will,
Go see your King do things all sense above,
And tell me then if that your hearts don't move
Kingward, and whether you not think that He
Participates much of Divinity.
For my part I believe he does, and why?
^ehold! he acts things for man too high!
(...) never yet could any reason see
^or these his cures, most wonderful to me,
The more I do admire them, I the more
Admire, and still admiring nere give over.
II.
Grear King, before You came, we had threeskore
Vice-Royes to king it over us, nay more,
God knows how many, yea our servants all
Our rebel Masters were both great and small.
Did not we do what they would have us then,
The Table's turned, we must turn Servingmen,
And wait their worships pleasures: O rare chang!
When all things did thus arsie versie range:
And little better with us, 'twould have been,
Had the wolf chanced to rule in the Lambs skin.
III.
Now to the end that aftertimes may know
As we do (to our cost) and shun the woe,
To have a Church and State (alack!) without
A Head and Guide, I here have set ours out
In part, as it was lately; ah how then
Transcendent were the sins of our Churchmen!
Even so as that Hyperboles most high
Too weak are to express their summity!
Ye Myter'd Angels, and ye Priests divine
Did not unto their crying sins incline.
'Twas ye Geneva Bulls were much to blame,
Yea wild, and some doubt, ye are scarce yet tame,
So as ye will to woolfs and foxes be
Joined rather, then unto the Hierarchy,
And first make choice of any Jack to reign
Then your own King, if he fit not your vein:
And O how strongly are ye bent to be
Each one of you that in Epitomy
You cannot at large; and make your fingers small
More heavy than the loins of Bishops all!
This is so true as none may doubt of this
Hypotyposial Periphrasis.
Your crimes are such as have ascended to
That place to which scarce Anti-Kings will go
And they who the Heavenly Hierarchy cannot ever
Endure; amongst the Angels dwell may never,
As some do think: who do in Heaven prove
Order to be, as well as joy and love.
Sure there is order there and Monarchy,
Or else no place 'twere for a Diety..
And is this so? O then let Earth resign
Its model, to Heavens pattern most divine.
And my dear Prince since you intend to reign
In wished for Peace, order in Church maintain.
Now by your leave, I will proceed, and say
Litely in what confusion we lay.
IV.
Before you came, alas! both Church and State
Were in condition most disconsolate,
Our learned and best Divines they were put out,
And Weather-cocks put in, which turned about
Nol-wards or Rump-wards, they not cared which,
So that the wind which blew did them enrich:
The Lord forgive them, how was it in their mind lieve,
Instantly to embrace each rising wind!
They preached what they themselves did not be*
And like old Hugh each one laughed in his sleeve
At their deluded Auditors to see
What fools, they were, and would so cheated be.
And this to the end they might more slily do,
Extremely long they prayed, and preached too,
So as they wearied God himself thereby,
Who hated their prolix hypocrisy:
Treason and Nonsense were the usual flowers
Wherewith they graced their sermons of two hours
Too long, alas! no loyal Subject could
Hear them with patience, so blaspheme they would
God and their King; one would have thought t^^ dev^^
Had spoken in them, or some spirit evil.
The Sacraments that are the bonds of Peace
They would not give, lest unity should increase
Whereby men might agree in one, and bring
Him home, whom they had long preached down their Kin^
The Churches stones sometimes to weep were see^
Whilst in their presence these things preached h^^^ been
And I am sure so fretted was old Paul,
In the mean while, as he was like to fall;
And God himself being angry, his wrath burned
And has them now out of their Pulpits turned,
And O how justly! for as sure as Gun
Would them uphold, this commonly was done.
V.
Before you came our Nations were a Jail,
A headless Monster, with a Nose and Tail,
A hellish Bedlam without any light,
Oceana like, a senfless Babel right;
A second Chaos more difform by far
Than was the first, for now did meet and jar
The seeds of all Antipathies together,
And in a most unnatural War persever.
The wrangling Elements did struggle all
^ike scolds at Billinsgate in a fier^ brawl,
and we like Moles, did in the darkness live,
No Sun, or Stars to us the light did give:
and whilst we thus were mufled up with woe,
O dismal case! few knew that they were so
That sickness is most probable to kill
That does not let the Patient know He Is ill;)
^las! this sickness did the heart oppress,
^et in most danger still we feared the less:
Whilst our State-mountebanks gave hopes and said,
^^l's well no doubt, you need not be affray'd.
(...) the mean while, lo! they such Physic gave
(...) might prolonge the Cure, but would not save;
^^d then they did administer most strong
^^d violent purges, which wrought over long;
^^d when they saw these did not do that good
^hey did expect, they fell to letting blood
^n the Basilick vein, and let it run
^^till Death had their Patients seized on,
(...) times! O madness this was our sad case
^hilst the proud heels usurped the heads place.
V.
Sir before you came, our Laws (O horrid!) stood
Like Draco's ah! all turned into blood,
And our choice Rights were not disputed, but
Like to the Gourdian knot asunder cut,
Or else blown up with Gunpowder; and which
Is more; such cruelty did then bewitch
Our new fleg'd Tyrants, that they burdens lay
Too heavy on us, yet stormed when we prayed
For our deliverance; ready to give over,
If we cried out, then they would load us more;
And when our backs, and sinews all were stray^^
They would but jeer us and give out we feigned
VI
Nor were, these all the mischiefs, we endured,
And with which we a long time were enured:
During your absence, Sir alas! no soul
Can set them out they were so sad and foul.
Worse then the Plagues of Egypt they sent out
Strange Caterpillars, their own rabble rout,
Their Myrmidons, and Furies came to fear us;
Their Teazers, and their Bloodhounds cam^ (...) tear (...)
The Centaures, Nemesis, and Atropos,
Came rushing in with Aeacus, and Abros,
Minos and those (...) brother^, Rhadamanthus
Brought with them Proserpin and many others;
Sphynx, and the Satyrs with Medusa came,
The Minotaures and Gorgons did the same:
Even Cerberus himself was now let loose,
With the huge monstrous Giant bold Typheus,
And the damned bratts of Acheron and Nox.
Together with them brought Pandora's box,
And Aeta's daughter, men in show divine
With hellish Charms turned into monstrous swine:
Aello, Celaeno and Ocypete
Comin to help fill up the Tragedy
And that which added most unto our doom
Was that old Nic himself did also come!
This was our Case, and ten times worse, Great King,
Before you came; but now there is no such thing.
VIII.
But what must we be called all this while?
Forsooth a Commonwealth; a goodly style!
But certainly it was a common woe,
The Lord of Heaven knew it to be so:
Where Traitors even such as were of old
A Metempsuchosis did now unfold;
For Cain, and Judas with proud Catiline
Returned were in vizards most divine,
Cruel Procrustes with Tiberius Nero,
Busiris, Phalaris, and Biberius Mero:
Besides the Athenian tender hearted crew
Did Rumpishly our miseries renew.
Ah! such strange Monsters as now in our Isle
Reigned; never were seen in Africa, Inde, or Nile,
Where to the making up our English Saints
The Infidel, Turks, Jews, and Sycophants,
The subtle Fox, the Panther, and Hiena,
The Hydra, Crocodile, and Amphisbena,
The Mermaydes, Tygres, and the Scorpion
Did all most divelishly concur in one.
Religion these did look on as a babble,
And GODS own sacred word as a mere fable:
How many thousand souls were heretofore,
And ere the world does end how many more
(Yet still before their grand cheats, they would fast,
And pray and preach unto the very last.)
Will be betrayed by the great abuse
Of that word which is of most Sovereign use;
And though Religion have been made a bawd
To Pride, Ambition, Avarice, and Frawd,
A stirrup to get up to Kingly power,
A lather to ascend rich Craesus Tower,
And though that under neath its mask some have
Been naught, and vile, and often played the Knave.
Yet it is impossible for any one
To clime to Heaven without Religion.
Laverniones now regarded were,
But few did to Apollo honor bear,
For by Bellona Themis banished was,
Astraea, and Minerva in like case;
Mnemosyne of small account was deemed,
And all the nine as little were esteemed,
Witness thee Clio, and Melpomene,
Euterpe, Thalia, Calliope,
And thou Terpsichore, and Erato,
Polymnia, and bright Urania too;
Oxford and Cambridge also witness may
This for a need no more beloved then they;
And our Metropolis can likewise show
This truth, from whence much of our wos did flow,
Where some with rampant Liberty grew mad,
And Parl'aments without their Head as bad,
Where Cross, and Harp in the Rumps breaches joined
With God without them, you might ever find:
Where our Prorectors Rebels did protect,
But loyal Subjects kill, or else reject,
Where Councils (such of safety men did call)
Made it their common course us to enthrall:
Keepers of Liberty did help to enslave
Three Nations, and brought them to their grave;
If this a Commonwealth were, surely Hell
A Common wealth may styled be as well.
IX.
Ah in my absence we did God forsake
And had got near unto Avernus lake,
It Is thou have brought us back again, who fear
Shoul'd thou not stay, we should be as we were;
And that full soon, and altogether by
The ears; sure such would be our destiny!
Like damned Enceladus the Rump once more
Would vent its flames out as it did before;
And what is it John Lambert would no do
To drive his ends, though he to Hell might go?
Goblings and Elves, and Furies then would dance
And lead the female Quakers in a Trance,
And the new Lights would rise the old to Eclipse,
And she Fanatics roundly will-E-wipse.
Nay which is more then this? it is thought by some
(And so think I) Pluto again would come
And act his old scene over, and a worse too,
If Hugh, and He could possibly it do,
Together with their black Crew, for it is said
They have a mind to 't, and the plot is laid.
X.
Now enter Hugh, the bellows of our evil,
An instrument most fitting for the Devil,
Thou Tumbler, Lurcher, and Virtumnian spawne,
Thou Traytrous Mountebank, fit to be drawn
Hanged, and quartered, and thy limbs on high
Set up, Rebellious souls to terrify.
Amphibious Villain! I no words can find
Which can set out thy false, and double mind
Art Thou not Hugh that Hocus Pocus which
Racked Hell, and skim'd Don Dis thy self to enrich
That linsy woolsy sacred Dragoneer,
Who in sheeps clothing foremost did appear most High,
Against thy King, and first gave fire?
So doing did he not at thee let fly
His damned shot? yes surely that he did;
For thine Anointed in thy self was hid.)
Thou cruel wolf that washed thy impious paws
In Sovereign blood in spite of holy Laws,
Or of the Lord himself? who did command
That thou should honor, but him not withstan*
Art Thou not He! who would no College have?
Cause thence thou were expelled like a knave,
And the Towers Records greatly did desire
To see translated into flames of fire:
Withal advise that some would Paul's confound
(Even reverend Paul's) and raze it to the ground:
And then pave Thamesstrete with its (sacred) stones,
Which, since their wicked motion, have their groans
Sent up to Heaven, and brought down on thy head
Gods Vengeance, which will shortly strik thee dead.
O hellish Monster who have been most vile,
Murdering one Father, the other in exile
Laboring with all thy Power to send, even thine
Own Countries Father, gracious, and divine;
And likewise have been so extremely base,
As to throw dirt in thine own Mothers face,
And often to stumble at a straw, were seen,
But high. and mighty blocks leap over clean,
To strain much at a gnat, (O tender soul)
Yet easily devour a Camel whole:
Church Ceremonies thou could not endure,
And yet thou made it nothing to inure
Thy self to an offense dark and unclean
As Witchcraft; damned Rebellion I mean,
Rebellion, that foul, and filthy sin
Which thy black soul deeply was bathed in.)
Thou cry'dsi' against Bishops, why was allthy moan
They Antichristian were cause Thou wast none:
The Hierarchy most altogether down
In policy thence to supplant the Crown;
For there is no greater Truth in any thing,
Then this tried rule, no Bishop, and no King.
Art thou not He? who under the pretense
Of Piety, helped banish it, from hence:
And like a Player in the Pulpit showed
Thy canting tricks, ah, how most vile. and lewd!
Thundering out Providence a Prologue to
Some horrid act thou were about to do.
And wonderfully swallow down thy throat
Engagements, Oaths, and Cov'nants, and what not?
With as much ease as Iuglers do their Knives,
Or thou embracedst Zealous loveing wives,
Or some strange lightning which the blade does melt
Within the Sheath, whilst that no scorching felt.
Art thou not He? that did lead out o'th way
The fervent Sisters, both by night, and day,
Even when they came to hear thee pray, and preach
Thou did design them then, to over reach:
Oh! how lascivious was thy intent
Let Sinners judge of the long Parliament:
I hope they n'ere may hear you any more,
Nor the stout butcher beat you out o'th door.
Art thou not He? who with thy cunning pate
Emptyedst the weaker vessels of their Plate,
And when thou made most show to seek the Lord
Thou then most playd'st the Devil under board.
Thimbles, and Bodkinss Jewels, and the like,
Made them their Husbands with the scabbard strik;
Thou having drawn the sword: O mighty man.
Of war what flesh could once withstand Thee the*
In those thy Rampant days, when women rose
Betimes, resolved to be led by the Nose
By a a seducing Sophister, whose end
To lust, gain, and Rebellion did tend.
In these thy summum bonum thou did place
Grand Hypocrite, even when thy Text was Grace
Bible, as well as Alcoran might burn
Alike for Thee, when thou had served thy turn,
Thou Boanerges, Fire brand, Chaplain fell
Most fit for Nol, and for the Devil in Hell.
XI.
But stay how now, Nol, and the Devil here
I find conjoined, as they at Wor'ster were,
And know not well how I shall part them, so
For ought I see they must together go:
O may they never more return, least they
Should join with new lights, and renew the fray,
And like so many Jack with lanthornes blaze,
And madmen make and fools lead Lamberts maze,
Whereby a Monk may needful be once more
To fright away the Spirits as before,
And mystically set them such a spell,
As Heaven alone could his good meaning tell,
Georg the Great Arbiter of three whole Nations,
Over threw the Dragon to our admirations,
And many a woodcock took in his dark net,
Which he to the purpose for John Lambert set
Amongst many there; but O behold the event
Both strange, and true, Jack in a box was pent.
XII.
What oracle that ever was heard of vented
Such dextrous language as George complemented?
It Is well that He himself knew what it meant
Before the Posts, and chains did give it vent,
How strange a Card to the Rebellious Rump,
And its well wishers did He turn up Trump,
Who in a Northern mist white powder shot,
Which scattered all his foes, yet sounded not.
George on his horse, scarce seen, nor understood,
Did conjure our of evil what is good,
Good for the King. and Kingdoms, and for All
Who date their rising from grand Rebels fall.
XIII.
The Dragon being conquered, and his Tail
Pickled in souse: whilst Fools did it bewail,
George, and his Boys, O rare! the Rump did roast
By such a fire, as was unseen by most,
And unfelt too, till they the sauce did make
And the true Members did their Places take,
Who did assess what reckoning should be paid
By those who had so many souls betrayed.
XIIII.
And now John Lambert tell me what that trick
Avayled thee, thou served'st honest Dick?
In Him persuading timely to resign
His usurped place, that so it might be thine.
And Dick where art thou now, (old Noll his son)
Who Whilome had so many Healths begun
Unto thy Fathers Landlord? (if thou be
Esteemed, or not, it shall not trouble me:
I never was thy favorite, not his
Nor the Rumps lover, (hang him up that is.)
And what is become of all that perjured fry
That vowed to God with thee to live, and die?
They may one part keep of their vow, but when
They Will keep it all, we shall see wonders then.
Surely they with the New lights vanished be,
For I not any one of them can see;
I hope they never will come again to cause
Fools wander from their God, and from their Laws,
Nor Monk occasion when they go astray,
To bring them back into the Kings high way,
XV.
Now thanks to thee good Monk, to whom God gave
A large Commission, Nations to save,
And Liberty to wear wise Gyges ring
To the advantage of thy Self, and King,
With strength to vanquish that Chimaera which
Had joined with Mars three Nations to bewitch;
Thou like God Janus truly have divined,
Looking not only before thee, but behind;
And beyond Argus such watch still did keep
As that no Mercury could make thee sleep.
'Twas thou who stoutly (maugre all thy Foes)
With burning Tongs held'st Cromwell by the Nose,
And when as Atlas shoulders did incline,
Thou then all Britane did uphold with thine.
Monk! thou great Monk! whose worth a lone out spells
And weighs down all the Monks in Rooms proud Cells.
Pronounced I Monk? Why? then the man I named
Who by a word both Land, and Sea new framed.
Made the round world look square, out of night
Extracted Day, out of a Chaos Light:
I challeng all the Heathen Gods to one
To do the like as mighty Monk has done.
The Name alone of Monk conquer more
Then all the Guns in several years before,
No Canon sounded like the Name of Monk,
At whose report Lambert his homes in shrunk,
And the scared Rumpers fowly did bewray
Their sears, and so most sweetly run away.
And now I hope we may good times regaine,
For now (the LORD be praised) my CHARLES dot^ 'raigne
Well may he long do so, to his content,
And live our KING, our Laws, and PARLIAMENT
ANd now great JOVE my thanks aeccept I pray
For bringing me thus forward in my way.
Unto my KING, in sounding his renown
Whose Triumphs blessed Eternity will Crown,
Momus himself must needs, be stricken dumb
Now CHARLES, (next under GODS,) his Kingdoms com^
His Kingdoms come, and happy will be they
Who fear their GOD, and do their KING obey.
Amen.
Finished June 1660.

