DOMINVS ILLVMINATIO MEA blazon of Oxford University
Advertisements from the Delegates of Convocation for his Majesty's Reception
for the Heads of Houses to deliver with great charge unto their Companies.
1.THAT they Admonish all such as are under their Charge that they appear no
where abroad during the Kings abode in the University without their Capps and
Gowns suitable to their Degree and condition, and that their Hair and Apparel
be such as the Statutes prescribe.

2. That no Scholar of what Condition soever shall presume to go out to meet
the King, either on foot or on Horsback, or to be at, or upon the Way where the
King is to come, but shall attend in that place and posture wherein he shall be
required to be, upon notice from his Superiors.

3. That no Scholar come into the presence, or near any of the Kings Offices,
as his Kitchen, Buttery or any Places about the Court, especially about Meal
times.

4. That on Saturday in the afternoon at the ringing of St. Mary's great Bell,
all Persons Graduats and others (that do not ride out with Mr. Vice Chancellor)
forthwith repair to the Schools Quadrangle, thence to go in order to the
Street above Christ Church West Gate, there to stand in Rank one by one on
each side of the Street as far as Bocardo, the Noblemen and Doctors standing
next to the Gate, and so the rest according to their Quality and Degree, and
there to remain quietly till his Majesty and his Train be passed, and then
every man immediately to depart to his College or Hall.

5. That the same order be observed, mutatis mutandis, at what time his
Majesty shall be pleased to Visit the Library, all being required to meet in
order thereunto in Oriel College Quadrangle to receive directions from Mr.
Vice Chancellor and those that have Procuratorial Power, who shall place them
in convenient Stations from the Schools South-Gate to Christ Church Eastgate,
the Seniors still standing next the Schools. And as soon as his Majesty and
his Train shall have entered the Schools, every one is required to depart to
his own College or Hall, to be in readiness to attend upon his Majesty if he
shall be pleased to visit any of the Colleges.

If any shall offend against any of those Orders he shall (beside the ordinary
punishment of the statutes to be inflicted upon him) be entered also into the
Black-Booke, and so kept back from his Degree, and all Masters that are
entrusted with the Procuratorial Power, are required virtute juramenti to see
the Orders executed and punctually observed.

The names of the Masters of Arts that have a Procuratorial Power committed to
them during his Majesty's abode in the University.
Mr. Corbet ex Aede Christi Mr. Estwick ex Aede Christi Mr. Hunt e Coll. Magd.
Mr. Cradock e Coll. Magd. Mr. Elways e Coll. Novo Mr. Pember e Coll. Om. An.
Mr. Fellows e Coll. Merton Mr. Creed e C. C. C. Mr. Lowth e Coll. D. Joh. Bapt.
Mr. Fielden e Coll. Aen. N. Mr. Nailer e Coll. Universit. Mr. Geer e Coll. Exon
Mr. Tonstall e Coll. Reg. Mr. Lidgold e Coll. Trinit. Mr, Adams e Coll. Lincoln
Mr. D'oyly e Coll. Wadh. Mr. Lancaster e Coll. Baliol Mr. Win e Coll, Jesu
Mr. Couteur e Coll. Pembr. Mr. Randolph ex Aul.Magd. Mr. Codrington ex Aul. S.
Edm.
Gilb. Ironsyde Vice Chancellor.


