OF Communion with God The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Each Person
Distinctly; IN Love, Grace, and Consolation: OR THE SAINTS FELLOWSHIP With the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, UNFOLDED. By JOHN OWEN D. D. A Servant of JESUS
CHRIST in the Work of the Gospel.

God is Love. 1 John 4. 8. Tell me O thou whom my Soul Loves where thou
Feedest. Cant. 1. 7. Make have my Beloved, Cant. 8. 14. Grieve not the Holy
Spirit of God whereby ye are Sealed to the day of Redemption. Ephesians. 4. 30. Now
there are diversities of Gifts but the same spirit. And there are differences
of Administrations, but the same Lord, and there are diversities of operations
but it is the same God. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. OXFORD, Printed by A. LICHFIELD
Printer to the University, for THO: ROBINSON. Anno Dom. 1637.

Christian Reader,
IT is now six years past, since I was brought under an engagement of promise
for the publishing of some meditations on the subject which thou will find
handled in the ensuing Treatise. The Reasons of this delay, being not of
public concernment, I shall not need to mention. Those who have been in
expectation of this duty from me, have for the most part been so far
acquainted with my condition and employments, as to be able to satisfy
themselves, as to the deferring of their desires. That which I have to add at
present is only this; having had many opportunity's, since the time I first
delivered any thing in pulicke on this Subject, (which was the means of
bringing me under the engagements mentioned) to reassume the consideration of
what I had first fixed on, I have been enabled to give it that improvement, and
to make those additions to the main of the design and matter treated on, that
my first debt, it come at length to be only the occasion of what is now tendered
to the Saints of God. I shall speak nothing of the subject here handled; it may
I hope speak for it self, in that spiritual savor and relish which it will
yield to them, whose hearts are not so filled with other things, as to render
the sweet things of the Gospel bitter to them. The design of the whole
Treatise, thou will find Christian Reader, in the first Chapters of the first
part: and I shall not detain thee here with the perusal of any thing which in
its proper place will offer it self unto thee: know only, that the whole of it
has been recommended to the Grace of God in many supplications, for its
usefullnesse unto them that are interested in the Good things mentioned therein.

J. O.
Oxon. Chapter Chapter Coll. Jul. 10. 1657.
CHAP. I.
That the Saints have Communion with God. 1 John 1. 3. considered to that
purpose. Somewhat of the nature of communion in General.

IN the first Epistle of John chap. 1. v. 3. Fellowship of Believers is with
the Father and with his Son Jesus (...) etc.
Christ: and this he does with such an unusual kind of expression as bears the
force of an Asseveration, whence we have rendered it, Truly our fellowship etc.

The outward appearance and condition Fellowship with them, and a participation
of the precious things which they did enjoy, seems (...): 1 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13. Romans 8. 35, 36. Hebrews c. 10. v. 32, 33, 34. Christianos ad
leones. Et puto nos deus Apostolos novissimos elegit veluti bestiarios Tert. de
Pud. Act. 17. 18. Gal. 6. 12. Semper casuris similes, nunquamque cadentes.
to be exposed to many contrary Reasonings, and Objections: What benefit is
there in Communion with them? Is it any thing else but to be sharers in
Troubles, Reproaches, Scorns, and all manner of evils? To prevent, or remove
these and the like Exceptions, the Apostle gives them to whom he wrote to know,
(and that with some earnestness of expression) that not withstanding all the
disadvantages their Fellowship lay under, unto a carnal view, yet in Truth it
was and would be found to be, (in reference to some with whom they held it)
very honorable glorious and desirable: For truly (says he) our fellowship
is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.

This being so earnestly and directly asserted by the Apostle, That the Saints
of God have communion with him: And an holy and spiritual communion it is, as
shall be declared. How this is spoken distinctly, in Reference to the Father,
and the Son; must afterward be fully opened, and carried on.

By Nature, since the Entrance of sin, no man has any Communion Light, We
Darkness, and what communion has Light with Darkness? He is life, we are
dead. He 1 John 1. 5. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Ephesians. 5. 8. John 5. 16. Math. 22. 32.
Ephesians. 2. 1. 1 John 4. 8. Romans 8. 7.
is Love and we are enmity, and what Agreement can there be between us? Men in
such a condition, have neither Christ, nor Hope, nor God in the World Ephesians. 2.
12. being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them.
Chap. 4. 18. Now, two cannot walk together unless they be agreed. Amos. 3. 3.
Whilst there is this distance between God and Man, there is no walking together
Magna hominismiseria est com illo non esse, sine quo non potest esse. August.
Ecles. 7. 29. Jerem. 13. 23. Acts 4. 12. Is. 33. 14, 15.
for them in any fellowship, or Communion. Our first Interest in God, was so
lost by sin, as that there was left unto us (in our selves) no possibility of
a Recovery. As we had deprived our selves of all Power for a Returnall, so God
had not revealed any way of Access unto himself, or that he could under any
consideration be approached unto by sinners, in Peace. Not any work that God
had made, not any Attribute that he had revealed, could give the least light
into such a dispensation.

The manifestation of Grace and pardoning Mercy, which is in whom it is, by
John 1. 18. Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21.
whom that Grace and mercy was purchased, through whom it is dispensed, who
reveals it from the Bosom of the Father. Hence this communion and fellowship
with God is not in express terms Unus verusque Mediator per Sacrificium pacis
reconcilians nos Deo, unum cum illo manebat cui offerebat, unum in se secit,
pro quibus offerebat, unus Ipse fuit, qui offerebat and quod offerebat: August.
de Trinit. 4.
mentioned in the old Testament. The thing it self is found there; but the
clear light of it, and the boldness of Faith in it, is discovered in the
Gospel, and by the spirit administered therein. By that Spirit, we have this
Liberty: 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18. Abraham was the friend of God: Isa. 41. 8. David a
man after his own heart. Enoch walked with him Genesis 5. 24. All enjoying this
communion and fellowship for the substance of it: But the way into the Holiest
was not yet made manifest, whilst the first tabernacle was standing Heb. 9. 8.
Though they had communion with God, yet they had not (...), a boldness and
confidence in that communion. This follows the entrance of our High Priest into
the most holy place: Heb. 4. 16. chap. 10. 9. The veil also was upon them,
that they had not (...), freedom and liberty in their access to God, 2 Cor.
3. 15, 16. etc. But now in Christ, (...).
we have boldness and access with confidence, to God. Ephesians. 3. 12. This
boldness and access with confidence, the Saints of old were not acquainted
with. By Jesus Christ alone then on all considerations as to being, and full
manifestation, is this distance taken away; He has consecrated for us a new
and living way (the old being quite shut up) through the veil, that is to say
his flesh, Heb. 10. 20. and through him we have an access by one spirit unto
the 1 John 3. 1. (...). Arist. Eth. lib. 8. cap. 1.
Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. We who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ, for he is our peace etc. verse. 13, 14. Of this foundation of
all our communion with God, more afterward and at large. Upon this new bottom
and Foundation, by this new and living way, are sinners admitted unto Communion
with God, and have Fellowship with him. And truly for sinners to have
fellowship with God, the infinitely holy God, is an astonishing dispensation.
To speak a little of it in General; Communion relates to things and persons.
A joint participation in any thing whatever, Good or evil, duty or enjoyment,
nature or actions, gives this denomination Quemadmo dum nobis arrhabonem
spiritus reliquit, ita and a nobis arrhabonem carnis accepit and vexit in
Coelum, pignus totius summae illuc redigendae. Tertul. Resur.
to them so partaking of it. A common interest in the same nature gives all men
a fellowship or communion therein. Of the Elect it is said, (...) Heb. 2. 14.
those children pertook of, (or had fellowship in with the rest of the world)
flesh and blood; the same common nature with the rest of mankind; and therefore
Christ also came into the same fellowship: (...). There is also a communion as
to state and condition, whether it be Good or evil; and this either in things
internal and spiritual, such as is the communion of Saints among themselves;
or in respect of outward things; so was it with Christ and the two theives, as
to one condition, and to one of them in respect of another. They were (...),
under the same sentence to the Cross. Luke 32. 40. ejusdem deloris socii. They
had communion as to that evil condition whereunto they were adjuged. And one of
them requested, which he also obtained, a participation in that blessed
condition, whereupon our Savior was immediately to enter. There is also a
communion or fellowship in Actions, whether Good or Evil. In good is that
Communion and fellowship in the Gospel, or in the performance and Celebration
of that worship of God, which in the Gospel is instituted, which the Saints
do enjoy; Phil. 1. 5. which as to the General kind of it, David so rejoices
in. Psalm. 42. 4. In Evil was that, wherein Symeon and Levi were brethren. Gen
49. 5. They had communion in that cruel act of revenge and murder. Our
Communion with God is not comprised in any one of these kinds; of some of them
it is exclusive. It cannot be natural. It must be voluntary and by consent: It
cannot be of state and conditions, but in actions: It cannot be in the same
actions upon a third party, but in a return from one to another. (...).
Aristot. Eth. lib. 8. c. 7. Cicer. de not. D. lib. 1.
The infinite disparity that is between God and Man, made the Great Philosopher
conclude, that there could be no friendship between them. Some distance in the
persons holding friendship he could allow; nor could exactly determine the
bounds and extent thereof: but that between God and Man, in his apprehension
left no place for it. Another says indeed, that there is communitas homini cum
Deo, a certain fellowship between God and Man. But the General intercourse of
providence is all he apprehended: some arose to higher expressions, but they
understood nothing whereof they spoke. This knowledge is hid in Christ, as will
afterward be made to appear. It is too wonderful for nature, as sinful and
corrupted. Terror and Apprehensions of Death at the presence of God, is all
that it guides unto. But we have, as was said, a new foundation, and a new
discovery of this privilege.

Now communion is the mutual Communication of such good things, as wherein the
Persons holding that Communion are delighted, bottomed upon 6. (...). Arist.
Eth. 8.
some union between them. So it was with Jonathan and David. their souls clave
to one another 1 Samuel 20. 17. in Love. There was the Union of Love between
them; and then they really communicated all Issues of love mutually: In
spiritual things this is more eminent. Those who enjoy this Communion have the
most excellent Union, for the foundation of it; and the Issues of that Union
which they mutually communicate are the most precious and eminent.

Of the Union, which is the foundation of all that Communion we have with God,
I have spoken largely elsewhere, and have

Our Communion then with God, consists in his communication of himself unto
us, with our returnall unto him, of that which he Union which in Jesus Christ
we have with him: And it is twofold, 1. Perfect and complete, in the full
fruition of his Glory, and total giving up of our selves to him, resting in
him, as our utmost end, which Nostra quippe and ipsius conjunctio, nec miscet
personas, nec unit substantias, sed affectus consociat, and confaederat
voluntates, Cyp. de Can. Dominic.
we shall enjoy, when we see him as he is: and 2. Initiall and incomplete, in
the first fruits and dawnings of that perfection, which we have here in Grace,
which only I shall handle.

It is then, I say of that mutual communication in giving and receiving, God
and the Saints while they walk together in a Covenant Magna est etiam illa
communitas quae conficitur ex beneficiis ultrocitroque datis acceptisque Cice.
Off. 1^.
of peace, ratifyed in the blood of Jesus, wereof we are to treat. And this we
shall do, if God permit, in the mean time, Praying the God and Father of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has of the riches of his Grace, recovered
us from a state of enmity, into a condition of Communion and Fellowship with
himself, that both he that writes, and they that read the words of this mercy,
may have such a Taste of his sweetness and excellencies therein, as to be
stirred up to a farther longing after the fullness of his Salvation, and the
eternal fruition of him in Glory.

CHAP. II.
That the Saints have this Communion distinctly with the Father, Son, and
Spirit: 1 John 5. 7. opened to this purpose. Also 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 2.
18. Father and Son mentioned jointly in this communion. The Father solely:
the Son also and the Holy Ghost singly. The Saints respective regard in all
worship to each Person manifested. Faith in the Father: Ioh. 5. 9, 10. and love
toward him. 1 John 2. 15. Mal. 1. 6. So is prayer and Praise: It is so
likewise with the Son. Ioh. 14. 1. Of our Communion with the Holy Ghost. The
truth farther confirmed.

THat the Saints have Communion with God, and Ecce dico alium esse patrem, and
aliu^, filiu^, non divisione alilium sed distinctione: Tertul. adv. Prax.
(...). Greg. Naz.
what communion in general is, was declared in the first chapter. The manner
how this communion is carried on, and the matter wherein it does consist, comes
next under consideration. For the first, in respect of the distinct persons of
the Godhead, with whom they have this fellowship, it is either distinct and
peculiar, or else, obtained and exercised jointly and in common. That the
Saints have distinct communion with the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, (that is, distinctly with the Father, and distinctly with the Son,
and distinctly with the Holy Spirit) and in what, the the peculiar
Appropriation of this distinct communion unto the several persons, does
consist, must in the first place be made manifest.

1 John chapter 5. v. 7. The Apostle tells us, there are three that hear witness
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit. In Heaven they are, and bear
witness to us. And what is it that they bear witness unto? Unto the Sonship
of Christ, and the Salvation of that, both by Blood and Water, Justification
and Sanctification, is He there treating. Now how ^o they hear witness
hereunto? even as three, as three distinct witness. When God Witnesses
concerning our Salvation, surely it is in cumbent on us to receive his
Testimony: And as he bears witness, so are we to receive it. Now this is
done distinctly. The Father bears witness, the Son bears witness, and the
Holy Spirit bears witness; for they are three distinct Witnesses. So then
are we to receive their several Testimonies, and in doing so, we have
communion with them severally; for in this giving and receiving of Testimony,
consists no small part of our Fellowship with God; wherein their distinct
witnessing consists, will be afterward declared.

1 Cor: chapter 12. v. 4, 5, 6. The Apostle speaking of the distribution of Gifts
and Graces unto the Saints, ascribes them distinctly Fountain of their
communication unto (...).
the distinct persons. There are diversities of Gifts, but the same SPIRIT. The
one and selfsame Spirit that is the Holy Ghost v. 12. And there are
differences of Administrations, but the same LORD. the same Lord Jesus. v. 3.
And there are diversities of Operations, but it is the same GOD, etc. even the
Father, Ephesians. 4. 6. So Graces and Gifts are bestowed, and so are they received.

And not only in the Emanation of Grace from God, and the Elapses of the Spirit
on us, but also in all our Approaches, unto God, is the same distinction
observed: For through Christ, we have an Access by one spirit, unto the
Father. (...). Orig. Cont. Cells. lib. 5.
Ephesians. chap. 2. v. 18. Our Access unto God (whrein we have communion with
him) is (...), through Christ, (...) in the Spirit, and (...), unto the Father.
The persons being herein considered, as engaged distinctly into the
Accomplishment of the Council of the will of God, revealed in the Gospel.

Sometimes indeed there is express mention made only of the Father and the
Son, 1 John: chapter 1. v. 3: Our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son
Jesus Christ. The particle (and) is both distinguishing, and uniting. Also Joh:
chap. 14. v. 23. If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will
love him, and WE will come unto him, and make our abode with him. It is in
this communion, wherein Father and Son do make their abode with the soul.

Sometimes the Son only is spoken of as to this purpose. 1 God is faithful by
whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. And
Revel. chapter 3. v. 20. If any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come
in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me; of which place afterward.

Sometimes the Spirit alone is mentioned, 2 Cor. chapter 13. v. 14: The Grace of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost
be with you all. This distinct Communion then of the Saints with the Father,
Son, and Spirit, is very plain in the Scripture; but yet, it may admit of
farther Demonstration: Only this caution I must lay in before hand. Whatever is
affirmed in the pursuit of this truth, it is done with Relation to the
Explanation ensuing in the beginning of the next Chapter.

The way and means then on the part of the Saints, whereby Communion with God,
are all the Spiritual and holy actings, and outgoings of their souls in those
Graces, Hic tibi praecipue sit puramente colendus.
and by those ways, wherein both the Moral, and Instituted worship of God
does consist. Faith, Love, Trust, joy, etc. are the natural or Moral worship
of God, whereby those in whom they are, have Communion with him. Now these are
either immediately acted on God, and not tied to any ways or means outwardly
manifesting themselves, or else they are farther drawn forth, in solemn Prayer
and Praises, according unto that way which he has appointed. That the
Scripture does distinctly assign all these unto the Father, Son, and Spirit:
manifesting that the Saints do, in all of them, both as they are purely and
nakedly moral, and as farther clothed with instituted worship, respect each
Person respectively, is that, which to give light to the assertion in hand, I
shall farther declare by particular Instances.

1. For the Father: Faith, Love, Obedience, etc. are distinctly yielded by the
Saints unto him, and He is peculiarly manifested in those ways as acting
peculiarly toward them, which should draw them forth, and stir them up
thereunto. He gives Testimony unto, and bears witness of his Son: 1 John
chap. 5. v. 9. This is the witness of God which he has testified of his
Son. In his bearing witness he is an object of belief. When he gives
Testimony (which he does as the Father, because he does it of the Son) he is to
be received in itby Faith. And this is affirmed v. 10. He that believes on the
Son of God, has the witness in himself. To believe on the Son of God in
this place, is, to receive the Lord Christ as the Son, the Son given unto us,
for all the ends of the Father-Love, upon the Credit of the Fathers Isa. 9. 6.
1 Cor. 1. 30.
Testimony: and therefore therein is Faith immediately acted Mat. 5. 16, 45. 6
1, 4, 68. 7. 21. 12. 50. Luke 24. 49. Joh. 4. 23. 6. 45. 12. 26. 14. 6, 21, 23
15. 1. 16. 25, 27. 20. 17. Gal 1. 1, 3. Ephesians. 2. 18. 5. 20. 1 These. 1. 1. Jam.
1. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 17- 1 Jo. 2. 13. etc.
on the Father. So it it follows in the next words, He that believes not God
(that is, the Father, who bears witness to the Son) makes him a Liar: You
belive in God, (says our Savior) Joh. chap. 14. 1. that is, the Father, as
such; for he adds, believe also in me; or believe you in God, believe also in
me: God as the prima Veritas,, upon whose Authority is founded, and whereinto
all divine faith is ultimately resolved, is not to be considered (...) as
peculiarly expressive of any Person, but (...), comprehending the whole Deity,
which undividedly is the prime object thereof. But in this particular it is the
Testimony and Authority of the Father (as such) therein, of which we speak,
and whereupon faith is distinctly fixed on him: which if it werenot so, the
son could not add; believe also on me.

The like also is said of Love. 1 John chap. 2. v. 15. If any man love the
world, the Love of the Father is not in him. That is, the Love which we bear
to him, not that which we receive from Father is here placed, as the Object of
our Love, in Opposition to the World, which takes up our Affections (...); The
Father denotes the matter and object, not the efficient cause of the love
enquired after. And this Love of him as a Father, is that which he calls his
Honor, Mal. 1. 6.

Futher, These Graces as acted in prayer and Praises, and as clothed with
instituted worship, are peculiarly directed unto him. Pet. 1. 17. Ephesians. chapter 3.
v. 14, 15. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Eearth is named. Bowing the
knee, comprizeth the whole worship of God, both that which is moral, in the
universal obedience he requires, and those peculiar ways of carrying it on,
which are by him appointed. Isa. chapter 45. v. 23. Unto me (says the Lord) every
kneee shall bow, and every tongue shall swear. Which v. 24, 25. he declares
to consist in their acknowledging of him, for Righteousness, and strength.
Yea, is seems sometimes to comprehend the orderly subjection of the Rom 14,
10, 11 Phil. 2. 10.
whole Creation unto his sovereignty. In this place of the Apostle, it has a
far more restrained Acceptance, and is but a figurative expression of
Prayer, taken from the most expressive bodily posture to be used in that duty.
This he farther manifests, v. 16, 17. declaring at large what his Aim was, and
whereabouts, his thoughts were exercised in that bowing of his knees. The
workings then of the spirit of Grace in that Duty, are distinctly directed to
the Father as such, as the fountain of the Deity, and of all good things in
Christ; as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore the same Apostle
does in another place, expressly conjoyne, and yet as expressly distinguish the
Father and the Son in directing his supplications: 1 Thessalonians. 3. 11. God
himself even our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our way unto you.
The like president also have you of thansgiving; Ephesians. chap. 1. v: 3, 4.
Blessed be the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ etc: I shall not
add those very many places, wherein the Jerem. 10. 11. 17. 5, 6. Gal. 4. 8.
several Particulars that do concur unto that whole divine divine worship
(not to be communicated unto any, by nature not God with out Idolatry) wherein
the Saints do hold Communion with God, are distinctly directed to the Person of
the Father.

It is so also in Reference unto the Son: Joh: chap: 14. v: 1. You believe in
God (says Christ) believe also in me. Believe also, act Faith distinctly on
me; Faith Divine, supernatural, that Faith whereby you believe in God, that is
the Father. There is a believing of Christ, viz. that he is the Son of God,
the Savior of the world. This is that whose neglect our Savior so threatened
unto the Pharisees: John 8. 24. If you belive not that I am He, you shall dye
in your sins. In this sense Faith is not immediately fixed on the Son, being
only an owning of him, that is, the Christ to be the Son, by closing with the
Testimony of the Father concerning him. But there is also a Believing on him,
called believing on the name of the Son of God. 1 John chap. 5. v. 13. So also
John chap. 9. v. 36. yea the distinct affixing of Faith, affiance and
confidence on the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, as the Son of God; is most
frequently pressed. Joh. 3. 16. God (that is the Father) so loved the World
that whosoever believes on him (that is the Son) should not perish. The
Son, who is given of the Father is believed on. He that believes on him, is
not condemned v. 18. He that believes on the Son has eternal life; v. 36.
This is the work of God that ye believe on him, whom he has sent, Joh. 6. 29.
v. 40. 1 John 5. 10. The foundation of the whole is laid Joh. 5. 23. That all
men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; he that honors
not the Son, honors not the Father which sent him. But of this honor and
worship of the Son. I have treated at large elsewhere: and shall not in
general insist upon it again. For Love, I shall only add that Vin. Evan.
cap. 10.
solemn Apostolical benediction, Ephesians. chap. 6. v. 24. Grace be with all
them that Love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. That is with Divine Love,
the Love of Religious worship; which is the only incorrupt love of the Lord
Jesus.

Further! that Faith, Hope, and Love, acting themselves in all appointed
Worship, are peculiarly due Psalm. 2. 7. 12. Dan. 3. 25. Math. 3. 17. 17. 5. 22.
45. John 3. 36. 5. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 8. 6. 1 Cor. 1. 9. Gal. 1. 16.
4. 6. 1 John 2. 22. 23, 24. 5. 10 11, 12 Heb. 1. 6. Phil. 2. 10. John 5. 23.
from the Saints, and distinctly directed unto the Son, is abundantly
manifested from that solemn doxology Revel. chap. 1. v. 5, 6. Unto him that
loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings
and Priests unto God and his Father, to to him be Glory and dominion for ever,
and ever, Amen. Which yet is set forth with more Glory, chap. 5. v. 8. The
four living creatures, and the four and twenty Elders fell down before the
Lamb, having every one of them Harpes, and Golden Vials full of Odours, which
are the prayers of Saints. and v. 13, 14. Every creature which is in Heaven,
and on earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are
in them, heard I saying, Blessings, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto him that
sits on the throne, and unto the LAMB for ever and ever. The Father, and
the Son, He that sits upon the throne, and the Lamb, are held out jointly,
yet distinctly as the adequate object of all divine Worship and Honor, for
ever and ever. And therefore Stephen in his solemn dying Invocation, fixes
his Faith and Hope distinctly on him: Acts 7. 59, 60. Lord Jesus receive my
spirit, and Lord lay not this sin to their charge; for he knew, that the
Son of man had power to forgive sins also. And this worship of the Lord
Jesus, the Apostle makes the discriminating character of the Saints: 1 Cor.
chap. 1. v. 2. With all (says he) that in every place call upon the name of
Jesus Christ Isa. 56. 7. Romans 10. 12, 13, 14.
our Lord, both theirs and ours; that is, with all the Saints of God. And
Invocation generally comprizes the whole worship of God. This then is the due
of our Mediator, though as God, as the Son, not as Mediator.

Thus also is it in reference unto the Holy Spirit of Grace. The closing of the
great sin of unbelief, is still described as an resisting of that Holy
Spirit. And you Acts 7. 51.
have distinct mention of the Love of the Spirit Romans chap. 15. v. 13. The
Apostle also peculiarly directs his supplication to him, in that Solemn
benediction, 2 Cor. 13. 14. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of
God, and the Communion of the Holy Spirit be with you. All such benedictions
are originally supplications. He is likewise entitled unto all instituted
worship, from the Appointment of the Administration of Baptism in his name
Math. 28. 18. Of which things more afterward.

Now of the things which have been delivered, this is the Sum: There is no
grace whereby our souls go forth unto God, no Act of divine worship yielded
unto him, no duty or obedience performed, but they are distinctly directed unto
Father, Son, and Spirit: Now by these and such like ways as these, do we
hold Communion with God: and therefore we have that Communion distinctly, as
has been described.

This also may farther appear, if we consider how distinctly communication of
Tametsi omnia unus idemque Deus efficit, ut dicitur opera trinitatis ad extra
sunt indivisa, distinguuntur ramen personae discrimine in istis operibus: Math.
3. 16. Acts 3. 3. Genesis 19. 24. Genesis 1. 26. Math. 28. 19. 2 Cor 13. 13.
those good things, wherein the Saints have Communion with God. As all the
spiritual ascendings of their souls, are assigned unto them respectively, so
all their internal receivings of the Communications of God unto them, are held
out in such a distribution, as points at distinct Rises and Fountains, (though
not of being in themselves, yet) of dispensations unto us. Now this is declared
two ways.

1. When the same thing, is at the same time, ascribed jointly, distinctly to
all the Persons in the Deity, and respectively to each of them. So are Grace
and Peace, Revel: chap. 1. v. 4, 5. Grace be unto you and Peace from him which
is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven spirits which are
before his throne, and from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness etc. The
seven spirits before the Throne, are the Holy Spirit of God, considered as the
perfect fountain of every perfect Gift and dispensation. All are here joined
together, and yet all mentioned as distinguished in their Communication of
Grace and Peace, unto the Saints. Grace and Peace be unto you, from the Father,
and from etc,

2. When the same thing is attributed severally and singly unto each person.
There is indeed, no gracious Influence from above, no Elapse of Light, Life,
Love, or grace upon our hearts, one Instance, which is very comprehensive, and
may be thought to comprize all other particulars; and this is TEACHING. The
Teaching of God, is the real Communication of all and every particular
Emanation from himself unto the Saints, whereof they are made partakers. That
promise, they shall be all taught of God, enwrapps in it self the whole
Mystery of Grace, as to its actual dispensation unto us, so far as we may be
made real possessours of it. Now this is assigned,

1. Unto the FATHER. The Accomplishment of that Promise is peculiarly referred
to him. John chap. 6. v. 45. It is written in the Prophets, and they shall be
all taught of God. Every man therefore who has heard and learned of the
FATHER, comes unto me. This Teaching whereby we are translated from death unto
life, brought unto Christ, unto a participation of Life and Love in him, it is
of, and from the Father: him we hear, of him we Math. 11. 25. Joh. 1. 13. Jam.
1. 18.
learn, by him are we brought unto Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus.
This is his drawing us, his begetting us a new of his own Will, by his own
spirit. And in which work he imploys the Ministers of the Gospel; Acts, 26.
18.

2. Unto the SON. The Father proclaims him from Heaven to be the great Teacher
in that solemn charge to hear him, which came once again from the excellent
glory; This is my beloved Math. 3. 17. cap. 17. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 17. Deuteronomy. 18. 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, etc. Acts 3. 22. 23 Joh. 5. 25. Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. Luke 4,
18, 19
Son, hear him. The whole of his Prophetical, and no small part of his Kingly
Office consists in this Teaching; Herein is he said to draw men unto him, as
the Father is said to do in his Teaching; Ioh. 12. 32. which he does with such
efficacy that the dead hear his voice andlive. The Teaching of the Son, is a
Life-Giving, a spirit breathing Teaching: an effectual influence of Light,
whereby he shines into darkness; Communication of Life, quickening the dead; an
opening of blind eyes, and changing of hard hearts, a pouring out of the
Spirit, with all the fruits thereof. Hence he claims it as his privilege to
be the sole Master; Math. 23. v. 10: One is your Master which is Christ.

3. To the SPIRIT. John chap. 14. v. 26. The Comforter he shall teach you all
things; And the Anointing which you have received, (says the Apostle) abides
in you, and you need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing
teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has
taught you, yee-shall abide in him 1 John chap. 2. v. 27. That teaching Unction
which is not only true, but TRUTH it self, is only the holy Spirit of God: so
that he teaches also; being given unto us, that we may know the things that
are freely given to us of God: 1 Cor. 2. 15. I have chosen this special
Instance, because as I told you, it is comprehensive, and comprizes in it self
most of the particulars that might be annumerated: Quickening, preserving, etc.

This then farther drives on the Truth that lies under Demonstration; there
being such a distinct Communion of Grace from the several persons of the
Deity, the Saints must needs have distinct Communion with them.

It remains only to intimate in a word, Wherein this distinction Father does
it by the way of Original Authority; the Son by the way of Communicating from
a purchased Treasury; the Holy Spirit by the way of immediate Efficacy.

1. The Father Communicates all Grace by the way of Original Authority. He
Quickneth WHOM HE WILL. John chap. 5. 21. Of HIS OWN WILL, begat he us. Jam. 1.
18. Life-giving power is in respect of Original Authority invested in the
Father by the way of Eminency: and therefore in sending of the quickening
Spirit, Christ is said to do it from the Father, or the Father himself to do
it. But the Comforter, the Holy Spirit whom the Father will send John chap. 14.
v. 26. But when the Comforter is come whom I will send from the Father. John
15. v. 26, Though he be also said to send him himself, on another account Ioh.
16. 7.

2. The Son, by the way of making out a purchased Treasury. Of his Fulness
do we all receive and Grace for Grace. Ioh. chapter 1. v. 16. And whence is this
fulness? It pleased the Father that in him all Fulness should dwell: Col.
1. 19. And upon what account he has the dispensation of that fulness to him
committed, you may see Phil: 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. When thou shall make his soul an
Offering for sin, he shall prolong his days, and the Pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand, He shall see of the Travail of his soul and be
satisfied, by his knowledge shall my righteous Servant justifye many, for he
shall bear their Iniquityes. Isa. chap. 53. v. 10, 11. And with this fulness
he has also Authority for the Communication of it: John 5. 25, 26. Math. 28.
18.

3. The Spirit does it by the way of immediate Efficacy: Romans chap. 8. v. 11.
But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you: he
that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by
his spirit that dwells in you. Here are all three comprised, with their
distinct concurrence unto our Quickening. Here is the Fathers Authoritative
Quickening, he raised Christ from the dead and he shall Quicken you: and the
Son's Mediatory Quickening, for it is done in the death of Christ: and the
Spirits immediate Efficacy; he shall do it by the Spirit that dwells in you.
He that desires to see this whole matter farther explayned, may consult what I
have elsewhere written on this subject. And thus is the distinct Communion
whereof we treat, both proved and demonstrated.

CHAP. III.
Of the Peculiar and distinct Communion which the Saints have with the Father.
Observations for the clearing of the whole premised. Our peculiar Communion
with the Father is in Love: 1 John 4. 7, 8. 2 Cor. 13. 13. John 16, 26, 27.
Romans 5. 5. John 3. 16. John 14. 23. Titus 3. 4. opened to this purpose. What is
required of Believers, to hold communion with the Father in Love. His Love
received by Faith. Returns of Love to him. Gods Love to us, and ours to him
wherein they agree. Wherein they differ.

HAving proved that there is such a distinct Communion in Father, Son, and
Spirit, as whereof we speak; it remains that it be farther cleared up by an
Induction of Instances, to manifest what and wherein the Saints peculiarly hold
this Communion with the several Persons respectively: which also I shall do
after the premising some observations, necessary to be previously considered,
as was promised, for the clearing of what has been spoken. And they are these
that follow.

1. When I assign any thing as peculiar, wherein we distinctly Communion with
any person, I do not exclude the other Opera ad extra sunt indivisa.
persons from Communion with the soul in the very same thing. Only this I say,
principally, immediately and by the way of eminency, we have in such a thing,
or in such a way Communion with some one Person; and therein with the others,
secundarily and by the way of consequence on that foundation: For the Person,
as the Person of any one of them, is not the prime object of divine worship,
but as it is identifyed with the nature or Essence of God. Now the works that
outwardly are of God, (called Trinitatis ad extra) which are commonly said to
be common and undivided, are either wholly so, and in all respects; as all
works of Common Providence, or else being common in respect of their Acts,
they are distinguished in respect of that principle, or next and immediate rise
in the manner of operation; so Creation is appropriated to the Father,
Redemption to the Son; in which sense we speak of these things.

2. There is a concurence of the Actings and operations of Deity, in that
dispensation, wherein each person concurres (...): Greg. Nazian. iamb. Car. 3.

(...):

Idem: orat. 24.

See Thom. 22 q. 81. A. 3. q. 84. a. 1.

Alexan: Ales: sum Theol. p. 3. q. 30. m. 1. a. 3.


to the work of our Salvation, unto every Act of our Communion with each
singular person. Look by what act soever, we hold Communion with any Person,
there is an influence from every Person to the putting forth of that Act. As
suppose it to be the act of Faith. It is bestowed on us by the Father: It is
not of our selves, it is the gift of God: Ephesians. chap. 2. v. 8. It is the Father
that reveals the Gospel, and Christ therein: Math. chap. 11. v. 25. And it
is purchased for us by the Son: It is given unto you for Christ's sake to
believe on him; Phil: chap: 1. v: 29. In him are we blessed with Spiritual
blessings, Ephesians: chap. 1. v. 3. He bestows on us, and increases Faith in us,
Luke 17. 5. And it is wrought in us by the Spirit: He administers that
exceeding greatness of his power which he exercises toward them who believe,
according to the working of this mighty power; which he wrought in God when he
raised him up from the dead, Ephesians: 1. 19. 20. Rom: 8. 11.

3. When I assign any particularthing wherein we hold Communion with any
Person, I do not do it exclusively unto other Mediums of communion; but only
by the way of inducing a special, and eminent Instance, for the proof and
manifestation of the former General Assertion: Otherwise there is no Grace, or
duty wherein we have not Communion with God in the way described. In every
thing wherein we are made partakers of the divine nature, there is a
communication and receiving between God and us. So near are we unto him in
Christ.

4. By asserting this distinct Communion, which merely respects that order in
the dispensation of Grace, which God is Communion with God under these
precincts, (his ways being exceeding broad, containing a perfection whereof
there is no end) nor to prejudice that holy fellowship we have with the whole
Deity, in our walking before him in Covenant obedience, which also (God
assisting) I shall handle hereafter.

These few observations being premised, I come now to declare Father: And this
is LOVE. Free, undeserved, and eternal Love. This the Father peculiarly fixes
upon the Saints: this they are immediately to eye in him, to receive of him,
and to make such Returns thereof, as he is delighted withal. This is the
great discovery of the Gospel. For whereas the Father as the Fountain of the
Deity, is not known any other way but as full of wrath, anger, and indignation
against sin, nor can the Sons of men have any other thoughts of him Romans 1.
18. Esa. 33. 15, 16. Hab. 1. 13. Psalm. 5. 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 2. 3. Here he is now
revealed peculiarly as Love, as full of it unto us; the manifestation whereof
is the peculiar work of the Gospel, Tit. 3. 4.

1. 1 John chap. 4. v. 8. God is Love. That the name of Deuteronomy. 33. 3. Jerem. 31.
3. John 3. 16. 5. 42. 14. 21. Romans 5. 5. 8. 39. Ephesians. 2. 4. 1 John 2. 15. 4.
10, 11. Heb. 12. 6.
God is here taken personally, and for the person of the Father, not
Essentially, is evident from v. 9. where he is distinguished from his only
begotten Son whom he sends into the world. Now (says he) the Father is Love,
that is, not only of an infinitely gracious, tender, Compassionate and Loving
nature, according as he has proclaimed himself Exodus chap. 34. v. 6, 7. but
also one that eminently and peculiarly dispenses himself unto us in free
love. So the Apostle sets it forth in the following verses; this is Multo (...)
loquitur quem si Deum diceret summopere atque adeo infinite nos amare, cum Deum
dicit erga nos ipsam charitatem esse, cujus latissimum (...) professed. Beza in
loc.
love v. 9. this is that which I would have you take notice of in him, that he
makes out love unto you, in sending his only begotten Son into the world, that
we might live through him. So also, v. 10. He loved us, and sent his Son to be
the propitiation for our sins. And that this is peculiarly to be eyed in him,
the holy Ghost plainly declares, in making it Antecedent to the Sending of
Christ, and all mercyes and benefits whatever by him received. This love I say,
in its self is Antecedent to the purchase of Christ, although the whole fruit
thereof be made out alone thereby. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6.

2. So in that distribution made by the Apostle in his solemn parting
Benediction, 2 Cor. chap. 13. v. 13. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the
LOVE OF GOD, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you Ascribing sundry
things unto the distinct persons, it is Love that he peculiarly assigns to the
Father. And the Fellowship of the Spirit is mentioned, with the Grace of
Christ, and the Love of God, because it is by the Spirit alone that we have
fellowship with Christ in Grace, and with the Father in Love; although we have
also peculiar fellowship with him, as shall be declared.

3. John, chap. 16. v. 26, 27. says our Savior, I say not unto you, that I
will pray the Father for you, for the Quomodo igitur negat? negat secundum
quid: hoc est, negat se ideo rogaturum patrem, ut patrem illis conciliet, and
ad illos amandos flectat: quasi non sit suapte sponte erga illos propensus.
Voluit ergo Christus his verbis persuadere apostolis, non solum se sed etiam
ipsum patrem illos complecti amore maximo. Et ita patrem eos amare, ac promptum
habere animum illis gratificandi, and benefaciendi, ut nullius, neque ipsius
filii opus habet tali intercessione qua solent placari, and flecti homines non
admodum erga aliquem been affecti etc. Zanc. de trib. Elo. lib. 4. cap. 9. Vid.
Hilar de Trinit. lib. 6. p. 97. Ed. Eras.
Father himself loves you: but how is this, that our Savior says, I say not
that I will pray the Father for you, when he says plainly chap. 14. v. 16. I
will pray the Father for you? The Disciples with all the Gracious words,
comfortable and Faithful promises of their Master, with most Heavenly
discoveries of his Heart unto them, were even fully convinced of HIS dear and
tender Affections toward them; as also of his continued care and kindness,
that he would not forget them, when bodily he was gone from them; as he was now
upon his departure; but now all their thoughts are concerning the Father, how
they should be accepted with him, what respect he had toward them. Says our
Savior, take no care of that, nay impose not that upon me, of procuring the
Fathers love for you, but know, that this is his peculiar Respect toward you,
and which you are in him; He himself loves you: It is true indeed (and as I
told you,) that I will pray the Father to send you the Spirit, the Comforter,
and with him all the Gracious fruits of his Love; but yet in the point of love
it self, free love, Eternal Love, there is no need of any Intercession for
that, for eminently the Father himself loves you; resolve of that, that you
may hold Communion with him in it, and be no more troubled about it. Yea as
your great trouble is, about the Fathers love, so you can no way more trouble
or burden him, then by your unkindnesse in not believing of it. So it must
needs be where sincere Love is questioned.

4 The Apostle teaches the same Romans chap. 5. 5. The Love of God is shed abroad
in your hearts by the Holy Ghost, that is, given unto you. God whose Love this
is, is plainly distinguished from the Holy Ghost, who sheds abroad that Love
of his; And v. 8. he is also distinguished from the Son; for it is from that
Love of his, that the Son is sent; and therefore it is the Father of whom the
Apostle here specially speaks: and what is it that he ascribes to him? even
Love; which also v. 8. he commends to us, sets it forth in such a signal and
eminent expression, that we may take notice of it, and close with him in it. To
carry this business to its height; there is not only most frequent peculiar
mention made of the Love of God, where the Father is eminently intended, and of
the Love of the Father expressly, but he is also called the God of Love, 2
Cor. 13. 11. and is said to be love, so that whoever will know him, 1 John 4.
8. or dwell in him by fellowship or Communion, verse 16. must do it as he is
Love.

5. Nay whereas there is a twofold divine Love, Beneplaciti, Amicitiae, a Love
of good pleasure, and destination, and a Love of Friendship and Approbation,
they are both peculiarly assigned to the Father, in an Eminent manner.

1 John chap. 3. 16. God so loved the world that he sont etc. that is, with the
Love of his purpose, and good pleasure, his determinate will of doing Good.
This is distinctly ascribed to him, being laid down as the cause of sending his
Son. So Romans 9. 11, 12, Ephesians, 1. 4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14. 1 John 4. 8, 9.

2 John. chap. 14. v. 23. there is Diligi a patre, recipi in amicitiam^ summi
Dei; a Deo foveri, adeoque Deo esse in deliciis Bucerus. in loc
mention of that other kind of love where of we speak. If any man love me
(says Christ) he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and make our abode with him. The Love of Friendship and
Approbation, is here eminently ascribed to him; says Christ, we will come, even
Father and Son to such a one, and dwell with him, that is, by the Spirit; but
yet he would have us take notice, that in point of Love, the Father has a
peculiar prerogative: My Father will love him.

6. Yea, and as this love is peculiarly to be eyed in him, so it fountain of
all following gracious Dispensations. Christians walk often times with
exceedingly troubled hearts, concerning the thoughts of the Father toward Te
quod at tinet non sumus solliciti, -- illud mo do desideramus, ut patrem nobis
vel semel intueri concedatur: Cart wright Harin Joh. 14. 8
them: they are well persuaded of the Lord Christ, and his good will: the
difficulty lies, in what is their acceptance with the Father, what is his heart
toward them? Show us the Father and it shall suffice: John 14. 8. Now this
ought to be so far a way, that his Love ought to be looked on as the
Fountain from whence all other sweetnesses flow. Thus the Apostle sets it out,
Titus chap. 3. v. 4. After that the kindness and Love of God our Savior
toward man appeared. It is of the Father of whom he speaks; for v. 6. he tells
us, that he makes out unto us, or sheds that love upon us abundantly, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And this Love he makes the Hinge, upon which the
great Alteration, and Translation of the Saints does turn: for (says he) v.
3. We our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasurs, living in malice, and envy, hateful, and hating one
another. All naught, all out of Order, and Vile, Whence then is our Recovery?
The whole rise of it is from this Love of God, flowing out by the ways there
described. For when the kindness and love of God appeared, that is, in the
fruits of it, then did this alteration ensue. To secure us hereof, there is not
any thing that has a loving and tender nature in the world, and does act
suitably thereunto, which God has not compared himself unto. Separate all
weakness and impefection which is in them, yet great impressions of love must
abide. He is as a Father, a Mother, a Sheaphard, an Hen over Chickins, and the
like. Psalm. 103. 13. Isa. 63. 16. Math: 6. 6. Isa: 66. 13. Psalm: 23. 1. Isa.
40. 11. Math: 23. 37.

I shall not need to add any more proofs; This is that which is demonstrated.
There is love in the person of the Father peculiarly held out unto the Saints,
as wherein he will and does hold Communion with them.

Now to complete Communion with the Father in love, two

1. That they receive it of him. 2. That they make suitable returns unto him.
1. That they do receive it. Communion consists in giving and receiving.
Until the Love of the Father be received, we have no Communion with him
therein. How then is this Love of the Father; to be received, so as to hold
fellowship with him? I answer, by Faith. The receiving of it, is the believing
of it. God has so fully, so eminently revealed his Love, that it may be
received by Faith. You believe in God, John chap. 14. 1. that is, the Father;
and what is to be believed in him? His love; for, he is love 1 John 8. 8.

It is true, there is not an immediate acting of Faith upon the Father, but by
the Son. He is the Way the Truth and the Life, no man comes unto the Father
but by him: John chap. 14. v. 6. He is the merciful high Priest over the House
of God, by whom we have Ephesians. 2. 1^
Access to the throne of Grace: by him is our manuduction unto the Father. By
him we believe in God: 1 Pet. 1. 21. But this is that I say: When by, and
through Christ, we have an Access unto the Father, we then behold his Glory
also, and see his Love that he peculiarly bears unto us, and act faith
thereon. We are then (I say) to Eye it, to believe it, to receive it, as in
him; the Issues and fruits thereof, being made out unto us, through Christ
alone. Though there be no Light for us, but in the Beams, yet we may by the
Beams see the sun, which is the Fountain of it. Though all our Refreshment
actually lie in the streams, yet by them we are led up unto the fountain.
Jesus Christ, in respect of the love of the Father, is but the Beam, the
Stream, wherein though actually all our Light, our Refreshment lies, yet by
him we are lead to the Fountain, the Sun of Eternal Love it self. Would
Believers exercise themselves herein, they would find it a matter of no small
Spiritual improovement in their walking with God.

This is that which is aimed at. Many dark and disturbing thoughts are apt to
arise in this thing. Few can carry up their hearts and minds to this height by
faith, as to rest their souls in the Love of the Father; they live below it,
in the troublesome Region of hopes and fears, storms and clouds. All here is
serene and quiet. But how to attain to this pitch they know not. This is the
will of God, that He may always be eyed as Benign, Kind, Tender, Loving, and
unchangeable therein: and that peculiarly as the Father, as the great fountain
and spring of all gracious Communications, and fruits of Love. This is that
which Christ came to reveal: God as a Father, John 1. 18. That name which he
declares to those who are given him out of the world, John 17. 6. And this is
that which he effectually leads us to by himself, as he is the only way of
going to God, as a Father: John 14. 5, 6. that is, as Love: And by doing so,
gives us the rest which he promises: for the Love of the Father is the only
rest of the soul. It is true as was said, we do not this formally in the
first instant of Believing. We believe in God through Christ. 1 Pet. 1. 21.
Faith seeks out rest for the soul. This is presented to it by Christ, the
Mediator, as the only procuring cause. Here it abides not, but by Christ it
has an access to the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. into his Love, finds out that he
is Love, as having a design, a purpose of Love, a good pleasure toward us
from eternity; A delight, a complacency, a good will in Christ; all cause of
Anger, and Aversation being taken away. The soul being thus by Faith through
Christ, and by him brought into the bosom of God, into a comfortable
persuasion, and spiritual perception and sense of his love, there reposes and
rests it self. And this is the first thing the Saints do, in their Communion
with the Father, of the due improovement whereof, more afterward.

2. For that suitable return which is required, this also (in a Love. God
Loves, that he may be beloved. Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5, 6
When he comes to command the Return of his Received Love to complete
Communion with him, he says, My son, give me thy Heart, Prove. chap. 23. v. 26.
thy Affections, thy Amor supernedescendens ad divinam puleritudinem omnia
convocat Preclus lib: de Anima: and dam.
Love. Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind: Luke chap. 10. v. 27.
this is the return that he demands. When the Soul sees God in his
dispensation of Love, to be Love, to be infinitely lovely, and loving, rests
upon, and delights in him as such, then has it Communion with him in Love.
This is Love, that God Loves us first, and then we love him again. I shall not
now go forth into a description of divine Love; Generally, Love Unio
substantialis est causa amoris sui ipsius, similitudinis, est causa amoris
alterius; sed unio realis quam amans quaerit de re amata, est Effectus amoris.
Th. 12. q. 28. 1. 3.
is an Affection of union and nerenesse, with Complacency therein. So long as
the Father is looked on, under any other Apprehension, but only as acting love
upon the Soul, it breeds in the soul a dread and Aversation. Josh. 22 5. 23.
11. Nehem. 1. 5.
Hence the flying, and hiding of sinners in the Scriptures. But when he who is
the Father, is considered as a Father, acting Love on the Soul, this Psalm: 18.
1. 31. 23. 97. 10. 116. 1. 1 Cor: 2. 9. Jam: 1. 12. Isa: 56. 6. Math. 22. 37.
Romans 8. 28.
raises it to love again. This is in Faith, the ground of all acceptable
obedience, Deuteronomy. 5. 10. Exodus 20. 6. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. 11. 1. 13. 13. 3.

Thus is this whole business stated by the Apostle: Ephesians. 1. 4. according as
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy and without blame before him in love. It begins in the love of God: and
ends in our love to him. That is it which the Eternal Love of God, aims at in
us, and works us up unto. It is true; our universal obedience falls within
the Compass of our Communion with God: but that is with him as God, our
blessed Sovereign Lawgiver, and Rewarder; As he is the Father, our Father in
Christ, as revealed unto us to be Love, above and contrary to all the
Expectations of the natural man, so it is in love that we have this
intercourse with him. Nor do I intend only that love, which is as the life and
form of all moral obedience; but a peculiar delight and acquiescing in the
Father revealed effectually as love unto the soul.

That this Communion with the Father in Love may be made

1. Wherein this love of God unto us, and our love to Him do agree, as to some
manner of Analogy and liknesse. 2. Wherein they (...). etc. Arist: Eth: lib:
8. c* 7.
differ; which will further discover the nature of each of them.
1. They agree in two things. 1. That they are each a love of Rest and
Complacency.
1. The love of God is so. Zeph. chap. 3. v. 17. The Lord thy God in the
midst of thee is mighty: he will save, he will rejoice over thee with Joy, he
will REST in his love, he will joy over thee with Singing. Both these things
are here assigned unto God in his Love; Effectus amoris quando habetur amatum,
est delectatio. Thom: 12. q. 25. a 2. 1. Amor est complacentia amantis in
amato. Amor est motus cordis, delectantis se in aliquo. August.
REST and DELIGHT. The words are (...) he shall be silent because of his love.
To rest with contentment is expressed by being silent; that is without
repining, without complaint. This God does upon the account of his own love. so
full, so every way complete and absolute, that it will not allow him to
complain of any thing in them whom he loves, but is silent on the account
thereof. Or rest in his Love, that is, he will not remove it; he will not seek
farther for another Object. It shall make its abode upon the soul where it is
once fixed, for ever. And Complacency or Delight: he rejoices with singing, as
one that is fully satifyed in that Object he has fixed his Love on. Here are
two words used to express the delight and Joy that God has in his Love: (...)
and (...). The first denotes the inward Affection of the mind, joy of heart;
and to set out the intensenesse hereof, it is said, he shall do it (...) in
gladness, or with Joy; to have joy of heart in gladness is the highest
expression of delight in Love: the latter word denotes not the inward
affection, but the outward Externum magis gaudii Gestum, qua^ internam animi
laetitiam significat; cum velut tripudiis and volutationionibus Gaudere se quis
ostendit. Pagnin: (...); laetitia gestiit, animilaetitiam gestu corporis
expressit, exilivit gaudio. Calas.
demonstration of it: (...) seems to be formed of it. It is to exult in outward
demonstration of internal delight and joy Externum magis gaudii Gestum, qua^
internam animi laetitiam significat; cum velut tripudiis and volutation ionibus
Gaudere se quis ostendit. Pagnin: (...); laetitia gestiit, animilaetitiam gestu
corporis expressit, exilivit gaudio. Calas.
. Tripudiare; to leap as men overcom with some joyful surprisall. And
therefore God is said to do this (...), with a joyful sound, or singing: to
rejoice with gladness of heart, to exult with singing and praise argues the
greatest delight and complacency ppossible. When he would express the contrary
of this Love, he says (...), he was not well pleased. 1 Cor. chap. 10. v. 5. he
fixed not his Delight, nor Rest on them. And, if any man draw back, the Lords
soul has no pleasure in him: Heb. chap. 10. v. 38. Jerem. 22. 28. Hos. 8. 8.
Mark. 1. 10. He takes pleasure in those that abide with him. He sings to his
Church, a Vineyard of red wine. I the Lord do keep it, Isa. 27. 3. Psalm. 147.
11. 149. 4. There is Rest, and Complacency in his Love. There is in the Hebrew,
but a metathesis of a letter between the word that signifies a love of will and
desire ((...) is so to love) and that which denotes a love of rest and
acquiescency, (which is (...)) and both are applied to God. He wills good to
us, that he may rest in that will. Some say (...) to love, is from (...);
perfectly to acquiesse in the thing loved, And when God calls his Son, (...),
beloved; Math. 3. 17. he adds as an exposition of it, (...); in whom I rest
well pleased.

2. The Return that the Saints make unto him to Complete Communion with him
herein, holds some Analogy with his Love in this; for it is a Love also of
Fecistinos ad te domine and irrequietum est Cor nostrum donec veniat ad te. Aug.
Rest and Delight. Return to thy REST O my soul, says David, Psalm. 116. v. 7.
He makes God his Rest; that is, he in whom his soul does rest, without seeking
further, for a more suitable and desirable Object: Whom have I (says he) in
Heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee: Psalm.
73. v. 25. Psalm. 37. 7. Isa. 28. 12. Heb. 4. 9.
Thus the soul gathers in it self from all its wanderings, from all other
beloved's to rest in God alone, to satiate and content himself in Him,
choosing the Father for his present, and Eternal Rest. And this also with
Delight. Thy loving kindness (says the Psalmist) is better then life,
therefore will I praise thee Psalm. 63. 3. Then life, (...) before lives. I will
not deny, but life in a single consideration sometimes is so expressed: But
always emphatically; so that the whole life, with all the concernements of it,
which may render it considerable are thereby intended. Austin on this place
reading it Super vitas, quas vitas? Quas sibi homines eligunt: alius elegit
sibivitam negociandi, alius vitam rusticandi; alius vitam faenerandi, alius
vitam militandi, alius illam alius illam, Diversae sunt vitae sed melior est
misericordia tua super vitas nostras. Aug: Onarrat. in Psalm. 62.
Super vitas, extends it to the several courses of life that men engage
themselves in. Life in the whole continuance of it with all its advantages
whatever, is at least intended. Supposing himself in the jaws of death,
rolling into the Grave through innumerable troubles, yet he found more
sweetness in God, then in a long life, under its best and most noble
considerations, attended with all enjoyments that make it pleasant and
Comfortable. From both these, is that of the Church in Hosea chap. 14. v. 3.
Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any
more to the work of our Hands, ye are our Gods, for in thee the Fatherless
find mercy. They reject the most goodly appearances of Rest and Contentment, to
make up all in God, on whom they cast themselves as otherwise helpless Orphans.

2. The mutual Love of God and the Saints agree in way of communicating the
Issues and fruits of these Loves, is only in Christ. The Father Communicates no
Issue of his Love unto us but through Christ: and we make no Return of Love
unto him but through Christ: He is the Treasure wherein the Father disposes
all the Riches of his Grace taken from the bottomless Mine of his Eternal
Love; and he is the Priest, into whose hand we put all the Offerings, that we
return unto the Father. Thence he is first, and by way of eminency said to
love the Son: not only as his Eternal Son, as he was the delight of his
soul before the foundation of the World, Prove. 8. 30. but also as our
Mediator, and the means of conveying his love to us; Mat. 3. 17. John 3. 33.
John 5. 21. John 10. 17. John 15. 9. John 17. 24. And we are said through him
to believe in, and to have access to God.

1. The Father Loves us, and chooses us before the Foundation of the world;
but in the pursuit of that Love, he blesses us with all Spiritual blessings
in Heavenly places in Christ. Ephesians. chap. 1: v. 3, 4. From his love, he sheds,
or powers out the Holy Spirit richly upon us, through Jesus Christ our Savior,
Titus chap. 3. v. 6. In the pouring out of his love, there is not one drop
falls besides the Lord Christ. The holy anointing Oil, was all powered on the
head of Aaron: Psalm. 133. v. 2. and thence went down to the Skirts of his
clothing. Love is first powered out on Christ; and from him, it drops as the
dew of Hermon upon the Souls of his Saints. The Father will have him to have
the pre-eminence in all things, Col. 1. 18. it pleased him that in him, all
fulness should dwell, v. 19. that of his fulness we might receive, and
Grace for Grace. John 1. v. 16. Though the Love of the Fathers purpose and good
pleasure, have its rise and Foundation in his mere Grace and will, yet the
design of its accomplishment is only in Christ. All the fruits of it, are
first given to him; and it is in him only that they are dispensed to us. So
that though the Saints may, nay do see an infinite Ocean of Love unto them in
the Bosom of the Father, yet they are not to look for one drop from him, but
what comes through Christ. He is the only means of Communication. Love in the
Father, is like Honey in the Flower? it must be in the Comb, before it be for
our use. Christ must extract and pepare this Honey for us. He draws this water
from the Fountain, (through union and dispensation of fulness) we (by Faith)
from the wells of Salvation that are in him. This was in part before discovered.

2. Returns are all in him, and by him also. And well is it with us, that it
is so. What lame and blind Sacrifices, should we otherwise present unto God. He
Ex 28. 38. Revel 83 Joh. 14. 6. Heb. 10. 20, 21, 22.
bears the Iniquity of our Offerings, and he adds Incense unto our Prayers.
Our love is fixed on the Father, but it is conveyed to him, through the Son of
his Love. He is the only way for our Graces, as well as our Persons to go unto
God: through him passes all our desire, our delight, our Complacency, our
Obedience. Of which more afterward.

Now in these two things, there is some Resemblance, between that mutual Love
of the Father and the Saints, wherein they hold Communion.

2. There are sundry things wherein they differ.

1. The Love of God is a Love of Bounty, our Love unto him is a Love of Duty.

1. The Love of the Father is a Love of Bounty, a descending Love. Such a Love
as carries him out to do good things to us, great things for us. His love lys
at the Bottom of all dispensations toward us: and we scarce any where find
any mention of it, but it is held out as the cause and Fountain of some free
gift, flowing from it. John 3. 16. Romans 5. 8. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. 1 John 4. 9, 10.
Heb. 12. 6. Revel. 3. 19.
He loves us and sends his Son to dye for us; He loves us, and blesses us with
all spiritual blessings. Loving is choosing Romans 9. 11, 12. He loves us and
chastizeth us; (...). Eurip.
A Love Like that of the Heavens to the Earth, when being full of rain, they
power forth showers to make it fruitful; As the Sea communicates his waters to
the Rivers; by the way of Bounty, out of its own fulness: they return unto
it only what they receive from it. It is the love of a Spring, of a Fountain,
always Communicating. Amor Dei est infundens and creans bonitatem in amatis.
Th: p. p: q: 20. A: 2. C.
A love from whence proceeds every thing that is lovely in its object. It
infuseth into, and creates Goodness in the persons beloved; and this answers
the description of love given by the Philopher: To love says he, (...). He
that loves, works out good to them he loves, as he is able. Gods power and
will are commensurate. What he wills he works

2. Our Love unto God, is a Love of Duty: the Love of a descends upon us in
Bounty and Fruitfullnesse; Amor Dei causat bonitatem in rebus, sed Amor noster
causatur ab ea.
our love ascends unto him, in Duty and Thankfulness. He adds to us by his
Love, we nothing to him by ours. Our goodness extends not unto him. Though our
Love be fixed on him Dilectio quae est appetativae uirtutis actus, etiam in
statum viae tendit in Deum primo and immediate: Th. 22. q. 27. a. 4.
immediately, yet no fruit of our love reaches him immediately, though he
requires our Love, he is not benefited by it, Job. 35. 5, 6, 7, 8. Romans 11. 35.
Job. 22. 2, 3. It is indeed made up of these four things. 1. Rest, 2. Delight,
3. Reverence, 4. Obedience. By these do we hold Communion with the Father in
his love. Hence God calls that Love which is due to him as a Father, honor:
Malac. chap. 1. v. 6. If I be a Father, where is mine Honor? It is a deserved
act, of Duty.

2. They differ in this: The Love of the Father unto us is an Antecedent love,
Our Love unto him is a Consequent Love.

1. The love of the Father unto us is an Antecedent love, and that in two
Respects.

1. It is antecedent in Respect of our love: 1 John 4. 10. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us. His love goes before ours. The Father
loves the child, when the child knows not the Father; much less loves him.
Yea we are by nature (...), Romans 1. 30. haters of God: He is in his own nature
(...); a lover of men: and surely all mutual love between him and us, must
begin on his hand.

2. In respect of all other Causes of love whatever. It goes not only before
our Love, but also any thing in us, that is Ezekiel. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10. etc. Romans 9. 11, 12 Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6 Deuteronomy. 7, 6, 7, 8 Mat. 11. 25, 26.
Joh. 3, 16.
lovely. Romans 5. 8, God commends his love toward us, in that whilst we were
yet sinners Christ died for us: Not only his Love, but the eminent fruit
thereof, is made out toward us, as sinners. Sin holds out all of
unlovelinesse, and undesirablenesse, that can be in a Creature. The very
mention of that, removes all causes, all moving occasions of Love whatever. Yet
as such, have we the Commendation of the Fathers Love unto us, by a most
signal Testimony. Not only when we have done no good, but when we are in our
blood, does he love us. Not because we are better then others; but because
himself is infinitely good. His kindness appears when we are foolish and
disobedient. Hence he is said to love the world, that is, those who have
nothing but what is in, and of the world, whose whole, lies in evil.

2. Our love is consequentiall in both these regardes. 1. In Respect of the
Love of God. Never did Creature turn his Affectitious sufficient causes of
Love. God must be revealed unto us as lovely and desirable, as a fit and
suitable object unto the soul to set up its Rest upon, before we can bear any
love unto him. The Saints (in this sense) do not love God for nothing, but for
that Excellency, Loveliness, and desireablenesse that is in him. As the
Psalmist says in one particular, Psalm. 116. 19. I love the Lord BECAUSE! so may
we in general, we love the Lord BECAUSE! Or as David in another case, what
have I now done, is there not a cause? If any man enquire about our love to
God, we may say, what have we now done, is there not a cause?

3. They differ in this also. The Love of God is like himself, equal,
constant, not capable of Augmentation, or Diminution: Our love is like our
selves, unequal, increasing, waining, growing, declining. His like the Sun,
always the same in its light, though a cloud may sometimes interpose: Ours, as
the Moon, has its Enlargements and streightnings.

1. The Love of the Father is Equal etc. 1 Samuel 15. 29 Isa. 46. 70. Jerem. 37.
3. Mal. 1. 6. Jam. 1. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
whom he loves he loves unto the end, and he loves, them always alike. The
strength of Israel is not a man that he should repent. On whom he fixes his
love, it is immutable: it does not grow to Eternity, it is not diminished at
any time. It is an eternal love, that had no beginning; that shall have no
ending; that cannot be heightened by any act of ours, that cannot be lessened by
any thing in us; I say in it self it is thus, otherwise in a two fold regard it
may admit of chang.

1. In respect of its Fruits; It is (as I said) a fruitful love, a greater,
sometimes less: Its communications are various. Who among the Saints, finds it
not? What Life, what Light, what strength sometimes? and again how dead, how
dark, how weak, as God is pleased to let out, or to restrain the fruits of
his Love? All the Graces of the spirit in us, all sanctified enjoyments
whatever, are fruits of his love. How variously these are dispensed, how
differently at sundry seasons, to the same Persons, experience will abundantly
testify.

2. In respect of its discoveries and manifestations. He sheds abroad his Love
in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost: Rom: 5 v. 5. gives us a sense of it; manifests
it unto us. Now this is Psalm. 31 16. 67. 1. 119. 135. Psalm. 13. 1. 27. 9. 30.
7. 88 14. Isa. 8. 1^^.
various and changeable, sometimes more, sometimes less: Now he shines, anon
hides his face, as it may be for our profit. Our Father will not always chide,
lest we be cast down; he does not always smile, lest we be full and neglect
him: but yet still his Love in its self is the same. When for a little moment
he hides Isa. his face, yet he gathers us, with everlasting kindness.

Ob. But you will say, this comes nigh to that Blasphemy, God loves his People
in their sinning, as well as in their strictest obedience: and if so, who will
care to serve him more, or to walk with him unto wellpleasing.

Ans. There are few Truths of Christ, which from some, or other, have not
received like entertainment with this. Terms and Appellations are at the Will
of every imposer: things are not at all varied by them. The Love of God in it
self, is the eternal purpose and act of his Will. This is no more changeable,
then God himself. If it were, no flesh could be saved: but it Mal. 3. 6.
changes not, and we are not consumed. What then! loves he his people in their
sinning? Yes, his People, not their sinning. Alters Psalm. 39. 11. Heb. 12. 7,
8. Revel. 3. 19. Isa. 8. 17. Isa: 57. 17. Joh. 6. 3. Psalm. 6. 6: Psalm. 38. 3,
4, 5, etc.
he not his Love toward them? Not the purpose of his will, but the
dispensations of his Grace. He rebukes them, he chastens them, he hides his
face from them, he smites them, he fills them with a sense of indignation; but
woe, woe would it be to us, should he change in his love, or take away his
kindness from us: Those very things which seem to be demonstrations of the
change of his Affections toward his, do at clearly proceed from Love, as those
which seem to be the most genuine Issues thereof. But will not this encourage
to sin? He never tasted of the Love of God, that can seriously make this
objection. The doctrine of Grace may be turned into wantonness, the Principle
cannot: I shall not wrong the Saints, by giving other answer to this objection.
Detestation of sin in any may well consist, with the Acceptance of their
persons, and their designation to life eternal.

But now, our Love to God, is ebbing and flowing, waining and. 28. g Revel. 2.
5, and 3 2. Ephesians. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19.
increasing. We lose our first Love, and we grow again in Love. Scarce a day at
a stand. What poor creatures are we? how unlike the Lord and his Love?
unstable as Water, we cannot excel: now it is! though all men for sake thee, I
will not: anon, I know not the man. One day, I shall never be moved, my hill is
so strong; the next, all men are liars, I shall perish. When ever was the time,
where ever was the place, that our love was one day equal toward God?

And thus these Agreements, and discrepancies, do farther describe that
Mutual Love of the Father, and the Saints, wherein they hold Communion. Other
Instances as to the Person of the Father I shall not give, but endeavor to
make some improvement of this, in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Inferences on the Former Doctrine concerning Communion with the
Father in Love.
HAving thus discovered the nature of that Distinct Communion Father, it
remains that we give some Exhortations unto it, directions in it, and take
some Observations from it.

1. First them, this is a Duty wherein it is most evident that Christians are
but little exercised, namely in holding immediate Father in Love.
Unacquaintednesse with our Mercys, our Privileges, is our sin, as well as
our Trouble. We hearken not to the voice of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 12.
which is given unto us, that we may know the things, that are freely bestowed
on us of God. This makes us go heavily, when we might rejoice; and to be
weak, where we might be strong in the Lord. How few of the Saints are
experimentally acquainted with this privilege, of holding immediate communion
with the Father in Love? with what anxious doubtful thoughts, do they look
upon him? what fears, what questionings are there, of his good will and
kindness? At the best, many think there is no sweetness at all in him toward
us, but what is purchased at the high price of the blood of Jesus: It is true,
that alone is the way of Communication: but the free Fountain and Spring of
all, is in the bosom of the Father, (...) 1 John 1. 2.
Eternal life was with the Father, and is manifested unto us; Let us then,

1. Eye the Father as love; Look not on him as an always lowering Father, but as
one most 3. Psalm. 103. 9. Mic. 7. 18.
kind, and tender. Let us look on him by faith, as one that has had thoughts
of kindness toward us from everlasting. It is misapprehension of God, that
makes any run from him, who have the least breathing wrought in them after
him. They that know thee will put their trust in thee. Men cannot abide with
God in spiritual Meditations. He loses Souls Company by their want of this
insight into his Love. They fix their thoughts only on his terrible Majesty,
severity and Greatness, and so their Spirits are not endeared. Would a soul
continually Eye his everlasting tenderness and compassion, his thoughts of
kindness that have been from of old, his present gracious Acceptance, it could
not bear an hours absence from him; whereas now perhaps, it cannot watch with
him one hour. Let then this be the Saints first notion of the Father, as one
full of eternal free Love toward them: Let their hearts and thoughts be
filled with breaking through all discouragements that lie in the way. To raise
them hereunto, let them Consider

1. Whose love it is? It is the Love of him who is in himself Alsufficient,
infinitely satiated with himself and his own Glorious forth with his love unto
others, nor to seek an Object of it without himself. There might He rest with
delight and Complacency to Eternity. He is sufficient unto his own love. He had
his Son also, (...) optime in Dei filium quadrat patris delicias. Mercer in
loc.
his Eternal* Wisdom to rejoice and delight himself in from all Eternity:
Prove. 8. 30. This might take up and satiate the whole delight of the Father:
But he will love his Saints also. And it is such a love, as wherein he seeks
not his own Satisfaction only, but our good therein also. The love of a God,
the love of a Father, whose proper outgoings are kindness and Bounty.

2. What kind of Love it is? and it is,

1. Eternal. It was fixed on us before the Romans 9. 11, 12. Acts 15. 18. 2 Timothy
1. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Prove. 8. 31. Jerem. 31. 3.
Foundation of the World: before we were, or had done the least good; then were
his thoughts upon us, then was his delight in us. Then did the Son rejoice in
the thoughts of fullfilling his Fathers delight in him: Prove. 8. 30. Yea the
Delight of the Father in the Son there mentioned, is not so much his absolute
delight in him, as the express image of his Person, and the brightness of his
Glory, wherein he might behold all his own Excellencys and perfections; but
with respect, unto his love, and his delight in the Sons of men. So the order
of the words require us to understand it: I was daily his Delight -- and My
delights were with the Sons of Men. That is, in the thoughts of kindness and
Redemption for them: and in that respect also, was he his Fathers delight. It
was from Eternity that he laid in his own bosom a design or our happiness.
The very thoughts of this, is enough to make all that is within us, like the
babe in the womb of Elizabeth, to leap for joy. A sense of it cannot but
prostrate our souls to the lowest abasement of an humble holy Reverence, and
make us rejoice before him with trembling.

2. Free. He Mat. 11. 25, 26. Hoc tanto and tam ineffabili bono, nemo inventus
est dignus* sordet natura sine gratia. Pros. de lib. Arb. ad Ruff.
Loves us because, he will; there was, there is nothing in us, for which we
should be beloved. Did we deserve his Love, it must go less in its valuation.
Things of due debt, are seldom the matter of thankfulness: but that which is
Eternally antecedent to our being, must needs be absolutely free in its
respects to our well being. This gives it life and being, is the Reason of it,
and sets a price upon it. Romans 9. 12. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. Titus 3. 5. Jam. 1. 18.

3. Mal. 3. 6. Iam: 1. 17. Hos: 11. 9.
Unchangeable. Though we change every day, yet his changes not. Could any kind
of provocation turn it a way, it had long since ceased. Its unchangeablenesse
is that which carries out the Father, unto that infiniteness of patience and
Forbearance (without which we dye, we perish 2 Pet. 3. 9.) which he exercises
toward us. And it is,

4. Romans 9. 12. Omnia diligit Deus, quae fecit and inter ea magis diligit
creaturas rationales and de illis eas amplius quae sunt membra unigeniti sui.
Et multo magis ipsum unigenitum: August.
Distinguishing. He has not thus loved all the word. Jacob have I loved, but I
hated Esau; why should he fix his love on us, and pass by millions from whom
we differ not by Ephesians: 2. 3.
Nature: that he should make us sharers in that, and all the fruits of it which
most of the great, and Math: 11. 26, 27. 1 Cor: 1. 20.
wisemen of the world are excluded from: I name but the heads of things. Let
them enlarge, whose hearts are touched.

Let I say the soul frequently Eye the Love of the Father, and that under
these Considerations: they are all soule-conquering and endearing.

2 So Eye it, as to receive it; unless this be added, all is in vain as to
any Communion with God. We do not hold Communion received by faith. This then
is that which I would provoke the Saints of God unto, even to 1 John: 4. 16.
believe this Love of God for themselves, and their own part; believe that such
is the Heart of the Father toward them, accept of his witness herein. His
Love is not ours in the sweetness of it, until it be so received. Continually
then act thoughts of faith on God, as Love to thee, as embracing thee with the
Eternal free Love before described. When the Lord is by his word, presented as
such unto thee, let thy mind know it, and assent that it is so; and thy will
embrace it, in its being so; and all thy Affections be filled with it. Set thy
whole heart to it. Let it be bound with the cords of this Love. Cant. 7. 5.
If the King be bound in the galleries with thy Love, should thou not be
bound in heaven with his?

3. Let it have its proper fruit and Efficacy upon thy heart, in returns of
Love to him again. So shall we walk in the Light of holy Communion with our
Father all the day long. Let us not deal unkindly with him, and return him
sleighting for his good will. Let there not be such an Heart in us, as to deal
so unthankfully with our God.

Now to further us in this duty and the daily constant practice of it, I shall
add one or two considerations that may be of importance thereunto. as,

1. It is exceeding acceptable unto God even our Father, that we should thus
hold Communion with him in his Love; that he full of Love, tenderness and
kindness toward us. Flesh and Blood is apt to have very hard thoughts of him;
to think he is always angry, yea implacable: that it is not for poor
creatures to draw nigh to him: that nothing in the World is more desirable
then never to come into his presence, or (as they say) where he has any thing
to do. Isa. 33. 15, 16.
Who amongst us shall dwell with that devouring fire, who amongst us shall
inhabit with those everlasting burnings? say the sinners in Sion: and Luke 19.
12.
I knew thou wast an austere man, says the evil Servant in the Gospel. Now
there is not any thing more grievous to the Lord, nor more subservient to the
design of Satan upon the Soul, then such thoughts as these. Satan claps his
hands (if I may so say) when he can take up the Soul with such thoughts of
God: he has enough, all that he does desire. This has been his design, and
way from the beginning. The Genesis 3. 21.
first blood, that Murderer shed, was by this means. He leads our first
Parents into hard thoughts of God. has God said so? has he threatened you with
death? he knows well enough, it will be better with you: with this Engine did
he batter, and overthrow all mankind in (...) Romans 5. 12.
one: and being mindful of his ancient conquest, he readily uses the same
weapons wherewith then, he so succesfully contended. Now it is exceeding
Grievous to the Spirit of God, to be so slandered in the hearts of those whom
he dearly loves. How does he expostulate this with Syon? What iniquity g Jer.
3, 5, 31.
have you seen in me? says he, have I been a Wilderness unto you, or a Land
of darkness? Isa. 40. 27, 28, 29. Isa: 49. 15, 16
Syon has said the Lord has forgotten me, and my God has forsaken me? but
can a mother etc. The Lord takes nothing worse at the hands of his, then such
hard thoughts of him, knowing full well what fruit this bitter Root is like to
bear: what Alienation of Heart, what drawings back, what unbelief, and
Tergiversations in our walking with him? How unwilling is a Child to come into
the presence of an angry Father? Consider then this in the first place:
Receiving of the Father as he holds out, Love to the soul, gives him the
Honor he aims at, and is exceeding acceptable unto him. He often sets it out
in an eminent manner that it may be so received. He commends his Love unto
us: Rom: 5. 8. Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed on us? Joh.
chapter 3. v. 1. Whence then is this folly? men are afraid to have good thoughts of
God. They think it a boldness to Eye God, as good, gracious, tender, kind,
loving: I speak of Saints; but for the other side, they can judge him hard,
austere, severe, almost implacable, and fierce, (the very worst Affections, of
the very worst of men, and most hated of him, Romans ch: 1. v. 31. 2 Timothy: 3. 3.)
and think herein they do well. Is not this Soule-deceit from Satan? was it
not his design from the beginning to inject such thoughts of God? Assure thy
self then, there is nothing more acceptable unto the Father, then for us to
keep up our hearts unto him, as the eternal fountain of all that rich Grace,
which flows out to sinners in the blood of Jesus. and,

2. This will be exceeding effectual to endeare thy soul unto God, to cause
thee to delight in him, and to make thy abode with him. Many Saints have no
greater burden in their Lives, then that their Hearts do not come clearly and
fully up, constantly to delight and rejoice in God: that there is still an
indisposednesse of Spirit unto close walking with him. What is at the bottom
of this distemper? Is it not their unskilfulnesse in, or neglect of this Duty,
even of holding Communion with the Father in Love? So much as we see of the
Love of God, so much shall we delight in him, and no more. Every other
discovery of God without this, will but make the Soul fly from him. But if the
heart be once much taken up with this, the Eminency of the Fathers Love, it
cannot choose but be overpowred, conquered and endeared unto him. This, if any
thing, will work upon us, to make our abode with him. If the Love of a Father
will not make a child delight in him, what will? put then this to the venture;
exercise your thoughts upon this very thing, the Eternal, Free, and Fruitful
Love of the Father, and see if your Hearts be not wrought upon to delight in
him. I dare boldly say, believers will find it as thriving a course, as ever
they pitched on in their lives. Sit down a little at the Fountain, and you
will quickly have a farther discovery of the sweetness of the streams. You
who have run from him, will not be able after a while, to keep at a distance
for a moment.

Ob. But some may say! Alas how shall I hold communion with the Father in
Love? I know not at all whether be Loves me or no; and shall I venture to cast
my self upon it? How if I should not be accepted? should I not rather perish
for my presumption, then find sweetness in his Bosom? God seems to me, only
as a consuming fire, and everlasting burnings, so that I dread to look up unto
him.

Ans. I know not what may be understood by knowing of the Love of God: though
it be carried on by Spiritual sense, and Experience, yet it is received purely
by believing. Our knowing of it, is our believing of it, as revealed. We have
known and believed the Love that God has to us, God is Love, 1 John chapter 4. v.
16. This is the Assurance which at the very Entrance of walking with God thou
may have of this Love, He who is Truth has said it: and whatever thy Heart
says, or Satan says, unless thou will take it up on this account, thou
do thy endeavor to make him a liar, who has spoken it. 1 John 5. 10.

Ob. 2. I can believe that God is Love to others, for he has said he is Love:
but that he will be so to me, I see no ground of persuasion: there is no cause,
no Reason in the world, why he should turn one thought of love or kindness
toward me: and therefore I dare not cast my self upon it, to hold communion
with him in his special love.

Ans. He has spoken it as particularly to thee, as to any one in the world.
And for cause of love, he has as much, to fix it on thee, as on any of the
Children of men; that is none at all without himself. So that I shall make
speedy work with this objection. Never any one from the foundation of the
World, who believed such Love in the Father, and made returns of Love to him
again, was deceived, neither shall ever any to the Worlds end be so, in so
doing. Thou art then in this upon a most sure bottom: If thou believe and
receivest the Father as Love, he will infallibly be so to thee, though others
may fall under his severity. but,

Ob: 3. I cannot find my heart making Returns of Love unto God. Could I find
my Soul set upon him, I could then believe his Soul delighted in me.

Answ. This is the most preposterous course, that possibly thy thoughts can
pitch upon, a most ready way to rob God of his glory. Herein is Love (says the
Holy Ghost) not that we loved God, but that he loved us first. 1 John 4. 10,
19. Now, thou would invert this Order, and say, herein is Love, not that God
loved me, but that I love him first. This is to take the Glory of God from him:
that whereas he loves us without a cause, that is in our selves, and we have
all cause in the World to love him, thou would have the contrary, viz, that
something should be in thee, for which God should love thee, even thy love to
him; and that thou should love God, before thou know any thing lovely in
him, viz. whether he love thee or no. This is a course of fleshes finding out,
that will never bring Glory to God, nor peace to thy own Soul. Lay down then
thy Reasonings; take up the Love of the Father upon a pure Act of believing,
and that will open thy Soul to let it out unto the Lord in the Communion of
Love.

To make yet some farther improvement of this Truth, so opened, and exhorted
unto as before; it will discover unto us, the Eminency and Privilege of the
Saints of God. What low thoughts soever the Sons of men may have of them, it
will appear that they have meat to eat that the World knowesnot of: they have
close communion and fellowship with the Father, They deal with him in the
enterchange of love. Men are generally esteemed according to the company they
keep. It is an Honor to stand in the presence of Princes, though but as
Servants. What Honor then have all the Saints, to stand with boldness in the
presence of the Father, and there to enjoy his Bosom love. What a blessing did
the Queen of Sheba pronounce on the Servants of Solomon, who stood before him,
and heard his Wisdom. How much more blessed then are they, who stand
continually before the God of Solomon, hearing his Wisdom, enjoying his love?
Whilst others have their fellowship with Satan, and their own Lusts, making
provision for them, and receiving perishing refreshments from them, (whose end
is destruction, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory is in their shame,
who mind earthly things;) they have this sweet Communion with the Father.

Moreover; what a safe and sweet retreat is here for the Saints, Scorns,
Reproaches, Scandalls, misrepresentations which they undergo in the World.
When Isa. 26. 20.
a Child is abused abroad in the streets by strangers, he runns with speed to
the bosom of his Father; there he makes his complaint, and is comforted. In
all the hard (...). Heb. 11. 36. (...). Heb. 10. 33.
censures, and tongue-persecutions which the Saints meet withal in the streets
of the World, they may run with their moanings unto their Father, and be
comforted. As one whom his Mother comfort, so will I comfort you, (says the
Lord) Isa: 66. v. 13. So that the Soul may say, if I have hatred in the World,
I will go where I am sure of Love: though all others are hard to me, yet my
Father is tender, and full of compassion: I will go to him, and satisfy my
self in him: Here I am accounted vile, frowned on, and rejected, but I have
honor and Love with him, whose kindness is better then Life it self. There I
shall have all things in the Fountain, which others have but in the dropps:
there is in my Fathers Love, every thing desirable: there is the sweetness of
all mercies in the abstract it self, and that fully, and durably.

Evidently then, the Saints are the most mistaken men in the Joh. 1. 3.
come and have Fellowship with us; are not men ready to say; why, what are you?
a sorry company of Act: 17. 6. 28. 22.
Seditious Factious Persons: be it known unto you, that we despise your
Fellowship; when we intend to leave Fellowship with all honest men, and men of
worth, then will we come to you. But alas! how are men mistaken? truly,
their Fellowship is with the Father: let men think of it as they please, they
have close, spiritual, Heavenly Refreshings in the mutual Communication of
Love with the Father himself; How they are generally misconceived, the Apostle
declares 2 Cor. chap. 6. v. 8, 9, 10. As deceivers, and yet true, as unknown,
yet well known, as dying and behold we live, as chastened, and not killed, as
sorrowful, yet always rejoysing, as poor yet making many rich, as having
nothing, yet possessing all things: And as it is thus in General, so in no one
thing more then this, that they are looked on as poor, low, despicable
persons, when indeed they are the only great and noble Personages in the world.
Consider the Company they keep, it is with the Father, who so glorious? the
Merchandise they trade in, it is Love, what so precious? doubtless they are
the excellent on the Earth. Psalm. 16. v. 3.

Further; this will discover a maine difference between Saints and empty
Professors. as to the Performance of Duties, and so the Enjoyment of outward
Privileges, fruitless Professors, often walk hand in hand with them: but now
come to their secret retirements, and what a difference is there? there the
Saints hold Communion with God; Hypocryts for the most part, with the world and
their own Lusts, with them they converse, and Communicate: they hearken what
they will say to them, and make provision for them: when the Saints are sweetly
wrapped up in the Bosom of their Fathers Love. It is oftentimes even almost
impossible that Believers should in outward appearance go beyond them who have
very rotten hearts: but this meat they have which others know not of? this
Refreshment in the Banqueting house wherein others have noe share; in the
multitude of their thoughts, the Comforts of God their Father refresh their
Souls.

Now then (to draw toward a close of this Discourse) if manner of holy
conversation? even our God is a consuming fire. What Communion is there between
Light and Darkness? Shall sin and lust dwell in those thoughts which receive
in, and carry out Love, from and unto the Father? Holiness becomes his
presence for ever. An unclean Spirit cannot draw nigh unto him; an unholy Heart
can make no abode with him. A lewd Person will not desire to hold fellowship
with a Sober man: and will a man of vain and foolish Imaginations, hold
communion and dwell with the most holy God? There is not any Consideration of
this Love but is a powerful motive unto Holiness and leads thereunto. Ephraim
says, what have I to do any more with Idols, when in God he finds Salvation.
Communion with the Father is wholly inconsistent with loose walking. If we say
that we have followship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not
the truth, 1 John 1. 6. He that says I know him (I have Communion with him)
and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar and the truth is not in him, chap.
1. v. 4. The most specious, and glorious pretense made to an acquaintance with
the Father, without holiness and Obedience to his Cammandements, serves only
to prove the pretenders to be liars. The love of the world and of the Father,
dwell not together.

And if this be so, (to shut up all) how many that go under the name of
Christians come short of the Truth of it? How unacquainted are the Generaliy of
Professors, with the Mystery of this Communion, and the fruits of it? Do not
many very evidently hold Communion with their lusts and with the world, and yet
would be thought to have a Portion and Inheritance among them that are
Sanctified? They have neither new name nor white stone, and yet would be called
the people of the most High. May it not be said of many of them, rather that
God is not in all their thoughts, then that they have Communion with him? The
Lord open the Eyes of men that they may see and know that walking with God is a
matter not of form, but power. And so far of peculiar Communion with Father,
in the Instance of love which we have insisted on; He is also faithful who
has called us to the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; of which in
the next place.

PART. II.
CHAP. I.
Of the Fellowship which the Saints have with Jesus Christ the Son of God. That
they have such a fellowship proved 1 Cor. 1. 9. Revel. 3. 20. Cant. 2, 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. opened. Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

OF that distinct Communion which we have with the Person of the Father, we
have treated in the foregoing Chapters; we now proceed to the Consideration of
that which we have with his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. Now the Fellowship we
have with the second Person, is with him as Mediator, in that Office whereunto
by dispensation he submitted himself for our sakes, being made of a woman,
made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might
receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4. 4, 5. And herein I shall do these two
things

1. Declare that we have such Fellowship with the Son of God. 2. Show wherein
that Fellowship, or Communion does consist.
For the first, I shall only produce some few places of Scripture confirm it,
that it is so. 1 Cor. chap. 1. v. 9. God is faithful by whom ye were called to
the Fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. This is that whereunto all
the Saints are called, and wherein by the Faithfulness of God they shall be
preserved, even Fellowship with Jesus Christ our Lord. We are called of God the
Father as the Father, in pursuit of his Love, to communion with the Son, as
our Lord.

Revel. chap 3 v. 20. John. 14. 23.
Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the
door, I will come in-to him, and sup with him, and he with me. Certainly this
is Fellowship, or I know not what is; Christ will Sup with Believers, he
refreshes himsefe with his own Graces in them, by his Spirit bestowed, on them.
The Lord Christ is excedingly delighted in tasting of the sweet fruits of the
Spirit in the Saints. Hence is that prayer of the Spouse that she may have
something for his Entertainment, when he comes to her. Cant. 4. 16, Awake O
North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof
may flow out, let my beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.
The Souls of the Saints are the Garden of Jesus Christ, the good ground Heb.
6. 7, 8. A Garden for delight: he rejoices in them, his delights are with the
Sons of Men: Prove. 8. 31. and he rejoices over them: Zeph 3. 17. And a Garden
for fruit, yea pleasant fruit, So he describes it: Cant. 4. 12, 13. 14. A
Garden enclosed is my sister my Spouse, a spring shut up, a Fountain sealed;
thy Plants are an Orchard of Pomgranates with pleasant fruits, Camphire with
Spicknard, Spicknard and Saffron, Calamus, and Cynamon, with all trees of
Frankincense, Mirrbe, and Aloes; with all chief fruits. Whatever is sweet and
delicious for taste, whatever savoury and odoriferous, whatever is useful and
medicinal, is in this Garden. There is all manner of Spiritual refreshments
of all kinds whatever, in the Souls of the Saints for the Lord Jesus. On this
account is the Spouse so earnest in the prayer mentioned for an increase of
these things, that her beloved may sup with her as he has promised. A wake O
north wind etc. Oh that the breathings and workings of the Spirit of all Grace,
might stir up all his gifts and Graces in me, that the Lord Jesus the
beloved of my soul may have meet and acceptable entertainment from me. God
complains of want of fruit in his vineyard, Isa. 5. 3. Hos. 10. 1. want of
good food for Christ's entertainment, is that the Spouse feared, and labors to
prevent. A barren heart is not fit to receive him. And the delight he takes in
the fruits of the spirit, is unspeakable. This he expresses at large, chap. 5.
1. I am come says he, I have eat, I am refreshed. He calls it (...) the fruit
of his sweetnesses; or most pleasant to him. Moreover, as Christ supps with his
Saints, so he has promised they shall sup with him, to complete the fellowship
that they have with him. Christ provides for their Entertainment in a most
eminent manner. There are Beasts killed, and Wine is mingled, and a table
furnished, b Prove. chapter 9. 2. He calls the spiritual dainties that he has for
them a Feast, a Wedding, Isa. 25. 6. Math 22 8. Revel. 19. 7.
A feast of fat things, Wine upon the Lees, etc. The fatted Calfe is killed for
their entertainment. Such is the Communion, and such is the mutual
Entertainment of Christ and his Saints in that communion.

Cantic 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. I am the Rose of Sharon, and the lilie of the
Valleys. As the Lilie among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters: as
the Aple-tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the Sons:
in his shadow I delighted and sat down, and his fruit was sweet to my taste,
etc.

In the two first verses you have the description that Christ gives, first of
himself, then of his Church. Of himself v. 1. that is, what he is to his
Spouse: I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the Valleys. The Lord Mal. 4.
2. Revel. 12. 1. Lnk: 1. 78. (...). Number. 24 17. 2 Pet. 1. 19. Kevel. 22. 16.
Genesis 49. 9. Mich. 5. 8. Revel. 5, 5.
Christ is in the Scripture compared to all things of Eminency in the whole
Creation. He is in the Heavens the Sun, and the bright morning star: As the
lion among the beasts, the Lion of the tribe of Judah. Among the flowers of the
field, here, he is the Rose, and the Lilie. The two Eminencies of Flowers,
sweetness of savor, and beauty of color are divided between these. The Rose
for sweetness, and the Lilie for beauty (Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed as one of these) have the pre-eminence. Further he is the Rose of
Sharon, a fruitful plain, where the choicest herds were fed. 1 Chr. 27. 29. so
eminent that it is promised to the Church, that there shall be given unto her
the Isa. 33. 9. chapter 65. 10.
Excellency of Sharon: Isa. 35. 2. This fruitful place doubtless brought
forth the most Precious Roses. Christ in the Savor of his love, and in his
Righteousness (which is as the Garment wherein Jacob received his blessing,
giving forth a smell as the smell of a pleasant field Genesis 27. v. 27.) is as
this excellent Rose, to draw and allure the Hearts of his Saints unto him. As
God smelled a sweet Savor from the blood of his Atonement, Ephesians. 5. 2. So from
the Graces wherewith for them he is anointed, his Saints receive a refreshing
cherishing savor: Cant. 1. 2. A sweet savor expresses that which is
acceptable and delightful: Gen: 8. 21. He is also the Lilie of the Vallyes,
that of all flowers is the most eminent in beauty Mat. 6. 29. most desirable
is he for the comeliness and perfection of his person incomparably fairer then
the children of men, of which afterward. He then being thus unto them,
abundantly satiating all their spiritual senses, their refreshment, their
ornament their delight, their Glory; in the next verse He tells us what they
are to him: As the Lilie among the thorns, so is my beloved among the
Daughters, That Christ and his Church are likened unto, and termed the same
thing, (as here the Lily) is, as from their Union by the Indwelling of the same
Spirit, so from that Romans 8. 29.
conformity and likeness that is between them, and whereunto the Saints are
appointed. Now she is a Lillye, very beautiful unto Christ; As the Lilly
among the thorns 1. By the way of Eminency: as the Lilly excels the
thorns, so do the Saints all others whatever in the Eye of Christ. Let
Comparison be made, so will it be found to be. And 2. by the way of trial: the
residue of the world, being pricking briers and grieving thorns to the house
of Israel. Ezekiel. 28. 24. The best of them is a brier, and the most upright of
them sharper then a thorn Hedge; Mich. 7. 4. And thus are they among the
Daughters; even the most eminent Collections, of the most improved professors,
that are no more but so. There cannot be in any comparison, a greater
exaltation of the Excellency of any thing. So then is Christ to them indeed, v.
1. So are they in his his Esteem, and indeed, v. 2. How he is in their esteem
and indeed, we have v. 3.

As the Aple-tree among the Trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the
Sons, I sat down under his shadow with great delight and his fruit was
sweet to my taste. To carry on this intercourse, the Spouse begins to speak her
thoughts of, and to show her delight in the Lord Christ. And as he compares her
to the Lilly among the Thorns, so she him to the Aple-tree among the trees of
the wood: And she adds this Reason of it, even because he has the two eminent
things of Trees, which the Residue of them have not: 1. Fruit for food. 2.
Shade for Refreshment: of the one she eats, under the other she rests,
both with great delight. All other sons, either Angels, the Sons of God by
Creation Job. 1. 6. 38. 7. or the Sons of Adam, the best of his offspring, the
Leaders of those companys, which v. 2. are called Daughters; or Sons of the old
Creation, the top branches of all its desirable things, are to an hungry,
weary soul, (such alone seek for shade and fruit) but as the fruitless,
leafelesse trees of the Forest, which will yield them neither food nor
Refreshment. In Christ, says she, there is fruit, fruit sweet to the Taste.
Yea his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed Joh. 6. 55.
Moreover he has brought forth that everlasting Righteousness, which will
abundantly satisfy any hungry, soul after it has gone to many a barren Tree
for food, and has found none. Besides he abounds in precious and pleasant
Graces, whereof I may Cante. 5. 1.
eat, yea he calls me to do so, and that abundantly. These are the fruits that
Christ bears. They speak of a Tree that brings forth all things needful
for life in food and raiment. Christ is that Tree of life, which has brought
forth all things that are needful unto life eternal: In him is that
Righteousness which we Math. 5. 6.
Hunger after: in him is that water of life, which who so Joh. 7. 38.
Drinks of, shall thirst no more. Oh how sweet are the fruits of Christ's
mediation to the faith of his Saints. He that can find no relief in Mercy,
Pardon, Grace, Acceptance with God, Holiness, Sanctification, etc. is an
utter stranger to these things, Isa. 25. 6. Prove. 9. 1.
(wine in the Lees) that are prepared for believers. Also he has Shades for
Refreshment and Shelter. Shelter from wrath without, and Refreshment because of
weariness from within. The first use of the Jonah: 4. 6, Isa. 25. 4. Isa. 32.
2. 2 Cor: 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13. Mal. 4. 2.
Shade, is to keep us from the Heat of the Sun, as did Jonah's Gourd. When the
Heat of wrath is ready to scorch the Soul; Christ interposing bears it all;
under the shadow of his wings, we sit down constantly, quietly, safely
putting our trust in him. And all this with great delight. Yea who can express
the Joy of a soul safe shaddowed from wrath, under the Covert of the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus? There is also Refreshment in a shade from
weariness: He is as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land: Isa 32. 2.
From the power of Corruptions, trouble of Temptations, distress of
persecutions, there is in him quiet Rest and Repose; Math. 11. 27. 28.

Having thus mutually described each other, and so made it manifest, that they
cannot but be delighted in Fellowship and Communion: in the next verses that
Communion of theirs is at large set forth and described. I shall briefly
observe four things therein.

1. Sweetness: 2. Delight. 3. Safety. 4. Comfort.
1. Sweetness. He brought me to the Banqueting House; or House of wine. It is
all set forth under expressions of the greatest sweetness, and most delicious
Refreshment: Flagons, Apples, Wine, etc. He entertains me (says the Spouse) as
some great Personage. Great Personages, at great Entertainments are had into
the Banqueting house, the House of wine, and dainties. These are the
preparations of Grace and Mercy, Love, Kindness, supplys revealed in the
Gospel, declared in the Assemblys of the Saints, exhibited by the Spirit. This
Love is better then Wine Cant. 1. v. 1. it is, not in meats and drinks, but
Righteousness and Romans 14. 17. Joh. 7. 37. Prove. 27. 7.
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Gospel daintys are sweet refreshments;
Whether these Houses of Wine, be the Scriptures, the Gospel, or the Ordinances
dispensed in the Assemblys of the Saints, or any eminent and signal
manifestations of special Love, (as banqueting is not every days work, nor
used at ordinary entertainments) it is all one. Wine that cheereth the heart of
man, that makes him forget his misery, Prove. 31. 6, 7. that gives him a
cherefull look and countenance, Genesis 49. 12. is that which is promised. The
Grace exhibited by Christ in his Ordinances, is Refreshing, Strengthening,
Comforting, and full of Sweetness to the Souls of the Saints. Woe be to such
full Souls, as loath these Honey Combs. But thus Christ makes all his
Assemblys, to be banqueting Houses, and there he gives his Saints Entertainment.

2. Delight. The Spouse is quite ravished with the sweetness of this
entertainment, finding love and care and kindness bestowed Stay me with
Flaggons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love. Upon the discovery of
the Excellency and sweetness of Christ in the banqueting house, the soul is
instantly overpowred, and cries out to be made partaker of the fullness of it.
She is sick of Love: not (as some suppose) fainting for want of a sense of
Love, under the Apprehension of Wrath, but made sick, and faint, even overcome
with the mighty actings of that divine Affection, after she had once tasted of
the sweetness of Christ in the Banqueting house. Her desire deferred, makes
her heart sick: therefore she cries stay me, etc. I have seen a glimpse of the
king in his beauty: tasted of the fruit of his righteousness, my soul melts
in longing after him, Oh support and sustain my Spirit, with his presence in
his Ordinances, those Flaggons and Apples of his banqueting house, or I shall
quite sink and faint. Oh what have thou done blessed Jesus? I have seen thee
and my soul is become as the Chariots of Amminadab; let me have something from
thee to support me, or I dye. When a person is fainting on any occasion, these
two things are to be done; strength is to be used to support him, that he sink
not to the ground; and comfortable things are to be applied to refresh his
spirits. These two, the soul overpowred, and fainting with the force of its
own love, raised by a sense of Christ's prays for: it would have strengthening
grace to support it in that condition, that it may be able to attend its duty;
and consolations of the Holy Ghost, to content, revive, and satiate it, until
it come to a full enjoyment of Christ. And thus sweetly and with delight is
this Communion carried on.

3. Safety: His banner over me was Love. v. 4. The Banner is Emblem of safety
and protection, a sign of the presence of an host. Persons belonging to an
Army, do encampe under their Banner in security. So did the children of Israel
in the wilderness, every Tribe kept their Camps under their own Standard. It
is also a token of success and victory, Psalm: 20. 6. Christ has a banner for
his saints: and that is Love. All their protection is from his Love; and they
shall have all the Protection his Love can give them. This safeguards them from
Hell, death, all their Enemies. What ever presses on them, it must pass
through the Banner of the love of the Lord Jesus. They have then great
spiritual safety, which is another Ornament or Excellency of their Communion
with him.

4. Supportment, and Consolation. v. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his
right hand does embrace me. Christ here has the posture tender friend toward
any one in sickness, and sadness. The Soul faints with Love; spiritual
longings after the enjoyment of his presence, and Christ comes in with his
Embraces. He nourishes and cherishes his Church: Ephesians. chapter 5. v. 29. Isa.
63. 13. Now the hand under the head, is supportment, sustaining Grace, in
pressures and difficulties; and the hand that does embrace, the hand upon the
heart; is joy and consolation: in both, Christ rejoicing, as the Bridegroom
rejoices over the Bride. Isa: 62, 5. Now thus to lie in the Arms of Christ's
Love, under a perpetual influence of supportment and Refreshment, is
certainly to hold communion with him. And hereupon v. 1. the spouse is most
earnest for the continuance of this fellowship, charging all so to demean
themselves, that her beloved be not disquieted, or provoked to depart.

In brief this whole Book is taken up in the description of the Communion that
is between the Lord Christ and his saints, and therefore it is very needless
to take from thence any more particular instances thereof.

I shall only add that of Prove. ch: 9. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Wisdom has builded
her house, she has hewn out her seven pillars. She has killed her beasts,
she has mingled her Wine, she has also furnished her table. She has sent
forth her maidens, she cries upon the highest places of the City. Who so is
simple, let him turn in hither, as for him that wants understanding she
says to him, Come eat of my bread, and drink of the Wine that I have mingled.

The Lord Christ, the Eternal Wisdom of the Father, and who of God is made
unto us Wisdom, erects a spirituall-house, wherein he makes provision for the
entertainment of those Guests whom he so freely invites. His Church is the
House which he has built on a perfect number of pillars, that it might have a
stable foundation: His slain Beasts, and mingled Wine wherewith his table is
furnished, are those spiritual fatt things of the Gospel, which he has
prepared for those that come in upon his Invitation: surely to eat of this
bread, and drink of this Wine which he has so graciously prepared, is to hold
fellowship with him; for in what ways or things, is there nearer communion
then in such.

I might further evince this Truth, by a consideration of all the Relations
wherein Christ and his Saints do stand, which necessarily require that there be
a communion between them, if we do suppose they are faithful in those
Relations: but this is commonly treated on, and something will be spoken to it,
in one signal instance afterward.

CHAP. II.
What it is, wherein we have peculiar Fellowship with the Lord Christ. This is
in Grace. This proved. Ioh. 1. 14, 16, 17. 2 Cor. 13. 14. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 17, 18.
Grace, of various acceptations. Personal Grace in Christ proposed to
Consideration. The Grace of Christ as Mediator intended. Psalm. 45. 2. Cant. 5.
9. Christ how white and ruddy. His fitness to save from the grace of Union.
His fulness to save. His suitableness to endeare. These considerations
improved.

HAving manifested that the Saints hold peculiar Fellowship peculiar Communion
with him.

Now this is in GRACE. This is every where ascribed to him by the way of
Eminency* Joh. 1. v. 14. He dwelt among us, full of GRACE and Truth. Grace in
the Truth and substance of it. All that Acts 15. 11. Romans 16. 24. 1 Cor. 16.
23. 2 Cor 13. 14. Gal. 6. 18. Ephesians. 6. 24.
went before was but Typpicall and in Representation: in the truth and
substance, it comes only by Christ. Grace and truth is by Jesus Christ, v. 17.
And of his fulness we receive GRACE for GRACE v: 16. that is, we have
Communion with him in Grace; we receive from him all manner of Grace whatever,
and therein have we Fellowship with him.

So likewise in that Apostollicall Benediction, wherein the Communication
Persons unto the Saints, is so exactly distinguished; it is GRACE that is
ascribed to our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 13. 14. The GRACE of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you
all.

Yea, Paul is so delighted with this, that he makes it his Motto, and the token
whereby he would have his Epistles known, The Salutation of Paul with mine own
hand, So I write, The GRACE of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Yea he
makes these two, GRACE be with you, and the Lord Jesus be with you, to be
equivalent Expressions; for whereas he affirms the one to be the Token in all
his Epistles, yet sometimes, he uses the one, only, sometimes the other of
these, and sometimes puts them both together. This then is that which we are
peculiarly to eye in the Lord Jesus, to receive it from him, even GRACE,
Gospel Grace, revealed in, or exhibited by the Gospel. He is the Head Stone
in the building of the Temple of God, to whom GRACE, GRACE, is to be cried:
Zach. 4. 7.

Grace is a word of various acceptations. In its most eminent significations it
may be referred unto one of these three Heads,

1. Grace of Personal Presence and Comeliness. Prove. 1. 9. 3. 32, 34. Cant.
3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Cant. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, etc.
So we say a Graceful and comely person, either from himself or his
ornaments. This in Christ (upon the matter) is the subject of near one half
of the book of Canticles: it is also mentioned Psalm. 45. v. 2. Thou art fairer
then the Children of men; Grace is powered into thy lips. And unto this first
head in respect of Christ, do I refer also that acceptance of Grace, which
in respect of us, I fix in the third place. Those inconceivable Gifts and
fruits of the Spirit which were bestowed on him, and brought forth in him,
concur to his Personal Excellency, as will afterward appear.

2. Grace of free favor and acceptance. Ezra 9. 8. Act. 4. 33. Luke 2. 40.
Ester 2. 17. Psalm. 84. 11.
By this Grace we are saved: that is, the free favor and gracious Acceptance
of God in Christ. In this sense is it used in that frequent expression, if I
have found Grace in thy sight: that is, if I be freely and favorably accepted
before thee. So he gives Grace, (that is, favor) to the Humble. Jam. 4. 6.
Genesis 39. 21. chap. 41. 37. Acts 7. 10. Ephesians. 2. 5. Acts 15. 40. 18. 27. Romans
1. 7. 4. 4. 16. 5. 2, 20. 11 5, 6. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16 Titus 3. 7. Rev. 1, 4. etc.
1 Samuel 2. 26. 2 Kings 25. 27. etc.

3. The fruits of the Spirit, Sanctifying and renewing our Natures, enabling
unto good, and preventing from Evil, are so termed. Thus the Lord tells Paul,
his Grace was sufficient for him: that is, the Assistance against Temptation
which he afforded him. Col. 3, 16. 2 Cor. 8. 6. 7. Heb. 12. 28.

These two latter, as relating unto Christ, in respect of us who receive them,
I call purchased Grace, being indeed purchased by him for us; and our Communion
with him therein, is termed a Fellowship in his sufferings, and the power of
his Resurrection: Phil. 3. 10.

Let us begin with the first, which I call Personal Grace, and

1. Show what it is, and wherein it consists, I mean the Personal Grace of
Christ. And 2. Declare how the Saints hold immediate Communion with him
therein.
To the handling of the first, I shall only premise this observation. Mediator
of whom we speak: and therefore by the Grace of his Person, I understand not

1. The glorious Excellencies of his Deity, considered in it self, abstracting
from the Office which for us, as God and Man, he undertook.

2. Nor the outward appearance of his humane Nature, neither when he conversed
here on Earth, bearing our infirmities, (whereof, by reason of the charge that
was laid upon him, the Prophet gives quite another character Isa. 52. 14.)
concerning which some of the Ancients were very Poetical in their Expressions:
Nor yet as now exalted in Glory; a vain imagination whereof, makes many bear
a false, a corrupted Respect unto Christ, even upon Carnal Apprehensions of
the mighty Exaltation of the humane Nature, which is but to know Christ after
the Flesh 2 Cor. 5. 19. a mischief much improved by the Abomination of foolish
Imagery: But this is that which I intend; the Graces of the Person of Christ,
as he is vested with the Office of Mediation: His spiritual Eminency,
Comeliness and Beauty, as appointed and anointed by the Father unto the great
work of bringing home all his Elect unto his Bosom.

Now in this Respect the Scripture describes him as exceeding excellent,
comely, and desirable, far above comparison with the chiefest, choicest,
created good, or any Endearement imaginable.

Psalm. 45. 2. Thou art fairer then the Children of men, Grace is powered into
thy Lips. Isa. 11. 1. Jerem. 23. 5. 33. 15. Zech. 3. 8. 6. 12.
He is beyond comparison, more beautiful and gracious than any here below.
(...) japhiaphita, the word is doubled to increase its significancy, and to
exalt its subject beyond all comparison. (...) says the Chaldee Paraphrast: Thy
fairness, O King Messiah, is more excellent then the Sons of men. Pulcher
Admodum prae filiis hominum. exceeding desirable. Inward beauty and Glory is
here expressed by that of outward shape, form and appearance; (...). Porphyr.
in Isag. inde Suetonius de Domitiano: commendari se verecundia oris adeo
sentiebat, ut apud senatum sic quondam jactaverit, usque adhuc certe animum
meum probastis and vultum. Sueton. Domit. cap. 18. formae elegantia in rege
laudatur, non quod per se decororis magni aestimari debeat, sed quia in ipso
vultu saepe reluceat generosa indoles: Calvin. in Loc.
because that was so much esteemed in those who were to rule or Govern. Isa.
4. v. 2. The Prophet terming of him the BRANCH of the Lord, and the fruit of
the Earth, affirms that he shall be beautiful and Glorious, Excellent and
Comely; For in him dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily: Col. 2. 9.

Cantic. 5. v 9. The Spouse is enquired of as to this very thing, even
concerning the Personal Excellencys of the Lord Christ her Beloved. What is
thy beloved (say the Daughters of Jerusalem) more then another beloved O thou
fairest among women, what is thy beloved more than another beloved? and she
returns this Answer v. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy the chiefest among
ten thousand. And so proceeds to a particular description of him by his
Excellencys, to the end of the chapter, and there concludes that he is
altogether lovely v. 16. whereof at large afterward. Particularly he is here
affirmed to be white and ruddy, a due mixture of which colors, composes the
most beautiful complexion. He is White in the Glory of his Deity, and ruddy in
the preciousnesse of his Humanity. His teeth are white with milk, and his eyes
are red with wine: Genesis 49. 12. Whiteness (if I may so say) is the Complexion
of Glory; In that appearance of the most high, the Ancient of days Dan. 7. v.
9. it is said, his Garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head as pure
wool. And of Christ in his Transfiguration, when he had on him a mighty Luster
of the Deity, His face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white as the
Light: Math. 17. v. 2. which in the phrase of another Evangelist, is, as white
as snow, so as no fuller on earth could white them: Mark. 9. 3. It was a divine
heavenly surpassing Glory that was upon him Revel. 1. 14. Hence the Angels and
glorified Saints, Revel. 3. 4, 5. 6. 11. 7. 9, 13. 19. 14.
that always behold him, and are fully translated into the Image of the same
Glory, are still said to be in white Robes. His whiteness is his Deity, and
the Glory thereof. And on this account, the Chalde Paraphrast ascribes this
whole passage unto God. They say (says he) to the house of Israel, who is the
God whom thou will serve? etc. Then began the Congregation of Israel to declare
the praises of the Ruler of the world: and said, I will serve that God who is
clothed in a Garment white as snow, the splendour of the Glory of whose
Countenance is as fire. He is also ruddy in the beauty of his humanity; Man was
called Adam from the red earth whereof he was (...)
made. The word here used points him out as the second Adam, partaker of Flesh
and Blood; because the children also partook of the same: Heb. 2. 14. The
beauty and comeliness of the Lord Jesus in the Union of both these in one
Person, shall afterward be declared.

2. He is White in the beauty of his Innocence, and Holiness, and ruddy in the
blood of his Oblation. Whiteness is the badge Nazarites for their Typical
Holiness, They were purer then snow, and whiter then Milk. Lam: 4. v. 7. And
the Prophet shows us, that scarlet, red, and crimson, are the colors of Sin
and Guilt, Whiteness of Innocence. Alii candidum exponunt esse puris and
probis, rubrum and cruentum reprobis ad eos puniendos ut Is. 63 dicitur. (...)
Cur rubent vestimenta tua, quod nostri minus recte de Christi passione
exponunt: Merc. in Loc.
Isa: 1. v. 18. Our beloved was a Lamb without spot or blemish: 1 Pet: 1. 18.
He did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth. 1 Pet. 2. 22. He
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. Heb. 7. 24. as afterward
will appear; and yet he, who was so White in his Innocence, was made ruddy in
his own blood: and that two ways: Naturally, in the pouring out of his blood
(his precious blood) in that Agony of his soul, when thick dropps of blood
trickled to the ground: Luke 22. v. 24. as also when the Whips and thorns,
nails and spears, powered it out abundantly: there came forth blood and water:
Ioh: 19. 34. He was ruddy, by being drenched all over in his own blood. And
2dly, Morally, by the Imputation of Sin, whose color is red and Crimson. God
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin: 2 Cor. 5. 21. He who was white,
became ruddy for our sakes, pouring out his blood, an oblation for Sin. This
also renders him Graceful: by his Whiteness, he fulfilled the Law, by his
redness he satisfied Justice: this is our beloved, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem.

3. His endearing Excellency in the Administration of his Kingdom, is hereby
also expressed: Revel. 6. 2.
He is White in Love and Mercy unto his own; red with Justice and Revenge
toward his Enemies. Isa. chapter 63. v. 3. Revel. 19. 13.

There are three things in General, wherein this personal Excellency

1. His fitness to save, from the Grace of Union, and the proper necessary
effects thereof. 2. His Fullness to save from the Grace of Communion: or the
free consequences of the Grace of Union. 3. His Excellency to endeare, from his
complete suitableness to all the wants of the Souls of men.
1. His Fitness to save: His being (...), a fit Savior suited to Grace of
Union. The uniting of the Natures of God and Man in one Person, made him fit to
be a Savior to the uttermost. He lays his hand upon God by partaking of his
Nature, Zach. 13. 7. and he lays his hand upon us, by being partaker of our
Nature, Heb. 2. 14, 16. and so becomes a Dayes-man or Umpire between both. By
this means, he fills up all the distance that was made by sin, between God,
and us, and we who were far off, are made nigh in him. Upon this account it
was, that he had Room enough in his breast to receive, and power enough in his
spirit to bear all the wrath that was prepared for us: Sin was infinite only
in respect of the object, and punishment was infinite in respect of the
subject. This arises from his Union.

Union is the conjunction of the two natures of God and man in one Person: Ioh.
1. 14. Isa. 9. 6. Romans 1. 3, 9, 5. the necessary subsistence of the humane
nature in the person of the Son of God, having no subsistence of its own: Luke
1. 35. 1 Timothy 3. 16. 2. (...), that communication of Attributes in the person,
whereby the propertyes of either nature, are promiscuously spoken of the Person
of Christ, under what name soever, of God or Man, he be spoken of. Act. 20. 28.
Act. 3. 21. 3. The Execution of his office of Mediation in his single person,
in respect of both natures: wherein is considerable, (...), the Agent, Christ
himself, God and man; he is the principium quo (...); the principle that gives
life and efficacy to the whole work: And then 2. the principium quod; that
which operates, which is both natures distinctly considered. 3. The (...), or
(...); the effectual working it self of each nature; and Lastly the (...) or
(...), the effect produced, which arises from all, and relates to them all; so
resolving the excellency I speak of, into his personal Union.

2. His Fullness to save, from the Grace of Communion, or the effects of his
Union which are free, and consequences of it, which furniture that he received
from the Father by the Unction of the spirit, for the work of our salvation. He
is able to save unto the uttermost them that come unto God by him. Heb. 7. 26.
having all fullness unto this end communicated unto him; for it pleased the
Father that in him all fullness should dwell. Col. 1. 19. And he received not
the spirit by measure, Ioh. 3. 34. and from this fullness, he makes out a
suitable supply unto all that are his; Grace for Grace, Joh 1. 16. had it been
given him by measure we had exhausted it.

3. His Excellency to endeare, from his complete suitableness to Want in
reference unto the things of God, but Christ will be unto him that which he
wants: I speak of those who are given him of his Father. Is he dead? Col. 3. 4.
1 Cor. 1. 24, 30 Jerem. 23. 6.
Christ is Life: Is he Weak? Christ is the power of God, and the Wisdom of
God; has he the sense of Guilt upon him? Christ is complete Righteousness,
the Lord our Righteousness. Many poor creatures are sensible of their wants,
but know not where their Remedy lies. Indeed whether it be Life, or Light,
Power or joy, all is wrapped up in him.

This then for the present may suffice in General to be spoken of the
personal Grace of the Lord Christ. He has a fitness to save, uttermost; and
a Fullness to save, of Redemption and sanctification, of Righteousness and the
Spirit; and a suitableness to the wants of all our souls, whereby he, becomes
exceeding desirable, yea altogether Lovely, as afterward will appear in
particular: And as to this in the first place have the Saints distinct
fellowship with the Lord Christ, the manner whereof shall be declared in the
ensuing Chapter.

Only from this entrance that has been made into the description him with whom
the Saints have Communion, some motives might be taken to stir us up
thereunto, as also considerations to lay open the nakedness and insufficiency
of all other ways and things, unto which men engage their thoughts and
desires. Something may be now proposed. The daughters of Jerusalem, ordinary
common Professors, having heard the spouse describing her beloved, Cant. 5. 4,
10. etc. instantly are stirred up to seek him together with her; chap 6. 1.
Whither is thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee? what Paul
says of them that crucified him, may be spoken of all that reject him, or
refuse communion with him. had they known him they would not have crucified the
Lord of Glory: did men know him, were they acquainted in any measure with him,
they would not so reject the Lord of Glory. Himself calls them simple ones,
fools and scorners, that despise his gracious invitation, Prove. 1. 24. There
is none despise Christ, but only they that know him not; whose eyes the God of
this world has blinded that they should not behold his glory; The souls of
men do naturally seek something to rest and repose themselves upon; something
to satiate and delight themselves withal, with which they hold communion; and
there are two ways whereby men proceed in the pursuit of what they so aim at.
Some set before them some certain end; perhaps, pleasure, profit, or, in
Religion it self, acceptance with God; others seek after some end, but
without any certainty, pleasing themselves now with one path, now with another;
with various thoughts and ways, like them Isa. 57. 10. because something comes
in by the life of the hand, they give not over though weary; in what condition
soever you may be, either in greediness pursuing some certain end, be it
secular or religious, or are wandering away in your own imaginations, wearying
your selves in the largeness of your ways, compare a little what you aim at,
or what you do, with what you have already heard of Jesus Christ; if any thing
you design be like to him, if any thing you desire be equal to him, let him
be rejected as one that has neither form nor comeliness in him; but if
indeed all your ways be but vanity and vexation of spirit in comparison of
him, why do you spend your thoughts for that which is not bread, and your
labor for that which satisfies not?

1. You that are yet in the flower of your days, full of health and strength,
and with all the vigor of your spirits, do pursue one thing, some another:
consider I pray, what are all your beloveds, to this beloved? what have you
gotten by them? let us see, the peace, quietness, assurance of everlasting
blessedness that they have given you? their paths are crooked paths, who ere
goes in them shall not know peace. Behold here a fit object for your choysest
affections; one in whom you may find rest to your souls: one in whom there is
nothing will grieve and trouble you to Eternity behold he stands at the door
of your souls and knocks: O reject him not, least you seek him and find him
not; pray study him a little; you love him not because you know him not why
does one of you spend his time in idleness and folly, and wasting of precious
time, perhaps debauchedly; why does another associate and assemble himself
with them that scoff at Religion and the things of God? merely because you
know not our dear Lord Jesus: oh when he shall reveal himself to you, and
tell you he is Jesus whom you have slighted and refused, how will it break your
hearts, and make you mourn like a dove, that you have neglected him; and if
you never come to know him, it had been better you had never been: whilst it
is called to day then harden not your hearts.

2. You, that are perhaps seeking earnestly after a Righteousness, Religious
persons, consider a little with your selves: has Christ his due place in your
hearts? is he your all? does he dwell in your thoughts? do you know him in his
excellency and desireablenesse? do you indeed account all things loss and dung
for his exceeding excellency? or rather, do you prefer almost any thing in
the world before it? But more of these things afterward.

CHAP. III.
Of the Way and Manner whereby the Saints hold Communion with the Lord Christ,
us to personal Grace: The Conjugall Relation between Christ and the Saints
Cant. 2. 16. Isa. 54. 5. etc. Cant. 3. 11. opened. The way of communion in
Conjugall Relation. Hos: 3. 3. Cant. 1. 15. on the part of Christ. on the part
of the Saints.

THe next thing that comes under consideration, is, the Way whereby we hold
communion with the Lord Christ, personal Grace whereof we have spoken. Now
this the Scripture manifests to be by the way of a conjugall Relation: He is
married unto us, and we unto him; which spiritual Relation is attended with
suitable conjugall affections. And this gives us fellowship with him, as to his
personal excellencies.

This the Spouse expresses Cant: 2. v. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his.
He is mine, I possess him, I have interest in him, as my Head, and my Husband:
and I am his, possessed of him, owned by him, given up unto him, and that as to
my beloved in a Conjugall Relation.

So Isa: 54. v. 5. Thy maker is thine Husband (the Lord of hosts is his name)
and thy Redeemer the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole Earth shall he be
called This is yielded as the Reason, why the Church shall not be ashamed nor
confounded, in the midst of her Troubles and Trialls, she is married unto
her Maker, and her Redeemer is her Husband. And Isa. ch: 61. 10. setting out
the mutual Glory of Christ and his Church in their walking together, he says
it is, as a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a Bride
adorneth her self with Jewels: such is their condition, because such is their
Relation: which he also farther expresses chapter 62. v. 5 As the Bridegroom
rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. As it is with
such persons in the day of their Espousalls, in the day of the Gladness of
their hearts, so is it with Christ and his Saints in this Relation: He is a
Husband to them, providing that it may be with them, according to the state and
condition whereinto he has taken them.

To this purpose we have his faithful engagement Hos. chapter 2. v. 19, 20. I will
(says he) betroth thee unto me for ever, yea I will betroth thee unto me in
Righteousness, and in Judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies, I
will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness. And it is the main design of
the Ministry of the Gospel to prevail with men to give up themselves unto the
Lord Christ, as he reveals his kindness in this engagement. Hence Paul tells
the Corinthians, 1 Epist. chapter 11. v. 2. that he had espoused them unto one
Husband, that he might present them as a Chaste virgin unto Christ. This he had
prevailed upon them for, by the preaching of the Gospel, that they should give
up themselves as a Virgin, unto him who had betrothed them to himself, as an
Husband,

And this is a Relation wherein the Lord Jesus is exceedingly delighted; and
inviteth others to behold him in this his Glory. Cant. 3. 11. Go forth (says
he) O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, and behold King Solomon with the Crown
wherewith his Mother Crowned him, in the day of his Espousalls, and in the day
of the Gladness of his heart. He calls forth the daughters of Jerusalem, all
sorts of Professors to consider him in the condition of betrothing and
espousing his Church unto himself: moreover he tells them that they shall find
on him two things eminently upon this account.

1. Honor; it is the day of his Corenation, and his spouse is the Crown,
wherewith he is crowned. For as Christ is a Diadem of beauty, and a Crown of
Glory unto Syon, Isaiah, chapter 18. v. 5. So Syon also is a Diadem, and a Crown
unto him, Isa. chapter 62. v. 3. Christ makes this Relation with his Saints to be
his Glory and his Honor. 2. Delight: The day of his Espousalls, of taking
poor sinful souls into his bosom, is the day of the gladness of his heart.
John was but the friend of the Bridegroom, that stood and heard his voice,
when he was taking his Bride unto himself, and he rejoiced greatly, Ioh: chapter
3. v. 29. how much more then must be the joy and gladness of the Bridegroom
himself, even that which is expressed Zeph. chapter 3. v. 14. He rejoices with
Joy, he joys with singing.

It is the gladness of the heart of Christ, the joy of his soul, Relation
with himself. He rejoysed in the thoughts of it from Eternity, Prove. 8. 31.
And always expresses the greatest willingness to undergo the hard task
required thereunto, Psalm. 40. 7, 8. Heb. 10. 7, 8. yea he was pained as a Woman
in travail, until he had accomplished it, Luke 12. 5. because he loved his
Church he gave himself for it, Ephesians, 5. 26. despising the shame, and enduring
the Cross, Heb. 12. 2. that he might enjoy his Bride; that he might be for
her, and she for him, and not for another: Hos. 3. 3. This is his joy, when he
is thus crowned by his Mother. It is believers that are mother, and brother of
this Solomon: Math: 12. 49. 50. They crown him in the day of his espousalls,
giving themselves to him, and becoming his glory: 2 Cor. 8. 23.

Thus he sets out his whole Communion with his Church under taking the Church
unto himself, is the day of his marriage, and the Church is his bride, his
Wife, Revel. chap. 19. v. 7, 8. The entertainment he makes for his Saints, is a
Wedding Supper. Math. chapter 22. v. 3. The Graces of his Church, are the Ornaments
of his Queen, Psalm. 45. v. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And the Fellowship he has
with his Saints, is as that which those who are mutually beloved in a Conjugall
Relation do hold. Cant. 1. Hence Paul in describing these two, makes sudden
and insensible Transitions from one to the other: Ephesians. chap. 5. from v. 22.
unto v. 32. concluding the whole with an Application unto Christ and the Church.

It is now to be enquired in the next place, how it is that we person of
Christ, in respect of Conjugall Relations and affections, and wherein this does
consist. Now herein there are some things that are common unto Christ and the
Saints, and some things that are peculiar to each of them, as the Nature of
this Relation does require. The whole may be reduced unto these two heads.

1. A Mutual Resignation of themselves one to the other. 2. Mutual
Consequentiall Conjugall Affections.
1. There is a mutual Resignation or making over of their Persons one to
another. This is the first Act of Communion, as to the his, as to all the love,
care, and tenderness of an husband; and the soul gives up it self wholly
unto the Lord Christ, to be his, as to all loving, tender obedience. And herein
is the main of Christ's and the Saints Espousals. This in the Prophet is set out
under a parable of himself and an Harlot, Hos. 3. 3. Thou shall abide for me
(says he unto her) thou shall not be for another, and I will be for thee. Poor
Harlot says the Lord Christ, I have bought thee unto my self with the price
of mine own Blood, and now this is that which we will consent unto, I WILL BE
FOR THEE, and THOU SHALL BE FOR ME, and not for another.

1. Christ gives himself to the Soul with all his Excellencys,
Righteousness, Preciousnesse, Graces and Eminencys, to be its Savior, Head,
and Husband, for ever to dwell with it, in this holy Relation. He looks upon
the souls of his Saints, likes them well, counts them fair, and beautiful,
because he has made them so. Cat. 1. 15. Behold thou art fair my Companion,
behold thou art fair, thou have Doves Eyes. Let others think what they please,
Christ redoubles it that the Souls of his Saints are very beautiful, even
perfect through his Comeliness which he puts upon them, Ezekiel. 15. v. 14.
behold thou art fair, thou art fair; particularly that their Spiritual Light
is very Excellent and Glorious, like the Eyes of a Dove, tender, discerning,
clear and shining. Therefore Repetit non citra (...) en tu puchra es: Mercer.
he adds that Patheticall wish of the Enjoyment of this his spouse: chap. 2.
14. O my dove (says he) that art in the clefis of the Rock, in the secret
places of the stairs, let me hear thy voice, let me see thy countenance, for
sweet is thy voice and thy Countenance is comely. Do not hide thy self as one
that flies to the clefts of the Rocks, be not dejected as one that hides her
self behind the stairs, and is afraid to come forth to the Company that
enquires for her? let not thy spirit be cast down at the weakness of thy
supplications, let me yet hear thy sighs and groans, thy breathings and
pantings to me, they are very sweet, very delightful: and thy spiritual
countenance, thy appearance in heavenly things, is comely and delightful unto
me. Neither does he leave her thus, but chap. 4. 8. presses her hard to a
closer with him in this conjugall bond. Come with me from Lebanon (my spouse)
with me from Lebanon, look from the top of Amana, from the the top of Shenir
and Hermon, from the Lions dens, and the mountains of the Leopards. Thou art
in a wandering condition, (as the Israelites of old) among Lions and Leopards,
sins and troubles? come from thence unto me, and I will give thee refreshment
Math. 11. 27. upon this Invitation the spouse boldly concludes, chap. 7. 10.
that the desire of Christ is toward her: that he does indeed love her, and
aim at taking her unto this fellowship with himselfee So in carrying on this
union, Christ freely besto weth himself. upon the Soul. Precious and excellent
as he is, he becomes ours. He makes himself to be so, and with him, all his
Graces. Hence says the spouse my Beloved is mine: in all that he is, he is
mine. Because he is Righteousness, Is. 45. 24, 25
he is the Lord Our Righteousness: Jer. chapter 23. v. 6. Because he is the
Wisdom of God, and the power of God, he is made unto us Wisdom etc. 1 Cor.
1. 30. Thus the Branch of the Lord is beautiful and glorious, and the fruit
of the Earth is excellent, and comely to them that are escaped of Israel. Isa.
4. v. 2. This is the first thing on the part of Christ, the free donation and
bestowing of himself upon us to be our Christ, our beloved, as to all the Ends
and Purposes of Love, Mercy, Grace, and Glory, whereunto in his Mediation he is
designed, in a marriage Covenant, never to be broken. This is the Sum of what
is intended. The Lord Jesus Christ fitted and prepared by the Accomplishment
and furniture of his Person as Mediator, and the large purchase of Grace and
Glory which he has made, to be an Husband to his Saints, his Church, tenders
himself in the Promises of the Gospel to them in all his desireablenesse,
convinces them of his goodwill toward them, and his alsufficiency for a supply
of their wants, and upon their consent to accept of him, which is all he
requires or expects at their hands, he ingageth himself in a marriage Covenant
to be theirs for ever.

2. On the part of the Saints? It is their free, willing consent Jesus, as
their Husband, Lord and Savior, to abide with him, subject their souls unto
him; and to be ruled by him for ever.

Now this in the soul, is either initiall, or the Solemn Consent at the first
entrance of Union, or Consequentiall, in renewed Acts of Consent all our days.
I speak of it especially in this latter sense, wherein it is proper unto
Communion, not in the former, wherein it primarily intends Union.

There are two things that complete this self Resignation of the soul.

1. The liking of Christ for his Excellency, Grace and suitableness, beloveds
whatever, preferring him in the Judgment andmind above them all. In the place
above mentioned; Can. 5 9, 10. the Spouse being earnestly pressed by Professors
at large, to give in her thoughts concerning the Excellency of her beloved in
comparison of other Endearements, Answers expressly, that he is the chiefest
of ten thousand, yea v. 16. altogether lovely: infinitely beyond comparison
with the choysest created good or Endearement imaginable. The soul takes a
view of all that is in the world, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes,
and the pride of Life, and sees it all to be vanity, that the world passes
away and the Lust thereof 1 John chap. 2. v. 16, 17. these beloveds are no way
to be compared unto him. It views also Legal Righteousness, blamelessnesse
before men, uprightness of Conversation, Dutys upon conviction, and concludes
of all as Paul does Phil. 3. v. 8. Doubtless I count all these things loss
for the Excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. So also does the
Church (Hos. chapter 14. v. 3, 4.) reject all appearing Assistances whatever, as
goodly as Ashur, as promising as Idols, that God alone may be preferred. And
this is the souls entrance into conjugall Communion with Jesus Christ as to
Personal Grace, the constant preferring him above all Pretenders to its
Affections, counting all Loss and dung in comparison of him. Beloved Peace,
beloved natural Relations, beloved Wisdom and learning, beloved
Righteousness, beloved dutys, all loss compared with Christ.

2. The accepting of Christ by the Will, as its only Husband, Lord and Savior.
This is called receiving of Christ Joh. chapter 1. intended only for that Solemn
Act whereby at first entrance we close with him, but also for the constant
frame of the soul in abiding with him, and owning of him, as such: When the
soul consents to take Christ on his own terms, to Romans 9. 31. 32 20. 3, 4.
save him in his own way, and says, Lord, I would have had thee and Salvation
in my way, that it might have been partly of mine endeavors, and as it were by
the works of the Law, I am now willing to receive thee and to be saved in thy
way, merely by Grace: and though I would have walked according to my own mind,
yet now I wholly give up my self to be ruled by thy Spirit, for in thee have I
Righteousness and strength, in thee Isa. 45. 24.
am I justified and do glory then does it carry on Communion with Christ as to
the Grace of his Person. This it is to receive the Lord Jesus in his
comeliness and Eminency. Let Believers exercise their Hearts abundantly unto
this thing. This is choice Communion with the Son Jesus Christ. Let us receive
him in all his Excellencys as he bestows himself upon us. Be frequent in
thoughts of faith, comparing him with other Beloveds; Sin, World, Legal
Righteousness, and preferring him before them, counting them all Loss and
Dung in comparison of him. And let our souls be persuaded of his Sincerity and
willingness in giving himself, in all that he is, as Mediator, unto us, to
be ours; And let our Hearts give up themselves unto him; let us tell him, that
we will be for him and not for another; Let him know it from us, he delights to
hear it, yea he says, sweet is our voice, and our Countenance is comely, and
we shall not fail in the Issue of sweet Refreshment with him.

DIGRESSION. I. Some Excellencys of Christ proposed to Consideration to endeare
our hearts unto him. His description Cant. 5. opened.
TO strengthen our hearts in the Resignation mentioned of our selves unto the
Lord Christ as our husband, as also to way for the stirring of us up to those
consequentiall conjugall Affections, of which mention shall afterward be made,
I shall turn aside to a more full description of some of the Personal
Excellencys of the Lord Christ, whereby the Hearts of his Saints are indeed
endeared unto him.

In the Lord our Righteousness then, may these ensuing things be considered,
which are exceeding suitable to prevail upon

1. He is exceeding Excellent and desirerable in his Number. 21. 5. 1 Cor. 10. 9.
Psalm. 68. 19. Ephesians. 4. v. 8. 10. Psalm. 97. 7. Heb. 2. 10. Psalm. 102. 26. Isa. 8.
13. Luke 2. 34. Romans 9. 30. 1 Pet. 2. 6. Is 40. 3. chapter 44. 6. chapter 45. 22. chapter
48. 12. Romans 14. 10. Revel. 1. 11. Malach 3, 1. Psalm. 2. 12. Isa 35. 4. Isa.
52. 5, 6. Isa. 45. 14, 15. Zech. 2. 8. 12. Zech. 3. 1. Zech. 12. 10. Math. 16.
17. Luke 1. 16, 17. Joh. 5. 18, 19. Joh. 10. 30. Joh. 1. 1, 3, 10. 14. Joh. 6.
62. Joh. 8. 23, 58. Col. 1. 16. Heb: 1. 2. 10, 11, 12. Joh. 3. 13. 31. Joh. 16.
28. Mich. 5. 2. Prove: 8. 23. Joh. 17. 5. Jerem. 23. 6. 1 John 5. 20. Revel. 1.
18. 4. 8. Act. 20. 28. 1 John 3. 16. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Heb. 2.
16. 1 John 4. 3. Heb. 10. 5. Joh. 20. 28. Romans 9. 5. John 10. 29, 30, 31. Math.
16. 16. Romans 8. 32. Joh. 3. 16, 18. Col. 1. 15. Joh. 17. 10. Isa. 9. 6. Col. 2.
9. 1 Cor. 8. 6. 1 Cor. 2. 8. Psalm. 68. 17.
Deity, and the Glory thereof. He is Jehovah our Righteousness. Jerem. 23. v.
6. In the rejoicing of Sion at his coming to her, this is the Bottom, Behold
thy God. Isa. 40. 9. we have seen his Glory (says the Apostle) what Glory is
that? the Glory of the only begotten Son of God John 1. 14. The choicest Saints
have been afraid, and amazed at the beauty of an Angel; and the stoutest
sinners have trembled at the Glory of one of those creatures in a low
appearance, representing but the back parts of their Glory, who yet themselves
in their highest Advancement do cover their faces at the presence of our
Beloved, as conscious to themselves of their utter disability to bear the rays
of his Glory, Isa. 6. 2. Joh. 12. 39, 40. He is the Fellow of the Lord of Hosts
Zech: chapter 13. v. 7. And though he once appeared in the form of of a Servant,
yet then he thought it no robbery to be EQUAL unto God: Phil. chapter 2. v. 8, In
the Glory of this Majesty he dwells in Light inaccessable. We cannot by
searching find out the Almighty to Perfection: it is high as Heaven, what can
we do? it is deeper then Hell what can we know, the measure thereof is longer
then the Earth, and broader then the Sea. Job. 11. v. 7, 8, 9. We may all say
one to another of this! surely we are more brutish then any man, and have not
the understanding of a man; We neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge
of the Holy; who has ascended up into Heaven or descended, who has gathered
the wind in his fist, who has bound the waters in a Garment, who has
established the Ends of the Earth, what is his name, and what is his Sons name,
if ye can tell. Prove. chap. 30. v. 2, 3, 4.

If any one should ask now with them in the Canticles, what is in the Lord
Jesus our beloved, more then in other Beloveds, amiable, and worthy of
Acceptance? What is he more then others? I ask what is a King more then a
Beggar? Much every way. Alas! this is nothing; they were borne alike, must dye
alike, and after that is the Judgment. What is an Angel more then a Worm? A
worm is a Creature, and an Angel is no more; He that made the one to creep in
the Earth, made also the other to dwell in Heaven. There is still a proportion
between these: they agree in something; But what are all the nothings of the
World, to the God infinitely blessed for ever more? Shall the dust of the
Balance, or the drop of the Bucket be laid in the scale against him? This is
He of whom the sinners in Syon are afraid and cry, Who amongst us shall dwell
with that devouring fire, who amongst us shall inhabit with everlasting
burnings? I might now give you a glimse of his Excellency in many of those
Propertys and attributes, by which he discovers himself to the faith of poor
Sinners. But as he that goes into a Garden where there are innumerable flowers
in great Variety, gathers not all he sees, but cropps here and there one, and
another; I shall endeavor to open a door, and give an inlet into the infinite
Excellency of the Graces of the Lord Jesus, as he is God blessed for evermore,
presenting the Reader with one or two Instances, leaving him to gather for his
own use, what farther he pleases. Hence then observe,

1. The Endless, Bottomless, boundless Grace and Compassion God of Syon. It
is not the grace of a Creature, nor all the Grace that can possibly at once
dwell in a created nature, that will serve our turn. We are too indigent to be
suited with such a supply. There was a Fulness of Grace in the Humane Nature
of Christ: He received not the Spirit by Measure. Joh. chap. 3. v. 34. A
fulness like that of Light, in the Sun, or of Water in the Sea; I speak not
in respect of Communication, but sufficiency. A fulness incomparably above
the measure of Angels, Yet it was not properly an infinite Fulness; it was a
created, and therefore a limited fulness. If it could be conceived as
separated from the Deity, surely so many thirsty guilty souls, as every day
drink deep and large draughts of Grace and Mercy from him, would (if I may so
speak)! sink him to the very bottom: nay, it could afford no supply at all,
but only in a moral way. But when the Conduit of his Humanity, is inseparably
united to the infinite inexhaustible Fountain of the Deity, who can look into
the depths thereof? If now there be Grace enough for sinners in an
All-sufficient God, it is in Christ And indeed in any other there cannot be
enough. The Lord gives this Reason for the Peace and confidence of sinners Isa.
54. 4, 5. Thou shall not be afraid, nor confounded, thou shall not be put to
shame: but how shall this be? So much Sin and not ashamed? So much guilt and
not confounded? Thy Master (says he) is thine Husband, the Lord of Hosts is
his Name, and thy Redeemer, the Holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth
shall he be called; This is the bottom of all peace, Confidence and
consolation: the Grace and mercy of our Maker, of the God of the whole Earth.
So are kindness and power tempered in him! he makes us and marrs us! he is our
God, and our Goel, our Redeemer. Look unto me (says he) and be saved, I am
God and none else. Isa. 45. 22. Surely one shall say, in JEHOVAH have I
Strength and Righteousness v. 24.

And on this ground it is, that if all the world should (if I may so say) set
themselves to drink free Grace, Mercy and Pardon; Cant. 5. 1. Isa. 55. 1.
Revel. 22. 17. Joh. 7. 37, 38.
water continually from the wells of Salvation; if they should set themselves
to draw from one single Promise, an Angel standing by, and crying drink O my
friends, yea drink abundantly, take so much Grace and Pardon as shall be
abundantly sufficient for the world of sin which is in every one of you; they
would not be able to sink the Grace of the promise one hairs breadth. There is
enough for millions of worlds if they were, because it flows into it from an
infinite bottomless fountain. Fear not O worm Jacob, I am GOD and not man,
is the bottom of sinners Consolation. This is that Head of Gold mentioned
Cant. 5. 11. that most precious Fountain of Grace and Mercy. This
Infiniteness of Grace in respect of its spring and Fountain will answer all
objections that might hinder our souls from drawing nigh to Communion with
him, and from a free embracing of him. Will not this suite us in all our
distresses? What is our finite guilt before it? Show me the sinner that can
spread his Iniquities to the dimensions (if I may so say) of this Grace? Here
is Mercy enough for the greatest, the oldest, the Stubbornest Transgressor? Why
will you dye, O ye house of Israel? Take heed of them who would rob you of the
Deity of Christ: If there were no more Grace for me then what can be treasured
up in a mere man, I should rejoice my portion might be under Rocks and
Mountains.

Consider hence his Eternal, free, unchangeable Love. Were the love of Christ
unto us, but the Love of a mere man, though never excellent, innocent and
glorious, it must have a beginning, it must have an ending, and perhaps be
fruitless. The Love of Christ in his humane nature toward his, is exceeding
intense, tender, precious, compassionate, abundantly heightened by a sense of
our miseries, feeling of our Wants, experience of our Temptations, all flowing
from that rich stock of Grace, pity and compassion, which on purpose for our
good and supply, was bestowed on him. But yet this Love as such, cannot be
infinite, nor eternal, nor from it self absolutely unchangeable. Were it no
more, though not to be parallelled, nor fathomed, yet our Savior could not say
of it, as he does, as my Father loves me, so have I loved you: Joh. 15. 9. His
love could not be compared with, and equalled unto the divine Love of the
Father, in those properties of Eternity, Fruitfulness, and Unchangeablenesse,
which are the chief Anchors of the soul, rolling it self on the bosom of
Christ, but now

1. It is Eternal. Come ye near unto me, hear you this, I have not (says
he) spoken from the beginning in secret, from the Time that it was, there am I,
and now the Lord God and his spirit has sent me: Isa. chapter 48. 16. He himself
is yesterday, to day, and for ever, and so is Heb. 13. 8.
his Love, being his who is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the
beginning, and the ending, which is, which was, and which is to come. Revel. 1.
11.

2. Unchangeable. Our Love is like our selves; as we are, so are all our
Affections: so is the Love of Christ, like himself: we love one, one day, and
hate him the next: he changes, and we change also; this day he is our right
Hand, our right eye, the next Genesis 4. 14, 15.
day cut him off, pluck him out. Jesus Christ is still the same, and so is his
Love: In the beginning he laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are
the works of his hands, they shall perish but He remains, they shall all wax
old as does a garment, and as a vesture shall he fold them up, and they shall
be changed; but he is the same, and his years fail not: Heb. 1. 10, 11, 12. He
is the Lord, and he changes not, and therefore we are not consumed. Whom he
Loves he loves unto Mal. 3. 6. John 13. 1.
the End. His Love is such as never had beginning, and never shall have Ending.

3. It is also Fruitful. Fruitful in all gracious Issues and Effects. help
him, He may thereby pity him in prison, but not relieve him: bemoane him in
misery, but not help him: suffer with him in trouble, but not ease him. We
cannot Love Grace into a child, nor mercy into a friend: we cannot love them
into Heaven, though it may be the great desire of our soul. It was Love that
made Abraham cry, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee, but it might not be.
But now, the Love of Christ, being the Love of God, is effectual and fruitful
in producing all the good things which he wills unto his beloved. He loves
Life, Grace and Holiness into us: He loves us also into Covenant, Loves us
into Heaven: Love in him is properly to will good to any one: Whatever good
Christ by his Love, Wills to any, that willing is operative of that Good.

These three Qualifications of the Love of Christ, make it exceedingly him
exceeding desirable. How many Millions of Sins, in every one of the Elect,
every one whereof Were enough to condemn them all, has this Love overcome?
what Mountains of unbelief does it remove? Look upon the conversation of any
one Saint, consider the frame of his Heart, see the many stains and spots, the
defilements and Infirmities, wherewith his Life is contaminated, and tell me
whether the Love that bears with all this, be not to be admired. And is it not
the the same toward thousands every day? what streams of Grace, purging,
pardoning, quickening, assisting, do flow from it every day? This is our
beloved, O ye daughters of Jerusalem.

2. He is desirable and worthy our Acceptance, as considered in his Humanity;
even therein also in reference to us, he is exceedingly

1. Its Freedom from sin. 2. Its Fullness of Grace: in both which regards
the Scripture sets him out as exceedingly lovely and amiable.
1. He was free from sin: The Pet. 2. 24.
Lamb of God, without Spot, Male of the flock to be offered unto God, the
curse falling on all other Oblations, and them that offer them. Mal. 1. 14 The
purity of the snow is not to be compared with the whiteness of this Lilly, of
this Cant. 2. 1.
Rose of Sharou, even from the womb: For such an High Priest became us, who is
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb: 7. v. 26. Sanctified
persons, whose stains are in any measure washed away, are exceeding fair in
the Eye of Christ himself. Cant. 1. 15, 16. Chap. 4. 1. 10.
Thou art all fair (says he) my beloved, thou have no spot in thee. How fair
then is he, who never had the least spot or stain?

It is true, Adam at his Creation had this spotless purity, so Angels. But
they came immediately from the Eccl. 7. 29.
hand of God, without concurrence of any secondary cause. Isa. 53. 2.
Jesus Christ is a plant and root of a dry Ground, a Blossom from the stem
of Jesse, a Bud from the Loins of sinful man, borne of a Sinner, after there
had been no innocent flesh in the World for 4000 years, every one upon the
Roll of his Genealogy being infected there withal. To have a Flower of
wonderful rarity to grow in Paradise, a Garden of Gods own planting, not
sullyed in the least, is not so strange: but as the Psalmist speaks (in another
kind,) to hear of it in a Wood, to find it in a Forest, to have a spotless
Bud, brought forth in the Wilderness of corrupted nature, is a thing which
Angels may desire to look into. Nay more! this whole nature, was not only
defiled, but also accursed: not only unclean, but also guilty; guilty of
Adam's Transgression in whom we have all sinned. That the humane Nature of
Christ, should be derived from hence, free from guilt, free from pollution,
this is to be adored.

But you will say, how can this be? who can bring a clean thing, from an
unclean? How could Christ take our Nature, and defilements of it, and the Guilt
of it? If Heb. 9. 7, 10
Levi paid Tithes in the Loins of Abraham, how is it that Christ did not sin
in the Loins of Adam?

Ans. There are two things in Original sin; 1. Guilt of the first sin,
which is imputed to us, we all sinned in him, (...), To. 5. 12. whether we
render it Relatively in whom, or Illatively, being all have sinned, all is one:
that one sin, is the sin of us all, omnes eramus unus ille homo: we were
all in Covenant with him; He was not only a natural head, but also a federall
head unto us; as Christ is to Believers (Romans 5. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 22.) so was he
to us all. and his Transgression of that Covenant is reckoned to us.

2ly There is the derivation of a polluted, corrupted nature Job. 14. 4. Ioh.
3. 6. (...): Romans 8. 7. (...). Col. 2. 14.
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? that which is borne of the
flesh is flesh, and nothing else; whose wisdom and mind is corrupted also. a
polluted fountain, will have polluted streams. The first person corrupted
nature, and that nature corrupts all persons following; now from both these was
Christ most free. He was never federally in Adam; and so not liable to the
imputation of his sin on that account. It is true, that sin was 2 Cor. 5. 21
imputed to him, when he was made sin; thereby he took away the sin of the
world, Ioh. 1. 29. but it was imputed to him in the Covenant of the Mediator,
through his voluntary susception; and not in the Covenant of Adam by a legal
imputation. Had it been reckoned to him, as a descendent from Adam, he had not
been a fit High Priest to have offered sacrifices for us; as not being separate
from sinners, Heb. 7. 25. Had Adam stood in his Innocence, Christ had not been
incarnate, to have been a Mediator for sinners, and therefore the Counsel of
his Incarnation morally took not place Genesis 3. 15.
until after the fall; though he was in Adam, in a natural sense from his
first Creation, in respect of the purpose of God, Luke 3. 23, 38 yet he was not
in him, in a Law sense, until after the fall; so that as to his own person, he
had no more to do with the first sin of Adam, then with any personal sin
of one whose punishment he voluntarily took upon him. As we are not liable to
the guilt of those progenitors who followed Adam, though naturally we were no
less in them then him. Therefore did He, all the days of his flesh serve God
in a Covenant of works; and was therein accepted with him; having done nothing
that should disanull the virtue of that Covenant as to him; This does not then
in the least take off from his perfection.

2. For the Pollution of our nature, it was prevented in him instant of
Conception Luke 35. the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall over shadow thee, therefore also that holy thing that shall be
borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God. He was made of a Woman, Gal.
4. 6. but that portion whereof he was made, was sanctified by the Holy Ghost,
that, what was borne thereof, should be an holy thing; Not only the Conjunction
and Union of soul and body, whereby a man becomes partaker of his whole
nature, and therein of the pollution of sin, being a son of Adam, was
prevented by the sanctification of the holy Ghost, but it also accompanied the
very separation of his bodily substance in the womb, unto that sacred purpose
whereunto it was set apart: so that upon all accounts, he is holy, harmless,
undefiled. Add now hereunto, that he did no sin, neither was there any guilt
found in him, 1 Pet. 2. 22. that he fulfilled all Righteousness Mat. 3. 15.
his Father being always well pleased with him, v. 17. on the account of his
perfect obedience, yea even in that sense wherein he charge his Angels with
folly, and those Inhabitants of heaven, are not clear in his sight, and his
Excellency and desireablenesse in this regard will lie before us: such was he,
such he is, and yet for our sakes, was he contented not only to be esteemed by
the vilest of men, to be a Transgressor, but to undergo from God, the
punishment due to the vilest sinners. Of which afterward.

2ly The fullness of grace in Christ's humane nature, sets forth the
Amiablenesse and desireablenesse thereof: should I make it business to
consider his perfections, as to this part of his Excellency, what he had from
the womb, Luke 1. 35 what received growth and improvement, as to exercise in
the days of his fesh, Luke 2. 52. with the complement of them all, in glory,
the whole would tend to the purpose in hand. I am but taking a view of these
things in transitu. These two things ly in open sight to all at the first
consideration: All Grace was in him, for the kinds thereof: and all degrees of
grace for its perfections; and both of them make up that fulness that was in
him; it is Created grace that I intend, and therefore I speak of the kinds of
it; it is grace inherent in a created nature, not infinite, and therefore I
speak of the degrees of it.

For the Fountain of Grace the holy Ghost, he received not him by measure Joh.
3. 34. and for the Communications of the Spirit, should all fulness dwell
Cor. 1. 19. that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. But these things
are commonly spoken unto.

This is the beloved of our souls! holy, harmless; undefiled; full of grace
and truth; John 1. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 1. Ephesians. 5. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 21. Math. 3. 17.
John 1. 18. Heb. 2. 15. chapter 7. 25. Joh. 1. 14, 15.
full to a sufficiency for every end of Grace; full for practice, to be an
Example to men and Angels as to Obedience; full to a certainty of uninterrupted
Communion with God; full to a readiness of giving supply to others; full to
suit him to all the occasions and necessitys of the souls of men; full to a
Glory not unbecomming a subsistence in the person of the Son of God; full to a
pefect victory in trials, over all Temptations; full to to an exact
Correspondency to the whole law, every righteous and holy law of God; full to
the utmost capacity of a limited, created, finite nature; full to the greatest
beauty and glory of a living Temple of God; full to the full pleasure and
delight of the soul of his Father; full to an everlasting monument of the
Glory of God in giving such inconceivable Excellencys to the Son of man.

And this is the second thing considerable, for the endearing of our souls to
our beloved.

3. Consider that he is all this in one Person. We have not been treating of
two, a God and a man; but of Qui propter homines liberandos ab aererna morte
homo factus est, and ita ad susceptionem humanitatis nostrae, sine suae
majestatis diminutione inclinans, ut manens quod erat, assume^sque quod non
erat; veram servi formam, ei formae, in qua Deo patri est aequalis aduniret, ut
nec minorem absumeret Glorificatio, nec superiorem minueret assumptio; salua
enim proprietate utriusque substantiae, and in unam coeunte personam,
suscipitur a majestate humilitas, a virture infirmitas, a mortalitate
aeternitas, and ad rependendu^ nostrae conditionis debitum, natura
inviolabilis, naturae est unita pashbili, etc. Leo. Sermon. 1. de not.
one who is God and Word that was with God in the beginning, and was God Joh.
1. 1. is also made flesh v. 14. not by a conversion of its self into flesh,
not by appearing in the outward shape, and likeness of flesh, but by assuming
that holy thing that was borne of the Virgin Luke 1. 55. into personal union
with himself. So the Mighty God, If. 9. 6. is a Child given to us; that holy
thing that was borne of the Virgin, is called the Son of God; Luke 1. 35.
That which made the man Christ Jesus to be a man, was the union of soul and
body; that which made him, that man, and without which he was not that man, was
the subsistence of both united in the person of the Son of God. As to the proof
hereof, I have spoken of it Vind. Evan c. 7.
elsewhere at large; I now propose it only in general, to show the
Amiablenesse of Christ on this account; Here lies, hence arises, the Grace,
Peace, life, and Security of the Church, of all believers: as by some few
considerations may be clearly evinced.

1. Hence was he fit Deus verus, and homo verus inunitatem domini temperatur,
ut quod nostris remediis congruebat unus atque idem dei hominumque mediator,
and mori possit ex uno, resurgere possit ex altero: Leo ubi Sup.
to suffer, and able to bear, whatever was due unto us; in that very Action,
wherein the Son of man gave himself a ransom for many Math. 20. 28. God
Redeemed his Church with his own blood Act. 20. 28 and therein was the love of
God seen that he gave his life for us. I Joh. 3. 16. on this account was there
room enough in his breast to receive the points of all the Zech. chap. 13. v.
7. Psalm. 89. v. 19.
swords that were sharpened by the Law against us, and strength enough in his
shoulders, to bear the burden of that Curse that was due to us. Thence was he
so willing to undertake the work of our Redemption, Heb. 10. 7, 8. Lo I come
to do thy will O God; because he knew his ability to go through with it. Had he
not been man, he could not have suffered, had he not been God, his suffering
could not have availed either himself or us, he had not satisfied; the
suffering of a mere man, could not bear any proportion to that which in any
respect was infinite. Had the Great and Righteous God gathered together all the
sins that had been Committed by his Elect from the foundation of the world, and
searched the bosoms of all that were to come to the end of the world, and
taken them all, from the sin of their nature, to the least deviation from the
rectitude of his most holy Law, and the highest provocation of their Regenerate
and Unregenerate Condition, and laid them on a mere holy innocent Creature, O
how would they have overwhelmed him, and buried him for ever out of the
presence of Gods love! Therefore does the Apostle premise that glorious
description of him to the purging of our sin. He has spoken to us by his
Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the world;
who being the brightness of his Glory, and the express image of his person,
vp-holding all things by the word of his power, has purged our sins. Heb. 1.
2, 3: It was he that purged our sins, who was the Son and heir of all
things, by whom the world was made, the brightness of his Fathers glory, and
express image of his person; He did it, he alone was able to do it. God was
manifested in the fiesh (1 Timothy 3. 16.) for this work; the sword awaked
against him that was the fellow of the Lord of Hosts Zach. 13. 7. and by the
wounds of that great shepherd, are the sheep healed. 1 Pet. 2. 24, 25.

2. Hence does he become an endless, bottomless fountain Grace to all them
that believe. The fullness, that it pleased the Father to Commit to Christ, to
be the great Treasury and storehouse of the Church, did not, does not lie in
the humane natrue considered in it self; but in the Person of the Mediator God
and man. Consider wherein his Communication of Grace does consist, and this
will be evident. The Foundation of all is laid in his satisfaction, Merit and
purchase, these are the morally procuring cause of all the Grace we receive
from Christ. Hence all Grace becoms to be t his; all the things of the new
Covenant, Joh. 16. 14, 15
the promises of God all the Mercy, Love, Grace, Glory promised, became (I say)
to be his. Not as though they were all actually invested or did reside and were
in the humane nature, and were from thence really Communicated to us; by a
participation of a portion of what did so inhere; but they are morally his by a
Is. 53. 11, 12 Joh 1. 16. Col. 1. 19, 20.
Compact, to be bestowed by him as he thinks good, as he is Mediator God and
man, that is, the only begotten Son made flesh Ioh. 1. 14. from whose fulness
we receive, and grace for grace: The real Communication of Grace is by Christ
sending the holy Ghost to regenerete us; and to create all the habitual grace,
with the daily supplys thereof in our hearts, that we are made partakers of;
now the Holy Ghost is thus sent by Christ as Mediator, God and man, as is at
large declared Ioh. 14. 15, 16. (of which more afterward.) This then is that
which I intend by this fulness of grace that is in Christ; from whence we
have both our beginning, and all our supplys, which makes him as he is the
alpha Heb. 12 2. Revel. 1. 11.
and omega of his Church, the beginner and finisher of our faith, Excellent and
desirable to our souls. Upon the payment of the great price of his blood, and
full Aquitment on the satisfaction he made, all Grace whatever, (of which at
large afterward) becomes in a moral sense his, at his disposal; and he
bestows it on, or works it in the hearts of his by the holy Ghost according as
in his infinite wisdom he sees it needful. How glorious is he to the Soul on
this Consideration? that is most Excellent to us which suites us in a wanting
Condition; that which gives bread to the hungry, water to the Thirsty, mercy to
the perishing. All our relifes are thus in our beloved. Here is the life of our
souls; the joy of our hearts; our relief against sin and deliverance from
the wrath to come.

3. Thus is he fitted for a mediator, a daysman, an Umpire between God and us;
being one with him, and one with us, and one in himself in this oneness, in
the Unity of one person. His Ability and universal fitness for his office of
Mediator are hence usually demonstrated. And herein is he Christ the wisdom
of God and the power of God. Herein shines out the infinitely glorious wisdom
of God: which we may better admire 1 Cor. 1. 24.
then express. What soul that has any acquaintance with these things falls
not down with reverence, and Astonishment? How glorious is he that is the
beloved of our souls? what can be wanting that should encourage us to take up
our rest, and peace in his bosom? Unless all ways of relief and refreshment
be so obstructed by unbelief, that no consideration can reach the heart to
yield it the least assistance, it is impossible but that from hence, the soul
may gather that which will endeare it unto him with whom we have to do. Let us
dwell on the thoughts of it. This is the hidden mystery, great, without
controversy, admirable to eternity. What poor, low, perishing things, do we
spend our contemplations on? Were we to have no advantage by this astonishing
dispensation, yet its Excellency, Glory, beauty, depths, deserve the flower of
our enquirys, the vigor of our spirits, the substance of our time; but when
withal our Life, our Peace, our Joy, our inheritance, our Eternity, our all
lys herein, shall not the thoughts of it, always dwell in our hearts, always
refresh, and delight our souls?

4. He is Excellent and Glorious in this; in that he is exalted, and invested
with all Authority; when Genesis 45. 26, 27.
Jacob heard of the Exaltation Joseph in Egypt and saw the Charets that he had
sent for him, his spirit fainted and recovered again, through abundance of Joy
and other overflowing Affections. Is our beloved lost who for our sakes was
upon the earth, poor and persecuted, reviled, killed? noe! he was dead, but he
is alive, and lo he lives for ever, and ever, and has the keys of Hell and
Death: our beloved is made a Lord, and Ruler Acts 2. 36. He Revel. 1. 18.
is made a King; God sets him his Ring on his holy hill of Syon, Psalm. 2. 8.
Genesis 49. 10. Number. 24. 17, 19. Psalm. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Pal. 89. 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Ps. 110. 1, 2, 3. Is. 11. 1, 2, Isa. 32. 1, 2. chap. 53.
12. Isa 63. 1, 2, 3. Jer. 23. 5, 6. Dan. 7. 13, 14. Luke 2. 11. Luke 19. 38.
Joh 5. 22, 23. Act. 2. 35, 36 chap. 5. 31. Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 1. v. 20,
21, 22. Rev. 5. 12, 13, 14. Revel. 19. 16.
and he is crowned with Honor, and dignity, after he had been made a little
lower than the Angels for the suffering of death Heb. 2. 7, 8, 9. and what is
he made king of? all things are put in subjection under his feet. v. 8. and
what power over them has our beloved? All power in heaven and earth Mat. 28.
18. as for men! he has power given him over all flesh Ioh. 17. 2. And in what
Glory does he exercise this power? He gives eternal life to his Elect: ruling
them in the power of God, Micah. 5. 3. until he bring them to himself; and for
his Enimys! His arrows are sharp in their hearts Psalm. 45. 5. he dips his
vesture in their blood: Oh how glorious is he in his Authority over his enemies?
in this world he terrifies, frightens, awes, convinces, bruises their Isa. 63.
3.
hearts and Consciences, fills them with fear, terror, disquietment, unill
they yield him feigned obedience; and sometime with outward judgments,
bruises, breaks, turns the wheel upon them; stains all his vesture with
their blood; fills the earth Psalm. 110.
with their Carcasses; and at last will gather them altogether, beast, false
prophet, nations, etc. and cast them into that lake Revel. 9. 20.
that burns with fire and brimstone.

He is gloriously exalted above Angels in this his Authority; Good, and bad,
Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. far above Principalities and Powers, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that to
come; they are all under his feet, at his command, and absolute disposal. He
is at the right hand of God, in the highest exaltation possible, and in full
possession of a Kingdom over the whole Creation; having received a name above
every name, etc. Phil. 2. v. 9. Thus is he glorious in his Throne, which is at
the right hand of the Heb. 1. 3. Ephesians. 1. 22. Math. 28. 18. Phil. 2. 7, 8.
Revel. 19. Psalm. 45. Psalm. 68. Dan. 7. 10.
Majesty on high; Glorious in his Commission which is all power in heaven and
earth; Glorious in his name, a name above every name, the Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings; Glorious in his Scepter, a Scepter of Righteousness is the
Scepter of his Kingdom; Glorious in his Attendants, his Charrets are twenty
thousand, even thousands of Angels, among them he rides on the Heavens, and
sends out the voice of his strength, attended with ten thousand times ten
thousands of his holy ones; Glorious in his Subjects, all creatures in heaven
and in earth, nothing is left that is not put in subjection to him; Glorious in
his way of Rule, and the Administration of his Kingdom, full of sweetness,
efficacy, power, serenity, holiness, Righteousness and Grace in, and toward
his Elect; of Terror, vengeance, and certain destruction toward the
Rebelliou, Angels, and men; Glorious in the issue of his Kingdom, when every
knee shall bow before him, and all shall stand before his judgment seat; And
what a little portion of his Glory is it, that we have poynted to? This is the
beloved of the Church, its head, its Husband; this is he with whom we have
Communion: but of the whole exaltation of Jesus Christ, I am elsewhere to treat
at large.

Having insisted on these Generals, for the farther carrying on the motives to
Communion with Christ, in the Relation mentioned, description given of him by
the Spouse in the Canticles, to this very end and purpose, Cant. 5. 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand.
His head is as the most fine gold; his locks are bushy and black as a raven.
His eyes are as the Eyes of Doves, by the rivers of waters, washed with milk,
and fitly set. His cheeks are as a bed of spices: his lips like lilly dropping
sweet smelling Myrrh: his hands are as gold Rings, set withthes beryl; his
belly is as bright ivory overlaid with saphyrs; his legs are as pillars, set
upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the
Cedars; His mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether lovely. This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, Oye Daughters of Jerusalem.

The general description given of him, v. 10. has been before instances to
make good the Assertion, that he is the Chiefest of ten thousand.

1. The Spouse begins with his head and face. v. 11, 12, 13. In his head, she
speaks first in general, unto the substance of it, it is fine gold, and then
in particular, as to its Ornaments, his locks are bushy, and black as a raven.

1. His Head is as the most fine gold; or his head gold, solid gold. so some,
made of pure gold, so others, (...) say the 70 retaining part of both the
Hebrew words (...) Massa auri.

Two things are eminent in Gold; splendour or Glory, and duration; This is that
which the Spouse speaks of the Head of Head, is his Government, Authority, and
Kingdom; Hence it is said a Crown of pure gold was on his head, Ps. 21. 3.
and his Head is here said to be Gold, because of the Crown of Gold, that
adornes it. A^ the Monarchy in Daniell, that was most eminent for glory and
duration, is termed an head of gold, Dan. 2. 38. And these two things are
eminent in the Kingdom, and Authority of Christ.

1. It is a glorious Kingdom; He is full of Glory and Majesty, and in his
Majesty he rides prosperously, Ps. 45. 3, 4. His Glory is great in the
salvation of God, Honor and Majesty are laid upon him, He is made blessed for
ever and ever, Psalm. 21. 5, 6. I might insist on Particulars, and show that
there is not any thing that may render a Kingdom or Government Glorious, but
it is in this of Christ in all its Excellencies. It is an heavenly, a
spiritual, an universal, and an unshaken Kingdom, all which render it
glorious: but of this somewhat before.

2. It is durable: yea Eternal; solid gold, his Throne is for ever the
increase of his Government there is no end, upon the throne of David, and upon
his Kingdom to order and establish it with Judgment, and Justice from hence
forth even for ever, Isa. 9. 7. his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, Dan:
7. 27. a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed, chapter 2. 44. for he must reign
until all his enemies be subdued. This is that Head of Gold, the Splendour, and
Eternity of his Government.

And if you take the Head in a natural sense; either the Glory of his Deity is
here attended to; or the fullness, and Excellency of his Wisdom, which the
Head is the seat of. The Allegory is not to be straightened, whilst we keep to
the Analogy of faith.

2. For the Ornaments of his head, his locks, they are said to be bushy, or
curled, black as a raven. His curled locks, are black: [as a raven] is added by
way of illustration, of the blackness, not with any Allusion to the nature of
the Raven. Take the Head spoken of in a political sense; his Locks or hair,
said to be curled, as seeming to be entangled, but really falling in perfect
order, and beauty, as bushy locks, are his Thoughts, and Counsels, and ways,
in the Administration of his Kingdom. They are black or dark because of their
depth, and unsearchablenesse; as God is said to dwell in thick darkness; and
curled or bushy, because of their exact interweavings from his infinite
Wisdom; His thoughts are many as the hairs of the head, seeming to be
perplexed, and entangled, but really set in all comely order, as curled bushy
hair; deep and unsearchable, and dreadful to his enemies, and full of beauty
and comeliness to his beloved. Such are I say, the thoughts of his heart, the
Counsels of his wisdom, in Reference to the Administrations of his Kingdom:
dark, perplexed, involved, to a carnal eye; in themselves, and to his Saints,
deep, manifold, ordered in all things, comely, desirable.

In a natural sense, black and curled locks, denote comeliness,

The next thing described in him is his Eyes, v. 12. his eyes are as the eyes
of Doves, by the rivers of waters, washed with milk, and fitly set. Doves are
tender birds, not birds of prey; and of all others they have the most bright,
shining, and piercing eye; their delight also in streams of water is known.
Their being washed in milk, or clear white crystal water, adds to their
beauty: and they are here said to be fitly set: that is, in due proportion for
beauty and luster; as a precious stone in the foil or fullness of a ring, as
the word signifies.

Eyes, being for sight, discerning, knowledge, and acquaintance knowledge, the
understanding, the discerning Spirit of Christ Jesus, are here intended, In the
Allusion used, four things are ascribed to them, 1. Tenderness, 2. Purity, 3.
Discerning, and 4 Glory.

1. The Tenderness, and Compassion of Christ toward his Church is here
intended: He looks on it, with the eyes of Doves; with tenderness and careful
compassion; without Anger, wrath, fury, or thoughts of revenge. So is the eye
interpreted Deuteronomy. 11. 12. the eyes of the Lord thy God are upon that land: Why
so! it is a Land that the Lord thy God cares for: cares for it in mercy: so
are the Eyes of Christ on us, as the eyes of one that in tenderness cares for
us; that lays out his Wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, in all tender
Love in our behalf. He is the stone, that foundation stone of the Church,
whereon are seven eyer, Zech. 3 9. wherein there is a perfection of wisdom,
knowledge, care and kindness for its guidance.

2d Purity; as washed Doves eyes for purity; This may be taken either
subjectively, for the Excellency, and immixed cleanness purity of his sight,
and knowledge in himself; or Objectively, for his delighting to behold purity
in others. He is of purer eyes, then to behold iniquity, Hab. 1. 15. he has no
pleasure in wickedness, the foolish shall not stand in his sight, Ps. 5. 4, 5.
if the Righteous soul of Lot was vexed with seeing the filthy deeds of wicked
men, 2 Pet. 2. 8. who yet had eyes of flesh, in which there was a mixture of
impurity: how much more do the pure eyes of our dear Lord Jesus abominate all
the filthiness of sinners; but herein lies the Excellency of his Love to us,
that he takes care, to take away our filth, and stains, that he may delight in
us; and seeing we are so defiled, that it could no otherwise be done, he will
do it by his own blood, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Even as Christ also loved the
(...), ^^d gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with
the (...) of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy without blemish. The End of this undertaking is, that the Church might be
thus gloriously presented unto himself; because he is of purer eyes then to
behold it with Joy and delight, in any other condition. He leaves not his
Spouse, until he says of her, thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in
thee: Cant. 4. 7. partly he takes away our Spotts, and stains by the renewing
of the Holy Ghost, and wholly Tit. 3. 4.
adornes us with his own Righteousness, and that because of the purity of his
own eyes, which cannot behold iniquity; that he might present us to himself
holy.

3. Discerning] he sees us doves, quickly, clearly, thoroughly; to the bottom
of that which he looks upon. Hence in another eyes are as a flame of fire
Revel. 1. 14. and why so? that the Churches might know, that he is He, which
searches the reins and heart, Rev. 2. 23. he has discerning eyes, nothing is
hid from him; all things are open, and naked before him, with whom we have to
do. It is said of him whilst he was in this World, that Jesus knew all men,
and needed not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man:
Ioh. 2. 24, 25. his piercing eyes look through all the thick coverings of
hypocrites, and the snow of pretenses that is on them: He sees the inside of
all; and what men are there, that they are to him; he sees not as we see, but
ponders the hidden man of the heart, no humble, broken, contrite soul, shall
loose one sigh, or groan after him, and Communion with him; no pant of Love,
or desire is hid from him, He sees in secret; no glorious performance of the
most glorious hypocrite will avail with him; his eyes look through all, and
the filth of their hearts lies naked before him.

4. Beauty and Glory are here intended also; Every thing beautiful, for he is
altogether lovely, v. 16. but most glorious in his sight, and Wisdom; he is
the Wisdom of Gods Eternal Wisdom its self; his understanding is infinite,
what spots and stains are in all our knowledge? when it is made perfect, yet it
will still be finite, and limited; his is without spot of darkness, without
foil of limitednesse.

Thus then is he beautiful and glorious, his Head is of Gold, his eyes are
Doves eyes, washed in milk and fitly set.

The next thing insisted on, is his cheeks, v. 15. His cheeks are as a bed of
Spices; as sweet flowers, or Towers of Perfumes: three things evidently pointed
at in these words.

1. A sweet savor as from spices, and flowers and Towers of perfume. 2.
Beauty, and order, as spices set in rows or beds, as the words import. 3.
Eminency in that word, as sweet or well grown, great flowers.
These things are in the Cheeks of Christ: the Chaldee Paraphrast, who applys
this whole song to Gods dealings with the people of the Jews; maks these Cheeks
of the Churches husband to be the two tables of stone, with the various lines
drawn in them, but that Allusion is strained; as are most of the Conjectures of
that Scholiast.

The Cheeks of a man are the seat of Comeliness, and manlike courage; The
Comeliness of Christ, as has in part been fulness of Grace in himself for
us. His manly Courage respects the Administration of his Rule, and Government,
from his fulness of Authority, as was before declared. This Comeliness and
Courage; the Spouse describing Christ as a beautiful, desirable personage, to
show that Spiritually he is so, calls his Cheeks; so to make up his parts,
and proportion. And to them does she ascribe a sweet savor, Order, and
Eminency a sweet savor; as God is said to smell a sweet savor from the Grace
and Obedience of his servants (Gen 8. 2. the Lord smelled a savor of rest from
the Sacrifice of Noah) so do the Saints, smell a sweet savor from his Grace
laid up in Christ. Cant. 1. 3. It is that which they rest in, which they
delight in, which they are refreshed with. As the smell of aromaticall spices,
and flowers, please the natural sense, refresh the spirits and delight the
person, so do the Graces of Christ to his Saints; They please their Spiritual
sense, they refresh their drooping Spirits, and give delight to their souls.
If he be nigh them they smell his Raiment, as Isaak the raiment of Jacob; They
say it is as the smell of a field that the Lord has blessed, Genesis 27. 27. and
their souls are refreshed with it.

2. Order and beauty are as spices set in a Garden bed. So are the Graces of
Christ. When spices are set in order, any one may use, and take and gather it
accordingly. Their answering also one to another makes them beautiful: so are
the graces of Christ in the Gospel, they are distinctly and in order set forth
that sinners by faith may view them, and take from him according to their
necessity. They are ordered for the use of Saints in the Promises of the
Gospel. There is Light in him, and Life in him, and power in him, and all
Consolation in him; a Constellation of Graces, shining with Glory, and beauty.
Believers take a view of them all; see their Glory and excellency, but fix
especially on that, which in the Condition wherein they are, is most useful to
them. One takes light and Joy; another life and power; by faith and prayer do
they gather these things, in this bed of Spices. Not any that comes to him goes
away unrefreshed. What may they not take, what may they not gather? what is it
that the poor soul wants? behold it is here provided, set out in order in the
promises of the Gospel; which are as the beds wherein these spices are set for
our use; and on the account hereof, is the Covenant said to be ordered in all
things 2 Samuel 2. 3, 4.

3. Eminency; his Cheeks are a tower of perfumes, held up, made conspicuous,
visible, eminent; so it is with the Graces of held out, and lifted up in the
preaching of the Gospel. They are a Tower of Perfumes; a sweet savor to God
and man.

The next clause of that verse is, His lips are like lillyes, dropping sweet
smelling myrrh. Two perfections in things natural are here alluded unto.
First the glory of Color in the lillys, and the sweetness of savor in the
myrrh. The glory, and beauty of the lillys in those Countries was such, as that
our Savior tells us, that Solomon in all his Glory, was not arrayd like one of
them Mat. 6. 29. and the Savor of myrrh, such as when the Scripture would set
forth any thing to be an excellent savor, it compares it thereunto, Psalm. 45.
8. and thereof was the sweet and holy ointment chiefly made Exodus 30. 26.
mention is also made frequently of it in other places to the same purpose. It
is said of Christ that Grace was powered into his lips Psalm. 45. 2. whence men
wondered, or were amazed, (...); at the words of Grace that proceeded out of his
mouth, so that by the lips of Christ, and their dropping sweet smelling
myrrh, the word of Christ, its savor, Excellency, and usefullnesse, is
intended. Herein is he Excellent, and glorious indeed, surpassing the
Excellencys, of those natural things which yet are most precious in their
kind; even in the Glory, beauty, and usefullnes of his Word. Hence they that
preach his word, to the saving of the souls of men, are said to be a sweet
savor to God 2 Cor. 2. 15. and the savor of the knowledge of God, is said to
be manifested by them v. 14. I might insist on the several propertys of
myrrh, whereto the word of Christ is here compared; its bitterness in taste,
its efficacy to preserve from putrefaction, its usefullnesse in perfumes and
Unctions, and press the Allegory in setting out the Excellencys of the Word in
allusions to them. But I only insist on generals; This is that which the holy
Ghost here intends; the Word of Christ is sweet, Savoury, precious unto
Believers, and they see him to be excellent, desirable, beautiful, in the
Precepts, Promises, Exhortations, and the most bitter threats thereof.

The Spouse adds; his hands are as gold Rings set with Beryll; the word beryll
in the original is Tarshish, which the Septuagint precious stone; the onyx say
some, the Chrysolite say others; any precious stone shining with a sea green
color, for the word signifies the sea also; Gold Rings set with precious,
glistering stones are both valuable, and desirable for profit and ornament; so
are the hands of Christ, that is all his works; the Effects, by the Cause: All
his works are Glorious, they are all fruits of Wisdom, Love, and Bounty; and
his belly is as bright Ivory, over laid with Sapphires: the smoothness and
brightness, of Ivory, the preciousnesse, and heavenly Color of the Saphires,
are here called in, to give some luster to the excellency of Christ; to these
is his belly or rather his bowels, which takes in the Heart also, compared. It
is the inward bowels, and not the outward bulk that is signified. Now to
show, that by Bowels in the Scripture ascribed either to God or man,
Affections are intended, is needless. The tender love, unspeakable affections
and kindness of Christ to his Church and people is thus set out. What a
beautiful sight is it to the eye, to see pure pollished Ivory set up and down
with heaps of precious Saphires; how much more Glorious are the tender
Affections, Mercys, and Compassion of the Lord Jesus unto Believers.

Verse. 15 The strength of his kingdom, the faithfulness and height, and
Glory of his person, in his Dominion, the sweetness and excellency of
Communion with him is set forth in these words: His legs are Pillars of Marble,
set upon sockets of fine Gold, his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the
Cedars, his mouth is most sweet.

When the Spouse has gone thus far in the description of him, she concludes
all in this general Assertion; he is wholly desirable, altogether to be
desired, or beloved. As if she should have said; I have thus reckoned up some
of the perfections of the Creatures, things of most value, price, usefullnesse,
Beauty, Glory, here below, and Compared some of the Excellencys of my beloved
unto them; In this way of Allegory I can carry things no higher: I find nothing
better, or more desirable to shadow out and to present his loveliness, and
desireablenesse; but alas! all this comes short of his perfections, beauty
and comeliness, he is all wholly to be desired, to be beloved.

Lovely, in his person, in the glorious Alsufficiency of his Deity, Gracious
purity, and holiness of his Humanity, Authority and Majesty, Love and Power.

Lovely in his birth, and Incarnation; when he was rich, for our sakes
becoming poor, taking part of flesh and blood because we partook of the same;
being made of a woman, that for us he might be made under the Law, ever for our
sakes.

Lovely, in the whole Course of his life, and the more then Angellicall
holiness, and obedience which in the depth of poverty and perfection he
exercised therein; doing good, receiving evil, blessing, and being cursed,
reviled; reproached all his days.

Lovely in his Death; yea therein most lovely to sinners; never more glorious
and desirable, then when he came broken, dead, from the Cross; then had he
carried all our sins into a land of forgetfullnesse; then had he made peace
and reconcilliation for us; then had he procured life and immortallity for us.

Lovely in his whole employment, in his great undertaking, in his Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascenion, being a Mediator between God and us, to recover the
glory of Gods Justice, and to save our souls; to bring us to an enjoyment of
God, who were set at such an infinite distance from him by sin.

Lovely in the glory, and majesty wherewith he is Crowned, now he is set down
at the right hand of Majesty on high: where though he be terrible to his
enemies, yet he is full of Mercy, Love, and Compassion toward his beloved ones.

Lovely in all those supplies of Grace, and Consolations, in all the
dispensations of his holy Spirit, whereof his Saints are made partakers.

Lovely in all the tender Care, Power and wisdom, which he exercises in the
protection, safeguarding, and delivery of his Church, and people, in the midst
of all the oppositions and persecutions whereunto they are exposed.

Lovely in all his Ordinances, and the whole of that spiritually glorious
Worship which he has appointed to his people, whereby they draw nigh, and have
Communion with him and his Father.

Lovely and glorious in the vengeance he takes, and will finally execute upon
the stubborn enemies of himself and his people.

Lovely in the pardon he has purchased and does dispense, in the
Reconciliation he has established, in the Grace he Communicates, in the
Consolations he does administer, in the peace, and Joy, he gives his Saints, in
his assured preservation of them unto Glory.

What shall I say, there is noe end of his excellencys, and desireablenesse; he
is altogether Lovely, this is our Beloved, and this is our Friend oh Daughters
of Jerusalem.

DIGRESSION. II.
All Solid Wisdom laid up in Christ. True wisdom wherein it consists.
Knowledge of God, in Christ only to be obtained. What of God may be known by
his works. Some propertyes of God not discovered but in Christ only; Love,
Mercy: others not fully but in him: as Vindictive Justice, Patience, Wisdom,
Alsufficiency. No Property of God Savingly known but in Christ. What is
required to a Saving Knowledge of the Properties of God. No true knowledge of
our selves but in Christ. Knowledge of our selves wherein it consists.
Knowledge of Sin how to be had in Christ. Also of Righteousness, and of
Judgment. The wisdom of walking with God hid in Christ. What is required
thereunto. Other pretenders to the Title of wisdom, examined and rejected.
Christ alone exalted.

A Second consideration of the Excellencys of Christ serving endeare the hearts
of them who stand with him in the Relation insisted on, arises from that which
in the mistaken Apprehension of it, is the great darling of men, and in its
true notion the great aim of the Saints, which is wisdom and knowledge. Let
it be evinced that all true and solid knowledge is laid up in, and is only to
be attained from and by the Lord Jesus Christ, and the hearts of men, if they
are but true to themselves, and their most predominate principles, must needs
be engaged to him. This is the great design of all men taken off from
professed slavery to the world, and the pursuit of sensual, licentious
courses, that they may be wise: and what ways the Generality of men engage in
for the compassing of that end, shall be afterward considered. To the Glory
and honor of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, and the establishment of our hearts
in Communion with him, the design of this digression, is to evince, that all
wisdom is laid up in him, and that from him alone it is to be obtained.

1. Cor. 1. 24. the Holy Ghost tells us that Christ is the Power of God and the
Wisdom of God: not the Essential Wisdom of God, as He is his Eternal
Son of the Father, upon which account He is called Wisdom in the Proverbs;
chap. 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. but as he is crucified v. 23 As He is Crucified, so he
is the Wisdom of God; that is, all that Wisdom which God lays forth for
the discovery, and manifestation of himself, and for the Saving of Sinners,
which makes foolish all the wisdom of the world; that is all in Christ
Crucified, held out in him, by him, and to be obtained only from him; And
thereby in him do we see the Glory of God 2 Cor. 3. last. For he is not only
said to be the Wisdom of God, but also to be made Wisdom to us, 1 Cor. 1.
30. he is made not by Creation but Ordination and Appoinment, Wisdom unto us;
not only by teaching us Wisdom (by a Metonymy of the Effect for the cause) as
he is the great Prophet of his Church, but also because by the knowing of him,
we become acquainted with the Wisdom of God, which is our wisdom; which is
a Metonymy of the Adjunct. This however verily promised, is thus only to be
had. The sum of what is contended for, is asserted in terms, Col. 2. 3. in
him dwell all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.

There are two things that might seem to have some color in Title and interest
in this business 1. Civil Wisdom and prudence, for the management of
affairs. 2. Ability of Learning and literature, but God rejects both these
as of no use at all to the end and intent of true Wisdom indeed. There is in
the world that which is called understanding, but it comes to nothing: There is
that which is called Wisdom, but it is turned into folly. 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20.
God brings to nothing the understanding of the prudent, and makes foolish the
wisdom of the World. And if there be neither Wisdom nor knowledge (as
doubtless there is not) without the knowledge of God, Jerem 8. 9 it is all
shut up in the Lord Christ. Joh. 1. 18. no man has seen God at any time, the
only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father he has revealed him.
He is nor seen at any other time Joh 5. 37. nor known upon any other account,
but only the Revelation of the Son: He has manifested him from his own
bosom: and therefore v. 9. it is said that he is the true light that lightneth
every man that comes into the world. The true light which has it in himself,
and none has any but from him, and all have it who come unto him: He who does
not so, is in darkness.

1. The sum of all true Wisdom and knowledge, may be reduced to these three
heads.

1. The Knowledge of God, his Nature, and his Properties. 2. The Knowledge of
our selves in reference to the will of God concerning us. 3. Skill to walk in
Communion with God.
The knowledge of the Works of God, and the chief End of all, does
necessarily attend these. In these three is summed up all true Wisdom and
knowledge; and not any of them is to any purpose to be obtained, or is
manifested, but only in and by the Lord Christ.

God by the work of the Creation, by the Creation it self, many of his
properties, unto his Creatures capable of his knowledge; His Power, his
Goodness, his Wisdom, his Allsufficiency, are thereby known: This the Apostle
asserts, Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. v. 19. he calls it (...); v. 20. That is, his
Eternal Power and Godhead. and v. 21. a knowing of God: and (...). Plotin.
Genesis 1. 31.
Quam vis speciali cura atque indulgentia Dei, populum Israeliticum constat
electum, omnesque alias nationes suas vias ingredi, hoc est secundu^ propriam
permistae sunt vivere voluntatem, non ita tamen se oeterna Creatoris honitas ab
illis hominibus avertit, ut eos ad cognoscendum atque metuendum nullis
significationibns admoneret. Prosp. de Vocat. Gent. 2. 4.
Coelum and terra, and omnia quae in eis sunt, ecce vidique, mihi dicunt ut te
amem, nec cessant dicere, omnes ut sint inexcusabiles: August. Confesst. lib.
10. cap. 6.
all this by the Creation. But yet there are some properties of God, which all
the works of Creation cannot in any measure reveal, or make known; as his
Patience, Long-suffering, and Forbearance. For all things being made (...).
Plotin.
Genesis 1. 31.
Quam vis speciali cura atque indulgentia Dei, populum Israeliticum constat
electum, omnesque alias nationes suas vias ingredi, hoc est secundu^ propriam
permistae sunt vivere voluntatem, non ita tamen se oeterna Creatoris honitas ab
illis hominibus avertit, ut eos ad cognoscendum atque metuendum nullis
significationibns admoneret. Prosp. de Vocat. Gent. 2. 4.
Coelum and terra, and omnia quae in eis sunt, ecce vidique, mihi dicunt ut te
amem, nec cessant dicere, omnes ut sint inexcusabiles: August. Confesst. lib.
10. cap. 6.
good, there could be no place for the exercise of any of these properties, or
manifestation of them. The whole fabric of heaven and Earth considered in it
self, as at first created. will not discover any such thing as Patience and
Forbearance in God; which yet are eminent properties of his nature, as himself
proclaims and declares. Exodus 34. 6, 7.

Wherefore the Lord goes further; and by the Works of Providence in preserving
and ruling the World which he made, discovers and reveals these Properties
also. For whereas by cursing the earth, and filling all the Elements oftentimes
with signs of his anger and indignation, he has as the Apostle tells us. Romans
1. 18. revealed from Heaven his wrath against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, yet not proceeding immediately to destroy all things,
he has manifested his Patience and Forbearance to all: this Paul Act. 14 16,
17. tells us He suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, yet he left
not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave rain from Heaven
and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness. A large
account of his Goodness and Wisdom herein, the Psalmist gives us, Psalm. 104.
throughout. By these ways he bare witness to his own Goodness and Patience:
and so it is said, he endures with much long suffering etc Romans 9. 22. But now
here all the world is at a stand: By all this they have but an obscure glimpse
of God, and see not so much as his back parts. Moses saw not that until he was
put into Exodus 33. 22. 1 Cor. 10, 4.
the Rock, and that Rock was Christ. There are some of the most eminent and
glorious Propertys of God, (I mean in the manifestation whereof he will be most
glorious, otherwise his Propertys are not to be compared) that there is not the
least glimpse to be attained of, out of the Lord Christ, but only by, and in
him; and some that comparatively we have no light of, but in him, and of all
the rest no true light, but by him.

Of the first sort, whereof not the least guess and imagination can enter into
the heart of man but only by Christ, are Love, and pardoning Mercy.

1. Love: I mean Love unto sinners. Without this man is of all creatures most
miserable; and there is not the least glimpse of it that can possibly be
discovered but in Christ: the Holy Ghost says, 1 John 4. 8, 16. God is Love:
that is not only of a loving and tender nature; but one that will exercise
himself in a dispensation of his Love, Eternal Love toward us: one that has
purposes of love for us from of old, and will fulfill them all toward us in
due season. But how is this demonstrated, how may we attain an acquaintance
with it? he tells us v. 9. in this was manifested the love of God, because God
sent his only begotten Son into the world that we might live through him. This
is the only discovery that God has made, of any such Property in his nature,
or of any thought of exercising it toward sinners, in that he has sent Jesus
Christ into the world that we might live by him; where now is the wise, where
is the Scribe, where is the disputer of this world, with all their wisdom?
Their voice must be that of the Hypocrites in Sion, Isa. 33. 14, 15. That
wisdom which cannot teach me that God is Love, shall ever pass for folly.
Let men go to the Sun, Moon and Stars, to showers of rain and fruitful
seasons, and answer truly, what by them, they learn hereof? Let them not think
themselves wiser or better then those that went before them, who, to a man, got
nothing by them, but being left unexcusable.

2. Pardoning Mercy or Grace; without this even his Love sinful man, may be
seen in the Father of us all; who when he had sinned had no reserve for mercy,
but hid himself. Genesis 3. 8. He did it (...) when the wind did but a little
blow at the presence of God; And he did it foolishly thinking to hide himself
among trees Psalm. 139. 7, 8. The Law was given by Moses, Grace and truth came
by Jesus Christ. Ioh. 1. 17. Grace in the truth and substance; Pardoning Mercy
that comes by Christ alone: that Pardoning mercy which is manifested in the
Gospel, and wherein God will be Glorified to all Eternity; (Ephesians. 1. 6.) I
mean not that General Mercy, that velleity of acceptance which some put their
hopes in, (...) Arist. 2. Rhet.

Quid autem misericordia, nisi alienae miseriae quaedam in nostro cord
compassio: qua alicui ^ possumus subvenire compellimur? August: de Civit. Dei.
lib. 9. cap. 5.


that (...) which to ascribe unto God is the greatest dishonor that can be
done him) shines not with one ray out of Christ; it is wholly treasured up in
him, and revealed by him. Pardoning Mercy is God's free gracious acceptance of
a sinner upon Satisfaction made to his Justice in the blood of Jesus. Nor is
any discovery of it, but as relating to the satifaction of Justice, consistent
with the Glory of God. It is a mercy of inconceivable condescension in
forgiveness, tempered with exact justice and severity. Romans 3. 25. God is
said, to set forth Christ to be a propitiation in his blood to declare his
Righteousness in the forgiveness of Sins: (...). Jam. 3. 17.
his Righteousness is also manifested in the business of forgiveness of
sins; and therefore it is every where said to be wholly in Christ: Ephesians. 1. 7.
So that this Gospel grace, and pardoning mercy is alone Purchased by him, and
revealed in him. And this was the maine end of all typical institutions, to
manifest that Remission, and forgiveness is wholly wrapped up in the Lord Christ,
and that out of him there is not the least conjecture to be made of it, nor the
least morsel to be tasted. Had not God set forth the Lord Christ, all the
Angels in Heaven and men on Earth could not have apprehended, that (...). 1
Pet. 1. 12.
there had been any such thing in the nature of God, as this grace, of
pardoning Mercy. The Apostle asserts the full manifestation, as well as the
exercise of this mercy to be in Christ only; Tit. 3. 4, 5. After that the
kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared; namely in the
sending of Christ, and the declaration of him in the Gospel, then was this
pardoning mercy, and Salvation not by works discovered.

And these are of those Properties of God, whereby he will known, whereof there
is not the least glimpse to be obtained, but by and in Christ; and whoever
knows him not by these, knows him not at all. They know an Idol, and not the
only true God. He that has not the Son, the same has not the Father. 1 John
2. 23. And not to have God, as a Father, is not to have Joh. 5. 23.
him at all; and he is known as a Father only, as he is Love, and full of
pardoning Mercy in Christ. How this is to be had the Holy Ghost tells us 1 John
5 20. The Son of God is come and has given us an undestanding that we may know
him that is true: by him alone we have our understanding, to know him that is
true. Now these Properties of God, Christ reveals in his doctrine, in the
Revelation he makes of God and his will, as the great Prophet of the Church,
Joh. 17. 6. And on this account the knowledge of them is exposed to all, with
an evidence unspeakably surmounting that which is given by the Creation, to his
eternal power and Godhead. But the life of this knowledge lies in an
acquaintance with his person, wherein the express image and beams of this
glory of his Father do shine forth Heb. 1. 3. of which before.

2. There are other Propertys of God which though also otherways discovered,
yet are so clearly, eminently and savingly

1. His Vindictive Justice in punishing sin. 2. His Patience, forbearance and
long-suffering toward sinners. 3. His Wisdom, in managing things for his own
Glory. 4. His Alsufficiency in himself and unto others.
All these though they may receive some lower and inferior manifestations out
of Christ, yet they clearly shine only in him, so as that it may be our
wisdom, to be acquainted with them.

1. His Vindictive Justice.

God has indeed many ways manifested his indignation and anger against sin;
so that men cannot but know that it is the Judgment of God, that they which
commit such things are worthy of death Romans 1 32. He has in the Law threatened
to kindle a fire in his anger, that shall burn to the very heart of Hell And
even in many providentiall dispensations, his wrath is revealed from Heaven
against all the ungodliness of men: Romans 1. 18. So that men must say that he
is a God of Judgment. And he that shall but consider that the Angels for
sin were cast from Heaven, shut up under chains of everlasting darkness
unto the Judgment of the great day. (The rumor whereof seems to have been
spread among the Gentiles, (...)

(...): Homer. Il. t.


whence the Poet makes his Jupiter threaten the inferior rebellions Deitys
with that punishment.) And how Sodom and Gomorrah were condemned with an
ovethrow and burned into ashes, that they might be examples unto those that
should after live ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 6. cannot but discover much of Gods
Vindictive Justice, and his anger against sin; but far more clear does
this shine into us in the Lord Christ.

1. In him God has manifested the Naturallnesse of this impossible that it
should be diverted from sinners, without the interposing of a propitiation.
Those who lay the necessity of satisfaction merely upon the account of a free
Act and determination of the Will of God, leave to my apprehension no just and
indispensable Vid. Diatrib. de Just. Vind.
foundation for the death of Christ, but lay it upon a supposition of that
which might have been otherwise. But plainly God in that he Romans 8. 32. Isa. 53
10. Heb. 10. 7, 8, 9. Romans 1. 32. 2 Th. 1. 5, 6. Psalm. 5. 5, 6. Hab. 1. 13. Ps.
119. 135.
spared not his only Son, but made his soul an offering for sin, and would
admit of no atonement but in his blood, has abundantly manifested that it is
of necessity to him, (his Holiness and Righteousness requiring it,) to render
indignation, wrath, tribulation and anguish unto sin. And the knowledge of
this naturallnesse of vindictive justice, with the necessity of its execution
on supposition of sin, is the only true and useful knowledge of it. To look
upon it, as that which God may exercise or forbear, make his justice not a
property of his nature, but a free Act of his will: And a will to punish, where
one may do otherwise without injustice, is rather ill will, then justice.

2. In the penalty inflicted on Christ for sin, this Justice is far more
gloriously manifested then otherwise. To see indeed a World made Genesis 3. 17.
18, 19. c. 8. 21. Romans 8. 21, 22. 2 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6. c. 3. 6. Jud. 6. 7.
good and beautiful, wrapped up in wrath and curses, clothed with thorns and
briars, to see the whole beautiful Creation, made subject to vanity, given up
to the bondage of Corruption, to hear it groan in pain under that burden;
to consider Legions of Angels most glorious and immortal creatures, cast
down into Hell, bound with chains of Darkness, and reserved for a more
dreadful judgment, for one sin: to view the Ocean of the blood of souls
spilt to Eternity on this account, will give some inlight into this thing. But
what is all this to that view of it which may be had by a spiritual eye in the
Lord Christ? all these things are worms, and of no value in comparison of him.
To see him, who is the 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, always Mat. 3. 17.
beloved of the Father, to see him I say fear, Mat. 26. 37, 38. Mark. 14. 33.
Luke 22. 43, 44. Heb. 5. 7. Mat. 27. 51. Mar. 15. 33, 34.
and tremble, and bow, and sweat, and pray, and dye; to see him lifted up upon
the cross, the Earth trembling under him, as if unable to bear his weight, and
the heavens darkened over him, as if shut against his cry, and himself hanging
between both, as if refused by both, and all this because our sins did Isa.
53. 6.
meet upon him; this of all things does most abundantly manifest the severity
of Gods vindictive justice. Here, or no where, is it to be learned.

2. His Patience, forbearance, and longsuffering toward sinners: there are
many glimpses of the patience of God, shining out in the works of his
providence; but all exceedingly beneath that discovery of it, which we have in
Christ: especially in these three things.

1. The manner of its discovery; this indeed is evident to all that God does
not ordinarily, immediately punish men upon their offenses; It may be learned
from his constant way in governing the World; Notwithstanding all provocations;
yet he does Mat. 5. 45. Act. 14. 17, 18.
good to men, causing his Sun to shine upon them, sending them rain and
fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness. Whence it was
easy for them to conclude, that there was in him abundance of goodness and
forbearance, but all this is yet in much darkness, being the exurgency of men's
reasonings from their observations; yea the mannagement of it has been such,
as that it has proved a snare almost universally unto them toward whom it
has been exercised: Eccles. 8. 11. as well as a Temptation to them who have
looked on, Job. 21 7. Psalm: 73. 2, 3, 4, etc. Jerem. 12. 1. Hab. 1. 13. The
discovery of it in Christ, is utterly of another nature. In him the very Nature
of God is discovered to be Love and kindness, and that he will exercise the
same to sinners, he has promised, sworn, and solemnly engaged himself by
Covenant. And that we may not hesitate about the aim which he has herein,
there is a stable bottom and foundation of acting sutably to those gracious
properties of his nature, held forth: viz. the Reconciliation and Atonement
that is made in the blood of Christ. What ever discovery were made of the
patience and Lenity of God unto us, yet if it were not withal revealed, that
the other Properties of God, as his Justice and Revenge for sin, had their
actings also assigned to them to the full, there could be little consolation
gathered from the former. And therefore though God may teach men his Goodness
and forbearance, by sending them rain and fruitful seasons, yet withal at
the same time upon all occasions revealing his wrath from Heaven against the
ungodliness of men, (Romans 1. 18.) It is impossible that they should do any
thing, but miserably fluctuate and tremble at the event of these dispensations:
And yet this is the best that men can have out of Christ, the utmost they can
attain unto: With the present possession of good things administered in this
patience, men might and did for a season take up their thoughts, and satiate
themselves; but yet they were not in the least delivered from the Animula
vagula blandula Hospes comesque corporis.

Quae nunc abibis in loca Pallida, rigida, nudula? Nec ut soles dabis jocos.
Had. Imp.


bondage they were in by reason of death, and the darkness attending it. The
Law reveals no patience or forbearance in God: it speaks, as to the issue of
transgressions, nothing but sword and fire, had not God interposed by an Act of
Sovereignty. But now, as was said, with that Revelation of forbearance which we
have in Christ, there is also a discovery of the Satisfaction of his Justice
and wrath against sin, so that we need not fear any actings from them, to
enterfere with the works of his Patience, which are so sweet unto us. Hence
God is said to be in Christ reconciling the world to himself: 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Manifesting himself in him, as one that has now no more to do, for the
manifestation of all his Attributes, that is, for the glorifying of himself,
but only to forbear, reconcile, and pardon sin in him.

2. In the nature of it; what is there in that forbearance, which out of Christ
is revealed? merely a not immediate punishing upon Romans 24, 5. 9. 22.
offense; and withal giving and continuing tempor all mercies; such things as
men are prone to abuse, and may perish with their bosoms full of them, to
Eternity. That which lies hid in Christ, and is revealed from him, is full of
Love, sweetness, tenderness, kindness, Grace. It is the Lords waiting to be
gracious to sinners: waiting for an advantage to show love and kindness for
the most eminent endearing of a soul unto himself, Isa. 30. 18. Therefore
will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be
exalted, that he may have mercy upon you Neither is there any Revelation of
God, that the soul finds more sweetness in, then this: When it is
experimentally convinced, that God from time to time has passed by many
innumerable iniquities; he is astonished to think that God should do so, and
admires that he did not take the Advantage of his provocations, to cast him out
of his presence; He finds that with infinite wisdom in all long suffering he
has managed all his dispensations toward him, to recover him from the power
of the Devil, to rebuke and chasten his spirit for sin, to endeare him unto
himself; there is, I say, nothing of greater sweetness to the soul then
this, and therefore the Apostle says, Romans 3. 25. that all is through the
forbearance of God: God makes way for complete forgiveness of sins, through
this his forbearance; which the other does not.

3. They differ in their Ends and aims. What is the aim and design of God in
the dispensation of that forbearance, which is What if God willing to show his
wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the
vessels of wrath fitted for destruction? It was but to leave them
inexcuseable, that his power, and wrath against sin, might be manifested in
their destruction. And therefore he calls it, a suffering of them to walk in
their own wates, Act. 14. 16. which elsewhere he holds out as a most dreadful
judgment, to wit, in respect of that issue whereto it will certainly come, as
Psalm. 81. 12. I gave them up to their Lusts, and they walked in their own
counsels, which is as dreadful a Eos, quibus indulgere videtur, quibus
parcere, molles venturis malis deus format. Seneca cur bon. vir. mal. fiunt.
cap. 4.
Pro dii immortales! cur interdum in hominum sceleribus maximis aut connivetis,
aut praesentis fraudis paenas in diem reservatis: Cic, pro: Cael.
condition as a creature is capable of falling into, in this world. And Act.
17. 30. he calls it a winking at the sins of their ignorance; as it were,
taking no care nor thought of them in their dark condition, as it appears by
the Antithesis, but now he commands all men every where to repent. He did not
take so much notice of them then, as to command them to repent, by any clear
Revelation of his mind and will. And therefore the exhortation of the Apostle,
Romans 2 4. and despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? is spoken to the Jews, who had advantages to learn the natural
tendency of that goodness and forbearance which God exercises in Christ, which
indeed leads to Repentance, or else he does in general intimate, that in very
Reason, men ought to make another use of those things, then usually they do,
and which he charge them withal, v. 5. but after thy hardness and
impenitent heart, etc. At (...). Arrian. (...).
best then the patience of God unto men out of Christ, by reason of their own
incorrigible stubbornness, proves but like the waters of the River Phasis, that
are sweet at the top, and bitter in the bottom: they swim for a while in the
sweet and good things of this life, (Luke 16. 25.) wherewith being filled, they
sink to the depth of all bitterness.

But now evidently and directly, the end of that Patience and forbearance of
God, which is excercised in Christ, and discovered in him to us, is, the saving
and bringing unto God, those, toward whom he is pleased to exercise them. And
therefore Peter tells you. 2 Pet. 3. 9. that he is long suffering to us ward,
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance,
that is, all us toward whom he exercises forbearance, for that is the End of
it, that his Will concerning our Repentance and Salvation, may be accomplished:
and the nature of it with its end is well expressed, Isa. 54. 9. This is as the
waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no
more cover the earth, so have I sworn, that I would not be wroth etc. it is
Gods taking a course in his infinite Wisdom and goodness, that we shall not
be destroyed notwithstanding our sins: and therefore, Romans 15. 5. these two
things are laid together, in God, as coming together from him, the God of
patience and Consolation: his patience is a matter of the greatest consolation.
And this is another property of God, which though it may break forth in some
ray's to some Ends and purposes in other things, yet the treasures of it are
hid in Christ, and none is acquainted with it unto any spiritual advantage,
that learnes it not in him.

3. His Wisdom, his Infinite Wisdom, in mannaging things for his own Glory,
and the good of them toward whom he has thoughts of Love. The Lord indeed
has laid out and manifested infinite Wisdom, Si amabilis est sapientia cum
cognitione rerum conditarum, quam amabilis est sapientia quae condidit omnia ex
nihilo? August. lib. Meditat. c. 18.
in his Works of Creation, Providence, and governing of the World: in Wisdom
has he made all his Creatures, How manifold are his works? in Wisdom has he
made them all; the Earth is full of his riches, Psalm. 104. 24. So in his
Providence, his supportment and guidance of all things, in order to one
another, and his own glory, unto the Ends appointed for them; for all these
things come forth from the Lord of Hosts, who is Wonderful in Counsel, and
excellent in working, Isa. 28 29. His Law also is for ever to be admired, for
the excellency of the Wisdom therein; Deuteronomy. 4. 7, 8. but yet there is that
which Paul is astonished at, and wherein God will for ever be exalted, which he
calls the depth of the riches of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, Romans 11, 33.
that is only hid in, and revealed by Christ. Hence as he is said to be the Cor.
1. 20. 30
Wisdom of God, and to be made unto us Wisdom, so the design of God which is
carried along in him, and revealed in the Gospel, is called the Wisdom of
God, and a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom which God ordained before the World
was, which none of the Princes of this world knew, 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8. and Ephesians.
3. 10. it is called the manifold Wisdom of God: and to discover the Depth and
Riches of this Wisdom, he tells us in that verse, that it is such, that
Principalities and Powers, that very Angels themselves could not in the least
measure get any acquaintance with it, until God by gathering of a Church of
Sinners, did actually discover it. Hence Peter informs us that they who are so
well acquainted with all the works of God, do yet bow down and desire with
earnestness to look into these things; (the things of the Wisdom of God in
the Gospel:) 1 Pet. 1. 13. It asks a man much Wisdom to make a curious work,
fabric and building, but if one shall come and deface it; to raise up the same
building to more beauty and glory then ever, this is excellency of Wisdom
indeed. God in the beginning made all things good, glorious and beautiful;
When all things, had in innocence and beauty, the clear Genesis 1. 31.
impresse of his Wisdom and Goodness upon them, they were very glorious.
Especially man, who was made for his special Glory: now all this beauty was
defaced by sin, and the whole Genesis 3. 17, 18 Romans 1. 18.
Creation rolled up in darkness, wrath, curses, confusion; and the great
praise of God, buried in the heaps of it. Man especially was utterly lost, and
came short of the Glory of God, for which he was created; Romans 3. 23. Here now
does the Depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and knowledge of God open it self.
A design in Christ, shines out from his bosom, that was lodged there from
Eternity, to recover things to such an estate as shall be exceedingly to the
advantage of his Glory, infinitely above what at first appeared; and for the
putting of sinners into inconceiveably a better condition then they were in,
before the entrance of sin. He appears now glorious, he is known to be a God
Exodus 33. v. 18, 19, 20. cap. 34, 6, 7, 8
pardoning iniquity and sin, and advances the Riches of his Grace, which was
his design, Ephesians. 1. 6. He has infinitely vindicated his Justice also, in
the face of Men, Angels, and Devils: in setting forth his Son for a To. 3.
24, 25
Propitiation. It is also to our Advantage, we are more fully established in
his favor, and are carried on toward a more exceeding 2 Cor. 4, 17.
weight of glory, then formerly was revealed. Hence was that ejaculation of one
of the Ancients, O faelix culpa, quae talem meruit Redemptorem! Thus Paul tells
us, great is the Mystery of Godliness; 1 Timothy 3. 16. and that without
controversy. We receive Grace for grace Joh. 1. 16.
, for that Grace lost in Adam, better Grace in Christ. Confessedly this is a
depth of Wisdom indeed. And of the Love of Christ to his Church, and his Union
with it, to carry on this business, this is a great Mystery, Ephesians. 5. 32. says
the Apostle, great Wisdom lies herein.

So then; this also is hid in Christ, the great and unspeakable Riches of the
Wisdom of God, in pardoning sin, saving sinners, satisfying Justice,
fulfilling the Law, repairing his own Honor, and providing for us a more
exceeding weight of Glory: and all this out of such a condition as wherein it
was impossible that it should enter into the hearts of Angels or men, how ever
the Glory of God should be repaired, and one sinning creature delivered from
everlasting ruin. Hence it is said, that at the last day, God shall be
glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
it shall be an admirable thing, and God shall be for ever Glorious in it, even
in the bringing of Believers to himself. To save Sinners through believing
shall be found to be a far more admirable work, then to create the World of
nothing.

4. His Allsufficiency is the last of this sort that I shall name

Gods Allsufficiency in himself, is his Absolute and Universal Perfection;
whereby nothing is wanting in him, nothing to him: no accession can be made to
his fulness, no decrease or wasting can happen thereunto. There is also in
him an Allsufficiency for others: Which is his power to impart and communicate
his goodness, and Himself, so to them, as to satisfy and fill them in their
utmost capacity, with whatever is good and desirable to them. For the first of
these, his Allsufficiency for the Communication of his goodness, that is in
the outward Effect of it, God abundantly manifested in the Creation; in that he
made all things good, all things perfect, that is to whom nothing was wanting
in their own kind; he put a stamp of his own goodness upon them all. But now
for the latter, his giving himself as an Allsufficient God, to be enjoyed by
the Creatures, to hold out all that is in him for the satiating and making them
blessed, that is alone discovered by and in Christ. In him he is a Father, a
God in Covenant, wherein he has promised to lay out himself for them, in him
has he promised to give himself into their Everlasting fruition as their
exceeding great reward.

And so I have insisted on the second sort of Properties in God, whereof,
though we have some obscure glimpse in other things, yet the clear knowledge
of them, and Acquaintance with them, is only to be had in the Lord Christ.

That which remains is briefly to declare, that not any of the propertys of
God whatever, can be known savingly and to Consolation, but only in him, and so
consequently all the Wisdom of the Knowledge of God is hid in him, alone; and
from him to be obtained.

3. There is no saving knowledge of any property of God, nor such as brings
Consolation, but what alone is to be had in Christ Jesus, being laid up in him,
and manifested by him. Some eye the Justice of God, and know that this is his
Righteousness, that they which do such things, as sin, are worthy of Death,
Romans 1. 32. But this is to no other end but to make them cry, who amongst us
shall dwell with that devouring fire? Isa. 33. 14. Others fix upon his
Patience, Goodness, Mercy, Forbearance, but it does not at all lead them to
Repentance; But they despise the Riches of his Goodness, and after their
hardness and impenitent hearts, treasure up unto themselves wrath against the
day of wrath, Romans 2. 3, 4. Others by the very works of Creation and
Providence come to know his Eternal power and Godhead, but they Glorify him
not as God, nor are thankful, but become vain in their imagination and their
foolish hearts are darkened, Romans 1. 20. Whatever discovery men have of truth
out of Christ, they hold it captive under unrighteousness, v. 18 Hence Jude
tells us v. 10. that in what they know naturally, as bruit beasts, in those
things they corrupt themselves.

That we may have a saving knowledge of the Propertyes of God attended with
Consolation, these three things are required.

1. That God has manifested the Glory of them all in a way of doing good unto
us.

2. That he will yet exercise and lay them out to the utmost in our behalf.

3. That being so manifested and exercised, they are fit and powerful to bring
us to the everlasting fruition of himself, which is our Blessedness. Now all
these three ly hid in Christ, and the least glimpse of them out of him, is not
to be attained.

1. This is to be received, that God has Actually manifested Righteous, Just,
and Holy, unchangeably true, and faithful, if we know not how he may preserve
the glory of his Justice, and Faithfulness in his Comminations and
threatenings, but only in our ruin and destruction? If we can from thence only
say it is a Righteous thing with him to recompense tribulation unto us for our
iniquities? What fruit of this consideration had Adam in the Garden? Genesis 3.
What swetnesse, what encouragement is there in knowing that he i^ Patient and
full of forbearance, if the Glory of these is to be exalted in enduring the
vessels of wrath fitted for destruction? nay what will it avail us to hear
him proclaim himself the Lord, the Lord God Ex. 34. 6, 7.
Merciful and Gracious, Abundant in Goodness and Truth, yet withal, that he
will by no means clear the guity; so shutting up the exercise of all his
other Properties toward us upon the account of our iniquiry? Doubtless not at
all. Under this naked consideration of the Propertys of God; Justice will make
men fly and hide, Genesis 3. Is. 2. 21. chap. 33. 15, 16. Patience render them
obdurate, Eccles. 8. 11. Holiness utterly deters them from all thoughts, of
approach unto him. Joh. 24. 19. what reliese have we from thoughts of his
immensity and omnipresence, if we have cause only to contrive how to fly from
him? Psalm. 139. 11, 12. if we have no pledge of his gracious presence with us?
This is that which brings Salvation, when we shall see, that God has glorified
all his Propertys in a way of doing us good. Now this he has done in Jesus
Christ. In him has he made his Justice glorious, in making all our iniquities
to Is. 53. 5, 6. Levit. 16. 21. Romans 8. 32.
meet upon him, causing him to bear them all, as the Escape Goat in the
Wilderness, not sparing him but giving him up to death for us all. So exalting
his Justice and Indignation against sin, in a way of freeing us from the
condemnation of it: Romans 3. v. 25. Romans 8. 33, 34. In him has he made his
Truth glorious, and his Faithfulness in the exact accomplishment of all his
absolute threatenings and promises; that fountain threat and commination,
whence all others flow, Genesis 2. 17. in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall
dye the death, seconded with a Curse; Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Cursed is every one that
continues not etc. is in him accomplished, fullfilled, and the truth of God in
them laid in a way to our good. He by the Grace of God tasted deathfor us, Heb.
2. 9. and so delivered us who were subject to death, v. 14. and he has
fullfilled the curse, by being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. So that in his
very threatenings, his Truth is made glorious in a way to our good. And for his
Promises; They are all yea, and in him Amen, to the Glory of God by us, 2 Cor.
1. 20. And for his Mercy, Goodness, and the Riches of his Grace, how eminently
are they made Glorious in Christ, and advanced for our good? God has set him
forth to declare his Righteousness for the forgiveness of sin: He has made
way in him for ever to exalt the Glory of his pardoning Mercy toward sinners.
To manifest this, is the great design of the Gospel, as Paul admirably sets
it out Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. There must our souls come to an acquaintance with
them, or for ever live in darkness.

Now this is a Saving knowledge and full of Consolation; when we can see all
the Propertys of God made Glorious and exalted in a way of doing us good. And
this wisdom is hid only in Jesus Christ: hence when he desired his Father to
Glorify his name, Joh. 12. 24. to make in him his name, that is, his Nature,
his Propertys, his Will, all glorious in that work of Redemption he had in
hand; he was instantly answered from Heaven, I have hoth glorified it, and will
glorify it again. He will give it its utmost glory in him.

2. That God will yet exercise and lay out those Properties of his to the
utmost in our behalf. Though he has made them good, yet it does not
absolutely follow that he will use them for our good: for do we not see
innumerable Persons perishing everlastingly, notwithstanding the manifestation
of himself which God has made in Christ. Wherefore further, God has
committed all his properties into the hand of Christ, if I may so say, to be
managed in our behalf, and for our good. He is the power of God, and the
wisdom of God, he is the Lord our Righteousness, and 1 Cor. 1. 20. 30.
Jerem. 23. 6.
is made unto us of God, Wisdom and Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. Christ having glorified his Father in all his Attributes, he has
now the exercise of them committed to him, that he might be the Captain of
Salvation to them that do believe. So that if in the Righteousness, the
Goodness, the Love, the Mercy, the Allsufficiency of God, there be any thing
that will do us good, the Lord Jesus is fully interested with the dispensing
of it in our behalf. Hence God is said to be in him reconciling the world unto
Himself 2 Cor. 5. 18. Whatever is in him he lays it out for the
Reconciliation of the World, in and by the Lord Christ. And he becomes the Lord
our Righteousness. Isa. 45. 24. 25. and this is the second thing required.

3. There remains only then, that these Attributes of God, manifested, and
exercised, are powerful and able to bring us to the Everlasting fruition of
him. To evince this, the Lord wraps up the whole Covenant of grace in one
Promise signifying no less I will be your God. In the Covenant God becomes our
God, and we are his People: and thereby all his Attributes are ours also; and
least that we should doubt, when once our eyes are opened, to see in any measure
the inconceivable difficulty that is in this thing, what inimaginable obstacles
on all hands there lie against us, that all is not enough to deliver and save
us, God has I say wrapped it up in this expression: Genesis 17. 1. I am, says he,
God Almighty, Allsufficient! I am wholly able to perform all my undertakings,
and to be thy exceeding great reward. I can remove c Saddai, Aquila
interpretatur (...), quod nos robustum and ad omnia perpetranda sufficientem
possumus dicere: Hieron. Epist. 136.
all difficulties, answer all objections, pardon all sins, conquer all
opposition, I am God Allsufficient. Now you know in whom this Covenant and all
the promises thereof are ratified, and in whose blood it is confirmed: towit in
the Lord Christ alone; in him only, is God an Allsufficient God to any, and an
exceeding great reward. And hence Christ himself is said to sove to the utmost
them that come to God by him; Heb. 7. And these three things I say are required
to be known, that we may have a saving acquaintance, and such as is attended
with consolation, with any of the Properties of God; and all these being hid
only in Christ, from him alone it is to be obtained.

This then is the first part of our first Demonstration, that all true, and
sound Wisdom and Knowledge, is laid up in the Lord Christ, and from him alone
to be obtained: because our Wisdom consisting in a maine part of it, in the
Knowledge of God, his Nature and his Properties, this lies wholly hid in Christ,
nor can possibly be obtained but by him.

For the knowledge of our selves, which is the Second part of (...). Arist.
wisdom, this consists in these three things which our Savior sends his
Spirit to convince the world of: even sin, Righteousness, and Judgment, Joh.
6. 8. to know our selves in reference unto these three, is a main part of true
and sound wisdom, for they all respect the supernatural and immortal End
whereunto we are appointed, and there is none of these, that we can attain
unto, but only in Christ.

1. In respect of sin; there is a sense and knowledge of sin left in the
Consciences of all men by nature. To tell them what is good and evil, in many
things to approve and disapprove of what they do in reference to a Judgment
to come, they need not go farther then themselves, Romans 2. 14, 15. But this is
obscure and relates mostly to greater sins, and is in sum, that which the
Apostle gives us Romans 1. 32. they know the Judgment of God, that they which
do such things are worthy of Death. This he places among the common
Presumptions and notions that are received by mankind, namely, that it is
(...). Romans 1. 12.
Perfecto demum scelere, magnitudo ejus intellecta est. Tacit.
(...); R: (...). Eurip.
Righteous with God, that they who do such things are worthy of Death; And if
that be true, which is commonly received, that no Nation is so barbarous or
rude, but it retains some sense of a Deity, then this also is true, that
there is no Nation but has a sense of sin, and the displeasure of God for
it. For this is the very first Primus est deorum cultus, Deos credere: deinde
reddere illis majestatem suam, reddere bonitatem, sine qua nulla majestas est.
Scire illos esse qui praesident mundo: qui universa vi sua temperant: qui
humani generis tutelam gerunt. Senec Epist. 96.
Neque honor ullus deberi potest deo, si nihil praestat colenti; nec ullus
metus, si non irascitur non colenti. Lactan.
Ra^o antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede paena claudo. Horat.
Quo fugis Encelade? quascunque accesseris or as,
Sub Jove semper eris, etc.

-- Hosce
Evasisse putes, quos diri cons^ia facti
Men's habet attonitos and caeco verbere caedit? Juvenal.

(...) Philemon: juxta Clement. seu Diphil. juxta Justin: Martyr.
notion of God in the World, that he is the Rewarder of good and evil: hence
were all the Sacrifices, purgings, expiations, which were so generally spread
over the face of the Earth: but this was and is but very dark, in respect of
that knowledge of sin with its appurtenances, which is to be obtained.

A further knowledge of sin upon all Accounts whatever, Law; that Law which
was added because of transgressions. This revives doctrinally all that sense of
good and evil which was at first implanted in man: and it is a glass
whereinto Gal. 3. 19. Romans 7, 13.
whosoever is able spiritually to look, may see sin in all its ugliness and
deformity. The truth is, look upon the Law in its Purity, Holiness, Compass,
and Perfection, its manner of delivery Exodus 19. 18, 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 4. 11. Heb.
12. 18, 19, 20, 21.
with dread, terror, thunder, Earthquakes, fire, the sanction of it, in death,
curse, wrath, and it makes a wonderful discovery of sin, upon every account,
its pollution, guilt, and exceeding sinfullnesse are seen by it. But yet all
this does not suffice to give a man a true and thorough conviction of sin. Not
but that the Glass is clear, but of our selves we have not eyes to look into
it; the Rule is straight, but we cannot apply it: and therefore Christ sends
his Spirit to convince the World of sin, Joh: 16 8. who, though as to some
ends and purposes he makes use of the Law, yet the work of conviction, which
alone is an useful knowledge of sin, is his peculiar work. And so the
discovery of sin, may also be said to be by Christ, to be part of the Wisdom
that is hid in him. But yet there is a twofold regard besides this, of his
sending his Spirit to convince us, wherein this wisdom appears to be hid in
him.

1. Because there are some near concernments of sin, which are more clearly
held out in the Lord Christ's being made sin for us, then any other way.

2. In that there is no knowledge to be had of sin, so as to give it a
spiritual and saving improvement, but only in him.

1. For the First. There are Four things in sin, that clearly Cross of
Christ. 1. The Desert of it. 2. Man's Impotency by reason of it. 3. The Death of
it. 4. A new end put to it.

1. The desert of sin does clearly shine in the Cross of Christ, upon a
twofold account. 1. Of the Person suffering for it. 2. Of the Penalty he
underwent.

1. Of the person suffering for it: This the Scripture oftentimes very
emphatically sets forth, and lays great weight upon: Joh. 3. 16. God so loved
the World, as that he sent his only begotten son: It was his only son that
God sent into the World to suffer for sin, Romans 8 32. he spared not his only
son, but gave him up to death for us all. To see a Slave beaten and
corrected, it argues a fault committed, but yet perhaps the demerit of it was
not very great. The correction of a Son argues a great provocation; that of
an only son, the greatest imaginable. Never was sin seen to be more
abominably sinful and full of provocation, then when the burden of it was
upon the shoulders of the son of God. God having made his son, the son of
his Love, his only begotten, full of Grace and Truth, sin for us, to manifest
2 Cor. 5. 21.
his indignation against it, and how utterly impossible it is, that he should
let the least sin go unpunished, he lays hand on him, and spares him not. If
Heb. 10. 7. Isa. 53. 6.
sin be imputed to the dear son Zach. 13. 7.
of his bosom, as upon his own voluntary assumption of it, it was, (for he
said to his Father, Lo I come to do thy will, and all our iniquities did meet
on him,) he will not spare him any thing of the due desert of it; Is it not
most clear from hence, even from the blood of the Cross of Christ, that such
is the demerit of sin, that it is altogether impossible that God should pass
by any, the least, unpunished; if he would have done it for any, he would have
done it in reference to his only Son; but he spared him not.

Moreover! God is not at all delighted with, nor desirous of the blood, the
tears, the cries, the unexpressible torments and sufferings of the son of
his Love, (for he delights not in the anguish of any (he does not i afflict
willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men) much less the son of his bosom)
only he required l Lam. 3 35.
that his Law be fulfilled, his Justice satisfied, his wrath atton'd for sin,
and nothing less then all this, would bring it about. If the debt of sin
might have been compounded for, at a cheaper rate, it had never been held up at
the price of the blood of Christ. Here then Soul, take a view of the desert of
sin;- behold it far more evident, then in all the threatenings and curses of
the Law. I thought indeed, may thou say from thence, that sin, being found
on such a poor worm as I am, was worthy of death, but that it should have
this effect, if charged on the son of God, that I never once imagined.

2. Consider also further, what he suffered; For though he excellent an one,
yet perhaps it was but a light Affliction, and trial that he underwent,
especially considering the strength he had to bear it. Why what ever it were,
it made this Zach 13. 7.
fellow of the Lord of Hosts, this Revel. 5. 5.
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, this Psalm. 89. 19.
mighty one, the wisdom and power of God, to tremble, Math. 26. 37, 38. mark.
14. 30. 31. Luke 22. 24. Heb. 5. 7.
sweat, cry, Prove. 8. 22. 1 Cor. 1. 24.
pray, wrestle, and that with strong supplications. Some of the Popish
devotionists tell us that one drop, the least, of the blood of Christ, was
abundantly enough to redeem all the World: but they err not knowing the
desert of sin, nor the severity of the Justice of God. If one drop, less
then was shed, one pang, less then was laid on, would have done it; those
other dropps had not been shed, nor those other pangs laid on. God did not
cruciate the dearly Beloved of his soul for naught. But there is more then all
this.

It pleased God to Is. 53. 5, 6.
bruise him, to put him to grief, to make his soul an offering for sin, and
to power out his life unto death. He Psalm. 22. 1.
hid himself from him, was far from the voice of his cry, until he cried
out, my God, my God, why host thou forsaken me? He made him 2 Cor. 5. 21.
sin, and a Gal. 1. 13.
Curse for us, executed on him the sentence of the Law, brought him into an
Agony, wherein he sweat thick drops of blood, was grievously troubled, and his
soul was heavy unto death; he that was the power of God, and the Wisdom of
God went stooping under the burden, until the whole frame of nature seemed
astonished at it. Now this, as I said before, that it discovered the
Indignation of God against sin, so it clearly holds out the desert of it.
Would you then see the true demerit of sin, take the measure of it, from the
Mediation of Christ, especially his Cross It brought him who was the Son of
God, equal unto God, God blessed for ever, into the form of a Phil. 2. 8.
Servant, who had not where to lay his head: it pursued him all his life, with
afflictions and persecutions, and lastly brought him under the rod of God:
there bruised him, and brake him, 1 Cor. 2. 8.
sl^w the Lord of Life. Hence is deep humiliation for it upon the account of
him whom we Zach. 12, 10
have pierced. And this is the first spiritual view of sin we have in Christ.

2. The Wisdom of understanding our impotency by reason of sin, is wrapped
up in him. By our impotency I understand two things.

1. Our disability to make any Atonement with God for sin.

2. Our disability to answer his mind and will, in all or any of the Obedience,
that he requires by Reason of sin.

For the First, that alone is discovered in Christ. Many enquiries have the
sons of men made after an Atonement, many ways have they entered into, to
accomplish it. After this they enquire, Mich 6. 6, 7. will any manner of
Sacrifices, though appointed of God, as burnt offerings and Calves of a year
old; though very costly, thousands of rams, and ten thousands Rivers of oil;
though dreadful and tremendous, offering violence to nature, as to give my
Children to the fire; will any of these things make an atonement? David does
positively indeed determine this business, Psalm 49. 7, 8. none of them, of the
best or richest of men, can by any means redeem his Brother, nor give to God
a ransom for him, for the Redemption of their souls is precious, and it
cease for ever. It cannot be done, no atonement can be made. Yet men would
still be doing, still attempting; hence did they heap up Vid. Diatr. Just.
Divin. cap. 3.
Sacrifices, some costly, some bloody and inhumane. The Jews to this day, think
that God was atton'd for sin, by the sacrifices of Bulls and Goats, and the
like: and the Socinians acknowledge no Atonement, but what consists in men's
Repentance and new obedience. In the cross of Christ, are the mouths of all
stopped as to this thing. For

1. God has there discovered that no Sacrifices for sin, though of his own
appointment, could ever make them perfect that offered them, Heb. 10. 11. Those
Sacrifices could never take away sin; those services could never make them
perfect that performed them, as to the Conscience, Heb. 9. 9. as the Apostle
Ps. 40. 6, 7.
proves Chap. 10. 1. and thence the Lord rejects all Sacrifices and offerings
whatever, as to any such end and purpose, v. 6, 7, 8. Christ in their stead
saying, Lo I come, and by him we are justified, from all, from which we could
not be justified by the Law, Act. 13 34. God I say in Christ, has condemned
all Sacrifices, as wholly insufficient in the least to make an atonement for
sin. And how great a thing it was, to instruct the Sons of man in this
Wisdom, the event has manifested.

2. He has also written vanity on all other endeavors whatever that have been
undertaken for that purpose, (Romans 3. 24, 25, 26.) by setting forth his only
Son to be a propitiation, he leaves no doubt upon the spirits of men, that in
themselves they could make no atonement. For if Righteousness were by the
Law, then were Christ dead in vain? To what purpose should he be made a
propitiation, were not we our selves weak and without strength to any such
purpose? so the Apostle argues Romans 6. 6. when we had no power, then did he by
death make an Atonement, as v 8, 9.

This Wisdom then is also hid in Christ: men may see by other helps perhaps
far enough to fill them with dread and Astonishment, as those in Isa. 33. 14.
But such a sight and view of it, as may lead a soul to any comfortable
settlement about it; that only is discovered in this treasury of heaven, the
Lord Jesus.

2. Our disability to answer the mind and will of God, in all or any of the
Obedience that he requires, is in him only to be discovered. This indeed is a
thing that many will not be acquainted with to this day. To teach a man that he
cannot do, what he ought to do; and for which he condemns himself, if he do
it not, is no easy task. Man rises up with all his power, to plead against a
conviction of impotency. Not to mention the proud Quia unusquisque sibi
virtutem acquirit; nem^ sapientum, de ea gratias Deo egit. Cicer.
conceits and expressions of the Philosophers, how many that would be called
Christians, do yet creep by several degrees, in the persuasion of a power of
fulfilling the Law: and from whence indeed should men have this knowledge that
we have not? Nature will not teach it, that is Z Natura sic apparet vitiata, ut
hoc majoris vitii sit, non videre. Aug.
proud and conceited, and it is one part of its pride, weakness, and
corruption, not to know it at all. The Law will not teach it; for though that
will show us, what we have done amiss, yet it will not discover to us, that we
could not do better; yea by requiring exact obedience of us, it takes for
granted, that such power is in us for that purpose; it takes no notice, that we
have lost it, nor does it concern it so to do; This then also lies hid in the
Lord Jesus, Romans 8. 2, 3, 4. The Law of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus,
has made me free from the Law of sin and death. For what the Law could not
do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son, in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: that
the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us: The Law can bring forth
no Righteousness, no obedience, it is weak to any such purpose, by reason of
the flesh, and that corruption that is come on us: these two things are done in
Christ, and by him. First sin is condemned as to its guilt, and we set free
from that, the Righteousness of the Law by his Obedience, is fulfilled in us,
who could never do it our selves: and Secondly, that Obedience which is
required of us, his Spirit works it in us; so that that perfection of Obedience
which we have in him, is imputed to us, and the sincerity that we have in
Obedience, is from his Spirit bestowed on us. And this is the most excellent
Glass wherein we see our impotency, for what need we his perfect obedience to
be made ours, but that we have not, cannot attain any? what need we his Spirit
of life to quicken us, but that we are dead in trespasses and in sins?

3. The Death of sin; sin dying in us, now in some Concernment of sin,
which it is our wisdom to be acquainted with, and it is hid only in Christ.
There is a two fold dying of sin. 1. As to the exercise of it in our mortal
members. 2. As to the root, principle, and power of it in our souls. The first
indeed may be learned in part, out of Christ. Christlesse men, may have sin
dying in them, as to the outward exercise of it. Men's bodies may be disabled for
the service of their lusts, or the practice of them may not consist with their
interest. Sin is never more alive, See Treatise of Mortification.
then when it is thus dying. But there is a dying of it as to the root, the
principle of it, the daily decaying of the strength, power and life of it, and
this is to be had alone in Christ. Sin is a thing that of it self, is not
apt to dye, or to decay, but to get ground, and strength, and life in the
subject wherein it is, to eternity: prevent all its actual eruptions, yet its
Original enmity against God will still grow. In Believers it is still dying
and decaying, until it be utterly abolished. The opening of this treasury you
have Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. etc Know you not, that as many of us, as were
baptized in Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? therefore we are buried
with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead
by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life;
for if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be
also in the likeness of his Resurrection; knowing this that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that hence forth
we should not serve sin. This is the design of the Apostle in the beginning of
that Chap. not only to manifest whence is the principle and rise of our
Mortification and the death of sin, even from the death and blood of Christ,
but also the manner of sins continuance and dying in us, from the manner of
Christ's dying for sin: he was crucified for us, and thereby sin was crucified
in us: he dyed for us, and the body of sin is destroyed that we should not
serve sin: that as he was raised from the dead that death should not have
dominion over him, so also are we raised from sin, that it should not have
dominion over us. This wisdom is hid in Christ only. Moses at his dying day
had all his strength and vigor, so have sin and the Law to all out of Jesus;
at their dying day, sin is no way decayed. Now next to the receiving of the
Righteousness prepared for us, to know this, is the chiefest part of our
wisdom: to be truly acquainted with the principle of the dying of sin, to
feel virtue and power flowing from the Cross of Christ to that purpose, to
find sin crucified in us, as Christ was crucified for us, this is wisdom
indeed, that is in him alone.

4. There is a glorious end whereunto sin is appointed, and ordained, and
discovered in Christ, that others are unacquainted dishonor of God; the
debasement of his Majesty, and the ruin of the creature in whom it is; Hell it
self is but the filling of wretched creatures, with the Prove. 1. 31. Jerem.
17. 10.
fruit of their own devises. The Comminations and threats of God in the Law,
do manifest one other end of it, even the Demonstration of the Vindictive
Justice of God in measuring out unto it a meet 2 Thessalonians, 1. 6
recompense of reward. But here the Law stays (and with it all other light) and
discovers no other use or end of it at all. In the Lord Jesus there is the
manifestation of an other, and more glorious end; towit, the praise of Gods
Glorious Ephesians. 1. 6.
Grace, in the pardon and forgiveness of it. God having taken order in Christ,
that that thing which tended merely to his dishonor, should be managed to his
Infinite Glory; and that which of all things he desires to Exalt; even that he
may be known and believed to be a Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
God Pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. To return then to this part
of our Demonstration.

In the Knowledge of our selves in reference to our eternal condition, does
much of our wesedome consist. There is not any thing wherein (in this depraved
condition of nature) we are more concerned, then sin: without a knowledge of
that, we know not our selves, Fools make a mock of sin. A true saving
knowledge of sin is to be had only in the Lord Christ: in him may we see the
desert of our iniquities, and their pollution which could not be borne, or
expiated but by his blood, neither is there any wholesome view of these but in
Christ, in him and his Cross is discovered our universal impotency either of
attoning Gods Justice or living up to his will; the death of sin is procured
by, and discovered in the death of Christ; as also the manifestation of the
riches of Gods Grace in the pardoning thereof, a real and experimental
acquaintance as to our selves, with all which, is our wisdom; and it is that
which is of more value, then all the Wisdom of the World.

2. Righteousness is a second thing whereof the Spirit of Christ convinces the
World, and the maine thing that it is our wisdom to be acquainted withal.
This all men are persuaded of; that God is a most Righteous God; (That is a
natural notion of God which Abraham insisted on Gen, 18. 35. Shall not the
Judge of all the world do right?) They know that this is the Judgment of God,
that they who commit such things are worthy of death, Romans 1. 32. that it is a
Righteous thing with him to recompense tribulation unto offenders, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
6. he is a God of purer eyes then to behold iniquity Hab. 1. 13. and therefore
the ungodly cannot stand in Judgment Psalm. 1. 5. Hence the great inquiry of
every one, (who lies in any measure under the power of it,) convinced of
Immortality, and the Judgment to come, is, concerning the Righteousness
wherewith to appear in the presence of this Righteous God: This more or less
they are solicirous about all their days; and so as the Apostle speaks Heb. 2.
15. through the fear of death they are subject to bondage all their life. They
are perplexed with fears about the Issue of their Righteousness, least it
should end in death and destruction.

Unto men set upon this Inquiry, that which first and naturally presents it
self, for their direction and assistance, assuredly promising them a
Righteousness that will abide the trial of God, provided they will follow its
direction, is the Law. The Law has many fair pleas to prevail with a Soul
to close with it for a Righteousness before God. It was given out from God
himself for that end and purpose; it contains the whole obedience that God
requires of any of the sons of men; it has the promise of life annexed to
it; do this and live; the doers of the Law are justified; and if thou will
enter into life keep the Commandments; yea it is most certain that it must be
wholly fullfilled, if we ever think to stand with boldness before God. This
being some part of the plea of the Law, there is no man that seeks after
Righteousness but does one time or another attend to it, and attempt its
direction: many do it every day, who yet will not own that so they do. This
then they set themselves about; laboring to correct their lives, amend their
ways, perform the dutys required, and so follow after a Righteousness
according to the prescript of the Law. And in this course do many men continue
long with much perplexity; sometimes hopeing, oftener fearing, sometimes ready
to give quite over, sometimes vowing to continue, (their Consciences being no
way satisfied; nor Rightiousnesse in any measure attained) all their days:
After they have wearied themselves, perhaps for a long season, in the
largeness of their ways, they come at length, with fear, trembling and
disappointment to that conclusion of the Apostle, by the works of the Law no
flesh is Justified; and with dread Cry, that if God mark what is done a miss,
there is no standing before him. That they have this Issue the Apostle
witnesses; (...).
Romans 9. 31, 32. Israel who followed after the Law of Righteousness, attained
not to the Law of Righteousness, wherefore! because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by the works of the Law: it was not solely for want of
endeavor in themselves that they were disappointed, for they earnestly
followed after the Law of Righteousness, but from the nature of the thing it
self, it would not bear it; Righteousness was not to be obtained that way:
for says the Apostle, if they which are of the Law be heirs, faith is made
void, and the Promise made of none effect, because the. Law works wrath, Romans
4. 14, 15. The Law it self is now such as that it cannot give life Gal. 3. 21.
If there had been a Law given which would have given life, verily
Righteousness should have been by the Law; and he gives the reason in the next
verse why it could not give life, because the Scripture concludes all under
sin, that is, it is very true, and the Scripture affirms it, that all men
are sinners, and the Law speaks not one word to sinners but death and
destruction: therefore the Apostle tells us plainly, that God himself found
fault with this way of attaining Righteousness, Heb. 8. 7, 8. (...)
He complains of it, that is, he declares it insufficient for that End and
Purpose.

Now there are two considerations that discover unto men the vanity and
hopelesnesse of seeking Righteousness in this path.

1. That they have already sinned, for all have sinned and come short of the
Glory of God; Rom 3. 23. (...). Romans 3. 23. (...). Romans 5. 12.
this they are sufficiently sensible of; that allthough they could for the time
to come, fulfill the whole Law, yet there is a score, a reckoning, upon them
already; that they know not how to Answer for. Do they consult their guide, the
Deuteronomy. 27. 26 Gal. 3. 10.
Law it self, how they may be eased of the account that is past; it has not
one word of Direction, or Consolation, but bids them prepare to dye; the
sentence is gone forth, and there is no escaping.

2. That if all former debts should be blotted out, yet they are no way able
for the future, to fulfill the Law; they can as well move the earth with a
finger, as answer the perfection thereof; and therefore as I said, on this
twofold account, they conclude that this labor is lost, by the Gal. 3. 11, 12
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified.

Wherefore Secondly, being thus disappointed by the severity inexorablenesse of
the Law, men generally betake themselves to some other way, that may satisfy
them as to those considerations, which took them off from their former hopes;
and this for the most part, is, by fixing themselves upon some ways of
Atonement to satisfy God, and helping out the rest with hopes of Mercy. Not to
insist on the ways of Atonement and expiation which the Gentiles had pitched
on, nor on the many ways and inventions by works satisfactory of their own,
supererogations of others, indulgences, and Purgatory in the close, that the
Papists have found out for this End and purpose, it is I say, proper to all
convinced persons, as above, to seek for a Righteousness, partly by an
endeavor to satisfy for what is past, and partly by hoping after General
Mercy. This the Apostle calls a seeking for it, as it were by the works of the
Law; Romans 9. 32. (...).
not directly, but as it were by the works of the Law; making up one thing with
another. And he tells us what Issue they have in this business, Chap. 10. 3.
Being ignorant of the Righteousness of God, and seeking to establish their own
Righteousness, they were not subject to the Righteousness of God. They were
by it Enemies to the Righteousness of God. The ground of this going about to
establish their own Righteousness, was, that they were ignorant of the
righteousness of God; had they known the Righteousness of God, and what exact
conformity to his will he requires, they had never undertaken such a
fruitless business, as to have compassed it, as it were by the works of the
Law: yet this many will stick on a long time. Something they do, something
they hope for; some old faults they will buy of with new obedience. And this
pacifies their Consciences for a season; but when the Spirit comes to convince
them of Righteousness, neither will this hold; wherefore,

3. The matter comes at length to this Issue: they look upon themselves under
this twofold qualification: as

1. Sinners; obnoxious to the Law of God, and the curse thereof: so that
unless that be satisfied, that nothing from thence shall ever be laid to
their charge, it is altogether in vain, once to seek after an appearance in
the presence of God.

2. As Creatures, made to a supernatural and Eternal End, and therefore bound
to Answer the whole mind and will of God in the Obedience required at their
hands Now it being before discovered to them, that both these are beyond the
compass of their own endeavors, and the Assistance which they have formerly
rested on, if their Eternal condition be of any concernment to them, their
Wisdom is, to find out a Righteousness that may Answer both these to the
utmost.

Now both these are to be had only in the Lord Christ, who is our
Righteousness; This Wisdom, and all the Treasures of it, are hid in him.

1. He Expiates former iniquities, he satisfies for sin, and procures
Remission of it: Romans 3. 24, 25. Being justified freely by his grace, through
the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. All we like
sheep etc. Isa. 53. 5, 6. In his blood we have Redemption, the forgiveness of
sins, Ephesians. 1. 7. God spared not him, but gave him etc. Romans 8. 32. This,
even this alone is our Righteousness, as to that first part of it which
consists in the removal of the whole guilt of sin, whereby we are come short
of the glory of God. On this Account it is, that we are assured, that none
shall ever lay any thing to our charge, or condemn us: Romans 8. 31, 34. there
being no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: v. 1. we are purged by
the Sacrifice of Christ, so as to have no more Conscience of sin, Heb. 10. 2.
that is, troubles in Conscience about it. This Wisdom is hid only in the Lord
Jesus; in him alone is there an Atonement discovered: and give me the Wisdom
which shall cut all scores concerning sin, and let the world take what
remains. But

2. There is yet something more required: it is not enough that we are not
guilty. We must also be Actually Righteous: not only all sin is to be
answered for, but all Righteousness is to be fulfilled; by taking away the
guilt of sin, we are as persons innocent, but something more is required to
make us to be considered as persons obedient. I know nothing to teach me that
an innocent person shall go to heaven, be rewarded, if he be no more but so.
Adam was innocent at his first Creation, but he was to do this, to keep the
Commandments before he entered into life, he had no Title to Life by Innocence.
This then moreover is required, that the whole Law be fulfilled, and all the
Obedience performed that God requires at our hands. This is the Souls second
inquiry, and it finds a resolution only in the Lord Christ; for if when we were
enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. Romans 5. 10. his Death reconciled us,
then are we saved by his life. The Actual Obedience which he yielded to the
whole Law of God, is that Righteousness whereby we are saved; If so be we are
found in him, not having on our own Righteousness which is of the Law, but the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil 3. 9. This I shall have occasion
to handle more at large hereafter.

To return then. It is not I suppose any difficult task, to persuade men
convinced of Immortality and judgment to come, that the maine of their Wisdom
lies in this, even to find out such a Righteousness as will accompany them for
ever, and abide the severe trial of God himself. Now all the Wisdom of the
world is but folly, as to the discovery of this thing. The utmost that man's
Wisdom can do, is but to find out most wretched, burdensome, and vexatious
ways of perishing eternally. All the treasures of this Wisdom are hid in
Christ, He of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

3. Come we to the last thing which I shall but touch upon, Judgment: The true
Wisdom of this also is hid in the Lord Christ; I mean in particular that
Judgment that is for to come; so at present I take the word in that place. Of
what concernment this is to us to know, I shall not speak; It is that, whose
Caesar haec disserit, credo falsa existimans ea quae de inferis memorantur,
diverso itinere malos a bonis loca tetra, inculta faeda atque formidolosa
habere: Cato. apud. Salust. bell. Catit. (...). Plat. in Phaed.
influence upon the sons of men, is the principle of their discriminating
themselves from the beasts that perish Neither shall I insist on the Devenere
locos laetos, and amaena vieta Fortunatorum nemorum, sedesque beatas etc. Virg.
Aen. 6.
obscure intimations of it, which are given by the present proceedings of
Providence in governing the World, nor that greater light of it, which shines
in the threats and promises of the Law. The Wisdom of it, is in two regards
hid in the Lord Jesus: 1, as to the Truth of it: 2. as to the Manner of it.

1. For the Truth of it; and so in and by him it is confirmed, and that two
ways: 1. by his Death: 2. by his Resurrection.

1. By his Death: God in the death of Christ, punishing and condemning sin in
the flesh of his own Son, in the fight of Men, Angels and Devils, has
given an abundant Assurance of a Righteous and universal Judgment to come;
wherefore, or upon what account imaginable, could he be induced to lay such
load on him, but that he will certainly reckon one day with the Sons of Men for
all their works, ways and walkings before him? The death of Christ is a most
solemn Exemplar of the last judgment. Those who own him to be the Son of
God, will not deny a judgment to come.

2. By his Resurrection, Act. 17. 31. (...), He has given faith and assurance
of this thing to all, by raising Christ from the dead, having appointed him to
be the judge of all, in whom, and by whom he will judge the World in
Righteousness. And then

Lastly, for the manner of it; that it shall be by him who has loved us, and
given himself for us, who is himself the Righteousness that he requires at
our hands; and on the other side by him who has been, in his person, grace,
ways, worship, Servants reviled, despised, contemned, by the men of the World,
which holds out unspeakable consolation on the one hand, and terror on the
other: so that the Wisdom of this also is hid in Christ.

And this is the Second part of our First Demonstration. Thus the knowledge of
our selves in reference to our supernatural end, is no small portion of our
Wisdom. The things of the greatest concernment hereunto, are Sin,
Righteousness, and Judgment, the Wisdom of all which, is alone hid in the
Lord Jesus. which was to be proved.

3. The 3d part of of our Wisdom is to walk with God; now that one may walk
with another, Five things are required. Agreement, 2. Acquaintance, 3.
Strength, 4 Boldness. 5. An aiming at the same End. And all these, with the
Wisdom of them, are hid in the Lord Jesus.

1. Agreement. The Prophet tells us, that two cannot walk together unless
they be agreed, Amos 3. 3. Until Agreement be made there is no communion, no
walking together, God and man, by nature (or whilst man is in the state of
nature) are at the Romans 1. 18.
greatest enmity; He declares nothing to us but wrath, whence we are said to be
Children of it, that is, borne obnoxious to it, Ephesians. 2 3. and whilst we
remain in that condition, the wrath of God abides on us, Joh 3. 36. All the
discovery that God makes of himself unto us, is, that he is unexpressibly
provoked, and therefore preparing wrath against the day of wrath, and the
Revelation of his Righteous Judgments; the Day of his and sinners meeting, is
called the day of wrath: Romans 2. 5, 6. Neither do we come short in our enmity
against him, yea we first began it, Ephesians. 7. 29
and we continue longest in it. To express this Enmity, the Apostle tells us,
that our very minds, the best part of us, are Enmity against God, Romans 8. 7, 8
and that we neither are, nor will, nor can be subject to him, our Enmity
manifesting it self by Universal Rebellion against him, what ever we do that
seems otherwise, is but hypocrisy or flattery, yea it is a part of this Enmity
to lessen it. In this state the Wisdom of walking with God must needs be most
remote from the soul; He is 1 John 1. 5. (...). John 1. 5. Ephesians. 5. 8. Ephesians.
2. 3. Exodus 15. 11. 1 John 4. 8. Tit. 3. 3.
light, and in him is no darkness at all: we are darkness, and in us there is
no light at all. He is life, a living God; we are dead, dead sinners, dead in
trespasses and sin: He is Holiness and glorious in it; we wholly defiled, an
abominable thing: he is Love, we full of hatred, hating and being hated. Surely
this is no foundation for agreement, or upon that, of walking together, nothing
can be more remote then this frame from such a condition The foundation then of
this, I say, is laid in Christ, hid in Christ, He, faith the Apostle, is our
peace, he has made peace for us, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. he slew the Enmity, in his
own body on the Cross, v. 16.

1. He takes out of the way the cause of the enmity that was between God and
us; Sin and the curse of the Law: Dan. 9. 24. He makes an end of sin; and
that by making Attonen ent for iniquity; and he blotteth out the hand writing
of Ordinances, Col. 2. 24. redeeming us from the Curse by being made a Curse
for us, Gal. 3. 13.

2. He destroys him who would continue the enmity, and make the breach wider.
Heb 2. 14 through death he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is,
the Devil: and Col. 2. 14 spoiled principalities and powers.

3. He made Reconciliation for the sins of the People, Heb. 2. 17. he made by
his blood an Atonement with God, to turn away that wrath which was due to us,
so making peace: hereupon God is said to be in Christ, reconciling the world
unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. being reconciled himself v 18. he lays down the
enmity on his part and proceeds to what remains, to slay the enmity on our
part, that we also may be reconciled: and this also

4. He does; for Romans 5. 11. by our Lord Jesus Christ we do receive the
Atonement, accept of the peace made and tendered, laying down our enmity to
God, and so confirming an agreement betwixt us in his blood. So that through
him we have an access unto the Father Ephesians. 2. 18. Now the whole wisdom of
this Agreement, without which, there is no walking with God, is hid in Christ:
out of him God on his part is a consuming fire: we are as stubble fully dry,
yet setting our selves in battle array against that fire; if we are brought
together we are consumed. All our approachings to him out of Christ, are but to
our detriment: in his blood alone have we this Agreement: and let not any of us
once suppose that we have taken any step in the paths of God, with him, that
any one duty is accepted, that all is not lost as to Eternity, if we have not
done it, upon the account hereof.

2. There is required Acquaintance also to walking together. Two may meet
together in the same way, and have no quarrel between them, no enmity, but if
they are mere strangers one to another, they pass by, without the least
Communion together. It does not suffice that the Enmity betwixt God and us be
taken away, we must also have acquaintance given us with him: Our not knowing
of him is a great cause and a great part of our enmity. Our understandings are
darkened, and we are alienated from the life of God, etc Ephesians. 4. 18. This also
then must be added, if we ever come to walk with God, which is our Wisdom.
And this also is hid in the Lord Christ, and comes forth from him. It is true
there are sundry other means, as his Word, and his Works, that God has given
the Sons of men, to make a discovery of himself unto them, and to give them
some acquaintance with him, that as the Apostle speaks Act. 17. 27. They
should seek the Lord, if happily they might find; but yet as that knowledge of
God, which we have by his works, is but very weak and imperfect, so that which
we have by the Word, the letter of it, by reason of our blindness, is not
saving to us if we have no other help: for though that be light as the Sun in
the firmament, yet if we have no eyes in our heads, what can it avail us? No
saving acquaintance with him, that may direct us to walk with him can be
obtained. This also is hid in the Lord Jesus, and comes forth from him: 1 John
5. 20. He has given us this understanding, that we should know him that is
true: all other light whatever without his giving us an understanding, will not
do it. He is the true light, which lights every one that is enlightened Joh.
15. Luke 24. 45. he opens our understandings that we may understand the
Scriptures; none has known God at any time, but he has revealed him. 1 John
18. God dwells in that light which no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6. 26. None
has ever had any such acquaintance with him, as to be said to have seen him,
but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Hence he tells the Pharisees, that
notwithstanding all their great knowledge which they pretended, indeed they had
neither heard the voice of God at any time, nor seen his shape Ioh. 5. 37. they
had no manner of spiritual acquaintance with God, but he was unto them as a
man whom they had never heard, nor seen. There is no acquaintance with God, as
love, and full of Kindness, Patience, Grace and pardoning Mercy, on which
knowledge of him alone we can walk with him, but only in Christ; but of this
fully before. This then also is hid in him.

3. There must moreover be a way wherein we must walk with God: God did at the
beginning assigned us a path to walk in with him: even the path of Innocence
and exact Holiness in a Covenant of works. This path by sin, is so filled
with thorns and briers, so stopped up by curses and wrath, that no flesh
living can take one step in that path: a new way for us to walk in, must be
found out, if ever we think to hold communion with God. And this also lys upon
the former account. It is hid in Christ: All the world cannot, but by and in
him, discover a path, that a man may walk one step with God in. And therefore
the holy Ghost tells us, that Christ has consecrated, dedicated, and set apart
for that purpose, a new and living way into the holiest of all, Heb. 10. 20. a
new one, for the first old one was useless, a living one, for the other is
dead: therefore says he v. 22. let us draw near; having a way to walk in, let
us draw near. And this way that he has prepared is no other but himself,
Ioh. 14. 5. in answer to them, who would go to the Father, and hold Communion
with him, he tells them, I am the way and no man comes to the Father, but by
me. He is the medium of all Communication between God and us: In him we meet,
in him we walk: all influences of Love, Kindesse, Mercy, from God to us, are
through him; all our returns of Love, Delight, Faith, Obedience unto God, are
all through him. He being that one way, God so often promises his people: and
it is a glorious way, Isa. 35. 8. an high way, a way of Holiness, a way that
none can err in, that once enter it; which is further set out Isa. 42. 16. All
other ways, all paths but this, go down to the chambers of death: they all lead
to walk contrary to God.

4. But suppose all this, that Agreement be made, Acquaintance given, and a way
provided, yet if we have no Strength way, what will all this avail us; This
also then must be added, Of our selves we are of no strength, Romans 5. 6. poor
weakelings, not able to go a step in the ways of God: when we are set in the
way either we throw our selves down, or Temptations cast us down; and we make
no progress: and the Lord Jesus tells us plainly, that without him we can do
nothing Ioh. 15. 5. not any thing at all, that shall have the least acceptance
with God. Neither can all the creatures; in Heaven and Earth yield us the least
assistance. Men's contending to do it in their own power, comes to nothing: This
part of this Wisdom also is hid in Christ. All strength to walk with God, is
from him; I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, says Saint
Paul, Phil. 4. 12. who denis that of our selves we have any sufficiency 2 Cor.
3. 5. We that can do nothing in our selves, we are such weaklings, can do all
things in Jesus Christ, as Giants; and therefore in him, we are, against all
oppositions in our way, more than Conquerours, Romans 8. 37. and that because
from his fulness, we receive Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. From him have we
the Spirit of life and power, whereby, he bears us, as on Eagles wings
swiftly, safely, in the paths of walking with God. Any step that is taken in
any way, by strength that is not immediately from Christ, is one step toward
Hell. He first takes us by the arm and teaches us to go, until he lead us on
to perfection. He has milk and strong meat, to feed us, he strengthens us,
with all might, and is with us in our running the race that is set before us.
But yet

5. Whence should we take this Confidence as to walk with our God, who is a
consuming fire? Was there not such a dread upon his people of old, that it was
taken for granted among them, that if they saw God, at any time, it was not to
be endured, they must dye? Can any but with extreme horror, think of that
dreadful appearance, that he made unto them of old upon Mount Sinai; until
Moses himself who was their Mediator, said I exceedingly fear, and quake Heb.
12. 21. and all the people said, let not God speak with us, least we dye Exodus
20. 19. Nay though men have apprehensions of the Goodness and kindness of
God, yet upon any discovery of his Glory, how do they tremble and are filled
with dread and astonishment? Has it not been so with the choicest of his
Saints, Heb. 3. 16. Isa. 6. 5. Job. 42. 5, 6. whence then, should we take to
our selves this boldness to walk with God? This the Apostle will inform us
in Heb. 10 19. it is by the blood of Jesus; so Ephesians. 3 12. in him we have
boldness; and access with confidence, not standing a far off, like the
people at the giving of the Law, but drawing nigh to God with boldness, and
that upon this account. The dread and terror of God, entered by sin. Adam had
not the least thought of hiding himself until he had sinned. The guilt of
sin being on the Conscience, and this being a common notion left in the
hearts of all, that God is a most Righteous revenger thereof; this fills men
with dread and horror at an apprehension of his presence, fearing that he is
come to call their sins to remembrance. Now the Lord Jesus by the Sacrifice
and the Atonement that he has made, has taken away this Conscience of sin;
that is, a dread of revenge from God, upon the account of the guilt thereof. He
has removed the slaying sword of the Law, and on that account gives us great
boldness with God; discovering him unto us now, no longer as a revenging
Judge, but as a tender, merciful, and reconciled Father, Moreover, wherereas
there is on us by nature a Spirit of Bondage, filling us with innumerable
tormenting fears, he takes it a way, and gives us the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father, and behave our selves with Confidence and gracious
boldness as Children: for where the Spirit of God is, there is Liberty 2 Cor.
3. 17. That is, a freedom from all that dread and terror, which the
Administration of the Law brought with it. Now as there is no sin that God
will more severely revenge then any boldness that man takes with him out of
Christ, so there is no grace more acceptable to him then that boldness, which
he is pleased to afford us in the blood of Jesus. There is then

6. But one thing more to add, and that is, that two cannot walk together,
unless they have the same design in hand, End; this also in a word, is given
us in the Lord Jesus. The End of God is the advancement of his own Glory: None
can aim at this end, but only in the Lord Jesus. The sum of all is, that the
whole Wisdom of our Walking with God, is hid in Christ, and from him only to
be obtained, as has been manifest by an enumeration of particulars.

And so have I brought my first Demonstration of what I true wisdom and
knowledge is laid up in, and laid out by the Lord Jesus; and this by an
Induction of the chief particular heads of those things wherein confessedly
our Wisdom does consist: I have but one more to add, and therein I shall be
brief.

Secondly then I say, this Truth will be further manifested by the
consideration of the insufficiency and vanity of any thing else, that may lay
claim, or pretend to a title to Wisdom.

There be two things in the World, that do pass under this account, The one
is Learning or Literature; 1. Skill and knowledge of Arts, Sciences, Tongues,
with the knowledge of the things that are past. 2. Prudence and skill for the
mannagement of our selves in reference to others, in civil affairs, for
public good, which is much the fairest flower, within the border of Natures
garden. Now concerning both these, I shall briefly evince;

1. That they are utterly insufficient for the compassing and obtaining of
those particular Ends, whereunto they are designed.

2. That both of them in conjunction, with their utmost improvement, cannot
reach the true general end of Wisdom; both which considerations will set the
crown in the issue upon the head of Jesus Christ.

Begin we with the First of these, and that as to the First particular.
Learning it self, if it were all in one man, is not able to compass the
particular end whereto it is designed, which writes vanity and vexation upon
the forehead thereof.

The particular end of Literature, (though not observed by many, men's eyes
being fixed on false ends, which compells them in their progress aberrare a
scopo is none other, but to remove some part of that curse which is come upon
us by sin. Learning, is the product of the Souls struggling with the curse
for sin. Adam at his first Creation, was completely furnished with all that
knowledge (excepting only things not then in being, neither in themselves, nor
any natural causes, as that which we now call tongues, and those things that
are the Subject of story) as far as it lies in a needful tendency to the
utmost end of man, which we now press after. There was no streitnesse, much
less darkness upon his understanding, that should make him sweat for a way to
improve, and make out those general conception of things which he had. For his
knowledge of Nature, it is manifest from his imposition of suitable (...).
Plato in Cratyle.
names to all the Creatures (the particular Reasons of the most of which to us
are lost) wherein from the Approbation given of his nomination of things in the
Scripture, and the significancy of what yet remains evident, it is most
apparent, it was done upon a clear acquaintance with their natures. Hence
Plato could observe that he was most wise that first imposed names on things,
yea had more than humane wisdom. Were the wisest man living, yea a General
collection of all the Wise men in the world, to make an Experiment of their
skill and learning, in giving names to all living creatures suitable to their
natures, and expressive of their qualitys, they would quickly perceive the
loss they have incurred. Adam was made perfect, for the whole end of ruling
the Creatures, and living to God for which he was made; which, without the
knowledge of the nature of the one, and the will of the other, he could not be.
All this being lost by sin, a multiplication of tongues also being brought in
as a curse for an after Rebellion, the whole design of Learning is but to
disintangle Gal. 10. 3. etc.
the soul from this Issue of sin. Ignorance, darkness and blindness is
come upon the understanding; acquaintance with the works of God, Spiritual
and natural, is lost; strangeness of communication is given by multiplication
of tongues. Tumultuating of Passions and Affections, with innumerable darkning
prejudices, are also come upon us. To remove and take this away, to disintangle
the mind in its reasonings, to recover an Acquaintance with the works of God,
to subduct the soul from under the Effects of the Curse of division of
tongues, is the aim and tendance of Literature. This is the aliquid quo
tendit. And he that has any other aim in it; passim sequitur corvum testaque
lutoque. Now not to insist upon that vanity and vexation of Spirit, with the
innumerable evils where with this enterprise is attended, this is that I only
say, it is in it self, no way sufficient for the attainment of its end, which
writes vanity upon its forehead with characters not to be obliterated. To this
purpose, I desire to observe these two things.

1. That the knowledge aimed at to be recovered, was given unto man in order to
his walking with God, unto that supernatural end whereunto he was appointed.
For after he was furnished with all his Endowments, the Law of life and death
was given to him, that he might know wherefore he received them. Therefore
knowledge in him was spiritualized, and sanctified, even that knowledge which
he had by nature, in respect of its principle, and end, was spiritual.

2. That the loss of it, is part of that curse which was inflicted on us for
sin. What ever we come short in of the state of the first man in innocence,
whether in loss of good, or addition of evil, it is all of the curse for
sin. Besides! that blindness, ignorance, darkness, deadness, which is
every where ascribed to us in the state of nature, does fully comprize that
also whereof we speak.

On these two considerations it is most apparent, that Learning, can no way of
it self attain the end it aymeth at. For

1. That Light which by it is discovered, (which the Lord knows is very little,
weak, obscure, imperfect, uncertain, conjecturall, for a great part only
enabling men to quarrel with, and oppose one another, to the reproach of
Reason, yet I say, that which is attained by it,) is not in the least measure
by it spiritualized, or brought into that order of living to God, and with God,
wherein at first it lay. This is wholly beyond its reach. As to this end, the
Apostle assures us, that the utmost Issue that men come to, is darkness and
folly: Romans 1. 21, 22 (...). Zenoph. ap^l^ pro Socrat.
Who knows not the profound enquiries, the subtle disputations, the accute
Reasonings, the admirable discoverys of Socrates, Plato and Aristotle and
others? What, as to the purpose in hand did they attain by all their studdys
and endeavors? (...) say the Apostle, they became fools. He that by General
consent bears the Crown, of Reputation for wisdom from them all, with whom
to have lived was counted an inestimable happiness, dyed like a fool,
sacrificing a Cock to Aesculapius. And another, that Jesus Christ alone is the
true light that lights us Joh. 1. 9. And there is not any that has any true
light but what is imdiately from him. After all the learning of men, if they
have nothing else, they are still natural men and perceive not the things of
God. Their light is still but darkness, and how great is that darkness? It is
the Lord Jesus alone who is anointed to open the eyes of the blind. Men cannot
Spiritualize a notion, nor lay it in any order, to the Glorifying of God. After
all their endeavors they are still blind and dark, yea darkness it self,
knowing nothing as they should. I know how the men of these seize are apt
to say, are we blind also? with great contempt of others; but God has blasted
all their pride; where (says he) is the wise? where the Scribe etc. 1 Cor. 1.
20. I shall not add what Paul has further cautioned us to the O Sapientia
superba irridens Christum crucifixum. August. Expos. in Joh. Trac. 2. de cap. 1.
seeming condemning of Haereses a Philosophia subornantur: inde Aeones, formae,
and nescio quae, trinitas hominum apud Valentinum, Plat onicus fue rat; inde
Marcionis deus melior de tranquilitate; a stoicis venerat: and ubi anima
interire dicarur, ab epicureis observatur, and ut carnis restitutio negetur, de
u na omnium philosophorum schola sumitur: -- quid ergo Athenis and
Hierosolomis? quid Academiae and Ecclesiae? quid Haereticis and Christianis?
nostra institutio de porticu Solomonis est: nobis curiositate non opus est post
Jesum Christum; nec inquisitione post evangelium: cum credimus, nihil
desideramus ultra credere: hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod ultra credere
debemus. Tertul. de praescript. ad Haeret.
-- (...) Just. Mart. ad Graet. Cohort.
Philosophy as being fitted to make spoil of souls; nor what Tertullian with
some other of the Ancients have spoken of it; being very confident, that it was
the abuse and not the true use and advantage of it, that they opposed. But

2. The darkness and ignorance that it strives to remove, being come upon us
as a curse, it is not in the least measure, as it is a curse, able to remove it
or take it away. He that has attained to the greatest height of Literature,
yet if he has nothing else, if he have not Christ, is as much under the curse
of blindness, ignorance, stupidity, dulnes, as the poorest, silliest soul in
the world. The curse is only removed in him who was made a curse for us. Every
thing that is penal is taken away only by him, on whom all our sins did meet
in a way of punnishment, yea upon this Account. The more Abilityes the mind is
furnished withal, the more it closes with the curse, and strengthens it self
to act its enmity against God. All that it receives does but help it to set up
high thoughts and imaginations against the Lord Christ. So that this knowledge
comes short of what in particular it is designed unto, and therefore cannot be
that solid wisdom we are enquiring after.

There be sundry other things whereby it were easy to blurre. 45. (...): Greg.
Naz. Car. 1. de reb. suis.
the countenance of this wisdom, and from its intricacy, difficulty,
uncertainty, unsatisfactorinesse, betraying its followers into that which they
most profess to avoid, blindness and folly, to write upon it vanity and
vexation of Spirit I hope I shall not need to add any thing to clear my self
for not giving a due esteem and respect unto Literature, my intendment being
only to cast it down at the feet of Jesus Christ, and to set the crown upon
his head.

2. Neither can the Second part of the choicest wisdom out of Christ attain
the peculiar end whereunto it is appointed; and that is Prudence in the
mannagement of Civil affairs, then which no perishing thing is more Glorious,
nothing more useful for the common good of humane kind. Now the immediate End
of this prudence is to keep the rational world in bounds and order, to draw
circles about the Sons of men, and to keep them from passing their allotted
bounds and limits, to the mutual disturbance and destruction of each other.
All manner of trouble and disturbance arises from irregularity; one man
breaking in upon the rights, usages, interests, relations of another, sets this
World at variance. The Sum and aim of all Wisdom below is, to cause all
things to move in their proper Sphere, whereby it would be impossible there
should be any more enterfering, then is in the Celestial Orbs,
notwithstanding all their diverse and various motions; To keep all to their own
alotments, within the compass of the lines that are fallen unto them is the
special end of this wisdom.

Now it will be a very easy task to demonstrate, that all Civil Prudence,
whatever, (besides the vexation of its attainment, (...) Excep. ex Nicostrat.
and loss being attained) is no way able to compass this end. The present
condition of affairs throughout the World, as also that of former ages, will
abundantly testify it, but I shall further discover the vanity of it for this
End, in some few Observations; and the

1. First is, That through the Righteous Judgment of God lopping off the top,
flowers of the pride of men, it frequently comes to pass, that those who are
furnished with the greatest Abilities in this kind, do lay them out to a direct
contrary End, unto that which is their proper natural tendency and aim, From
whom (for the most part) are all the commotions, in the world; the breaking up
of bounds, setting the whole frame of nature on fire; is it not from such men
as these? Were not men so wise, the world perhaps would be more quiet, when the
end of wisdom is to keep it in quietness. This seems to be a curse that God
has spread upon the wisdom of the World in the most in whom it is, that it
shall be employed in direct opposition to its proper end.

2. That God has made this a constant path toward the advancement of his own
Glory; even to leven the Wisdom and the counsels of the wisest of the Sons
of men, with solly and madness, that they shall in the depth of their policy
advise things for the compassing of the ends they do propose, as unsuitable as
any thing that could proceed out of the mouth of a Isthuc est sapere, non quod
ante pedes modo est, Videre, sed etiam illa quae futura sunt, Prospicere.
Teren. Adelp.
Child or a fool, and as directly tending to their own disappointment and
ruin as any thing that could be invented against them. He destroys the
wisdom of the wise, and brings to nothing the understanding of the prudent, 1
Cor. 1. 19. This he largely describes Is. 19. 11, 12, 13, 14. drunkenness and
staggering is the Issue of all their wisdom: and that upon this account, the
Lord gives them the spirit of giddiness. So also Job. 5. 12, 13, 14. They meet
with darkness in the day time: when all things seem clear about them, and a
man would wonder how men should Isa. 29. 14. 47. 10. Jerem. 49. 7. Obad. 8.
miss their way, then will God make it darkness to such as these; so Psalm.
33. 10. Hence God as it were sets them at work, and undertakes their
disappointment, Isa 8. 9, 10. Go about your Counsels says the Lord, and I
will take order that it shall come to naught. And Psalm. 2. 3, 4; When men are
deep at their plots and contrivances, God is said to have them in derision, to
laugh them to scorn; seeing the poor worms industriously working out their
own ruin. Never was this made more clear, then in the days wherein we live;
scarsely have any wise men been brought to destruction but it has evidently
been through their own folly: neither has the wisest council of most, been
one jot better then madness.

3. That this wisdom which should tend to universal quietness, has almost
constantly given universal disquietnesse unto themselves, in whom it has been
most eminent. In much wisdom is much grief; Ecles. 1. 18. And in the issue,
some of them have made away with themselves, as Ahithophel, and the most of
them have been violently dispatched by others. There is indeed no end of the
folly Prudens futuri temporis exitum Caliginosa nocte premit Deus, Ridetque si
mortalis ultra Fas trepidat. Horat.
of this wisdom. The great men of the world carry away the reputation of it:
really it is found in few of them. They are for the most part common events,
whereunto they contribute not the least mite, which are ascribed to their care,
vigilance and foresight. Mean men that have learned to adore what is above
them, reverence the meetings and conferences of those who are in Greatness and
esteem. Their weakness and folly is little known; where this wisdom has
been most eminent, it has dwelt so close upon the borders of Atheism, been
attended with such falsenesse and injustice, that it has made its possessors:
wicked and infamous.

I shall not need to give any more instances to manifest the insufficiency of
this wisdom for the attainning of its own peculiar, and immediate End. This
is the vanity of any thing whatever, that it comes short of the mark it is
directed unto. It is far then from being true and solid Wisdom, seeing on
the forehead thereof you may read disappointment.

And this is the first Reason why true wisdom cannot consist in either of
these, because they come short even of the particular and immediate ends they
aim at. But

2. Both these in conjunction, with their utmost immprovement, are not able to
reach the true general end of wisdom. This Assertion disabilility and
unsuitablenesse for the true end of wisdom: but it is so professedly done by
him who had the largest portion of both of any of the Sornes of men (Solomon in
his Preacher) that I shall not any further, insist upon it.

To draw then unto a close; If true and solid wisdom is not in the least to
be found amongst these, if the pearl be not bid in this field, if these two
are but vanity and disappointment, it cannot but be to no purpose to seek for
it in any thing else below, these being amongst them incomparably the most
excellent, and therefore with one accord let us set the crown of this Wisdom
on the head of the Lord Jesus.

Let the Reader then in a few words take a view of the Tendency of this whole
Digression. To draw our hearts to the more cheerful entertainment of, and
delight in the Lord Jesus, is the aim thereof. If all wiseome be laid up in
him, and by an interest in him only to be attained; if all things beside him
and without him, that lay claim thereto, are folly and vanity, let them that
would be wise learn where to repose their souls.

CHAP. IV.
Of Communion with Christ in a Conjugall Relation in respect of consequentiall
Affections. His delight in his Saints first insisted on. Isa. 62. 5. Cant. 3.
11. Prove. 8. 21. Instance of Christ's delight in Believers. He reveals his
whole heart to them. Joh. 15. 14, 15. Himself 1 John 14. 21. His Kingdom.
Enables them to communicate their mind to him, giving them: Assistance: a way:
boldness: Romans 8. 26, 27. The Saints delight in Christ: this manifested: Cant.
2. 7. Chap. 8. 6. Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. opened. Their delight in his Servants
and ordinances of worship for his sake.

THE Conmunion begun, as before declared, between Christ and the soul, is in
the next place carried on consequentiall Affections; Affections suiting such a
relation. Christ having given himself to the soul, loves the soul; and the
soul having given it self unto Christ, loves him also. Christ loves his own,
yea he loves them to the end. Joh. 13. v. 1. and the Saints they love Christ,
they love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Ephesians. the last.

Now the love of Christ wherewith he follows his Saints consists in these four
things,

1. Delight. 2. Valuation. 3. Pity or compassion. 4. Bounty.
The love also of the Saints unto Christ may be referred to these four heads;

1. Delight. 2. Valuation. 3. Chastity. 4. Duty.
Two of these, are of the same kind; and two distinct: as is required in this
Relation, wherein all things stand not on equal terms.

1. The first thing on the part of Christ is Delight. Delight is the flowing of
Love and Joy: the (...): Arist. Eth. lib. 7. cap. 14. (...). id. l, 10. c. 4.
rest and complacence of the mind, in a suitable desirable Good enjoyed. Now
Christ delights exceedingly in his Saints; As the Bridegroom rejoices over
the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee, Is. 62 5. hence he calls the
day of his Espousals, the day of the gladness of his heart Can. 3 11. It is
known that usually this is the most immixed delight, that the Sons of men are
in their Pilgrimage made partakers of. The Delight of the Bridegroom in the
day of his espousalls is the height of what an expression of delight can be
carried unto. This is in Christ answerable to the Relation he takes us into.
His heart is glad in us, without sorrow. And every day whilst we live is his
wedding day. It is said of him. Zeph. 3. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of
thee (that is dwelling amongst us taking our nature Joh. 1. 14.) is mighty, he
will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his Love, he
will joy over thee with singing: which is a full description of delight in all
the parts of it; joy; and exaltation, rest and complacence. I rejoiced (said
he) in the habitable parts of the earth, and my delights were with the Sons of
men. Prove. 8. 31. The thoughts of Communion with the Saints, were the joy of
his heart from Eternity. On the Compact and agreement that was between his
Father and him, that he should divide a portion with the Strong, and save a
remnant for his inheritance, his soul rejoiced in the thoughts of that
pleasure and delight, which he would take in them, when he should actually take
them into Communion with himself. Therefore in the preceding verse it is said
he was by him as (...); say we as one brought up with him: alumnus: the 70
render it (...); and the latin with most other translations, cuncta componens,
or disponens. The word taken actively signifye; him whom another takes into his
care to breed up, and disposes of things for his advantage: so did Christ take
us then into his care, and rejoiced in the thoughts of the execution of his
trust. Concerning them he says, here will I dwell, and here will I make my
habitation for ever For, them has he chosen for his Temple and his dwelling
place, because he delights in them. This makes him take them so nigh himself
in every relation. As he is God, they are his Temple. As he is a King, they are
his Subjects; he is the King of Saints; as he is a head, they are his Body, he
is the Head of the Church; as he is a first borne he makes them his Brethren,
He is not ashamed to call them brethren.

I shall choose out one particular from among many as an Instance for the proof
of this thing: And that is this, Christ reveals his secrets, his mind unto
his Saints, and enables them to reveal the secrets of their hearts to him. An
evident demonstration of great delight. It was Sampsons carnal delight in
Dalilah, that prevailed with him to reveal unto her those things which were of
greatest concernment unto him: He will not hide his mind from her, though it
cost him his life. It is only a bosom friend unto whom we will unbosome our
selves. Neither is there possible a greater evidence of delight in close
Communion, then this, that one will reveal his heart unto him whom he takes
into society, and not entertain him with things common and vulgarly known. And
therefore have I chose this instance from amongst a thousand that might be
given of this delight of Christ in his Saints.

He then communicates his mind unto his Saints, and unto them only: his mind,
the Council of his love, the thoughts of his purposes of his bosom for our
eternal good. His Mal. 4. 2. Luke 1. 78. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
mind; the ways of his grace, the workings of his spirit, the Rule of his
scepter, and the obedience of his Gospel. All spiritual Revelation is by
Christ. He is the true light that inlightneth every man that comes into the
world. John 1. 9. He is the day spring, the day star, and the Sun So that it
is impossible any light should be but by him; from him it is, that the secret
of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he shows them his Covenant. Psalm.
15. v. 14. as he expresses it at large, Joh. 15. 14, 15 Voluntate^ Dei nosse
quisqua^ desidetat, fiat anticus Deo: quia si voluntatem hominis nosse vellet
cujus, amicus non esser, omnes ejus in pudentiam and slultitiam deridereur.
August de Genesis Cont. Man. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you: Hence forth I call you
not servants, for the Servant knows not what his Lord does, but I have called
you friends, for Vox (...) ex subject a materia, restrictionem ad doctrinam
salutis requirit. Tarnov. in loc.
all things that I have heard of my Father. I have made known unto you: He
makes them as his friends and uses them as friends, as bosom friends, in whom
he is delighted. He makes known all his mind unto them, every thing that his
Father has committed to him as Mediator, to be revealed, Act. 20. 24. And the
Apostle declares how this is done. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. he has revealed these
things to us by his Spirit, for we have received him that we might know the
things that are freely given us of God. He sends us his Spirit (as he promised)
to make known his mind unto his Saints, and to lead them into all truth; and
thence the Apostle concludes, we have known the mind of Christ v. 16. for he
uses us as friends and declares it unto us. Joh. 1. 18. There is not any
thing in the heart of Christ wherein these his friends are concerned, that he
does not reveal to them. All his love, his Goodwill, the secrets of his
Covenant, the paths of obedience, the Mystery of Faith is told them.

And all this is spoken in opposition to unbelievers, with whom he has no
communion. These know nothing of the mind of Christ as they ought: the natural
man receives not the things that are of God, 1 Cor: 2. 14. There is a wide
difference between understanding the Doctrine of the Scripture as in the
letter, and a true knowing the mind of Christ. This we have by special
unction from Christ. 1 John 2. 24. we have an unction from the holy one, and we
know all things, 1 Ioh. 5. last.

Now the things which in this Communion Christ reveals delights in, may be
referred to these two heads

1. Himself. 2. His Kingdom.
1. Himself, John 14. 21. He that loves me shall be loved of my Father; and I
will love him and will manifest my self unto him; manifest my self in all my
Graces, desireablenesse and loveliness; he shall know me as I am, and such I
will be unto him, a Savior, a Redemer, the chiefest of ten thousand. He shall
be acquainted with the true worth and value of the Pearl of Price: let others
look upon him as having neither form nor Comeliness, as noe way desirable,
He will manifest himself and his excellencyes unto them in whom he is
delighted, that they shall see him altogether Lovely. He will veil himself to
all the world, but the Saints with d open face shall behold his beauty, and his
glory, and so be translated to the Image of the same Glory as by the spirit of
the Lord 2 Cor. 3. 14.

2. His kingdom; they shall be acquainted with the Government of his Spirit in
their hearts, as also with his Rule, and the Administration of Authority in his
Word, and among his Churches.

Thus, in the first place does he manifest his delight in his Saints, he
communicates his secrets unto them. He gives them to know his Person, his
Excellencys, his Grace, his Love, his Kingdom, his will, the Riches of his
Goodness, and the Bowels of his mercy more and more, when the world shall
neither see, nor know any such thing.

2. He enables his Saints to communicate their mind, to reveal walk together
as intimate friends; Christ knows the minds of all. He knows what is in man,
and needs not that any man testify of him: Joh. 2. 25. He searches the hearts
and tries the reins of all Revel. 2. 23. But all know not how to communicate
their mind to Christ. It will not avail a man at all, that Christ knows his
mind; for so he does of every one whether he will or no: but that a man can
make his heart known unto Christ, this is consolation. Hence the prayers of the
Saints are Revel. 8. 3.
Incense, Odours, and those of others are Hos. 7. 14. Isa. 66. 3. Prove. 28. 9.
Howling, cutting off a dogs neck, offering of Swines blood, an Abomination
unto the Lord. Now three things are required to enable a man to communicate his
heart unto the Lord Jesus.

1. Assistance for the work, for of our selves we cannot do it. And this the
Saints have by the Spirit of Jesus, Romans 8 26, 27. Likewise the spirit helps
our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings that cannot be
uttered. And he that searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the
Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of
God. All endeavors, all attempts for Communion with God, without the supplies
of the Spirit of supplications, without his effectual working in the heart, is
of no value nor to any purpose. And this opening of our hearts and bosoms to
the Lord Jesus is that wherein he is exceedingly delighted. Hence is that
affectionate call of his unto us, to be treating with him on this account Chap.
2. 14. O my Dove that art in the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy
countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice and thy countenence
is comely. When the soul on any account, is driven to hide its self, in any
neglected condition, in the most unlikely place of abode, then does he call for
this communication of its self by prayer to him, for which he gives the
assistance of the Spirit mentioned

2. A way whereby to approach unto God with our desires. Thomas says unto
Jesus, Lord we know not whether thou go, and how can we know the way? Jesus
says unto him, I am the Vera via vitae. Bez.
way, no man comes unto the Father but by me. That way which we had of going
unto God at our Creation, is quite shut up by sin. The sword of the Law which
has fire put into it by sin, turns every way to stop all passages unto
communion with God. Jesus Christ has consecrated a Via nullius ante trita
solo. (...): recens ininterfectam; tamen viventem.
new and living way (for the Saints) through the veil, that is to say the
flesh, Heb. 10 20. He has consecrated and set it apart, for Believers, and for
them alone. Others pretend to go to God with their prayers, but they come not
nigh him. How can they possibly come to the end, who go not in the way? Christ
only is the way to the throne of Grace, none comes to God but by him. By him we
have an access in one Spirit unto the Father. Ephesians. 2. v. 18. These two
things then the Saints have for the opening of their hearts at the throne of
Grace, Assistance and a Way. The Assistance of the Spirit, without which they
are nothing, and the way of Christ's Mediation, without which God is not to be
approached unto.

3. Boldness to go unto God. The voice of sinners in themselves, Terror of
the Lord is, Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us
shall inhabit with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33 v. 14, And no marvel; Genesis 3.
8, 9.
shame and trembling before God are the proper Issues of sin. God will
revenge that Carnal, Atheistical boldness which sinners out of Christ do
use toward him. But we have now, boldness to enter into the Holiest by the
blood of Jesus: by a new and living way which he has Consecrated for us
through the veil, that is to say his flesh, and having a high Priest over the
house of God, we may draw near with a true heart in full assurance of Faith,
Heb. 10 9, 20. The truth is, such is the Glory and terror of the Lord, such
the infinite perfection of his Holiness, that on clear sight of it, it will
make the soul conclude, that of its self, it Josh. 24. 19 Exodus 20. 19, Deuteronomy.
5. 24. 18. 16. Isa. 33. 14. Mich. 6. 6, 7.
cannot serve him, nor will it be to any advantage, but add to the fierceness
of his destruction, once to draw nigh to him. It is in Christ alone, and on the
account alone of his oblation and intercession, that we have any boldness to
approach unto him. And these 3. Advantages have the Saints of communicating
their minds unto the Lord Christ, which he has provided for them because he
delights in them.

To touch a little by the way, because this is of great importance, one of
these, as I might in every one, that you may see the difference between a
spiritual revealing of our minds unto Christ, in this Acceptable manner, and
that praying upon conviction which others practice: and this shall be from the
first, viz. the Assistance we have by the Spirit.

1. The Spirit of Christ reveals to us our own wants, that we may reveal them
unto him: we know not what etc. Romans 8. 26. no teachings under those of the
spirit of God are able to make our Isa. 38. 14
souls acquainted with their own wants, its burdens, its Temptations. For a
soul to know its wants, its Infirmities, is a Heavenly discovery. He that has
this (...), est advocatorum qui clientibus desideria dictant.
assistance, his prayer is more then half made before he begins to pray. His
Conscience is affected with what he has to do: his mind and Spirit contend
within him, there especially where he finds himself most straightened. He brings
his burden on his shoulders, and unloads himself on the Lord Christ. He finds
(not by a perplexing Conviction, but an holy sense and weariness of sin) where
he is dead, where dull and cold, wherein unbelieving, wherein ttempted above
all his strength, where the light of Gods countenance is wanting. And all these
the soul has a sense of, by the Spirit, an unexpressible sense and
experience. Without this, prayer is not prayer: 1 Samuel 1. 13.
Men's voices may be heard but they speak not in their hearts. Sense of want,
is the spring of desire: natural of natural; spiritual of spiritual.
Without this sense given by the Holy Ghost, there is neither desire nor prayer.

2 d The expressions, or the Words of such persons, come exceeding short of the
laboring of their hearts; and therefore in, (and after) their supplications,
the Spirit makes intercession with sighs and groans that cannot be Is. 38 14.
Exodus 14. 15.
uttered. Some men's words go exceedingly beyond their hearts. Did their
Spirits come up to their expressions, it were well. He that has this
Assistance, can provide no clothing that is large and broad enough to set forth
the desires of his heart; and therefore in the close of his best, and most
fervent supplications, such a person finds a double dissatisfaction in them.
First, that they are not a Righteousness to be rested on that if God should
Is. 64. 6. Psalm. 130. 3.
mark what is in them amiss, they could not abide the trial. 2. That his
heart in them is not powered out, nor delivered in any proportion to the holy
desires and labourings that were conceived therein; though they may in Christ
have great refreshment by them. The more they speak, the more they find they
have left unspoken.

3 d The Intercession of the Saints thus assisted, is according to the mind of
God; that is, they are guided by the Spirit to make requests for those things
unto God, which it is his will they should desire: which he knows to be good
for them, useful and suitable to them, in the condition wherein they were.
There are many ways, whereby we may know when we make our Supplications
according to the Will of God: I shall instance only in one: that is, when we
do it according to the promise. When our prayers are regulated by the promise,
we make them according to the will of God: so David Ps. 119. 49. Remember the
words wherein thou have caused me to put my trust. He prays, and regulates his
desire by the word of promise, wherein he had trusted. But yet, Men may ask
that which is in the promise, and yet not have their prayers regulated by the
promise: They may pray for what is in the promise, but not as it is in the
promise, so James says, some ask and receive not, because they ask amiss,
to spend it on their lusts: Ch: 4. 3. though the things which God would have us
ask, be requested, yet if not according as he would have us do it, we ask
amiss,

Two things are required, that we may pray for the things in the promise, as
they are in the promise.

1. That we look upon them as promised, and promised in Christ; that is, that
all the reason we have, whence we hope for attaining the things we ask for, is
from the Mediation and purchase of Christ, in whom all the Promises are yea and
amen. This it is, to ask the Father in Christ's name; God as a Father, the
fountain, and Christ as the procurer of them.

2. That we ask for them for the end of the promise: not to spend on our Lust,
when we ask pardon for sin, with secret Psalm. 78. v. 35, 36. 37.
reserves in our hearts to continue in sin, we ask the choysest mercy of the
covenant, to spend it on our Lusts. The end of the promise the Apostle tells us
2 Cor: 7. 1. Having th^se promises, let us cleanse our selves from all
pollution of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. when
we ask what is in the promise, as it is in the promise, to this end of the
promise, our supplications are according to the will of God. And this is the
first Conjugall Affection that Christ exercises toward Believers; he delights
in them: which that he does is evident, as upon other considerations
innumerable, so from the instance, given.

In return hereunto, for the carrying on of the communion between them, the
Saints delight in Christ: He is their Joy, their Crown, their Rejoicing, their
Life, food, health, strength, desire, Righteousness, Salvation, Blessedness:
without him they have nothing, in him they find all things, Gal. 6. 14. God
forbid that I should rejoice, save in the Cross of Christ. He has from the
foundation of the world, been the hopes, expectation, desire, and delight of
all Believers. The promise of him was all, (and it was enough) that God gave
Adam in his unexpressible distress, to relieve and comfort him, Genesis 3. 15.
Eve perhaps supposed that the promised seed had been borne in her first borne,
when she said, I have gotten a man from the Lord, so most properly (...)
denoting the 4th Case; and this was the matter of her joy, Gen: 4. 1. Lamech
having Noah given to him as a type of Christ, and salvation by him, cries out,
this same shall comfort us concerning our work, and the toil of our hands,
because of the ground which the Lord has cursed, Genesis 5. 29. he rejoices in
him who was to take away the Curse, by being made a curse for us. When Abraham
was in the height of his Glory, returning from the Conquest of the Kings of the
East, that came against the confederate Kings of the vale of Sodom, God
appears to him with a glorious promise, Genesis 15. 1. fear not Abraham, I am thy
shield, and thy exceeding great reward. What now could his soul more desire?
alas he cries (as Reuben afterward upon the loss of Joseph) the Child is not,
and whither shall I go? v. 2. Lord God what will thou give me, seeing I go
Childlesse? Thou have promised, that in my seed shall all the earth be blessed,
if I have not that seed, ah what will all other things do me good? Thence it
is said that he rejoiced to see the day of Christ; He saw it and was glad, Joh.
8. 56. the thoughts of the coming of Christ, which he looked on at the distance
of 2000 years, was the joy and delight of his heart. Jacob blessing his sons,
lifted up his spirit when he comes to Judah, in whom he considered the Shilo to
come, Genesis 49. 8, 9 and a little after, wearied with the foresight and
consideration of the distresses of his posterity, this he diverts to for his
relief, as that great delight of his soul, I have waited for thy salvation O
God: for him who was to be the salvation of his people. But it would be
endless to instance in particulars: Old Si meon sums up the whole: Christ, is
Gods salvation, and Isreal's glory: Luke 2. 30, 31. and what ever was called the
Glory of old, it was either himself, or a type of him. The glory of man is
their delight* Hence Haggai 2. 7. he is called the desire of all Nations: Him
whom their soul loves and delights in, desire, and long after. So is the
Saints delight in him made a description of him by way of eminence, Mal. 3. 1.
The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple, even the Messenger of
the Covenant whom ye delight in. He whom ye seek, whom you delight in, is the
description of Christ: He is their delight and desirable one, the person of
their desire. To fix on something in particular.

In that pattern of Communion with Jesus Christ, which we have in the
Canticles, this is abundantly insisted on. The Spouse tells us, that she sitts
down under his shadow with great delight, chapter 2. 3. And this delight to be
vigorous and active, she manifests several ways, wherein we should labor to
find our hearts in like manner toward him.

1. By her exceeding great care to keep his Company and society, I charge you,
O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of the field, that
ye stir not up, nor awake my beloved until he please. Having obtained sweet
communion with Christ, described in the verses foregoing, of which before, here
she expresses her delight in it, and desire of the continuance of it: and
therefore following on the Allusion formerly insisted on, she speaks as one
would do to her Companion, that had rest with one she loved: I charge you by
all that is dear to you, by the things you most delight in, which among the
Creatures are most lovely, all the pleasant and desirable things that you can
think of, that you disturb him not: The sum of her aim and desire is, that
nothing may fall out, nothing of sin or provocation happen that may occasion
Christ to depart from her, or to remove, from that dispensation wherein he
seemed to take that rest in her. O stir him not up until he please, that
Aeternitatem temporis juxta sensum mystieum in se includit, ut alias in
Scriptura; quia nunquam a tali somno, id est, conjunctione cum sponso, excitari
velit.
is, never, (...), Love its self: in the abstract to express a (...), or
earnest affection, for so that word is often used: When once the soul of a
Believer has obtained sweet and real Communion with Christ, it looks about
him, watches all temptations, all ways whereby sin might approach, to
disturb him in his enjoyment of his dear Lord and Savior, his rest and
desire. How does it charge it self, not to omit any thing, not to do any
thing, that may interrupt the communion obtained. And because the common
entrance of Temptations, which tend to the disturbance of that rest and
complacency which Christ takes in the soul, is from delightful Mor. in loc.
diversions from actual communion with him, therefore is desire strong and
active, that the companions of such a soul, those with whom it does converse,
would not by their proposalls or allurements, divert it into any such frame, as
Christ cannot delight, nor rest in. A believer that has gotten Christ in his
arms, is like one that has found great spoils, or a pearl of price. He
looks about him every way, and fears every thing, that may deprive him of it.
Riches make men watchful; and the actual sensible possession of him, in whom
are all the riches and treasure of God, will make men look about them for the
keeping of him. The line of choysest Communion, is a line of the greatest
spiritual solicitousnesse: Carelessness, in the enjoyment of Christ pretended,
is a manifest evidence of a false heart.

2. The Spouse manifests her delight in him, by her utmost impatience of his
absence, with Hag. 2. 24. Jer. 22. 24.
desires still of nearer communion with him, chapter 8. 6. Set me as a seal upon
thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm, for Love is strong as death, jealousy
is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a
most vehement flame. The Allusion is doubtless from the High Priest of the
Jews, in his spiritual representation of the Church before God. He had a
brestplate which he is said to wear on his heart, Exodus 28, 29. wherein the
names of the Children of Israel were engraven after the manner of Seals or
Signets, and he bare them for a memorial before the Lord. He had the like also
upon his shoulder, or on his arms, v. 11, 12. both representing the Priesthood
of Christ, who bears the names of all his, before his Father, in the holiest of
holies, Heb. 9. 24. Now the seal on the heart, is near, inward, tender, love,
and care, which gives an impression and image on the heart of the thing so
loved. Set me, says the Spouse, as a seal upon thine heart; let me be
constantly fixed in thy most tender and affectionate Love; let me always have
a place in thine heart, let me have an engraving, a mighty Impression of Love
upon thine heart, that shall never be oblitterated. The Soul is never
satisfied with thoughts of Christ's love to it. Oh that it were more, that it
were more, that I were as a Seal on his heart, is its Language. The soul
knows indeed on serious thoughts, that the Love of Christ is inconceivable, and
cannot be increased, but it would feign work up its self to an apprehension of
it; and therefore she adds here, set me as a seal upon thine Arm; the heart
is the fountain, but close and hidden; the arm is manifestation and Power.
Let, says the Spouse, thy Love be manifested to me in thy tender and powerful
persuasion of me. Two things are evident in this request; The continual
mindfulnesse of Christ of the Soul, as having its condition still in his eye,
engraven on his arm, Isai. 49. 15, 16. with the exalting of his power for the
preservation of it, suitable to the Love of his heart unto it, and the
manifestation of the hidden love and care of the heart of Christ, unto the
Soul, being made visible on his arm, or evident by the fruits of it. This is
that which she would be assured of; and without a sense whereof, there is no
rest to be obtained.

The Reason she gives of this earnestness in her supplications, is that which
principally evinces her delight in him. Love is strong as death, Jealousy is
cruel as the grave, or hard as Hell. This is the intendment of what is so
loftily set out by so many metaphors in this and the following verse. I am not
able to bear the workings of my love to thee; unless I may allways have
society and fellowship Prove. 30. 16.
with thee; there is no satisfying of my love without it. it is as the grave
that still says give, give. Death is not satisfied without its prey: if it have
not all, it has nothing: let what will happen, if death has not its whole
desire it has nothing at all. Nor can it be withstood in its appointed season.
No ransom will be taken. So is my love, if I have thee not wholly, I have
nothing, nor can all the world bribe it to a diversion: it will be no more
turned aside then death in its time. Also I am not able to bear my Jealous
thoughts; I fear thou do not love me, that thou have forsaken me, because I
know I deserve not to be beloved. These thoughts are hard as Hell. They give no
rest to my soul. If I find not my self on thy heart and arm, I am as one
that lies down in a bed of coals. This also argues an holy greediness of
delight.

3. She further manifests this by her sollicitousnesse, trouble, loss of that
whose whole enjoyment they delight in. We easily bear the absence of that,
whose presence is not delightful. This state of the Spouse is discovered chap.
3. 1, 2, 3. By Isa. 50. 10.
night on my bed I sought him whom Eleganter periphrasi utitur loco nominis
proprii, ut vim amoris sui exprimat. Merc. starlepetitio assensum indicat and
studium quo eum quaerebat, and moerorem quo angebatur, quod occurrere non
posset. idem.
my soul loved, I sought him but I found him not. I will rise now and go about
the City in the streets and in the broad ways, I will seek him whom my soul
loves, I Eleganter periphrasi utitur loco nominis proprii, ut vim amoris sui
exprimat. Merc. star lepetitio assensum indicat and studium quo eum quaerebat,
and moerorem quo angebatur, quod occurrere non posset. idem.
sought him but I found him not. The watchmen that go about the City found me,
to whom I said, saw you him whom my soul loves? It is night now with the
soul, a time of darkness and trouble, or Affliction. When ever Christ is
absent it is night with a Believer. He is the Mal. 4. 3.
Sun; if he go down upon them, if his beams be eclipsed, if in his Light,
they see no Light, it is all darkness with them. Here, whither the coming of
the night of any trouble on her, made her discover Christ's absence, or the
absence of Christ made it night with her, is not expressed. I rather think the
latter; because setting that aside, all things seem to be well with her. The
absence of Christ will indeed make it night, dark as darkness it self in
the midst of all other glowing consolations. But is the Spouse contented with
this dispensation? She is upon her bed; that is, of ease; The bed indeed
sometimes signifies tribulation Rev. 2. 22. but in this book every where rest
and contentment there is not the least intimation of any tribulation but what
is in the want of Christ: but in the greatest peace and opportunity of ease and
rest, a believer finds none in the absence of Christ; Though he be on his bed,
having nothing to disquiet him, he rests not, if Christ his rest be not there.
She sought him seeking of Christ by night, on the bed, that is alone in an
immediate inquest and in the dark, has two parts; searching of our own souls
for the cause of his absence; Secondly searching the promises for his presence.

1. The soul finding not Christ present in his wonted manner, warming,
cherishing, reviving it with love, nigh to it, supping with it, always filling
its thoughts with himself, dropping myrrh and sweet tastes of love into it,
but on the contrary that other thoughts crowd in, and perplex the heart, and
Christ is not nigh when enquired after; it presently enquires into the cause of
all this, 2 Cor. 13 5.
calls it self to an account, what it has don, how it has behaved its self,
that it is not with it, as at other times; that Christ has withdrawn himself
and is not nigh to it, in the wonted manner. Here it accomplisheth a diligent
search. It considers the love, tenderness, and kindness of the Lord Jesus;
what delight he takes in abiding with his Saints: so that his departure is not
without cause and provocation. How says it, have I demeaned my self, that I
have lost my beloved? Where have I been wandering after other lovers? and when
the miscarriage is found out, it abounds in revenge and indignation.

2. Having driven this to some issue, the soul applies it self to the
promises of the Covenant wherein Christ is most graciously exhibited unto it:
Considers one, ponders another, to find a taste of him. It considers dilligently
if it can see the delightful Countenance and favor of Christ in them or no:
but now, if (as it often falls out,) the soul finds nothing but the carcass,
but the bare letter in the promise: if it come to it as to the grave of Christ,
of which it may be said, (not in it self, but in respect of the seeking soul)
he is risen he is not here, this amazes the soul and it knows not what to do.
As a man that has a Jewel of great price having no occasion to use it, lays
it aside as he supposes in a safe place; in an agony and extremity of want
going to seek for his Jewel, he finds it not in the place he expected, and is
filled with amazement, and knows not what to do: so is it with this pearl of
the Gospel; after a man has sold all that he has for it, and enjoyed it for
a season, then to have it missing at a time of need, it must needs perplex him.
So was it with the Spouse here, I sought him (says she) but I found him not;
A thing which not seldom befalls us in our Communion with Christ.

But what does she now do? does she give over and search I will arise: I will
not so give over, I must have Christ or dye, I will now arise, or let me arise,
and go about this business.

1. She resolves to put her self upon another course, a more vigorous inquest;
I will arise and make use of other means besides those of private prayer,
meditation, selfe-searching, and inquiring into the Promises, which she had
insisted on before. It carries (1.) Resolution and a Zealous, violent casting
off that frame wherein she had lost her love. I Is. 52. 2. Isa. 60. 1.
will arise, I will not rest in this frame. I am undone if I do. So sometimes
God calls his Church to arise and shake it self out of the dust: abide not in
that Condition. (2.) Diligence, I will now take another course, I will leave no
way unattempted, no means untried whereby I may possibly recover Communion
with my Beloved.

This is the condition of a Soul that finds not the wonted presence of Christ
in its private and more retired inquiries. Dull in prayer, wandering in
Meditations, rare in thoughts of him! I will not bear this frame, what ever
way God has appointed I will in his strength vigorously pursue until this
frame be altered, and I find my beloved.

2. Then, the way she puts her self upon, is to go about the City. Not to
insist upon particulars, nor to strain the parts of the Allegory too far, the
City here intended is the City of God; the Church: and the passing through the
broad and narrow streets, is the diligent enquiry, that the Spouse makes in all
the paths and ordinances given unto it. This then is the next thing the Soul
addresses it self unto, in the want of Christ; when it finds him not in any
private endeavors, it makes vigorous application to the Ordinances of public
worship; in prayer, in preaching, in Administration of the seals does it look
after Christ. Indeed the great enquiry the souls of Believers make in every
ordinance is after Christ. So much as they find of him, so much sweetness, and
refreshment have they and no more. Especially when under any desertion they
rise up to this enquiry. They listen to every word, to every prayer to find if
any thing of Christ, any light from him, any Life, any Love appears to them.
Oh that Christ would at length meet me in this, or that Sermon and recover my
poor heart to some sight of his Love, to some taste of kindness. The
Solicitousnesse of a Believer in his inquest after Christ, when he finds not
his presence, either for Grace or Consolation as in former days, is indeed
inexpressible. Much of the frame of such a heart is couched in the redoubling
of the Expression, I sought him, I sought him; setting out an unconceivable
passion, and suitably industrious desire. Thus being disappointted at home the
Spouse proceeds.

But yet see the Event of this also; she sought him but found him not. It does
sometimes so fall out; all will not do, they shall seek him and not find him;
they shall not come nigh him: let them that enjoy any thing of the presence of
Christ, take heed what they do; if they provoke him to depart, if they loose
him, it may cost them many a bitter enquiry before they find him again. When
a soul, prays and Meditates, searches the promises in private, when it with
earnestness and diligence attends all Ordinances in public, and all to get
one glimpse of the face of Jesus Christ, and all in vain, it is a sad
condition.

What now follows in this estate? v. 3. The watchmen found me etc. That these
watchmen of the City of God are the Watchmen and Officers of the Church, is
confessed: and it is of sad consider ration that the Holy Ghost does sometimes
in this Book take notice of them on no good account plainly chap. 5. 7. they
turn persecutors. It was Luther's saying, nunquam periclitatur religio nise
inter reverendissimos. Here they are of a more Gentle temper and seeing the
poor disconsolate soul, they seem to take notice of her Condition.

It is the duty indeed of faithful watchmen to take notice of poor, troubled,
deserted souls: not to keep at a distance, but to be willing to assist. And a
truly pressed soul on the account of Christ's Absence cannot cover its love,
but must be enquiring after him; saw you him whom my soul loves? This is my
Condition! I have had sweet enjoyment of my blessed Jesus, he is now withdrawn
from me; can you help me? can you guide me to my Consolation? what
acquaintance have you with him? when saw you him? how did he manifest himself
to you, and wherein? All these labourings in his Absence sufficiently discover
the souls delight in the presence of Christ. Go one step farther to the
discovery that it made of him once again, and it will yet be more evident, v.
4, 5. It was but a little while that I passed from them, but I found him whom
my soul loves, I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him
into my mothers House, and into the chamber of her that conceived me, I charge
ye O ye Daughters of Jerusalem etc.

1. She tells you how she came to him; she found him: What ways and by what
means, is not expressed. It often so falls out in our Communion with Christ;
when private and public means fail, and the soul has nothing left but
waiting silently and walking humbly, Christ appears, that his so doing may be
evidently of Grace. Let us not at any time give over in this condition. When
all ways are past, the summer and harvest are gone without relief, when
neither bed nor watchmen can assist; let us wait a little, and we shall see
the salvation of God. Christ honors his immediate absolute actings sometimes;
though ordinarily he crowns his ordinances. Christ often manifests himself
immediately, and out of Ordinances, to them that wait for him in them. That he
will do so to them that despise them, I know not. Though he will meet men
unexpectedly in his way; yet he will not meet them at all out of it. Let us
wait as he has appointed; let him appear as he pleases. How she deals with
him when found; is nextly declared. She held him, and would not let him go,
etc. They are all expressions of the greatest Joy and delight imaginable. The
sum is, having at length come once more to an enjoyment of sweet Communion
with Christ, the soul lays fast hold on him by faith, ((...), to hold fast is
an act of faith) refuses to part with him any more in vehemence of love; tryes
to keep him in ordinances, in the house of its mother, the Church of God, and
so uses all means for the confirming of the mutual love between Christ and
her: All the expressions all the allusions used, evidencing delight to the
utmost capacity of the soul. Should I pursue all the Instances and Testimonies
that are given hereunto in that one book of the Song of Solomon, I must enter
upon an exposition of the greatest part of it, which is not my present
business. Let the hearts of the Saints that are acquainted with these things;
be allowed to make the close. What is it they long for? they rejoice in? What
is it that satisfies them to the utmost, and gives sweet complacency to their
spirits in every condition? what is it whose loss they fear, whose absence
they cannot bear? is it not this their beloved, and He alone?

This also they further manifest by their delight in every thing sake whom we
delight in, we also delight in every thing that belongs to him. Christ's great
interest in this world, lys in his people, and his Ordinances; his household,
and their provision: now in both these, do the Saints exceedingly delight for
his sake. Take an instance in both kinds in one man viz. David Psalm. 16. 3. in
the Saints and the excellent, or the noble of the Earth, is all my delight; my
delight in them. Christ says of his Church, that she is Hephzibah. Isa. 62. my
delight in her: here says David of the same, Hephzibam my delight in them. As
Christ delights in his Saints, so do they in one another on his account. Here
says David is all my delight. Whatever contentment he took in any other
persons, it was nothing in comparison of the delight he took in them. Hence
mention is made, of laying down our lives for the Brethren, or any common cause
wherein the interest of the Community of the Brethren does lie.

2 For the ordinances, consider the same person; Ps. 42. and 84. and 48. are
such plentiful Testimonies throughout, as we need no farther enquiring; nor
shall I go forth to a new discourse on this particular.

And this is the first mutual consequentiall Act of Conjugall Affections in
this Communion between Christ and Believers. He delights in them and they
delight in him; He delights in their prosperity, has pleasure in it; They
delight in his honor and glory, and in his presence with them: for his sake
they delight in his servants, (though by the world contemned) as the most
excellent in the world; and in his ordinances, as the wisdom of God, which
are foolishness to the world.

CHAP. V.
Other consequentiall affections; 1. On the part of Christ. He values his
Saints. Evidences of that valuation 1. his Incarnation. 2. Exinanition. 2 Cor.
8. 9. Phil. 2. 6, 7. 3. Obedience as a Servant. 4. In his death his valuation
of them in comparison of others. Believers estimation of Christ. 1. They value
him above all other things and persons. 2. Above their own lives. 3. All
spiritual Excellency's: The sum of all on the part of Christ. The sum on
the part of Believers. The third Conjugall Affection on the part of Christ,
Pity or Compassion, wherein manifested. Suffering and Supply, fruits of
Compassion. Several ways whereby Christ relieves the Saints under temptations.
His Compassion in their afflictions. Chastity the third Conjugall affection in
the Saints. The fourth on the part of Christ, Bounty: on the part of the
Saints, Duty.

CHRIST values his Saints, values Believers. Which is the second branch of that
conjugall affection he bears toward them, having taken them into the Relation
Heaven and earth are full of evidences of it. Some few considerations will give
life to the Assertion. Consider them then

1. Absolutely. 2. In respect of others: and you will see what a valuation he
puts upon them.

1. All that ever he did or does, all that ever he underwent, or suffered as
Mediator, was for their sakes. Now these things were so great, and grievous
that had he not esteemed them above all that can be expressed, he had never
engaged to their performance and undergoing. Take a few instances.

1. For their sakes was he made a flesh; manifested in the flesh Heb. 2. 14.
Whereas therefore the Children pertooke of flesh and blood, even he in like
manner pertook of the same: and the Height of this valuation of them the
Apostle aggravates verse 16. Verily he took not on him the nature of Angels,
but he took on him the seed of Abraham, he had no such esteem of Angels.
Whether you take (...) properly to take, or to take hold of, as our
translators, and so supply the word nature, and refer the whole unto Christ's
Incarnation, who therein took our nature on him and not the nature of Angels:
Or for (...), to help, he did not help nor succor fallen Angels; but he did
help and Vid. Vind. Evan. cap. 13. 55.
succor the seed of Abraham, and so consider it as the fruit of Christ's
Incarnation, it is all one as to our present business; His preferring the seed
of Abraham before Angels, his valuing them above the other is plainly
expressed. And observe that he came to help the seed of Abraham, that is Romans
4. 17. Gel. 3. 7.
Believers; his esteem and valuation is of them only.

2. For their sakes he was so made flesh, as that there was an emptying, an
exinanition of himself, and an eclipsing of his glory, and a becoming poor
for them 2 Cor. 8. 9. Ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that being
rich, for us he became poor. Being rich in Eternal Glory with his father John
17. 5. He became poor, for Believers. The same person that was rich, was also
poor. That the riches here meant can be none but those of the Deity, is
evident by its opposition to the poverty which as man he undertook. This is
also more fully expressed Phil. 2. 6, 7. Who being in the form of God, counted
it no robbery to be equal to God, but he emptied himself, taking the form of
a servant, and being made in the fashion of a man, and sound in form as a man,
etc. That the form of God is here the Essence of the Deity, sundry things
inevitably evince. As

1. That he was therein See Vind. Evan. cap. 13. 6, 7, 8.
equal to God, that is his Father. Now God, is equal to God, not Joh. 14. 28.
Christ as he is Mediator in his greatest Glory: nothing but that which is
infinite, is equal to that which is infinite.

2. The form of God is opposed to the form of a Servant, and that form of a
Servant, is called the fashion of a man, v. 8. that fashion wherein he was
found when he gave himself to death. wherein as a man he powered out his blood
and dyed: (...), (he took the form of a servant) is expounded in the next
words (...): an expression used to set out his Incarnation. Romans 8. 3. God sent
him (...), in taking true flesh, he was in the likeness of sinful flesh. Now
in thus doing, it is said (...), he humbled, emptied himself, made himself of
no reputation. In the very taking of flesh, there was a condescension, a
debasing of the person of the Son of God: It could not be without it. If God
humbled himself to behold the things that are in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 113.
6. then certainly it was an inconceivable condescension and abasement not only
to behold, but take upon him, into personal union, our nature with himself.
And though nothing could possibly be taken off from the essential Glory of the
Deity, yet that Person appearing in the fashion of a man, and form of a
servant, the Glory of it as to the manifestation was eclipsed; and he appeared
Isa. 53. 1.
quite another thing, then what indeed he was, and had been from Eternity.
Hence he prays, that his Father would Glorify him, with the glory he had with
him before the world was Joh. 17. 3. as to the manifestation of it. And so
though the divine nature was not abased, the person was.

3. For their sakes he so humbled and emptyed himself in servant, in the eyes
of the world of no esteem nor account, and a true and real servant Is. 42. 1.
19. Joh. 14. 51.
unto the Father; for their sakes he humbled himself and became obedient. All
that he did and suffered in his life, comes under this consideration. All which
may be referred to these three heads Math. 3. 15.
(1.) Fulfilling all righteousness. (2.) Enduring all manner of persecutions
and hardships, (3.) Doing all manner of good to men. He took on him for their
sakes a life, and course pointed to Heb. 5. 7, 8. A life of prayers, tears,
fears, obedience, suffering, and all this with cherefullnesse and delight,
calling his employment his meat and drink, and still professing that the law
of this obedience was in his Heb. 10. 7, 8.
heart that he was content to do this will of God. He that will sorely Hebr.
2. v. 14, 15.
Revenge the least opposition that is or shall be made to him by others, was
content to undergo any thing all things for believers.

4. He stays not here, but for the consummation of all that before: for their
sakes he becomes obedient to death, the death of the Cross, so he professes
to his Father Joh. 17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self; I dedicate my
self as an Offering, as a Sacrifice to be killed and slain. This was his aim
in all the former, that he might dye. He was borne and l lived that he might
dye. He valued them above his life. And if we might stay to consider a little
what was in this death, that he underwent for them, we should perceive what a
price indeed he put upon them. The Gal. 3. 13.
curse of the Law was in it, the 2 Cor. 5. 21.
wrath of God was in it, Psalm. 22. 1.
the loss of Gods presence was in it. It was a Mat. 26. 39.
fearful cup that he tasted of, and drank of, that they might never taste of
it. A man would not for ten thousand worlds be willing to undergo, that
which Christ underwent for us in that one thing of desertion from God, were it
attended with no more distress, but what a mere Creature might possibly emerge
from under. And what thoughts we should have of this, himself tells us, Joh.
15. 13. Greater love has none then this, that one lay down his life for his
friends. It is impossible there should be any greater demonstration or evidence
of love then this; what can any one do more? And yet he tells us in another
place, that it has another aggravation and heightning Romans 5. 8. God
commends his love to us in that whilst we were yet sinners Christ dyed for
us. When he did this for us we were sinners, and enemies whom he might justly
have destroyed. What can more be done? to dye for us when we were sinners? such
a death, in such a manner, with such attendences of wrath and curse; a death
accompanied with the worst that God had ever threatened to sinners, argues as
high a valuation of us, as the heart of Christ himself was capable of.

For one to part with his Glory, his Riches, his Ease, his Life, his Love from
God, to undergo loss, shame, wrath, curse, death for another, is an evidence
of a dear valuation, and that it was all on this account we are informed. Heb.
12. 2. Certainly Christ had a dear esteem of them, that rather than they
should perish that they should not be his, and be made partakers of his Glory,
he would part with all he had for their sakes, Ephesians. 5. v. 25, 26.

There would be no end should I go through all the instances of Christ's
valuation of Believers in all their deliverances, Afflictions, in all
conditions of sinning and suffering, what he has done, what he does in his
Intercession, what he delivers them from, what he procures for them; all
telling out this one thing, they are the apple of his eye, his Jewel, his
Diadem, his Crown.

2. In comparison of others. All the world is nothing to Garden; the rest of
the world a Wilderness. Cant. 4. 12. A Garden enclosed is my Sister my Spouse,
a Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed. They are his inheritance, the rest, his
enemies of no regard with him. So Isa. 43. 3, 4. I am the Lord thy God, the
holy one of Israel, thy Savior; I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and
Seba for thee; since thou wast Amorem istum non esse vulgarem oftendit, dum nos
pretiosos esse dicit. Calv. in loc.
precious in my sight, thou have been honorable and I have loved thee,
therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy life. The reason of this
dealing of Christ with his Church in parting with all others for them, is
because he loves her, she is precious and honorable in his sight, thence he
puts this great esteem upon her. Indeed he disposes of all Nations and their
interest according as is for the good of Believers. Amos 9. 9. in all the
siftings of the nations, the eye of God is upon the house of Israel, not a
grain of them shall perish. Look to Heaven, Angels are appointed to minister
for them Heb. 1. 14. Look into the world; the Nations in General are either
Genesis 12. 3. Mich 5. 7, 8.
blessed for their sakes, or Isa. 34. 8. 63. 4. Isa. 84. 15.
destroyed on their account; preserved to try them, or rejected for their
cruelty toward them: and will receive from Christ their Math. 24. v. 35, 36,
37, 38.
final doom according to their deportment toward these despised ones: on
this account are the pillars of the Earth borne up, and patience is exercised
toward the perishing world. In a word there is not the meanest, the weakest,
the poorest Believer on the earth but Christ prizeth him more then all the
world besides; were our hearts filled-much with thoughts hereof, it would tend
much to our consolation.

2. To answer this, Believers also value Jesus Christ; they have an esteem of
him above all the world, and all things in the delight in him, and enquiry
after him. They say of him in their hearts continually as David, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and whom in Earth that I desire besides thee. Psalm. 73. 25.
Neither Heaven nor Earth will yield them an object any way comparable to him,
that they can delight in.

1. They value him above all other things and persons, Mallem. 9. Luther.
(said one) ruere cum Christo, quam regnare cum Caesare. Pulchra terra,
pulchrum coelum, sed pulcherrimus dominus Jesus. Christ and a dungeon, Christ
and a cross is infinitely sweeter then a Crown, a Scepter without him to their
souls. So was it with Moses, Heb. 11. 26. He esteemed the reproach of Christ
greater riches then the Treasures of Egypt. The reproach of Christ, is the
worst consequent that the wickedness of the world or malice of Satan can bring
upon the followers of him. The treasures of Egypt were in those days the
greatest in the world. Moses despised the very best of the world, for the worst
of the Cross of Christ. Indeed himself has told believers, that if they love
any thing better then him, Father or Mother, they are not worthy of him. A
despising of all things for Christ, is the very first lesson of the Gospel.
Give away all, take up the cross and follow me, was the way whereby he tried
his Disciples of old, and if there be not the same mind and heart in us, we
are none of his.

2. They value him above their lives. Act. 20. 24. My life is not dear that I
may perfect my course with joy, and the ministry I have received of the Lord
Jesus. Let life and all go, so that I may serve him, and when all is done,
enjoy him, and be made like to him. It is known what is reported of (...). Vit.
Ignat.
Ignatius when he was lead to Martyrdom, let what will said he come upon me
only so I may obtain Jesus Christ. Hence they of old rejoiced when whipped,
scourged, put to shame for his sake, Act. 5. 41. Heb. 11. all is welcome that
comes from him, or for him. The lives they have to live, the death they have to
dye, is little, is light upon the thoughts of him, who is the stay of their
lives and the end of their death. Were it not for the refreshment which daily
they receive by thoughts of him, they could not live; their lives would be a
burden to them, and the thoughts of enjoyment of him make them cry with Paul,
Oh that we were dissolved: The storys of the Martyrs of old, and of late, the
sufferers in giving witness to him, under the Dragon, and under the false
Prophet, the neglect of life in women and Children on his account, contempt of
torments whilst his name sweetened all, have rendered this truth clear to Men
and Angels.

3. They value him above all spiritual Excellencys and all other
righteousness whatever Phil. 3. 7, 8. Those things which were advantage to me,
I esteemed loss for Christ. Yea also I account all things to be loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whose sake I have lost
all things, and do esteem them common that I may gain Christ, and be found in
him. having recounted the Excellency's which he had, and the privileges which
he enjoyed in his Judaisme, which were all of a spiritual nature, and a
participation wherein, made the rest of his country men despise all the world,
and look upon themselves as the only acceptable persons with God, resting on
them for righteousness, the Apostle tells us what is his esteem of them in
Comparison of the Lord Jesus, they are loss and dung, things that for his
sake, he had really suffered the loss of; that is, whereas he had for many
years been a Zealot of the Law, seeking after a righteousness as it were by
the works of it, Romans 9. 31. instantly serving God day and night to obtain
the promise Act. 26. 7. living in all good conscience from his youth, Act. 22.
all the while very zealous for God and his institutions, now willingly casts
away all these things, looks upon them as loss and dung, and could not only
be contented to be without them, but as for that end for which he sought after
them, he abhored them all. When men have been strongly convinced of their duty,
and have labored many years to keep a Act. 23. 1.
good Conscience, have prayed, and heard, and done good, and denied themselves,
and been Romans 10. v. 2, 3, 4.
zealous for God, and labored with all their might to Act. 25. 7.
please him, and so at length to come to enjoy him: they had rather Joh. 9 40.
Romans 9. 30, 31.
part with all the world, life and all, then with this they have wrought. You
know how unwilling we are to part with any thing we have labored, and beaten
our heads about? How much more when the things are so excellent, as our duty to
God, blamelesnesse of conversation, hope of Heaven and the like which we have
beaten our hearts about. But now when once Christ appears to the Soul, when
he is known in his Excellency, all these things as without him, have their
paint washed of, their beauty fades, their desireablenesse vanishes, and the
soul is not only contented to part with them all, but puts them away as a
defiled thing; and cries, in the Lord Jesus only is my Is. 45. 24.
Righteousness and Glory. Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15. among innumerable Testimonies
may be admitted to give witness hereunto, Happy is the man that finds
wisdom and the man that gets understanding. For the merchandise of it, is
better then the Merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then fine Gold;
she is more precious then rubyes and all the things that thou can desire, are
not to be compared to her. It is of Jesus Christ, the wisdom of God, the
Eternal wisdom of the Father that the Holy Ghost speaks, as is evident from
the description which is given hereof chap. 8 He and his ways are better then
silver and gold, rubies, and all desirable things. As in the Gospel he likens
himself to the Math. 13. 45. 46,
Principium culmenque? omnium rerum pretii, margaritae ^enent: Plin.
pearl in the field, which when the Merchant man finds, he sells all that he
has to purchase. All goes for Christ, all righteousness without him, all ways
of Religion, all goes for that one pearl. The Glory of his Deity, the
Excellency of his person, his all-conquering desireablenesse, ineffable Love,
wonderful undertaking, unspeakable Condescensions, effectual Mediation,
complete Righteousness; lie in their eyes, ravish their hearts, fill their
Affections, and possess their souls. And this is the second mutual conjugall
affection between Christ and Believers, all which on the part of Christ, may be
referred unto two heads.

1. All that he parted withal, all that he did, all that he suffered, all that
he does as Mediator, he parted withal, did, suffered, does, on the account of
his Gal. 2. 20. 1 John 3. 2. Revel. 1 5, 6. Ephesians 5. 25, 26 Heb. 10. 9, 10.
Love to, and esteem of Believers. He parted with the greatest Glory, he
underwent the greatest misery, he does the greatest works that ever were
because he loves his spouse; because he values Believers. What can more, what
can farther be spoken? how little is the depth of that which is spoken
fathomed? how unable are we to look into the misterious recesses of it? He so
loves, so values his Saints, as that having from Eternity undertaken to bring
them to God, he rejoices his soul in the thoughts of it; and pursues his
design through Heaven and Hell, life and death, by suffering and doing, in
misery and with power, and cease not until he bring it to perfection. For

2. He does so value them, as that he will not loose any Eternity, though all
the world should combine to take them out of his hand. When in the days of his
flesh he foresaw what Opposition, what Danger, what Rocks, they should meet
with all, he cried out Holy Father keep them, Joh. 17. 11. let not one of them
be lost; and tells us plainly Joh. 10. 28. that no man shall take his sheep out
of his hand. And because he was then in the form of a servant, and it might be
supposed that he might not be able to hold them, he tells them true! as to his
present condition of carrying on the work of mediation, his Father was greater
then he Joh. 14. 28.
and therefore to him he committed them, and none should take them out of his
Fathers hands. Joh. 10. 29. and whereas the World, afflictions, and
persecutions which are without may be conquered, and yet no security given, but
that sin from within, by the assistance of Satan may prevail against them to
their ruin; as he has provided against Satan in his promise, that the gates
of hell shall not prevail against them, so he has taken care that sin it
self shall not destroy them. Herein indeed is the depth of his Love to be
contemplated: that whereas his holy soul hate, every sin, it is a burden, an
Abomination, a new wound to him, and his poor spouse is sinful, Believers are
full of sins, failings, and infirmities; he hides all, covers all, bears
with all, rather then he will loose them; by his power preserving them from
such sins as a Remedy is not provided for in the Covenant of Grace. Oh the
world of sinful follys, that our dear Lord Jesus bears withal on this
account? are not our own souls astonished with the thoughts of it? Infinite
patience, Infinite forbearance, Infinite love, Infinite Grace, Infinite Mercy
are all set on work for this end, to answer this his Valuation of us.

2. On our part it may also be referred to two heads.

1. That upon the discovery of him to our souls, they rejoice to Math. 13. v.
45, 46. Phil. 3. 8.
part with all things wherein they have delighted, or reposed their confidence
for him, and his sake, that they may enjoy him. Sin and lust, pleasure and
profit, Righteousness and duty in their several conditions, all shall go so
they may have Christ.

2. That they are willing to part with all things rather then with Him, when
they do enjoy him. To think of parting with Peace, Health, Liberty, Relations,
Wives, Children, it is offensive, Mat. 10. 37.
heavy and grievous to the best of the Saints. But their souls cannot bear
the thoughts of parting with Jesus Christ. Such a thought is cruel as the
grave. The worst thoughts that in any fear Cant. 8. 6.
in desertions that they have of (...). Basil:
Hell, is that they shall not enjoy Jesus Christ. So they may enjoy him, here,
hereafter, be like him, be ever with him, stand in his presence; they can part
with all things freely, cheerfully, be they never so beautiful in reference
to this life, or that which is to come.

3. The third conjugall Affection on the part of Christ is pity compassion. As
a man nourishes and cherishes his Fateor in sitam nobis esse corporis nostri
charitatem: Senec. Epist. 14. Generi animantium omni a natura tributum ut se
vitam corpusque tueatur. Cicer. Off. 1.
own flesh, so does the Lord his Church Ephesians. 5. 29. Christ has a fellow
feeling with his Saints in all their troubles as a man has with his own flesh.
This Act of the conjugall love of Christ, relates to the many trialls and
pressures of Afflictions that his Saints meet withal here below. He does not
deal with Believers as the Samaritans with the Jews; that fawned on them in
their prosperity, but despised them in their trouble. He is a: a tender Ps.
103. 13.
Father, who though perhaps he love all his children alike, yet he will take
most pains with, and give most of his presence unto one that is sick and
weak, though therein and thereby, he may be made most froward, and as it
should seem hardest to be borne with. And which is more then the pity of any
Father can extend to, he himself suffers with them, and takes share in all
their troubles.

Now all the sufferings of the Saints in this world, wherein their Head and
Husband exercises pity, tenderness, care, and compassion toward them are of
two sorts, or may be referred to two heads. 1. Temptations. 2. Afflictions.

1. Temptations, (under which head, I comprize sin also, whereto they tend)
as in, from, and by their own Infirmities, as also from their Adversaries
without. The frame of the heart of Christ, and his deportment toward them in
this condition you have Heb. 4. 15. We have not an high Priest which cannot be
touched with our infirmites. We have not such an one, as cannot. The two
negations do vehemently affirm, that we have such an high Priest as can be,
or is touched; the word, touched, comes exceedingly short of exprressing the
original word; It is b Hoc quidem certum est, hoc vocabulo, summum illum
consensum membrorum and capitis, significari, de quo toties Paulus disserit.
Deinde ut cum de Deo loquitur, ita, etiam de Christo glorioso disserens
scriptura, ad nostrum captum se demittit. Gloriosum autem ad dextram patris
Christum sedere credimus; ubi dicitur nostris malis affici, quod sibi facturum
ducat quicquid nobis sit injuriae: altiores speculationes scrutari, nec utile
nec tutum existimo. Bez. in loc.
(...) to suffer together. We have says the Apostle such an high priest as
can, and consequently does suffer with us, endure our infirmities. And in what
respect he suffers with us, in regard of our inffirmities, or has a
fellowfeeling with us in them, he declares in the next words, for he was
tempted like unto us v. 16 It is as our Romans 8. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 32. 2 Cor. 11.
30, chap. 12. 9, 10. Gal. 4. 13.
infirmities, our Temptations, spiritual weakness; therein, in particular
has he a compassionate Sympathy and fellow-feeling with us. Whatever be our
infirmities so far as they are our temptations, he does suffer with us, under
them and compassionates us. Hence at the last Math. 25. 34.
day he says I was hungry etc. There are two ways of expressing a fellow
feeling and suffering with another.

1. Per benevolam condolentiam; a friendly grieving.

2. Per gratiosam opitulationem; a gracious supply: both are eminent in Christ.

1. He Act. 9. 4. Isa. 63. 9.
grieves and labors with us; Zech. 1. 12. The Angel of the Lord answered and
said, Oh Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem. He
speaks as one intimately affected with the state and condition of poor
Jerusalem, and therefore he has bid all the world take notice, that what is
done to them is done to him chap. 2. v. 8, 9. Yea to the Deu. 32. 10. Pal. 17.
8.
apple of his eye.

2. In the second he abounds Isa. 40. 11. He shall feed his flock like a
Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and gently lead them that are with young. Yea we have both here
together, tender compassionatenesse, and Assistance.

The whole frame wherein he is here described, is a -- En ipse capellas
protinus aeger ago; hanc etiam vix Tytire duco etc. Virg.
frame of the greatest Quod frequenter in scriptura. Pastoris nomen Deus
usurpat, personamque induit, non vulgar est teneri in nos amoris signum; nam
quum humilis and abjecta sit loquendi forma, singulariter erga nos affectus sit
oportet, qui se nostri causa ita demittere non gravatur: mirum itaque nisi tam
blanda and familiaris imitatio ad eum nos alliciat: Calvin in Psalm. 23. v. 1.
tenderness, compassion, condescension that can be imagined. His people are
set forth under many infirmities; some are Lambs, some great with young; some
very tender, some burdened with temptations nothing in any of them all strong
or comely. To them all Christ is Heb. 13. 20. 1 Pet. 2 25. chap. 5. 4. Psalm.
23. 1. Zach. 13. 7. Isa. 44. 28. Ezekiel. 34. 23. John 10. v. 11, 12, 16.
a Sheapheard, that feeds his own sheep, and drives them out to pleasant
pasture; where if he sees a poor weak Lamb does not thrust it on, but takes
him into his bosom, where he both eases and refreshes him. He leads them
gently and tenderly. As did Jacob them that were burdened with Genesis 33. 13.
young: so does our deer Lord Jesus with his flock in the several ways and
paths wherein he leads them. When he sees a poor soul weak, tender, halting,
ready to sink and perish, he takes him into his arms by some gracious promise
administered to him, carrys him, bears him up when he is not able to go one
step forward. Hence is his great quarrel with those Shepherds Ezekiel. 34. 4.
Wce be to you Shepherds, the diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye
healed that was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither
have ye brought gain that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that
which was lost. This is that which our careful, tender husband would have done.

So mention being made of his compassionatenesse and fellow-suffering with us;
Heb. 4. 15. it is added v. 16. that he administers, (...), seasonable Grace,
Grace for help in a time of need. This is an evidence of compassion when like
the Samaritan we afford seasonable help. To lament our troubles, or miseries
without affording help, is to no purpose. Now this Christ does, he gives (...)
seasonable help. Help being a thing that regards want, is always Excellent:
but its coming in season, puts a crown upon it. A pardon to a malefactor when
he is ready to be executed, is sweet and welcome. Such is the Assistance given
by Christ. All his Saints may take this as a sure Rule, both in their
Temptations and Afflictions; when they can want them, they shall not want
relief; and when they can bear no longer, they shall be relieved, 1 Cor. 10.
13.

So it is said Emphatically of him; Heb. 2. 13. In that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. It is
true, there is something in all our temptations more then was in the temptation
of Christ. There is something in our selves to take part with every temptation;
and there is enough in our selves to Jam. 1. v. 14, 15.
tempt us, though nothing else should appear against us. With Christ it was
not so, Joh. 14. 30. but this is so far from taking off his compassion toward
us, that on all accounts whatever it does increase it; for if he will give us
succor because we are tempted, the so^er our temptations are, the more ready
will he be to succor us. Take some instances, of Christ's giving (...),
seasonable help in, and under Temptations unto sin; now this he does several
ways.

1. By keeping the soul, which is liable to temptation and exposed to it, in a
strong habitual bent, against that sin that he Joseph: Christ knew that
Joseph's great trial, and that whereon if he had been conquared he had been
undone, would lie upon the hand of his Mistress tempting him to lewdness;
whereupon he kept his heart in a steady frame against that sin: as his Answer
without the least deliberation argues Genesis 39. 9. In other things wherein he
was not so deeply concerned, Jesephs heart was not so fortifyed by habitual
grace; as it appears by his swearing by the Genesis 42 15
life of Pharaoh. This is one way whereby Christ gives suitable help to his,
in tenderness and compassion. The Saints in the course of their lives, by the
Company, Society, business they are cast upon, are liable and exposed to
Temptations, great and violent; some in one kind some in another. Herein is
Christ exceedingly kind and tender to them in fortifying their hearts with
abundance of Grace, as to that sin unto temptations whereunto they are most
exposed; When perhaps in other things they are very weak and are often
surprised.

2. Christ sometimes, by some strong impulse of actual grace borders of Sin.
So it was in the case of David, 1 Samuel 24. 4, 5, 6. He was almost gone as he
speaks himself, his feet had well nigh slipped. The temptation was at the door
of prevalency when a mighty impulse of Grace recovers him. To show his Saints
what they are, their own weakness and infirmity, he sometimes suffers them to
go to the very edge and brow of the hill, and then causes them to here a word
behind them saying this is the right way walk in it, and that with power and
efficacy, and so recovers them to himself.

3. By taking away the Temptation it self, when it grows so strong and violent
that the poor soul knows not what to do. This is called delivering the Godly
out of temptation 2 Pet. 2. 9. As a man is plucked out of the snare, and the
snare left behind to hold another. This have I known to be the case of many in
sundry perplexing Temptations. When they have been quite weary, have tried all
means of help and assistance, and have not been able to come to a comfortable
issue, on a sudden, unexpectedly the Lord Christ in his tenderness and
compassion, rebukes Satan, that they hear not one word more of him as to
their temptation, Christ comes in, in the storm and says peace, be still.

4. By giving in fresh supplys of Grace, according as Temptations do grow or
increase. So was it in the case of Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 9. My Grace is sufficient
for thee. The Temptation whatever it were, grew high; Paul was earnest for it is
removal; and receives only this Answer of the sufficiency of the grace of God,
for his supportment, notwithstanding all the growth and increase of the
temptation.

5. By giving them wisdom, to make a right, holy, and spiritual improvement
of all temptations. James bids us count it all joy when we fall into manyfold
Temptations Ja. 1. 2. which could not be done, were there not an holy and
Sprituall use to be made of them, which also himself manifests in the words
following. There are manifold uses of Temptations, which experienced Christians
with assistance suitable from Christ, may make of them. This is not the least
that by them we are brought to know our selves. So Hezechiah was left, to be
tried to know what was in him. By temptation, some bosom, hidden corruption is
oftentimes discovered that the soul knew not of before. As it was with Hazel in
respect of enormous crimes; so in lesser things with the Saints. They would
never have believed there had been such lusts and corruptions in them as they 2
King. 8. 13.
have discovered upon their temptations. Yea diverse having been tempted to one
sin, have discovered another that they thought not of. As some being tempted to
pride, or worldliness, or looseness of conversation, have been startled by it
and lead to a discovery of a neglect of many dutys, and much communion with
God, which before they thought not of. And this is from the tender care of
Jesus Christ, giving them in suitable help, without which no man can possibly
make use of, or improve a Temptation. And this is a suitable help indeed,
whereby a temptation which otherwise, or to other persons might be a deadly
wound, proves the lancing of a fester'd sore, and the letting out of corruption
that otherwise might have endangered the life it self. So 1 Pet. 1. 6. If need
be ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations.

6. When the soul is at any time, more or less overcome by temptations Christ
in his tenderness relieves it with mercy and pardon. So that his shall not
sink utterly under their burden 1 John 2. 1, 2. By one more, or all of these
ways does the Lord Jesus manifest his conjugall tenderness, and compassion
toward his Saints, in and under their Temptations.

2. Christ is compassionate toward them in their Afflictions; in all their
Afflictions he is Afflicted, Is. 63. 9. yea it seems that all one sort, namely
which consist in Persecutions) are his in the first place, ours only by
participation. Coll. 1. 24. (...) Christi duo sunt genera: (...), quae passus
est in corpore suo, (...), quae in sonctis. Zanc. in loc.
We fill up the measure of the Afflictions of Christ. Two things evidently
manifest this compassionatenesse in Christ.

1. His interceding with his Father for their releife, Zech 1. 12. Christ
intercedeth on our behalf not only in respect of our sins, but also our
sufferings; and when the work of our Afflictions is accomplished, we shall
have the relief he interceds for. The Father always hears him Heb. 7. 25.
. And we have not a deliverance from trouble, a recovering of health, ease of
pain, freedom from any evil that ever laid hold upon us, but it is given us,
on the intercession of Jesus Christ. Believers are unacquainted with their own
condition, if they look upon their mercys as dispensed in a way of common
providence. And this may indeed be a cause why we esteem them no more, are no
more thankful for them, nor fruitful in the enjoyment of them; we see not
how, by what means, nor on what account they are dispensed to us. The
Generation of the people of God in the world are at this day alive, undevour'd,
merely on the account of the Intercession of the Lord Jesus. His
Compassionatenesse has been the fountain of their deliverances. Hence often
times he rebukes their sufferings and Afflictions, that they shall not act to
the utmost upon them, when they are under them. He is with them when they pass
through fire and water. Isa. 43. 2, 3.

2. In that that he does and will, in the winding up of the matter, so sorely
revenge the quarrel of their sufferings upon their enemies. He avenges his
Elect that cry unto him, yea he does it speedily. The controversy of Sion,
leads on the day of his vengeance, Isa. 34. 4. He looks upon them sometimes in
distress and considers what is the state of the world in reference to them
Zach. 1. 11. We have walked to and fro through the earth, and behold all the
earth sits still and is at rest; Say his Messengers to him, whom he sent to
consider the world and its condition, during the affliction of his people. This
commonly is the condition of the world in such a season, they are at rest and
quiet, their hearts are abundantly satiated; they drink wine in bowls, and
Amos 6. v. 3, 4, 5, 6. Revel. 11. 10.
send gifts one to another. Then Christ looks to see who will come in for
their succor. Isa. 59. 16, 17, and finding none engaging himself for their
relief, by the destruction of their adversaries, himself undertakes it. Now
this vengeance he accomplishes two ways.

1. Temporally upon Persons, Kingdoms, Nations and Countries, A type whereof
you have. Is. 63. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. As he did it upon the old Roman world,
Revel. 6. 16. and this also he does two ways.

1. By calling out here and there an eminent opposer, and making him an example
to all the world, so he dealt with Pharaoh, for this cause have I raised thee
up: Exodus 9. 16. So he does to this day, he lays his hand upon eminent
Adversaries; fills one with fury, another with folly, blasts a third, and makes
another wither, or destroys them utterly and terribly. As a provoked lion, he
lys not down without his prey.

2. In general, in the viols of his wrath which he will in these latter days
pour out upon the Antichristian world, and all that partake with them in their
thoughts of vengeance and persecution. He will miserably destroy them, and make
such work with them in the issue, that whosoever hears, both his ears shall
tingle.

2 In eternal vengeance will he plead with the adversarys of his Beloved. Mat.
25. 41, 42, 43, 44. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Jud. 15. It is hence evident, that Christ
abounds in pity and Compassion toward his beloved. Instances might be
multipyed, but these things are obvious and occur to the thoughts of all.

In answer to this, I place in the Saints, Chastity unto Christ Corinth, the
Apostle made it his endeavor

2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as
a chaste Virgin to Christ: And I fear least by any means as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ. And so is it said of the followers of the Lamb,
on mount Sion. Revel. 14. 4. These are they that are not defiled with women for
they are Virgins: what desilement that was they were free from, shall be
afterward declared.

Now there are three things wherein this Chastity consists.

1. The not taking any thing into their Affections and esteem for those ends
and purposes for which they have received Jesus Christ. Here the Galatians
failed in their conjugall Affection to Christ: they preserved not themselves
Chaste to him: They had received Christ for Life, and Justification and him
only; but being after a while overcome with Gal. 3. 1.
charms, or bewitched, they took into the same place with him the
righteousness of the Law. How Paul deals with them hereupon is known; How
sorely, how pathetically does he admonish them, how severely reprove them, how
clearly convince them of their madness and folly? This then is the first chaste
Affection Believers bear in their heart to Christ; having received him for
their Righteousness and Salvation before God, for the fountain, spring, and
wellhead of all their supply's, they will not now receive any other thing into
his room and in his stead. As to instance in one particular. We receive him
for our Cor. 1. 30.
Acceptance with God! all that here can stand in competition with him for our
Affections, must be our own endeavors for a Romans 10. 4.
Righteousness to commend us to God. Now this must be either before we receive
him, or after: for all dutys and endeavors of what sort soever for the
pleasing of God before our receiving of Christ, you know what was the Apostles
frame. Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10. all endeavors, all advantages, all privileges he
rejects with Indignation as loss, with Abomination as dung; and winds up all
his aims and desires in Christ alone and his Righteousness for those ends and
purposes. But the works we do after we have received Christ, are of another
consideration. Indeed they are, acceptable to God; it pleases him that we
should walk in them. But as to that end for which we receive Christ, of no
other account then the former, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. Even the works we do after
believing, those which we are created unto in Christ Jesus, those that God has
ordained that believers should walk in them, as to Justification and acceptance
with God here called Salvation, are excluded. It will one day appear that
Christ abhorrs the janglings of men, about the place of their own works and
obedience, in the business of their acceptance with God. Nor will the Saints
find any peace in adulterous thoughts of that kind. The Chastity we owe unto
him, requires another frame. The necessity, usefullnesse, and Excellency of
Gospel obedience shall be afterward declared. It is mavelous to see, how
Perfice hoc precibus, pretio, ut haeream in part aliqua tandem etc.
hard it is to keep some Professors to any faithfulness with Christ in this
thing. How many disputes have been managed, how many distinctions invented,
how many shifts and evasions studied, to keep up something in some place or
other, to some purpose or other, that they may dally withal. Those that love
him indeed, are otherwise minded.

Herein then of all things, do the Saints endeavor to keep chaste and loyal
to Jesus Christ. He is made unto them of God Righteousness, and they will own
nothing else to that purpose: yea sometimes they know not whether they have any
interest in him or no; he absents and withdrawes himself, they still continue
solitary in a state of widdowhood, refusing to be comforted, though many things
offer themselves to that purpose, because he is not. When Christ is at any time
absent from the soul, when it cannot see that it has any interest in him, many
lovers offer themselves to it, many woo it is Affections to get it to rest on
this or that thing for relief and succor; but though it go mourning never so
long it will have nothing but Christ to lean upon. When ever the soul is in
the wilderness, in the saddest condition, there it will stay until Christ
come for to take it up; until it can come forth leaning upon him, Cant. 8. 5.
The many instances of this that the book of Canticles affords us, we have in
part spoken of before.

This does he who has communion with Christ; he watches own heart, that
nothing creep into it is Affections to give it any peace or establishment before
God, but Christ only. When ever that question is to be answered, wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, and appear before the high God? he does not
gather up, this or that I will do, or here and there I will watch and amend my
ways; but instantly he cries in the Lord Jesus, have I Isa. 45. 24. Phil. 3. 9.
Hab. 2. 1, 4.
Righteousness? all my desire is to be found in him, not having on my own
Righteousness.

2. In cherishing that Spirit, that Holy Comforter which Christ sends to us; to
abide with us in his room, and stead: He tells us that he sends him to that
purpose Joh. 16. 7. he gives him to us, Vicariam navare operam, says
Tertullian, to abide with us for ever, for all those ends and purposes which he
has to fulfill toward us, and upon us; He gives him to dwell in us, to keep
us and preserve us blameless for himself; his name is in him, and with him;
and it is upon his account that whatever is done to any of Christ's, is done to
him, because it is done to them in whom he is and dwells by his spirit. Now
herein do the Saints preserve their conjugall affections entire to Christ, that
they labor by all means not to grieve his Holy Spirit, which he has sent in
his stead to abide with them. This the Apostle puts them in mind of. Ephesians. 4.
30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit.

There be two maine ends for which Christ sends his Spirit to Believers.

1. For their Sanctification. 2. For their Consolation: to which two all the
particular acts of purging, teaching, annoynting, and the rest that are
ascribed to him may be referred. So there be two way's whereby we may grieve
him. 1. In respect of Sanctification. 2. In respect of Consolation.

1. In respect of Sanctification; He is the Spirit of Holiness; holy in
himself and the Author of Holiness in us, he works it in us Tit. 3. 5. and
he persuades us to it, by those motions of his which are not be quenched. Now
this in the first place grieves 2 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
the Spirit, when he is carrying on in us, and for us, a work so infinitely
for our Advantage, and without which we cannot see God, that we should run
cross to him in ways of unholinesse, pollution, and defilement. So the
connection of the words in the place before mentioned manifests Ephesians. 4. 28, 29,
0, 31. and thence does Paul bottom his powerful and most effectual
persuasion unto holiness, even from the abode and indwelling of this holy
Spirit with us, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. indeed what can grieve a loving and tender
friend more then to oppose him and slight him, when he is most intent about our
good; and that a good of the greatest consequence to us? In this then Believers
make it their business to keep their hearts loyal and their Affections chaste
to Jesus Christ. They labor instantly not to grieve the Holy Spirit by loose
and foolish, by careless and negligent walking, which he has sent to dwell
and abide with them. Therefore shall no anger, wrath, malice, envy dwell in
their hearts, because they are contrary to the Holy meek spirit of Christ,
which he has given to dwell with them. They attend to his motions, make use of
his assistance, improve his gifts, and nothing lys more upon their Spirits then
that they may walk worthy of the presence of this holy substitute of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

2. As to Consolation; this is the second great end for which gives and sends
his Spirit to us, who from thence by the way of eminency is called the
Comforter: to this end he seals us, anoynts us, establishes us, and gives us
peace and joy: of all which I shall afterward speak at large. Now there be
two ways, whereby he may be grieved as to this end of his mission, and our
chastity to Jesus Christ thereby violated.

1. By placeing our comforts and joys in other things, and not being filled
with joy in the holy Ghost. When we make creatures or comforts, any thing
whatever, but what we receive by the Spirit of Christ, to be our joy and our
delight, we are false with Christ. So was it with Demas who loved the present
world. When the ways of the Spirit of God are grievous and burdensome to us,
when 2 Timothy 4. 10.
we say when will the Sabbath be past that we may exact all our labors? when
our delight and refreshment lies in earthly things, we are unsuitable to
Christ. May not his Spirit say, why do I still abide with these poor souls?
I provide them joys unspeakeable and glorious, but they refuse them for
perishing things; I provide them spiritual, eternal, abiding consolations,
and it is all rejected for a thing of naught. This Christ cannot bear!
wherefore Believers are exceeding careful in this, not to place their joy and
Consolation in any thing but what is administered by the Spirit. Their daily
work is to get their hearts crucified to the world and the things of it; and
the world to their hearts, that they may not have living affections to dying
things; they would feign look on the world as a crucified dead thing, that has
neither form nor beauty; and if at any times they have been entangled with
creatures and inferior contentments, and have lost their better joys, they cry
out to Christ, O restore to us the joys of thy Spirit!

2. He is grieved when through darkness, and unbelief we receive those
Consolations which he tenders to us, and which he is abundantly willing that we
should receive; but of this I shall have occasion to speak afterward in
handling our Communion with the Holy Ghost.

3. In his institutions or matter and manner of his worship, Christ marrying
his Church to himself, taking it to that Relation, still maine of their chaste
and choice Affections to him, to lie in their keeping his Institutions and his
worship according to his appointment. The breach of this he calls Adultery
every where, and whoredom; He is a jealous God, and he gives himself that
title only in respect of his institutions. And the whole Apostasy of the
Christian Church unto false worship is called Revel. 17. 5.
fornication, and the Church that lead the others to false worship, the Mother
of Harlots. On this account those Believers who really attend to Communion with
Jesus Christ, do labor to keep their hearts chaste to him in his Ordinances,
institutions and worship, and that two ways.

1. They will receive nothing, practice nothing, own nothing in his worship,
but what is of his Appointment. They know that from the foundation of the world
he never did allow, nor ever will, that in any thing the will of the creatures
should be the measure of his honor, or the principle of his worship, either as
to matter or manner. It was a witty and true sense that one gave of the second
Commandment; Non imago, non simulachrum prohibetur; sed, non facies tibi: it
is a making to our selves, an inventing, a finding out ways of worship or
means of honoring God, not by him appointed, that is so severely forbidden.
Believers know what entertainment all will worship finds with God. Who has
required those things at your hands? and, in vain do you worship me, teaching
for doctrines the traditions of men, is the best it meets with: I shall take
leave to say what is upon my Heart, and what (the Lord assisting,) I shall
willingly endeavor to make good against all the world; namely, that that
principle, that the Church has power to institute and appoint any thing, or
ceremony belonging to the worship of God, either as to matter or to manner
beyond the orderly observance of such circumstances as necessarily attend such
ordinances as Christ himself has instituted, lies at the bottom of all the
horrible superstition and idolatry, of all the confusion, blood, persecution
and wars that have for so long a season spread themselves over the face of
the Christian world; and that it is the design of a great part of the
Revelation, to make a discovery of this Truth. And I doubt not but that the
great controversy which God has had with this Nation for so many years, and
which he has pursued with so much Anger and Indignation, was upon this
account! that contrary to that glorious light of the Gospel which shone among
us, the wills and fancys of men, under the name of order, decency, and the
Authority of the Church (a Chimaera that none knew what it was, nor wherein the
power of it did consist, nor in whom reside) were imposed on men, in the ways
and worship of God. Neither was all that pretense of Glory, beauty, comeliness,
and conformity, that then was pleaded, any thing more or less, then what God
does so describe in the Church of Israel, Ezekiel. 16. v. 25, and forwards. Hence
was the Spirit of God in prayer derided, hence was the powerful preaching of
the Gospel despised, hence was the Sabbath decryed, hence was holiness
stigmatized and persecuted; to what end? that Jesus Christ might be deposed
from the sole privilege and power of Law-making in his Chruch; that the true
husband might be thrust aside, and adulterers of his Spouse Embraced! that
taskemasters might be appointed in and over his house, which he never gave to
his Church. Ephesians. 4. 12. that a ceremonious pompous, outward show worship,
drawn from Pagan, Judaicall and Antichristian observations might be
introduced; of all which there is not one word, tittle or iota in the whole
book of God: This then they who hold Communion with Christ are careful of;
They will admit of nothing, practice nothing in the worship of God* private or
public, but what they have his warrant for; unless it comes in his name,
with thus says the Lord Jesus, they will not hear an Angel from Heaven. They
know the Apostles themselves were to teach the Saints only what Christ
commanded them: Math. 28. 20. You know how many in this very nation in the days
not long since passed, yea how many thousands left their native soil, and went
into a vast and Howling wilderness in the utmost parts of the world, to keep
their souls undefiled and chaste to their dear Lord Jesus, as to this of his
worship and institutions.

2. They readily embrace, receive, and practice every thing that Lord Christ
has appointed. They enquire diligently into his mind and will, that they may
know it. They go to him for directions, and beg of him to lead them in the
way they have not known. The 119. Psalm may be a pattern for this. How does
the good holy soul breath after instruction in the ways and ordinances, the
statutes and judgments of God? This I say they are tender in. What ever is of
Christ, they willingly submit unto, accept of and give up themselves to the
constant practice hereof. What ever comes on any other account they refuse.

4. Christ manifests and evidences his love to his Saints in a way of bounty,
in that rich plentiful provision he makes for them. It has pleased the Father
that in him all fulness should dwell, Col. 1. 19. and that for this end, that
of his fulness we might all receive Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. I shall not
insist upon the particulars of that provision which Christ makes for his
Saints, with all those influences of the Spirit of life and grace that daily
they receive from him, that bread that he gives them to the full, the
refreshment they have from him: I shall only observe this, that the Scripture
affirms him to do all things for them in an abundant manner, or to do it
richly in a way of bounty. Whatever he gives us, his grace to assist us, his
presence to comfort us, he does it abundantly. You have the General assertion
of it Romans 5. 20. Where sin abounded, Grace did abound much more. If grace
abound much more in comparison of sin, it is abundant grace indeed, as will
easily be granted by any that shall consider how sin has abounded and does in
every soul. Hence he is said to be able, and we are bid to expect that he
should do for us exceeding abundantly above what we can ask or think Ephesians 3.
20, Is it pardoning mercy we receive of him? why he does abundantly pardon, Is.
55. 7. he will multiply or add to pardon, he will add pardon to pardon, that
grace and mercy shall abound above all our sins and iniquities. Is it the
Spirit he gives us? he sheds him upon us richly or abundantly Tit. 3. 6. not
only bidding us drink of the waters of life freely, but also bestowing him in
such a plentiful measure that rivers of water shall flow from them that
receive him, Joh. 7. 38, 39. that they shall never thirst any more who have
drank of him. Is it Grace that we receive of him? he gives that also in a way
of bounty. We receive abundance of Grace Romans 5. 17. he abounds toward us in
all wisdom and Prudence, Ephesians. 1. 18. Hence is that invitation Can. 5 1. If
in any thing then we are straightened, it is in our selves, Christ deals
bountifully with us. Indeed the great sin of believers is, that they make not
use of Christ's Bounty as they ought to do; that we do not every day take of
him mercy in Abundance. The oil never cease, till the vessels cease; supplys
from Christ fail not but only when our faith fails in receiving them.

4. Then our return to Christ is in a way of duty; unto this two things are
required.

1. That we follow after and practice Holiness in the power of it, as it is
obedience unto Jesus Christ; under this formality, as obedience to him. All
Gospell-obedience is called, whatsoever Christ commands us, Mat. 28. 20. And
says he, Joh. 15. 14. ye are my friends if you do what I command you: and it
is required of us that we live to him who dyed for us, 2 Cor. 5. 15. live to
him in all holy obedience; live to him as our Lord and King. Not that I suppose
there are peculiar precepts and a peculiar law of Jesus Christ, in the
observance whereof we are justified, as the Socinians fancy: for surely the
Gospel requires of us no more, but to love the Lord our God with all
ourhearts, and all our souls, which the Law also required: but that the Lord
Jesus having brought us into a condition of acceptance with God, wherein our
obedince is well pleasing to him, and we being to honor him as we honor the
Father, that we have a respect and peculiar regard to him in all our Obedience
so Tit. 2. 14. he has purchased us unto himself: and thus Believers do in
their obedience, they eye Jesus Christ.

1. As the Author of their Faith and Obedience for whose sake it is given to
them to believe, Phil. 1. 29. and who by his Spirit works that obedience in
them. So the Apostle Heb. 12. 1, 2. in the course of our obedience we still
look to Jesus the Author of our Faith; Faith is here both the grace of Faith;
and the fruit of it in obediemce.

2. As He, in, for, and by whom we have acceptance with God obedience. They
know, all their dutys are weak, imperfect, not able to abide the presence of
God; and therefore they look to Christ as he who bears the iniquity of their
Holy things, who adds incense to their prayers, gathers out all the weeds of
their dutys, end makes them acceptable to God.

3. As one that has renewed the commands of God unto them with mighty
obligations unto obedience. So the Apostle 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. the love of Christ
constraines us, of which afterward.

4. They consider him as God equal with his Father, to whom all honor and
obedience is due, So Rev. 5. 14. But these things I have not long since opened
Vindiciae Evangel. chap. 13.
in another treatise dealing about the Worship of Christ as Mediator. This
then the Saints do in all their Obedience; they have a special regard to
their dear Lord Jesus. He is on all these accounts and innumerable others
continually in their thoughs: his love to them, his life for them, his death
for them, all his kindness and mercys constrains them to live to him.

2. By laboring to abound in fruits of Holiness; as he deals bounty, and
deals out unto us abundantly, so he requires that we abound in all grateful,
obedientiall returns to him; so we are exhorted to be allways abounding in the
work of the Lord 1 Cor. 15. 58. This is that I intend; the Saints are not
satisfied with that measure that at any time they have attained, but are still
pressing that they may be more dutiful, more fruitful to Christ.

And this is a little glympse, of some of that Communion ten thousand worlds;
who desires to spend the residue of the few and evil days of his pilgrimage,
in pusuite hereof, in the contemplation of the Excellencys, desireablenesse,
Love and Grace of our dear Lord Jesus and in making returns of obedience
according to his will: To whose soul in the midst of the perplexities of
this wretched world, and cursed rebellions of his own heart, this is the great
relief, that he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; The spirit and
the Bride say come; and let him that reads say come; even so come Lord Jesus.

CHAP. VI.
1. Of Communion with Christ in purchased Grace: Purchased Grace considered in
respect of its rise and fountain. The first rise of it, in the Obedience of
Christ: Obedience Properly ascribed to Christ: Two ways considered: what it
was, and wherein it did consist. Of his Obedience to the Law in General: Of the
Law of the Mediator: His habitual Righteousness how necessary, as also his
obedience to the Law of the Mediator. Of his actual obedience or active
Righteousness. All Christ's obedience performed as he was mediator. His active
obedience for us. This proved at large: Gal. 4. 4, 5. Romans 5. 19. Phil. 3. 19.
Zach. 3. 3, 4, 5. One Objection removed. Considerations of Christ's active
Righteousness closed. Of the Death of Christ, and its influence into our
Acceptance with God: A price: Redemption what it is. A Sacrifice: Atonement
made thereby: A punishment: satisfaction thereby. The intercession of Christ:
with its influence into our Acceptance with God.

OUR process is now to Communion with Christ, in Purchased Grace: as it was
before proposed. That we may know him, and the Power of his Resurrection and
the Fellowship of his suffering, and be made conformable to his death: Phil. 3.
10.

By Purcased grace I understand all that Righteousness, and Grace which Christ
has procured, or wrought out for us, or does by any means make us partakers
of, or bestows on us for our benefit, by any thing that he has done, or
suffered, or by any thing he continues to do as Mediator.

The first may be considered two ways.

1. In respect of the Rise and Fountain of it. 2. Of its nature, or wherein it
consists. 1. It has a threefold Rise, Spring, or Causality in Christ. 1. The
Obedience of his Life. 2. The Suffering of his Death. 3. His continued
Intercession. All the Actions of Christ as Mediator, leading to the
Communication of Grace unto us; may be either referred to these heads, or to
some things that are subservient to them, or consequents of them.


For the nature of this Grace wherein we have Communion with Christ flowing from
these heads and fountains, it may referred to these three.

1. Grace of Justification or acceptance with God, which makes a relative
change in us, as a state and condition. 2. Grace of Sanctification or Holiness
before God, which makes a real change in us, as to principle and operation. 3.
Grace of Privilege, which is mixed, as we shall show, if I go forth to the
handling thereof.
Now that we have Communion with Christ in this purchased Grace, is evident on
this single consideration; that there is almost nothing that Christ has done,
which is a spring of that Grace whereof we speak, but we are said to do it
with him. We are Crucified with him Gal. 2. 20. we are dead with him: 2 Timothy 2.
11. Col. 3. 3. and buried with him: Romans 6. 4. Col. 2. 12. we are quickened
together with him: Col. 2. 13. risen with him: Col. 3. 1. He has quickened us
together with Christ and has raised us up together, and made us sit together
in Heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. In the actings of Christ, there is by
virtue of the compact between him as Mediator and the Father, such an assured
foundation laid of the communication of the fruits of those actings, unto
those in whose stead he performed them, that they are said, in the
participation of those fruits, to have done the same things with him. The life
and power of which truth, we may have occasion hereafter to inquire into.

The first fountain and spring of this Grace wherein we have Obedience of his
life concerning which it must be declared,

1. What it is that is intended thereby; and wherein it consists.

2. What influence it has into the Grace, whereof we speak.

To the handling of this, I shall only premise this Observation: namely; that
in the order of procurement, the Life of Christ, (as was necessary:) precedeth
his death, and therefore we shall handle it in the first place: But in the
order of Application, the Benefits of his death are bestowed on us,
antecedently in the nature of the things themselves, unto those of his life; as
will appear, and that necessarily from the state and condiwherein we are.

1. By the Obedience of the life of Christ, I intend the universal Conformity
of the Lord Jesus Christ, as he was, or is in his being Mediator, to the whole
will of God; and his complete actual fullfilling of the whole of every Law of
God, or doing of all, that God in them required. He might have been perfectly
holy by obedience to the Law of Creation, the Moral Law, as the Angels were:
neither could any more as a man walking with God Vox haec (...), latissime
sumitur, ita ut significet non modo (...), sed and quicquid ullam aequi atque
beni habet rationem: nam lex Mosis de hoc baptismo nihil praescripserat. Grot.
Per (...) Chritus hic non designat Justitiam legalem, sed ut ita loqui liceat
personalem; (...) personae, and (...) muneri. Walae. (...): Clem.
be required of him. But he submitted himself also to every Law or Ordinance
that was introduced upon the occasion of sin, which on his own account He
could not be subject to; it becoming him to fulfill ALL RIGHTEOUSNESS; Math.
3. 15. as he spoke in reference to a newly instituted Ceremony.

That Obedience is properly ascribed unto Jesus Christ, as name and thing. Heb.
5. 8. Though he were a Son yet learned he obedience etc. yea he was obedient in
his sufferings, and it was that which gave life to his death: Phil. 2. 8. He
was obedient to death; for therein, He did make his soul an offering for
sin. Isa. 53. 10. or His soul made an offering for sin as it is
interpreted v. 12. He powered out his soul to death, or his soul poured out
its self unto death. And He not only Sanctified himself to be an offering,
Joh. 17. 9. But he also offered up himself, Heb. 9. 14. an offering of a sweet
savor to God: Ephesians. 5. 2. Hence as to the whole of his work, He is called
the Father's Servant, Isa. 42. 1. and v. 19. And He professes of himself that
he came into the world, to do the will of God, the will of him that sent him;
for which he manifests his great readiness, Heb. 10. 7. all which evince his
obedience. But I suppose I need not insist on the proof of this, that Christ
in the work of mediation, and as Mediator, was obedient and did what He did,
willingly and cheerfully in obedience to God.

Now this obedience of Christ may be considered two ways,

1. As to the Habitual root and fountain of it. 2. As to the Actual parts or
duties of it.
1. The Habitual Righteousness of Christ: as Mediator in his humane nature,
was the absolute, complete, exact conformity of the Soul of Christ, to the
will, mind or Law of God; or his perfect De Angelis loquitur, qui si cum Deo
conferantur, aut si eos secum Deus conferat, non habens rationem eorum quae in
illis posuit, and dotium ac donorum quae in illos contulit, and quibus eos
exornavit and illustravit, inveniat eos stolidos. Sane quicquid habent Angeli a
Deo habent. Mercer. in loc.
habitually inherent Righteousness. This he had necessarily from the Grace of
Union, from whence it is, that, that which was borne of the Uirgin was an Holy
thing, Luke 1. 35. It was I say necessary consequentially that it should be so;
though the effecting of it were by the free operations of the Spirit. Luke 2.
52. He had an All-fullnesse of Grace on all accounts. This the Apostle
describes Heb. 7. 26. Such an high Priest became us, Holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners. Every way separate and distant from sin and
sinners he was to be. Whence he is called the Lamb of God without spot or
blemish, 1 Pet. 1. 19. This habitual Holiness of Christ was inconceivably
above that of the Angels. He who charge his Angels with folly Job. 4. 18.
who puts no trust in his Saints, and in whose sight the Heavens (or their
inhabitants) are not clean, chapter 15. 15. allways embraces him in his bosom,
and is allways well pleased with him, Math. 3. 17. And the reason of this is,
because every other creature though never so holy, has the spirit of God by
measure; but he was not given to Christ by measure, Joh. 3. 34. and that
because it pleased him, that in him all fulness should dwell. Col. 1. 19.
This habitual grace of Christ, though not absolutely infinite, yet in respect
of any other creature, it is as the water of the Sea, to the water of a pond or
poole. All other creatures are depressed from perfection by this, that they
subsist in a created, dependent being, and so have the fountain of what is
communicated to them, without them. But the humane nature of Christ subsists in
the person of the Son of God, and so has the bottom and fountain of its
holiness, in the stricktest unity with it self.

2. The Actual Obedience of Christ, (as was said) was willing, cheerful,
obedientiall performance of every thing, duty, or command, that God by virtue
of any Law, whereto we were subject and obnoxious, did require; and moreover to
the peculiar Law of the Mediator: Hereof then are two parts,

1. That whatever was required of us by virtue of any Law, that he did and
fullfiled. Whatever was required of us, by the innocence, whatever kind of duty
was added by morally positive, or ceremonial institutions, whatever is
required of us in way of Obedience to Righteous Judicial Laws, He did it all.
Hence he is said to be made under the Law: Gal. 4. 4. subject or obnoxious to
it, to all the precepts or commands of it. So Math. 3. 15. He said, it became
him to Fuit legis servituri subjectus, ut eam implendo nos ab ea redimeret, and
ab ejus servitute. Bez.
fulfill all Righteousness, (...), all manner of Righteousness whatever;
that is every thing that God required, as is evident from the application of
that general axiom to the baptism of John. I shall not need for this to go
to particular instances, in the duties of the Law of nature, to God and his
parents: of morally positive in the Sabath, and other acts of worship; of the
Ceremonial Law, in Circumcision, and observation of all the rites of the
Judaicall Church; of the Judicial, in paying tribute to Governors. It will
suffice I presume that on the one hand He did no sin, neither was guile found
in his mouth, and on the other, that He fullfilled all Righteousness, and
thereupon the Father was allways well pleased with him: This was that which he
owned of himself, that He came to do the will of God, and he did it.

2. There was a peculiar Law of the Mediator, which respected himself merely,
and contained all those acts and duties of his,. 10. Propriu^ objectum
obedientiae est praeceptum tacitum vel expressum, id est, voluntas superioris
quocunque modo innotescat. Thom. 2. 2. q. 2. 5. Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Act. 3. 22. Joh.
12. 49. chap. 14. 31. Joh. 6. 38. Joh, 5. 30.
which are not for our imitation. So that obedience which He showed in dying,
was peculiarly to this Law: Joh. 10. 18. I have power to lay down my life. This
commandment have I received of my Father. As Mediator, He received this
peculiar command of his Father, that he should lay down his life, and take it
again, and He was obedient thereunto. Hence we say, He, who is Mediator, did
some things merely as a man subject to the Law of God in general, so He
prayed for his persecutors, those that put him to death, Luke 23. 24. some
things as Mediator; so He prayed for his Elect only, Joh. 17. 9. There were not
worse in the world really and evidently, then many of them that crucified him;
yet as a man subject to the Law, he forgave them and prayed for them. When he
prayed as Mediator, his Father allwaies heard him and answered him, Joh. 11.
41. and in the other Prayers, He was accepted as one exactly performing his
duty.

This then is the Obedience of Christ, which was the first thing influence into
the Grace of which we speak, wherein we hold communion with him, namely our
free Acceptance with God: what that influence is, must also follow in its
order.

1. For his habitual Righteousness, I shall only propose it under these two
considerations:

1. That upon this supposition, that it was needful that we should have a
Mediator that was God and Man in one person, as it could not otherwise be, it
must needs be, that He must be so holy. For all though there be but one primary
necessary effect of the Hypostaticall union, which is the subsistence of the
humane nature in the person of the Son of God, yet that He that was so united
to him, should be an holy thing, completely holy; was necessary also; of which
before.

2. That the Relation which this Righteousness of Christ has to the Grace we
receive from him, is only this, that thereby, he was (...), fit to do all that
He had to do for us. This is the intendment of the Apostle, Heb. 7. 26. such
an one became us: it was needful He should be such an one, that he might do
what he had to do. And the Reasons hereof are two.

1. Had he not been completely furnished with habitual Grace, He could never
have actually fullfilled the Righteousness, which was required at his hands.
It was therein that he was able to do all that he did. So himself lays down
the presence of the Spirit with him as the bottom and foundation of his going
foth to his work: Isa. 61, 1. Praecipitur Levit. 22. 20. ne offeratur pecus in
quo sit. (...) mum: id est corporis vitium: a (...) efficitur (...) culpa: unde
Christus dicitur (...): inculpatus: opponitur autem (...), hoc est integrum.?
ibid. v 19. and sic Exodus 12. 5. praecipitur de agno paschali, ut sit (...), id
est integer, omnis scilicet vitii expers. Idem praecipitur de agnis jugis
sacrificii: Namb, 28. 3. quo ipsa nimirum sanctitas Christi tanquam victimae
praefiguratae sunt Piscat. in 1 Pet. 1. 19.


2. He could not have been a complete and perfect Sacrifice, nor have answered
all the 'types and figures of him, that were complete and without blemish: but
now Christ having this Habitual Righteousness, if he had never yielded any
continued obedience to the Law actively, but had suffered as soon after his
Incarnation, as Adam sinned after his Creation, He had been a fit Sacrifice and
Offering, and therefore doubtless his following Obedience, has another use
besides to fit him for an Oblation, for which he was most fit without it.

2. For Christ's obedience to the Law of Mediation, wherein it is not coincident
with his passive obedience as they speak (for I requisite for the discharging
of his Office, and is not imputed unto us, as though we had done it, though the
(...) and fruits of it are; but is of the nature of his Intercession; whereby
He provides the good things we stand in need of, at least subserviently to his
Oblation and Intercession: of which more afterward.

3. About his Actual fulfilling of the Law, or doing all things that of us are
required, there is some doubt and question: and three several opinions.

1. That this Active Obedience of Christ, has no farther influence into our
Justification and Acceptance with God, but as it was preparatory to his blood
shedding and oblation, which is the sole cause of our Justification, the whole
Righteousness which is imputed to us, arising from thence.

2. That it may be considered two ways, 1. As it is purely obedience, and so
it has no other state, but that before mentioned. 2. As it was accomplished
with suffering, and joined with it, as it was part of his humiliation, so it is
imputed to us, or is part of that, upon the account whereof, we are justified.

3. That this obedience of Christ being done for us, is reckoned graciously of
God, unto us, and upon the account thereof, are we accepted as Righteous before
him. My intendment is not to handle this difference in the way of a
controversy, but to give such an understanding of the whole, as may speedily be
reduced to the practice of Godliness and consolation: and this I shall do in
the ensuing Observations.

1. That the Obedience that Christ yielded to the Law in Mediator, though he
yielded it as Mediator. He was incarnate as Mediator, Heb. 2. 14. and Gal. 4.
4. And all He afterward did, it was as our Mediator: for that cause came he
into the World, and did, and suffered, what ever He did or suffered in this
world. So that of this expression, as Mediator, there is a twofold sense: for
it may be taken strictly, as relating solely to the Law of the Mediator, and so
Christ may be said to do as Mediator, only what he did in obedience to that
^^w; but in the sense now insisted on, what ever Christ did as a man subject to
any Law, he did it as Mediator, because he did it as part of the duty incumbent
on him, who undertook so to be.

2. That what ever Christ did as Mediator, He did it for them whose Mediator He
was, or in whose stead, and for whose good, He executed the Office of a
Mediator before God: This the Holy Ghost witnesses, Romans 8. 3. What the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son,
in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh,
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. because that we
could not in that condition of weakness, whereinto we are cast by sin, come
to God and be freed from condemnation by the Law; God sent Christ, as a
Mediator to doc and suffer whatever the Law required at our hands, for that end
and purpose, that we might not be condemned but accepted of God. It was all to
this end, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us: that is,
which the Law required of us, consisting in duties of obedience, this Christ
performed for us. This expression of the Apostle, God sending his own Son, in
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemning sin in the flesh: if
you will add to it, that of Gal: 4. 4. that he was so sent forth, as that he
was (...), made under the Law, that is, obnoxious to it, to yield all the
obedience that it does require, comprizes the whole of what Christ did or
suffered; and all this the Holy Ghost tells us, was for us, v. 4.

3. That the end of this Active Obedience of Christ, cannot be assigned to be,
that He might be fitted for his death and Oblation. types, and was every way
(...) fit to be made an offering for sin, by his union, and Habitual Grace;
so that if the obedience Christ performed, be not reckoned to us and done upon
our account, there is no just cause to be assigned, why He should live here in
the world so long as He did, in perfect obedience to all the Laws of God. Had
He dyed before, there had been perfect Innocence, and perfect Holiness, by his
habitual Grace, and infinite virtue and worth from the dignity of his Person:
and surely He yielded not that long course of all manner of Obedience, but for
some great and special purpose, in reference to our Salvation.

4. That, had not the Obedience of Christ been for us, (in life have been
required of him, to yield obedience to the Law of Nature, the alone Law which
he could be liable to as a man; for an innocent man in a Covenant of Works, as
he was, needs no other Law; nor did God ever give any other Law to any such
person; (the Law of Creation is all that an innocent creature is liable to,
with what Symbols of that Law God is pleased to add.) And yet to this Law also
was his subjection voluntary; and that not only consequentially, because he was
borne upon his own choice, not by any natural course, but also because as
Mediator God and Man, he was not by the institution of that Law obliged unto
it, being as it were exempted, and lifted above that Law by the Hypostaticall
Union: yet when I say his subjection hereunto was voluntary, I do not intend
that it was merely arbitrary and at choice, whither he would yield obedience
unto it or no; but on supposition of his undertaking to be a Mediator,
Obedientia importat necessitatem respectu ejus quod praecipitur, and voluntatem
respectu impletionis praecepti. Thom. 3 q. 47. 2. 2.
it was necessary it should be so: but that he voluntarily and willingly
submitted unto, and so became really subject to the commands of it. But now
moreover Jesus Christ yielded perfect obedience to all those Laws, which came
upon us by the occasion of sin; as the Ceremonial Law: yea those very
institutions that signified the washing away of sin, and Repentance from
sin, as the Baptism of John, which He had no need of himself. This
therefore must needs be for us.

5. That the Obedience of Christ cannot be reckoned amongst sufferings, but is
clearly distinct from it: as to all formalityes, Doing is one thing, suffering
another; they are in diverse predicaments, and cannot be coincident.

See then briefly what we have obtained by those considerations; and then I
shall intimate what is the stream issuing from this first spring or Fountain
of purchased Grace, with what influence it has thereinto.

1. By the Obedience of the Life of Christ, you see what is intended: his
willing submission unto, and perfect complete fulfilling of every Law of God,
that any of the Saints of God were obliged unto. It is true, every Act almost
of Christ's obedience, from the blood of his Circumcision, to the blood of his
Cross, was attended with suffering; so that his whole life might in that
regard be called a death: But yet looking upon his willingness In vita
passivam hahuit actionem; in morte passionem activam sustinuit; dum salutem
operatur in medio terrae: Bern-Ser. 4.
and obedience in it, it is distinguished from his sufferings peculiarly so
called, and termed his Active Righteousness. This is then I say, as was
showed, that complete obsolutely perfect Accomplishment of the whole Law of God
by Christ, our Mediator; whereby He not only did no sin, neither was there
guile found in his mouth, but also most perfectly fulfilled all Righteousness,
as He affirmed it became him to do.

2. That this obedience was performed by Christ, not for himself, but for us:
and in our stead: it is true! It must needs be, that whilst he had his
conversation in the flesh, He must be most perfectly and absolutely holy. But
yet the prime intendment of his accomplishing of holiness, which consists in
the complete obedience of his whole life to any Law of God, that was no less
for us, then his suffering death: That this is so, the Apostle tells us, Gal.
4. 4, 5. God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to
redeem them that were under the Law: this Scripture formerly named, must be a
little farther insisted on. He was both made of a Woman, and made under the
Law, that is, obedient to it for us. The end here both of the Incarnation and
Obedience of Christ to the Law, (for that must needs be understood here by the
phrase (...), that is, disposed of in such a condition, as that he must yield
subjection and obedience to the Law) was all to redeem us. In those two
expressions made of a Woman, made under the Law, the Apostle does not knit his
Incarnation and death together, with an exclusion of the obedience of his life.
And he was so made under the Law, as those were under the Law whom he was to
redeem. Now we were under the Law, not only as obnoxious to its penalties, but
as bound to all the duties of it. That this is our being under the Law, the
Apostle informs us, Gal. 4. 21. Tell me, ye that desire to be under the Law.
It was not the penalty of the Law they desired to be under; but to be under it,
in respect of obedience. Take away then the end and you destroy the means: if
Christ were not incarnate, nor made under the Law for himself, He did not
yield obedience for himself: it was all for us, for our good: let us now look
forward and see what influence this has into our acceptance.

3. Then I say, this perfect complete Obedience of Christ to the Law is
reckoned unto us. As there is a truth in that, the day thou eatest thou shall
dye; death is the reward of sin, and so we cannot be freed from death, but by
the death of Christ: Heb. 2. 13, 14. So also is that no less true, do this and
live, that life is not to be obtained, unless all be done, that the Law
requires. That is still true, if thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments, Math. 19. 17. they must then be kept by us, or our surety.
Neither is it of any value which by some is objected, that if Christ yielded
perfect obedience to the Law for us, then are we no more bound to yield
obedience: for by his undergoing death the penalty of the Law, we are freed
from it. I Answer; How did Christ undergo death, merely as it was penal: how
then are we delivered from death, merely as it is penal: yet we must dye
still, yea as the last conflict with the effects of sin, as a passage to our
Father we must dye. Well then, Christ yielded perfect obedience to the Law, but
how did he do it? purely as it stood in that conditional, do this and live:
He did it in the strength of the Grace he had received: He did it as a means
of life, to procure life by it, as the tenor of a covenant. Are we then freed
from this obedience? yes, but how far? from doing it in our own strength,
from doing it for this end, that we may obtain life everlasting. It is vain
that some say confidently, that we must yet work for life, It is all one, as to
say, we are yet under the old covenant, hoc fac and vives: we are not freed
from obedience, as a way of walking with God, but we are, as a way of working
to come to him, of which at large afterward.

Romans 5. 18, 19. By the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men
unto Justification of Life, By the Obedience of one many shall be made
Righteous, says the Holy Ghost. By his Obedience to the Law, are we made
Righteous, it is reckoned to us for Righteousness. That the passive Obedience
of Christ is here only intended, is false.

First it is opposed to the disobedience of Adam which was active. The (...),
is opposed (...): the Righteousness to the fault. The fault was an active
transgression of the Law; and the Obedience opposed to it must be an active
accomplishment of it. Besides obedience placed singly in its own nature denotes
an Action, or Actions conformable to the Law; and therein came Christ, not to
destroy but to fulfill the Law; Math. 5. 17. that was the design of his
coming; and so for us; he came to fulfill the Law for us, Isa. 9. 6. and borne
to us; Luke 2. 11. This also was in that will of the Father, which out of his
infinite Love he came to accomplish. 2. It cannot clearly be evinced that there
is any such thing in propriety of speech, as passive Obedience: obeying is
doing; to which passion or suffering cannot belong: I know it is commonly
called so, when men obey until they suffer; but properly it is not so.

So also Phil. 3. 9. And be found in him not having my own Righteousness which
is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by faith. The Righteousness we receive is
opposed to our own obedience to the Law: opposed to it, not as something in
another kind, but as something in the same kind, excluding that from such an
end which the other obtaines. Now this is the obedience of Christ to the Law.
Himself thereby being made to us Righteousness: 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Romans 5. 10. the issue of the death of Christ is placed upon Reconciliation,
that is a slaying of the Enmity and restoring us into that Condition of Peace
and Friendship wherein Adam was before his fall. But is there no more to be
done? notwithstanding that there was no wrath due to Adam, yet he was to obey
if he would enjoy eternal life. Something there is moreover to be done in
respect of us, if after the slaying of the enmity and Reconciliation made we
shall enjoy life; being reconciled by his death: we are saved by that perfect
Obedience which in his life he yielded to the Law of God. There is distinct
mention made of Reconciliation, through a non-imputation of sin: as Psalm 321.
Luke 1. 77. Romans 3. 25. 2 Cor. 5. 19. and Justification through an imputation
of Righteousness: Jerem, 23. 6. Romans 4. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 30. although these things
are so far from being separated, that they are reciprocally affirmed of one
another; which as it does not evince an Identity, so it does an eminent
Conjunction: and this last we have by the life of Christ.

This is fully expressed in that Typical Representation of our Justification
before the Lord, Zech. 3. 3, 4, 5. two things are

1. The taking away of the guilt of our sin, our filthy robes: this is done
by the death of Christ. Remission of sin is the proper fruit thereof; but
there is more also required, even a collation of Righteousness, and thereby a
right to life eternal: this is here called fine change of raiment: so the Holy
Ghost expresses it again, Isa. 61. 10. where he calls it plainly the garment
of Salvation, and the robe of Righteousness: now this is only made ours by the
obedience of Christ, as the other by his death.

Obj. But if this be so, then are we as Righteous as Christ himself, being
Righteous with his Righteousness.

Ans. But first here is a great difference if it were no more then that this
Righteousness was inherent in Christ, and properly his own, it is only
reckoned or imputed to us: or freely bestowed on us: and we are made Righteous
with that which is not ours. But secondly the truth is, that Christ was not
Righteous with that Righteousness for himself, but for us: So that here can
be no comparison; only this we may say, we are Righteous with his
Righteousness which he wrought for us, and that compleately.

And this now is the rise of the purchased Grace whereof we speak, the
obedience of Christ. And this is the influence of it into our Acceptance with
God. Whereas the guilt of sin, and our obnoxiousnesse to punnishment on that
account, is removed and taken away, as shall farther be declared, by the Death
of Christ; and whereas besides the taking away of sin, we have need of a
complete righteousness upon the account whereof we may be accepted with God,
this obedience of Christ, through the free Grace of God is imputed unto us for
that end and purpose.

This is all I shall for the present insist on to this purpose; that the
passive Righteousness of Christ only, is imputed to us, in the non-imputation
of sin, and that on the Condition of our faith and new obedience, so exalting
them into the room of the Righteousness of Christ, is a thing which in
Communion with the Lord Jesus, I have as yet no acquaintance withal: what may
be said in the way of Argument on the one side or other, must be elsewhere
considered.

The second spring of our Communion with Christ in purchased Grace, is his
death and Oblation. He lived for us; he dyed for us. He was ours in all he did,
in all he suffered. Tantane me tenuit vivendi nate, voluptas. Ut pro me hostili
paterer succedere dextrae, quem genui? tuane haec genitor per vulnera servor
morte tua vivens? Virgil Aeneid. lib. 10. 845.


I shall be the more brief in handling of this because on another design I
have elsewhere at large treated of all the concernements Vindic. Evan. cap. 20,
21, 22
of it.

Now the Death of Christ as it is a spring of that purchased Grace wherein we
have Communion with him, is in the Scripture proposed under a threefold
Consideration.

1. Of a Price. 2. Of a Sacrifice. 3. Of a Penalty.
In the first regard its proper effect is Redemption, in the second
Reconciliation or Atonement, in the third Satisfaction; which are the great
ingredients of that Purchased Grace whereby in the first place we have
Communion with Christ.

1. It is a Price: we are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Nil quidom emitur
nisi interveniente pretio; sed hoc tamen addit u^ magnam emphasin habet. Bez.
being not redeemed with Silver and Gold, and corruptible things but with the
precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18. which therein answers those things
in other contracts: He came to lay down his life a ransom for many. Math. 20.
28. A price of Redemption: 1 Timothy 2. 6. The proper use and energie of this
expression in the Scripture, I have elsewhere declared.

Now the proper effect and issue of the death of Christ as a Redemption. Now
Redemption is the deliverance of any one from bondage, or captivity, and the
miseries attending that condition, by the intervention or interposition of a
price or Ransom paid by the Redeemer to him by whose Authority the Captive
was detained.

1. In General it is a deliverance: Hence Christ is called the deliverer, Romans
11. 26. giving himself to deliver us; Gal, 1. 4. He is Jesus who delivers us
from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.

2. It is the delivery of one from bondage or captivity; we are without him,
all prisoners and captives: bound in prison Isa. 61. 1. sitting in darkness,
in the prison house Isa. 42. 7. Chap. 49. 9. Prisoners in the pit wherein there
is no water Zech. 9. 11. the captives of the Mighty and the prey of the
terrible Isa. 49. 25. under a Captivity that must be lead captive: Psalm. 68.
18. this puts us in bondage, Heb. 2. 14.

3. The person committing thus to prison and into bondage, is God himself. To
him we owe our debts Math. 6. 12. chap. 18. 27. 28, 29. against him are our
offenses Psalm. 51. 5. He is the Judge and Lawgiver James 4. 12. to sin is to
rebel against him. He shuts up men under disobedience. Romans 1^. 32. And he
shall cast both body and soul of the impenitent into Hell fire: Math. 10. 28.
To his wrath are men obnoxious, Joh. 3. 36. and lie under it by the sentence of
the Law, which is their prison.

4. The miseryes that attend this condition are innumerable, Bondage to Satan,
Sin, and the world, comprizes the sum of them, from all which we are
delivered by the death of Christ as a Price or Ransom. God has delivered us
from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his
dear Son, in whom we have Redemption through his blood: Col. 1. 13. 14. And he
redeems us from all iniquity Tit. 2. 14. from our vain Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.
18, F 19. even from the guilt and power of our sin, purchasing us to himself a
peculiar people zealous of Good works: Tit. 2. 14. so dying for the Redemption
of transgressors Heb. 9. 15. Redeeming us also from the world, Gal 4. 5.

4. And all this is by the payment of the price mentioned into the hand of God,
by whose supreme Authority, we were detained captives under the sentence of
the Law. The debt is due to the great householder, Math. 18. 23, 24. And the
penalty, his curse, and wrath from which by it we are delivered, Rev. 2. 5.

This the Holy Ghost frequently insists on, Romans 3. 24, 25. Being justified
freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins: so also 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
Math. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 13. Gal 3. 13. And this is the
first consideration of the death of Christ, as it has an influence into the
procurement of that Grace wherein we hold communion with him.

Secondly it was a Sacrifice also. He had a body prepared him, Heb. 10. 5.
wherein he was to accomplish what by the typical that body he offered, Heb.
10. 10. that is his whole humane nature, for his Soul also was made an
offering for sin, Isa. 53. 10. on which account he is said to offer himself,
Ephesians. 5. 2. Heb. 1. 3. Heb. 9. 24. He gave him self a sacrifice to God of a
sweet smelling savor. Observatum est a Sacrificantibus, ut si hostia quae ad
aras duceretur, fuisset vehementer reluctata, ostendissetque se invitam
altaribus admoveri, amoveretur, quia invito deo eam offcrri putabant: quae vero
stetisset oblata, hanc volenti numini dari existimabant. Macrob. Saturnal. lib.
3. Hoc quoque notandum, vitulos ad aras humeris hominum allatos non fere
litare; sicut nec claudicante, nec aliena hostia placari deos, neque trahente
se ab aris. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 45.
And this he did willingly, as became him who was to be a Sacrifice. The Law of
this obedience being written in his heart: Psalm. 40. v. 9. that is, he had a
readiness, willingness, desire for its performance.

Now the end of Sacrifices, such as his was, bloody and for sin, Romans 4. 3.
Heb. 2. 17. was Atonement and Reconciliation. This is every where ascribed to
them, that they were to make atonement, that is in a way suitable to their
nature. And this is the tendency of the death of Christ, as a Sacrifice,
Atonement and Reconciliation with God. Sin had broken friendship between God
and us, Isa. 63. 10. whence his wrath was on us, Ioh. 3. 36. and we are by
nature obnoxious to it: Ephesians. 2. 3. This is taken away by the death of Christ,
as it was a sacrifice: Dan. 9. 24. when we were enemies we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Son Romans 5. 10. And thereby do we receive the
Atonement: v. 11. For God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not
imputing to them their sins, and their iniquities 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20, 21. So
also Ephesians. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and in sundry other places: And this is the
second consideration of the death of Christ, which I do but name, having at
large insisted on these things elsewhere.

Thirdly it was also a punishment. A punishment in our stead. He was wounded
for our sins, and bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our Peace
was on him, Isa. 53. v. 5. God made all our iniquities (that is the punishment
of them) to meet upon him v. 6. he bare the sins of many. v. 12. His own
self bare our sins in his body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24, 25. And therein he
who knew no sin, was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. what it is in the
Scripture to bear sin, see Deuteronomy. 19. 5. 20, 17, Numb. 14. 33. Ephesians. 18. 20.
The nature, kind, matter, and manner of this punishment I have, as I said
before elsewhere discussed.

Now bearing of Punishment tends directly to the giving satisfaction to him who
was offended, and on that account inflicted the punishment. Justice can desire
no more then a proportion all punishment due to the offense. And this on his
own voluntary taking of our persons, undertaking to be our Mediator, was
inflicted on our dear Lord Jesus. His substituting himself in our Room,
being allowed of by the Righteous judge, satisfaction to him does thence
properly ensue.

And this is the threefold consideration of the death of Christ, as it is a
principal spring and fountain of that Grace wherein we have communion with
him: for, as will appear in our process, the single and most eminent part of
purchased grace, is nothing but the natural exurgency of the threefold effects
of the death of Christ, intimated to flow from it, on the account of the
threefold consideration insisted on. This then is the Second rise of purchased
Grace, which we are to eye, if we will hold communion with Christ in it, his
death and bloodsheding, under this threefold notion, of a price, an offering,
and punishment.

But Thirdly this is not all; the Lord Christ goes farther yet: He does not
leave us so: but follows on the work to the utmost: He dyed for our sins,
and rose again for our justification; He Romans 4. 35.
rose again to carry on the complete work of purchased Grace; that is, by his
Intercession; which is the Third rise of it. In respect of this he is said to
be able to save to the uttermost them that come to God by him, seeing he lives
ever to make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 27.

Now the Intercession of Christ, in respect of its influence into purchased
Grace, is considered two ways:

1. As a continuance and carrying on of his Oblation, for the making out of all
the fruits and effects thereof unto us. This is called his oppearing in the
presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24. that is, as the High Priest having offered
the great offering for expiation of sin, carried in the blood thereof into
the most holy place, where was the Representation of the presence of God, so to
perfect the Atonement He had made for himself and the people: So the Lord
Christ having offered himself as a sweet smelling Sacrifice to God, being
sprinkled with his own blood, appears in the presence of God, as it were to
mind him of the engagement made to him, or the Redemption of sinners by his
blood, and the making out the good things to them which were procured thereby;
and so this appearance of his has an influence into Purchased Grace, in as
much as thereby he puts in his claim for it, in our behalf.

2. He procures the Holy Spirit for us, effectually to collate and bestow all
this purchased Grace upon us: That he would do this, and does it for us, we
have his Engagement, Ioh. 14. 16. This is purchased Grace, in respect of its
fountain and spring; of which I shall not speak farther at present, seeing I
must handle it at large, in the matter of the Communion we have with the Holy
Ghost.

CHAP. VII.
The Nature of Purchased Grace: Referred to three heads. 1. Of our Acceptance
with God. Two parts of it. Of the Grace of Sanctification. The several parts
of it.

THe Fountain of that Purchased Grace, wherein the Communion with Christ being
discovered, in the next place the nature of this Grace it self may be
considered. As was said, it may be referred unto three heads:

1. Grace of Acceptance with God. 2. Grace of Sanctification from God. 3.
Grace of Privileges with, and before God.
1. Of Acceptance with God; out of Christ, we are in a state of Alienation
from God: accepted neither in our Persons, nor our separation between God and
us: that Joh. 3. 36. Ephesians. 3. 2.
state, with all its consequences, and attendencies, is not my business to
unfold. The first issue of Purchased Grace, is to restore us into a state of
Acceptance; and this is done two ways.

1. By a Removeall of that for which we are refused, the cause of the Enmity.
2. By a bestowing of that for which we are accepted. Not only all causes of
quarrel were to be taken away, that so we shouldnot be under displeasure; but
also that was to be given untous, that makes us the objects of God's delight
and pleasure: on the account of the want whereof we are distanced from God.

1. It gives a Removeall of that for which we are refused. sin in the guilt,
and all the attendencies thereof. The first issue of Purchased Grace tends to
the taking away of sin in its guilt, that it shall not bind over the Soul
to the wages of it, which is death.

How this is accomplished and brought about by Christ, was evidenced in the
close of the foregoing Chapter. It is the fruit death for us. Guilt of sin
was the only cause of our separation and distance from God, as has been said.
This made us obnoxious to wrath, punishment, and the whole displeasure of God.
On the account hereof, were we imprisoned under the curse of the Law, and given
up to the power of Satan. This is the state of our unacceptation. By his
death, Christ, bearing the Curse, undergoing the punishment that was due to us,
paying the ransom that was due for us, delivers us from this condition. And
thus far, the death of Christ, is the sole cause of our Acceptance with God;
that all cause of quarrel and rejection of us, is thereby taken away: and to
that end, are his sufferings reckoned to us: For being made sin for us, 2
Cor* 5. 21. He is made righteousness unto us, 2 Cor. 1. 31.

But yet farther, This will not complete our Acceptance with God. The old
quarrel may be laid aside, and yet, no new friendship begun. We may be not
sinners, and yet not be so far Righteous, as to have a right to the Kingdom
of Heaven. Adam had no right to life, because he was innocent, he must moreover
do this, and then he shall live: He must not only have a negative
Righteousness, he was not guilty of any thing; but also a positive
Righteousness, he must do all things.

This then is required in the second place to our complete acceptance, that we
have not only the not imputation of sin, but also a reckoning of
Righteousness. Now this we have, in the Obedience of the life of Christ. This
also was discovered in the last Chapter. The obedience of the life of Christ
was for us, is imputed to us and is our righteousness before God: by his
obedience are we made righteous, Romans 5. 18. On what score the obedience of
Faith takes place, shall be afterward declared.

These two things then, complete our Grace of Acceptance; removed, and
Righteousness bestowed, we have peace with God: are continually accepted
before him. There is not any thing to charge us withal: that which was, is
taken out of the way by Christ, and nailed to his cross; made fast there: yea
publicly and legally cancelled, that it can never be admitted again as an
evidence. What Court among men would admit of an Evidence that has been
publicly cancelled, and nailed up for all to see it? So has Christ dealt with
that which was against us; and not only so; but also he puts that upon us, for
which we are received into favor: He makes us comely through his beauty: gives
us white raiment to stand before the Lord. This is the first part of purchased
Grace wherein the Saints have communion with Jesus Christ. In remission of sin,
and imputation of Righteousness does it consist: from the death of Christ, as
a price, sacrifice, and a punishment; from the life of Christ spent in
obedience to the Law does it arise. The great product it is of the Fathers
Righteousness, Wisdom* Love and Grace; the great and astonishable fruit of
the Love and condescension of the Son: The great discovery of the Holy Ghost,
in the Revelation of the mystery of the Gospel.

The second is Grace of Sanctification; He makes us not only accepted, but also
acceptable. He does not only purchase Love, for his Saints but also makes them
lovely. He came not by blood only, but by water, and blood. He does not only
Justify his Saints from the guilt of sin, but also sanctify and wash them
from the filth of sin: the first is from his life and death as a Sacrifice of
Propitiaton, this from his death as a purchase, and his life as an example. So
the Apostle Heb. 9. 14. as also Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. Two things are eminent in this
Issue of Purchased Grace; 1. The removal of defilement; 2. The bestowing of
cleanness, in Actual Grace.

For the first, it is also threefold; 1. The habitual cleansing of naturally
unclean, defiled; habitually so. For who can bring a clean thing, from that
which is unclean, Job. 14. 4. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh Joh.
3. 6. It is in the pollution of our blood that we are borne, Ezekiel. 16. wholly
defiled and polluted. The Grace of Sanctification purchased by the blood of
Christ removes this defilement of our nature. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of
you, but ye are washed, ye are Sanctified. So also Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5. He has
saved us by the washing of Regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. How
far this original, habitual pollution is removed, need not be disputed. It is
certain the soul is made fair and beautiful in the sight of God. Though the
sin that does defile remains; yet its habitual defilement, is taken away.
But the handling of this lys not in my aim.

2. Taking away the Pollutions of all our actual transgressions: There is a
defilement attending every actual sin. Our own clothes make us to be
abhorred Job. 9. 31. A spot, a stain, rust, wrinkle, filth, blood attends
every sin. Now 1 John 1. 7. the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all
sin. Besides the defilement of our natures which he purges, Tit. 1. 15. he
takes away the defilement of our Persons by actual follies: by one offering He
Pefected for ever them that are Sanctified: By himself He purged our sins
before He sat down at the right hand of Majesty on high Heb. 1. 3.

3. In our best dutys we have defilement: Isa. 64 6. Self, Unbelief, Form,
drop themselves into all that we do We may be ashamed of our choysest
performances: God has promised that the Saints good works shall follow them;
truly were they to be measured by the Rule as they come from us, and weighed
in the balance of the Sanctuary, it might be well for us that they might be
buried for ever: but the Lord Christ, first as our High Priest bears the
iniquity, the guilt and provocation which in severe Justice does attend them:
Exodus 28. 37. 38. and not only so but he washes away all their filth and
defilements. He is as a Refiners fire, to purge both the Sons of Levi and their
offerings: adding moreover sweet incense to them that they may be accepted.
Whatever is of the Spirit, of Himself, of Grace, that remains; whatever is of
self, flesh, unbelief that is hay and stubble, that he consumes, wastes, takes
away. So that the Saints good works shall meet them one day, with a changed
countenance, that they shall scarce know them; that which seemed to them to be
black, deformed, defiled, shall appear beautiful and glorious: they shall not
be afraid of them, but rejoice to see them follow them.

And this cleansing of our Natures, Persons, and dutys, has its whole
foundation in the death of Christ. Hence our washing and purifying, our
cleansing and purging is ascribed to his blood and the sprinkling thereof.
Meritoriously this work is done by the shedding of the blood of Christ;
efficiently by its sprinkling. The sprinkling of the blood of Christ proceeds
from the Communication of the Holy Ghost; which he promises to us, as
purchased by him for us. He is the pure water, wherewith we are sprinkled from
all our sins. That spirit of Judgment and Burning that takes away the filth
and blood of the daughters of Syon. And this is the first thing in the Grace of
Sanctification. Of which more afterward.

2. By bestowing cleanesse, as to actual Grace. The blood defilement, but also
it gives purity: and that also in a threefold gradation.

1. It gives the Spirit of Holiness to dwell in us; He is made unto us
Sanctification 2 Cor. 1. 31. by procuring for us the Spirit of Sanctification:
our renewing is of the Holy Ghost who is shed on us through Christ alone Tit.
3. 6. this the Apostle mainly insists on. Romans 8. to wit, that the prime and
principal gift of Sanctification that we receive from Christ, is the
indwelling of the Spirit, and our following after the guidance thereof. But
what concerns the Spirit in any kind, must be referred to that which I have to
offer concerning our Communion with him.

2. He gives us Habitual Grace: a principle of Grace opposed to abode with us,
which according to the distinct faculties of our souls wherein it is, or the
distinct objects about which it is exercised, receives various Appellations,
being indeed all but one new principle of life. In the understanding it is
light, in the will obedience, in the Affections love, in all Faith. So also it
is differenced in respect of its operations: when it carries out the soul to
rest on Christ, it is Faith; when to delight in him, it is Love; but still one
and the same habit of Grace. And this is the second thing.

3. Actual influence for the performance of every spiritual duty whatever.
After the Saints have both the former, yet Christ tells them that without him
they can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. They are still in dependence upon him, for
new influences of Grace, or supplys of the spirit, they cannot live and spend
upon the old stock: for every new act they must have new Grace: He must work
in us to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. And in these three
thus briefly named consists that purchased Grace in the point of
Sanctification, as to the collating of purity and cleanness wherein we have
Communion with Christ.

Thirdly, this purchased Grace consists, in privileges to stand before God,
and these are of two sorts: 1. Primary. 2. Consequentiall: Adoption: The Spirit
of Adoption: Consequentiall, are all the favors of the Gospel, which the
Saints alone have right unto. But of this I shall speak when I come to the
last branch of Communion with the Holy Ghost.

These are the things wherein we have Communion with Christ, as to purchased
Grace in this life. Drive them up to perfection, and you have that which we
call everlasting Glory; perfect Acceptance, perfect Holiness, perfect
Adoption, or inheritance of Sons, that is Glory.

Our process now in the next place is to what I mainely in tend, even the
manner how we hold Communion with Christ in

1. How we hold Communion with him in the Obedience of his Life and merit of
his Death, as to acceptance with God the Father.

2. How we hold communion with Christ in his blood, as to the Spirit of
Sanctification, the habits, and acts of Grace.

3. How we hold communion with him as to the privileges we enjoy. Of which in
the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Saints hold Communion with Christ as to their Acceptance with God.
What is required on the part of Christ, hereunto: in his Intention: In the
declaration thereof. The sum of our acceptance with God wherein it consists.
What is required on the part of Believers to this Communion: and how they hold
it with Christ. Some objections proposed to consideration: why the Elect are
not accepted immediately on the undertaking, and death of Christ: in what sense
they are so: Christ a Common or public person. How he came to be so: The way
of our acceptance with God on that account: The second objection. The
necessity of our obedience stated: Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. The Grounds, Causes and
Ends of it manifested. Its proper place in the new Covenant. How the Saints in
particular hold Communion with Christ in this purchased Grace. They approve of
this Righteousness: the grounds thereof. Reject their own: the grounds
thereof. The Commutation of sin and Righteousness between Christ and
Believers, Some objections Answered.

COmmunion with Christ, in purchased Grace, as unto Acceptance with God, from
the Obedience of his Life, efficacy of his death, is the first thing we enquire
into. The discovery of what on the part of Christ, and what on our part is
required thereunto (for our mutual actings, even his and ours are necessary,
that we may have fellowship and Communion together herein,) is that which
herein I intend.

1. On the part of Christ there is no more required but these did and suffered,
was and should be for us, and our advantage as to our Acceptance with God: That
he still continues making use of what he so did and suffered, for that end and
purpose, and that only. Now this is most evident.

What he did, he did for us, and not for himself: He was made under the Law,
that we might receive the Adoption of Sons Gal. 4. 4, 5. He was made under
the Law, that is, in that condition that he was obnoxious to the will and
commands of it: and why was this? to what end? for himself? no, but to redeem
us, is the aim of all that He did, of all his obedience: and that he did. This
very intention in what he did, he acquaints us with Joh. 17. 19. for their
sakes I sanctify my self, that they may be sanctified through the truth; I
sanctify my self, dedicate and set my self apart to all that work I have to
do. I came not to do my own will, I came to save that which was lost, to
minister, not to be ministered unto, and to give my life a ransom, It was the
Testimony he bare to all he did in the world. This Intendment of his is
especially to be eyed. From Eternity he had thoughts of what he would do for
us, and delighted himself therein. And when he was in the world, in all He
went about, he had still this thought, this is for them, and and this is for
them, my beloved: When he went to be baptized, says John, I have need to come
to thee, and come thou to me? Math. 3. 14, 15. as if he had said, thou have
no need at all of it. But says Christ, suffer us now for so it becomes us to
fulfill all Righteousness, I do it for them who have none at all, and stand
obliged unto all,

2. In what He suffered, this is more clear. Dan. 9. 21. Messiah shall be cut
off, and not for himself: and the Apostle lays down this as a main difference
between him, and the High priest of the Jews that when they made their solemn
offerings, they offered first for themselves and then for the People: But Jesus
Christ offers only for others: He had no sin and could make no Sacrifice
for his own sin, which he had not, but only for others. He tasted death for
all Heb. 2. 9. gave his life a ransom for many Math. 20. 10. The iniquity of
us all was made to meet on him Isa. 53. 6. he bare our sin, in his body on
the tree 1 Pet. 1. loved his Church and gave himself for it: Ephesians. 5. 26.
Gal. 2. 20. Romans 4. 25. Revel. 1. 5, 6. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Isa. 53, 12.
Joh. 17. 19. But this is exceeding clear and confessed, that Christ in his
suffering and oblation, had his intention only upon the good of his Elect, and
their Acceptance with God; suffering for us, the just for the unjust that he
might bring us to God.

Secondly to complete this Communion on the part of Christ, it is required
first that there he added to what he has done, the Gospel tenders of that
complete Righteousness and Acceptance with God, which arises from his
perfect Obedience and sufferings. Now they are twofold.

1. Declaratory, in the conditional Promises of the Gospel. Joh. 7. 37. Math.
11. 28. He that believes shall be saved: come to me and you shall have life:
as the Serpent was lifted up etc. Christ is the end of the Law of
Righteousness to them that believe, Romans 10. 4. and innumerable others. Now
declaratory tenders are very precious; there is much kindness in them, and if
they be rejected, they will be the savor of death unto death: but the Lord
Christ knows that the outward letter though never so effectually held out, will
not enable any of his for that reception of his Righteousness, which is
necessary to interest them therein; wherefore 2. In this tender of Acceptance
with God, on the account of what he has done and suffered, a Law is
established, that whosoever receives it, shall be so accepted. But Christ knows
the condition and state of his in this World. This will not do. If he do not
effectually invest them with it, all is lost. Therefore

2 He sends them his Holy Spirit to quicken them, Ioh. 6. 63. to cause them
that are dead to hear his voice, Ioh. 5. And to work in them, what ever is
required of them, to make them partakers of his righteousness, and accepted
with God. Thus does Christ deal with his; He lives and dies with an intention
to work out, and complete righteousness for them: their enjoying of it, to a
perfect Acceptance before God, is all that in the one and other he aimed at.
Then he tenders it unto them, declares the usefullnesse and pretiousnesse of it
to their Souls, stirring them up to a desire and valuation of it; and lastly
effectually bestows it upon them, reckons it unto them as theirs; that they
should by it, for it, with it, be perfectly accepted with his Father.

Thus for our Acceptance with God, two things are required.

1. That Satisfaction be made for our disobedience, for whatever we had done
which might damage the justice and Honor of God, and that God be attoned
toward us, which could no otherwise be, but by undergoing the penalty of the
Law. This, I have showed abundantly is done by the death of Christ: God made
him to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. a Curse, Gal: 3. 13. On this account we
have our Absolution, our Acquitment from the guilt of sin: the sentence of
the Law, the wrath of God, Romans 8. 33. 38. We are justified, acquitted freed
from condemnation, because it was Christ that dyed; He bare our sins in his
body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

2. That the Righteousness of the Law be fulfilled: and the obedience
performed that is required at our hands; and this is life of Christ; Romans 5.
18, 19. So that answerably hereunto, according to our state and condition, of
our Acceptance with God, there are two parts.

1. Our Absolution from the guilt of sin: that our Disobedience death of
Christ, our sins being imputed to him, shall not be imputed to us, 2 Cor. 5.
21. Romans 4. 25. Isa. 5. 12.

2. Imputation of Righteousness; that we may be accounted perfectly Righteous
before God: and this we have by the life of Christ. His Righteousness in
yielding obedience to the Law, is imputed to us. And thus is our Acceptance
with God completed. Being discharged from the guilt of our disobedience by the
death of Christ, and having the Righteousness of the Life of Christ imputed to
us, we have Friendship and Peace with God. And this is that which I call our
Grace of Acceptance with God, wherein we have communion with Jesus Christ.

That which remains for me to do, is, to show how Believers hold distinct
communion with Christ, in this Grace of Acceptance, alive a sense of it, the
comfort and life of it being to be renewed every day. Without this, life is an
Hell; no Peace, no Joy can we be made partakers of, but what has its rise from
hence. Look what grounded persuasion we have of our Acceptance with God, that
He is at peace with us, thereunto is the revenue of our Peace, Comfort, Joy,
yea and Holiness it self proportioned.

But yet before I come in particular to handle our practical communion with
the Lord Jesus, in this thing; I must remove two considerable objections, the
one of them lying against the first part of our Acceptance with God, the other
against the latter.

Ob 1. For our Absolution by, and upon the death of Christ, it may be said;
that if the Elect have their Absolution, Reconciliation and Freedom, by the
Death, Blood and Cross of Christ, whence is it then, that they are not all
Actually absolved, at the death of Christ, or at least so soon as they are
borne, but that many of them live a long while under the wrath of God in this
world, as being Unbelievers, under the sentence and condemning power of the
Law: why are they not immediately freed, upon Joh. 3. 36.
the payment of the price, and making Reconciliation for them.

Ob. 2. If the Obedience of the Life of Christ be imputed unto us, and that is
our Righteousness before God, then what need we yield any Obedience our
selves? is not all our praying, laboring, watching, fasting, giving alms, are
not all fruits of Holiness, in purity of heart, and usefulness of
conversation? all in vain, and to no purpose; and who then will or need take
care to be holy, humble, righteous, meek, temperate, patient, good, peaceable,
or to abound in good works in the World?

I shall, God assisting, briefly remove these two Objections, and then
proceed, to carry on the design in hand, about our communion with Christ.

1. Jesus Christ in his undertaking of the work of our Reconciliation with God,
for which cause he came into the world, and death, was constituted and
considered as a Common public person, in the stead of them for whose
Reconciliation to God He suffered. Hence He is the Mediator between God and
Man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. that is, one who undertook to God for us, as the next words
manifest, v. 6. and gave himself a Ransom for all: And the Surety of the new
Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. undertaking for, and on the behalf of them with whom
that Covenant was made; Hence he is said to be given for a Covenant to the
people, Isa. 42. 6. and a leader, 49. 8. He was the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 45,
47. to all Ends and purposes of Righteousness to his spiritual seed; as the
first Adam was of sin to his natural seed, Romans 5. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

2. His being thus a Common Person, arose chiefly from these things: 1. In
general, from the Covenant entered into, by his God which is a Covenant
expression, Psalm. 89. 26. Heb: 1. 5. Psalm. 22. 1. Psalm. 40. 8. Psalm. 45. 7.
Revel. 3. 12. Mich. 5. 4. So was he by his Father, on this account designed to
this work, Isa. 42. 1. chapter 6. 1. chapter 49. 9. Mal. 3. 1. Zech. 13. 7. Joh. 3. 16.
1 Timothy 1. 15. Thus the Counsel of peace became to be between them both, Zech.
6. 13. that is the Father, and Son. And the Son rejoices from Eternity in the
thought of this undertaking, Prove. 8. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
The command given him to this purpose; the Promises made to him thereon, the
assistance afforded to him, I have elsewhere handled.

2. In the Sovereign Grant, Appointment, and Design of the Father, giving and
delivering the Elect to Jesus Christ in this redeemed and reonciled to
himself, Joh. 17. 6. thine they were, and thou gave them to me. They were
Gods by Eternal Designation and Election, and He gave them to Christ to be
redeemed: Hence before their calling or believing, He calls them his sheep,
Joh. 10. 15, 16. laying down his life for them as such; And hence are we said
to be chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4. or designed to obtain all the fruits of the
Love of God by Christ, and committed into his hand, for that end and purpose.

3. In his undertaking to suffer what was due to them, and to do what was to
be done by them, that they might be delivered, reconciled, and accepted with
God. And he undertakes to give in to the Father, without loss or miscarriage,
what he had so received of the Father as above, Joh. 17. 2. 12. chapter 6. 37, 39.
As Jacob did the cattle he received of Laban, Genesis 31. 39, 40. Of both these I
have treated somewhat at large elsewhere, in handling the Covenant between the
Father and the Son, so that I shall not need to take it up here again.

4. They being given unto him, He undertaking for them, to do and suffer, what
was on their part required, He received on behalf and for them, all the
promises of all the Mercies, Grace, good things and Privileges, which they
were to receive, upon the account of his undertaking for them. On this account,
Eternal life is said to be promised of God before the world began, Titus 1. 2.
That is to the Son of God for us, on his undertaking on our behalf. And Grace
also is said to be given unto us before the World was, 2 Timothy 1. 9. that is in
Christ our appointed head, Mediator, and Representative.

5. Christ being thus a Common Person, a Mediator, Surely, and Representative
of his Church, upon his undertaking, as to efficacy Actual performance as to
solemn declaration, was, as such, acquitted, absolved, justified and freed,
from all and every thing, that on the behalf of the Elect, as due to them, was
charged upon him, or could so be: I say as to all the Efficacy and merit of his
undertakings, He was immediately absolved upon his faithfulness, in his first
engagement: and thereby all the Saints of the Old Testament, were saved by his
blood no less then we. As to solemn declaration, He was so absolved, when the
pains of Death being loosed, He was declared to be the Son of God with
power, Romans 1. 4. By the Resurrection from the dead; God saying to him, thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Psalm. 15. 33. And this his
Absolution does Christ express his confidence of, Isa. 50. 6, 7, 8, 9. And he
was justified, 1 Timothy 3. 16. That which I intend by this Absolution of Christ
as a public person, is this; God having made him under the Law for them who
were so, Gal. 4. 4. in their stead, obnoxious to the punishment due to sin,
made him sin, 2 Cor, 5. 21. and so gave Justice, and Law, and all the
consequents of the Curse thereof, power against him, Isa. 53. 6. upon his
undergoing of that which was required of him, Isa. 53. 12. God looses the
pains and power of death, accepts him, and is well pleased with him, as to the
performance and discharge of his work, Ioh. 17. 3, 4, 5, 6. pronounces him
free from the obligation that was on him, Act. 13. and gave him a promise of
all the good things He aimed at, and which his soul desired. Hereon are all
the Promises of God made to Christ, and their accomplishment, all the
encouragements given him to ask and make demand of the things originally
engaged for to him, Psalm. 2. 8. which he did accordingly, Ioh. 17. founded, and
built. And here lies the certain stable foundation, of our Absolution, and
acceptance with God. Christ in our stead, acting for us as our surety, being
acquitted, absolved, solemnly declared to have answered the whole debt that
was incumbent on him to pay, and made satisfaction for all the injury we had
done, a general Pardon is sealed for us all, to be sued out particularly in
the way to be appointed. For,

Christ as a public person being thus absolved, it became Righteous with God,
a Righteous thing, from the Covenant, compact, those in whose stead he was,
should obtain, and have bestowed on them, all the fruits of his death, in
Reconciliation with God, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10, 11. That as Christ received the
General acquittance for them all, so that they should every one of them, enjoy
it respectively. This is every where manifested in those expressions, which
express a Commutation designed by God, in this matter, as 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal.
3. 13. 1. Pet. 2. 21, 24. of which afterward.

7. Being thus acquitted in the Covenant of the Mediator, (whence they are
said to be circumcised with him, to dye with buried with him, to rise with him,
to sit with him in heavenly places, namely in the Covenant of the Mediator,)
and it being Righteous, that they should be acquitted Personally in the
Covenant of Grace, it was determined by Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that the
way of their Actual Personal deliverance from the sentence and curse of the
Law, should be in and by such a way and dispensation, as might lead to the
praise of the Glorious Grace of God, Ehpes. 1. 5, 6, 7. The Appointment of God
is that we shall have the Adoption of Children. The means of it is by Jesus
Christ: the peculiar way of bringing it about, is by the Redemption that is in
his blood, the end is the praise of his glorious Grace. And thence it is, that

8. Until the full time of their Actual deliverance, determined 9. 19.
and appointed to them in their several generations, be accomplished, they are
Personally under the curse of the Law, and on that account are Legally
obnoxious to the wrath of God, from which they shall certainly be delivered. I
say, they are thus personally obnoxious to the Law and the Curse thereof, but
not at all with its primitive intention of execution upon them, but as it is a
means appointed to help forward their acquaintance with Christ and acceptance
with God, on his account; when this is accomplished, that whole obligation
ceases; being continued on them in a design of Love; their last condition
being such, as that they cannot without it, be brought to a participation of
Christ, to the praise of the Glorious Grace of God.

9. The End of the dispensation of Grace, being to glorify the whole Trinity,
the order fixed on, and appointed, wherein this ascending to the Fathers Love,
through the works of the Spirit, and blood of the Son. The emanation of
Divine Love to us, begins with the Father, is carried on by the Son, and then
communicated by the Spirit: the Father Designing, the Son Purchasing, the
Spirit effectually working, which is their order. Our participation, is first
by the work of the Spirit, to an actual interest in the blood of the Son,
whence we have Acceptance with the Father.

This then is the Order, whereby we are brought to Acceptance with the Father,
for the Glory of God through Christ.

1. That the Spirit may be glorified, He is given unto us, to quicken us,
convert us, work Faith in us, Romans 8, 11. Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. according to all
the promises of the Covenant, Isa. 4. 4, 5. Ezekiel. 19. 11. Ezekiel. 36. 26.

2. This being wrought in us, for the Glory of the Son, we are actually
interested according to the tenor of the Covenant, at the same instant of
time, in the blood of Christ, as to the Benefits which he has procured for us
thereby. Yea this very work of the Spirit it self, is a fruit, and part of the
purchase of Christ: but we speak of our sense of this thing, whereunto the
communication of the spirit is antecedent. And

3. To the Glory of the Father, we are accepted with him, justified, freed from
guilt, pardoned, and have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. Thus, through Christ we
have Access by one spirit unto the Father, 2 Ephesians. 2. 18. And thus are both
Father and Son, and the Holy Spirit, Glorified in our justification, and
acceptance with God: the Father in his Free Love, the Son in his Full
purchase, and the Holy Spirit in his effectual working.

10. All this, in all the parts of it, is no less fully procured for us, nor
less freely bestowed on us, for Christ's sake and on his merits; then if all of
us immediately upon his death, had been translated into Heaven; only this way of
our deliverance and freedom, is fixed on, that the whole Trinity may be
glorified thereby. And this may suffice in answer to the first Objection.
Though our Reconciliation with God be fully and completely procured by the
death of Christ, and all the ways and means whereby it is accomplished, yet we
are brought unto an Actual enjoyment thereof, by the way and in the order
mentioned, for the praise of the Glorious Grace of God.

The second Objection is, that if the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ to
the Law, be imputed unto us, then what need we yield Obedience our selves. To
this also I shall return answer as briefly as I can, in the ensuing
Observations: Then

1. The placeing of our Gospel Obedience, on the right foot of account, that
it may neither be exalted into a state, condition, Use, nor End, not given it
of God, nor any Reason, Cause, Motive, end, necessity of it on the other hand,
taken away, weakened or impaired, is a matter of Great importance. Some make our
Obedience, the works of Faith, our works, the matter or cause of our
Justification; Some the condition of the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, some the qualification of the Person justified, on the one hand; some
exclude all the necessity of them, and turn the Grace of God into
lasciviousness on the other. To debate these differences, is not my present
business: only I say, on this and other accounts, the right stating of our
Obedience, is of great importance as to our walking with God.

2. We do by no means, assign the same place, condition, state and use, to
the Obedience of Christ, imputed to us, and performed to God. If we did, they
were really inconsistent. And therefore those, who affirm that our Obedience
is the Condition or Cause of our Justification, do all of them deny, the
Imputation of the Obedience of Christ unto us. The Righteousness of Christ is
imputed to us, as that on the account whereof we are accepted, and esteemed
Righteous before God, and are really so, though not inherently. We are as truly
Righteous with the Obedience of Christ, imputed to us, as Adam was or could
have been, by a complete Righteousness of his own performance. So Romans 5. 18.
by his Obedience we are made Righteous; made so truly, and so accepted, as by
the disobedience of Adam we are truly made Trespassours and so accounted. And
this is that which the Apostle desires to be found in, in opposition to his Own
Righteousness Phil. 3 9. But our own Obedience is not the Righteousness
whereupon we are accepted and justified before God; although it be acceptable
to God, that we should abound therein. And this distinction the Apostle does
evidently deliver and confirm, so as nothing can be more clearly revealed,
Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. For by Grace we are Saved through Faith. and this not of our
selves. It is the gift of God. Not of works, least any man should boast. For
we are his works manship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works which God
has prepared that we should walk in them. We are saved, or justified (for
that it is whereof the Apostle treats) by Grace through Faith, which receives
Jesus Christ and his Obedience: not of works least any man should boast: but
what works are they that the Apostle intends? The works of Believers, as in
the very beginning of the next words, is manifest; for we are; we Believers,
with our Obedience and our works, of whom I speak: yea but what need then of
works; need still there is, we are the workmanship etc.

Two things the Apostle intimates in these words:

1. A Reason why we cannot be saved by works: namely because we do them not
in, or by our own strength, which is necessary we should do if we will be
saved by them, or justified by them: but this is not so says the Apostle, for
we are the workmanship of God etc. all our works are wrought in us, by full
and Effectual undeserved Grace.

2. An Assertion of the necessity of good works, notwithstanding that we are
not saved by them, and that is, that God has ordained that we shall walk in
them: which is a sufficient ground of our Obedience what ever be the use of it.

If you will say then, what are the true and proper Gospel Reasons, Uses, and
Motives of our Obedience, whence the necessity thereof may be demonstrated, and
our souls be stirred up, to abound and be fruitful therein? I say they are so
many and lie so deep in the Mystery of the Gospel, and Dispensation of Grace,
spread themselves so throughout the whole Revelation of the will of God unto
us, that to handle them fully and distinctly, and to give them their due
weight, is a thing that I cannot engage in, least I should be turned aside from
what I principally intend. I shall only give you some brief heads of what
might at large be insisted on.

1. Our universal Obedience, and good works, are indispensably necessary from
the sovereign appointment and will

1. In General: this is the will of God, even our Sanctification, or Holiness
1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. this is that which God wills, which he requires of us, that we
be holy, that we be obedient. That we do his will as the Angels do in Heaven:
The Equity, necessity profit and advantage of this ground of our Obedience,
might at large be insisted on. And were there no more, this might suffice
alone. If it be the will of God, it is our duty.

1. The Father has ordained or appointed it: it is the will of the Father
Ephesians. 2. 10. the Father is spoken of personally; Christ being mentioned as
Mediator.

2. The Son has ordained and appointed it as Mediator Joh. 15, 16. I have
ordained you that you should bring forth fruit, (of Obedience) and that it
should remain. And

3. The Holy Ghost appoints and Ordaines Believers to works of Obedience and
Holiness, and to work holiness in others: So in particular, Act. 13. 2. He
appoints and designs men to the great work of Obedience in preaching the
Gospel, and in sinning, men sin against him.

2. Our Holiness, our Obedience, work of Righteousness, is Father, Son,
and Spirit in the business of exalting the Glory of God in our Salvation: of
the Electing love of the Father: the Purchasing love of the Son: And the
Operative love of the Spirit.

1. It is a peculiar end of the Electing love of the Father: Ephesians. 1. 4. He
has chosen us that we should be holy and unblameable. So Isa. 4. 3, 4. His
aim and design in choosing of us was, that we should be Holy, and unblameable
before him in love. This he is to accomplish and will bring about in them that
are his. He chooses us to Salvation, through the sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the truth: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. This the Father designed as the first
and immediate end of Electing love: And proposes the Consideration of that
Love, as a motive to Holiness. 1 John 4. 8, 9, 10.

2. It is so also of the exceeding love of the Son, whereof the Testimonys are
innumerable. I shall give but one or two: Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all inquity, and purify to himself a peculiar
people zealous of good works. This was his aim his design in giving himself
for us: as Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word:
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle or any such thing but that it should be holy and without blemish. 2
Cor. 5. 15. Romans 6. 5.

3. It is the very work of the Love of the Holy Ghost: his whole work upon
us, in us, for us consists in preparing of us for Obedience, enabling of us
thereunto, and bringing forth the fruits of it, in us: and this he does in
opposition to a Righteousness of our own, either before it, or to be made up
by it: Tit. 3. 5. I need not insist on this: The fruits of the Spirit in us are
known Gal. 5. 22.

And thus have we a twofold bottom of the necessity of our Obedience, and
personal Holiness: God has appointed it. He requires it. And it is an
eminent immediate End of the distinct dispensation of Father, Son, and Hoy
Ghost, in the work of our Salvation. If Gods Sovereignty over us is to be
owned; If his Love toward us be to be regarded, if the whole work of the ever
blessed Trinity, for us, in us, be of any moment, our Obedience is necessary.

3. It is necessary in respect of the end thereof: and that

1. The end of our Obedience in respect of God, is his Glory and Honor, Mal.
1. 6. This is Gods honor, all that we give him. It is true, he will take his
honor from the stoutest and proudest Rebel in the world: but all we give him,
is in our Obedience. The Glorifying of God by our Obedience, is all that we are
or can be. Particularly,

1. It is the Glory of the Father: Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your Good works, and Glorify your Father which is in
Heaven. By our walking in the light of Faith, does Glory arise to the Father.
The fruits of his Love, of his Grace, of his Kindness. are seen upon us; and
God is glorified in our behalf: And

2. The Son is Glorified thereby. It is the will of God, that as all men
honor the Father, so should they honor the Son: Joh. 5. 23. and how is this
done, by believing in him, Joh. 14. 1. obeying of him. Hence, Joh. 17. 10. He
says, He is Glorified in Believers: and prays for an increase of Grace and
Union for them, that he may yet be more Glorified, and all might know that as
Mediator he was sent of God.

3. The Spirit is Glorified also by it: He is grieved by our Disobedience
Ephesians. 4. 30. and therefore his Glory is in our bringing forth fruit. He dwells
in us as in his Temple: which is not to be defiled; Holiness becomes his
Habitation for ever.

Now if this that has been said, be not sufficient to evince a necessity of
our Obedience, we must suppose our selves to speak with a sort of men, who
regard neither the Sovereignty, nor Love, nor Glory of God, Father, Son, or
Holy Ghost. Let men say what they please, though our Obedience should be all
lost, and never regarded, which is impossible, (for God is not unjust to forget
our labor of love) yet here is a sufficient bottom, ground and Reason of
yiedling more Obedience unto God, then ever we shall do, whilst we live in
this world. I speak also only of Gospel Grounds of Obedience, and not of
those that are Natural and Legal, which are indispensable to all mankind.

2. The end in respect of our selves immediately, is threefold,

1. Honor: It is by Holiness that we are made like unto God, and his Image is
renewed again in us. This was our honor at our Creation; this exalted us
above all our fellow creatures here below; we were made in the Image of God.
This we lost by sin, and became like the beasts that perish. To this honor
of conformity to God, of bearing his Image, are we exalted again by Holiness
alone. Be ye holy, says God, because I am Holy: 1 Pet. 1. 16. And be you
perfect, that is, in doing good, as your Heavenly Father is perfect, Math. 5.
48. in a likeness and conformity to him. and herein is the Image of God
renewed: Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Therein we put on the new man which after God is
created in Righteousness, and Holiness of truth. This was that which
originally was attended with power and dominion; is still all that is
beautiful or comely in the world; How it makes men honorable and precious in
the sight of God, of Angels, of men, how alone it is that which is not
despised, which is of price before the Lord; what contempt and scorn he has
of them in whom it is not, in what Abomination he has them and all their ways,
might easily be evinced;

2. Peace, by it we have Communion with God, wherein Peace alone is to be
enjoyed. The Wicked are like a troubled Sea, that cannot rest, and there is no
peace to them says my God: Isa. 48. 21. There is no peace, rest, or
quietness, in a distance, separation, or alienation from God. He is the rest
of our souls: In the light of his Countenance is life and peace: Now if we
walk in the light, as He is light, we have fellowship one with another, 1 Ioh
1. 7. and verily our fellowship is with the Father, and with the Son Jesus
Christ: v. 3. He that walks in the light of new obedience, he has Communion
with God, and in his presence is fulness of joy for ever: without it there is
nothing but darkness, and wandering and confusion.

3. Usefullnesse, A man without Holiness is good for nothing: Ephraim, says
the Prophet, is an empty vine, that brings forth fruit to it self. And what is
such a vine good for? nothing, says another Prophet, a man cannot make a pin
of it, so much as to hang a vessel on: A barren tree is good for nothing, but
to be cut down for the fire. Notwithstanding the seeming usefullnesse of men,
who serve the providence of God in their Generations, I could easily manifest
that the World and the Church might want them, and that indeed in themselves
they are good for nothing: only the holy man is commune bonum.

3. The end of it in respect of others, in the world is manifold. 1. It serves
to the Conviction, and stopping the mouths of Enemies of God, both here and
hereafter: Here, 1 Pet. 3. 16. Keeping a good Conscience that wherein they
speak against you as evil doers, they may be ashamed, beholding your good
conversation in Christ. By our keeping of a good Conscience men will be made
ashamed of their false accusations. That whereas their malice and hatred of the
ways of God, has provoked them to speak all manner of evil of the
profession of them; by the Holiness and Righteousness of the Saints, they are
convinced, and made ashamed, as a Thief is when he is taken, and be driven to
acknowledge that God is amongst them, and that they are wicked themselves, Ioh.
17. 23. 2. Hereafter; It is said that the Saints shall judge the World: It is
on this as well as upon other considerations. Their good works, their
Righteousness, their Holiness shall be brought forth, and manifested to all
the world, and the Righteousness of Gods judgments against wicked men, be
thence evinced; See, says Christ, these are they that I own, whom you so
despised and abhorred; and see, their works following them, this and that they
have done, when you wallowed in your Abominations, Math. 25. 42, 43.

2. The Conversion of others, 1 Pet. 2. 12. Having your conversation honest
among the Gentiles, that wherein they spoke against you as evil doers,
beholding your good works, they may glorify God in the day of visitation. Math.
5, 17. Even Revilers, Persecutors, Evil speakers, have been overcome by the
constant holy walking of Professors, and when their day of visitation has
come, have Glorified God on that account, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2.

3. The Benefit of all: partly in keeping of Judgments from the residue of men,
as ten good men would have preserved Sodom partly, Genesis 18. 32, 33.
by their real communication of good to them, with whom they have to do in
their Generation. Holiness makes a man a good man; useful to all, and others
eat of the fruits of the Spirit, that he brings forth continually.

4. It is necessary in respect of the state and condition of Justified Persons;
and that whether you consider their Relative state Sanctification.

1. They are Accepted and received into friendship, with an Holy God; a God of
purer eyes then to behold iniquity; who hates every unclean thing. And is it
not necessary, that they should be Holy, who are admitted into his presence,
walk in his sight, yea lay in his bosom? Should they not with all diligence
cleanse themselves from all pollution of Flesh and Spirit, and 2 Cor. 7. 1.
perfect Holiness in the fear of the Lord?

2. In respect of Sanctification; we have in us a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
this new Creature is fed, cherished, nourished, kept alive by the fruits of
Holiness: to what end has God given us new Hearts, and new natures? Is it
that we should kill them, stifle the creature that is found in us, in the
womb? that we should give him to the old man to be devoured?

5. It is necessary in respect of the proper place of Holiness in the new
Covenant, and that is twofold:

1. Of the Means unto the end: God has appointed, that Holiness, shall be
the means, the way, to that eternal life, Romans 6. 23.
which as in it self and originally is his gift, by Jesus Christ, so Heb. 11.
6. Genesis 15. 1. Psalm. ^^ 11. (...). 2 Pet. 2. 3^*
with regard to his constitution of our obedience, as the means of attaining
it, is a reward: and God in bestowing of it a Rewarder. Though it be neither,
the Cause, Matter, nor condition of our Justification, yet it is the way
appointed of God, for us to walk in, for the obtaining of Salvation: And
therefore he that has hope of Eternal life purifies himself, as He is pure:
and none shall ever come to that End, who walks not in that way: for without
Holiness it is impossible to see God.

2. It is a Testimony and pledge of Adoption: a sign and evidence of Grace,
that is, of Acceptance with God. And 3ly. the whole expression of our
thankfulness. Now there is not one of all these Causes and Reasons of the
necessity, the indispensible necessity, of our Obedience, good works, and
personal Righteousness, but would require a more large discourse to unfold
and explain, then I have allotted to the proposal of them all: And innumerable
others there are of the same import, that I cannot name. He that upon these
Accounts does not think universal Holiness and Obedience to be of
indispensible necessity, un. less also it be exalted into the room of the
Obedience and Righteousness of Christ, let him be filthy still.

These Objections being Removed, and having at the entrance of this Chapter,
declared what is done on the part of Christ, as fellowship with him, in this
purchased Grace, as to our Acceptance with God; It remains that I now show,
what also is required and performed on our part, for the completing thereof:
this then consists in the ensuing particulars.

1. The Saints cordially approve of this Righteousness, as that alone which is
absolutely complete, and able to make them acceptable

1. Their clear and full conviction of the necessity of a Righteousness,
wherewith to appear before God. This is always in their thoughts. This in
their whole lives they take for granted. Many men spend their days in
obstinacy and hardness, adding drunkenness unto thirst, never once enquiring
what their condition shall be, when they enter into Eternity. Others trifle
away their times and their souls, sowing the wind of empty hopes, and
preparing to reap a whirlewind of wrath. But this lies at the bottom of all
the Saints communion with Christ. A deep fixed, resolved persuasion, of an
absolute and indispensable necessity of a Righteousness, wherewith to appear
before God. The Holiness of Gods nature, the Righteousness of his Government,
the severity of his Law, the Terror of his wrath, are always before them.
They have been all convinced of sin, and have looked on themselves, as ready
to sink under the vengeance due to it. They have all cried, Men and Brethren,
what shall we do to be saved? Wherewith shall we appear before God? And have
all concluded, that it is in vain to flatter themselves with hopes of escaping
as they are by nature; if God be Holy, and Righteous, and of purer eyes then to
behold iniquity, they must have a Righteousness to stand before him: and they
know what will be the cry one day, of those who now bear up themselves, as if
they were otherwise minded, Isa. 53. 15. Mich. 7. 6, 7.

2. They weigh their own Righteousness in the balance, and wanting. And this
two ways.

1. In General, and upon the whole of the matter, at their first setting
themselves before God. When men are convinced of the necessity of a
Righteousness, they catch at every thing that presents it self to them for
relief. Like men ready to sink in deep waters, catch at that that is next to
save them from drowning, which sometimes proves a rotten stick, that sinkes
with them. So did the Jews Romans 9. 31, 32. they caught hold of the Law, and it
would not relieve them: and how they perished with it, the Apostle declares,
Chap. 10. 14. The Law put them upon setting up a Righteousness of their own;
this kept them doing, and in hope, but kept them from submitting to the
Righteousness of God. Here many perish, and never get one step nearer God all
their days. This the Saints renounce. They have no confidence in the flesh:
they know that all they can do, all that the Law can do, which is weak
through the Flesh, will not avail them. See what judgment Paul makes of all a
man's own Righteousness, Phil. 3. 8. 10. This they bear in their minds daily,
this they fill their thoughts withal, that upon the account of what they have
done, can do, ever shall do, they cannot be accepted with God, or justified
thereby. This keeps their souls humble, full of a sense of their own
vileness all their days.

2. In particular: they daily weigh all their particular Actions wanting, as to
any such compleatnesse, as upon their own account to be accepted with God. Oh!
says a Saint, if I had nothing to commend me unto God, but this prayer, this
duty, this conquest of a Temptation, wherein I my self see so many failings,
so much imperfection, could I appear with any boldness before him? Shall I
then piece up a garment of Righteousness out of my best duties; ah! it is all
as a defiled cloth, Isa 64. 6. These thoughts accompany them in all their
duties: in their best and most choice performances. Lord what am I in my best
estate? How little suitableness unto thy Holiness is in my best duties? O
spare me! in reference to the Neh. 13. 12.
best thing that ever I did in my life. When a man who lives up on convictions,
has got some enlargements in duties, some conquest over a sin or temptation,
he Huggs himself, like Micha when he had got a Levite to be his Priest; now
surely it shall be well with him, now God will bless him, his heart is now at
ease; he has peace in what he has done. But he who has Communion with Christ,
when he is highest in duties of sanctification and holiness, is clearest in
the Apprehension of his own unprofitablenesse, and rejects every thought that
might arise in his heart, of setting his peace in them, or upon them. He says
to his soul, do these things seem something to thee? Alas, thou have to do
with an infinitely Righteous God, who looks through and through all that
vanity, which thou art but little acquainted withal; and should he deal with
thee, according to thy best works, thou must perish.

3. They approve of, value and rejoice in this Righteousness, Acceptance,
which the Lord Jesus has wrought out, and provided for them: this being
discovered to them, they approve of it with all their hearts, and rest in it,
Isa. 45. 24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and
strength. This is their voice and language, when once the Righteousness of God
in Christ, is made known to them: Here is Righteousness indeed, here have I
rest for my soul. Like the Merchant man in the Gospel, Math. 13. 45, 46. that
finds the pearl of price: I had been searching up and down, I looked this and
that way for help, but it was far away: I spent my strength for that which
was not bread; here is that indeed, which makes me rich for ever. When first
the Righteousness of Christ, for Acceptance with God, is revealed to a poor
laboring Soul, that has sought for rest and has found none, he is surprised
and amazed, and is not able to contain it self: and such an one always in
his heart approves this Righteousness on a fivefold account.

1. As full of infinite wisdom: unto them that believe says the Apostle,
Christ crucified, is the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. infinite Wisdom in this
way of their Acceptance with God. In what darkness, says such an one, in
what streights, in what intanglements, was my poor soul? How little able was I
to look through the clouds and perplexities wherewith I was encompassed? I
looked inwards, and there was nothing, but sin, horror, fear, tremblings; I
looked upwards, and saw nothing but wrath, curses and vengeance; I knew that
God was an Holy and Righteous God, and that no unclean thing should abide
before him; I knew that I was a poor, vile, unclean, and sinful creature,
and how to bring these two together in Peace, I knew not: but in the
Righteousness of Christ, does a world of Wisdom open it self, dispelling all
difficulties and darkness, and manifesting a Reconciliation of all this. O the
depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! Romans 11. 33. and Col.
2. 3. but of this before.

2. As full of Grace. He knows that sin had shut up the whole way of Grace
toward him; and whereas God aims at nothing manifestation of his Grace, he
was utterly cut short of it. Now to have a complete Righteousness provided,
and yet abundance of Grace manifested, exceedingly delights the soul: to have
Gods dealing with his person, all Grace, and dealing with his Righteousness,
all Justice, takes up his thoughts. God every where assures us, that this
Righteousness is of Grace. It is by Grace, and no more of Works, Rom 11. 6.
as the Apostle at large sets it out, Ephesians. 2. 7, 8, 9. It is from riches of
Grace and kindness, that the provision of this Righteousness is made: it is
of mere Grace that it is bestowed on us, it is not at all of works: Though it
be in its self, a Righteousness of works, yet to us, it is of mere Grace.
So Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. But ofter that the kindness and love of God our Savior
toward man appeared, Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, Which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior: That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life. The rise of all this dispensation is
kindness and Love, that is Grace, v. 4. The way of Communication, negatively
is not by works of Righteousness that we have done; positively, by the
communication of the Holy Ghost, v. 5. The means of whose procurement, is
Jesus Christ, v. 6. And the work it self is by grace, v. 7. Here is use made
of every word almost, whereby the exceeding rich Grace, kindness, mercy, and
goodness of God may be expressed, all concurring in this work. As, 1. (...),
his goodness, benignity, readiness to communicate of himself, and his good
things that may be profitable to us* 2. (...), mercy, love, and propensity of
mind to help, assist, relieve them of whom he speaks, toward whom he is so
affected: (...), mercy, forgivenesse^, compassion, tenderness, to them that
suffer: and (...), free pardoning, bounty, undeserved love: and all this is
said to be (...); He exercises all these Properties and Attributes of his
nature toward us, that he may save us: and in the bestowing of it, giving us
the Holy Ghost, it is said, (...), he powered him out, as water out of a
vessel, without stop and hesitation, and that not in a small measure, but
(...), richly and in abundance: whence as to the work it self, it is
emphatically said, (...): justified by the Grace of him, who is such an one.
And this do the Saints of God in their communion with Christ, exceedingly
rejoice in before him, that the way of their Acceptance before God, is a way
of Grace, kindness and mercy, that they might not boast in themselves, but in
the Lord, and his goodness; crying, how great is thy goodness? how great is
thy bounty?

3. They approve of it, and rejoice in it, as a way of great peace and security
to themselves and their own souls. They remember state and condition, whilst
they went about to set up a Righteousness of their own, and were not subject
to the Righteousness of Christ: how miserably they were tossed up and down,
with continual fluctuating thoughts: sometimes they had hope, and sometimes
were full of fear: sometimes they thought themselves in some good condition,
and anon were at the very brink of Hell; their Consciences being racked and
torn, with sin and fear: but now, being justified by Faith, they have peace
with God, Romans 5. 1. All is quiet and serene: not only that storm is over, but
they are in the haven where they would be. They have abiding peace with God.
Hence is that description of Christ, to a poor soul, Isa. 32. 2. And a man
shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, as
rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.
Wind, and Tempest, and drought, and weariness, nothing now troubles the soul
that is in Christ, he has an hiding place and a covert, and rivers of water,
and the shadow of a great rock, for his security. This is the great mystery of
Faith in this business of our Acceptance with God by Christ; that whereas the
soul of a Believer finds enough in him, and upon him, to rend the very caul
of the heart, to fill him with fears, terror, disquietments all his days,
yet through Christ, he is at perfect peace with God, Isa. 26. 3. Psalm. 4. 6, 7,
8. Hence do the souls of Believers exceedingly magnify Jesus Christ: that they
can behold the face of God, with boldness, confidence, peace, joy, Assurance,
that they can call him Father, bear themselves on his love, walk up and down
in quietness and without fear; how glorious is the Son of God, in this Grace?
They remember the wormwood and gall, that they have eaten, the vinegar and
tears they have drunk, the trembling of their souls like an Aspen leaf that
is shaken with the wind, when ever they thought of God, what contrivances they
have had to hide, and fly and escape; to be brought now to setlement and
security, must needs greatly affect them.

4. They cordially approve of this Righteousness because it is a way and
means of the exceeding Exaltation and honor of souls do love. Being once
brought to an acquaintance with Jesus Christ, their hearts desire nothing more
then that He may be honored and glorified to the utmost, and in all things
have the pre-eminence. Now what can more tend to the advancing and honoring of
him in our hearts, then to know that He is made of God unto us, Wisdom and
Righteousness 1 Cor. 1. 30. Not that He is this or that part of our
Acceptance with God: but He is all, He is the whole. They know that in the
account of his working out their acceptance with God. He is

1. Honored of God his Father: Phil. 2. 7. 8, 9, 10. He made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is above every name; that
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven and things in
earth, and things under the earth: and that every tongue should confess, that
Jesus Christ Ps. 110. 1. 6. Ps. 2. 8, 9. Zech. 9. 10. Ps. 72. 8. Romans 14. 11.
Isa. 45. 23. Phil. 2. 10.
is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father. Whether that word wherefore, denotes
a connection of causality, or only a consequence, this is evident, that on the
account of his suffering, and as the end of it, He was honored and exalted of
God; to an unspeakable pre-eminence, dignity, and Authority; according as God
had promised him, on the same account: Is. 53. 11, 12. Act. 2. 36. Act. 5. 30,
31. And therefore it is said, that when He had by himself purged our sins,
He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high: Heb. 1. 3.

2. He is on this account honored of all the Angels in Heaven, bringing
sinners unto God: for they do not only bow down and desire to look into the
mystery of the cross, 1 Pet. 1. 12. but worship and praise him allways on this
account, Revel. 5. 11, 12, 13, 14. I heard the voice of many Angels round
about the throne, and living creatures, and the Elders, and the number of them
was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with a
loud voice, worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches
and wisdom, and strength, and Honor, and Glory, and blessing. And every
creature which is in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in
the Sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, blessing, honor, glory, and
power, be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever. And the living creatures said Amen, and the fore and twenty Elders fell
down and worshipped him, that lives for ever and ever. The Reason given of this
glorious and wonderful Doxologie, this Attribution of Honor and Glory, to
Jesus Christ, by the whole Host of Heaven, is because he was the Lamb that was
slain: that is, because of the work of our Redemption, and our bringing unto
God. And it is not a little refreshment and rejoicing to the souls of the
Saints, to know, that all the Angels of God, the whole Host of Heaven, which
never sinned, do yet continually rejoice, and ascribe prays and honor to the
Lord Jesus, for his bringing them to peace and favor with God.

3. He is honored by his Saints all the world over: and do not, who should.
If they honor him not as they honor the Father, they were of all men the most
unworthy: but see what they do Revel. 1. 5, 6. Unto him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and Priests
to God and his Father, to him be Glory for ever and ever, amen. Chap. 5. 8, 9,
10. The four living creatures and four and twenty Elders, fell down before the
Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden viols full of Odors, which
are the prayers of the Saints; and they sung a new song, saying, thou art
worthy to take the book and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain,
and have redeemed us unto Godby thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue,
and people, and Nation, and have made us unto God Kings, and priests, and we
shall reign on the earth. The great solemn worship of the Christian Church,
consists in this Assignation of Honor and Glory to the Lord Jesus: therefore
do they love him, honor him, delight in him, as Paul. Phil. 3. 8. and so the
Spouse, Cant. 5. 9, 10, 11. and this is on this account.

5. They cordially approve of this Righteousness, this way Acceptance as that
which brings Glory to God as such. When they were laboring under the guilt of
sin, that which did most of all perplex their souls was, that their safety
was inconsistent with the Glory and honor of the great God; with his Justice,
Faithfulness, and truth; all which were engaged for the destruction of sin;
and how to come off from ruin, without Romans 1. 17. 10. 3, 4.
the loss of their honor he saw not. But now by the Revelation of this
Righteousness from Faith, to Faith, they plainly see, that all the properties
of God are exceedingly glorified, in the pardon, Justification, and Acceptance
of poor sinners. As before was manifested.

And this is the first way whereby the Saints hold daily communion with the
Lord Jesus, in this purchased Grace of Acceptance with God. They consider,
approve of, and rejoice in the way, means, and thing it self.

2. They make an Actual commutation with the Lord Jesus, as to their sins and
his Righteousness: of this there are also sundry

1. They Continually keep alive upon their hearts a sense of the guilt and
evil of sin, even then when they are under some comfortable persuasions of
their personal Acceptance with God. Sense of pardon takes away the horror and
fear, but not a due sense of the guilt of sin. It is the daily exercise of
the Saints of God, to consider the great provocation that is in sin, their
sins; the sin of their nature and lives: to render themselves vile in their
own hearts and thoughts on that account: to compare it with the terror at the
Lord: and to judge themselves continually. This they do in General, my sin is
ever before me, says David, They set sin before them not to terrify and
offright their souls with it, but that a due sense of the evil of it, may be
kept alive upon their hearts.

2. They gather up in their thoughts the sins for which they have not made a
papticular reckoning with God in Christ: or if they have begun so to do, yet
they have not made clear work of it, nor come to a clear and comfortable
issue. There is nothing more dreadful then for a man to be able to digest his
convictions: to have sin look him in the face, and speak perhaps some words of
terror to him, and to be able by any charms of diversions or delays, to put it
off, without coming to a full trial as to state and condition in reference
thereunto. This the Saints do. They gather up their sins, lay them in the
balance of the Law; see and consider their weight and desert. And then

3. They make this commutation I speak of with Jesus Christ:

1. They seriously consider, and by Faith conquer all objections to the
contrary, that Jesus Christ by the will and appointment of the Father, has
really undergone the punishment that was due to those sins, they lay now
under his eye and consideration. Isa. 53. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21. He has as certainly
and really answered the Justice of God, for them, as if he himself, the
sinner, should at that instant be cast into Hell, he could do.

2. They hearken to the voice of Christ calling them to him come unto me ye
that are weary and heavy laden: come with your burdens: Come thou (poor soul)
with thy guilt of sin: why what to do? why, this is mine says Christ: this
Agreement I made with my Father, that I should come, and take thy sins, and
hear them away: They were my lot. Give me thy burden, give me all thy sins;
thou know not what to do with them, I know how to dispose of them well
enough, so that God shall be glorified and thy soul delivered. Hereupon,

3. They lay down their sins at the Cross of Christ, upon great and bold
venture upon the Grace, Faithfulness and Truth of God. To stand by the cross
and say, ah! He is bruised for my sins, and wounded for my transgressions,
and the chastisement of my peace is upon him. He is thus made sin for me.
Here I give up my sins to him that is able to bear them, to undergo them.
He requires it of my hands, that I should be content that he should undertake
for them, and that I heartily consent unto. This is every days work. I know
not how any peace can be maintained with God, without it. If it be the work of
souls to receive Christ, as made sin for us, we must receive him, as one
that takes our sins upon him. Not as though he dyed any more, or suffered any
more: but as the faith of the Saints of old, made that present, and done before
their eyes (not come to pass, Heb. 11. 1.) So faith now, makes that present,
which was accomplished and past many generations ago. This it is to know
Christ Crucified.

4. Having thus by Faith given up their sins to Christ, and seen God laying
them all on him, they draw nigh, and take Righteousness which he has wrought
out for them: so fulfilling the whole of that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He
was made sin for us, that we might become the righteousness of God in him.
They consider him tendering himself and his Righteousness, to be their
Righteousness before God: they take it, and accept of it, and complete this
blessed bartering and exchange of Faith. Anger, Curse, Wrath, death, sin as
to its guilt, He took it all, and takes it all away; with him we leave what
ever of this nature belongs to us, and from him we receive, Love, Life,
Righteousness and peace.

Obj. But it may be said, surely this course of procedure can Filth, our Guilt,
our Sins? may He not, will He not bid us keep them to our selves, they are
our own; shall we be allwaies giving sins, and taking Righteousness?

Ans. There is not any thing that Jesus Christ is more delighted with, then
that his Saints should allwaies hold communion with him, as to this business
of giving and receiving. For

1. This exceedingly honors him, and gives him the Glory Lord, Lord, and make
mention of him, but honor him not at all. How so? They take his work out of
his hands, and ascribe it unto other things; their Repentance, their Duties,
shall bear their iniquities. They do not say so, but they do so. The
commutation they make, if they make any, it is with themselves. All their
bartering about sin, is in and with their own souls. The work that Christ
came to do in the world, was to bear our iniquities, and lay down his life a
Ransom for our sins. The Cup He had to drink of, was filled with our sins,
as to the punishment due to them. What greater dishonor then can be done to
the Lord Jesus, then to ascribe this work to any thing else: to think to get
rid of our sins any other way, or means. Herein, then I say, is Christ
honored indeed, when we go to him with our sins, by Faith: and say unto
him: Lord this is thy work: this is that for which thou came into the World;
this is that thou have undertaken to do; thou call for my burden, which is
too heavy for me to bear: take it blessed Redeemer: thou tenderest thy
Righteousness, that is my portion. Then is Christ honored, then is the Glory
of Mediation ascribed to him, when we walk with him in this Communion.

2. This exceedingly endeares the souls of the Saints to him, valuation upon
him, his Love, his Righteousness and Grace. When they find, and have the daily
use of it, then they do it. Who would not love him: I have been with the Lord
Jesus, may the poor soul say: I have left my sins, my by burden with him,
and he has given me his Righteousness, wherewith I am going with boldness to
God. I was dead, and am alive, for He dyed for me; I was cursed, and am
blessed, for He was made a curse for me; I was troubled, but have peace, for
the chastisement of my peace was upon him; I knew not what to do, nor whither
to cause my sorrow to go; by him have I received joy unspeakable and Glorious:
if I do not love him, delight in him, obey him, live to him, dye for him, I am
worse then the Devils in hell. Now the great aim of Christ in the world, is,
to have an high place and esteem in the hearts of his people: to have there,
(as He has in himself,) the pre-eminence in all things; not to be justled up
and down among other things: to be all, and in all. And thus are the Saints of
God prepared to esteem him, upon the engaging themselves to this Communion
with him.

Obj. Yea, but you will say, if this be so, what need we to repent, amend our
ways, it is but going to Christ by faith, making this exchange with him, and
so we may sin that grace may abound?

Ans. I judge no man's person: but this I must needs say, that I do not
understand, how a man that makes this objection in cold blood, not under a
temptation or accidental darkness, can have any true or real acquaintance
with Jesus Christ: however this I am certain of, that this Communion in its
self, produces quite other effects, then those supposed. For

1. For Repentance; it is I suppose, a Gospel Repentance that amazement,
terror, self-love, astonishment at the presence of God, I confess this
Communion takes it away, prevents it, casts it out, with its bondage and fear:
But for Gospel Repentance, whose nature consists in Godly sorrow for sin,
with its relinquishment, proceeding from Faith, Love, and Abhorrency of sin,
on accounts of Father, Son, and Spirit, both Law, and Love, that this should be
hindered by this Communion, is not possible. I told you that the Foundation of
this Communion, is laid in a deep, serious, daily consideration of sin, its
guilt, vileness and abomination, and our own vileness on that account. That
a sense hereof is to be kept alive in and upon the heart of every one, that
will enjoy this Communion with Christ: without it Christ is of no value, nor
esteem to him. Now is it possible that a man should daily fill his heart, with
the thoughts of the vileness of sin, on all considerations what ever, of
Law, Love, Grace, Gospel, life and death, and be filled with self abhorrency
on this account, and yet be a stranger to Godly sorrow? Here is the mistake,
the Foundation of this Communion, is laid in that, which they suppose it
overthrowes.

2. But what shall we say for obedience: if Christ be so Glorified honored by
taking our sins, the more we bring to him the more will he be glorified. A
man could not suppose that this Objection would be made, but that the Holy
Ghost, who knows what is in man, and his heart, has made it for them, and in
their name, Romans 6. 1, 2, 3. The very same Doctrine that I have insisted on,
being delivered Chap. 5. 18, 19, 20. The same objection is made to it; and for
those who think it may have any weight, I refer them to the Answer given in
that Chapter by the Apostle, as also to what was said before to the necessity
of our obedience, notwithstanding the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ.

But you will say: How should we address our selves to the performance of this
duty: what path are we to walk in?

1. Faith exercises it is self in it especially three ways.

1. In Meditation. The heart goes over in its own thoughts the part above
insisted on, sometimes severally, semetimes jointly, sometimes fixing primarily
on one thing, sometimes on another, and sometimes going over the whole. At one
time perhaps the soul is most upon consideration of its own sinfulness, and
filling it self with shame, and self abhorrency on that account; sometimes it
is filled with the thoughts of the Righteousness of Christ, and with joy
unspeakable, and glorious on that account. Especially on great occasions, when
grieved and burdened by negligence or eruption of corruption, then the soul
goes over the whole work, and so drives things to an issue with God, and takes
up the peace that Christ has wrought out for him.

2. Considering and enquiring into the promises of the Gospel, which hold out
all these things; the Excellency, Fulness and Suitableness of the
Righteousness of Christ, the Rejection of all false Righteousness, and the
commutation made in the Love of God, which was formerly insisted on.

3. In Prayer: herein do their Souls go through this work day by day. And
this communion have all the Saints with the Lord Jesus, as to their Acceptance
with God, which was the first thing proposed to consideration.

CHAP. IX.
Of Communion with Christ in holiness. The several Acts ascribed unto the
Lord Christ herein. 1. His Intercession. 2. Sending of the Spirit. 3. Bestows
habitual Grace; What that is, and wherein it consists. This purchased by
Christ: bestowed by him. Of actual Grace. How the Saints hold communion with
Christ in these things: manifested in sundry particulars.

OUr Communion with the Lord Jesus, as to that Grace of Sanctification, and
Purification, whereof we have Method must be observed; and we must show. 1.
What are the peculiar Actings of the Lord Christ as to this Communion: and 2dly
what is the Duty of the Saints herein: The sum is, how we hold Communion with
Christ in Holiness, as well as in Righteousness, and that very briefly.

There are several Acts ascribed unto the Lord Jesus in reference to this
particular: as,

1. His Interceding with the Father, by virtue of his Oblation in the behalf
of his, that he would bestow the Holy Spirit on them. Here I choose to enter,
because, of the oblation of Christ it self, I have spoken before. Otherwise
every thing is to be run up to that head, that sourse and spring. There lies
the foundation of all spiritual mercies whatever: as afterward also shall be
manifested: Now the Spirit, as unto us, a Spirit of Grace, Holiness and
Consolation, is of the purchase of Christ. It is upon the matter, the great
promise of the New Covenant, Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will put a new Spirit within you:
So also, Chap. 36. v. 27. Jerem. 32. 39, 40. and in sundry other places.
whereof afterward. Christ is the Mediator and Surety of this new Covenant,
Heb. 7. 22., Jesus was made Surety of a better Testament, or rather Covenant. A
Testament needs no Surety. He is the undertaker on the part of God and man
also. Of man to give satisfaction; of God to bestow the whole Grace of the
Promise, as Chap. 9. 15. For this cause he is the Mediator of the New
Testament, that by means of death, for the Redemption of Transgressions that
were under the first Testament, they which are called, might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance. He both satisfied for sin, and procured the
promise. He procures all the Love and Kindness, which are the fruits of the
Covenant; being himself the Original promise thereof, Genesis 3. 16. The whole
being so ordered in all things, and made sure, 2 Samuel 23 5. that the residue of
its Effects, should all be derived from him, depend upon him, and be procured
by him, that he in all things might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1. 19.
according to the compact and agreement made with him, Isa. 53. 12. They are all
the Purchase of his blood, and therefore the Spirit also, as promised in that
Covenant, 1 Cor. 1. 20. Now the whole Fruit and Purchase of his Death, is made
out from the Father upon his Intercession. This Ioh. 14. 16, 17, 18. He
promises his Disciples, that he will pursue the work which he has in hand in
their behalf, and intercede with the Father for the Spirit, as a fruit of his
purchase. Therefore He tells them, that He will not pray the Father for his
Love unto them, because the Eternal Love of the Father, is not the Fruit, but
the Fountain of his Purchase: but the Spirit that is a Fruit, that (says He)
I will pray the Father for etc. And what Christ asks the Father as Mediator,
to bestow on us, that is part of his Purchase Psalm. 2. 8. Isa. 53. 12. Psalm.
40. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
, being promised unto him upon his undertaking to do the will of God. And this
is the First thing that is to be considered in the Lord Jesus, as to the
communication of the spirit of Sanctification and purification; (the First
thing to be considered in this our Communion with him) He intercedes with his
Father, that he may be bestowed on us, as a Fruit of his Death and Bloodshed in
our behalf. This is the Relation of the Spirit of Holiness as bestowed on us,
unto the Mediation of Christ. He is the great Genesis 3. 15. Isa. 42. 6. 49 8.
Dan. 9. 24.
foundation of the covenant of Grace; being himself everlastingly destinated,
and freely given to make a purchase of all the good things thereof. Receiving
according to promise the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 33. he sheds him abroad on his
own. This Faith considers, fixes on, dwells upon. For 2ly His Prayer being
granted (as the Father allwaies hears him) He actually sends his Spirit into
the Hearts of his Saints, there to dwell in his stead, and to do all things
for them, and Joh. 11. 42.
in them, which He himself has to do. This Secondly is the Lord Christ by
Faith to be Eyed in: and that not only in respect of the first enduing of our
hearts with his Holy Spirit, but also of the continual supplies of it, drawing
forth, and exciting Vicariam navare operam. Tertull. Prove. 1. 23.
more effectual Operations and Actings of that indwelling Spirit. Hence,
though Ioh. 14. 16. He says, the Father will give them the Comforter, because
the Original and Sovereign Dispensation is in his hand, and it is by him made
out upon the Intercession of Christ, yet not being bestowed immediately on us,
but (as it were) given into the hand of Christ for us, He affirms, that (as to
Actual collation or bestowing) he sends him himself: Chap. 15. v. 26. I will
send the Comforter to you from the Father. He receives him from his Father, and
Actually sends him unto his Saints. So Chapt. 16. 7. I will send him: and v. 14
15. He manifests how he will send him, He will furnish him with that which is
his, to bestow upon them: He shall take of mine (of that which is properly and
peculiarly so, mine as Mediator, the fruit of my Life and Death unto
Holiness) and give it unto you. but of these things more afterward. This then
is the Second thing that the Lord Christ does, and which is to be eyed in him,
he sends his Holy Spirit into our Hearts, which is the efficient cause Titus 3.
56.
of all Holiness and Sanctification, quickening, enlightening, purifying the
Souls of his Saints. How our union with him, with all the benefits thereon
depending, flows from this his communication of the spirit unto us, to abide
with us, and to dwell in us, I have at large elsewhere declared: where also
this Saints Perseverance, cap. 8. p. 189.
whole matter is more fully opened. And this is to be considered in him by
faith, in reference to the Spirit its self.

2ly There is that, which we call Habitual Grace, that is, the Fruits of the
Spirit, the Spirit which is borne of the Spirit: Ioh. 3. 6. That which is borne
of, or produced by the Holy Ghost, Gal. 5. 17.
in the heart or soul of a man when he is regenerate, that which makes him so,
is spirit; in opposition to the flesh, or that enmity which is in us by nature
against God: It is, Faith, Love, Joy, Hope, and the rest of the Graces of the
Gospel, in their root or common principle. Concerning which these two things
are to be observed.

1. That though many particular Graces are mentioned, Habits or Qualities in
us; not several or distinct principles, to answer them; but only the same
Habit 2 Cor. 5. 17.
or Spiritual principle, putting forth it self in various operations, or
ways of working, according to the variety of the Objects which it goes forth
unto, is their common principle. So that it is called and distinguished as
above, rather in respect of actual exercise, with relation to its objects,
then habitual Inherence, it being one Root, which has these many Branches.

2. This is that which I intend by this Habit of Grace. A 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ezekiel.
11. 19. 18. 31. 36. 26. Gal. 6. 15. Ephesians. 2. 15. 5. 24. Col. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 2.
2. Ioh. 3. 6.
new gracious Spiritual Col. 3. 3, 4. Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. Romans 8. 11. Ioh. 5. 21.
chapter 6. 63.
life, or principle, Psalm. 51. 10. Ephesians. 2. 10. chapter 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. 2 Cor.
5. 17.
created, and 2 Cor. 3. 6. 2 cor. 4. 6. Act. 5. 31. Luke 1. 79. Ioh. 4. 14.
Ioh. 3. 27. 1. Cor. 2. 12. Ephesians. 4. 7. Phil. 1. 29.
bestowed on the Soul, whereby it is Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 5. 8. 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Ioh. 5. 24.
changed in all its Faculties and Affections, fitted, and enabled to go forth,
in the way of obedience, unto every divine Object, that is proposed unto it,
according to the mind of God. For Instance. The mind can discern of 1 Cor. 2.
12. Ephesians. 1. 18. 2 Cor. 3. 18. and 4. 6.
Spiritual things in a Spiritual manner, and therein it is Light,
Illumination. The whole soul closes with Christ, as held forth in the
Promises of the Gospel for Righteousness and Salvation, that is Faith: which
being the maine and principal work of it, it often gives Denomination unto the
whole. So when it rests in God, in Christ, with Delight, Desire, and
complacency, it is called Love, being indeed the Principle suiting all the
Faculties of our souls for Spiritual and living Operations, according to
their natural use. Now it differs.

1. From the Spirit dwelling in the Saints? for it is a created Quality. The
Spirit dwells in us as a Free Agent in an Holy Quality, remains in us, as in
its own proper Subject, that has not any subsistence but therein, and is
capeable of being intended or restrained under great variety of degrees.

2. From actual Grace which is transient, this making its Residence in the
soul. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Psalm 119. 36. Phil. 2. 13.
Actual Grace is an Elapse of Divine Influence and Assistance, working in and
by the Soul, any Spiritual Act or Duty whatsoever, without any praeexistence
unto that Act or Continuance after it, God working in us, both to will and to
do. But this Habitual Grace is always resident in us, causing the soul to
be a meet principle for all those holy and Spiritual opperations, which by
Actual Grace are to be performed. And

3. It is capable of Augmentation and Diminution, as was Cant. 5. 2. Revel. 1.
5. 3. 2. 3. 4. 17, 18, 19. Hos. 14. 4. Psalm. 51. etc.
said. In some it is more large and more Effectual then in others: Yea in some
persons more at one time then another: Hence are those Dyings, Decays, Ruins,
Recoverys, Complaynts and Rejoycings, whereof so frequent mention is made in
the Scripture.

These things being premised, as to the nature of it: Let us Lord Jesus, in
reference hereunto, to make an entrance into our Communion with him therein, as
things by him, or on his part performed.

1. As I said of the Spirit, so (in the first place) I say of this, it is of
the Purchase of Christ, and is so to be looked on. It is given unto us, for his
sake to believe on him: Phil. 1. 29. The Lord, on the behalf of Christ, for
his sake, because it is purchased, and procured (...).
by him for us, bestows Faith, and (by same rule) all grace upon us. We are
blessed with all spiritual blessings in Heavenly places in him, Ephesians. 1. 3. IN
HIM, that is, in and through his Mediation for us. His Joh, 2. 1, 2.
Oblation and Intercession Iye at the bottom of this dispensation. Were not
Grace by them procured, it would never by any one soul be enjoyed. All Grace
is from this fountain. In our receiving it from Christ, we must still consider
what it cost him; want of this weakens faith in its proper workings: Romans 8. 32.
His whole intercession is founded on his Oblation: 1 John 2. 1, 2. What he
purchased by his Death, that (nor more, nor less as has been often said) He
intercedeth may be bestowed. And he prays that all his Saints may have this
Grace whereof we speak, Joh. 17. 17. Did we continually consider all Grace as
the fruit of the Purchase of Christ, it would be an exceeding Endearement on
our Spirits. Nor can we without this consideration according to the tenor of
the Gospel, ask or exspect any Grace. It is no prejudice to the free Grace of
the Father, to look on any thing as the purchase of the Son. It was from that
Grace, that he made that Purchase. And in the Receiving of Grace from God, we
have not Communion with Christ, who is yet the treasury and store house of it;
unless we look upon it as his purchase. He has obtained that we should be
sanctified Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Tit. 2. 14. Romans 6. 4.
through out, have life in us, be humble, holy, believing, dividing the spoil
with the mighty, by destroying the works of the Devil in us.

2. The Lord Christ does Actually Communicate this Grace unto his Saints, and
bestows it on them. Of his fulness we have all received, and Grace for Grace,
Joh. 1. 16. For

1. The Father actually invests him with all the Grace, whereof by Compact and
Agreement, he has made a purchase (as he received the promise of the Spirit)
which is all that is of use for the bringing his many Sons to Glory. It
pleased the Father, that in him all fulness should dwell. Col. 1. 17. That he
should be invested with a Fulness of that grace which is needful for his
People. This himself calls the Power of giving Eternal Life to his Elect:
John 17. 2. Which power is not only his Ability to do it, but also his Right
to do it. Hence this Delivering of all things unto him by his Father, he lays
as the bottom of his inviting sinners unto him for Refreshment. All things are
delivered unto me of my Father Math. 11. 37. Come unto me all that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest v. 28.

This being the Covenant of the Father with him, and his promise unto him, that
upon the making his soul an Offering for sin, He should see his seed, and
the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hand: Isa. 53. 10. and in the
verses following, the pouring out of his soul unto death, and bearing the
sins of many, is laid as the bottom and procuring cause of these things. 1.
of Justification, by his knowledge he shall justify many. 2. Of Sanctification;
in destroying the works of the Devil: v. 11. 12. Thus comes our merciful
High Priest to be the great possessor of all Grace, that he may give out to us
according to his own pleasure; quickening whom he will. He has it in him really
as our Head, in that he received not that spirit by measure Joh. 3. 34. which
is the bond of Union between him and us, 1 Cor. 6. 17. whereby holding him the
Head, we are filled with his fulness Ephesians. 1. 22 23. Col. 2. 19. He has it
as a Common person entrusted with it on our behalf: Romans 5. 14, 15, 16, 17.
The last Adam is made unto us a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. He is also a
Treasury of this Grace in a moral and law sense; not only as it pleased the
Father, that all fulness should dwell in him, Col. 1. 19. but also because in
his mediation, as has been declared, is founded the whole dispensation of
Grace.

2. Being thus actually vested with this power and privilege and fulness, He
designs the spirit to take of this fulness, and to give it unto us. He shall
take of mine and show it unto you; Joh. 16. 15. The Spirit takes of that
Fulness that is in Christ, and in the Name of the Lord Jesus, bestows it
actually on them, for whose Sanctification He is sent. Concerning the manner
and Allmighty efficacy of the Spirit of Grace, whereby this is done (I mean,
this actual Collation of Grace upon his peculiar ones) more will be spoken
afterward.

3. Actual Grace, or that Influence of power whereby the Saints are enabled to
perform particular Duties according to the mind of God, there is not any need
of further Enlargement about it. What concerns our Communion with the Lord
Christ therein, holds proportion with what was spoken before.

There remains only one thing more to be observed concerning those things,
whereof mention has been made, and I proceed to the way whereby we carry on
communion with the Lord Jesus in all these. And that is, that these things may
be considered two ways.

1. In respect of their First Collation or bestowing on the Soul. 2. In respect
of their Continuance and Increase, as unto the Degrees of them.
In the First sense, as to the real Communicating of the Spirit of Grace unto
the Soul, so raising it from Death unto Life, the Saints have no kind of
Communion with Christ therein, but only what consists in a passive Reception of
that life-giving, quickening Spirit and power. They are but as the dead bones
in the Prophet, the wind blows on them, and they live: as Lazarus in the Grave,
Christ calls and they come forth; the call being accompained with life, and
power. This then is not that whereof particularly I speak. But it is the
second in respect of further Efficacy of the Spirit, and Increase of Grace,
both Habitual and Actual, whereby we become more holy, and to be more
powerful in walking with God, have more fruit in Obedience, and success
against Temptations: And in this they hold Communion with the Lord Christ: And
wherein and how they do it, shall now be declared.

1. They continually eye the Lord Jesus as the Great Joseph, disposal of all
the Granarys of the Kingdom of Heaven, committed unto him; as one in whom it
has pleased the Father to gather All things unto an Head, Ephesians. 1. 10. that
from him all things might be dispensed unto them. All Treasures, all fulness,
the Spirit not by measure, are in him. And this Fulness in this Joseph in
reference to their condition, they Eye in these Thee Particulars.

1. In the preparation unto the dispensation mentioned, in the Expiating,
Parging, Purifying Efficacy of his Blood, It was a Sacrifice not only of
Atonement as offered, but also of purification, as powered out. This the
Apostle eminently sets forth, Heb. 9. 13. 14. For if the blood of Bulls and
Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean sanctifies to the
purifying of the flesh, How much more shall the blood of Christ who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot unto God, purge your Consciences
from dead works that you may serve the Living God. This blood of his is that
which answers all Typical institutions, for carnal purification, and
therefore has a spiritually purifying, cleansing, sanctifying virtue in it
self, as offered and powered out. Hence it is called a fountain for sin and
for uncleanness, Zech. 13. 1. that is, for their washing and taking away. A
fountain opened, ready prepared, virtuous, efficacious in its self, before
any be put into it: because poured out, instituted, appointed to that purpose.
The Saints see that in themselves they are still exceedingly defiled: (and
indeed to have a sight of the Defilements of sin, is a more spiritual
discovery, then to have only a sense of the guilt of sin. This follows every
conviction, and is commensurate unto it; that usually only such as reveal the
Purity and Holiness of God, and all his ways.) Hereupon they cry with shame
within themselves, Unclean, Unclean. Unclean in their Natures, Unclean in
their Persons; Unclean in their Conversations. All Ezekiel. 16. 4, 6. etc. Joh.
3. 3, 5, 5. (...) Revel. 21. 27. Heb. 1. 13.
rolled in the blood of their defilements: their Hearts being by nature a very
sink, and their Lives a Dunghill. They know also, that no unclean thing shall
enter into the Kingdom of God, or have place in the new Jerusalem: that God is
of purer eyes then to behold iniquity. They cannot endure to look on themselves,
and how shall they dare to appear in his presence? What Remedies shall they
now use? Though they wash themselves with Nitre, and take them much soap, yet
their iniquity will continue marked, Jerem. 2. 22. Wherewith then shall they
come before the Lord? For the removal of this, I say, they look in the first
place to the purifying virtue of the blood of Christ, which is able to cleanse
them from all their sins; 1 John 1. 7. Being the Spring from whence flows
all the purifying virtue, which in the Issue will take away all their Spots and
Stains; make them holy and without blemish, and (in the end) present them
glorious unto himself, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. This they dwell upon with thoughts of
faith; they roll it in their minds and spirits. Here faith obtaines new life,
new vigor, when a sense of vileness has even overwhelmed it. Here is a
fountain opened; draw nigh and see its beauty, purity, efficacy. Here is a
foundation laid of that work, whose accomplishment we long for. One moments
Communion with Christ by faith herein, is more effectual to the purging of the
soul, to the increasing of Grace, then the utmost self endeavors of a 1000
ages.

2. Eye the Blood of Christ, as the Blood of Sprinkling. Comeing to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, they come to the Blood of Sprinkling Heb. 12. 24.
The eying of the blood of (...).
Christ as shed, will not of its self take away Pollution. There is not only
(...), a shedding of Blood, without which, there is no Remission, Heb. 9. 22.
but there is also (...) a sprinkling of blood, without which there is no
actual purification. This the Apostle largely describes: Heb. 9. When Moses
(says he) had spoken every precept to the People according to the Law, he
took the blood of Calves and of Goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and
Hyssop, and sprinkled both the book and all the People, saying, this is the
blood of the testament which God has enjoined unto you: More over, he
sprinkled with blood, both the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels of the
Ministry; and almost all things are by the Law purged with blood: It was
therefore necessary that the patterns of the things in the Heavens, should be
purifyed with these, but the Heavenly things themselves, with better Sacrifices
then these v. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. He had formerly compared the Blood of Christ,
to the blood of Sacrifices as offered in respect of the impetration and the
Purchase it made; now he does it unto that blood as sprinkled, in respect of
its Aplication unto purification and holiness. And he tells us how this
sprinkling was performed, it was by dipping Hyssop in the blood of the
Sacrifice, and so dashing it out upon the things and persons to be purifyed. As
the Institution also was with the Paschall Lamb: Exodus 12. 12. Hence David in a
sense of the pollution of sin prays, that he may be purged with Hyssop: Ps. 51.
7. For that this peculiarly respected the Uncleanness and Defilement of sin,
is evident, because there is no mention made in the Institution of any
Sacrifice, (after that of the Lamb before mentioned,) of sprinkling blood with
Hyssop, but only in those which respected purification of uncleanness. As in
the case of Leprosy, Levit. 14. 6. and all other defilements Numb. 19. 18.
which latter indeed, is not of blood but of the water of separation, this also
being eminently Typpicall of the blood of Christ, which is the Fountain for
separation for Uncleanness. Zech. 13. 1. Now this branch of Hyssop wherein the
blood of purification was prepared for the sprinkling of the unclean, is,
(unto us) the free promises of Christ. The cleasing virtue of the Blood of
Christ lies in the Promises, as the blood of Sacrifices in the Hyssop, ready to
pass out unto them that draw nigh thereunto. Therefore the Apostle argues
from receiving of the Promises unto Universal Holiness and purity. Having
therefore these Promises (Dearly Beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of the Lord,
2 Cor. 7. 1. This then the Saints do; they eye the Blood of Christ as it is in
the Promise, ready to issue out upon the Soul for the purification thereof:
and thence is purging and cleansing virtue to be communicated unto them, and by
the blood of Christ are they to be purged from all their sins, Joh. 1. 7.
Thus far as it were, this Purifying blood thus prepared and made ready is at
some distance to the soul. Though it be shed to this purpose, that it might
purge, cleanse, and Sanctify, though it be taken up with the bunch of Hyssop in
the Promises, yet the soul may not partake of it: wherefore

3. own Spirit he is the only Dispenser of the Spirit, and of all Grace of
Sanctification and Holiness. They consider that upon his Intercession it is
granted to him, that he shall make effectual all the fruits of his Purchase to
the Sanctification, the purifying and making glorious in Holiness of his whole
people. They know that this is actually to be accomplished by the Spirit,
according to the innumerable Promises given to that Purpose. He is to sprinkle
that blood upon their souls, He is to create the Holiness in them that they
long after, He is to be himself in them a well of water springing up to
everlasting life. In this state they look to Jesus; here faith fixes its self
in expectation of his giving out the Spirit, for all these ends and purposes;
mixing the Promises with faith and so becoming actual partaker of all this
Grace. This is their way, this their Coumunion with Christ; This is the life of
Faith as to Grace and Holiness. Blessed is the soul that is exercised
therein: He shall be as a tree planted by the waters, that spreads forth her
roots by the River, and shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall be
green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease
from yiedling fruit: Jerem 17. 18. Convinced persons who know not Christ, nor
the fellowship of his sufferings, would spin an holiness out of their own
bowels: they would work it out in their own strength. They begin it with
tyring endeavors, and follow it with Vows, Dutys, Resolutions, Engagements,
Romans 10. 14.
sweating at it all the day long. Thus they continue for a season; their
Hypocrisy for the most part ending in Apostasy. The Saints of God, do in the
very entrance of their walking with him, reckon upon it, that they have a
Threefold want.

1. Of the Spirit of Holiness, to dwell in them. 2. Of an Habit of Holiness,
to be infused into them. 3. Of Actual Assistance, to work all their works for
them;
and that if these should continue to be wanting, they can never with all their
might, power, and endeavors, perform any one act of Holiness before the
Lord. They know that of themselves they have no sufficiency; that without
Christ, they can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5.
therefore they look to him who is entrusted with a fulness of all these in
their behalf, and thereupon by Faith derive from him an Increase of that,
whereof they stand in need. Thus I say, have the Saints communion with Christ,
as to their sanctification and holiness. From him do they receive the spirit
to dwell in them; from him the new principle of Life, which is the root of all
their obedience, from him have they actual Assistance for every duty they are
called unto. In waiting for, expectation and receiving of these blessings on
the accounts before mentioned, do they spend their Lives and time with him. In
vain is help looked for from other mountains. In vain do men spend their
strength in following after Righteousness, if this be wanting. Fix thy soul
here! thou shall not tarry until thou be ashamed. This is the way, the only
way, to obtain full effectual manifestations of the spirits dwelling in us; to
have our hearts purified, our consciences purged, our sins mortified, our
graces increased, our souls made humble, holy, zealous, believing; like to
him; to have our lives fruitful, our deaths comfortable; Let us herein abide,
eying Christ by Faith, to attain that measure of conformity to him, which is
allotted unto us in this world, that when we shall see him as he is, we may be
like unto him.

CHAP. X.
Of Communion with Christ in privileges: of Adoption: the nature of it: the
consequents of it: peculiar privileges attending it: Liberty, Title;
Boldness, Affliction, Communion with Christ hereby.

THe third-thing wherein we have communion with Christ is Grace of Privilege
before God: I mean as third head of purchased Grace. The privileges we enjoy
by Christ, are great and innumerable. To insist on them in particular, were
work for a man's whole life, not a design to be wrapped up in a few sheets. I
shall take a view of them only in the Head, the spring and Fountain whence they
all arise and flow. This is our Adoption. Beloved, now we are the Sons of God.
1 Ioh. 3. 2. This is our great and fountain privilege. Whence is it that we
are so? it is from the Love of the Father, v. 1. Behold, what love the Father
has given unto us, that we should be called the sons of God. But by whom
immediately do we receive this honor? As many as believe on Christ, he gives
them this power to become the Sons of God, Ioh. 1. 12. Himself was appointed
to be the first borne among many brethren, Rom: 8. 29. and his taking us to be
brethren, Heb. 2. 11. makes us become the Children of God. Now that God is our
Father, by being the Father of Christ, and we his children, by being the
brethren of Christ, being the head and sum of all the honor, privilege,
right, and Title we have, let us a little consider the nature of that act,
whereby we are invested with this state and title; namely our Adaption.

Now Adoption is the Authorative translation of a Believer by Jesus Christ from
the family of the world and Satan, into the family of God, with his investiture
in all the privileges, and advantages of that Family.

To the complete Adoption of any person, these five things rre required.

1. That he be actually, and of his own right, of another family, then that
whereunto he is adopted. He must be the son of one family or other in his own
right, as all persons are.

2. That there be a Family unto which of himself he has no right, whereinto
he is to be grafted. If a man comes into a family upon a personal right,
though originally at never so great a distance, that man is not adopted. If a
man of a most remote consanguinity, do come into the inheritance of any family
by the death of the nearer heirs, though his right before were little better
then nothing, yet he is a borne son of that Family, he is not adopted. He is
not to have the plea of the most remote possibility of succession.

3. That there be an Authoritative legal translation of him, by some that have
power thereunto, from one family into another. It was not by the Law of old, in
the power of particular persons, to adopt when, and whom they would. It was to
be done by the Authority of the Sovereign power.

4. That the adopted person be freed from all the obligations that be upon him
unto the family, from whence he is translated: otherwise he can be no way
useful, or serviceable unto the family, whereinto he is engrafted: He cannot
serve two masters, much less two Fathers.

5. That by virtue of his Adoption, he be invested in all the rights,
Privileges, Advantages, and Title to the whole inheritance of the family into
which he is adopted, in as full and ample manner, as if he had been borne a son
therein.

Now all these things and Circumstances do concur, and are found in the
Adoption of believers.

1. They are by their own original right of another family, of wrath, Ephesians. 2.
3. Sons of wrath: of that family whose inheritance is wrath; called the power
of darkness, Col. 1. 13. For from thence does God translate them into the
Kingdom of his dear Son. This is the family of the world and of Satan, of
which by nature believers are. What ever is to be inherited in that family; as
wrath, curse, death, Hell, they have a right thereunto. Neither can they of
themselves, or by themselves get free of this family: a strong man armed, keeps
them in subjection. Their natural estate is a family condition, attended with
all circumstances of a family; family duties and services; rights and titles;
Relations, and observances. They are of the black family of sin, and Satan.

2. There is another family whereinto they are to be translated, right nor
title. This is that family in heaven and earth, which is called after the name
of Christ. Ephesians. 3. v. 15. The great family of God: God has an house, and
family for his children, of whom, some he maintains on the riches of his
grace, and some he entertaines Heb. 5. 6.
with the fulness of his glory. This is that house whereof the Lord Christ is
the great dispenser, It having pleased the Father to gather in one all things
in him, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth, even in him Ephesians 1.
v. 10. Herein live all the Sons and daughters of God, spending largely on the
Riches of his Grace. Unto this family of themselves they have no right, nor
Title: they are wholly alienated from it. Ephesians. 2. 12. and can lay no claim to
any thing in it. God driving fallen Adam out of the Garden, and shutting up all
ways of Return with a flaming sword ready to cut him off, if he should
attempt it; abundantly declares that he, and all in him, had lost all right of
approaching unto God, in any family relation. Corrupted, cursed nature is not
vested with the least right to any thing of God: therefore

They have an Authoritative translation from one of these families private
underhand-way, but in the way of Authority. Ioh: 1, 12. to as many as received
him, he gave power to become the sons of God. Power, or Authority. This
investing them with the power, excellency, and right of the Sons of God, is a
forensicall act, and has a legal proceeding in it. It is called the making us
meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. v. 12. A Judicial
exalting us into Romans 8. 29. Heb. 2. 12.
membership in that family, where God is the Father, Christ the elder Brother,
all Saints and Angels Brethren and fellow children, and the inheritance a
Crown immortal and incorruptible, that fades not away.

Now this Authoritative translation of Believers from one family into another,
consists of these two parts.

1. An effectual Proclamation and declaration of such a persons immunity from
all Obligations to the former family, to which by Nature he was related, And
this declaration has a threefold object.

1. Angels: It is declared un to them, they are the Sons of God. They are the
Sons of God, and so of the family whereunto Job. 1. 16. 38. 7. Heb. 12. 22, 23,
24. Revel. 22. 9.
the adopted person is to be admitted, and therefore it concerns them to know,
who are invested with the rights of that family, that they may discharge their
duty toward them; unto them then it is declared, that Believers are freed from
the family of sin, and hell, to become fellow Sons, and servants with them:
and this is done two ways.

1. Generally by the doctrine of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 10. Unto the
principalities, and powers in heavenly places is made known by the Church, the
manifold wisdom of God.

1. By the Church is this wisdom made known to the Angels: either as the
doctrine of the Gospel is delivered unto it, or as it is gathered thereby. And
what is this Wisdom of God, that is thus made known to principalities and
powers? It is that the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body
with us, v. 6. The mystery of Adopting sinners of the Gentiles, taking them
from their slavery in the family of the World, that they might have a right of
heirship, becoming Sons in the family of God, is this wise. dome thus made
known. And how was it primitively made known? It was revealed by the spirit
unto the Prophets and Apostles, v. 5.

2. In Particular by Immediate Revelation. When any particular soul is freed
from the family of this World, it is revealed to the Angels. There is joy in
the presence of the Angels of God (that is among the Angels, and by them)
over one sinner that Repents, Luke 15. v. 10. Now the Angels cannot of
themselves absolutely know the true Repentance of a sinner in it self. It is a
work wrought in that Cabinet, which none has a key unto but Jesus Christ: by
him it is revealed to the Angels, when the peculiar care, and charge of such
an one is committed to them. These things have their transaction before the
Angels, Luke 12. v. 8, 9. Christ ownes the names of his brethren before the
Angels; Revel. 2. 5. when he gives them admittance into the family where they
are, Heb. 12. 22. he declares to them that they are Sons, that they may
discharge their duty toward them; Heb. 1. last.

2. It is denounced in a judicial way unto Satan, the great the Lord Christ
delivers a soul from under the power of that strong armed one, he binds him:
ties him from the exercise of that power and dominion which before he had over
him. And by this means does he know that such an one is delivered from his
family; and all his future attempts upon him, are encroachings upon the
possession, and inheritance of the Lord Christ.

3. Unto the Conscience of the Person adopted. The spirit of Christ testifies
to the heart and Conscience of a Believer, that he is freed from all
engagements unto the family of Satan, and is become the Son of God, Romans 8. 14,
15. and enables him to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4. 6. Of the Particulars of this
testification of the Spirit, and of its absolving the soul from its old
alliance, I shall speak afterward. And herein consists the first thing
mentioned.

2. There is an Authoritative engrafting of a Believer actually

1. The giving a believer a new name in a white stone, Revel. 1. 17. they that
are adopted are to take new names: They change their names they had in their
old families, to take the names of the families whereinto they are translated.
This new name is, A Child of God: that is the new name given in adoption: and
no man knows what is in that name, but only he that does receive it. And this
new name is given, and written in a white stone; that is the Tessera of our
admission into the house of God. It is a stone of judicial acquitment. Our
adoption by the spirit is bottomed on our Absolution in the blood of Jesus: and
therefore is the new name, in the white stone; privilege grounded on
discharge. The white stone quits the claim of the old family; The new name
gives entrance to the other.

2. An enrolling of his name in the Catalogue of the household of God. Admitting
him thereby, into fellowship therein. This is called the writing of the house
of Israel, Ezekiel. 13. 9. that is the roll, wherein all the names of the Israel,
the family of God are written. God has a Catalogue of his household; Christ
knows his sheep by name. When God writes up the people, he counts that this
man was borne in Sion, Ps. 87. 6. This is an extract of the Lambs book of life.

3ly Testifying to his Conscience, his Acceptance with God, enableing him to
behave himself as a child, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 5, 6.

The two last things required to Adoption are, that the adopted person be freed
from all Obligations to the family from Rights and Privileges of that
whereunto he is translated. Now because these two comprize the whole issue of
Adoption, wherein the Saints have Communion with Christ. I shall handle them
together, referring the concernments of them unto these four heads.

1. Liberty: 2. Title, or right: 3. Boldness: 4. Correction. family of the
Adopted person, that he does receive by his Adoption, wherein he holds
communion with the Lord Jesus.

1. Liberty: The spirit of the Lord, that was upon the Lord Jesus did anoint
him to proclaim liberty to the captive: Esaias: 67. 1. And where the spirit of
God is, (that is the spirit of Christ given to us by him because we are Sons)
there is Liberty: 2 Cor. 3. 17. All spiritual liberty is from the spirit of
Adoption. What ever else is pretended, is licentiousness. So the Apostle
argues, Gal. 4. 6, 7. he has sent forth his spirit into their hearts crying
Abba Father, wherefore ye are no more Servants, no more in bondage, but have
the liberty of Sons; And this Liberty respects in the first place, the family
from whence the adopted person is translated; it is his setting free from all
the obligations of that family.

Now in this sense, the liberty which the Saints have by Adoption, real, or
that which is pretended; that which is real respects a twofold issue of Law,
and Sin. The moral unchangeable Law of God, and Sin, being in conjunction,
meeting with reference to any persons, has, and has had a twofold issue;

1. An Oeconomicall institution of a new Law of Ordinances, keeping in bondage
those to whom it was given, Col. 2. 14.

2. A Natural (if I may so call it) pressing off those persons with its power
and efficacy against sin, whereof there are these parts.

1. Its rigor, and terror in commanding.

2. Its Impossibility for accomplishment, and so insufficiency for its
primitively appointed end.

3. The Issues of its transgression, which are referred unto two heads: 1.
Curse: 2. Death. I shall speak very briefly of these, because they are commonly
handled, and granted by all.

2. That which is pretended, is the power of any whatever conscience, when once
made free by Christ.

First then, Believers are freed from the instituted Law of Ordinances, which
upon the testimony of the Apostles, was a yoke neither we nor our Fathers (in
the faith) could bear, Acts 15. 10. Wherefore Christ blotted out this hand
writing of Ordinances that was against them, which was contrary to them, and
took it out of the way, nayling it to his Cross: Col: 2. 14. and thereupon the
Apostle after a long dispute concerning the Liberty that we have from that Law,
concludes with this instruction, Gal. 5. 1. stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free.

2. In reference to the Moral Law! the first thing we have liberty from, is
its rigor, and terror in commanding, Heb. 12 We are not come to the Mount that
might be touched, and that burned with fire, to the whirlwind, darkness, and
tempest, to the sound of the trumpet, and the voice of words, which they that
heard besought that they might hear it no more; But we are come to mount Sion
etc. As to that administration of the Law wherein it was given out with dread,
and terror, and so exacted its obedience with rigor, we are freed from it, we
are not called to that estate.

2. Its Impossibility of accomplishment, and so insufficiency impossibility of
obtaining life by the Law, we are exempted from it as to any such end, and that
by the righteousness of Christ, Romans 8. 3.

3. From the Issue of its transgression.

1. Curse. There is a solemn curse enwrapping the whole wrath of Cod, annexed
to the Law, with reference to the transgression thereof: and from this are we
wholly at liberty, Gal: 3. 13. By being made a curse, he has delivered us from
the curse.

2. Death: Heb: 2. 14, 15. and therewith from Satan; Heb. 2. 15. Col. 1. 13.
and Sin, Romans 6. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18. with the World, Gal. 1. 14. with all the
attendances, advantages, and claim of them all, Gal. 4 3, 4, 5. Col. 2. 20.
without which we could not live one day.

That which is pretended, and claimed by some, wherein indeed binding
Conscience by any Laws and constitutions, not from God, Col. 2. 20. 21 22.

2. There is a Liberty in the family of God, as well as a liberty from the
family of Satan; Sons are free: their obedience is a free obedience, They have
the spirit of the Lord, and where he is, there is Liberty: 2 Cor. 3. 18. as a
spirit of Adoption he is opposed to the spirit of bondage, Rom: 8. 15. Now this
liberty of our fathers family, which we have as Sons and children, being
adopted by Christ through the spirit, is; a spiritual largeness of heart,
whereby the children of God do freely, willingly, genuinely, without fear,
terror, bondage, and constraint go forth unto all holy obedience in Christ.

I say this is our Liberty in our Fathers family; what we have liberty from,
has been already declared.

There be Gibeonites outwardly attending the family of God: that do the
service of his house, as the drudgery of their lives; the principle they yield
obedience upon, is a spirit of bondage unto fear, Romans 8. 15. the Rule they
do it by, is the Law in its dread and rigor, exacting it of them to the
utmost, without mercy and mitigation; the End they do it for, is to fly from
the wrath to come, to Pacify conscience, and seek righteousness as it were by
the works of the Law. Thus servilely, painfully, fruitlessely, they seek to
serve their own conviction all their days.

The Saints, by Adoption have a largeness of heart in all holy obedience,
says David, I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts, Amplitude, or
Son-like freedom of the spirit in obedience, consists in sundry things.

1. In the Principles of all spiritual service, which are Life, and Love: The
one respecting the matter of their obedience, giveing them power, the other
respecting the manner of their obedience giving them Joy, and sweetness in it.
It is from Life, that gives them power as to the matter of obedience, Romans 8.

3. The Law of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, sets them free from the law
of sin and death: it frees them, it carries them out to all obedience freely.
So that they walk after the Spirit, v. 1. that being the Principle of their
workings, G. 2. 20. Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the
flesh, is by the faith of the Son of God: the life which I now live in the
fiesh, that is the obedience which I yield unto God, whilst I am in the flesh,
it is from a Principle of life, Christ living in me: There is then power for
all living unto God, from Christ in them, the spirit of life, from Christ
carrying them out thereto. The fruits of a dead root, are but dead
excrescencies; living Acts are from a principle of life.

Hence you may see the difference between the liberty that slaves assume, and
the liberty which is due to children.

1. Slaves take liberty from duty; children have liberty in duty; there is not
a greater mistake in the world, then that the liberty of Sons in the house of
God, consists in this, they can perform duties, or take the freedom to omit
them; they can serve in the family of God; that is, they think they may if they
will, and they can choose whether they will or no. This is a liberty stolen by
Slaves, not a liberty given by the Spirit unto Sons.

The liberty of Sons is in the inward spiritual freedom of their hearts
naturally and kindly going out in all the ways and worship of God. When they
find themselves straitened, and shut up in them, they wrestle with God for
enlargement, and are never contented with the doing of a duty, unless it be
done as in Christ, with free genuine and enlarged hearts. The liberty that
servants have is from duty, the liberty given to Sons is in duty.

2. The liberty of slaves or servants is from mistaken deceiving conclusions;
The liberty of Sons is from the power of the indwelling Spirit of Grace; or the
liberty of servants is from outward dead conclusions, the liberty of Sons from
an inward living principle.

2. Love, as to the manner of their obedience gives them delight and joy: Ioh.
14. 15. If ye love me (says Christ keep my Commandments: Love is the bottom
of all their dutys: hence our Savior resolves all obedience into the love of
God, and our Neighbor: and Paul upon the same ground tells us, that Love is
the fullfilling of the Law: 1 Cor. 13. 10. where love is in any duty it is
complete in Christ. How often does David even with admiration express this
principle of his walking with God: Oh (says he) how I love thy Commandments.
This gives Saints delight, that the Commandments of Christ are not grievous to
them: Jacobs hard service was not grievous to him, because of his love to
Rachel: No duty of a Saint is grievous to him, because of his love to Christ:
They do from hence all things with delight and Complacency: Hence do they
long for advantages of walking with God, pant after more ability, and this is a
great share of their Son-like freedom in obedience. It gives them joy in it: 1
John 4. 18. there is no fear in Love, but perfect love casts out fear: when
their soul is acted to obedience by love; it expells that fear which is the
issue of bondage upon the Spirit. Now when there is a concurrence of these two,
Life, and Love, there is freedom, liberty, largeness of heart, exceedingly
distanced from that straight, and bondaged frame, which many walk in all their
days, that know not the Adoption of Sons.

2. The Object of their Obedience is represented to them as desirable, when to
others as it is terrible. In all their approaches Father; they call him Father;
Gal. 4. 6. not in a form of words, but in the spirit of Sons. God in Christ is
continually before them not only as one deserving all the honor and obedience
which he requires, but also as one exceedingly to be delighted in, as being all
sufficient to satisfy and satiate all the desires of the soul; when others
napkin their tallents, as having to deal with an austeer master, they draw out
their strength to the uttermost, as drawing nigh to a gracious rewarder. They
go from the principle of life, and love to the bosom of a living and loving
Father; they do but return the strength they do receive unto the fountain,
unto the Ocean.

3. Their Motive unto obedience is love 2 Cor. 5. 15. love they are effectually
carried out by love, to give up themselves unto him who is love: What a
freedom is this, what a largeness of spirit is in them who walk according to
this rule? Darkness, fear, bondage, conviction, hopes of Righteousness,
accompany others in their ways: The Sonns by the Spirit of Adoption have light,
Love with complacency in all their walkings with God; the world is an
universal stranger unto the frame of children in their Fathers house.

4 The Manner of their obedience is willingness. They yield themselves unto
God, as those that are alive from the dead. Romans 6. 13. they yield themselves,
give up themselves willingly, cheerfully, freely; with my whole heart (says
David): Romans 12. 1. they present themselves a living sacrifice: and a willing
sacrifice.

5. The Rule of their walking with God is the law of divested of all its
terrifying, threatening, killing, condemning, cursing power, and rendered in the
blood of Jesus, sweet, tender, useful, directing, helpful as a rule of
walking in the life they have received, not the way of working for the life
they have not. I might give more instances. These may suffice to manifest that
liberty of Obedience in the family of God which his sons, and daughters have,
that the poor convinced Gibeonites are not acquainted withal.

2. The second thing which the Children of God have by Title. They have Title
and right to all the privileges and advantages of the family whereinto they
are translated; This is the pre-eminence of the true sons of any family. The
ground on which Sarah pleaded the ejection of Ishmael was, that he was the son
of the bondwoman: Genesis 21. 10 and so no genuine Child of the family, and
therefore could have no right of heir ship with Isaak. The Apostles arguing is,
we are no more servants but Sons, and if Sons then heirs Romans 8. 14, 16. then
have we right and Title, and being not borne hereunto (for by nature we are the
Children of wrath) we have this Right by our Adoption.

Now the Saints hereby have a double right, and Title: 1 Proper and direct in
respect of spiritualls. 2. Consequentiall in respect of temporalls.

The first also, or the Title as adopted Sons unto spiritualls is in respect of
the object of it, twofold;

1. Unto a present place, name, and room in the House of

2. To a future fulness of the great inheritance of Glory, of a Kingdom
purchased for that whole family, whereof they are by Jesus Christ.

1. They have a Title unto and an interest in the whole administration of the
family of God here.

The supreme administration of the house of God in the hand of the Lord
Christ, as to the institution of ordinances and dispensation of the spirit, to
enliven and make effectual those Ordinances for the end of their institution,
is the prime Notion of this administration. And hereof they are the prime
objects: All this is for them; and exercised toward them; God has given Jesus
Christ to be the head over all things unto the Church which is his body, Ephesians.
1. 22, 23. he has made him the head over all these spiritual things,
committed the authoritative administration of them all unto him to the use and
behoof of the Church, that is the family of God. It is for the benefit and
advantage of the many sons whom he will bring unto Glory, that he does all
these things Heb. 2. 17. see Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. the aim of the Lord
Jesus in establishing Gospel Administrations, and Administrators, is for the
perfecting of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, etc. All is for them, all
is for the Family; In that is the faithfulness of Christ Exercised, he is
faithful in all the house of God Heb. 3. 2, Hence the Apostle tells the
Corinthians Ephesians. 2. v. 22, 23. of all these Gospel administrations, and
ordinances they are all theirs, and all for them. What benefit soever
redoundeth to the world by the things of the Gospel (as much does every way,)
it is engaged for it to the children of this family: This then is the aim and
intendment of the Lord Christ in the institution of all Gospel Ordinances and
administrations, that they may be of use for the House and Family of God; and
all his Children and servants therein.

It is true the word is preached to all the world, to gather in the Children of
Gods purpose, that are scattered up and down in the world, and to leave the
rest inexcusable: But the prime end and aim of the Lord Christ thereby, is to
gather in those heirs of Salvation unto the enjoyment of that feast of fat
things which he has prepared for them in his house.

Again they, and they only have right, and Title to Gospel house of God 1 Timothy 3. 15. Heb. 3. 6. herein he keeps and maintains his whole family,
ordering them according to his mind and will: Now who shall have any right in
the house of God, but only his Children? we will not allow a right to any, but
our own Children in our houses, will God think you, allow any right in his
house, but to his Children? Is it meet to take Childrens bread and to cast it
unto dogs? We shall see that none, but children have any right or Title to the
privileges and advantages of the house of God, if we consider,

1. The nature of that house, it is made up of such persons, children should
have right unto a place in it; it is composed of living stones 1 Pet. ^^5. a
chosen Generation, a roy all people, an holy Nation, a peculiar. people. v. 9.
Saints and faithful inChrist Jesus Ephesians. 1. 1. Saints, and faithful brethren
Col. 1. 2. a People that are all righteous Isa. 60. 61. And the whole fabric
of it glorious Is. 54. 11, 12, 13, 14 The way of the house is a way of
holiness which the unclean shall not pass through Chapter 35. 8. Yea expressly
they are the sons, and daughters of the Lord God Almighty, and they only 2 Cor,
6. 17, 18. All others are excluded Revel. 21, 27. It is true that oftentimes at
unawares other persons creep in into the great house of God; and so there
becomes in it not only vessels of Gold and Silver, but also of wood and clay,
etc. 2 Timothy 2. 20. But they only creep in as Jude speaks: v. 4. they have no
right nor title to it.

2. The Privileges of the House are such, as they will not suit nor profit any
other. To what purpose is it to give food to a dead man? will he grow strong by
it? will he increase upon it? The things of the family, and house of God, are
food for living souls: Now Children only are alive, all others are dead in
trespasses and sins. What will outward signs avail, if life and power be
away. Look upon what particular you please of the Saints enjoyments in the
family of God, you shall find them all suited unto Believers: and being
bestowed on the world would be a pearl in the snour of a swine.

It is then only the Sons of the family that have this Right; they have
fellowship with one another, and that fellowship with the Father and the Son
Jesus Christ: They set forth the Lords death till he come; They are entrusted
with all the Ordinances of the house, and the administration of them: and who
shall deny them the enjoyment of this right, or keep them from what Christ has
purchased for them: And the Lord will in the end give them hearts every where
to make use of this Title accordingly; and not to wander on the mountains,
forgetting their resting place.

2. They have a Title to the future fulness of the inheritance that is
purchased for this whole family by Jesus Christ So the If children then heirs
etc. All Gods Children are first borne Heb. 12. 23. and therefore are heirs:
hence the whole weight of Glory that is prepared for them, is called the
Inheritance Col. 1 12. The inheritance of the Saints in light: If you be
Christ's then are you Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the Promise Gal.
3. 29. heirs of the Promise, that is of all things promised unto Abraham in
and with Christ.

There are three things that in this regard the Children of God are said to be
heirs unto.

1 The Promise as in that place of the Gal: 3. 29. and Heb. 6. 11. God shows
to the heirs of the Promise the immutability of his Council: Abraham. Isaac,
and Jacob, are said to be hetres of the same promise, Heb. 11 9. God had from
the foundation of the world, made a most excellent promise in Christ,
containing a deliverance from all evil; and an engagement for the bestowing
all good things upon them: It contains a deliverance from all the evil which
the guilt of sin, and dominion of Satan had brought upon them, with an invest
ture of them in all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ Jesus:
hence Heb. 9. 15. The Holy Ghost calls it a promise of the eternal
inheritance. This in the first place are the adopted children of God heirs
unto. Look what ever is in the promise which God made at the beginning to
fallen man, and has since solemnly renewed, and confirmed by his Oath; they
are heirs of it, and are accepted in their claim for their inheritance in the
Court of heaven.

2. They are heirs of Righteousness, Heb. 11. 7. Noah was an Peter calls a
being heir of the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. 9. and James puts both these
together, Jam. 2. 6. heirs of the Kingdom which God has promised: that is, of
the kingdom of Grace, and the righteousness thereof, and in this respect it
is that the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 1. 11. that we have obtained an inheritance;
which he also places with the righteousness of Faith, Acts 26. 13. Now by this
righteousness, grace, and inheritance, is not only intended that
righteousness which we are here actually made partakers of, but also the end,
and accomplishment of that righteousness in glory, which is also assured in the

3d Place; They are heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. and heirs according to the
hope of eternal life, Titus 3. 7. which Peter calls an inheritance
incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1. 4. and Paul the reward of the inheritance, Col. 3. 24.
that is, The Issue of the inheritance of light, and holiness which they
already enjoy. Thus then distinguish the full salvation by Christ, into the
foundation of it, the Promises, and means of it, Righteousness and holiness,
the end of it eternal Glory; The Sons of God have a right and Title to all in
that, that they are made heirs with Christ.

And this is that which is the maine of the Saints Title and right which they
have by adoption: which in sum is, that the Lord is their portion, and
inheritance, and they are the inheritance of the Lord; And a large portion it
is that they have. The lines are fallen to them in a goodly place.

2. Besides this Principal, the adopted Sons of God have a second
consequentiall Right: a Right unto the things of this world that is, unto all
the portions of it, which God is pleased to entrust them here withal. Christ
is the heir of all things, Heb. 1. 3. All Right, and title to the things of the
Creation was lost, and forfeited by sin. The Lord by his sovereignty, had made
an original grant of all things here below for man's use; he had appointed the
residue of the works of his hands in their several stations, to be serviceable
unto his behoof. Sin reversed this whole grant, and institution: all things
were set at liberty from the subjection unto him: yet that liberty being a
taking them off from the end, to which they were originally appointed, is a
part of their vanity, and curse. It is evil to any thing to be Laid aside as
to the end, to which it was primitively appointed: by this means the whole
Creation is turned loose from any subordinate ruler; And man having lost the
whole Title whereby he held his dominion over, and possession of the creatures,
has not the least color of interest in any of them, nor can lay any claim
unto them; but now the Lord intending to take a portion to himself, out of the
lump of fallen mankind, whom he appointed heirs of Salvation, he does not
immediately destroy the works of creation, but reserve them for their use in
their pilgrimage. To this end he invests the whole right and title of them in
the second Adam, which the first had lost; he appoints him, heir of all
things. And thereupon his adopted ones, being fellow heirs with Christ, become
also to have a right and title unto the things of this creation.

To clear up this right what it is, I must give some few observations.

1. The Right they have, is not as the right that Christ has: That is
Sovereign, and supreme, to do what he will with his own: but theirs
subordinate, and such, as that they must be accountable for the use of those
things whereunto they have a right and title. The right of Christ, is the right
of the Lord of the house, the right of the Saints is the right of Servants.

2. That the whole number of the children of God have a right unto the whole
earth, which is the Lords and the fulness thereof, in these two regards.

1. He who is the Sovereign Lord of it, does preserve it merely for their use,
and upon their account: all others whatever being malae fidei possessores,
invading a portion of the Lords territories, without grant or leave from him.

2. In that Christ has promised to give them the Kingdom and dominion of it,
in such a way and manner, as in his providence he shall dispose; that is, that
the government of the earth shall be exercised to their advantage.

3. This right is a spiritual right, which does not give a civil interest,
but only sanctifies the right and interest bestowed God has providentially
disposed of the civil bounds of the inheritance of men, Acts 17. 26. suffering
the men of the world to enjoy a portion here, and that oftentimes very full,
and plenteous, and that for his childrens sake, that those beasts of the
forest, which are made to be destroyed, may not break loose upon the whole
possession. Hence

4. No one particular adopted person, has any right by virtue thereof, to any
portion of earthly things, whereunto he has not right and Title upon a civil
interest given him by the Providence of God. But

5. This they have by their Adoption, that

1. Look what portion soever God is pleased to give them, they have a right
unto it, as it is reinvested in Christ, and not as it lies wholly under the
Curse and vanity that is come upon the Creation by sin, and therefore can never
be called unto an account for usurping that which they have no right unto, as
shall all the sons of men, who violently graspe those things which God has set
at liberty from under their dominion because of sin.

2. By this their right, they are lead unto a sanctified use of what thereby
they do enjoy: in as much as the things themselves are to them pledges of the
Fathers Love, washed in the blood of Christ, and endearements upon their
spirits to live to his praise, who gives them all things rithly to enjoy.

And this is a second thing we have by our Adoption: and

They have no true, unquestionable right I say even unto the temporal things
they do possess; it is true they have a civil right in respect of others, but
they have not a sanctified right in respect of their own Souls. They have a
right and Title that will hold plea in the Courts of men, but not a right that
will hold in the court of God, and in their own Conscience. It will one day be
sad with them when they shall come to give an account of their enjoyments. They
shall not only be reckoned withal for the abuse of that they have possessed,
that they have not used, and laid it out for the glory of him whose it is but
also that they have ever laid their hands upon the Creatures of God, and kept
them from them for whose sakes alone they are preserved from destruction. When
the God of Glory shall come home to any of them, either in their consciences
here, or in the Judgment that is for to come, and speak with the terror of a
revengefull judge: I have suffered you to enjoy Corn, Wine, and Oil, a great
portion of my creatures; you have rolled your selves in wealth and prosperity,
when the right heirs of these things lived poor, and low, and mean at the
next doors; Give in now an answer what, and how you have used these things,
what have you laid out for the service and advancement of the Gospel? what
have you given unto them for whom nothing was provided? What contribution have
you made for the poor Saints? have you had a ready hand, and willing mind to
lay down all for my sake? When they shall be compelled to answer as the truth
is, Lord, we had indeed a large portion in the world, but we took it to be our
own, and thought we might have done what we would with our own, we have eat the
fat, and drank the sweet, and left the rest of our substance for our babes; we
have spent somewhat upon our lusts, somewhat upon our friends, but the truth is
we cannot say that we made friends of this unrighteous mammon, that we used it
to the advancement of the Gospel or for ministering unto thy poor Saints, and
now behold we must dye, etc. So also when the Lord shall proceed further and
question not only the use of these things, but also their Title to them, and
tell them the Earth is mine and the fulness thereof: I did indeed make an
original grant of these things to man, but that is lost by sin; I have
restored it only for my Saints, why have you laid then your fingers of prey
upon that which was not yours, why have you compelled my creatures to serve
you, and your lusts, which I had set at loose from under your dominion: Give me
my flax, my wine and wool, I Will set you naked as in the day of your birth, and
revenge upon you your rapine, and unjust possession of that which was not
yours. I say at such a time what will men do?

3. Boldness with God by Christ is another privilege of our Adoption; but
hereof I have spoke at large before, in treating of the excellency of Christ in
respect of our approach to God by Him; so that I shall not reassume the
consideration of it.

4. Affliction also as proceeding from love, as leading to Spiritual
advantages, as conforming unto Christ; as sweetened with his presence is the
privilege of children; Heb. 12 3, 4, 5, 6. but on these particulars I must not
insist.

This I say is the Head, and sourse of all the privileges fellowship with him:
fellowship in name, we are (as he is) Sons of God; fellowship in Title and
right, we are heirs, coheires with Christ; Fellowship in likeness, and
Conformity, we are predestined to be like the first borne of the family;
fellowship in honor; he is not ashamed to call us brethren; fellowship in
sufferings, he learned obedience by what he suffered; and every Son is to be
scourged that is received; Fellowship in his Kingdom; we shall reign with
him; of all which I must speak peculiarly in another place, and so shall not
here draw out the discourse concerning them any farther.

PART. III.
CHAP. I. Of Communion with the Holy Ghost.
The foundation of our communion with the Holy Ghost, Joh. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7. opened at large. (...) a comforter. who he is. The H. Gh. his own will in
his coming to us, sent also by Christ. The spirit sent as a sanctifier, and as
a comforter. The adjuncts of his mission considered. The foundation of his
mission. Ioh. 15. 26. His procession from the Father. Twofold: as to
personallity, or to office. Things considerable in his procession as to office.
The manner of his collation. He is given freely: sent, Authoritatively. The
sin against the holy G. whence unpardonable. how we ask the Spirit of the
Father. To grieve the spirit, what. powered out. How the holy Ghost is received.
By Faith: Faiths actings in receiving the H. G. His abode with us how declared.
How we may loose our comfort, whilst the comforter abides with us.

THe foundation of all our Communion with the Holy Ghost, consisting in his
mission, or sending to be our Comforter by Jesus Christ; the whole matter of
that Economy or dispensation is firstly to be proposed and considered, that so
we may have a right understanding of the truth enquired after. Now the maine
promise hereof, and the chief considerations of it, with the good received,
and evil prevented thereby, being given and declared in the beginning of the
16. Chap. of John, I shall take a view of the state of it, as there proposed.

Our blessed Savior being to leave the world, having acquainted his Disciples
among other things, what Entertainment now gave them the doleful tidings of
it, considering how sad and disperited they were upon the mention of his
departure from them. v. 1. These things have I said unto you that you should
not be offended. I have, (says he, given you an acquaintance with these things
(that is the things which will come upon you, which you are to suffer) before
hand, least you who (poor souls) have entertained expectations of another
state of affairs, should be surprised, so as to be offended at me, and my
doctrine, and fall away from me. You are now forewarned, and know what you have
to look for. Yea, says he, v. 2. having acquainted you in general, that you
shall be persecuted, I tell you plainly, that there shall be a combination of
all men against you, and all sorts of men will put forth their power for your
ruin. They shall cast you out of the Synagogue, and the time shall come, that
whosoever killes you, will think that he does God good service. The
Ecclesiastical power shall Excommunicate you, they shall put you out of their
Synagogues; and that you may not expect relief from the power of the
magistrate against their perversity, they will kill you; and that you may know
that they will do it to the purpose, without check or control, they will
think that in killing you, they do God good service, which will cause them to
act rigorously, and to the utmost.

But this is a shaking trial, might they reply: is our condition confidences,
know that their blind and desperate ignorance is the cause of their fury and
persuasion, v. 3. These things will they do unto you, because they have not
known the Father nor me.

This then was to be the state with the Disciples; but why did perplexities to
their grief and sorrow? what advantage should they obtain thereby? says their
blessed Master, v. 4. there are weighty reasons why I should tell you these
things; chiefly, that as you may be provided for them, so when they do befall
you, you may be supported with the consideration of my Deity and Omniscience,
who told you all these things before they came to pass, v. 4. but these things
have I told you, that when the time shall come, you may remember I told you of
them. But if they be so necessary, whence is it, that thou have not acquainted
us with it, all this while? why not in the beginning, at our first calling?
Even, says our Savior, because there was no need of any such thing; for,
whilst I was with you, you had protection and direction at hand. And these
things I said not at the beginning, because I was present with you: but now the
state of things is altered; I must leave you, v. 5. And for your parts, so are
you astonished with sorrow, that you do not ask me whether I go, the
consideration whereof would certainly relieve you, seeing I go to take
possession of my glory, and to carry on the work of your salvation: but your
hearts are filled with sorrow and fear, and you do not so much as enquire
after relief v. 5. 6. whereupon he adjoynes that wonderful assertion, v. 7.
Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you, that I go away;
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I
will send him unto you.

This verse then, being the peculiar foundation of what shall afterward
interpretation: and that both with respect to the preface of them, and the
asseveration in them, with the Reason annexed thereunto.

1. The first word (...) is an adversative, not excepting to any thing of what
himself had spoken before, but to their apprehension; I know you have sad
thoughts of these things, but yet, nevertheless.

2. (...) I tell you the truth. The words are exceeding Emphaticall, and denote
some great thing to be ushered in by them. First (...) I tell it you, this that
shall now be spoken; I who love you, who take care of you, who am now about to
lay down my life for you, they are my dying words, that you may believe me; I
who am truth it self, I tell you: and,

(...). I tell you the truth: you have in your sad misgiving hearts, many
misapprehensions of things; you think, if I would abide with you, all these
evils might be prevented; but alas! you know not what is good for you, nor
what is expedient; I tell you the truth; this is truth it self, and quiet your
hearts in it. There is need of a great deal of evidence of truth; to comfort
their souls that are dejected and disconsolate under an apprehension of the
absence of Christ from them, be the Apprehension true or false.

And this is the first part of the words of our Savior, the preface to what he
was to deliver to them, by way of a weighty convincing asseveration, to
disintangle thereby the thoughts of his Disciples from prejudice, and to
prepare them for the receiving of that great Truth which he was to deliver.

2. The Assertion it self follows: (...). it is expedient for you, that I go
away.

There are two things in the words. Christ's departure, and the usefulness of
it to his Disciples. For his departure, it is known what is intended by it: The
withdrawing his bodily presence from the earth after his Resurrection, the
heavens being to receive him, until the time of the restitution of all things.
For in respect Acts 3. 21.
of his Diety, and the exercise of Love and care toward them, he promised to
be with them to the end of the world, Mat. 28. last. Of this says he (...), it
conduces to your good; it is profitable for you, it is for your advantage, it
will answer the end that you aim at; that is the sense of the word, which we
have translated, expedient: it is for your profit and advantage. This then is
that, which our Savior asserts; and that with the earnestness before
mentioned, desiring to convince his sorrowful followers of the truth of it;
namely, that his departure which they so much feared, and were troubled to
think of, would turn to their profit and advantage.

3. Now although it might be expected that they should acquiesce asseveration
of truth it self, yet because they were generally concerned in the ground of
the truth of it, he acquaints them with that also; and that we may confess it
to be a great matter, that gives certainty and evidence to that proposition, he
expresses it negatively and positively; if I go not away he will not come, but
if I depart I will send him. Concerning the going away of Christ, I have spoken
before: of the Comforter his coming and sending, I shall now treat, as being
the thing aimed at.

(...): the word being of sundry significations, Translations have thought fit
not to restrain it, but do retain the Original word paracletus, so the
Syriak also: and as some think, it was a word before in use among the Jews:
whence the Chaldee Paraphrast makes use of it, Job. 16. 20. and among'st them
it signifies one that so taught others, as to delight them also in his
teaching; that is to be their Comforter. In Scripture it has two eminent
significations; an Advocate and a Comforter; in the first sense our Savior is
called (...) 1 John 2. 2. whether it be better rendered here an Advocate or a
Comforter, may be doubted.

Look into the foregoing occasion of the words which is the Disciples sorrow
and trouble, and it seems to require the Comforter; sorrow has filled your
hearts, but I will send you the Comforter; look into the next words following,
which contain his peculiar work for which he is now promised to be sent, and
they require he should be an Advocate to plead the cause of Christ, against the
world v. 8. I shall choose rather to interpret the promise by the Occasion of
it, which was the Sorrow of his Disciples and to retain the name of the
Comforter.

Who this Comforter is our Blessed Savior had before declared, Chap. 15. 26.
he is (...) the Spirit of Truth, that is the Holy Ghost, who reveals all
truth to the Sons of men. Now of this Comforter two things are affirmed,

1. That He shall come. 2. That Christ shall send him.
1. That he shall come; The Affirmative of his coming, on the performance of
that condition of it, of Christ's going away, is included in the negation of his
coming, without its accomplishment; If I go not away, he will not come; if I
do go, (...) he will come, so that there is not only the mission of Christ
but the will of the Spirit in his coming; He will come, his own will is in his
work.

2. (...), I will send him; the mystery of his sending the degrees; Chapter 14. 16.
he says I will PRAY THE FATHER, He shall send you another Comforter. In the
progress of his discourse he gets one step more upon their faith, v. 26. But
the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost whom THE FATHER WILL SEND IN MY NAME: but
Chap. 15. 26. he says I WILL SEND HIM FROM THE FATHER; and here absolutely I
WILL SEND HIM. The business of sending the Holy Ghost by Christ which argues
his personal Procession also from him, the Son, was a deep mystery which at
once they could not bear; and therefore he thus instructs them in it by
degrees.

This is the sum: the presence of the Holy Ghost with Believers as a Comforter
sent by Christ for those ends and purposes for which he is promised; is better
and more profitable for Believers then any corporeal presence of Christ can
be, now he has fullfilled the one sacrifice for sin, which he was to offer.

Now the holy Spirit is promised under a twofold consideration 1. As a Spirit
of Sanctification to the Elect, to convert them and make them Believers; 2. As
a Spirit of Consolation to Believers,
to give them the privileges of the death and purchase of Christ: it is in the
latter sense only wherein he is here spoken of; now as to his presence with us
in this regard, and the end and purposes for which he is sent, for what is
aimed at; observe,

1. The Rise and fountain of it; 2. The manner of his being given; 3. Our
manner of receiving him: 4. His abiding with us; 5. His acting in us; 6. what
are the Effects of his working in us And then how we hold Communion with him,
will from all these appear.
What the Scripture speaks to these particulars, shall briefly be considered.

1. For the fountain of his coming it is mentioned Joh. 15. 26 (...), He
proceeds from the Father; this proceeds from the Father; now there is a
twofold (...) or procession of the Spirit.

1. (...), in respect of Substance and personality.

2. (...) or dispensatory, in respect of the work of grace: of the first, in
which respect he is the Spirit of the Father and the Son, proceeding from
both eternally, so receiving his substance and personality; I speak not: It is
a business of another nature then that, I have now in hand. Therein indeed
lies the first and most remote foundation of all our distinct Communion with
him and our worship of him. But because abiding in the naked consideration
hereof, we can make no other progress, then the bare acquiescence of Faith in
the mystery revealed with the performance of that which is due to the Person,
solely on the account of his Participation of the Essence, I shall not at
present dwell upon it.

His (...) or proceeding mentioned in the place insisted on is his oeconomicall
or dispensatory proceeding for the carrying Ascension: I will send him which
proceeds, namely then when I send him. As God is said to arise out of his
place Isa, 26. 21. not in regard of any mutation in him, but of the new work
which he would effect; so it follows, the Lord comes out of his place to
punish the inhabitants of the earth. And it is in reference to a peculiar work
that he is said to proceed, namely to testify of Christ; which cannot be
assigned to him in respect of his Eternal procession but of his actual
dispensation; As it is said of Christ, He came forth from God. The single
mention of the Father in this place, and not of the Son, belongs to the
gradation before mentioned, whereby our Savior discovers this mystery to his
Disciples. He speaks as much concerning himself Joh. 16. 7. And this Relation
ad extra as they call it, of the spirit unto the Father and the Son in
respect of operation, proves his Relation ad intra, in respect of personal
procession whereof I spoke before.

Three things are considerable in the foundation of this dispensation, in
reference to our Communion with the Holy Ghost.

1. That the will of the Spirit is in the work; (...) he comes forth himself?
frequent mention is made (as we shall see afterward) of his being sent, his
being given and powered out: that it might not be thus apprehended, either that
this spirit were altogether an inferior, created Spirit, a mere servant, as
some have blasphemed, nor yet merely and principally as to his personality the
virtue of God as some have fancied; He has (...) personal properties applied
to him in this work arguing his personality and liberty; (...). He of himself
and of his own accord proceeds.

2. The Condescension of the Holy Ghost in this order of working this
dispensation, to proceed from the Father and the Son, as to this work; to
take upon him this work of a comforter, as the Son did the work of a
Redeemer, of which afterward.

3. The fountain of the whole is discovered to be the Father, that we may know
his works in the pursuit of electing love which every where is ascribed to the
Father. This is the order here intimated. 1. There is the (...) of the Father;
or the purpose of his Love the fountain of all: Then the (...) the asking of
the Son Joh 14. 15. which takes in his merit and purchase, whereunto follows
(...), or willing proceeding of the Holy Ghost And this gives testimony also,
to the Foundation of this whole discourse, namely our peculiar Communion with
the Father in Love, the Son, in Grace, and the Holy Ghost in Consolation. This
is the door and entrance of that fellowship of of the Holy Ghost, whereunto we
are called. His Gracious and blessed Will, his infinite and ineffable
condesension being eyed by Faith, as the foundation of all those Effects, which
he works in us, and Privileges whereof by him we are made partakers, our
souls are peculiarly conversant with him, and their Desires, affections, and
thankfulness, terminated in him: of which more afterward. This is the first
thing considerable is our Communion with the Holy Ghost.

2. The manner of his collaion, or bestowing; or the manner of his
Communication unto us from this fountain is hereinalso

1. The freeness of it: thus he is said to be given Joh. 14. 16. he shall give
you another comforter; I need not multiply places to this purpose. The most
frequent Adjunct of the Communication Nehem. 9. 20,
of the Spirit is this, that he is given, and received as of Gift, he will give
his holy Spirit to them that ask him: that Ioh. 14. 16. Ioh. 7. 39. 20. 22.
Acts 2. 28. 5. 32. 8. 15. 10. 47. 15. 8. 19. 2. Romans 5. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 11. 6. 19.
12. 7. 1 These. 4. 8. 1 Ioh. 4. 14.
which is of gift is free, the Spirit of grace is given of grace: And not only
the Spirit of Sanctification, or the Spirit to Sanctify and convert us, is a
gift of free grace, but in the sense whereof we speak in respect of consolation
he is of gift also; he is promised to be given unto Believers. Hence the Spirit
is said to be received by the Gospel, not by the Law, Gal. 3. 2 that is of
mere grace and not of our own procuring. And all his workings are called (...),
free donations. He is freely bestowed and freely works: and the different
measures wherein he is received for those ends and purposes of consolation
which we shall consider, by Believers, which are great, various and
unexpressable, arise from hence that we have him by donation, or freegift. And
this is the Tenor whereby we hold and enjoy him: a Tenor of free donation. So
is he to be eyed, so to be asked, so to be received. And this also faith takes
in, and closes withal, in our Communion with the Comforter. The Conjunction
and accord of his Will, with the Gift of Father and Son: The one respecting
the distinct operation of the Deity in the Person of the Holy Ghost; the other
the economy of the whole Trinity, in the work of our Salvation by Jesus
Christ. Here the Soul rejoices its self in the Comforter; that he is willing
to come to him, that he is willing to be given him. And seeing all is Will and
Gift, Grace is magnifyed on this account.

2. The Authority of it! thence he is said to be SENT; send him in my name: and
Chap. 15. 26. I will send him unto you from the Father, and him will I send to
you chap 16. 17. This mission of the holy Ghost by the Father and the Son, as
it answers the order of the persons subsistence in the blessed Trinity, and his
procession from them both, so the order voluntarily engaged in by them, for the
accomplishment, (as was said) of the work of our Salvation. There is in it, in
a most special manner the Condescension of the Holy Ghost in his Love to us,
to the Authoritative delegation of Father, and Son, in this business: which
argues not a disparity dissimilitude, or inequality of Essence, but of Office,
in this work: It is the Office of the Holy Ghost to be an Advocate for us, and
a Comforter to us; in which respect, not absolutely, he is thus sent
Authoritatively by Father and Son: It is a known maxim, that Inaequalitas
officii non tollit aequalitatem naturae: This subjection (if I may so call it)
or inequality in respect of office does no way's prejudice the equality of
nature which he has with Father and Son, no more then the mission of the Son
by the Father does his. And on this Authoritative mission of the Spirit, does
the right Apprehensions of many mysterys in the Gospel, and the ordering of
our hearts in Communion with him depend.

Hence is the sin against the Holy Ghost (what it is I do unpardonable; and
has that Adjunct of Rebellion put upon it, that no other sin has: namely
because he comes not, he acts not in his own name only, though in his own also,
but in the name and Authority of the Father and Son, from and by whom he is
sent; and therefore to sin against him, is to sin against all the Authority
of God, all the Love of the Trinity, and the utmost condescension of each
person to the work of our Salvation. It is I say from the Authoritative
mission of the Spirit that the sin against him is peculiarly unpardonable; It
is a sin against the recapitulation of the love of the Father, Son, and Spirit.
And from this consideration, were that our present business, might the true
nature of the sin against the Holy Ghost be investigated. Certainly it must
consist in the contempt of some operation of his, as acting in the name and
Authority of the whole Trinity, and that in their ineffable condescension to
the work of Grace. But this is of another Consideration.

2. On this account, we are to pray the Father and the Son, your Heavenly
Father will give his holy Spirit to them that ask him: now the Holy Ghost
being God, is no less to be invocated, prayed to, and called on, then the
Father and Son, as elsewhere I have proved; how then do we ask the Father for
him, as we do in all our Supplications, seeing that we also pray that he
himself would come to us visit us, and abide with us? In our prayers that are
directed to himself, we consider him as essentially God over all blessed for
evermore; we pray for him from the Father and Son, as under this mission and
delegation from them. And indeed God having most plentifully revealed himself
in the order of this dispensation to us, we are (as Christians generally do,)
in our Communion to abound in answerable addresses; that is not only to the
Person of the holy Ghost himself, but properly to the Father and Son, for him
which refers to this dispensation.

3. Hence is that great weight in particular laid upon our grieving the spirit,
Ephesians. 4. 30. because he comes to us in the name, with the Love, and upon the
condescension of the whole blessed Trinity. To do that which might grieve him
so sent, on such an account, for that end and purpose which shall afterward be
mentioned, is a great aggravation of sin. He expects cheerful entertainment
with us, and may do so justly upon his own account; and the account of the work
which he comes about: but when this also is added; that he is sent of the
Father, and the Son, commissioned with their Love and Grace, to communicate
them to their souls, this is that which is, or ought to be of unspeakable
esteem with Believers. And this is that second thing expressed in the manner
of his communication, he is sent by Authority.

He is said to be powered out, or shed on us, Titus 3. 6. (...), richly powered
out upon us, or shed on us abundantly: And this was the chief expression of
his communication under the old Testament, the mystery of the Father and the
Son, and the matter of commission and delegation being then not so clearly
discovered, Isaiah 32. 15. until the spirit be powered on us from on high, and
the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a
forest; that is, 'till the Gentiles be called, and the Jews rejected: and
chap. 43 3 I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy
offspring, that eminent place of Zech. 12. 10. is allwaies in our thoughts. Now
this expression, as is known, is taken from the allusion of the spirit unto
water: and that in relation to all the uses of water both natural and
Typical: a particular relation of them, I cannot now insist on: perhaps
efficacy and plenty are chiefly intended.

Now this threefold expression of giving, sending, and pouring properties of
the Covenant of grace.

1. That it is free, he is given. 2. That it is orderly, ordered in all things
and sure; from the love of the Father, by the procurement of the son; and
thence is that variety of expression, of the Fathers sending him, and the Son's
sending him from the Father; he being the gift of the Father's love, and the
purchase of the blood of the son; 3. The efficacy of it, as was last
observed. And this is the second thing considerable.
3. The third, which is our receiving him, I shall speak more briefly of. That
which I first proposed, of the spirit considered Sanctification, and a spirit
of consolation, is here to be minded. Our receiving of him, as a spirit of
sanctification is a mere passive reception, as a vessel receiv's water. He
comes as the wind on Ezechiel's dead bones, and makes them live. He comes into
dead hearts, and quickens them, by an act of his Allmighty power: but now as he
is the spirit of consolation, it is otherwise; in this sense our Savior tells
us that the world cannot receive him, Ioh. 14 17. the world receives him not,
because it sees him not, nor knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with
you, and abides in you. That it is the spirit of consolation, or the spirit
for consolation that here is promised, is evident from the close of the verse
where he is said, then to be in them, when he is promised to them. He was in
them as a spirit of quickening and sanctification when promised to them, as a
spirit of comfort and consolation, to abide with them for that purpose. Now the
power, that is here denied to be in the world, with the reason of it, that they
cannot receive the spirit, because they know him not, is ascribed to Believers;
they can receive him, because they know him. So that there is an active power
to be put forth in his reception for consolation, though not in his reception
for Regeneration and Sanctification. And this is the power of faith, so Gal. 3.
2. they received the spirit by the hearing of the Faith; the Preaching of the
Gospel begetting faith in them, enabled them to receive the Spirit. Hence
believing is put as the qualification of all our receiving the holy Ghost, Joh.
7. 39. this he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive: it is Believers that thus receive the Spirit; and they receive him by
Faith: now there are three special acts of Faith, whereby it goes forth in the
receiving of the spirit, I shall but name them.

1. It considers the spirit in the Economy before described, as promised. It
is Faith alone, that makes profit of the benefit of the spirit of that promise,
Ephesians: 2. 13. the spirit that in the covenant is promised, and we receive the
promise of the spirit through Faith, Gal. 3. 14. so that the receiving of the
Spirit through Faith, is the receiving of him as promised: faith eyes the
promise of God, and of Jesus Christ, of sending the spirit for all those ends,
that he is desired: thus it depends, waits, mixing the promise with it self,
until it receive him.

2. By Prayer: He is given as a spirit of supplication, that we may ask him as
a spirit of consolation, Luke 11. 13. and indeed this asking of the Spirit of
God, in the name of Christ, either directly or immediately, or under the name
of some fruit and effect of him, is the chiefest work of faith in this World.

3. It cherishes him, by attending to his motions, improving his actings
according to his mind and will: which is all I shall say to this third thing,
or our receiving of the Spirit, which is sent of Jesus Christ; we do it by
faith, looking on him as purchased by Jesus Christ, and promised of the Father,
we seek him at the hands of God, and do receive him.

4. The next considerable thing, is his abode with us; now this is two ways
expressed in the Scripture; 1. In general, as to abide with us; 2. In
particular as to the manner of its abiding, it is by inhabitation or
indwelling. Of the inhabitation of the spirit, I have spoken Persev. of Saints
chapter 8.
fully elsewhere, nor shall I now insist on it: only whereas the spirit, as
has been observed, is considered as a spirit of sanctification, or a spirit of
consolation: He is said to dwell in us chiefly or perhaps solely, as he is a
spirit of sanctification; which is evident from the work he does, as
indwelling; He quickneth and sanctifies, Romans 8. 11. and the manner of his
indwelling, as in a Temple, which he makes holy thereby, 2 Cor. 6. and his
permanency in his so doing, which, as is evident, relates to sanctification
only: but yet the general notion of it in abiding, is ascribed to him as a
Comforter, Joh. 14. 16. he shall abide with you for ever; now all the
difficulty of this promise lies in this, that whereas the spirit of
sanctification dwells in us allwaies, and it is therefore impossible that we
should loose utterly our holiness; whence is it; that, if the Comforter abide
with us for ever, we may yet utterly loose our Comfort? a little to clear this
in our passage.

1. He is promised to abide with the Disciples for ever, in opposition to the
abode of Christ: Christ in the flesh, had been leaving them, and going to his
Father. He had been the comforter immediately himself for a season, but is now
upon his departing; wherefore promising them another comforter, they might
fear that he would even but visit them for a little season also, and then
their condition would be worser then ever. Nay but says our Savior fear it
not, this is the last dispensation: there is to be no Alteration, when I am
gone, the Comforter is to do all the remaining work: there is not another to
be looked for, and I promise you him; nor shall he depart from you, but
allwaies abide with you.

2. The Comforter may allwaies abide with us, though not comfort us, He who is
the comforter may abide, though he do not always that work: for other ends
and purposes he is always with us, as to sanctify and make us holy So was the
case with David, Psalm. 51. 11, 12. take not thy holy spirit from me, the holy
spirit of sanctification was still with David, but says he restore unto me the
joy of thy salvation, that is, the spirit of Consolation; that was lost, when
the promise was made good in the abode of the other.

3. The comforter may abide as a Comforter, when he does not actually comfort
he soul; in truth as to the Essence of Holiness, dwell in us, but withal he
must make us holy, for the Temple of God is holy; but as to his comforting, his
actings therein, are all of his Sovereign will, so that he may abide, and yet
no actually comfort us.

4. The Spirit often works for it, and tenders consolation to receive it; the
well is nigh, and we see it not: we refuse to be comforted: I told you that the
Spirit as a sanctifier comes with power to conquer an unbelieving heart; the
spirit as a comforter comes with sweetness, to be received in a believing
heart; He speaks and we believe not that it is his voice; he tenders the
things of consolation and we receive them not: my sore ran (says David,) and
my soul refused to be comforted.

5. I deny that ever the Holy Spirit does absolutely and universally
consolation: a man may be darkened, clouded, refuse comfort, actually find none,
feel none, but radically he has a foundation of Consolation, which in due
time will be drawn forth: and therefore when God promises that he will heal
sinners and restore comfort to them, as Isa. 57. 17. it is not that they were
without any, but that they had not so much as they needed, that that promise is
made. To insist on the several ways whereby men refuse comfort, and come short
of the strong consolation, which God is willing that we should receive, is not
my purpose at present. Thus then the Spirit being sent, and given, abides with
the souls of Believers: leaves them not, though he variously manifest himself
in his operations: of which in the next place.

CHAP. II. Of the Actings of the Holy Ghost in us being bestowed on us. He
works effectually, distributeth, gives.
HAving thus declared, from whence, and how the Holy Ghost is given unto us as
a spirit of Consolation actings in us, and toward us, being so bestowed on us,
and received by us Now here are two general Heads to be considered; 1. The
manner and kind of his actings in us, which are variously expressed: and 2. The
particular products of his actings in our souls, wherein we have Communion
with him. The first is variously expressed: I shall pass through them briefly.

1. He is said (...) to work effectually, 1 Cor. 12. 11. that one and self
same spirit: it is spoken there indeed in respect of his distribution of gifts:
but the way is the same for the Communication of Graces, and privileges: he
does it by working, which as it convinces his personality, especially as
considered with the words following, dividing to every man according to his
will, (for to work according to will is the the inseparable property of a
person, and is spoken expressly of God, Ephesians. 1. 11.) so in relation to v. 6.
foregoing, it makes no less evident his Deity. What he is here said to do as
the Spirit bestowed on us, and given unto us; there is he said as God himself
to do: there are diversity of operations but it is one God that works all in
all; which here in other words is; all these works the self same spirit
dividing to every man as he will; What we have then from him, we have by the
way of his energeticall working; It is not by proposing this or that Argument
to us, persuading us by these or those moral motives or inducements alone,
leaving us to make use of them as we can; But he works effectually himself,
what he communicates of Grace, or consolation to us.

2. In the same verse as to the manner of his operation, He is divides or
distributeth to every one as he will. This of distribution adds to that of
operation, choice, judgment, and freedom. He that distributes variously does
it with choice and judgment, and freedom of will: such are the proceedings of
the Spirit in his dispensations: to one he gives one thing eminently to
another another. To one in one degree, to another in another; Thus are the
Saints in his soveraginty kept in a constant dependence on him; He distributs
as he will; who should not be content with his portion? what claim can any lay
to that which he distributeth as he will? which is farther manifested,

3. By his being said to give, when and what he bestows; he bestows npo^ us, is
of his gift. And hence it is to be observed that in the Economy of our
Salvation, the acting of no one person does prejudice the frreedome and liberty
of any other; so the Love of the Father in sending the Son is free, and his
sending does no ways prejudice the liberty and Love of the Son, but that he
lays down his life freely also. So the Sati-faction and purchase made by the
Son does no way prejudice the freedom of the Fathers Grace in pardoning and
accepting us thereupon: so the Father's and Sonne's sending of the Spirit does
not derogate from his freedom in his workings, but he gives freely what he
givts. And the reason of this is, because the will of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost is essentially the same; so that in the acting of one there is the
Counsel of all, and each freely therein.

Thus in General is the manner and kind of his working in Effects, that shall
be insisted on.

That which remains in the last place for the explanation of foundation of the
Communion which we have with the Holy Ghost, is the Effects that being thus
sent and thus working he does produce; which I shall do, not casting them into
any artificial method, but taking them up as I find them lying scattered up
and down in the Scripture, only descending from those which are more general,
to those which are more particular, neither aiming nor desiring to gather all
the severalls, but insisting on those which do most obviously occur.

Only as formerly, so now you must observe, that I speak of the spirit,
principally, if not only as a comforter, and not as a sanctifier: new light,
power, vigor, as to our receivings of grace from him, belonging to that head of
sanctification, must be omitted.

Nor 2dly shall I insist on those things which the comforter does in Believers,
effect toward others, in his testifying of them, and convincing of the world
which are promised, Ioh. 15. 26. 16. 8, 9. wherein he is properly their
Advocate, but only on those which as a Comforter he works in, and toward them
on whom he is bestowed.

CHAP. III.
Of the Things wherein we have Communion with the Holy Ghost. He brings to
remembrance the things spoken by Christ: Joh. 14. 26. The manner how he does
it. The Spirit Glorifyes Christ in the hearts of Believers, Joh. 16. 14. sheds
abroad the love of God in them. The witness of the Spirit what it is. Romans 8.
16. The Sealing of the Spirit Ephesians. 1. 13. The Spirit how an earnest, on the
part of God, on the part of the Saints. Difference between the earnest of the
Spirit, and tasting of the powers of the world to come. Unction by the Spirit,
Is. 11. 2, 3. The various teachings of the Holy Ghost. How the Spirit of
Adoption; and of supplication.

THe things which in the foregoing Chapters, I called Effects of the Holy Ghost
in us, or toward us, are the communion with him; or the things wherein we hold
peculiar fellowship with him, as our comforter; These are now proposed to
consideration,

1. The first and most general is that of Ioh. 14. 26. He shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, that I have spoken to you.
There are two parts of this promise,

1. Of Teaching, 2. Of bringing to remembrance.
Of his Teaching I shall speak afterward, when I come to treat of his
anointing us.

His bringing the things to remembrance that Christ spoke, is the first
general promise of him as a Comforter. (...), make you mind all these things;
now this also may be considered two ways:

1. Merely in respect of the things spoken themselves. So our Savior here
promises his Apostles, that the holy Ghost should bring to their minds by an
immediate efficacy, the things that he had spoken, that by his inspiration they
might be enabled to write and Preach them for the good and benefit of his
Church. So Peter tells us, 1 Ep. 1. 21. Holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost; that is, in writing the Scripture. (...); borne up by
him, carried beyond themselves, to speak his words, and what he indicted to
them. The Apostles forgot much of what Christ had said to them, or might do
so; and what they did retain in a natural way of Remembrance, was not a
sufficient foundation to them to write what they so remembered, for a rule of
faith to the Church. For the word of Prophesy, is not (...), from any man's
proper impulse; it comes not from any private conception, understanding, or
Remembrance. Wherefore Christ promises that the Holy Ghost shall do this work,
that they might infallibly give out what he had delivered to them. Hence that
expression in Luke chap. 1.

3. (...), is better rendered, having obtained perfect knowledge of things from
above; noting the rise and spring of his so understanding things, as to be able
infallibly to give them out in a Rule of Faith to the Church, then the
beginning of the things themselves spoken of; which the word it self, will not
easily allow of.

2. In respect of the Comfort of what he had spoken; which great part of the
intendment of this promise. He had been speaking to them things suited for
their consolation; giving them precious promises of the supplies they should
have from him in this life; of the Love of the Father, of the Glory he was
providing for them; the sense and comfort whereof is unspeakable, and the joy
arising from them, full of Glory. But, says he, I know how unable you are to
make use of these things for your own consolation; The Spirit therefore shall
recover them upon your minds in their full strength and vigor for that end,
for which I speak them. And this is one cause why it was expedient for
Believers that Christ's bodily absence, should be supplied by the presence of
the Spirit. Whilst he was with them, how little Efficacy on their hearts had
any of the heavenly promises he gave them? when the Spirit came, how full of
joy did he make all things to them? That which was his peculiar work, which
belonged to him by virtue of his Office, that he also might be glorified, was
reserved for him. And this is his work to the end of the World, To bring the
promises of Christ to our minds and hearts, to give us the comfort of them, the
joy and sweetness of them, much beyond that which the Disciples found in them,
when Christ in person spoke them to them; their gracious influence being then
restrained, that, as was said, the dispensation of the spirit might be
glorified; so are the next words to this promise, v. 27. My peace I leave with
you, peace I give unto you. The comforter being sent to bring what Christ said,
to remembrance, the consequent of it is Peace, and freedom from trouble of
heart: what ever peace, relief, comfort, joy, supportment, we have at any time
received from any work, promise, or thing done by Christ, it all belongs to
this dispensation of the Comforter. In vain should we apply our natural
abilities to remember, call to mind, consider the promises of Christ: Without
success would it be; it is so daily: but when the Comforter does undertake the
work, it is done to the purpose, How we have peculiar communion with him
herein; in faith and obedience, in the consolation received, in and by the
promises of him brought to mind, shall be afterward declared. This in general
is obtained. Our Savior Jesus Christ leaving the efficacy even of those
promises, which in person he gave to his Apostles in their great distress, as
to their consolation, unto the Holy Ghost, we may see the immediate spring of
all the spiritual comfort we have in this world, and the fellowship which we
have with the Holy Ghost therein.

Only here, as in all the particulars following the manner working, this thing,
is always to be borne in mind, and the interest of his Power, Will, and
Goodness in his working; He does this

1. Powerfully, or effectually. 2. Voluntarily. 3. Freely.
1. Powerfully! and therefore does comfort from the words and promises of
Christ, sometimes break in through all opposition, into the saddest and darkest
condition imaginable; it comes and makes men sing in a dungeon, rejoice in
flames, glory in Tribulation, it will into Prisons, racks, through temptations,
and the greatest distresses imaginable: whence is this? (...); the spirit works
effectually, his power is in it; he will work, and none shall let him. If he
will bring to our remembrance the promises of Christ for our Consolation,
neither Satan nor man, sin nor world, nor Death shall interrupt our comfort.
This the Saints who have Communion with the Holy Ghost, know to their
Advantage, sometimes the Heavens are black over them, and the Earth trembles
under them; public, personal calamities and distresses appear so full of
horror, and darkness, that they are ready to faint with the Apprehensions of
them. Hence is their great relief, and the retrivement of their Spirits; their
consolation nor trouble depend not on any out ward condition, nor inward frame
of their own hearts; but on the powerful and effectual workings of the Holy
Ghost; which by Faith they give themselves up unto.

2. Voluntarily: distributing to every one as he will: and therefore is this
work done in so great variety, both as to the persons, and diverse. For the
same person! full of joy sometimes in a great distress, full of consolation;
every promise brings sweetness, when his pressures are great and heavy:
another time in the least trial, seeks for comfort, searches the promise, and
it is far away. The reason is! (...). the spirit distributes as he will. And
so with diverse persons; to some each promise is full of Life and comfort;
others taste little all their days, all upon the same account. And this faith
especially regards in the whole business of consolation: it depends on the
sovereign will of the Holy Ghost; and so is not tied unto any rules, or course
of procedure. Therefore does it exercise it self in waiting upon him, for the
seasonable accomplishment of the good pleasure of his Will.

3. Freely. Much of the variety of the dispensation of Consolation by promises,
depends on this freedom of the spirits operation. Hence it is that comfort is
given unexpectedly, when the heart has all the Reasons in the World to look
for destresse and sorrow; thus sometimes it is the first means of recovering a
backsliding soul, who might justly expect to be utterly cast off. And these
considerations are to be carried on, in all the other Effects and fruits of the
Comforter; of which afterward. And in this first general Effect or work of
the Holy Ghost toward us, have we communion and fellowship with him. The Life
and Soul of all our comforts lie treasured up in the promises of Christ. They
are the breasts of all our consolation. Who knows not how powerless they are
in the bare letter, even when improved to the uttermost, by our considerations
of them, and meditation on them: as also how unexpectedly they sometimes break
in upon the soul, with a conquering, endearing Life and vigor: Here Faith
deals peculiarly with the Holy Ghost: It considers the promises themselves;
looks up to him; waits for him, considers his appearances: in the word
depended on, ownes him in his work and Efficacy. No sooner does the soul begin
to feel the life of a promise, warming his heart, relieving, cherishing,
supporting, delivering from fear, entanglements, or troubles, but it may, it
ought to know, that the Holy Ghost is there; which will add to his joy, and
lead him into fellowship with him.

2. The next general work seems to be that of Joh. 16. 14. The Comforter
shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you.
The work of the spirit is to glorify Christ: whence by the way, we may see how
far that spirit is from being the comforter, who sets up himself in the
room of Christ; such a spirit as says, He is all himself: for as for him
that suffered at Jerusalem, it is no matter that we trouble our selves about
him: this spirit is now all. This is not the Comforter; His work is to glorify
Christ, him that sends him. And this is an evident sign of a false spirit;
what ever its pretense be, if it glorify not that Christ, who was now speaking
to his Apostles; and such are many that are gone abroad into the World. But
what shall this spirit do, that Christ may be glorified, He shall (says he)
take of mine, (...); what these things are, is declared in the next verse; all
things that the Father has are mine, therefore I said, he shall take of mine.
It is not of the Essence, and essential properties of the Father and Son, that
our Savior speaks; but of the Grace which is communicated to us by them. This
Christ calls my things, being the fruit of his purchase and mediation: on which
account he says, all his Fathers things are his; that is, the things that the
Father in his Eternal love, has provided to be dispensed in the blood of his
Son, all the fruits of Election: these, said he, the comforter shall receive:
that is they shall be committed unto him, to dispose for your good, and
advantage, to the end before proposed. So it follows (...), He shall show or
declare, and make them known to you. Thus then is he a Comforter. He reveals
to the souls of Believers, the good things of the Covenant of Grace, which the
Father has provided, and the Son purchased. He shows to us Mercy, Grace,
Forgiveness, Righteousness, Acceptance with God; lets us know that these
are the things of Christ, which he has procured for us, shows them to us for
our comfort and establishment. These things, I say, he effectually declares to
the souls of Believers; and makes them know them for their own good: know them
as originally the things of the Father, prepared from eternity in his Love and
Good Will; as purchased for them by Christ, and laid up in store in the
Covenant of Grace, for theiruse. Then is Christ magnified and glorified in
their hearts: then they know what a Savior and Redeemer he is. A soul does
never glorify or honor Christ upon a discovery, or sense of the Eternal
Redemption he has purchased for him, but it is in him a peculiar Effect of the
Holy Ghost as our Comforter. No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord but by the
Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3.

3. He sheds abroad the Love of God in our hearts, Romans 5. 5. That Love of God
to us, not our Love to God, which is here intended, the context is so clear,
as nothing can be added thereunto: now the Love of God is either of Ordination
or of Acceptance: The love of his purpose to do us good, or the Love of
Acceptance, and approbation with him, both these are called the Love of God
frequently in Scripture, as I have declared. Now how can these be shed abroad
in our hearts? not in themselves, but in a sense of them; in a spiritual
apprehension of them; (...), is shed abroad, the same word that is used
concerning the Comforter being given us, Titus 2. 6. God sheds him abundantly,
or powers him on us; so He sheds abroad, or powers out the Love of God in our
hearts. Not to insist on the expression, which is Metaphorical; the business
is, that the Comforter gives a sweet and plentiful Evidence and persuasion of
the Love of God to us, such as the soul is taken, delighted, satiated withal.
This is his work, and he does it effectually. To give a poor sinful soul a
comfortable persuasion, affecting it throughout, in all its faculties and
affections, that God in Jesus Christ loves him, delights in him, is well
pleased with him, has thoughts of tenderness and kindness toward him; to
give, I say, a soul an overflowing sense hereof, is an unexpressible mercy.

This we have in a peculiar manner by the H. Gh: it is his proper work: as all
his works, are works of Love and kindness, so this of communicating a sense of
the Love of the Father, mixes it self with all the particulars of his actings.
And as we have herein peculiar communion with himself; so by him we have
communion with the Father; even in his Love, which is thus shed abroad in our
hearts: so not only do we rejoice in, and Glorify the Holy Ghost which does
this work, but in him also whose love it is. Thus is it also in respect of the
Son; in his taking of His, and showing of it unto us, as was declared. What
we have of heaven in this World, lies herein: and the manner of our fellowship
with the Holy Ghost on this account, falls in with what was spoken before.

4. Another Effect we have of his, Romans 8. 16. The spirit it self bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the Children of God. You know whose
Children we are by nature; children of Satan, and of the curse, or of wrath. By
the Spirit we are put into another capacity, and are Adopted to be the children
of God, inasmuch as by receiving the spirit of our Father, we become the
children of our Father. Thence is he called v. 15. the Spirit of Adoption. Now
sometimes the soul, because it has somewhat remaining in it, of the principle
that it had in its old condition, is put to Question, whether it be a child of
God or no, and thereupon as in a thing of the greatest importance, puts in its
claim, with all the Evidences that it has, to make good its Title. The spirit
comes and bears witness in this case. An allusion it is to judicial
proceedings in point of Titles and Evidences. The Judge being set, the person
concerned lays his claim, produces his Evidences and pleads them; his
Adversaries endeavoring all that in them lies, to invalidate them, and
disanull his plea, and to cast him in his claim: In the midst of the trial,
a person of known and approved integrity comes into the Court, and gives
Testimony fully and directly on the behalf of the claimer, which stops the
mouths of all his Adversaries, and filles the man that pleaded, with joy and
satisfaction. So is it in this case. The soul by the power of its own
Conscience, is brought before the Law of God: there a man puts in his plea,
that He is a Child of God, that he belongs to Gods family, and for this end
produces all his Evidences, every thing, whereby Faith gives him an interest
in God. Satan in the mean time opposes with all his might; sin and Law
assist him: many flawes are found in his Evidences; the Truth of them all is
questioned, and the soul hangs in suspense as to the issue. In the midst of
the plea and contest, the Comforter comes; and by a word of promise; or
otherwise, overpowers the heart with a comfortable persuasion, (and bears down
all objections) that his plea is good and that he is a child of God. And
therefore it is said of him, (...): When our Spirits are pleading their Right
and Title, He comes in and bears witness on our side: at the same time,
enabling us to put forth acts of filial obedience; kind and Child like, which
is called crying Abba father. Remember still the manner of the Spirit's working
before mentioned; that he does it effectually, voluntarily, Gal. 4. 6.
and freely. Hence sometimes the dispute hangs long; the cause is pleading many
years: The Law seems sometimes to prevail; sin and Satan to rejoice; and the
poor soul is filled with dread about its inheritance, perhaps its own
witness, from its Faith, Sanctification, former experience, keeps up the plea
with some life and comfort; but the work is not done, the conquest is not fully
obtained, until the Spirit who works freely and effectually, when and how he
will, comes in with his Testimony also: clothing his power with a word of
promise, he makes all parties concerned to attend unto him, and puts an end to
the Controversy.

Herein he gives us holy Communion with himself. The soul knows his voice
when he speaks: nec hominem sonat. There is something too great in it, to be
the Effect of a created power. When the Lord Jesus Christ, at one word stilled
the raging of the Sea and Wind, all that were with him, knew there was Divine
power at hand: Math. 4. 39. And when the Holy Ghost by one word stills the
tumults and storms that are raised in the Soul, giving it an immediate calm
and security, it knows his divine power, and rejoices in his presence.

5. He seals us. We are sealed by the holy Spirit of promise Ephesians. sealed to
the day of redemption; chap. 4. 30. I am not very clear in the certain
peculiar intendment of this Metaphor, what I am persuaded of the mind of God in
it, I shall briefly impart. In a seal two things are Considered,

1. The nature of it. 2. The use of it.
The nature of sealing consists in the imparting of the image or character of
the seal to the thing sealed; This is to seal a thing; to stamp the
character of the seal on it. In this sense the effectual Communication of the
image of God unto us, should be our sealing. The Spirit on Believers really
communicating the image of God in Righteousness and true Holiness unto the
Soul, seals us. To have this stamp of the Holy Ghost, so as to be an
evidence unto the soul that it is accepted with God, is to be sealed by the
spirit; taking the Metaphor from the nature of sealing. And in this sense is
our Savior Mich. 5. 4.
said to be sealed of God: Joh. 6. 27. even from that impression of the power,
wisdom and majesty of God that he had upon him in the discharge of his Office.

2. The End of sealing is twofold. 1. To confirm or ratify any grant or
conveiance made in writing; In such cases men seals to make good and confirm
their grants, and when this is done they are irrevocable. Or to confirm the
testimony that is given by any one of the truth of any thing. Such was the
manner among the Jews: when any one had given true witness unto any thing or
matter, and it was received by the Judges; they instantly set their seals to
it, to confirm it in Judgment. Hence is it said, that he who receives the
Testimony of Christ, sets to his seal that God is true Joh 3. 33, The promise
is the great grant and conveiance of life and Salvation in Christ to the souls
of Believers. That we may have full assurance of the truth and irrevocablenesse
of the promise, God gives us the Spirit to satisfy our hearts of it; and thence
is he said to seal us; by Assuring our hearts of those promises, and their
stability. But though many Expositors go this way, I do not see how this can
consist with the very meaning of the word: It is not said that the promise is
sealed, but that we are sealed, and when we seal a deed or grant to any one,
we do not say the man is sealed, but the deed or grant.

2. To appropriate, distinguish or keep safe; this is the end of fealing; men
set their seals on that, which they appropriate, and desire to keep safe for
themselves: so evidently in this sense, are the servants of God said to be
sealed Revel. 7. 4. that is, marked with Gods mark, as his peculiar ones, for
this sealing answers to the setting of a mark Ezekiel. 9. Then are Believers
sealed when they are marked for God, to be heirs of the purchased inheritance,
and to be preserved to the day of Redemption. Now if this be the sealing
intended, it denotes not an act of sense in the heart but of security to the
person: The Father gives the Elect into the hands of Christ to be redeemed:
having redeemed them in due time, they are called by the Spirit, and marked for
God, and so give up themselves to the hands of the Father.

If you ask now which of these senses is chiefly intended in this expression
of our being sealed by the Holy Ghost; I answer the first, not excluding the
other; we are sealed to the Day of Redemption, when from the stamp, image, and
Character of the Spirit upon our souls, we have a fresh sense of the love of
God given to us with a comfortable persuasion of our acceptance with Pers. of
Saints cap.
him. But of this whole matter I have treated at large elsewhere.

Thus then the Holy Ghost communicates unto us his own likeness, which is also
the image of the Father and the Son. We are changed into this image by the
Lord the Spirit: 2 Cor. 3. 18. And herein he brings us into fellowship with
himself. Our likeness to him, gives us boldness with him: His work we look
for, his fruits we pray for; and when any effect of Grace, any discovery of the
image of Christ implanted in us, gives us a persuasion of our being separated
and set apart for God, we have a Communion with him therein.

6. He is an Earnest unto us 2 Cor. 1. 22. He has given the earnest of the
Spirit in our hearts: chap. 5. 5. who also has given unto us the earnest of
the Spirit: as also Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. Ye are sealed with that Holy Spirie of
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. In the two former places we
are said to have the earnest of the Spirit, in the latter the Spirit is said to
be our earnest, of the Spirit, then in the first place is as we say Genitivus
materiae; denoting not the cause but the thing it self; not the Author of the
earnest, but the matter of it. The Spirit is our Earnest, as in the last place
is expressed. The consideration of what is meant by the Spirit here, and what
is meant by an Earnest will give some insight in to this privilege, which we
receive by the Comforter.

1. What Grace, what gift of the Spirit is intended by this Earnest, some have
made enquiry, I suppose to no purpose. Spirit himself personally considered,
that is said to be this earnest. 2 Cor. 1. 22. It is God has given the earnest
of the Spirit in our hearts: an expression directly answering that of Gal. 4 6.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son, into our hearts: that is the Person
of the Spirit, for nothing else can be called the Spirit of his Son: and in
Ephesians. 1. 14. he has given the Spirit ((...) for (...)) which is that earnest.
The Spirit himself of promise is this earnest. In giving us this Spirit he
gives us this earnest.

2. An earnest it is (...), neither the Greek, nor the Latin Latins have made
words for it, from that expressed here in the greeks: arrha and arrabo. The
Greek word is but the Hebrew herabon which as some conceive came amongst them,
by the Tyrian ^erchants being a word of trade: It is by some renderd in Latin,
Pignus, a pledge: but this cannot be here intended. A pledge is that property
which any one gives, or leaves in the custody of another to assure him that he
will give him, or pay him some other thing; in the nature of that which we call
a pawn. Now the thing, that is here intended, is a part of that which is to
come, and but a part of it according to the trade use of the word, whence the
metaphor is taken, it is excellently rendered in our Language an earnest. An
earnest is part of the price of any thing, or part of any grant, given before
hand to assure the person, to whom it is given, that at the appointed season he
shall receive the whole that is promised him.

That a thing be an earnest, it is required: 1. That is be part of the whole of
the same kind and nature with it. As we do confirmation of a promise and
appointment; first the whole is promised then the earnest is given for the good
and true performance of that promise.

Thus the Spirit is this Earnest God gives us the promise of eternal life. To
confirm this to us, he gives us his Spirit, which is as the first part of the
promise, to secure us of the whole. Hence he is said to be the earnest of the
inheritance that is promised, and purchased. And it may be considered how it
may, be said to be an Earnest on the part of God, who gives him, and on the
part of Believers who receive him.

1. He is an Earnest on the part of God, in that God gives him as a choice part
of the Inheritance it self; and of the same kind with the whole, as an Earnest
ought to be. The full inheritance promised, is the fulness of the Spirit in
the enjoyment of God. When that Spirit which is given us in this world shall
have perfectly taken away all sin, and sorrow, and shall have made us able to
enjoy the Glory of God in his presence, that is the fullinheritance promised.
So that the Spirit given us for the fitting of us for enjoyment of God in some
measure, whilst we are here, is the earnest of the whole.

2. God does it to this purpose, to assure us and secure us of the inheritance;
having given us so many securityes without us, his Word, Promises, Covenant,
Oath, the Revelation and discovery of his faithfulness, and immutability in
them all: he is pleased also graciously to give us one within us; (Isa. 59.
21.) Heb. 6. 17, 18
that we may have all the security, we are capable of: What can more be done?
He has given us of the Holy Spirit; in him the first fruits of Glory, the
utmost pledge of his Love; the Earnest of all.

2. On the part of Believers, He is an earnest, in that he gives them an
Acquaintance with, 1. The love of God; their Acceptance favor in his sight:
that he is their Father and will deal with them as with children; and
consequently that the inheritance shall be theirs. He sends his Spirit into our
hearts cryinb ba Father. Gal. 4. 6. and what is the inference of Believers from
hence, (v. 7) then we are not servants, but sons, and if sons, then heirs of
God: the same Apostle again Romans 8. 17) If children then heirs of God and
joint heirs with Christ. On that persuasion of the Spirit, that we are
children, the inference is, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Christ: We have then a right to an inheritance and an eviction of it. This is
the use then we have of it; even the Spirit persuading us of our sonship, and
acceptance with God our Father. And what is this inheritance of Glory? if we
suffer with him, we shall be glorified together. And that the Spirit is given
for this end is attested 1 John 3. 24.) Hereby we know, that he abides in us,
by the Spirit which he has given us. The Apostle is speaking of our Union with
God, which he expresses in the words foregoing. He that keeps his
Commandments dwells in him, and he in him. Of that Union elsewhere: now this
we know from hence, even by the Spirit which he has given us. The Spirit
acquaints us with it: not that we have such an acquaintance, but that the
Argument is good and conclusive in it self; we have of the Spirit, therefore
he dwells in us, and we in him; because indeed his dwelling in us, is by that
Spirit, and our interest in him is from thence; a sense of this he gives as he
pleases.

2. The Spirit being given as an Earnest, acquaints Believers Earnest being
part of the whole, gives knowledge of it, so does the Spirit as in sundry
particulars might be demonstrated.

So is he in all respects completely an Earnest: Given of God, received by us,
as the beginning of our inheritance, and Assurance of it. So much as we have of
the spirit, so much we have of Heaven, in perfect enjoyment, and so much
evidence of its future fulness. Under this apprehension of him in the
dispensation of Grace, do Believers receive him, and rejoice in him: Every
gracious self evidencing act of his in their hearts, they rejoice in, as a
drop from Heaven; and long for the Ocean of it* Not to drive every effect of
grace to this issue, to neglect the work of the Holy Ghost in us, and toward
us.

There remains only that a difference be in a few words assigned between
Believers receiving the Spirit, 'as an Earnest of the whole inheritance; and
hypocrites, tasting of the powers of the world to come Heb. 5. 6. A test of the
powers of the world to come, seems to be the same with the earnest of the
inheritance.

But (1.) that by the powers of the world to come in that place, is intended
the joys of Heaven, there is indeed no ground to imagine: they are nowhere so
called; nor does it suitably express the glory that shall be revealed, which
we shall be made partakers of. It is doubtless the powerful Ministry of the
Ordinances and dispensations of the times of the Gospel (there, called to the
Hebrews according their own idiome) the powers or great effectual things of
the world to come; that is intended: but

2. Suppose that by the powers of the world to come the Glory of Heaven is
intended; there is a wide difference between taking a vanishing taste of it our
selves, and receiving an abiding earnest from God: To take a taste of the things
of Heaven, and to have them assured of God, as from his Love differ greatly. An
Hypocrite may have his thoughts raised to a great deal of Joy and contentment
in the consideration of the good things of the Kingdom of God for a season,
considering the things in themselves, but the Spirit as he is an Earnest gives
us a pleadge of them as provided for us in the Love of God and purchase of his
Son Jesus Christ. This by the way.

7. The Spirit anoynts Believers. We are anointed by the Spirit, 2 Cor. an
unction from the holy one, and we know all things, 1 Ioh. 2. 20. and v. 27. I
cannot intend to run this expression up into its rise and original. Also I
have done it elsewhere. The use of unctions in the Judaicall Church, the
meaning and intendment of the Types attended therewith. The Offices that men
were consecrated unto thereby, are at the bottom of this expression; nearer
the Unction of Jesus Christ, from whence he is called Messiah, and the Christ,
the whole performance of his office of Mediatorship, being called also his
Annoynting, Dan. 9. as to his furnishment for it, concurres hereunto. Christ is
said to be anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Heb. 1. 9.
which is the same with that of Ioh. 3. 34. God gives him not the spirit by
measure. We who have the Spirit by measure, are anointed with the oil of
gladness: Christ has the fullness of the Spirit, whence our measure is
communicated; so he is anointed above us; that in all things he may have the
pre-eminence. How Christ was anointed with the Spirit to his three fold
Office, of King, Priest, and Prophet, how by virtue of an unction with the same
Spirit dwelling in him, and us, we become to be intersted in these offices of
his, and are made also Kings, Priests, and Prophets to God, is known, and would
be matter of a long discourse to handle, and my design is only to communicate
the things treated of.

I shall only therefore fix on one place, where the Communications of the
spirit in this unction of Christ are enumerated, of Measure from him, and with
him, by this unction, we are made partakers: and that is Isai. 11. 2, 3. The
spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of council and might, the spirit of knowledge, and
of the fear of the Lord, etc. Many of the endowments of Christ, from the
Spirit wherewith he was abundantly anointed, are here recounted. Principally
those of Wisdom, Council, and Understanding, are insisted on: on the Account
whereof, all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are said to be in him, Col.
2. 3. and though this be but some part of the furniture of Jesus Christ, for
the discharge of his Office, yet it is such, as where our anointing to the same
purpose is mentioned, it is said peculiarly on the effecting of such
Qualifications as these; so John 2. 22, and 27. the work of the anointing, is
to teach us. The Spirit therein, is a Spirit of Wisdom and understanding of
Council, Knowledge and quick understanding in the fear of the Lord. So was
the great promise of the Comforter, that he should teach us, Joh. 14. 26. that
he should guide us into all truth; Chap. 16. 13. This of teaching us the mind
and will of God, in the manner wherein we are taught it by the Spirit, our
Comforter, is an eminent part of our unction by him, which only I shall
instance in. Give me leave to say there is a threefold teaching by the spirit.

1. A teaching by the Spirit of Conviction and illumination; so the Spirit
teaches the world, that is, many in it, by the Preaching of the Word, as he is
promised to do, Joh. 16. 8.

2. A teaching by the spirit of Sanctification, opening blind eyes, giving a
new understanding shining into our hearts, to give us a knowledge of the Glory
of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, enableing us to receive Spiritual things
in a Spiritual light. 1 Cor. 2. 8. giving a saving knowledge of the mystery of
the Gospel; and this in several degrees is common to all Believers.

3. A teaching by the Spirit of Consolation, making sweet, useful, and joyful
to the soul the discoveries that are made of the mind and Will of God in the
light of the Spirit of Sanctification. Here the oil of the Spirit, is called
the Oil of gladness That which beings Joy and Gladness with it; And the name
of Christ hereby discovered, is a sweet ointment powered forth, that causes
Souls to run after him with joy and delight, Cant. 1. 2. We see it by daily
experience, that very many have little taste and sweetness and relish in their
Souls of those Truths, which yet they savingly know and believe: But when we
are taught by this unction, oh how sweet is every thing we know of God? As we
may see in the place of John, where mention is made of the teaching of this
unction, it respects peculiarly, the Spirit teaching of us the Love of God in
Christ, the shining of his Countenance, which as David speaks, puts Gladness
into our hearts, Psalm. 4. 6, 7.

We have this then by the Spirit, he teaches us of the Love of God in Christ,
he makes every Gospel Truth as wine well refined feast of fatt things: gives
us Joy and gladness of heart with all that we know of God, which is the great
preservative of the Soul to keep it close to Truth. The Apostle speaks of our
teaching by this unction, as the means whereby we are preserved from
seduction. Indeed to know any Truth in the Power, sweetness, Joy, and
Gladness of it, is that great security of the souls constancy in the
preservation and retaining of it. They will readily change Truth for Error, who
find no more sweetness in the one then in the other. I must crave the Readers
pardon, for my brief passing over these great things of the Gospel: my
present design is rather to enumerate, then to unfold them. This one work of
the Holy Ghost might it be pursued, would require a fuller discourse then I can
allot unto the whole matter in hand. All the privileges we enjoy, all the
Dignity and honor we are invested withal, our whole dedication unto God, our
Nobility and Royalty, our interest in all Church advantages, and approaches to
God in worship, our separation from the world, the name whereby we are called,
the liberty we enjoy, all flow from this head, are all branches of this effect
of the Holy Ghost. I have mentioned only our teaching by this unction: a
Teaching that brings joy and gladness with it, by giving the heart a sense of
the Truth wherein we are instructed. When we find any of the good Truths of the
Gospel come home to our souls, with life, vigor, and power; giving us
gladness of heart, transforming us into the image and likeness of it, the
Holy Ghost is then at his work; is pouring out of his oil.

We have Adoption also by the Spirit, hence he is called the Spirit of
Adoption: that is either, he who is given to Adopted ones, Persuasion of the
Fathers Adopting Love; or else to give them the privilege it self, as is
intimated Joh. 1. 12. Neither is that opposite hereunto which we have, Gal. 4,
6. for God may send the spirit of supplication into our hearts, because we are
Sons, and yet Adopted by his spirit. But of this elsewhere.

He is also called the Spirit of Supplication, under which notion he is
promised, Zach. 12. 10. and how he affects that in us, is to pray in the Holy
Ghost. Our prayers may be considered.

1. Two ways. First as a spiritual Duty required of us by God; and so they
are wrought in us by the Spirit of Sanctification, which helps us to perform
all our duties, by exalting all the faculties of the Soul for the Spiritual
discharge of their respective offices in them.

2. As a means of retaining Communion with God, whereby we sweetly ease our
hearts in the bosom of the Father, and receive in refreshing tastes of his
Love. The Soul is never more raised with the Love of God, then when by the
Spirit taken into intimate communion with him, in the discharge of this duty:
and therein it belongs to the Spirit of Consolation, to the Spirit promised as
a Comforter. And this is the next thing to be considered in our Communion with
the Holy Ghost: namely what are the peculiar Effects which he works in us,
and toward us, being so bestowed on us, as was declared, and working in the
way and manner insisted on. Now these are, His bringing the promises of Christ
to remembrance, glorifying him in our hearts, shedding abroad the love of God
in us, witnessing with us, as to our spiritual estate and condition, sealing
us to the day of redemption; being the earnest of our Inheritance, anointing us
with privileges as to their consolation, confirming our Adoption, and being
present with us in our supplications. Here is the wisdom of Faith; to find
out, and meet with the Comforter in all these things: not to loose their
sweetness, by lying in the dark to their Author; nor coming short of the
Returns which are required of us.

CHAP. IV.
The General consequences in the Hearts of Believers, of the Effects of the
Holy Ghost before mentioned. Consolation: its adjuncts. Peace. Joy. how it is
wrought immediately, mediately.

HAving proceeded thus far in discovering the way of our Communion with the
Holy Ghost, and insisted on Effects that he produces, it remains that it be
declared, what General consequents of these Effects there are brought forth in
the hearts of Believers; and so we shall at least have made mention of the
maine heads of his dispensation, and work in the economy of Grace. Now these
(as with the former) I shall do little more then name; it being not at all in
my design, to handle the natures of them, but only to show what respects they
bear to the business in hand.

Consolation is the first of these. The Disciples walked in the fear of the
Lord, and in the Consolation of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9, 31. (...). work
toward us, and in us, we have Comfort and Consolation. This is the first
general consequent of his dispensation and work. When ever there is mention
made of Comfort and Consolation in the Scripture given to the Saints, (as there
is most frequently,) it is the proper consequent of the work of the Holy Ghost
toward them. Comfort or Consolation in general, is the setting and composing
of the Soul in rest and contentedness, in the midst of, or from troubles,
by the consideration, or presence, of some good wherein it is interested,
outweighing the Evil, trouble, or perplexity that it has to wrestle withal.
Where mention is made of Comfort and Consolation properly so called, there is
relation to trouble or perplexity; so the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 5, 6. As the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation also abounds by Christ.
Suffering and Consolation are opposed; the latter being a relief against the
former; so are all the promises of Comfort, and all the expressions of it in
the Old and New Testament, still proposed as relieses against Trouble.

And (as I said) Consolation arises from the presence or consideration greater
Good, that outballances the evil, or perplexity where with we are to contend.
Now in the Effects or acts of the Holy Ghost before mentioned, lie all the
springs of our consolation. There is no comfort but from them. And there is no
trouble, that we may not have comfort in, and against, by them. That a man may
have consolation in any condition, nothing is required, but the presence of a
good, rendering the evil, wherewith he is pressed, inconsiderable to him.
Suppose a man under the greatest calamity that can possibly befall a child of
God, or a confluence of all those evils numbered by Paul, Romans 8. 38, etc. Let
this man have the Holy Ghost, performing the works mentioned before toward him,
and in despite of all his evil, his Consolations will abound. Suppose him to
have a sense of the Love of God all the while shed abroad in his heart, a
clear witness within that he is a child of God, accepted with him, that he is
sealed and marked of God for his own, that he is an heir of all the promises
of God, and the like, it is impossible that man should not triumph in all his
tribulations.

From this Rise of all our Consolation, are those descriptions abiding, thence
it is called everlasting consolation, 2 These. 2. 16. God our Father, which has
loved us, and given us everlasting consolation; that is, Comfort, that
vanishes not; and that because it rises from everlasting things. There may be
some perishing Comfort given for a little season, by perishing things: but
abiding consolation, which we have by the Holy Ghost, is from things
everlasting. Everlasting Love, eternal Redemption, an everlasting inheritance.

2. Strong. Heb. 6. 18. That the heirs of the Promise should receive strong
Consolation. As Strong opposition lies sometimes against us, and trouble, whose
bands are strong, so is our consolation strong; it abounds, and is
unconquerable. (...): it is such, as will make its way through all opposition,
it confirms, corroborates,, and strengthens the heart under any evil, it
fortifies the soul, and makes it able cheerfully to undergo any thing that it
is called unto, and that because it is from him who is strong.

3. It is Precious. Hence the Apostle makes it the great motive unto obedience,
which he exhorts the Philipians unto, cap. 2. 1. If there be any consolation in
Christ: if you set any esteem and valuation upon this precious mercy of
consolation in Christ; by those comforts, let it be so with you.

And this is the first general consequent in the hearts of Believers, of those
great Effects of the Holy Ghost before mentioned: denomination, as to the whole
work he has to perform for us from hence; He is the Comforter; as Jesus
Christ, from the work of Redemption and salvation, is the Redeemer and Savior
of his Church. Now as we have no consolation but from the Holy Ghost: so all
his Effects toward us, have certainly this consequent more, or less, in us.
Yea I dare say; whatever we have in the kinds of the things before mentioned
that brings not consolation with it, in the root at least, if not in the ripe
fruit, is not of the Holy Ghost. The way whereby comfort issues out from those
works of his, belongs to particular cases. The fellowship we have with him,
consists, in no small portion of it, in the consolation we receive from him.
This gives us a valuation of his Love; teaches whether to make applications in
our distress; whom to pray for, to pray to, whom to wait upon in perplexities.

2. Peace arises hence also, Romans 15. 13. The God of hope fill you with all
peace in believing, that you may abound in hope through the power of the Holy
Ghost. The power of the Holy Ghost, is not only extended to hope, but to our
peace also in believing. So is it in the connection of those promises, Joh. 14.
26, 27. I will give you the Comforter: and what then? what follows that grant?
Peace, says he, I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Nor does Christ
otherwise leave his peace, or give his peace unto them, but by bestowing the
comforter on them. The peace of Christ, consists in the souls sense of its
Acceptance with God in friendship. So is Christ said to be our Peace, Ephesians. 2.
14. by slaying the enmity between God and us, and in taking away the
handwriting, that was against us, Romans 5. 1. being justified by Faith, we have
Peace with God. A comfortable persuasion of our Acceptance with God in Christ,
is the bottom of this peace, it enwrapps deliverance from Eternal wrath,
hatred, curse, condemnation; all sweetly affecting the soul and conscience.

And this is a Branch from the same Root with that foregoing. consequent of the
Effects of the Holy Ghost before mentioned. Suppose a man chosen in the
eternal Love of the Father, Redeemed by the blood of the Son; and justified
freely by the Grace of God, so that he has a right to all the promises of the
Gospel; yet this person can by no reasonings nor arguings of his own heart, by
no considerations of the promises themselves, nor of the Love of God, or Grace
of Christ in them, be brought to any establishment in peace, until it be
produced in him, as a fruit and consequent of the work of the Holy Ghost in
him, and toward him. Peace is the fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. The savor
of the spirit is life and Peace, Romans 8. 6. All we have is from him, and by him.

3. Joy also is of this number. The Spirit as was showed, is Oil of Gladness,
Heb. 1. 10. his anointing brings Gladness with it, Isa. 61. 3. the oil of joy
for mourning. The kingdom of God is righteousness, Peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost, Romans 14. 17. 1 These. 1. 6. Received the Gospel, with joy in the Holy
Ghost. with joy, as Peter tells believers, unspeakable, and full of glory. 1
Pet 1. 8. To give joy to the hearts of Believers, is eminently the work of the
Comforter, and this he does by the particulars before instanced in; that
rejoicing in hope of the Glory of God, mentioned Romans 5. 2. which carries the
Soul through any Tribulation even with glorying, has its rise in the Spirits
shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts, v 5. Now there are two ways,
whereby the Spirit works this joy in the hearts of believers.

1. He does it immediately by himself; without the consideration of any other
Acts, or works of his, or the interposition of reasonings, or deductions, and
conclusions; As in sanctification, He is a well of water springing up in the
Soul, immediately exerting his efficacy, and refreshment: so in Consolation,
He Immediately works the soul, and minds of men to a joyful rejoicing, and
spiritual frame, filling them with Exultation and gladness; not that this
arises from our reflex consideration of the Love of God; but rather gives
occasion thereunto: When he so sheds abroad the love of God in our hearts, and
so filling them with gladness by an immediate act and operation (as he caused
John Baptist, to leap for joy in the womb, upon the approach of the mother of
Jesus.) Then does the Soul even from hence, raise it self to a consideration
of the Love of God, whence joy and rejoicing does also flow. Of this joy there
is no account to be given, but that the spirit works it, when, and how he
will; he secretly infuseth, and distills it into the soul, prevailing against
all fears, and sorrows, filling it with gladness, exultations, and sometimes
with unspeakable raptures of mind.

2. Mediately by his other works toward us. He gives a Adoption and
acceptance with him: and on the consideration thereof, enables us to
re-receive it. Let what has been spoken of his operations toward us be
considered, what Assurance he gives us of the Love of God, what life* power,
and security, what pledge of our eternal welfare, and it will be easily
perceived, that he lays a sufficient foundation of this Joy, and gladness: not
that we are able upon any rational consideration, deduction, or conclusion,
that we can make from the things mentioned, to affect our hearts with the joy,
and gladness intended: it is left no less the proper work of the Spirit to
do it from hence and by the intervenience of these considerations, then to do
it immediately without them. This process of producing joy in the heart we
have. Psalm. 23. 5, 6. Thou annoyntest my head with oil. Hence is the
conclusion, as in the way of exultation, surely goodness and mercy shall
follow me. Of this effect of the Comforter see Isai. 35. throughout.

4. Hope also is an effect of those workings of the Holy Ghost in us, and
toward us. Romans 15. 13. These I say are the general consequents of the
Effects of the Holy Ghost upon the hearts of Believers; which if we might
consider the^ in their offspring with all the branches that shoot out from
them, in Exultation, Assurance, Boldness, Confidence, Expectation, glorying
and the like, it would appear how far our whole Communion with God is
influenced by them: But I only name the heads of things, and hasten to what
remains; it is the general and particular way of our Communion with the Holy
Ghost, that should nextly ensue, but that some other considerations necessarily
do here interpose themselves.

CHAP. V.
Some observations and inferences from Discourses foregoing concerning the
Spirit. The contempt of the whole Administration of the Spirit by some. The
vain pretense of the Spirit by others. The false Spirit discovered.

THis process being made, I should now show immediately dispensation of the
Holy Ghost, both on the one hand and the other, in contempt of his true work,
and pretense of that which is not; that I cannot but remark in my passage;
which to do shall be the business of this chapter.

1. Take a view then of the state and condition of them Gospel of Jesus
Christ, do yet contemn and despise his spirit as to all its operations, Gifts,
Graces and dispensations to his Churches and Saints. Whilst Christ was in the
World with his disciples, he made them no greater promise, neither in respect
of their own good, nor of carrying on the work which he had committed to them,
then this of giving them the holy Ghost. Him, he instructs them to pray for
of the Father, as that which is needful for them, as bread for children Luke
11. 13. Him he promises them, as a well of water springing up in them, for
their refreshment strengthening and consolation, unto everlasting life: John 7.
37, 38, 39. As also to carry on, and accomplish the whole work of the ministry
to them committed: John 16. 8. 9, 10. with all those eminent works and
privileges before mentioned. And upon his Ascension this is laid as the
bottom of that glorious Communication of gifts and Graces in his plentiful
effusion mentioned Ephesians. 4. 8, 11. 12. namely, That he had received of the
Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost: Act. 2. 33. and that in such an eminent
manner, as thereby to make the greatest and most glorious difference between the
Administration of the new Covenant and old. Especially does the whole work of
the ministry relate to the Holy Ghost; though that be not my present business
to evince. He calls men to that work, and they are separated unto him, Act.
13. 2. He furnishes them with gifts, and abilitys for that employment, 1 Cor.
12. 7, 8, 9, 10. Soc that the whole Religion we profess without this
Administration of the Spirit, is nothing: nor is there any fruit without it of
the Resurrection of Christ from the the dead.

This being the state of things, that in our worship of, and Obedience to God,
in our own consolation, sanctification, and ministerial employment, the Spirit
being the Principle the life, soul, the all of the whole; yet so desperate
has been the malice of Satan, and wickedness of men; that their great
endeavor has been, to shut him quite out of all Gospel administrations.

First his Gifts and Graces were not only decryed, but almost excluded from the
public worship of the Church, by the operous form of service, to be read by
the minister; which to do, is neither a peculiar gift of the Holy Ghost to
any; nor of the ministry at all. It is mavelous to consider what pleas and
pretenses were invented, and used by learned men, from its Antiquity, its
composure or approbation by Martyrs, the beauty of Uniformity in the worship of
God established, and pressed thereby etc. for the defense and maintenance of
it. But the maine Argument they insisted on, and the chief field wherein they
expatiated, and laid out all their Eloquence was, the vain babbling repetitions
and folly of men praying by the Spirit. When once this was fallen upon, all (at
least as they supposed) was carried away before them, and their Adversaries
rendered sufficiently ridiculous. So great is the cunning of Satan, and so
unsearchable are the follys of the hearts of men. The sum of all these
reasonings amount to no more but this: Though the Lord Jesus Christ has
promised the Holy Ghost to be with his Church to the end of the world, to fit
and furnish men with gifts and abilitys, for the carrying on of that worship
which he requires, and accepts at our hands, yet the work is not done to the
purpose; the gifts he bestows, are not sufficient to that end neither as to
invocation, nor doctrine, and therefore we will not only help men by our
directions but exclude them from their exercise. This I say was the sum of
all, as I could undeniably evidence. Were that my present business. What
innumerable evils ensue on this Principle, in a formal setting a part of men
to the ministry, who had never once tasted of the powers of the world to come,
nor received any gifts from the Holy Ghost to that purpose; of crying up, and
growing in, an outside pompous worship, wholly foreign to the power and
simplicity of the Gospel; of silencing, destroying, banishing men, whose
ministry was accompanied with the evidence, and demonstration of the Spirit, I
shall not need to declare. This is that I aim at, to point out the public
contempt of the Holy Ghost; his gifts and graces wtih their administration in
the Church of God, that has been found even where the Gospel has been
professed.

Again, it is a thing of most sad consideration, once to call to plead for, or
pretend to pray by the Spi^rit, was enough to render a man the object of scorn
and reproach, from all sorts of men, from the Pulpit to the stage. What? you
are full of the Spirit, you will pray by the spirit, you have the gift, come
let us hear your nonsense; And yet perhaps these men would think themselves
wronged, not to be accounted Christians. Christians, yea have not some
pretending themselves to be leaders of the flock; yea, mounted a story or two
above their brethren, and claiming a Rule and government over them, made it
their business to scoff at, and reproach the gifts of the spirit of God. And
if this were the frame of their Spirit, what might be expected from others of
professed prophannesse? It is not imaginable to what height of blasphemy, the
process in this kind amounted. The Lord grant there be nothing of this cursed
leaven still remaining amongst us. Some bleatings of ill importance are
sometimes heard. Is this the fellowship of the Holy Ghost that Believers are
called unto? Is this the due Entertainment of him whom our Savior promised to
send for the supply of his Bodily absence, so as we might be no loosers
thereby? Is it not enough that me^ should be contented with such a stupid
blindness, as being called Christians, to look no farther for this comfort
and consolation, then moral considerations common to Heathens, would lead
them, when one infinitely holy and blessed person of the Trinity, has taken
this office upon him to be our Comforter, but they must oppose and despise him
also; nothing more discovers how few there are in the world, that have interest
in that blessed name whereby we are all called. But this is no place to pursue
this discourse. The aim of this discourse is to evince the folly and madness
of men in general, who profess to own the Gospel of Chist, and yet contemn
and despise his Spi^rit, in whomsoever he is manifested. Let us be zealous of
the gifts of the Spirit, not envious at them.

From what has bin discoursed we may also try the spirits that are Ascension
of Christ. The iniquity of the generation that is past, and passing away, lay
in open cursed opposition to the holy Ghost. God has been above them wherein
they behaved themselves presumptiously. Satan, whose design, as he is God of
this world, is to be uppermost, not to dwell wholly in any form cast down by
the providence of God, has now tran formed himself into an Angel of light,
and he will pretend the Spirit also, and only. But there are seducing Spirits.
1 Timothy 4. 1. And we have a command not to believe every Spirit, but try the
Spirits 1 John 4. 16. And the reason added, is, because many false Spirits are
gone abroad in the world, that is, men pretending to the Revelation of new
Doctrines by the Spirit, whose deceipts in the first Church Paul into mateth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. Calling on men not to be shaken in mind by Spirit. The truth is
the Spirits of these days are so gross, that a man of a very easy discerning,
may find them out: and yet their delusion so strong that not a few are
deceived. This is one thing that lys evident to every eye; That according to
his wounted course, Satan with his delusions is run into an extreme to his
former actings.

Not long since, his great design (as I manifested,) was to try up Ordinances
without the Spirit casting all the reproach Spirit without and against
Ordinances, casting all reproach, and contempt possible upon them. Then he
would have a ministry without the Spirit: now a Spirit without a ministry. Then
the reading of the word might suffice without either preaching, or praying by
the Spirit: now the Spirit is enough without reading or studying the word at
all. The^ he allowed a litterall embracing of what Christ had don in the flesh,
now he talks of Christ in the Spirit only, and denis him to be come in the
flesh, the proper character of the false Spirit, we are warned of 1 John 1. 3.
Now because it is most certain that the Spirit which we are to hear and
embrace, is the Spirit promised by Christ, which is so clear, that Him the
Montanists Paraclete, yea and Mahomet pretended himself to be, and those of
our days affirm also pretend the same. Let us briefly try them by some of the
Effects mentioned, which Christ has promised to give the Holy Ghost for.

The first general Effect, as was observed, was this; that he should bring to
remembrance the things that Christ spoke for our guidance, and Consolation.
This was to be the work of the Holy Ghost penmen of the Scriptures: this is
to be his work toward Believers to the end of the world. Now the things that
Christ has spoken and did, are written that we might believe, and believing
have life through his name Ioh. 20. 30. They are written in the Scripture. This
then is the work of the Spirit, which Christ has promised, he shall bring to
our remembrances and give us understanding of the words of Christ in the
Scripture for our guidance, and consolation. Is this now the work of the
Spirit, which is abroad in the world, and perverteth many? Nothing less. His
business is to decry the things that Christ has spoken which are written in
the Word; To pretend new Revelations of his own; To lead men from the written
word, wherein the whole work of God, and all the promises of Christ are
recorded.

Again, the work of the Spirit promised by Christ, is to glorify him. He
shall Glorify me, for he shall take of mine and show it unto you. John 16. 14.
him who was to suffer at Jerusalem, who Glorious, Honorable, and of high
esteem in the hearts of Believers, and that by showing his things, his Love,
Kindness, Grace, and purchase unto them. This is the work of the Spirit. The
work of the Spirit, that is gone abroad, is to glorify it self; to decry, and
render contemptible Christ that suffered for us under the name of a Christ
without us; which it slights and despises, and that professedly. Its own
Glory, its own honor is all that it aims at: wholly inverting the order of
the divine dispensations. The fountain of all being, and lying in the Fathers
love, the Son came to glorify the Father. He still says, I seek not my own
glory, but the glory of him that sent me. The Son having carried on the work
of Redemption, was now to be glorified with the Father. So he prays that it
might be. John 17. 1. The hour is come, glorify the Son, and that with the
glrry which he had before the world, when his joint council was in the
carrying on the Fathers Love. Wherefore the Holy Ghost, is sent, and his work
is to glorify the Son; but now (as I said) we have a Spirit come forth, whose
whole business is to glorify himself; whereby we may easily know whence he is.

Furthermore, the Holy Ghost sheds abroad the love of God in our Hearts (as was
declared) and thence fills them with joy; Peace, and hope; quieting and
refreshing the hearts of them, in whom he dwells, giving them liberty and rest,
confidence and the boldness of children. This Spirit whereof men now boast is
a Spirit of bondage, whose utmost work is to make men quake, and tremble,
casting them into an unsonlike frame of Spirit driving them up and down with
horror and bondage, and drinking up their very natural spirits and making
their whole man wither away. There is scarce any one thing that more evidently
manifests the Spirit whereby some are now acted, not to be the Comforter
promised by Christ then this, That he is a Spirit of bondage and slavery, in
them in whom he is, and a spirit of cruelty; and reproach toward others, in a
direct opposition to the holy Ghost in Believers, and all the ends and
purpurposes, for which as a Spirit of Adoption and Consolation, he is bestowed
on them.

To give one instance more; the Holy Ghost bestowed on Prayer and Supplication,
as was manifested. The Spirit wherewith we have to do, pretends the carrying
men above such low and contemptible means of communion with God. In a word it
were a very easy and facile task to pass through all of the eminent effects
of the Holy Ghost, in and toward Believers; and to manifest, that the
pretending spirit of our days comes in a direct opposition, and contradiction
to every one of them. Thus has Satan passed from one extreme to another: from
a bitter wretched opposition to the Spirit of Christ, unto a cursed pretending
to the Spirit, still to the same end and purpose.

I might give sundry other instances of the contempt or abuse of the
dispensation of the Spirit. Those mentioned are the extremes whereunto all
other are, or may be reduced; and I will not farther divert from that which lys
directly in my aim.

CHAP. VI.
Of Particular Communion with the Holy Ghost. Of preparation thereunto:
Valution of the the Benefits we receive by him: what it is he comforts us in,
and against: Wherewith, How.

THe way being thus made plain for us, I come to show communion with the Holy
Ghost, as he is promised of Christ to be our Comforter, and as working out our
Consolation by the means formerly insisted on. Now, the first thing I shall
do herein; is the proposal of that, which may be some preparation to the duty
under consideration; and this by leading the souls of Believers, to a due
valuation of this work of his, toward us, whence he is called our comforter.

To raise up our hearts to this frame, and fit us for the duty

1. First, What it is he comforts us against. 2. Secondly, Wherewith he
Comforts us. 3. Thirdly, The principle of all his actings, and operations in us
for our consolation.
1. There are three things in the whole course of our pilgrimage, that the
consolations of the Holy Ghost are useful and necessary in

1. First. In our Afflictions. Affliction is part of the provision that God
has made in his house for his Children, Heb. 12. 5, 6. The great variety of
its causes, means, uses, and effects, is generally known. There is a measure
of them appointed for every one. To be wholly without them is a temptation, and
so in some measure an Affliction. That which I am to speak unto is, that in
all our afflictions, we need the consolations of the Holy Ghost. It is the
nature of man to relieve himself, when he is entangled, by all ways and
means. According as men's natural spirits are, so do they manage themselves
under pressures. The spirit of a man will bear his infirmity; at least it will
struggle with it.

There are two great evils, one of which does generally seize Afflictions, and
keep them from a due management of them. The Apostle mentions them both, Heb.
12. 5. (...). despise not the chastisement of the Lord, neither faint when thou
art reproved. One of these extremes do men usually fall into; either they
despise the Lords correction, or sink under it.

First, Men despise it. They account that which befalls them to be a light or
common thing. They take no notice of God in it. They can shift with it well
enough: they look on instruments, second causes, provide for their own defense
and vindication, with little regard to God, or his hand in their affliction.
And the ground of this is, because they take in succors in their trouble, that
God will not mix his grace withal. They fix on other remedies, then what he
has appointed, and utterly loose all the benefits and advantage of their
affliction. And so shall every man do that relieves himself from any thing,
but the consolations of the Holy Ghost.

2. Secondly, Men Faint and sink under their trialls, and afflictions, Which
the Apostle farther reproves, verse. 12. The first despise the assistance of the
Holy Ghost through pride of heart: the latter refuse it through dejectedness
of spirit, and sink under the weight of their troubles. And who almost is
there, that offends not on one of these hands? Had we not learned to count
light of the chastisements of the Lord, and to take little notice of his
dealings with us; we should find the season of our Afflictions to comprize no
small portion of our Pilgrimage.

Now there is no due management of our souls under any affliction, so that God
may have the glory of it; and our selves any spiritual benefit or emprovement
thereby; but by the consolations of the H. Ghost. All that our Savior
promises his Disciples, when he tells them of the great trialls and
tribulations they were to undergo, is, I will send you the spirit, the
comfortour, He shall give you peace in me, when in the world you shall have
trouble. He shall guide, and direct, and keep you in all your trialls. And so
the Apostle tells us it came to pass, 2 Cor. 1. 4, 5, 6. Yea and this under
the greatest afflictions will carry the soul to the highest joy, peace, rest,
and contentment. So the same Apostle, Romans 5. 3. We glory in tribulations. It
is a great expression. He had said before, that we glorted in the hope of the
glory of God, verse. 2. Yea, but what if manifold afflictions, and tribulations
befall us? why? even in them also we glory, says he, We glory in our
tribulations; But whence is it, that our spirits are so borne up, to a due
management of afflictions, as to glory in them in the Lord? He tells us, verse.
5. It is from the shedding abroad of the Love of God in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost. And thence are Believers said to receive the word in much affliction,
with joy of the Holy Ghost. 1 These. 1 6. And to take joyfully the spoiling of
their goods. This is that I aim at; There is no management, nor improvement of
any Affliction, but merely and solely, by the Consolations of the Holy Ghost.
Is it then of any esteem or value unto you, that you loose not all your
trialls, temptations, and afflictions, learn to value that whereby alone they
are rendered useful.

2. Sin is the second burden of our lives, and much the greatest; man stayer
under the Low, who having killed a man at unawares, and brought the guilt of
his blood upon him self, fled with speed for his deliverance to the City of
refuge: our great and only refuge from the guilt of sin, is the Lord Jesus
Christ in our flying to him, does the spirit administer consolation to us. A
sense of sin fills the heart with troubles and disquietnesse; it is the Holy
Ghost, which gives us peace in Christ. That gives an apprehension of wrath, the
Holy Ghost sheds abroad the Love of God in our hearts. From thence does Satan,
and the Low accuse us, as objects of Gods hatred, the spirit bears witness
with our spirits, that we are the Children of God. There is not any one engine
or instrument, that sin uses, or sets up against our peace, but one effect or
other of the Holy Ghost toward us, is suited and fitted to the casting of it
down.

In the whole course of our obedience are his consolations necessary also; That
we may go through with it cheerfully, willingly, communion with this blessed
comforter. In a word, in all the concernments of this life, and in our whole
expectation of another, we stand in need of the consolations of the Holy Ghost.

Without them, we shall either despise afflictions, or faint under

Without them, sin will either harden us to a contempt of it, or cast us down
to a neglect of the remedies, graciously provided against it.

Without them, duties will either puff us up with pride, or leave us without
that sweetness which is in new obedience.

Without them, prosperity will make us carnal, sensual, and to take up our
contentment in these things, and utterly weaken us for the trialls of adversity.

Without them, the comforts of our Relations, will separate us from God, and
the loss of them make our hearts as Nabals.

Without them, the calamity of the Church will overwhelme us; and the
prosperity of the Church will not concern us.

Without them, we shall have wisdom for no work, Peace in no condition,
strength for no duty, success in no trial, joy in no state, no comfort in
life, no light in death?

Now our Afflictions, our sins, and our obedience, with the Attendencies of
them respectively, are the great concernments of management of them, with their
contraries, which come under the same rule; Through all these, does there run a
line of consolation from the Holy Ghost, that gives us a joyful issue
throughout: How sad is the condition of of poor, souls destitute of these
consolations? What poor shifts are they forced to betake themselves unto? what
Giants have they to encounter in their own strength and wehther they are
conquered, or seem to conquer, they have nothing but the misery of their
trialls.

2. The second thing considerable, to teach us to put a due valuation on the
consolations of the Holy Ghost, is, the matter of them, or that wherewith he
comforts us. Now this may be referred to the two heads, that I have formerly
treated of: the Love of the Father, and the Grace of the Son. All the
consolations of the Holy Ghost consist in his acquainting us with, and
communicating unto us, the Love of the Father, and the Grace of the Son: nor
is there any thing in the one or the other, but he makes it a matter of
consolation to us; so that indeed we have our communion with the Father in his
Love, and the Son in his Grace, by the operation of the Holy Ghost.

1. First, He communicates to us, and acquaints us with the Love of the Father.
Having informed his Disciples with that comforter they should receive; our
blessed Savior, Joh. 16. 27. shuts up all in this, The Father himself loves
you: This is that which the Comforter is given to acquaint us withal; even
that God is the Father, and that he loves us. In particular, that the Father
the first Person in Trinity, considered so distinctly, loves us. On this
account is he said so often to come forth from the Father, because he comes in
pursuit of his Love, and to acquaint the Hearts of Believers therewith, that
they may be comforted and established. By persuading us of the eternal, and
unchangeable Love of the Father, he fills us with Consolation. And indeed all
the effects of the Holy Ghost before mentioned, have their tendency this way.
Of this Love, and its transcendent excellency you heard at large before.
Whatever is desirable in it, is thus communicated to us by the Holy Ghost. A
sense of this is able, not only to relieve us, but to make us in every
condition to rejoice with joy unspeakable, and glorious. It is not with an
increase of Corn, and Wine, and Oil; but with the shining of the countenance
of God upon us, that he comforts our souls, Psalm. 4. 6. The world hates me,
(may such a soul as has the spirit say,) but my Father loves me. Men despise
me, as an Hypocrite, but my Father loves me, as a Child. I am poor in this
world, but I have a rich inheritance in the love of my Father. I am straightened
in all things but there is bread enough in my Fathers house. I mourn in
secret, under the power of my lusts, and sin, where no eye sees me; yea, but
the Father sees me, and is full of compassion. With a sense of his kindness,
which is better then life, I rejoice in tribulation, glory in affliction,
triumph as a conqueror, Though I am killed all the day long, All my sorrows
have a bottom that may be fathomed; my trialls bounds, that may be compassed:
but the breadth, and depth, and height of the love of the Father, who can
express? I might render glorious this way of the spirits comforting us, with
the Love of the Father, by comparing it with all other causes, and means of
joy and consolation whatever. And so discover their emptiness, its fulness,
their nothingnesse, its being all; as also by revealing the properties of it
before rehearsed.

Again, He does it by communicating to us, and acquainting Grace of Christ.
All the fruits of his purchase, all the desireablenesse of his Person, as we
are interested in him. The grace of Christ (as I formerly discoursed of at
large) is referred to two heads: The Grace of his Person; and of his Office,
and Work. By both these does the Holy Ghost administer Consolation to us, Joh.
14. 15. He glorifies Christ, by revealing his Excellencies, and desireablenesse
to believers, as the chiefest of ten thousand, altogether lovely. And then he
shows them of the things of Christ; his Love, grace, all the fruits of his
Death, Suffering, Resurrection, and Intercession, and with these supports their
hearts and souls. And here whatever is of refreshment in the pardon of sin,
deliverance from the curse, and wrath to come, in justification, and adoption,
with the innumerable privileges attending them in the hope of glory given unto
us, comes in on this head of account.

Thirdly, The Principle, and fountain of all his actings for our Consolation
comes next under consideration to the same nearer to the Communion intended to
be directed in. Now this is his own great Love, and infinite condescension. He
willingly proceeds, or comes forth from the Father to be our comforter. He
knew what we were, and what we could do, and what would be our dealings with
him. He knew we would grieve him, provoke him, quench his motions, defile his
dwelling place; and yet he would come to be our comforter. Want of a due
consideration of the great Love of the Holy Ghost, weakens all the principles
of our obedience. Did this dwell, and abide upon our hearts, what a dear
valuation must we needs put upon all his operations and actings toward us?
Nothing indeed is valuable, but what comes from love and goodwill. This is the
way the Scripture takes to raise up our hearts, to a right and due estimation
of our Redemption by Jesus Christ. It tells us that he did it freely; that of
his own Will he has laid down his life, that he did it out of love. Herein is
manifested the love of God, that he laid down his life for us, he loved 1 John
4. 6. Gal 2. 20. (...). 1. 7.
us, and gave himself for us, He loved us, and washed us with his own blood.
Hereunto it adds our state and condition, considered as he undertook for us,
sinners, enemies, dead, alienated, then he loved us, and dyed for us, and
washed us with his blood. May we not hence also have a valuation of the
dispensation of the spirit for our consolation. He proceeds to that end from
the Father; he distributes as he will, works as he pleases. And what are we
toward whom he carries on this work? Froward, perverse, unthankefull,
grieving, vexing, provoking him. Yet in his love and tenderness, does he
continue to do us good. Let us by Faith consider this Love of the Holy Ghost.
It is the head, and sourse of all the communion we have with him in this life.
This is, as I said, spoken only to prepare our hearts to the communion
proposed: and what a little portion is it, of what might be spoken? how might
all these considerations be aggravated? what a numberless number might be
added? it suffices that from what is spoken it appears, that the work in hand
is amongst the greatest duties, and most excellent privileges of the Gospel.

CHAP. VII.
The general ways of the Saints acting in Communion with the Holy Ghost.

AS in the account given of the Actings of the Holy Ghost in us, we manifested
first the general adjuncts of his actings, Now there are three general ways,
of the souls deportment in this communion, expressed all negatively in the
Scripture, but all including positive duties.

1. Now these are First. Not to grieve him. 2. Secondly, Not to quench his
motions. 3. Thirdly, Not to resist him.
There are three things considerable in the Holy Ghost.

1. First His Person, as dwelling in us. 2. Secondly his actings by Grace, or
his motions. 3. Thirdly His working in Ordinances of the word, and the
Sacraments; all for the same end and purpose.
To these three, are the three cautions before suited.

1. First, not to grieve him, in respect of his Person dwelling in us. 2.
Secondly, Not to quench him, in respect of the actings, and motions of his
grace. 3. Thirdly, Not to resist him in respect of the Ordinances of Christ and
his gifts, for their administration.
Now because the whole general duty of Believers in their communion with the
Holy Ghost, is comprised in these three things; I shall handle them severally.

The First Caution concerns his Person immediately, as dwelling in us. It is
given Ephesians. 4. 30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God. vexed, or grieved the
Spirit of God. And from thence does this Caution seem to be taken. That it is
the Person of the Holy Ghost which is here intended, is evident.

First, from the Phrase, or manner of expression, with a double article (...);
that holy spirit: And also,

2. From the work assigned to him in the following words, of Sealing to the day
of Redemption. Which (as has been manifested,) is the work of the Holy Ghost.
Now whereas this may be understood of the spirit in others, or in ourselves; it
is evident that the Apostle intends it in the latter sense, by his addition of
that signal, and eminent privilege which we our selves enjoy by him, he
seals us to the day of redemption.

Let us see then the tendency of this expression, as comprizing the first
General rule of our communion with the Holy Ghost. Grieve not the spirit.

The term of grieving, or affecting with sorrow, may be considered either
Actively, in respect of the Persons grieving; or Passively in respect of the
Persons grieved. In the latter sense the expression is Metaphorical; the
Spirit cannot be grieved, or affected with sorrow, which inferrs alteration,
disappointment, weakness, all incompatible with his infinite perfections: yet
men may actively do that which is fit and able to grieve any one that stands
affected toward them, as does the Holy Ghost. If he be not grieved it is no
thanks to us, but to his own unchangeable nature. So that there are two things
denoted in this expression.

First, That the Holy Ghost is affected toward us, as one that is loving,
careful, tender, concerned in our good, and welldoing, and therefore upon our
miscarriages is said to be grieved. As a good friend of a kind, and loving
nature is apt to be so on the miscarriage of him whom he does affect. And this
is that we are principally to regard in this caution as the ground and
foundation of it; the Love, Kindness, and tenderness of the Holy Ghost unto
us. Grieve him not.

Secondly, That we may do those things, that are proper to grieve him, though
he be not passively grieved; our sin being no less therein, then if he were
grived as we are. Now how this is done, how the Spirit is grieved, the Apostle
declares in the contexture of that discourse, verses 21, 22, 23, 24. He
presses to a progress in Sanctification, and all the fruits of Regeneration
verse. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. He dehorts from sundry particular evils, that were
contrary thereto, and then gives the general enforcement of the one and the
other; and grieve not the Holy Spirit of God; that is by coming short of that
universal Sanctification, which our planting into Christ does require. The
positive duty included in this caution, of not grieving the holy Spirit is
this; That we pursue universal Holiness with regard unto, and upon the
account of the love, kindness, and tenderness of the Holy Ghost. This is the
foundation of our Communion, we have in general. When the soul considers the
love, kindness and tenderness of the Holy Ghost unto him, when he considers
all the fruits and acts of his love and goodwill toward him, and on that
account, and under that consideration, because he is so concerned in our ways,
and walkings, to abstain from evils and to walk in all duties of Holiness,
this is to have communion with him. This consideration that the Holy Ghost, who
is our Comforter, is delighted with our obedience, grieved at our evils, and
follies, being made a continual motive to, and reason of our close walking
with God in all holiness, is, I say, the first general way of our Communion
with him.

Here let us fix a little. We loose both the power and pleasure Comforter, by
what ways and means he performs that Office toward us: what an unworthy
thing it is to grieve him, who comes to us on purpose to give us consolation?
Let the soul in the whole course of its obedience exercise its self by faith
to thoughts hereof, and lay due weight upon it. The Holy Ghost in his infinite
love and kindness toward me, has condescended to be my Comforter; He does it
willingly, freely, powerfully; what have I received from him? in the multitude
of my perplexitys how has he refreshed my soul? Can I live one day without
his consolations? And shall I be regardlesse of him in that wherein he is
concerned? shall I grieve him by negligence, sin and folly? shall not his
love constrain me to walk before him to all well pleasing? So have we in
general, fellowship with him.

The second is that of the 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit. There are
various thoughts about the sense of these words. despise not Prophesying. The
Light that God has set up in our hearts, say others. But where is that called
absolutely (...) the Spirit. It is the Holy Ghost himself that is here
intended. Not immediately, in respect of his Person, in which regard he is said
to be grieved, which is a Personal affection: but in respect of Isa. 4. 4.
his motions, actings, and operations. The Holy Ghost was typified by the fire,
that was allways kept alive on the Altar. He is also called a Spirit of
burning. The reasons of that Allusio^ are manifold, not now to be insisted on.
Now the oppositio^ that is made to fire in its acting, is by querching. Hence
the opposition made to the actings of the Holy Ghost are called Quenching of
the Spirit, as some kind of wet wood will do, when it is cast into the the
fire. Thence are we said in pursuance of the same metaphor, (...), to stir up
with new fire the gifts that are in us. The Holy Ghost is striving with us,
acting in us, moving variously for our growth in grace, and bringing forth
fruit meet for the principle he has endued us withal. Take heed (says the
Apostle) least by the power of your lusts and temptations, you attend not to
his workings, but hinder him in his good will toward you; that is what in you
lies.

This then is the second General Rule for our Communion with operations in us,
and by us. There are several and various ways, whereby the Holy Ghost is said
to act, ex^rt, and put forth his power in us: partly by moving upon and
stirring up the Grace we have received: partly by new supplys of Grace from
Jesus Christ, falling in with ocasions for their exercise, raising good motions
immediately, or occasionally within us, all tending to our furtherance in
obedience, and walking with God. All these are we carefully to observe and take
notice of. Consider the Fountain, whence they come and the end which they lead
us unto; Hence have we Communion with the Holy Ghost, when we can consider him
by faith, as the immediate author of all supplys, assistances, and the whole
relief we have by Grace, of all good actings, risings, motions in our hearts,
of all strivings and contendings against sin; When we consider I say all
these his actings, and workings in their tendencys to our consolation, and on
that account are careful and watchful to improve them all to the end aimed
at, as coming from him, who is so loving and kind, and tender to us, we have
Communion with him.

This is that which is intended. Every gracious acting of coming from him in a
peculiar manner: His mind, his good will, is to be observed therein. Hence
care and diligence for the improvement of every motion of his will arise,
thence reverence of his presence with us, with due spiritual regard to his
Holiness does ensue, and our souls are wonted to intercourse with him.

3. The third caution concerns him, and his work, in the ordinance of the
Word. Stephen tells the Jews Act. 7. 51. that They resisted the Holy Ghost,
How did they do it? why as their Fathers did it. As your Fathers did, so do
ye. How did their Fathers resist the Holy Ghost? verse, 52. They persecuted the
Prophets and slew them; their opposition to the Prophets in preaching the
Gospel, or their showing of the coming of the just one, was their resisting of
the Holy Ghost. Now the Holy Ghost is said to be resisted in the contempt of
the preaching of the word, because the gift of preaching of it is from him. The
1 Cor. 12. 6.
manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit. Hence when our Savior
Promises the Spirit to his Disciples, to be present with them for the
conviction of the world; he tells them he will give them a mouth and wisdom,
which their adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist: Luke 20. 16.
concerning which in the accomplishment of it in Stephen, it is said that they
were not able to resist the Spirit by which he spoke, Act. 6. 10. The Holy
Ghost then setting up a ministry in the Church, separating men thereto,
furnishing them with gifts and abilitys for the dispensation of the Word; the
not obeying of that word, opposing of it, not falling down before it, is called
resisting of the Holy Ghost. This in the examples of the wickedness of others
are we cautioned against. And this enwraps the third general Rule of our
Communion with the Holy Ghost; in the despensation of the Word of the Gospel,
the Authority, wisdom and goodness of the Holy Ghost, in furnishing men with
gifts for that end, and purpose, and his presence with them, as to the virtue
thereof, is to be eyed; and subjection given unto it on that account. On this
reason I say, on this ground, is obedience to be yielded to the word, in the
ministerial dispensation thereof; because the Holy Ghost and he alone does
furnish with gifts to that end and purpose. When this consideration causes us
to fall low before the word, then have we Commuinon with the Holy Ghost in that
Ordinance. But this is commonly Spoken unto.

CHAP. VIII. Particular Directions for Communion with the Holy Ghost.
BEfore I name Particular Directions for our Communion with the Holy Ghost, I
must premise some Cautions, as directions to be given concern his worship.

First, The Divine Nature is the Reason, and cause of all worship; so that it
is impossible to worship any one person, and not worship the whole Trinity. It
is (and that not without ground) denied by the Schoolmen, that the formal
Reason and object of divine worship, is in the persons precisely considered;
that is under the formally constitutive Reason of their personality, which is
their Relation to each other: But this belongs to the Divine Nature, and
Essence, and to their distinct persons as they are identified with the Essence
it self. Hence is that way of praying to the Trinity, by the repetition of the
same Petition, to the several persons (as in the Letany) groundless, if not
impious. It supposes that one person is worshipped, and not another, when each
person is worshipped as God, and each person is so. As though we first should
desire one thing of the Father, and be heard and granted by him, then ask the
same thing of the Son, and so of the Holy Ghost; And so act as to the same
thing three distinct acts of worship, and expect to be heard, and have the same
thing granted three times distinctly, when all the works of the Trinity ad
extra, are indivisible.

The proper, and peculiar object of divine worship, and invocation, is the
Essence of God in its infinite Excellency, dignity, Majesty, and its causality
as the first sovereign cause of all things: Now this is common to all the
three Persons, and is proper to each of them; not formally, as a Person, but as
God blessed for ever. All adoration respects that which is common to all: so
that in each Act of Adoration and worship, all are adored, and worshipped. The
Creatures worship their Creator; and a man him in whose image he was created,
viz. him from whom descends every good and perfect gift; all this describing
God, as God. Hence,

Secondly, when we begin our Prayers to God the Father, and Jesus Christ: yet
the Son is no less invocated, and worshipped in the beginning then the
Father, though he be peculiarly mentioned as mediator in the close; not as
Son to himself, but as Mediator to the whole Trinity, or God in Trinity. But
in the invocation of God the Father, we invocate every Person, because we
Invocate the Father as God, every Person being so.

Thirdly. In that heavenly Directory which we have, Ephesians. 2. worship is said to
be to the Father; and this through Christ, or his mediation by the Spirit, or
his assistance. Here is a distinction of the Persons, as to their operations;
but not at all as to their being the object of our Worship. For the Son, and
the Holy Ghost are no less worshipped, in our access to God, then the Father
himself. Only the Grace of the Father, which we obtain by the mediation of the
Son, and the assistance of the spirit, is that which we draw nigh to God for.
So that when by the distinct dispensation of the Trinity, and every Person, we
are lead to worship; that is, to act Faith on, or invocate any Person, we do
herein worship the whole Trinity, and every Person, by what name soever, of
Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, we invocate him. So that this is to be observed
in this whole matter; That when any work of the Holy Ghost (or any other
Person) which is appropriated to him (we never exclude the concurrence of other
Persons) draws us to the worship of him; yet he is not worshipped exclusively,
but the whole Godhead is worshipped.

Fourthly. These Cautions being premised, I say, that we worship the Holy
Ghost. As it is in the case of Faith, in respect of the Father and the Son,
Joh. 14 1. Believe in God, believe also in me. This extends it self no less
to the Holy Ghost. Christ called the Disciples for the acting of Faith on him,
he being upon the accomplishment of the great work of his Mediation: and the
Holy Ghost now carrying on the work of his delegation requires the same. And
to the same purpose are their distinct operations mentioned. My Father works
hitherto, and I work. Now as the formal Reason of the worship of the Son,
is not his mediation, but his being God, his mediation being a powerful motive
thereto; so the formal Reason of our worshipping the Holy Ghost, is not his
being our comforter, but his being God, yet his being our comforter is a
powerful motive thereunto.

This is the sum of the first Direction. The Grace, actings, Love, effects of
the Holy Ghost, as he is our Comforter, ought to Love, worship, believe in, and
invocate him: though all this being directed to him as God, is no less
directed on that account, to the other Persons, then to him; only by the fruits
of his Love toward us, are we stirred up unto it.

These things being presupposed; let the Saints learn to act distinctly on the
Holy Ghost, as the immediate efficient cause of all the good things mentioned.
Faith I say to believe in him; and Faith in all things to believe him, and to
yield obedience to him. Faith, not imagination. The distinction of the Persons
in the Trinity, is not to be fancyed but believed. So then, the Scripture so
fully, frequently, clearly, distinctly ascribing the things we have been
speaking of, to the immediate efficiency of the Holy Ghost, Faith closes with
him, in the truth revealed, and peculiarly regards him, worships, him serves
him, waits for him, prays to him, prayseth him; All these things, I say, the
Saints do in Faith; The person of the Holy Ghost, revealing its self in these
operations and effects, is the peculiar object of our Worship. Therefore when
he ought to be peculiarly honored, and is not, he is peculiarly sinned
against. Acts 5. 2 Ananias is said to lie to the Holy Ghost: not to God, which
being taken essentially, would denote the whole Trinity; but peculiarly to the
Holy Ghost. Him he was to have honored peculiarly, in that especial gift of
his, which he made profession of: not doing it, he sinned peculiarly against
him: But this must be a little farther branched into particulars.

Let us then say weight on every Effect of the Holy Ghost, in any of the
Particulars before mentioned, on this account, that acts of his Love, and power
toward us. This faith will do that takes notice of his kindnesie in all
things. Frequently he performs, in sundry particulars, the office of a
Comforter toward us, and we are not thoroughly comforted; we take no notice at
all of what he does. Then is he grieved. Of those who do receive and own the
Consolation he tenders, and administers; how few are there that consider him as
the comforter, and rejoice in him as they ought. Upon every work of consolation
that the Believer receives, this ought his Faith to resolve upon. This is from
the Holy Ghost. He is the comforter, the God of all Consolation. I know there
is no joy, peace, hope, nor comfort but what he works, gives and bestows; and
that he might give me this Consolation, he has willingly condescended to this
office of a Comforter, his Love was in it, and on that account does he continue
it. Also he is sent by the Father and Son for that end and purpose. By this
means come I to be partaker of my joy; it is in the Holy Ghost; of
consolation, he is the comforter. What price now shall I set upon his Love. How
shall I value the mercy, that I have received?

This I say, is applicable to every particular effect of the Holy Ghost toward
us; and herein have we communion and fellowship with discovered in our handling
the particulars. Does he shed abroad the Love of God in our hearts? does he
witness: unto our Adoption? the soul considers his presence, ponders his
Love, his condescension, goodness, and kindness, is filled with reverence of
him, and care not to grieve him, and labors to preserve his Temple, his
Habitation pure and holy.

Again, our communion with him causes in us Returning praise, and thanks, and
honor, and glory, and blessing to him, receive from him, which are many:
Herein consists our next direction. So do we with the Son of God on the
account of our Redemption. To him that loved us, and washed us with his own
blood, to him be praise and glory, Rev. 1. 6, 4, 14. And are not the like
praises and blessings due to him, by whom the work of Redemption is made
effectual to us? who with no less infinite love undertook our consolation,
then the Son our Redemption? when we feel our hearts warmed with joy,
supported in peace, established in our obedience, let us ascribe to him the
praise that is due to him; bless his name, and rejoice in him.

And this glorifying of the Holy Ghost in thanksgivings, on spiritual sense of
his consolations, is no small part of our communion with him. Considering his
free engagement in this work, his coming forth from the Father to this purpose,
his mission by the Son, and condescension therein, his Love and kindness, the
soul of a believer, is powered out in thankful praises to him, and is sweetly
affected with the duty. There is no duty that leaves a more heavenly savor in
the soul then this does.

Also in our prayers to him, for the carrying on the work of our consolation,
which he has undertaken ly's our communion John prays for Grace and peace
from the seven spirits that are before the Throne; or the Holy Ghost, whose
operations are perfect and complete. This part of his worship is expressly
mentioned frequently in Scripture, and all others do necessarily attend it. Let
the Saints consider, what need they stand in of these effects of the Holy Ghost
before mentioned, with many such others, as might be insisted on. Weigh all the
privileges, which we are made partakers of. Remember that he distributes them
as he will; that he has the Sovereign disposal of them, and they will be
prepared for this duty.

How and in what sense it is to be performed, has been already declared: what
is the formal reason of this worship, and ultimate object of it, I have also
manifested. In the duty it self is put forth no small part of the life,
Efficacy, and vigor of Faith: and we come short of that enlargednesse of spirit
in dealing with God, and are straightned from walking in the breadth of his
ways, which we are called unto, if we learn not our selves to meet him with
his worship in every way, he is pleased to communicate himself unto us. In
these things he does so, in the person of the Holy Ghost; In that person do we
meet him, his Love, Grace, and Authority, by our prayers and supplications.

Again, Consider him as he condescends to this delegation of the Father, and
the Son, to be our Comforter, and ask him daily Father in the name of Jesus
Christ. This is the daily work of Believers. They look upon, and by Faith
consider the Holy Ghost, as promised to be sent: In this promise they know lies
all their Grace, peace, mercy, joy, and hope. For by him so promised, and him
alone, are these things communicated to them. If therefore our life to God, or
the joy of that life be considerable, in this we are to abound: to ask him of
the Father, as Children do of their Parents, daily bread. And as in this
asking and receiving of the Holy Ghost, we have communion with the Father, in
his Love, whence he is sent, and with the Son in his Grace, whereby he is
obtained for us, so with himself, on the account of his voluntary
condescension to this dispensation. Every request for the Holy Ghost, implies
our closing with all these; Oh the Riches of the Grace of God.

Humbling our selves for our miscarriages in reference to him, is another part
of our communion with him. That we grieved him, as to his Person, quenched him,
as to the motion of his grace, or resisted him in his Ordinances, is to be
mourned for, as has been declared Let our Souls be humbled before him on this
account. This one considerable Ingredient of Godly sorrow, and the thoughts of
it, are as suitable to the affecting of our Hearts with humiliation, and
indignation against sin, as any other whatever. I might proceed in the like
considerations; as also make application of them to the particular effects of
the Holy Ghost enumerated; but my design is only to point out the heads of
things, and to leave them to the improvement of others.

I shall shut up this whole discourse with some considerations, estate and
condition of men not interested in this promise of the Spirit, nor made
partakers of his Consolation.

1. They have no true Consolation or comfort be their Estate and condition what
it will. Are they under affliction or in trouble? They must bear their own
burden; and how much to weak they are for it, if God be pleased to lay on his
hand with more weight then ordinary, is easily known. Men may have stoutnesse
of Spirit, and put on great Resolutions to wrestle with their troubles. But
when this is merely from the natural spirit of a man,

1. For the most part it is but an outside. It is done with respect to others,
that they may not appear low spirited, or dejected. Their hearts are eaten up
and devoured with troubles and anxiety of mind. Their thoughts are perplexed,
and they are still striving, but never come to a conquest, Every new trouble
every little alteration in their trialls, puts them to new vexation. It is an
ungrounded resolution that bears them up and they are easily shaken.

2. Secondly what is the best of their resolves and enduring? it is but a
contending with God, who has entangled them; the struggling of a flea under a
mountain. Yea though on out ward considerations and principles, they endeavor
after patience and tolerance; yet all is but a contending with God; a striving
to be quiet under that which God has sent on purpose to disturb them: God
does not afflict men without the Spirit, to exercise their patience; but to
disturb their peace, and security All their arming themselves with patience
and resolution, is but to keep the hold, that God will cast them out of; or
else make them the nearer to ruin. This is the best of their consolation in
the time of their trouble.

3. Thirdly, if they do promise to themselves any thing of the care of God
toward them, and relieve themselves thereby, as they often do on one account
or another, (especially when they are driven from other holds) all their
relief is but like the dreaming of an hungry man, who supposes that he eats
and drinks, and is refreshed; but when he awaketh, he is empty, and
disappointed. So are they as to all their relief, that they promise to receive
from God, and the support which they seem to have from him. When they are
awaked at the latter day and see all things clearly, they will find that God
was their enemy, laughing at their calamity, and mocking when their fear was
on them.

So is it with them in trouble. Is it any better with them in prosperity? This
indeed is often great and is marvellously described in Scripture, as to their
lives and oftentimes quiet peaceable ends. But have they any true consolation
all their days? They eat, drink, sleep, and make merry, and perhaps heap up to
themselves: but how little do these things make them to differ from the beasts
that perish? Solomon's advantage to have the use, and know the utmost of these
things much beyond any of the sons of men of our generation, is commonly taken
notice of. The account also that he gives of them is known: They are all
vanity, and vexation of Spirit. This is their consolation; a crackling of
thorns under the pot, a sudden flash, and blaze, that begins but to perish. So
that both Adversity and prosperity slays them, and whether they are laughing
or crying, they are still dying.

Secondly, They have no peace; No peace with God, nor in their own souls. I
know that many of them upon false bottomes, quietness. Neither is it my
business at present to discover the falsenesses and unsoundnesse of it. But
this is their State: True, and Solid peace being an effect of the Holy Ghost in
the hearts of Believers (as has been declared) they who are not made partakers
of him, have no such peace. They may cry Peace, Peace indeed, when sudden
destruction is at hand. The Principles of their peace, (as may be easily
evidenced) are darkness, or ignorance, treachery of Conscience, self
righteousness, and vain hope. To these heads may all the principles of their
peace be reduced, and what will these avail them in the day when the Lord
shall deal with them.

I might say the same concerning their joy and hope: they are false and
perishing. Let them then consider this, who have satisfied perish who in
profession use him kindly, and honor him, if he dwell not in them with power,
where shall they appear who oppose and affront him? The Scripture tells us
that unless the Spirit of Christ be in us, we are dead, we are reprobates, we
are none of Christ's without him, you can have none of these glorious effects of
his toward Believers before mentioned; and you are so far from enquiring
whether he be in you or no, as that you are ready to deride them in whom he is.
Are there none who profess the Gospel, who have never once seriously
enquired, whether they are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, or no? you that
almost account it a ridiculous thing to be put upon any such Question; who
look on all men as vain pretenders that talk of the Spirit; the Lord awake
such men to a sight of their condition, before it be too late. If the Spirit
dwell not in you, if he be not your Comforter, neither is God your Father, nor
the Son your Advocate, nor have you any portion in the Gospel. O that God
would awake some poor soul to the consideration of this thing; before the
neglect and contempt of the Holy Ghost come to that dispising of him, from
which there is no recovery? That the Lord would spread before them all the
folly of their hearts, that they may be ashamed, and confounded, and do no more
Presumptiously.

FINIS.

