IOANNES OWENVS CAMBRO BRITANNVS OXONIENSIS.



John Owen's LATIN EPIGRAMS Englished By THO. HARVEY, Gent. Dedicated By the
Author Mr. John Owen unto the Lady Mary Nevil, Daughter of the Earl of DORSET.

Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere -- Horat. de Art Poet.

Licensed May 25. 1677. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons at the Sign of the Prince's
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Thomas Sawbridge at the three Flower de
Luces in Little-Britain. 1677.

THE LATIN EPIGRAMS OF John Owen, LATE One of the Fellows of New College in
OXFORD.

Rendered into English by Thomas Harvey, Gent. Once a Commoner in the College
at Winchester; Both Colleges being Founded and Endowed by William Wickam,
heretofore Bishop of Winton, in Anno Dom. 1389.

Anno 120. Richardi secundi Regis Angliae.

Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori. Horat.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simons at the Sign of the Prince's
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, and for Thomas Sawbridge at the Three
Flower-de-Luces in Little-Britain. 1677.

To Mr. Thomas Harvey upon his Translation of Owen's Epigrams.
Who could divine a Branch so old could bring
Such specious Blossoms as might suit the Spring
Of youths best Fancy? for here stand at vye
The Cream of wit, and Oil of Industry.
I wonder how this English Muse could sink
Into Owens depths, into each hole and chink
Of his hid sense: Sure All thy year is May,
And owns no darkness; For I needs must say
When I read Owen, I conceived each part
Of his Laconick Epigrams so smart,
So sharp, so short, so comprehensive, that
No English Genius could it adequate.
Pardon my Country, that my Thoughts so roved
And undervalu'd Thee; For here it is proved,
An English Pen makes That inventive Brain,
For all its intricate Conceits, so plain
That now each Epigram, each Riddle lies
Anatomized to All unclouded eyes.
His Criticismes dissected and made bare,
And so Diaphanous, that now They are
(Although not word for word, yet sense for sense)
Unriddled, and with such quaint Eloquence,
That as I read Both, I could swear almost
That Harvey's Muse consulted Owen's Ghost;
For but Compare Them, and you will censure, that
Harvey has hit what Owen aimed at.
David Lochard.

To Mr. Thomas Harvey of his Englishing Owen's Latin Epigrams.
SMooth Ogleby for Virgil; Sandys won
The Garland, what for Ovid he has done.
And Martial's Epigrams has Fletcher dressed
In English Garb: Horace is so expressed
By diverse Persons, eminent for worth
^^genious Brom (deceased) did set them forch.
But as for Owen's Epigrams, there is none
As yet, has vent'red a Translation,
But only Harvey; and He Mantuan thus
Has made most happily conspicuous.
The Sun's unclouded now, what Owen writ
In shadowed mysteries of Roman wit,
His de^t'rous hand Translated has, and Penned
That ^h^^h none yet attempted, f^w can mend.
Robert Coxshall.

Of the same.
OWen composed, Harvey Translated well;
The question's, which of these does most excel?
The answer in few words is quickly done,
Which like you best the Shadow or the Sun?
Robert Coxshall.

To the Book.
OWen had many Patrons, I have None:
None that will be my Patron, no, not One.
None that to Me will give a Quire of Paper,
Nor Pens, nor Ink, nor a poor Farthing Taper.
To the Reader.
THough I These Epigrams which Owen writ
Have done int' English, Thou must not expect
Like quaint Conceits, like Criticismes of wit
In the Translator, as in the Architect.
For in their Idiome and Dialect
Each Language different is, as man from man:
One from Another differs in Aspect,
In Nuture, in Condition; nor Can
Translations with the original hold weight;
In sense They may Consent, not in Conceit.
But take it as it is, and with a Candid Eye
Read, Ruminate, Remember and apply.
September. 26. 1672. Sic dixit Tho. Harvey.

To his Patroness.
MIne English Owen Patron-less did pine,
Wanting an Heroes, or an Heroine
To Potronize It: Almost in despair:
Until a candid Nymph ( Mecaenas heir)
Not willing Papers fitted for the Press
Should be suppressed, became my Patroness.
Tho. Harvey.

IN rendering mine, with Owen, parallels,
I am like One than rings or Chimes the Bells;
If I do jangle (venidl's the sin)
It is to soul a better Ringer in.
Tho. Harvey.

In Praise of the Author.
To the Reader.
A. Clerick art? or Laick? read This Book;
Here Thou shall find thy will, if well Thou look.
D. Du-Tr. Med.

2. To D. John Owen of his Book.
What hinders, but thy Book should pass the Press?
If I know Verse, This Age will say no less.
Suppose not, so great hazard's of thy wit:
Yet This my judgment is, I think it fit.
John Hoskins, J. C.

3. To John Owen of his three Books of Epigrams.
Results of Love, the Graces effluence,
The Muses mirth, Apollo's Eloquence,
Wise Sentences, and Criticisms of Art,
The Genius of an ingenious Heart;
All These Thy Book, O Owen, represents
Unt' us, replenished with rare Arguments.
John Bowman, Theol.

4. To John Owen.
Owen, do ask what Epigrams w' approve?
Those, which That Engine of thy wit does move,
What Is short, chaste, learned, quick, polite withal,
That many Satyrs has, yet free from Gall.
Thy Muse, thy Genius gives This; no less
By Thee it is promised to thy Patroness.
Thine, William James, Theol.

5. In Praise of the Author.
What was, is, shall be still the Poets use,
Women and Men are Censured by thy Muse:
Yet in my Judgment, thy rare wit, thy Pen
Deserves Praise of Women and of Men.
Jane Owen of Oxford.

6. To the Reader, in Praise of the Author, whose Epigrams were published the
second Time within a Month 1606.
Greek, Latin Authors, Epigrams have writ,
Whose Work took up their Life to finish it:
Owen except, he sole unparalled,
Has equaliz'd Them All, if not excelled.
D. Du-Tr. Med.

7. Of the Third Edition of these Epigrams.
To the Author.
This Book is like the world, moves, and is moved:
Though silent, It is by the Printer proved:
For These thine Epigrams have had Access
Thrice to the Printer, and half tired the Press.
John Hoskins, J. C.

THE EPIGRAMS OF John Owen.
The First Book.
To the Lady Mary Neville.
I Dedicate, lest Patron-less It be,
My Book to the Reader, and My Self to Thee.
2. To the Reader.
The Folly's blamed, if Thou Commendest all
That here Thou read, no Thing if, thy Gall.
3. Of his Book, to John Hoskins, a Lawyer.
This Book is as The World: as Men, The Verse:
Good Verses Here, as There good Men, are scarce.
4. To the Lady Mary Neville.
If us Pythagoras does not delude,
Thou, Juno, Pallas, Venus, do include:
For in Thee, though but One, Three virtues be:
Where, One of Them is rare, in other Three.
5. To the same.
As in the Skies the Sun, in the Sun the Light,
So virtue's splendour in thy Face seems site:
Who comes a Looker on; becomes a Lover:
Thy Virtue, or thy Beauty's the sole Mover.
6. To her Son Thomas Neville.
Such rare Things of thy Genius are Penned,
That though All true, they All belief transcend.
Hope in a Child, not present Worth, is praised:
Thee present Worth, not Hope alone has raised.
7. To her Daughter Cecily.
Thou like thy Mother art, and needst none other
Applause: It is enough, the art like thy Mother.
8. Know thy Self. Of Harpalus.
Thou worthy to be known art not of worth:
Fit for thy knowledge then seek something forth.
9. To a Lawyer.
If happy's he who knows of Things the Cause:
How happy thou Cause-Pleader with Applause?
10. Of John Prote.
To lead a Wife, that is, to marry One,
Often have Thou menaced; Drunkards can do none:
Rather a Wife must marry Thee, to lead
Thee drunken from the City to thy Bed.
11. To Aulus an ignoble Nobleman.
Thou to thine Ancestors ow'st All: to Thee
Posterity shall not indebted he.
12. To Hernicus.
Thou bought'st a Fool for Twenty Pounds, but I*
Will not at such a price the Buyer buy.
13. Of Venus.
Love's first Sweet's better; bitter is in Fine:
Venus comes smiling, mourning does decline;
So run fresh Rivers to the Sea, whose Taste
Returns Them brackish-brinish at the last.
14. To Mr. Gilbert.
Thou the Earth denyst to stand: prodigious Note,
Thus writing, Thou perhaps were in a Boat.
15. To Physicians and Lawyers.
Galen, thine Health does from our sickness rise;
Justinian, our Folly makes Thee wise.
16. O Times, O Manners!
Learned Scaliger The Worlds deformed Times
Reformed: Who shall Now reform Men's Crimes?
17. Paris his judgment.
When Paris was elect a Judge to be
Between Three Goddesses, and of the Three,
Doubtful which to prefer; Pallas was wise,
Juno majestic: Venus wan the Prize.
Love Conquered All: were it now to vote again,
One moneyed Juno would the Prize obtain.
18. Germanical Truth.
Democritus affirmed that Truth was drowned
In some profound Abyss, not to be found.
If hid in Wine, as Proverbs have assigned,
The Teutons have It found, or will It find.
19. To Linus.
Thou, Linus, have Books.
Labrorum store, but more
Would learned be Pounds.
Librarum had such store.
20. To a certain young Nobleman.
Old Age, not Death's Thee wished: the Sickness; Age,
Not Death, the Cure, is wished Thee by the Sage.
21. To a certain poor Physician.
Thou that of late A Beggar.
Mendicus came to Town,
Thy Name but changing A Physician.
Medicus art grown:
Physic Thou giv'st the Sick, he gives Thee Coin,
Thus his Disease Thou curest, and he Thine.
22. Of a certain Woman.
Thy Form brought forth thy Fame: But O the Child
Did kill the Mother: fair Form; Fame defiled.
23. On Marcus.
In Nature why do Vacuum.
Emptiness deny,
Si^h in thine Head's so much vacuity?
24. Upon modern Writers. To the Reader.
Whether the vulgar more untruths unmask
In Quart', Octav', or Folio do ask?
In Sexto-decimo some Writers I
Suspect in every Folio to lie.
25. Of Phillis.
Phillis, Thou will not give, but take a kiss,
Knowing that taking One, a giving is.
26. To the same.
If Love be Fire (as does the Proverb prove)
Ah, woe to Me, how Cold a Fire's thy Love?
27. A wicked Atheist.
Use present Times and Things: A Time will be
When there will be no Time at all for Thee:
Grammarians, Past, Future Times display,
But I will use the Present while I may.
28. The Atheist's Epitaph.
He died, as if dead, no Life There were:
As if There were no Death, He lived Here.
29. The Optative Mood.
The Infinitive is near the Optative Mood,
For Infinite's the wish of Goods or Good.
30. Of Alana.
Wedlock to be the intolerablest yoke
Alana cries all day: but does revoke
When Night is come her Clamorous Regreet,
And says, No yoke like Wedlock is so sweet.
31. Prophets, Poets.
Prophets of Things to come the Truth predict:
But Poets of Things past write false and fict.
32. Of Life and Death.
Life tends to Death, as Rivers to the Seas:
For Life is sweet, Death bitter, does displease.
33. Of Vulcan.
Vulcan made splendid Arms for Mars his Breast,
Mars gave unt' him a specious-spacious Crest:
Thou were well paid O Vulcan for thy pains,
Horns for thine Iron; Were such Glaucus gains?
34. An English Grammar.
The Feminine does unt' It self design
What Is proper to the Gender Masculine.
35. Free Will.
Freedom of will, which is The worlds Contest,
Husbands have lost, but Wives have It possessed.
36. Of Life and Love.
Though every Action unt' its End does tend,
Yet Life and Love abominate their End.
37. The Elysian Fields.
Through Hells dark-dismal Cell A^neas walked
Into the Elysian Fields, as Poets talked:
For when He shot Elisa's Gulf, who can
Deny, He was in the Fields Elysian?
38. An Husband, and an Adulterer.
The Husband.
I have A wife, others her Love: so rather
For Others not Themselves Bees Honey gather.
The Adulterer.
This Seed I raised, but in Another Field:
So Birds for Others, not Themselves do build.
39. New Rhetoric.
His Arguments, who Money wants, are sick:
Gifts Now, not words, are the New Rhetoric.
40. Of Cotta lately made a Monk.
Cotta perplexed with his wife a A Monks Hood.
Cucule bought,
That dying He might die no Cuckold thought.
41. Geneva' s Arms.
Geneva in her Ensign does display
The Imperial Eagle, and the Popedoms Key:
But how Geneva Them to keep do hope,
Should The Emperor.
Rodolph claim his Bird, his Key the Pope?
42. Upon the Trifles of Borbonius a Poet.
Thou Trifles thought not, what Thou so did call:
I call Them not, but think Them Trifles All.
43. Of Faith.
Not Faiths, but Faith is mentioned on Record:
For former Times did but one Faith afford.
44. Of Paulinus a Physician.
Wherefore's a sick Man called thy Patient,
Since He Is impatient at thine Advent?
By suffering He Is thy Patient, for He
Does suffer more, than by's disease, by Thee.
45. Of Cottula.
If what Apollo said of Socrates
One be true,
Thou Art Wise: Thou know, Thou Nothing know: Adieu*
46. Of Fabiana.
If Fields be fertile called that bear much Corn,
Then Fab'an's fertile; for she has many born.
47. A Joque upon Covetous Men.
The Vulgar, Nature pleased with little praise,
And on the Covetous a Scandal raise:
Yet sole the Covetous pleased with least we see;
Nature, Enough thinks little, Nothing He.
48. To Philopater.
Though for Ones Country noble it is to die,
Yet nobler it is to live for It, think I.
49. The World.
IN the world's no Constancy; All Is Circular:
What wonder Then no Rectitude is There?
50. Of Aretinus.
In All Things there is a Mediocrity,
Excepting in the Thing called Venery:
Lust has found out a Thousand means, with Art
To do, what should be done on Natures part.
51. Of Silius.
Thou Art Atheist: For Papist Thou may not be;
And to b' a Protestant disliketh Thee.
52. Against Atheists.
No House does want Its Lord; shall Then (alone)
This specious-spacious House the World have None?
53. A Physician.
Physicians take Gold, but seldom give:
They Physic give, take none; yet healthy live.
A Diet They prescribe; the Sick must for it
Give Gold; Each other Thus supply-support.
54. Of Lawyers
Lawyers are prudent, provident beside,
For prudently They for Themselves provide.
55. A Courtier.
If good, Thou may be better, but not greater:
If great, more great; not better, nor compleater.
56. To Marcus a Monoculist.
Thou Marcus wantst an Eye; Enough's one Eye:
Both Eyes may more, not better Things espy:
I have both Ears, but hear no Truth now told;
Both Eyes, but can with Them no good behold.
57. Of Paulus.
Thou to preserve thy Fame, have built thy Tomb:
As if that Tombs should not to ruin come.
58. A Secret against Gray Hairs. To Bithynicus.
Lest in old Age thine hairs should silvered be,
Thy youth has made Thee bald: O happy Thee!
59. Of Theodore.
Thou newly married did think the had found
A narrow Passage to the Starry Round:
But that New Passage led to another Road,
TO a lower, not the strait way, but the broad.
60. Of Apollo and the Muses.
The Muses Femes, Apollo's Masculine:
For One Apollo's worth the Muses Nine.
61. Of Alanus, grown old.
His Cubit with his Wives Cubit measuring,
Alanus said, O sweet concubiting!
62. The Calends of January. Of Olus and Quintus.
To the Rich Ole gives not, lest his Gifts ask more;
Nor to the Poor, because Himself is poor.
But Quintus gives expecting by that shift,
For what He durst not ask, a better Gift.
63. Of Pontia.
One wished All Cuckolds cast in the Sea; but to Him
His Wife thus said, Learn (Husband) first to Swim.
64. A work of Darkness.
It Is to preserve the Species of profit,
But the Individuum's the Opposer of it.
65. Thou Lie.
Beware, to a Soldier give not the Lie:
He takes it for the great'st Indignity:
Ye that the Lie for such Disgrace esteem,
Why then to Lie so great a grace do you deem?
66. Of an Hypocrite.
Thou will not swear, it is Sin: but thou will Lie:
Is this Religion or Hypocrisy?
67. Androgynus.
Who Venus-like, and Mercury's in fight,
Nor Man nor Woman, 's an Hermaphrodite.
68. Venus.
Love like the Sea does flow, does Ebb again:
What wonder? For Venus sprung from the Main.
No Trust's in Her, she is light; and placed (with Mars)
Among the Planets, not the fixed Stars.
69. Of Rivals.
Each unt' himself would Phillis have, but There
Does more of Envy than of Love appear.
70. A Woman.
A woman from man's Womb was ham'd: but Eve
Did from Man's Bone, not Flesh, her Form receive.
71. The Alliance of Physicians and Lawyers.
Physicians and Lawyers in their Trade
Are like, their gain of others loss is made.
To Patients Those, to Clients These apply
Their helping-hand, but help themselves thereby.
72. Of Pamphilus to Philippe.
Nature does no Vacuities admit:
Pamph' therefore as his Leader follows It.
73. To one Bald.
Leaves to the Trees, and Grass returns to Ground:
But not one hair on thy bald pate is found.
74. Nilus in the Eyes. Aetna in the Heart.
Cold Nilus entered has my burning Eyes,
Mine Heart with Aetna's Flames inflamed fryes:
No Floods of Tears can quench so great a Fire,
Nor burning Love can make those Floods retire;
So though discording Fire and Water be,
Concording yet They show their force in me.
75. Caeteris paribus.
The rest alike.
Of Camilla.
^wo Suitors did Camilla love and Court;
The beautiful, in Stature yet but short:
That other not so fair, but taller proved:
The Maid b'ing asked which of them best she loved,
^he looking on the Taller, when she spies
^is Nose, Arms, Legs, Feet, all of longest size,
^he thus, or Impudent, or prudent spoke,
^f all he like, I will this long Man take.
76. Of Giants and Dwarfs.
Giants and Dwarfs are Monsters in their Forms,
Those are like Elephants, and these like Worms.
77. Of an Abbat's two Bastards.
When in the Temple with the rest you pray,
You two, not fictly, Abba, Father say.
78. Of Priests.
Priests wedded are: what thereby gain they more?
They had as much as that in Tenths before.
79. A Participle.
A Verb if Eras, Mus a Noun's declined,
What is Erasmus let the Reader find.
80. A Cuse. To the Lawyers.
A Man lies with a Wife, which is his own
Whom he supposed Another, till 'twas known:
Whether the Child by such mistake begot,
Be spurious, legitimate, or not?
81. Of the Morning.
Do wonder why the Light's expatiated
^ the Morn before the Sun? 'twas First created.
82. Of the Day.
Though Night than Argus be more full of Eyes,
The Day's One Eye more clearly things descries.
83. Of the Night.
Why does dark Night put on her black Array?
It Widow-like mourns for departed Day:
Should not the Stars inlighten mourning Night,
Grief would oppress us e're the Mournings light.
84. To Marcus.
Thy Verses praise Me, but I think because
I should thy Verses praise with mine Applause.
85. Of Death.
Thieves shall restore their Theft, Robbers their Prey,
But Nothing Death; For Death takes All away.
86. To his Friend.
Half of thy Dear, whom Thou do dearly love,
Since the art, and Half thine own, how Mine do prove
Yet writ'st thy self still Mine: while having thine
Own Wife, art scarce thine own, how can be Mine?
87. A good Man.
If what is Rare 's preclare, and of Account,
A good Man does all Rarities surmount.
88. Of a certain Old man.
Thy Beard once black, Age has made white: thy Min^*
Once white 's now black; once candid, now is unkind.
89. Of Paulinus.
When I thy Friend a Boon from Thee would borrow,
Thine Answer is, It shall be done to Morrow:
Wilt that I Thanks condign should Thee repay?
Thou shall have Thanks to Morrow, not to day.
90. Of painted Ladies.
You that your Faces paint, may well, nay must
With Hora^^
Flaccus say, We Shadows are and Dust.
91. Of Cotta.
Thy Wives Thou Wholly, but not solely art:
She Is solely Thine, not wholly, but in part.
92. A Politician.
Dissemble, Feign: Thy Self comport-comply
With Humors, with the Times: it is Policy.
If Thou be wise, thy Self comply-comport
To serve the Times, that Times may serve Thee for it.
93. Of Venus.
Why follows Venus Mars his lawless Flame?
Because to his lawful Venus Vulcan's lame.
94. Of Marinus.
None can Two Masters serve (without disaster)
But Thou Two Mistresses do serve, no Master.
95. Of Marcus.
(...) Beard does grow, thine hairs from head do fall:
^^^ve bearded, but lightheaded the art withal.
96. To Mr. John Hoskins.
^^en I conversed with Thee (my Friend instil'd)
^outh at New College in Oxford.
Oxon, Winchester College where the Scholars are called Children.
Winton at a Child:
(...) without doubts, in doubts I found thy love,
(...) Friendship without Fraud I often did prove:
(...) that thy Love, which then thou shew'd'st to Me,
^^mands, commends These grateful Lines to Thee.
97. Of Death to Epicharmus.
^^y would not die, but yet be dead? O why
^^uldst without dying, Epicharmus, die?
(...) of brings Death; Death Grief extinguisheth:
(...) therefore ( Epicharme) is worse than Death.
98. Of Phylllis.
(...) Parthians in their Flight shoot, wound their Foe,
(...) Lovers, Phyllis fleeing, wounds so.
99. Of Hallus the Grammaticaster.
^^mous am while fasting, but when full,
(...), says Hallus, Infamous and dull.
100. Of the Loadstone.
(...) Court Magnates Gold to Them attract,
(...) on the Magnetes; All exact:
(...) not deal with Such, in Asking learned,
(...) Giving flack, in Taking most concerned:
(...) to Them go, none from them come again,
(...) I nill ask them, lest I ask in vain.
101. Of Death.
(...) ask what is Death? till dead I know not Vere
,
(...) to Me then, I will resolve thy Quere. Certainly.

102. Of Clients.
^^nts before a Thief run singing home,
(...) from the City Money-less they come.
103. To Zoilus.
(...) I bad Manners check, thou carp'st at Me,
^onscious for reprehending Thee.
Why fear thou more than others? I perhaps
Blaming bad Manners, blame mine own Relapse.
104. Children and Fools tell Truth.
Our Proverb calls Truth-tellers Fools: What then?
Is It Folly to tell Truth in English Men?
105. To one Bald-headed.
Thy Front had certain Measure, till a blast,
I know not of what Wind thy Leaves off cast:
Thy Front has sithence All thine Head ingrost,
And is perpetual at last, not lost:
Thou can not tell the largeness of thy Front,
No Trust is therefore to be built upon it.
106. To the same.
Mine hairs I cannot number, 'cause so many:
Nor can Thou number thine, because not any.
107. Fortunes Apology.
Dame Fortune does an equiballance bear,
She fills the Poor with Hope, the Rich with Fear.
108. On Cotta.
Cotta the Stews advent'ring in, returned
TO his house ('it is said) with something that was burn'^*
109. On Procillus a Nobleman.
If thou to Liars would not lend thine Ear,
None with a Lie before Thee durst appear.
110. To Paulus a Lawyer.
Between thy self and Wife thou do disjoyn
The year, so that scarce Half is wholly Thine:
One part's thy Wives, Vacation called, to apply
Thy Wives Vocation, or Vacuity.
That other part's not wholly thine; thy Bride
Neglected, Thou by Clients art employed.
This Part of the year the Term is called, and why?
Because It Terminates thy Venery.
111. To the same.
No Terms determine, no Vacation's vain,
Thou wholly Vacant art by Strifes to gain.
112. To Marinus.
As often as from the Bed thy wife does rise
Untouched by Thee, her Nails assault thine Eyes:
Thou speak her Fair, but words in vain proceed,
She must be pleased in doing of the Deed.
113. A Surgeon.
Shall I wish Wars, or Peace? Each serves for me:
Fierce Mars, fair Venus, both my Patrons be.
114. The Venetian disease.
My Country's Italy, my Parents Gauls,
It Is doubt which of those Names to me befalls.
115. Back-biters, Flatterers.
Anaxagoras.
One said, The Snow was Black; an Author sad:
This Age has Many seen as sad, as bad:
The Fox a Crow's white Feathers praised: Ah me,
How many Foxes in this Age have we?
116. To Ponticus.
Thou said thou would repent: I scarce believe Thee,
For I did never yet so wise perceive Thee.
117. An Herculean labor.
To tame a shrewd Wives Tongue, and haughty mind,
A Thirteenth Labor Hercules will find.
118. Mars, Mors.
War, Death.
War brings Dearth, Dearth Death to Men on Earth;
War therefore's worse than either Death or Dearth.
Our Troubles War begins, Death finisheth,
In War small distance is 'twixt Dearth and Death.
119. To Cynthia.
O that thy Feats were like thy Feature: And
O that thine Heart were candid like thine Hand.
120. To Gellia.
In secret sins thou think thy self secure;
Though Nothing's done in secret that is impure.
121. Of Albinus.
A Friend Albinus meeting, said, Retire,
Thine shakes, for O thy Neighbors Wall's on Fire:
Albinus hasting home, his wife did take
In the Act; O Now, quoth He, my Wall does shake.
122. Of Claudius a Philosophaster.
Sick Claudius, poor, foolish, parts by's Art
Good in Three Parts; but of Them has no Part.
123. Of Bardella a Thief at Mantua.
A Monk the Thief Bardella judged to die
Thus Comforted, O thou shall Sup on high:
Bardella then replied, I fast this day,
Please you to Sup There in my Place, you may.
124. Of Flitting Flora.
In thy Coition thou did boast thine Act,
Thy boasting was more sinful than thy Fact.
125. Of Quintillus.
He nothing gives to his Friend, but liberal
TO his Friendless, gives Himself, his Wealth, his All.
126. To Aulus of old Quintius.
Though Quintius a young wild Wife did Wed,
Why sentst an Epithalamy to his Bed?
An Epitaph were fitter to confer:
For his own Grave he dug in Bedding her.
127. Of Costus.
Thou sinn'st impunely, but thy Foreman paid
Thy Penance with his Head: 'twas burned, it is said.
128. An Answer to Cynthia's Letter.
Thy Paper's white, thy Letter's black within:
This does denote thine Heart, and That thy Skin.
129. To Sextilian a Bastard.
Not to Create Thee, but to recreate
Himself, thy Father thee begot ('it was Fate,)
If Givers Minds than Gifts b' accepted rather,
Thou do not owe thy Life unto thy Father.
130. Of Porcia an Hypocrite.
Thou, 'cause my Book a Foreman Names, do flout it:
Books Thou would have, but not a Man without it.
131. Of Saturns Three Sons.
Divines, Physicians, Lawyers; These Three
Do regulate the World in their degree.
132. Of a single Life. To a Married man.
Woe to the sole, said Solomon, Eccles.
He, that had a Wife:
Saint Paul does much Commend a single Life:
A Welsh Proverb, Gwelh iw gua^ si, na gua ni, that is, Better is woe to me
than woe to us.
That, Woe unt^ us, says: This, but Woe to Me:
That Is double, This, but single Woe can be.
133. Of Corneus.
Hear, mark, be silent: he whose Feminine
Is wanton, to these three must most incline.
134. Of Cajus.
When Cajus was accused of Bigamy,
Confessing, he professing did reply,
A Bishop Husband of One wife may be:
May not a Layman then have Two or Three?
135. Of Pomponia.
She Is punctual, her self that prostitutes:
Because with profit, pleasure she commutes.
136. Of Pinotus sick with the Colic.
Thy Life was saved by breathing out thy Breath:
That was thy Life which proves unt' others Death.
137. Of Pomponia.
A Plume of Feathers brave Pomponia wears:
What Mars his Ensign was now Venus bears:
As Mars his favor She does wear't, that she
May show how friendly Mars and Venus be.
Cic. Tusc. quaest. lib. 5.
Suum Cuique pulchrum.
138. To H. L.
Thou love thy Neighbors wife, he thine does love:
So that ones own does not still pleasing prove.
139. Venus.
Since Venus is exposed to sale like Wine,
Why hangs there not before her door a Sign?
140. To Marinus. Difficilia quae pulchra.
If difficult what is fair, on this Result
Take Facile thou, give me the Difficult.
141. To Theodorus.
By the now*new Law thou may not wed, what then?
By the old thou may without offending men
But twice against Levit. 21.7, 13, 14.
Moses Law the have done amiss,
Thy first wife was a whore, a widow this.
142. Ka'end. Jan To Germanicus.
Instead of Gifts I Verses send to thee:
Send Gifts instead of Verses unto Me.
143. Sara.
She that her Maid would unt' her Husband give,
As did rare Sara, now does rarely live.
144. To D. T.
Thy Titles, Scholars Servant, Masters Lord,
Mine Envy and my Pity both afford.
145. Of Paula an Atheist.
Whether a Man two Wives, or Husbands two
A Maid should have, 'twas asked: This knot to undo,
Thus Paula said, A Maid two Men should have,
Else how can two consist in one Concave?
146. In Medio virtus.
Between two Men a pompous Woman sat,
Virtue the middle Place has lost of late.
147. Of Acerra.
He Is blessed, whom others Horns have made afraid,
Unwedded A'cer often to his Father said.
148. To Pinotus.
Do ask, What I would have a Feminine?
Not Venale, Vendible I would have Mine.
149. Of Quintus and Quintina.
Quintus his Wifes Entreaties for Commands,
Her words for Laws, her Beck for Statute stands:
She leads, she drives at will, the silly Sot,
As if she had an Husband, and had not:
Against Nature, Laws, Arts Rules: Grammarian
Avaunt: For Here Is He Woman, and She Man.
150. A Paradox to his absent Mistress.
I burn with Love: And I the more am burned,
The more remote from me the Fire is turned.
151. Of Paulina.
False to the First false to the second Bed:
Both void, She lived unblam'd-unblemished,
Not for the fear of Sin; but fear of Shame
Preferred Her without Blemish, without Blame:
Though many did her treat, did her entreat,
She granted unto none the Vacant Seat.
152. Of Gellia.
If it be Simony to Merchandise,
And at a price Things consecrate to prize,
We well may call thee Simoniacal,
Who sellest Love, For Love's Spiritual.
153. Of a certain Woman.
In small time how immense thy Things did grow?
Of late but Omicron, Omega now.
154. Aenigma.
Tell where that Creature is, on Hill, or Vale,
Whose Father Female, Mother is a Male?
155. To Ponticus.
That Both thine Eyes thou have I wonder: Why?
Because thy Parents Each had but One Eye.
156. Of D. Vitus.
I know not whether Horned, I know (by signs)
That the art a Bull, having Three Vitulines.
157. Of a Dactyle, to a certain Lover.
Would with a pleasing Verse thy Mistress Court?
'T were fit to know what Feet should it support:
Of all the Measures which a Verse do summon,
The Dactyle Measure best delights a woman.
158. Of Love descending.
From the Eyes Love rises, by the Mouth descends
Into Loves Center, where It has it is Ends.
159. Of Balba.
Balba, leave taking of her Spouse, said Thus
Phi-Philip you will b' I hope soon-soon with us.
160. Of Theft, a Problem, to Lawyers.
Who takes a thing, ^illing his Lord, 's a Thief;
But what if's Lordess in that Act be Chief?
161. Of Ponticus.
Of Promise thou do no Performance make:
Physician-like, who gives not, yet says Take.
162. Of Cerellia, married to an Eunuch.
Now to the Spartane Customs I agree,
That Men, Maids, when they wed should naked be:
For Cerill having late espoused a Frank,
Thiking to gain a Prize, got but a Blank.
163. Of Horns, a Problem.
When any Wife betrays the Marriage Bed,
Why wears her Husband Horns? Because he is Head.
164. To Germanicus, Calend. Jan.
Or give m' a Gift, my Verses or restore,
Which I on that condition gave before.
165. Christ-Church College in Oxford.
Though this imperfect House to ruin tend,
Its large Quadrangle yet does it commend.
166. Of Phyllis.
Phyllis pretends my Verse her Fancy moves;
She loves a Verse, but something more she loves.
167. Of Himself.
I spend the Time in Trifles, and in Folly:
Thus lest my Time be lost, I lose it wholly.
168. To the Reader, of Himself.
My Brevity perchance seems Sloth to imply:
Believe me no small labor, 's Brevity:
I not as some, speak much in foolish sort:
Perhaps my Speech is foolish, but it is short.
169. Of boasting Thraso.
Why does Sir Thraso wear great Spurs? Because
Glory does wear great Spurs to gain Applause.
170. Of Himself.
Ask, says Saint James, it shall be given thee:
O that King James would say the same to me.
171. Court Music consisting of two Voices.
The Favourite's advanced, and Elah sings:
Another, all his Tunes to a Cadence brings.
^
^
172. To the Reader.
Lest this my Book should make Tobaco vapor,
Wipe rather thy Posteriours with my Paper.
173. To his Book.
My Book, Me living, thou may die perhaps:
What then? A Child does often to death elapse
Before his Father: So then, whether I
Survive Thee, or Thou me, We both must die.
The End of the First Book.
To Mr. Thomas Harvey on his Translation of the First Book of Owen's Epigrams.
WHen what is begun, tha' ast finished, Owen sha^^*
Be the Translation, thine the original:
Thy Native Tongue the vigor does express
More of his Fancy, than his Latin dress.
So from thy Version, he derives this Good,
To be esteemed, in being understood.
T. M.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE EPIGRAMS OF John Owen.
Englished by Thomas Harvey, Gent.

Incept. 10. November. 1672.

1. To the Reader.
LEst this my Book please Fools, whereof are Many,
I would not have It many please, if any:
Few Readers are enough, but One (if wise)
If none do read me, none shall me suffice.
2. To the Lady Mary Neville.
The Praise of many's raised by Poets Art,
But all thy Praise springs from thine own desert.
3. To the same.
Thou to thy Foes, if any be, do will-
Do wish none ill, to Friends art Candid still:
This one thou never do forget: That other
Thou never did remember, Maid nor Mother.
4. To the same.
In Tables men fair Faces paint and place,
There to survive, when Fates the Face deface:
I cannot paint, but I can Poetize,
And Verses can give Life, when Picture dies:
Though sole Apollo, sole Apelles able's
Thee to describe in Verse, to paint in Tables.
5. To D. J. H.
I am no learned Poet, but a Learner:
No Learner Thou, but Poets learned Discerner.
6. What News?
The foolish People, as I pass the Street,
I^^uisitive, thus ask (when me they meet)
What News? I tell them I know nothing New:
Or if I knew, I say no News I knew.
7. The Court.
He that complies not in the Princes Hall
With All the witty, has no wit at all.
8. Of Aulus.
Were Knighted, that thy wise should love thee more?
She loves thee less, her self more than before:
Her Garb, her Garments must new fashioned be,
So that thy Dear will be more dear to thee.
9. Of the Chemist.
The Chemist Gold decocts, till (leaving none)
He loses all his Gold to find a Stone.
10. A Trojan.
Troy lost, at last the Trojans Wiser grew:
What man is not in this a Trojan true?
11. Loves Remedy.
Take Wood from Fire (thy Lust with Fasting tame)
Sit from a Woman far, as from a Flame:
If nor the former cool thee, nor the later,
Then take a wife, she will b' instead of water.
12. Troynovant.
To the Londoners.
As Phoenix Ashes do the Phoenix breed,
So from old Troy new London did proceed.
13. The Lawyers Deity.
Rome had one God, called Terminus of old:
But Westminster more Terms than one does hold.
14. Of the Earth.
In all things we the Middle things commend,
For they to Mediocrity do tend:
The Earth therefore than the Skies has greater grace,
Because in the world it holds the middle Place.
15. To King James, Defender of the Faith.
Thou greatest art of Christian Kings, in this
That to thy Faith the Faith committed is.
16. To the Lord Treasurer of England.
The art Kings and Kingdoms faithful Treasurer:
Thy Faith before all Treasures I prefer.
17. To the Kings Principal Secretary.
Thou secret keep'st the Kingdoms Secrets, even
So secret, that Faith to thy Faith is given.
18. To the Venetians.
Your Cities Situation (O wonder)
Is Founded unconfounded; the Ocean's under:
Lest only Fish should in the water dwell,
Y' have seated in the Sea your Citadel:
Where the Ocean was, a City's now complete,
What Nature made a Sea, Art made a Seat:
Y' have constituted (to your grand Renown):
The Inconstant water constant to your Town:
What wonder then by Laws your City stands,
When it the lawless waters countermands.
19. To the Lord Chancellor of England.
Lest Force the greatest Enemy to Law,
Should violate it, Law keeps Force in awe:
But thou the Laws Extremes have power to abate,
And in the Chancery to moderate.
20. To Richard Sackeville Earl of Dorset.
Though thou from Noble Ancestors were born,
And do thy Birth with Noble Parts adorn:
Yet thou (which was a wonder heretofore,
And for a Prodigy now stands, or more)
Merit to Mercenaries, Peace to War,
Virtue to Strength, Worth do to Birth prefer.
21. Caecil Treasurer of England 1597.
Arms are, and Stratagems of small concern,
If Caecil's Counsel sits not at the Stern:
Caecil and Atlas nobly both prognate,
This does support the Skies, and that the State.
22. To Guil. Caecil: Virtut Duce, Comite Fortuna.
Great Queen Elisa Fortune made a Count,
Why Virtue did She not to a Dukedom mount?
23. To Richard Vaughan Bishop of London.
O, of the British Thou the immortal Grace,
Art the First British Bishop of London.
this Place.
24. To the same.
I like those Preachers best, who Preach and Act;
Not those that only Preach but wave the Fact:
Thou therefore do excel, for thou do teach
What should be done, and do what thou do Preach.
25. To Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester.
Bilson, I was thy Scholar heretofore,
And to thy Precepts owe these Lines, and more.
26. The Life of William Wickham, formerly Bishop of Winchester, written in
Latin by Thomas Martin, Dr. in the Civil Law.
Life to the Dead to give, the Dead to raise
From Death to Life, 's a Work deserving Praise:
Which had not done, thou Martin had been dead:
But now both in this one Book live, are read.
27. Winchester College.
Europes prime School: whereof a little Part
I was to my great'st praise in Learnings Art:
Zoilus himself will not to thee deny,
(Thy Founder Wickham known) this Primacy.
28. To Sir Philip Sidney.
Great Alexander called Achilles blessed,
Whom Homer praised in Verse above the rest:
Unhappy I, because thou half Divine,
Can not made happy be by Verse of Mine.
29. To Sir Philip Sidney.
Whose Deeds worth writing, Lines worth reading are,
Is Rare* Thou therefore doing both art Rare:
Thy Lines worth reading, Deeds worth writing show
Thee learned, candid: equaliz'd by Few.
30. Upon the Marriage of William Earl of Pembroke, and Mary, daughter of the
Earl of Shrewsbury 1605.
In Manners, Personage, Wit, Age, Estates,
And in Nobility, you Both are Mates,
Yet thou deserve a better Bride than She:
A better Bridegroom She deserve than Thee.
31. To Elizabeth Countess of Rutland, Sir Philip Sidney' s Daughter.
'Twas Philip's Praise thou were his Child: But rather
Thine, that thou Daughter were of such a Father.
32. To Lucy Countess of Bedford.
Jury, thy splendid Name a Luce came,
That splendent through the World might be thy Names
Thy Noble Parents brought thee forth to sight,
But thee thy Virtues brought into the Light.
33. A Knights Ring. To Henry Goodyeer, Knight.
Nobility the Gold, the Gem be Grace:
This Ring upon thy Finger ever place.
34. To D. J. H.
Thy Verse is Nameless, though not worthless, while
Others their worthless Verse with Names instile.
35. To D. B.
Thou live well, if one well hid, well lives:
And thy great wit concealed more splendor gives.
36. To Th. M. the Princes Tutor.
Thou so do form, inform the Prince, that He
King of his Realms, and of Himself will be:
This Fifth to prize before those Kingdoms Four,
And of Himself, as well of them to have Power.
37. To Th. M. the Princes Tutor.
Thou so do teach (for times of Sword and Gown)
The docile Prince, prime Hope of Britains Crown,
That scarce in future times 'twill be discerned,
Whether He be more great, more good, more learned.
38. To Walter Gwyn.
The Increase of the good Prince thou votest fair,
And say, Seeming a fatal Anagram of the Prince, as appears in the Book of
Anagrams of Mr. Walter Gwyn, published in Scotland before Britain reborn.
Increase to sit in Arthur's Chair;
Nature gave Wit, may Grace attend his youth,
Grow may thine Honor with the Princes growth.
39. Francis Drake 1581.
Thy Travels, Drake, have reached Earths utmost bound,
Have seen both sides of the Terrestrial Round:
If men be mute, the Stars will blaze thy Name;
And both the Poles will sound-resound thy Fame
Beyond Hercules Pillars.
the Gades: Thou may these words repeat,
I greater am than Hercules the Great.
40. Britains Strength.
To the Prince.
The Havens.
Ports are Englands Gates; the Ships her Walls;
Camp, Seas; Forts, Bodies; Hearts, the Generals.
41. The Terrestrial Globe.
Of Water and of Earth's the Globe, (Sea, Land)
That movable, this unremov'd does stand.
42. Health, unhealthy.
The more thou drink'st of drunken Healths, the less
Of Health, of Happiness thou do possess:
I wish a thousand of such Healths to thee,
And envy not: One Health's enough for me:
One Health's enough for sober men and sane:
No Health's in Drinking Healths, no Boon, but Bane.
43. The Divine.
To know thine's nothing, if not known it is known.
The Politician.
If known it is nothing then to know thine own.
44. All Things affect good.
From Opto's Optimus, without contest,
For he that is wise does wish himself the best.
45. A Phoenix on Earth.
A certain Maid of Burgundy surpised
With Maiden Sickness, helpless and advised
To take a little Meant, an Herb, a thing
Helpful to many (taken in the Spring)
She rather than to live by sin, would die:
Death being all the Purchase sin did buy.
46. Democritus, and Heraclitus.
That only laughed, this only wept: but whether
Shall be laughed at, or wept for? Both, or Neither?
47. Of Langa.
Langa (she Papist) 'spous'd to a Lutheran,
TO avoid contesting, thus to speak began:
Lest future Discords should disturb our Peace,
To me be facile, and I thee will please;
Grant me the Liberty of Conscience,
And with all other things I will dispense.
48. King Arthur's Round-Table.
Why thy Round Table do to a Square prefer?
Men made things Square, God made The World.
the Circular.
49. To Theophila B. C.
He must love much, and have no vulgar spirit,
Who does thee praise, and love as thou do merit.
50. Of Hernicus.
His Soul to God, his Body to the Ground
Hernick bequeathed: And lying in a Swound
He heard some whispering, that his wife had gained
A new-another Husband, which disdained
By the envious Man, he gave his wife the Lie:
Revived, whereas before he thought to die.
51. Of Love and Faith.
Love is from Faith divorced: that ever is
Suspicious, not once suspected this.
52. A Lover.
Uncertain Hope, Fear constant, flying Pleasure,
Sad Joys, sweet Grief, Love bitter. Where Is the Treasure?
53. The Golden Age.
Before the virtue was of Gold disclosed,
Why was that Age the Golden Age supposed?
54. Of Alana.
In Bed Alana's Place is lowest, yet
At Table in the highest Place She Is set:
Her facile Husband parts with her the Sway,
He rules by Night, She governs all the day.
55. Germanick Death, to Polynicus.
Death's not to be, says Seneca; some think,
(And Germans too) that Death is not to drink.
56. Of Philodemus.
Rare things, 'cause dear, thou shunnest, seek common,
To thee more dear's a vile than dearer Woman.
57. Of Battus.
Thou secrets tell, crave'st pardon for the wrong:
Would have no need of Pardon? Hold thy Tongue.
58. The Gordian Knot.
The Gordian Knot cut once with Sword; Is it
Now rather to be loosed by Sword, or Wit?
None can dissolve this Knot by Wit or Word:
Nor yet can Alexander with his Sword.
59. Love.
Wars, Peace again: these things occur in Love:
Content, Contention in one Circle move.
60. Strifes, Laws, to J. C.
Strife Laws produced, and Law produces Strife:
None without One of these can live this Life.
61. The Miser and Prodigal.
My study's Rhetoric says Prodigal:
And mine the Miser says is Logical.
Logic, close-fisted Avarice descries,
And Rhetoric men's Prodigalities.
62. Labor.
Though the active Romans Grief no Labor deemed,
The inactive Greeks Labor a Grief esteemed.
63. A good, strong, wise man.
Good Men want Wealth (but have divine supplies)
Wit to the Strong, Faith's wanting to the Wise.
64. The Order of the Golden Fleece.
Philip the Duke of Burgundy, it is feigned,
That Order of the Golden Fleece ordained:
Whose Heirs the Golden Indies now possess:
This Order was an Oracle: no less.
65. The Motto of Thomas Earl of Dorset.
Nec temere, nec timide.
Not hastily, nor heartlesly.
Wisely suspect, and stoutly things expect;
Be circumspect, lei thee no Fear deject.
66. The Motto of Henry Neville, Knight.
Ne vile velis: Not vile's thy will.
Neville, thy will ne-vile, or vain brings forth:
Since vile things little, vain are Nothing worth.
67. To Sir Philip Sidney of his Arcadia.
Thou did command, when passing to thine Urne,
(Witness thy Wife) they should the Arcadia burn,
If it should die, for kindling Lovers Flames,
It ought not to be burned, but drowned in Thames:
(In this thy Book no Line, no Letter's found
That merits either to be burned or drowned.)
What ever censure on thy Book may fall,
Thy Wit nor censure merits, Death, nor Gall.
68. To Jane Owen a most learned woman.
None of thy Sisters have I heard or seen,
Though Five to the aged Father born have been.
How many then I know, but what they be
I know not: yet I know, if like to thee.
69. To his Friend.
He be none's Enemy, nor twice a Friend;
My Friendship where it does begin shall end.
70. The Usurers Grammar.
Things Creeping, Swimming, Going, Fleeing, All
Love These, Those, all things, all Men does inthral:
He, She, That, Coin, Money, and Gold, these Three
Do conquer Love, by whom all conquered be.
71. To one like neither Parent.
Why did thy Parents thee, not like unt' Either
Beget, when they Consented Both together?
Thou no right form of Either Parent have,
While both of them to form thee did what is past.
72. To two (nameless) returning from Venice.
That your Adventure fourfold might return,
Your Journey you to Venice did adjourn;
From whence, when with your gain you came again,
Your Friends, though to their loss, rejoiced amain.
73. Adultery and Fornication.
What differs base Adulterers from vile
Fornicators? Tragic as from Comic style.
74. Of Hercules, to C. D.
No force could force, or Hercules remove:
What was the greatest of his Labors? Love:
A Lioness, not Manness he could tame:
No Monstress, him a Mistress overcame.
75. A Saluting Kiss.
Give me three Kisses, Phyllis: if not three,
So many as thy Lips are, give to Me:
Thou giv'st and take one, deny'st one more,
Or take thou thine, or mine to me restore.
76. A Problem to Naturalists, of Kisses.
If Kisses to the Taste bring nothing sweet,
Why Kiss we with our mouth when Friends we meet?
77. Of Labienus.
This Thief the Gallows mounting, there to die,
Thus, thus, said he, we scale the Starry Sky.
78. Of Alexander.
One World, one Alexander not confined:
O than the world, immenser was his mind.
To this one World, one Man was not complete:
Great Alexander, but the World more great.
79. To Firmicus, of Aulus.
Thou Firmick credit'st none, all credit thee:
Aulus trusts all, but cannot trusted be.
80. Of a certain Poetaster.
Thou pottest so as if no Pot, no Poet.
No Poetry; as if Pots only show it.
Drunken Carnifex, an Hangman.
Carminifex, from out this word
Take Mi, the rest to thee will well accord.
81. Of ones Lying Letters.
Thy false Epistle often comes to my sight:
Or rare, or never thou do Gospel write.
82. Physician heal thy self, to Gilbertus.
Vain is advice to thee, thy self to cure,
For it is thy greatest care, that cure to ensure.
83. Of a certain Usurer.
The thousand Pounds thou did to Flava lend,
Thou for it with full Usury do send.
If like for like she gave, thou art paid thereby:
Thou had her Bodies use for the Usury.
84. Of an Hypocrite.
All things he does dissemble, or surmise:
Though Labor hence, thence Dolor does arise.
85. Of Erasmus his Book of Follies.
Erasmus was the first who Folly praised:
This Folly showed his wit, his wisdom raised.
86. Of Anagrammatists.
Whither, O whither will your wits enforce.
Vowels and Letters here and there to course?
As when Augustus leisure gave, in one
Thyrsis his Sheep, his Goats brought Corydon.
87. Of a certain indoctrin'd Doctor.
Master in Art, thou Beardless-Artless were:
Now Bearded Doctor thou art, but more inert.
88. Of naked Love.
Nature the Fields, the Birds, the Sheep, the Beasts,
With Grass, with Plume, with Fleece, with hair invests:
What ever under the Air is born or bred,
By Nature, or with Art is covered.
Why are all clothed but naked Love? express,
The more Love naked is it is called the less.
89. Of the Exchequer, to Sir William Pits, Knight.
Into the Treasury collected Coin
Runs, as fresh Rivers run into the The Sea.
Brine:
Out of the Treasury the Coin dispersed,
Runs as the Rivers from the Sea reversed:
Nor all those Rivers can the Sea supply,
Nor are the Fountains in the Mountains dry.
90. Of a persidious Person.
I learn by trusting, not to trust Pretenses:
My false and hapless Hope beguiled my Senses.
91. The Silver Sin.
No Whoremongers did Saturns Kingdom stain:
The World was chaste till Jupiter did Reign.
92. A Bawd.
No part from Sale is of thy Body Free,
Nor is thy Soul, if one would buy't of thee:
Thy Soul's exposed to Sale, but none will buy it,
For all, except the Devil, will deny it.
93. Self-Love.
I the First Person, Second Thou, Third He;
Yet Each to himself seems First of all the Three.
94. Wisdom.
Who Is Rich? the Wise: Who Is Poor? the Fool: by which
If I be wise, I shall be quickly Rich.
Who Is wise? the Rich: Who Is Fool? the Poor: then se^*
If Rich I am not, I a Fool must be.
95. The Etymology of Venus.
Venus (says Cicero de Not. Deorum Lib. 2.
one) spontan'ous does advene
Unt' all things: does he not u^t' all men mean?
96. Of a certain Drunkard.
If Potable, as Optable were Gold,
What Mines of Gold would thy vast Guts insold?
97. To Polla.
A Kiss thou nor deny'st, nor give one;
But turn'st thy Cheek, arid as is a Bone.
If new things must have new Names (not the same)
Kisses must have a New, another Name.
98. A Friend and a Wife.
Life's dear unt' us, a Friend is therefore dear:
A Wife to her Husband's dear, why? 'cause so near.
99. Anger.
Because that Anger Valor does precur,
Called Aristotle Anger, Valors Spur?
100. The Roman Flora.
Proud Rome, to which the world did Tribute pay,
Paid Tribute unto thee by night by day.
For All that was contributed to thee,
For Portage thou may call thy Tribute Free.
101. The Etymology of the English word Anger (Ira.)
Angry men Anguish have in Deed in Name:
Anger and ( Vexing.
Angor) then are near the same.
102. Of Himself.
I grave in Trifles, Study playing: when
In grave things trifling, I play studying then.
103. Women's Titles.
A Court, when spous'd, his Wife a Countess makes:
A Countess makes no Count the Spouse she takes.
So from the Sun, the Moon receives her Light:
The Sun's Light is his own, no borrowed Right.
104. To Zoilus.
The Praiser Praise, the Lover Love does merit:
Praise then if Praise; Love, if thou't Love inherit.
105. Of the middle Age an indefinite Definition.
While drawing is our frail Life's latest Line,
No Line the Middle Place can it assign.
That which the unlearned and learned call Middle Age,
None knows, till finished is his Pilgrimage.
106. To a Grey-hair'd Dier.
Thy Beard, once colored Black, 's now colored White:
This Nature, not thine Art wrought, brought to Light.
107. To Aulus.
New Rome expelled her King, proud she the proud:
What wonder? Pride Kings loved not, nor allowed:
Tell why so few Kings Friends are found? 'cause there is
Few that are Kings Competitors, or Peers.
108. The Bed.
What the English Bed, the Welsh call Sepulcher:
The Bed a Tomb, and Sleep does Death infer.
109. Riders Library.
What means arrided Riders Book, thus styled
A Library, since but one Book's compiled,
And that of words? It therefore should not carry
The Name of Library, but Dictionary.
110. Nummus, Money.
Do Latin Critics Money.
Nume and Numisme name
That, which the Greeks Nome and Nomisme proclaim?
Or is it O Nummus 'cause thou numbered art,
Thy Name from Numb'ring comes, in whole or part?
Or is it because the world esteems Queen Coin
To be some Goddess, Numen, or Divine?
111. Of J. S. a Covetous Man.
An Iron Chest thy Gold, Iron bars inviron
Thy Gate, House and House-holder all are Iron.
112. Of Roman Flora, to Grammarians.
The Romans for the Flowers of their Fruit
Did Flora for a Goddess constitute.
She too too prodigal of Flesh and Fame,
Did neither bear good Fruit, nor keep good Name:
But prostitute in the Flower of her youth
She lost both Fruit and Flowers in their growth.
113. Of J. Protus.
As Leaves from Trees in Autumn by the wind
Are whiffled all away, none left behind;
The bald-man so, by shaking of his head
Has shook off all those Hairs which there were bred.
114. Of Theodorus.
When David threescore years and Ten was old,
A fair young Virgin kept him from the cold:
Thou to be like that Prophet great and sage,
A young wife have espoused in thine old Age.
115. Of the Plague in England 1603.
This Plague so many men and women slew,
That scarce is place for any Plague anew.
116. To a certain Woman.
If Fortune had thee favored, as did Nature,
England had not a more accomplished Creature:
When Trojan Wars began had thou been born,
Troy for thy sake might have been sacked and torn.
117. Of a Perjured Person Convicted by his own Handwriting.
In vain perfidious; thy words deny
That Truth which thine own hand does testify:
That words more constancy than Deeds should have,
One Mouth to thee, not two thy Maker gave,
But one Tongue, though two hands to thee belong;
Why single are thine Hands, double thy Tongue?
118. Of Cottula, a Grammaticaster.
Thus Cottula did Labyrinth expound,
Because (quoth he) great labor in it is found.
119. Anagram of Rome, to the Carthaginians.
Stout Annibal in a few hours delayed
His fortune, having not Romes wealth surveyed:
He knew to conquer, knew not how to prize
His Conquest, though an African and wise.
Alas, what loss had he? Procrastination
Though small, preserved great Rome from Devastation.
120. Of a great Clark.
Sick Stomachs much receive, not much concoct;
So thou know much, I know, yet art indoct.
121. Of one called Davis.
From London Davisses thou bragg'st Descent,
And do dissent from British Orient.
Ignoble thou, a noble Stock and pure
Disclaim'st, and claim'st from Parents more obscure:
Thou with thy native soil do well agree,
For thou of it, and it is ashamed of thee.
122. Of Aulus.
Thee wise men think a fool: Fools think thee wise:
What art? what think thou of thy self? Advise.
123. Of Linus a Doctor.
Why do for form things frame? so coveting
Wit slightest: Form gives Essence to the thing.
If thou deny this Philosophic Norme,
I vouch it; thou were Doctor made for Form.
124. Of Thais.
O would thou were less fair, or honest more,
For no thing's fouler than the fairest Whore.
125. Of a nameless Voluminous Writer.
When dire-dure Hunger, and sad wants oppressed thee,
When Thirst insatiated did molest thee,
Thy Books thou (self distracted) did distract,
What should thou do? Famine advised that Act.
Thee Poverty compelled, thy Books (with sweat
Compiled) first penned, after to vend, and eat.
126. On a Bald Pate.
Lo, not an hair thine heads bald Crown does Crown:
Thy Faithless Front has not one hair thine own:
Before, Behind thine hair's blown off with Blast,
What Is left thee to be lost? thine Head at last.
127. To Claudius and Linus.
Lewd Claud, to make thee good, thou want sole will:
Thou Linus want sole Power to make thee ill.
128. To George.
Nom.
George, whether thou desir'st to b' in my Book,
Wherein a Verse averse is, if thou look:
Genesis
Or whether of thy Kindred I should raise
Trophys in Verse, often sounding Thine-their Praise:
Dat.
Or whether I to thee would recommend
Due thanks, my Verse cannot due thanks repend:
Accus.
It Is well no Verse of mine thee does accuse:
In this thy Name well pleases Me-my Muse.
Vocat.
If generous, O George, thou would be called
Thou in the extremest Place shall still b' installed.
Ablat.
Wo's me, that I my Verse cannot enforce
Longer to hold with thee a long Discourse.
129. A Lover is a Warrior.
Soldiers with Harlots, Aulus well compared:
Mars bodies armed, Venus unarmed does guard.
130. The Military Oath.
The Latins Sacrament, called sacred Oath,
Which Soldiers to their Captain did betroth:
If Sacraments be but an Oath, then there
More Sacraments than two will soon appear.
131. Of Alanus, Covetous and Lame.
Give but a Gift to Alanus, He, though Lame,
Is hundred-handed to receive the same:
But if for Gift a Gift he must restore,
He Is Lame that hundred-handed was before.
132. The Condition of Kings.
While This forbears, That fears Truth to relate
To Kings, O miserable Kingly state!
133. Vis, Jus, Force, Right, to J. C.
Vis, Force; Jus, Right are adverse: yet the Name
Of Vis and Jus inverted, is the fame.
134. Of Marcus.
Wives, Widows, Maids, Whores, Wenches, (women-kind)
Thou love, but thine own Wife thou leave behind:
Among so many kinds of Venus sports,
Why leave the lawful, love the unlawful sorts?
135. Desperate Debt.
Who Is not in Debt to his wise? who Solvency or Payment is not to be
understood, but of one that is able to pay the whole debt. Jabol. de verb.
signif. 1. solvendo.
solvent is?
None solid, but insolvent is in This.
136. Of Culianus.
Wise men are Cic. de Divin. lib. 2.
wonders: wonders now are none:
Then now there is no wise man; no, not one.
But Culian, the art wise: then wonders are;
Or thou from wisdom, Culian, art far.
137. Of Marcus, a man venust or comely.
Too much of Venus Burnt.
usted part of Thee,
That in some Part thou may Venustus be.
138. Of Adrian 5.
Derided Epigrams, derided Verse
Thou writest, which with mirth have no commerce:
No mirth is in them; yet the Reader smiled,
Because both wit and mirth from them's exiled.
139. I, Thou, He.
There Is no man but prefers Himself unt' All
Hence the first Person, I, we count and call.
Thou fam'st thy present, blam'st thine absent Friend,
He Thou next Me, and He next Thee does tend.
140. Petite and dabitur vobis.
Ask and it shall be given you.
That which was promised Askers heretofore
Is given now to Givers: men no more
Will gratis give: what is gratis comes from Heaven:
Of naught comes naught: Give, and it shall be given. Date and dabitur vobi^

141. Married Persons, Children, Parents.
Husband and wife once two, are now but one:
Once one, two now are Father and his Son.
142. Of Marcus a Lawyer.
Thou pleadest for thy self not Client; he
Not for himself, but brings his Gold for thee:
The certain Laws uncertain Causes cross:
Thou sure of gain, thy Client's sure of loss.
143. To his Father.
As man more excellent than woman is,
I so thy son do more excel in this.
144. An Italian.
The Italians of their wives (as Books comprize)
The parts incluse-s^cluse Monopolize:
This, what God said unt' Eve, the woman gains
By this, I will multiplicate thy pains.
145. What Wife the Author would have.
I like a woman facile to be loved,
To love difficile, comely, well approved:
Rivals in love I like; deserve she should
The love of all, not love alone I would.
146. To one complaining that his Children were not like him.
Would on thy wife beget a Self-like Child?
First get a wife like thee compos'd-compil'd.
147. To the Married.
Of Conjugal Love.
When Adam had espoused Eve his Bride,
No woman was for him to love beside:
Love Conjugal is therefore First and best:
Paternal does the Second Love attest.
148. Sir Francis Drake' s Epitaph.
Though Papistry should rage in time to come,
It would not, Drake, I think, dig up thy Tomb:
Thou need'st not fear it should thy Body burn,
For in the water safe from Fire's thine Urne.
149. A Child's Epitaph dying before his Grandfather and Father.
Death keeps no method, Logick's Art denies:
A Son before his Sire and Grandsire dies.
150. Epitaph of Maurus.
His Soul of 's Corpse, his Corpse of 's Soul's hereft;
Maurus wants both: his Name is only left.
151. Epitaph of Pyramus and Thisbe.
Death friendly-foe from you that grief removed
Which brought on Death before: because you loved.
152. Tho. Moor, dying.
Moor had his Head from's Body severed:
But would not have his Hair cut from his Head.
153. Three Languages Crucified.
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, First, Next, Third commixt;
Sacred, Learned, Roman, all three Crucifixt.
154. Don Antonio King of Portugal.
Between thee and thy Kingdom a Divorce
Was lately made against thy will, by force:
Now thou may of thy Kingdom (took away)
What Christ Himself My Kingdom is not of this World.
did of his Kingdom say.
155. Alexander, Aristotle.
He great'st of Kings, of Sophists this compleater,
Great Alexander, Aristotle greater:
This learned, made Alexander more complete;
Great He, made Aristotle not more great.
156. Of Plato.
The Bees which swarmed on Plato's lips, do still
Distill rare Sweets from his mellistuous Quill.
157. Virgil' s Georgicks.
Thou, Maro, writ'st rich Verse of Husbandry,
And do manure the Readers wit thereby.
158. Persius the Poet.
Dark Persius I read, but not conceive:
IN the dark he does his Readers lead and leave.
159. Tacitus.
Thee Candor made Truth-telling, Nature wise,
Briefness obscure, and Gravity concise.
160. To Martial.
Persons thou know to spare, to speak of things,
All thy Conceits are honyed, have no Stings.
161. To Petrarch.
While O thy Laura's read, the doubt will be,
Laurel or Laura whether fitt'st for thee.
162. Pliny, Englisht by Philemon Holland, a Physician.
Pliny writes many things, is long: is short
Much writing: Holland's Because more plene
, longer, Because more plai^^
shorter for it*
163. Of Cicero, to Catullus.
What thou did tell Catullus, and foretell
Of Cicero, was true: for it befell.
164. Of Historians in this Age.
Historians of old wrote truth, no lies:
Now to write lies, no truth, it does suffice.
This Nay, that Yea concludes: O which I pray
Shall the next Age believe of Yea or Nay?
The certain Reader is uncertain, whether
He Neither of them shall believe, or Either.
165. Kings. People.
By Kings unlearned the People's led-misled,
Like faultring feet by a distemp'red Head.
166. The Senate.
Kings Reign alone, why rule they not alone?
He rules best, who is ruled by more than one.
167. To an Historian.
Thou conversant in Histories do read,
And travelst without danger, without dread:
An History does teach in Time, though short,
More than long Times Experience does comport.
168. Of Diet, to J. H.
If old thou would be slowly, then use all
Medicines, like Modicums, Reciprocal.
Like too much meat, Medicines may health infest;
And meat like Medicines used is most times best.
169. The Peers of France.
Not altogether Peers: for it appears
Imparity with Parity co-heres.
170. P. Magnus, C. Major, F. Maximus, Pompey, Cato, Fabius.
This great'st, less than the great, greater than he
The Greater: which is greatest of the three?
171. To T. S.
Thy wit and Judgment in my Verse to show
My wit and Judgment are too weak, too low.
Thy wit and Judgment I transcendent find,
Or else my wit and Judgment both are blind:
But whatso'ere my Judgment is, or wit,
I to thy wit and Judgment mine submit.
172. Of himself.
What wonder if bad Verse my Muse unveils?
For I nor claw mine Head, nor gnaw my Nails.
173. The Five Senses.
These Five to will and pleasure that relate,
Do they their Office, or officiate?
174. Seeing.
The more the sight assimilates the Mind,
The more it draws it, makes it more inclined.
175. Hearing.
How soon sounds vocal vanish from our Ear?
Like Air they come, like Air they disappear.
176. Smelling.
Between the mouth and Eyes the expanded Nare
Does carnal with spiritual things compare.
177. Tasting.
That meat may be more pleasing to the Taste,
Hunger, like Sauce, will sweeten the repast.
178. Touching.
Some Touch sole pleases, some has Titillation:
This youth, that Age affects with Delectation.
179. Objects of the Senses.
Sight, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Touching, these
Affect, infect my Senses as they please.
180. Touching and Tasting.
Some are, who can nor Smell, nor Hear, nor See:
And of five Senses are deprived of three:
Why want none Tasting, Touching? 'cause of these
That the individ, this guards the Species.
181. Epigrams, Satyrs.
Satyrs are but long Epigrams; And these
Are but short Satyrs, to displease, or please:
Satyrs avail not, if they be not tart;
Nor Epigrams, unless like Satyrs, smart.
182. A dumb man.
He moves his Lips, but utters no true sound,
Let Apollonius his mind expound.
183. Blind and Deaf.
Why this with his Eyes, with his Ears more quick is he?
This hears with his Eyes, he with his Ears does see.
184. Teeth and Tongue.
A Tooth.
Dens comes from Edens, Eating; Lingua, Tongue,
From Licking; each from what does to it belong.
185. The Phoenix and the Viper.
The dying Phoenix leaves a living seed;
But living Vipers dying are to breed.
186. The Silkworm.
Me skill does kill, I make my self my Tomb,
I draw my fatal Thread, spin Death my Doom.
187. The Right Hand.
To give or take I use my Right Hand; Why?
Lest what my Right Hand does, my left should 'spy.
188. The Left Hand.
From Pleasantness the Left Hand has its name;
An idle Hand, and in all Labor lume.
189. Sunday.
Why's that day called (when Light was first dilated)
Sunday, when yet the Sun was not created?
190. Terra di Lavoro.
Why is Campania so fully famed
For Pleasure, now the Land of Labor named?
191. Garments.
New things wax old, and old things are renewed:
Thus men are pleased with a vicissitude.
192. Wine.
Wine from sad hearts expels Grief; and mine
Letificates, dilating when supine.
193. A Sheep.
Want we flesh, skins, young, dung, dice, Musick-strings,
Wool, Milk? one Sheep supplies with all these things.
194. Soyling of Fields.
Dung's a vile Excrement; yet has its worth:
Its Element mine Aliment brings forth.
195. Harmony.
Discording Concords best concur in Nature:
So man and woman generate a creature.
196. A Parret.
If words to invert be lawful, and unblam'd,
A Parret then a prater shall be named.
197. Ink and Paper.
That it may more apparent be, we write
With cole-black Ink on Paper Snow-like white.
198. A Comedy.
The Scene our facts obscene describes*descries:
Our faults are found not feigned in Comedies.
199. A Cloak.
My Cloak from the Earth, than I my self more far's:
A Gown.
My Gown sweeps the Earth, my Mind transcends the Stars.
200. A Satyr.
One reason Satyrs did produce and Laws:
Ill Manners of both's being were the Cause.
201. An Eunuch.
My Testicles I want, yet I attest
My self a Man, a Masculine at least.
202. An Hourglass.
False is the truest Hourglass: for with use
The Sand wears smaller, wider grows the Sluice.
203. A Merchant.
It Is hard to say That Merchant's rich or poor,
Who to the trustless Seas intrusts his store.
204. Lust.
That thing's deformed, fair formed by night should seem,
It Is not black Nights, but it is blind Lust's esteem.
205. Donna, Lady.
By how much more man's Lord of 's wife, why than
His wife, his Lady calls the uxorious Man?
206. A Soldier.
Though Wars give bloody Skarrs, yet more are harmed
By naked Venus, than by Mars when armed.
207. An Army.
Huge Hulk, Faith faithless, inhumane, too greedy
Of bloodshed, to shed humane blood too speedy.
208. Lovers Tears.
As fervent fire from wood the moisture drills,
So Love within the Tears from the Eyes distills.
209. The Stars.
He that affects the odd Number (that is) God
Created all the Stars, in number odd.
210. The Venetians.
As Seas with Waters, Skies with Stars abound:
So Riches the Venetians surround.
211. An Harp.
Since the Harps discording Strings concording be,
Is It not a shame for men to disagree?
212. A Fowler.
Shun cruel Flames, not knowing sports events.
All Elements give thy sport Aliments.
213. The Echo.
No skill nor Art a voice can form, or found:
Sole Echo does reiterate the sound.
214. A Looking-glass.
Than Phid'ias or Apelles wiser, thou
The Bodies moti'on form'st, they knew not how.
215. The Echo, and Looking-glass.
Nothing of Life has the Echo, but to squeake:
The Glass would seem to live, if it could speak.
216. Music.
The name of Music from the Muses came;
Best Art; none other Science has this Name.
217. Albion, To the King.
England was once an Heptarchy: that while
Into nine Parts was parted all this Isle.
Unhappy Britain when divided thus;
United, happy made by thee for us.
The End of the Second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF JOH. OWEN'S Epigrams.
1. To the Lady Mary Neville.
I Gloze not, lie not thee when I applaud:
None more deserves, less desires land.
Thou seek'st not praise, though thou deserve it best:
And of thy praises this is not the least.
2. To the same.
Thou who before thy Birth a burden were
Unto thy Parent, born, her honor art.
3. To the Reader, of his Book.
Lest this my Book displease the candid Eye
I fear; and fear lest it with Fools comply.
4. The Virgin Birth of Elizabeth, Queen of England 1602.
England and Scotland are united by
The auspicious Birth of thy Virginity.
TO unite then multiply's of greater worth:
And thou best Parent by not bringing forth.
5. To the Hollander 1602.
Thou not against Minerva's will did fight,
Whilst Englands Pallas backed thee with her might.
But thy fate changed; Death (like Ulysses come)
Took hence thy Pallas and Palladium.
6. To James King of Great Britain, etc.
The Golden Age is come, long since foretold,
When but one King should wear Brute's Crown of Gold
Who should the Britains, that divided were
Unite; of Peace should the Olive Branches bear:
That having Peace, all good unt' us comes forth,
We now may say (most truly) from For Owen, Grandfather to King Henry the
seventh came from North Wales: And King James from the North of great Britain.
the North.
7. To the Prince.
Great Britains Hope, son of so great a Sire,
Half of each Parent; for Example higher
Almost than imitation; in rare Parts
Followed by few, beloved in all men's hearts.
Had thou these virtues from thy Sires instinct?
Or from thy Mothers Breasts? from both I think it.
8. Basilicon Doron, to the King.
None needs this Author, none this Book proclaim:
He This, This Him resounds with Trump of Fame.
9. To the Lady Mary Neville.
Thy Glass reflects thee fair, fame calls thee chaste;
Thou nor from Glass, nor Fame a fable have;
Fame that of all things has the swiftest wing,
Dares not presume thy fame to stain, or sting.
10. Of her daughter Cecily.
No Painter can delineate the mind:
Yet in this Picture thou thy self may find.
11. To the Candid Reader.
My good Verse, best: indifferent mine ill,
Kind Reader thou do call with candid will.
To the malevolent Reader.
My bad Verse, worst: indifferent, my good
Thou call'st, (black Reader) so thy censure stood.
12. Hercules By-way.
Some in Quadruples, some in Triples err:
The Herculean Duple is most sinister.
13. Of Virtue.
Virtue contemns praise, though praise incline
To Virtue Shadows as to Bodies join;
For Virtue's real, praise but verbal, bare
As Bodies something, Shadows nothing are.
14. Life's Dyal.
From East to West without return am I,
Born yesterday, live this day, next day die.
15. Of God.
So great thy Greatness Euclide could not show:
And such as Aristotle did not know.
16. Of an Atheist.
There is no God the Fool in secret says:
But none so soolish as to make it his Faith.
If none a God deny, who is the Atheist? he
Who does desire that there no God should be.
17. Charity.
As Wives where loveless, there do faithless prove,
So's Faith deprived of Charitable love.
18. Dives and Lazarus.
The Gospel does a nameless Rich man blame,
Where Lazarus has an eternal Name.
19. Increase and Multiply.
The first man was at first but one, till God
Of him made two, evening the number odd:
After when God unt' Eve did Adam tie,
God made them one again to multiply:
God first made one, then two, then (as before)
He made them one to multiply the more.
20. Union.
Divine is Union, Division evil's:
For there is one God, innumerable Devils.
21. Three Tempters.
The World, Flesh, Devil; are three Sophisters;
In Logic he, in Rhet'rick they converse.
22. The Spirit and Flesh.
Me Flesh and Spirit hither, thither force;
Jove, Caesar are in me Competitors:
Peace to you both: were you but once at Peace,
Peace then in all the world would soon increase.
23. Man to Man a God, Wolf.

Man is to man a God, a Wolf: why? when?
For Christ's a God, Adam a Wolf to men.
24. God's word.
Men few things see, God all things sees foresees:
Hence men speak often, God but once decrees.
25. The Broad and Narrow way.
The Scripture bids us strive ('it is our concern)
To walk the Narrow way to Life eterne:
If that way leads us not to inherit Bliss,
The broader way will lead us down to Dis.
26. St. John Baptist.
The Baptist Christ preceded, as the Light
Precedes the Sun, brings day, dispells the night.
27. Of Autumn.
Autumn shakes off the Leaves, and for man's use
Produces fruit: let us the like produce.
28. The Misery of Life.
Who long would live, wretched although and poor,
That is, he would be wretched more and more:
Poor-wretched Irus dies against his will:
That i^, he would be poor and wretched still.
29. Of Nature and Grace.
Nature like to the Moon gives pallid Light:
Grace like the Sun more splendid shines and bright.
30. The Catechism.
Twelve things thou must believe, must pray for seven,
And ten things do if thou will enter Heaven.
31. A Rich Man.
Why are few rich men saved? because their bent
Repents Expenses, nothing else repent.
32. O guileful Hopes!
O rather guileful things; our Hope a friend
Most faithful, us concomitates to the end.
33. The Redeemer.
One man by dying, man from Death has freed,
Which was to man for one man's sin decreed:
Christ all things did post-pone, lost man to win,
Contemn'd-condemn'd, O Adam, for thy sin.
34. The Holy Spirit.
As Doves to whitest Houses soonest come,
So the holy God makes cleanest Hearts his home.
35. Fortitude.
The Wise does know, the Just will do what is right,
Who dares thus, shall b' esteemed a man of might.
36. Of a King.
Law, where is no King's like light when Sun's away:
King, where is no Law's like Sun without a Ray.
People first chose a King: The King with them
Made Laws, yet subject to the Diadem.
37. A Welsh Man.
English and Scots by name are one with thee:
Now Welch-man, sole thou shall not British be.
38. English-Scots.
Disjoined in Laws, what Law shall them conjoyn?
The Kingdoms safety best of Laws divine.
39. Henry the Roses, James the Kingdoms. To the King.
The Roses, English colors Red and White,
Like Cadmus new-sprung Host engaged in Fight,
And as the Twins, which one Egg did include,
Do Rise and Set in a vicissitude,
As Day the Night, as Night succeeds the Day,
The Roses so did bear alternate sway,
Till Mother Mona A British Proverb, Mon Mam Gymri, in English thus, Anglisey
the Mother of Wales.
British Angles'y,
An Isle which Tacitus not tacitly
Records, happy Mother, happier
By bearing British Owen Theodor:
From whom arose a Noble Prince, a Rose
Whose Wife and Mother sprung from Stem of those,
Who thousand dangers passed in Nuptial Bed,
United Remarkable here that the Triple Empire of Britain by a certain occult
Fate was restored to the British Blood, (1) The Kingdom of Scotland by Stuart.
(2) The Kingdom of England by Tyder. (3) The Empire of the whole Island by
James the first, descended from both.
both the Roses White and Red.
Which Union, lest Change or Chance divide
The Roses, His: The Kingdoms are thy Bride.
40. The Apocalypse of John Napeir.
Ninety two years the World continue shall,
If as thou Calculat'st, it stand and fall:
Why do not the End to be more near surmize?
Lest thou a Liar should be found: the art wise.
41. God, Man.
God cannot die, nor man Death conquer can:
But Christ did both, he was both God and Man.
42. Death.
Death unto bad men bane, to good men bliss:
An endless Ill, or End of all Ill is.
43. God.
God is Immense, all measuring alone:
And He Is Innumerable; for but but one.
44. Miracle.
Let others Miracles admire: but I
Admire their Maker only, God on high.
45. Adam' s Fall.
Men's Bodies, Goods, and Souls, Adam's foul fall
To Physic, Law, Divines did first inthrall.
46. To Adam.
False Eve, Death's Parent, thee deceived by Fruit;
And foully ruined with a fair salute.
47. To Preachers.
The Cock (the Mornings Herald) claps his wings,
To rouse himself before he Crows or Sings:
Preachers should do the like, first should begin
To rouse themselves; next others raise from sin.
48. The Tempter.
As Mice in Walls, so Satan in man's heart
Orfinds, or makes a way with his black Art.
49. Mortification.
We live to die, and die to live: O why,
Then learn we not to die, before we die?
50. Hodie, to Day.
This Day was yesterday to Morrow named:
To Morrow shall be yesterday proclaimed:
To Morrow not yet come, nor far away,
What shall to Morrow then be called? To Day.
51. Against thee only have I sinned.
Subjects do sin against God, the King, the Laws:
A King against God alone: A King because.
52. Prayer.
As Christ transpiere'd the Doors fast shut at Even:
So Prayers pierce the Impenetrable Heaven.
53. Mary Magdalens Tears.
Vain wandering Eyes sinning by seeing vain:
Wiped off, by weeping with those Eyes, sins stain:
I err, if not that weeping faculty,
Because the Eye first did sin, 's infused in the Eye.
54. Of Hope and Fear.
Riches and Fear, Hope want concomitate:
Hope's to be wished for, Fear's a froward fate.
Poor men have Hopes, the Rich men Fears: But I
These Fears had rather than those Hopes apply.
55. Mathusalem is dead.
Life is not long, but still to live: what profit
Is in long life, when Death's the sequel of it?
56. Of Law and Justice.
The way to Law than Justice more we trace,
Though this the shorter, that is the longer Race.
57. Intemperance.
We who desire long life before we die,
Why do we shorten it by Luxury?
We will, and will not lengthen our short spans:
We nill our selves, will, by Physicians.
58. To Ponticus.
Art poor? it is hard to make thee rich: but when
The art rich, it is easy to be richer then.
59. The Pharisees.
They say, but do not: it is our Ages sin:
First say, then do: Faith so does enter in.
60. Liberty.
If happy's he that all things has at will,
Why do men will, yet are repining still?
The best-great'st virtue's Liberty: sole he
Can live at will, whose will is well to be.
61. Christ, whence.
Conceived at Nazareth, at Beth'lem born:
Thy Natures two, two Countries did adorn.
62. Christ Crucified.
To the Erring, Dying, Sick, the Way, Life, Cure,
The Crosses Cross, Deaths Death did Cross endure.
63. Christ's Cross.
The Cross bare Christ, Christ bare the Cross: and thus
Christ bare the Cross, the Cross Christ: all for us.
64. Of Religion.
A pleasant Tree planted in pious breast,
Whose Root has labor, fruit has honors Crest:
Fear first brought Gods into the world: no lie:
For to fear God is the prime Piety.
In Piety's root's Gall, Honey's above:
For Fear's Religion's Fount, the River, Love.
65. On the Prodigal and Miser.
This till his death gives nothing; that at's death
Has nothing left to give, or to bequeath.
66. The Married.
Let man love's wife, let wife submissive be
TO her husband; he is her Head, his Heart is she.
67. Study.
Students grow mad by studying much to know;
None mad by studying to be good does grow.
68. Remember Death.
Death of uncertains has most certainty;
Uncertain when, but certain once to die:
None from his birth, none from his death is far,
Yet none of this is a Remembrancer.
69. The Blessed Virgin.
Gods Spouse, her Fathers Parent, her Sons Child,
Virgin by man, without man Mother styled.
70. What Is rare, not dear.
A Paradox.
Vice common is, yet nothing is more dear:
Virtue seems vile, yet rare it does appear.
71. A Beast.
Past hope, what is past; sole future hope does rest,
Things hopeless pass, hopes fruitless with the Beast.
While past things vex, future perplex with care
Us men; Beasts, wiser, pleased with present are.
72. Reason.
Reason's the Queen of things; their Mother's Nature:
This brings them forth; that is their Regulater.
73. Nature.
Wise Nature has with Reason us supplied;
Which wills us to take Nature for our Guide.
74. Freedom of Speech.
Thou seem to have freedom fables to relate;
But free enough's the Tongue that less does pra^^.
75. To Marcus, a Problem.
Be'st good or bad what matter's it? For those
Force like the Laws, these Laws like force oppose.
76. Upon Old and New Fashions.
It Is foolish Envy new things to despise;
And envious folly new things sole to prize.
57. A Christians Death.
Death, like the way, leads thee to life; and is
No dying, but an Entrance into Bliss.
78. To Christ.
Anchor of Hope, Faiths Ship, Loves shoreless Sea,
Earth's Salt, Heavens Sun, the Souls sole saving Plea:
Death, by thy death is killed, Death dead does lie:
Yet who would think that ever Death could die?
79. Self-Love.
Who sees not his own faults, but others spies,
Is wise unt' others, but to himself unwise.
80. Saints Lives.
It Is vain Saints Lives to read, and not to lead;
Do both; the lives of Saints read, lead: lead, read.
81. Our Country.
A good man's still at home, not in Exile:
Each Land each Sea is as his native soil:
Exile's where ill, our Country where contrary:
In this Good, Bad are each ubiquitary.
82. Upon an Atheist.
No faith of past, nor hopes of future move
Within thy Soul, the present's thy sole love.
83. Of Heretics.
Virgil from Enn'us dross did Gold extract:
But Heretics from Gold do dross compact.
84. An Encomiastick.
The Good by praise is better, worse the bad,
The Crafty craftier, the fool more mad.
85. Not too fast.
None's on the sudden good: have not too fast,
Although in Virtues way thou make have:
Good counsel used in have, proves bad we find:
First recollect, and then correct thy mind.
86. The Envious, and Fool.
This wants right Reason, that a candid heart:
This cannot, and that will not Truth assert.
87. (...), Sermo, Speech.
Gods Speech all Reason's, ours all Oraizon:
So what God speaks, and man's a speaking Tone.
88. Opinion.
None will believe, yet all would be believed:
^o faith like friendship is by gain achieved.
89. Art.
God has all Arts laid up in Natures breast,
That man might thence require, acquire the best.
90. Adams Apology.
Why am I blamed as Author of man's sin?
I sinned not first: Eve did to me begin.
91. The Serpent.
Thou thy self-tempter, self-deceiver were,
None did attempt to tempt, or thee pervert.
92. Still the same.
One God in all the World was, is, and shall:
Why is not then the same one faith for all?
One faith, like day, the world to enlighten, even
As one Sun's in the Sky, one God in Heaven.
93. Mental Prayer.
Let Soul be pure, House Oratory, Reader
The Spirit, cleansed Heart, Prayers the Pleader.
94. The five Wounds.
Balsoms not wounds were the wounds which Christ endured,
For by those wounds our wounds are closed, are cured.
95. Feigned Friendship.
While the dark World, the Suns bright beams accend,
The shadow on the body does attend:
But when Clouds intervening shade the shine,
The shadow does thy body then decline:
While Fortune smiles, thy friends will follow thee,
As shadows Bodies, when Sun shines, we see.
96. Virtue.
Virtue consists not in words but Deeds:
Faith, Hope, and Charity are Herbs not Weeds.
97. Rachel.
Why do bewail thy loss in thy lost Son?
Thou brought him forth with pain, with grief he is gone.
98. Solomon.
So many Miracles, as wise men, are:
For than a wise man, what is more strange, more rare?
But Solomon's before the seven Sages,
He Is then the first, not the Eighth by our Suffrages.
99. Hope.
Since in things future, artless is my Skill,
Why should I hope for good, or fear what is ill?
Yet I despair not, without hope I die:
Long hope prolongs my short Life's Brevity.
100. Man's Ignorance.
I scarce know what is to live: no wonder I
Then know not what it is to be born, or die.
101. Christ the Way.
Would know the way which does unt' Heaven tend?
The Way from Heaven does to thee descend.
102. Of Fame.
Seek virtue, but the praise thereof disclaim:
Not of the man the praise is, but the Name.
103. Faith.
Faith in Pythag'ras principles 's a Prince:
His Ipse dixit did convince-evince.
104. Aequanimity.
Whether Deaths hour be come or not, abhor it
To be too willing, or unwilling for it
105. Newest Times.
The Times which first produced things in view,
Were the New Times, for then the world was new:
Tell me learned Reader of the Books enrolled,
Whether our Times be the New Times, or Old?
106. The Will.
Will thou be good? Will sole, it shall be so:
Who gave thee Will, will on thee Power bestow.
107. To the Sun.
Fair Phoebus who twice fourscore times (by guess)
Art than the Earth greater though thou seem less.
Thou who to me poor worm so small do seem,
How little (Ah) am I in thine esteem?
108. Honesty.
The wise man than the good's more wise: no matter,
While that the good is than the wise man better.
109. Man.
His Heart's but care, his flesh a Carcass, and
Sickness his Birth, his Life at Deaths command.
110. Multiloquy, to a Preacher.
Multiloquy shows Ignorance: what needs
So many words when thou do see the Deeds?
111. Death with and against Nature.
By Natures course, O Death, thou should not gather,
Nor take away the Son before his Father.
In Life and death we Natures Rules apply,
Nature will have men live, will have men die.
112. Eloquence.
Not to speak much, but well, is Eloquence:
As fertile Fields good fruit, not much dispense.
113. God.
As from our sight thick Clouds the Skies obscure,
So God's invisible to minds impure:
None have seen God: and few have heard Him speak,
Hence Faith is by Hearing: Love by Seeing.
Faith's so rare, but Love's more rare, more weak.
114. To Ponticus.
Thou ask'st what years thou have? I answer None:
For what thou had, thou have not: they be gone.
115. Love and Friendship, to Carolus.
From a long custom Nature does dissent,
As Love from friendship differs in the extent.
116. Princes.
You seem to show a zealous-pious care,
For true Religions Progress to prepare:
But your Religion moves to have Honor more,
Not the Honor true Religion to restore.
117. O Times, O Manners!
Why does man blame the Manners, and the Times,
Imputing to their pravities his Crimes?
In Times or Manners is no fault at all.
Not by Them, in Them are we criminal.
118. Philosophy.
All much would know, but to believe it few:
Hence many much believe, yet few do know.
119. Infinite Evil.
Born but one way, a thousand ways we die,
Our thousand Sores have but one Remedy.
120. Of Controversies.
Divines contend, and yet is their contest
Under the Judge: O would it there might rest:
Divines contend, and of the Judge complain:
O would that all the strife did there remain.
Or that in us there was such strife of Love,
As Love of strife in every Sphere does move.
121. Christ on the Cross.
When Christ was Crucified two Thieves between,
Then Virtue, never, or in the midst was seen.
122. Times Daughter.
Though truth be sometimes hid, 'twill be proclaimed,
Hence by the Greeks it is Without Oblivi^^
(...) named.
123. Physic and Law.
If Mortals would as Nature dictates, live,
They need not Fees to the Physicians give:
If men were wise, they need not have their Cause
Pleaded, prolonged by the ambiguous Laws.
So Bartolus might (Feeless) go to Bed,
And Mice corrode Hippocrates unread.
124. Man and Wife.
The total House us holds not, when we chide,
But one Bed serves us both when pacified.
125. The shortest Day.
One Day, the last is our Life's shortest Day,
For it is next our End, and will away.
126. Virtues Complaint.
Rare's love of love, love of Virtue's rare:
Price is now prized, and Honors honored are:
Riches are prostitute, Coin Money buys,
And Virtue's vile, she must her own worth prize.
127. An hard Father.
A sparing Father is most liberal
TO his Son: For dying he does leave him all.
128. A Prayer to God in Sickness.
Nature of Nature, O good God, when I
Can live no longer, give me will to die.
129. To a litigious Person.
If Judge to thee be deaf, thy Cause is lost,
Thy gain is vain Experience with cost:
It Is better Judges please than plead the Laws,
Those before these indulge unto thy Cause.
130. Of Brunonius.
Our Fathers instituted Fasts that (they)
Their Flesh, the Spirit, that it might God obey:
But with full Table thou keep'st Fast that thence
Thy Spirit may thy flesh, thy flesh serve sense.
131. Time.
Age all things brings, all things bears hence with it:
All things have Time, and Time has all things fit.
132. Miracles.
Since Miracles are ceased (what shall I speak?)
Is Gods hand shorter? or our faith more weak?
133. To Irus.
Thou still would live, but live thou caust not still,
Though still to live thou may, do wish, and will,
But since thou liv'st so poor, I know not why,
Though life thou will'st, thou should not wish to die.
134. Knowledge.
Methinks they sole are happy here below
That either all things, or else no things know.
135. Christ.
As Morning ends the Night, begins the Day,
So thou Death's End were, and Life's rising Ray.
136. Who art Thou.
Whom do mine Eyes behold, mine Eyes are blind:
What sees my mind, my mind does want a mind.
If my best part, my mind, it does not know,
How can I, what I am, unto thee show?
137. The Kingdom of Heaven.
Why do so few the Kingdom gain of Heaven?
Because the way's so strait, uncouth, uneven.
138. Grief and Pleasure.
Man's heart and body present Grief does grieve,
Future with fear does vex, past does relieve:
Present Delight, bought with past pain, does please,
But fear of future pain does it disease.
139. Peter.
Jerusalems last High Priest Caiaphas was;
But Romes first High Priest was (they say) Kephas.
140. Of Sleep.
If Sleep be but as Death, Death but as Sleep,
The more I Sleep, the less of Life I keep.
141. Rome.
The world begun, Abel was killed by Cain,
Rome Founded, Remus was by Rom'lus slain:
The world and Rome with blood alike stained stand,
Both did begin in blood by Brothers hand.
142. Man's Perfection.
The chief Perfection of every Creature
Is to return to its principles by Nature:
Then I shall perfect be, when I return
My Soul to God, my Body to mine Urne.
143. Lord increase our Faith, Luke Cap. 17.
Faith needs not an increase, but a decay,
Since scarce so many men as Faiths bear sway:
Each has his Faith, his Tutor of his own,
Never more Faiths, more faithless men were known. Lord, diminish our Faith*

144. On the Covetous.
He, Hercules Nil ultra, does pass by,
And Carolus Plus ultra does apply.
145. Good Transcending.
Good all transcends and boundless is alone,
None therefore in the world is good, not one.
146. All is Vanity.
Heraclite living would our Manners mourn,
Our Times Democritus would laugh to scorn:
Though to deride what vain on Earth is seen,
Democritus has not enough of spleen:
Nor to lament poor Mortals miseries,
Heraclitus has tears in both his Eyes.
147. Of Epicurus.
Young men complain that short's their youthful sport;
And old men murmur that their Life's so short:
The life of pleasure, pleasures life arise
Both short, who vilipends them both is wise.
148. Works.
Good men shall follow their good works: But then
Their wicked works shall follow wicked men.
149. Wisdoms Beginning.
None would for Heaven hope, if none feared Hell:
Fear in the prudent hope creates: it is well.
150. Of Battologus.
Thou not content to tire the learned ear
With words, and with vain babbling, Time to tear,
But after a Tautology long spun,
Do yet complain that Time too fast did run,
Return unt' Oxford, and distinguish better.
Thy Sermon long, short time was not thy debtor.
151. Of the same.
Learned Tullies long Orations seem not long,
Nor would thy Sermons could thou clip thy Tongue.
152. Of Polytheans.
O foolish folk, what madness does y' ensnare
To think there be more Gods than worlds there are!
153. Of Wit and Study.
Wit, if not whet with Study, waxes null,
As Knives without the Whetstones help are dull;
Wit is by Study cherished, perished there,
As Whetstones make Knives sharp, and sharpning tear.
154. Know thy Self.
None knows himself aright: yet mind he can
Himself a Child, when old, a younger man.
155. Long Art, short Life.
An Age to make one wise does not suffice:
Death's at our backs before we can be wise.
156. Of Moranus an old man.
Not to be learned, but to be unlearned by thee,
Are many things if thou will better be:
But how thou will unlearn, or learn will thou
To be made good, thus old, is hopeless now.
157. To D. T.
Twice wretched thou, because once fortunate,
Twice happy's he, who wretched was of late.
158. All seek their own.
The Laick Gain, not Christ seeks, uncontrolled,
And thou, O Clerick, seek'st not God, but Gold.
159. Of Brunonius.
Why does the Pest, as is supposed, attest
God's wrath, since thee the Pest does not infest?
The reason's ready, and a solid one,
Thou to thy Country art a Pest alone.
160. Respect thine End.
Look back on thy beginning, and thine End
Foresee, scorn Earth, in Soul unt' Heaven ascend.
161. Sense, Reason, Faith, Charity, God.
Sense without Reason, Reason faithless, (Dull)
Faith without love, love without God is null.
162. Of Prudence.
Prudence is useful matters to dispense,
And of three Virtues is the Quintessence:
For what is Good in Life she does impart,
As Logic teaches what is Truth in Art.
163. To his Parents.
Dear Parents I am of your Flesh and Bone:
You both are in my Flesh, yet Flesh but one.
164. Prudence and Fortitude.
Wise men must ills beware, Strong must them bear,
That those may suffer none, these none may fear.
165. In the sweat of thy Brows, etc.
He that enjoined thee to eat thy bread in sweat
Will not to the idle give the eternal Meat.
166. Of Faith and Charity.
As Trees first planted are e're Fruit they bear,
So where are virtues faith must first appear;
Life lives by Faith, not without Love: as poor
Do live in hope, yet labor more and more.
Faith's first, Love's chief; for it is a virtue great
God to believe, to love God's more complete.
167. If thy right Eye, etc. Mat. 5.29.
If the Right Eye, by sinning often, must out,
The world would suddenly be blind no doubt.
168. Christian Adverbs.
Adverbs all Adjectives do far excel:
God less rewards good Deeds, than Deeds done well.
169. Life's Brevity.
TO an unborn Infant, and an old man dead
Time's all alike, that is future, this is fled:
Abate time past, abate the time to come
From both, how little then is Life's total Sum.
170. Like for like.
To Aulus.
Thy Predecessors Facts thou do not read:
Strange if Posterity read thine, when dead.
171. Time.
Time, things Devourer, us and all out-wears:
We wear out Time: and thus are we compeers.
172. Abundant Caution.
Not temerous, nor timorous, nor late,
Art quickly wary, not precipitate:
Is nature fearful? Prudence strength prepares,
None danger fears, of danger that bewares.
173. John opposing.
Though all Antiquities oppose thy sense,
Thou can them all with one word (No) convince.
174. Justification.
Do Faith or Facts sole justify? declare
Facts Faith by God sole justified are.
175. Doomsday.
When all for all their works shall to answer come,
Suffices one day, for so great a Doom?
176. To Marianus.
The Good hate sin, because they virtue love:
Few therefore now on Earth good men do prove:
Vice is so prized; Virtue so vile reputed,
That it is almost a sin to b' unpolluted.
177. Mary Magdalens Tears.
Two fluent Fountains from two Mountains rise,
Whence flows a double River from mine Eyes.
178. Of the Soul.
The Soul's from God, not drawn from mortal Line,
For with the Body then it would decline.
179. To Marcus.
In Bed thou prayest with thy Face erect:
No wonder slothful Prayers want effect:
Such praying, as vain words of one not praying
God hears, as if he heard not, by gainsaying.
180. Hell.
As Art black colors cannot turn to white,
So from dark Hell none can return to Light.
181. To a poor Friend.
Is It bad? I would 'twere worse: for at the worst
Often better things succeed than came at first.
182. The Parts of the World.
The world though round is parted int' a Square,
Whereas four Parts, so Jews, Christians, Mahumetans, Pagans.
four Religions are.
183. The Causes of Discord.
Self-sense, Self-reason each man regulates;
Each his own will, his own Faith estimates:
Each wilful is: hence Brethren strive: the while
Will only wants all strifes to reconcile.
184. The Liberal.
The just man gives unt' each his own; but thou
To Rich men theirs, to poor must thine allow.
185. The Temperate.
He that things causes knows, with Times complies,
Calms his affects, orders his acts, is wise.
186. The Wise.
Fate governs Fools, the wise more sublimate,
Themselves by wisdom govern not by Fate.
187. Anonymus, an Infant dead before Baptized.
What dead? Al is, unnam'd, and unbaptiz'd,
O Christ, I nameless must by thee b' agniz'd:
IN the Book of Life without a Name me write,
For in thy name alone mine hope is scire.
188. The Flatterer and Carper.
These differ not in Nature but in Name,
This Good, that Bad maligneth: Both to blame.
189. Love and Friendship.
The knot of Friendship's to be broke for Love:
But Love for Friendship must not once remove.
190. Peter and Paul.
The Sword keeps Kingdoms, Coin the Keys, by which
Peter than Paul reputed is more rich.
Saint Paul in an Epistle says he is poor:
Saint Peter no where does his wants deplore.
191. Socrates.
Thou nothing know, this one thing know, and this
One thing is something, something, nothing is.
192. Man.
Born weeping, being born at first did cry:
Thou then not pleased, why now displeased to die?
193. To Paul inhum'd.
Thou naked came to the world from mothers womb,
With Shirt and Shroud returnst unto thy Tomb:
More than thou broughtst thou take hence to thy Grave,
Thou giv'st thy mother more than she thee gave.
194. To the Courtly Reader.
If much for School, for Court here is little, note
That this for Court, that for the School we wrote.
195. Wise Simplicity.
That thou do wrong to none be like a Dove:
That none thee wrong, wise like a Serpent prove.
196. The Commonwealths Eyes.
Religion and Law conjoin, combine,
That curbs men's hearts, their hands this does confine.
197. To Doctor John Gifford a Learned Physician.
That in Apollo's Art thou skilful art,
No wonder, for thy parts thou know apart:
If Galen says not this, yet wise Apollo
Says, Know thy Self: his dictates thou do follow.
198. The Daw.
No Birds more loquent-eloquent than I:
The Goose.
But I write more than thou can Crake, or Cry.
199. Jobs Miseries.
Satan (the Lord permitting) did disrobe
Of Children, Wealth, and Health poor-poorest Job:
When all was gone, his wife did yet remain
Who vexed him more than all his loss and pain.
200. The Temples of St. Paul in London. St. Peter in Westminster.

At Peter's West the Exchequer Law Courts are,
White Hall the Princes Palace thence not far.
At Paul's the Preacher things divine declares,
And Stationers there vend their sacred Wares.
All things convene, here Paul, and Peter there:
Peter more rich, more learned does Paul appear.
201. Of the Conspirators in the Gunpowder Treason upon Tuesday the Fifth of
November 1605.
Heaven to provoke from Earth, and from below
Upon the Gods above our threats to throw,
What is if this be not to accumulate
On Ossa Pelion? to fabricate
The Tower Babel, old Troy new to burn,
And int' a Chaos all things to return.
202. Of the same.
And would you Troynovant to Cinders turn
By the same Fate which Phrygian Troy did burn?
Unfit was Tuesday for such fatal Flashes,
Ash wednesday is the day designed for Ashes.
203. The King to Britain.
Fame brought a Rumor of my death to thee:
O do not credit Fame, but credit Me.
204. To England of the uniting of Britain.
Concord intern-etern Crowns Britains Brow,
For her three Nations are united now:
Scotland with Shield, Wales does like Walls immure
Thy Land, O England: thou may rest secure.
205. To Thomas Nevill, an hopeful Child.
Extract from Nevil's Noble Blood, the Grace
Of both thy Parents shines in thy sweet Face.
Their Natures, not sole Features thou shewst forth,
Thy Mothers Virtues, and thy Fathers worth.
206. Upon the Death of Charles Blount, Earl of Devonshire 1606.
Whether with Eulogies, or Elegies,
With Praise, or Tears thy Death to solemnize
It Is doubtful: diverse men speak diverse things:
Good speak the best, malignants wound with Stings.
207. To the Reader.
Reader these Epigrams are short, and few:
For many if, though short, they long would show:
Reader, these Epigrams are few, and short,
For few, if long, a many would import.
208. Of speaking and writing:
Though words be living voices, writings dead,
Yet these survive, when those are vanished.
The End of the Third Books
EPIGRAMS OF John Owen AN OXONIAN AND CAMBROBRITAN.

A Single Book.

Dedicated To the most Learned Heroine the Lady ARBELLA STUART.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Nevil Simmons at the Sign of the Prince's
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, and for Thomas Sawbridge at the three
Flower-de-Luces in Little-Britain. 1677.

John Owen's EPIGRAMS.
A Single Book.
1. To the Lady Arbella-Stuart.
ILlustrious Virgin, sprung from Regal Race,
Whose Real worth thy Royal Birth does Grace.
He that his wits First Fruits thee gave, even He
Does tender render now new Fruits to Thee,
Upon thine A fair Altar.
Ara-Bella (as most fit)
I consecrate, I sacrifice my wit.
2. To the same.
Thy constant Life does from thy youth express
The Genius of thine Ingeniousness:
Adverse things quell thee not, nor prosperous swell
Thy Sails; thy front and mind are parallel:
And thy rare signal virtues are the cause
That none will think I flatter for applause.
3. To his Book.
Before innum'rous Judges thou must plead,
Not one or two will censure when they read.
Perhaps unread thou shall not censures flee:
And more Reprovers will than Readers be.
4. Union, to the Britains, 1606.
Who, unless mad, will off'red Gold refuse?
Here Is Union: This Pearl who will not choose?
5. Vacuity.
The Ethics of vacuities complain,
But Physics show that nothing's made in vain.
6. On Zoilus.
Zoilus is torn with an eternal Verse,
Though e're two thousand years he lies on's Hearse.
Is it because his heirs do never die,
He Is punished for his whole Posterity?
7. From the Center to the Circumference.
Not from the Center to the Circumference
Sole one Line's, yet but one way to Heaven's hence.
8. Cock-Crowing, to the Prince.
France felt and did our English Forces see,
No Gallick sound could make our Lion flee.
9. Of Quintus.
Money's a Noun, a Verb, to promise: he
Promised a Noun, but gave a Verb to me.
10. Three Dimensions on Battologus.
Of three Dimensions thou but one do sound,
That Is broad enough, too long, but not profound.
11. To the Reader.
As after several Births a woman's womb,
Past Fifty, fruitless, childless does become:
So my three former Books of better strain
Have stupifi'd, and arifi'd my brain.
12. To Simon Waterson, Stationer.
Kind Waterson, who first my Book did take,
And undertake it public for to make:
Though Monopolies Laws against arise,
Yet thou shall all my wit Monopolize.
13. The Sea.
Salt Meats cause thirst: what is salter than the Seas?
Fresh waters therefore are drank up by these.
14. The Solstice, of Ponticus an Atheist.
Death is Life's Solstice: the Sun seems to our Eyes
To stand, but stands not: man to die, not dies.
15. To his Book.
My little Book by me forewarned, forearm'd,
Observe at Court to keep thy self unharm'd.
Perhaps thou there may find some one thy friend,
And some perchance that thee will reprehend;
If any be too rigid, too severe,
Say thus, My Master blame, but me forbear.
16. Courtship, to his Friend a Courtier.
Loves thee the King? his Page will then thee love,
As Shadows when the Bodies move, do move:
Frowns but the King? his Page will on thee frown,
As Shadows Bodies when the Sun's gone down.
17. On Corbulo.
Why's Corbulo so bald upon his Pate
For want of hair? was it his fault or fate?
18. To Pontilian.
Pontilian, thee Christ'pher sues at Law^
Not thee, but money it is from thee to draw.
19. To Sir Edward Herbert, Knight,
Fame whispered that thou did commend my Lays:
O that I could but equalize this praise?
Thou who do praise this slender Muse of mine,
Do merit to be praised by the Muses Nine.
20. Envies Genealogy, to J. H.
Virtue brings Envy forth, brought forth defends:
From virtue this one-only Vice descends:
Know why to thee this Epigram I write?
Thou may of right expect pale Envyes spite.
21. Of Virtue, a Paradox.
Each virtue 'twixt two vices has its place:
If vice were placed there, better were the case.
22. The Seven Planets, to Paula.
Among the Erratick Stars thou well did mark
Five Males, two Females wandering in the dark.
23. To Marcus.
More than thy Promise thou must keep, not less:
Hence but one Tongue, two Hands thou do possess:
But thou do promise much, performest none,
As if thou two Tongues had, and Hands not one.
24. A Roman Priest.
Would have Adultery not punished
By death? no wonder: the art unmarried.
25. A Minister of Geneva.
Would have Adultery have loss of Life?
No wonder: for thou have a buxom Wife.
26. Self-loving Poet.
The Moon because of her vicinity,
Though least, seems greatest Planet in our Eye:
So, since I Am next my self, my self the best
I think of Poets, though I am the least.
27. Of a penurious Client.
Wonder'st the Judges Ears are shut to thee,
When unto them thine hands not open be?
28. Of a certain Ass.
That I thee call, not name an Ass, do grieve?
We Names unt' Horse, not unt' Asses give.
29. Of the Picture in the Looking-glass.
Thou smiling, there thine Image seems to smile,
And while thou weep'st, it seems to weep the while.
It winks, thee winking, it thee moving moves:
But though thou speak, thine Image speechless proves.
30. Glaucus Change.
His Birthright Esau unt' his brother sold:
Jacob his Pottage for it gave, not gold.
31. Of Asellus a Dreamer.
Thou sleeping art inspired with Mysteries,
Which waking are concealed from thine Eyes:
O how would Death inform thee, since that sleep,
Deaths Image, prompteth thee with things so deep?
32. Wales and Kent.
Wales keeps, though not its name, its ancient Nation:
Kent keeps its name, but not its first Plantation.
33. Heauton-timoroumenos, Self-vexing.
Angels not having Bodies happy are.
And the brute Beasts which Reason want, want care;
Sole man, who soul and body does possess,
Is wretched, knows and feels his wretchedness:
Yea every man has Menedemus Fates,
Whom Reason ruinates, not regulates.
34. Of Linus.
Thou bound were to me, when I did thee lend*
Wilt have me bound to thee? my Coin repend.
35. Single Life.
If Heaven to Good works be ascribed as Merit,
Thy Single Life has wherewith Heaven to inherit.
36. The Creation.
In the beginning God made Heaven, Earth, Man.
Why? 'cause not to be sole he then began.
37. Of Marcus.
Promise, thou say, makes rich: but I by thee.
Thy Promises shall never richer be.
38. Of Aulus an Atheist.
When we with thee discourse of God and Heaven,
With thee who prizest God, at six and seven:
Thou say, what is us above concerns us not:
True: for the lowest hole in Hell's thy lot.
39. Man a Stage Player.
Hope is Life's Argument (for Life's a Fable)
World, Scene: Faith, Prologue: Acts are Love unstable
40. To the Reader.
Why am I in mine Epigrams so brief?
It is, O Reader, for thy sake in chief:
As Gold than Silver is more light to carry,
So than long Epigrams short make less weary.
41. New Style.
Wherefore does Rome, which new things so detests,
So dotes on old, ordain new Fasts, new Feasts?
42. To Marinus.
Motion's the praise of the Heavens constant Station.
Earths glory fixed upon a firm Foundation:
Whence to thee Phillis seems of heavenly birth,
Still moveable, she nothing has of Earth.
43. Eves Fall.
The Sun's not often: the Moon's often in the Eclipse:
So women are than men more prone to slips.
44. Neither in this nor in the World to come, of Damianus.
Whether I present things, or future mind,
I none more wretched than thy self do find
The art wicked, future times will thee condemn,
A Fool the art: present times do thee contemn.
45. By wanting rather than having, to Ponticus.
Thou know what wit, what valor is, if by
Their want, one their true value may descry.
46. Manslaughter.
One man himself may kill a thousand men:
But two can scarce beget one man again.
47. Friendship to his Friend.
Why seeks Likes like Friends friend? because that none
Can long stand steadfast on one foot alone.
48. To Sir John Harington, son of the Lord Harington.
If virtue may be guessed at by the front,
Thy Face has wit and virtue stamped upon it:
And herein is thy Fathers wisdom seen,
That learned Tovey has thy Tutor been:
Since all this Isle of Britain, but a few
Tutors like him, Pupils like thee can show.
49. Polydore Virgil.
Two Virgils were; one Maro (soaring higher)
A Poet; next thou Polydore a Liar.
50. Upon Momus an unjust Censurer of the former Epigrams.
Among so many wicked then alive,
Had but Gomorrha found of just men five
It yet had stood. --
And thou, malignant Reader, for a few
Loose Lines, would all the Structure overthrow?
51. On the same.
One, whom I know not, infamous by Fame
Diana's Temple burned to get a Name:
So with black Teeth thou do my Verses bite,
Hoping to have thy name in what I write:
But bite, backbite thy fill, I will deceive
Thine hopes, and thee without a name will leave.
52. Upon a domestic Carper.
And me thy Brother, thou my Brother dear
Woundst with thy tongue, and with thy teeth do tear.
Why do malign my Verse, if praise it merit?
If blame, to spare it 'twere a brothers spirit.
53. A Cuckold.
Why for my Wives close Thefts am I (alas)
Traduced? men call me Cuckold as they pass,
And point at me: For what I did not sign
(But you, I know not who) I call not mine.
54. A Self-Lover.
Love, like thy self, thy Neighbor, says the Text:
I do, thou say, I to my self am next.
55. Fortune assists the Bold.
Fair women are like Fortune: Neither she,
Nor they love men that slothful-bashful be.
56. Love blind.
Love not too fierce at first has large extent:
For slow things longer last than violent.
Lovers in have, are like that breeding kind,
which like blind love, bring forth their younglings blind.
57. Love not blind, to Firmicus.
Love is not blind: Argus to love is prone,
But Polyphemus, blinded loves none:
Love's bred by Seeing: therefore Love's not blind,
Which through the Eyes windows does inflame the mind.
58. To Quintus, a Courtier.
Ulysses fear, have ( Quintus) but one Eye?
An hundred have? beware of Mercury.
59. Epitaph of Justice.
E're since Astraea, last of heavenly Race,
Abandoned Earth, and took in Heaven her place,
Laws Altars, Justice Temples are forsook,
And to each his Jus signifies Right. Pottage.

Jus to give, sole knows the Cook.
60. Of Marcus, skulking.
Wisely the art hid, if hid thine hiding were:
But open thy close hiding does appear.
61. Jesus College, and Christ Church College in Oxford not fully Finished
1607.
Jesus, one House unfinished bears thy Name,
And Christ, thou have another like the same:
Among so many Noble Structures, those-
Thy two, thy former Poverty disclose.
62. Merchants Trust.
Poor Irus paid rich Croesus all: now which
Is of the greater credit, Poor or Rich?
63. Muses most sad.
Shorn is Apollo now, unshorne e're while:
Scarce in a year does our Apollo smile.
O he mistook who called the Muses merry:
Phoebus his Harp's untuned, his hand is weary.
64. Incredulity.
Credulity's an error, not a fault;
Too much an error is too little, naught.
65. Credulity.
Him I distrust, who trusts all by guess:
The more thou me, I credit thee the less.
66. Faiths Obsequiousness, to young men.
I like Pythagoras his Discipline
Which seven years Trial did for Trust assign:
Wilt have the unlearned thee trust? the learned trust rather:
Wilt have thy son thee trust? trust then thy Father.
67. Better to give than receive.
God gives, man receives (and does bow)
Never, I think, were fewer Gods than now.
68. Of Ponticus, a Client.
Thy Gout's in the hand, thy Lawyer do not Fee,
His is in's Feet, he moves no Foot for thee.
69. Tho. Wolsey, I, and my King.
I, and my King with Grammar Rules comply:
Good Manners teaches thus, My King and I.
This is the way to live, that to discourse,
This in the Court, that in the School's of force.
70. To the Gauls.
Each drinks in his own Glass, I like it well:
But who is content with his own wife to dwell?
71. Philautus to Philaristus, Calend. January.
Thou lookst I should a Gift to thee commend,
I but my self have nothing else to send.
72. Philaristus to Philautus.
Thou nothing sent'st, thy nothing I repel:
Thou gav'st thy self, I give thee back. Farewell.
73. To Henry Fanshaw, Knight, 1606.
Augustus Empire had it been thy Fate
TO have had, or else Mecaenas his Estate,
In these our times had many Maro's been,
Now no Mecaenas, nor no Maro's seen.
74. To Henry Good-yeer, Knight, upon his Wifes Decease, 1606.
Men to command, women to obey, to bear
Nature injoynes: thy Wife did both, while here
Sh' obeyed, she bare sweet Pledges, hopeful Sons,
Which props support the Ports of greatest Dons.
O happy Good-yeer thrice, four times and more,
If one as good succeed as went before.
75. Ulysses and Penelope.
Death's to us Ulysses-like when snatched from's Wife:
As she her Thread, so we spin out our Life.
76. Of Mancinus an Artless Master.
Thou the whole day from Street to Street do walk,
Yet lest thou should be thought thy Book to baulk,
Thou sleep'st at night by Candlelight: thine Oil
Mancinus thou will lose, but not thy Toil.
77. Upon a certain woman.
Though thy two sons be both unlike to thee,
Each yet with his Fathers likeness does agree.
78. The Celestial Archer, to William Ravenscroft, J. C.
Thine Arrow, Faith: Bow, Love: thy Bow-string, Hope:
Let Heaven be thy Mark, and God the scope.
79. Ponderous things descend.
No Creature in the World is more sublime
Than Man, why must he slabber in the slime?
Of the Elements, of what is the World within
The solid Earth most ponderous is, save sin.
What wonder then that man is downward pressed?
Since man is nothing else but sin at best.
80. Of a litigious Debtor.
Thou do not pay me, do the Lawyer pay:
Thy Folly this, that does thy Fault display.
81. Of the same.
Thy care is not to pay thy Debts: thy care
Is not to pay thy Debts what e're they are.
82. Of the Church Derivative.
Since that there is but one Faith, one Church that is true,
Sprung from the Fount of Life; within the new
Jerusalem, what Church does not derive
It self from thence, erres from the Primitive.
83. Four Seas.
Britain's Trine-like, Triangular: why be
Four Seas therein, and yet but Kingdoms three?
84. To a Rich Friend.
If by the want of things their worth is known,
I know the worth of Wealth, for none's mine own.
85. The Generation of one is the corruption of two.
The male and female, in the course of nature,
Corrupt two bodies to produce one Creature.
86. The Wedding Ring.
A Ring at Nuptials the Bridegroom gave
The Bride in sign of Love: a custom grave.
The wife should rather give the Ring to the man:
Let him reach out his Finger for it than.
87. The Worlds of Democritus.
If Worlds so many were, as does attest
Democritus, this were the worst of the rest.
88. Of Epigrams to the Reader.
An Epigram is like a fair-fac'd woman,
Which is, because more beautiful, more common:
But common once her beauty's out of date,
And then Adulterers it nauseate.
89. The Earth.
The Heavens, though in motion, constant prove,
For with the self-same motion still they move:
But the Earth is most inconstant, though fast fixed,
Each Angle of it is with Errors mixed.
90. The Moon.
Cynthia thou art called the Star that rules the Seas,
Thou rather rulest now the Land than these.
91. Covetous Liberality, to Acerra.
Thou giv'st to take, not take to give Acerra:
Thy mark's Receiving, Giving is thine Arrow.
92. Of Paula, a false Catholic.
If any ask of Paula, what is her Faith,
It Is Catholic, Apostolic she says.
I think her love is Catholic unt' all;
But I would have her Faith Catholical.
93. A Prodigy.
Penelope's chaste trust a Proverb was:
But for a Prodigy it now may pass.
94. Of Annetta, a Franck.
Nature with very little is content:
But of thy Nature this I think's not meant.
95. Of Marcus a Soldier, blind and blear-cy'd.
One of thine Eyes does, Marcus, yet remain,
Which with continual drops thy Face does slain:
Why is that Eye with Tears so much im^ost?
Because his Brother in the Wars was lost.
96. Peace in Europe, to Divines.
Kings war; and Kings in peaceful Leagues combine:
It Is something yet to enjoy sweet peace in Fine:
The Priests with an immortal strife contend;
And their contests nor measure have, nor End.
Hence by Tongues virulence it does appear
That than the Sword, the Pen is more severe.
97. To Carolina.
As often as in the Glass thou view'st thy face,
Lest that thy beauty make thee proud, abase-
Abate thy Pride: think though thou art fair (alas)
The art frail, though beautiful yet like thy Glass.
98. Florals.
As in the Scene obscene came Cato, thence
To go: so man comes here, to pass from hence:
And never to come hither from his Urne,
As Ca^o to the Scene did not return.
99. Man's Epitaph.
Who lies here? no man: no man here does lie:
A liveless Corpse does not a man imply.
100. The Souls Horizon.
The high Elements we see not, Fire and Air:
Water and Earth we see, the lower pair:
So we know men and beasts with us below:
But God and the Angels (ah) we do not know.
101. The Souls Eclipse.
As the Earth 'twixt Sun and Moon does stand we see
In her Eclipse: so sin 'twixt God and me.
102. A Merchant.
Plautus a Tale, the Merchant called, compiled:
The next, like it, is the Deceiver styled.
103. Worshipper: of Images.
Who Grandees honor, Idolize: it is clear:
Since woman man's, man does Gods Image bear.
104. Erasmus his desire.
Erasmus Desiderius I could
Desire; who sole might write what e're he would?
105. A Neuter.
Pompey and I, if Pompey win the Field:
If Caesar, then to Caesar I will yield.
106. Scandalizing Grandees, to the Servants of Servants.
The Master says, I will my Servant have
To be still faithful: how? my Goods to save.
Stand, watch, go, come: perform the most the art able,
The art yet a Servant, but unprofitable.
107. Mars and Venus.
Venus and Mars themselves alike extend,
Mars common Foe, Venus a common Friend.
108. February.
Thou sole of many Brothers, not one other,
Have eight and twenty days, most like thy mother.
109. To E. J.
Thy modesty thee (virtue like) does praise,
I to thy wit, with leave, would Tropheys raise:
But O thy modest Face, and candid spirit
Cause me to praise thee less than is thy Merit.
110. A Circles Square.
What is a Circles Square? but this alone,
The Earth parted in four parts, at first but One.
111. Whether an Arithmetical unite answers to a Geometrical Point.
God than a Point is more, yet is but One:
Like as a Point does differ from a Unity.
Moan.
112. From the Womb to the Tomb.
Man's born to death most certain, which comes on,
As a lean Ox feeds to be fed upon.
113. To the King.
O of what Force Example's in a King?
Actest? thou bidst: forbearst? forbidst the thing.
A Prince moves principal; a King does steer.
As Skies the Stars, so Kings the People bear.
114. The Head and Body, to the same.
Reason's in the Head, there its five Agents ^bide:
Little's Divine in the whole Man beside.
115. Report of the Death of Henry 4. the French King: To the French King.
What Kings to hear, and Servants fear to tell,
Fame sounds in the Ear, To die remember well.
116. Light and Air.
Air, though a Body, is unseen with the Eye:
Light has no body, yet is seen on high.
117. One God, many Friends.
Though no man can two Masters serve as slave,
What hinders but two Patrons one may have?
One God forbids not to seek many friends,
As one Faith many Arts not discommends.
118. Donna, Danno.
Adam a Rib lost for the woman's sake:
And for her sake he laid his Soul at stake.
119. Women's Tire.
This is more like an house than covering: this
Is not to deck, to erect the Head it is.
120. All things Nothing.
All things who made of Nothing, He Is sole All:
What God of Nothing made, we Nothing call.
121. The East and Western Church.
The right-true Faith in the Worlds left Part resounds:
Faith sinister in the Worlds right Part abounds.
122. Anger, Patience.
Ire minds inflames, and Patience cools that Ire:
As Fire does temper water, water fire.
123. Ruin of Heaven and Earth.
The Earth lowest is, Heaven highest is of all:
Yet that has whither, this no where to fall.
124. To Henry Howard, Earl of Northampton.
Allied unt' one, Uncle to two great Counts,
Of great Account, thy Fame thy Name surmounts:
Of many Noble Dukes sprung from the Stemm,
Ones Brother; Nephew unto three of them;
An Earls son, who (but Fates did not so please)
Had been the fourth Duke in this Series:
An Earl thy self: None wonders at thy Fates,
Whom wit conducts, Fortune concomitates!
125. To Pontia.
I from thy sight, which wounds mine Heart, remove,
Not that I love thee not, but that I love.
126. To an Adulterer.
Adam in Eden was forbid to taste
One Fruit, the rest were all for his Repast.
I wonder, having so much at command,
That He from One could not withhold his hand.
Thou contrary, art All forbid but One,
That thou may use, the rest must let alone.
Less strange, than Adam, that thou did decline,
Whose Liberty was greater far than thine.
127. To the Reader.
Salt meats cause thirst: O that my verses might
The Reader cause to thirst with Appetite.
128. To an Uxorious Man.
Let not thy Wife command, give if she crave;
Make not thy Wife thy Master, nor thy Slave.
129. To Ponticus.
Thy Life's a Comic, Death a Tragic Story;
Unlike thy Death will be to thy Life's Glory.
130. Of a certain married Priest.
A Levite born, a Levite made, thy Wife
Of Levi's Tribe, Levitical's thy Life.
131. Of Innovators.
You pull down All Things, No Thing you rebuild,
Are you with Zeal, or fiery fury filled?
The Spirit, you pretend, does you compel;
What Spirit is it? Apoc. 9.11. A bad one.
Abaddon, One from Hell.
132. Of Cotta.
God out of Nothing, All things did Create,
Thou Chemist All things do Annihilate.
133. Tho. Egerton Chancellor of England, and Francis Leigh his Son-in-law.
^any Virtue loves, and Honors Arts,
that Father, and this Son act both these parts:
^ave Egerton, Brave Leigh the Muses love,
^he Son would not unlike the Father prove.
134. Consubstantiation.
To the same Francis, and Mary his Wife.
You have not both one Soul, but both one Mind,
Nor both one Body, but one flesh conjoined:
Man, Wife, in name are two, but one in Troth,
They different are in Sex, but humane both.
135. Funeral Sermons.
Good men are wronged while living, praised when dead;
O black Life, O Death candid-honoured.
136. Paul's Cross, and the Cross in Cheap, in the Parish of St. Peter.
Why's Peter's Golden, Paul's a Leaden Cross?
Why, because Golden words Paul's Cross ingross.
137. Loves Chronicle.
A Moment multiplied amounts to an Hour,
A Day's made up with Hours twenty four:
Days many make a Month, twelve Months a year:
So, with more Times, my Love does more appear.
138. Twins.
Nothing's unlike in us, all is like; sole we
Differ in number, we two Bodies be.
139. Friends.
We scarce in number differ: Two we be,
Yet One: You Twins in Body, In Mind we.
140. Of the Art of Love.
Though Naso's Art of Love some prove-approve,
Yet men unexpert know not what is Love:
Love is by Nature taught, not learned by Art,
By the Eyes, not Ears, Love enters int' our Heart.
140. Seneca the Philosopher.
Thy Dictates seem like Epigrams almost,
But that in Numbers they be not ingrost.
141. To Attalus.
Thou said once at thy Table (as I take it,)
Thou did not relish Salt, but did forsake it:
For Salt thou needst not care, nor is it a fault,
All, almost, that thy Tongue does speak, is Salt.
142. Sir Philip Sidney' s Life.
Who while they lived writ Books deserving Fame,
Their Lives need not he writ, there lives their Name:
The Corpse, not Life of Sidney's in the Tomb,
His short Life's longer Glory keeps more room.
143. The Bodies Valediction to the Soul.
I for thy sake did Mother Earth forsake.
The Soul departing.
Fool, I left God my Father, to betake
My self to Thee: Now called, I to him return;
And leave thee to thy Mother in thine Urn.
Till when (For we till then shall meet no more)
The Earth Thee to Me, God Me to Thee restore.
144. A Kingdom divided.
Two Kingdoms undivided are, Heaven, Hell,
As in themselves: There Good, here Bad do dwell:
On Earth alone (oh shame) Division raigns,
Which Good and Bad promiscuously sustains.
But time will come when the Earth shall lie divast,
When Heaven and Hell shall both be filled at last.
145. How Waters.
Tears prest-exprest do tacit Love declare,
Love Tears begets, Fire Water: Strange and Rare.
146. Of Wit and Memory.
To Ponticus.
It Is asked, Why wit is called sharpness? Why?
Because what is sharp does pierce more inwardly:
The Memory is to retain, not pierce,
Thus Vessels are made round, and with reverse.
Whence I supect that or thy Wit is round,
Or sharp thy Memory: Both unprofound.
147. Comfort for the Poor.
To the Rich.
Inconstant Fortune various appears:
Whence Hopes arise to Me, to The ^ but Fears.
148. Of Titius and Gellia.
One in disgrace did Titius upbraid
That Is Wife, when first he took her, was no Maid.
What Is that to Me, thus Titius replied,
She then was Semprones Daughter, not my Bride.
149. The Heart.
Why in the left side rather than the right
Is Man's Heart placed? to Good 'cause opposite.
150. The Flesh and Spirit.
God made man's Body first, and when created,
He with a living Soul it animated.
Hence the dull Body, does, I think, deny
TO obey the Soul; pleads Seniority.
151. The Innocents, Proto-Martyrs.
For Christ the Children suff'red death, before
Christ for the Children shed his precious Blood.
Gore.
152. To his Friend.
The Dual Number often does Friendship bound:
Scarce in the Plural Number Love is found.
153. To a friend growing old. 1607.
Thou were a youth, when I a Child: And now
Thou art grown old, while I a youth do grow:
Thee therefore Death expects, and Old Age Me;
Certain's thy lot, though mine uncertain be.
154. Of A. G.
Thy Name and Face is Man's, Wit, Animals,
A Fool in Specie, learned in Generals.
155. Harmony. To Divines.
Of Gospels Harmony have diverse writ:
But who that Harmony? Great Labor's it.
156. Dissonancy.
So great discordance does abound with Men,
That what Souls Peace is, scarce knows One of Ten:
Here Is Base, depressed, There Elah too much reared,
That scarce the Tenor, or the Mean is heard.
157. To Pontilianus.
Art jealous of thy Wife? The art wise in part:
But art not jealous? Then thou wiser art.
To watch thy Wife is vain: That wife loves best
That though can, will not raise her husbands Crest.
158. To Porcia.
Art thou the Daughter of the Night, or Light,
Born in the Day, begotten in the Night?
159. An Epitome of the Histories of his Time.
To Marianus.
We worse are than our Fathers, worser they
Than their Forefathers, apt to run astray:
If our Posterity prove worse than we,
Nothing can worse than our Poster'ty be.
160. London.
To J. W. A London Goldsmiths.
As Thames the Rivulets drinks up and drowns,
So London swalloweth the poorer Towns:
Though Thames with Flux, re-flux, Send and resend,
Its Floods to Sea, The art still a constant Friend.
161. Debtor and Creditor.
To Will. Cawley, A London Merchant.
Though in my Book, thou find, if there thou look,
Thy Name, My Name, yet, is not in thy Book:
I owe thee naught but Love: Of this to thee
A Creditor and Debtor still will be.
162. Fools and Dwarfs.
Though we be not accounted men of might.
Yet are we great men's sport, and their delight.
163. To Pontilian.
Poor Irus still was careful, why? 'Cause poor.
Croesus was careful, why? For's wealth was more.
One's vexed, because he wants a Wife, and thou,
Because thou have a wife, art vexed now.
164. Union.
To Married Britains.
One God and Union, the World supply,
Wedlock on Earth was the first Unity.
165. The Elements War.
Though God created all things for man's sake,
Yet the Elements against us Wars do make:
How many have (alas) been swept from hence
With the contagious Air, by Pestilence?
How near has London felt the Trojan Flames?
How many have been drenched and drowned in Thames?
Earth stops her Fruits: Yet no man does repent;
Though Heaven with Tears, and Earth our sins lament:
Though the Earth be mollifi'd with moistning showers,
Yet sin our stubborn hearts more-more obdures.
166. An Epithalamy, To Tullia.
By day, Thou, the sole Object of my Sight,
Shall be the Subject of my Love at Night.
167. To Sextus, an Academian.
That thou may mind thy Grave before the art dead,
It Is said, by day thou make for Night thy Bed.
That in Remembrance thou thy Death may keep,
Why do not oftener go to Bed and Sleep?
168. To his Beloved.
Thee known I love, I loved thee when unknown,
Fame then, thy Face has made me now thine own:
I now know Love; I love, not loved: Yea, now
I know not to be loved, to love I know.
169. The Younger Brother.
I m poor: My Parents Fault (not mine, nor other,)
Who did not me beget before my Brother.
170. The Firmament.
The Earth stands unmoved, standing there moves the Creature:
Heaven moves, yet the fixed Stars move not by Nature.
171. The blessed Virgin.
Although the blessed Virgin we thee call,
Thou among women blessed art withal:
I profit nothing by thy Virgin vest,
But as a Mother, Me Thou profitest.
172. Hope and Faith.
Faith is no Faith, unless but One, firm fixed:
Nor Hope is Hope, if not with doubts commixt.
173. Novelty.
Revived are many things which heretofore
Fell, and shall fall, though now they flourish more.
New things now please, but will not still, because
What Is now new will wax old, and full of Flaws.
174. Marcus his Looking-glass.
Why is thy Fool before thee still? (All-Ass,)
Thou view'st thy self in him, as in a Glass.
175. To one Uxorious.
The Field's not always plough'd: Thy Wife's a Field,
Yet she loves daily to be duly tilled.
176. To a Friend.
Four years, and more, praeter-plu-perfect past,
First sprung thy love, and then was rooted fast:
In vain thou now do seek it to remove,
No new young Plant, an old grown Tree's thy Love.
177. To Porphyrius.
We read that Christ wept twice, not laughed at all:
Why do man's Nature Risible then call?
178. To Pontilianus.
As a Blind Man, by Boy or Woman led,
Ways to him unseen-unknown does often tread:
So Venus or her Boy, thee blind in Love,
Hither and Thither lead, move and remove.
179. Love is beyond all Exception.
To a certain Friend.
Though some new cause old Love may (chance) suspend,
I, by the Laws of Friendship, am thy Friend:
My Love's beyond Exception unto thee,
Except, thou love not, as thou should love me.
180. Of Ponticus aged sixty years.
In all thy Life thou good have done to none:
When will thou now begin? Thou say upon
My death, I all will to the poor bequeath:
Too late he is wise, that is not wise till death.
181. Of Nigella, Candidated.
Rare Bird on Earth thou art, and Swan-like white,
White are thy Clothes, thy Skin as black as night.
182. Le Carneval de la vit.
Why does the Soul abhor the Bodies death?
Fears that to die, when this has lost its Breath?
Or does it fear that after death remains
Unt' it short Judgment, but long lasting pains?
I doubt, this does the Soul in death dismay,
That to the Flesh it cannot farewell say.
183. Quintina' s Praise.
Should I thee praise, thou then would prouder be:
I praise thee not: Thou Art proud enough I see.
184. Earth' s Son.
Heaven looks on us, and we must look on Heaven,
For Stars in Skies, God Eyes to thee has given:
Thou scarce the thousandth part of Earth can see:
Half Heaven yet is visible to thee.
Fool, why do Earth prefer unt' Heaven rather,
But as some love their Mother more than Father.
185. The lowest Species.
Though Mankind is the chief, yet him we call-
We account the lowest Species of all:
Heaven has but few: More men in Hell do lie,
Who men's unhappiness can then deny?
186. Of Envy, a Paradox.
If Virtue did, Envy would less abound:
For where is more Virtue, there less Vice is found.
187. James, of that Name, The sixth King of Scotland, The first of England,
Happiness to Britain.
What has been often wished, scarce hoped for, came
'Twixt Hope and Fear unto thy royal Name:
King James, the first, the sixth of Regal Line,
Sice Ace, the best chance of the Dice was thine.
188. To James the First, King of Great Britain, etc.
Thine Hand four Crowns, four Scepters does command,
Four Languages are spoken in thy Land;
The Britains Language, though not one, their Heart
Is One, of thy three Kingdoms being part.
At first the Devil did men's hearts divide:
But God their Languages: And all for Pride.
189. Kings and Prophets.
Out of his Country, no King rules in chief,
No Prophet in his Country gains Belief.
190. Virtue.
A double Genius, (while transitory,)
Attends on Virtue, Good, Bad, Envy, Glory.
191. Envy.
Envy corrodes men's praises (like a Slave)
As Worms corrode their Bodies in the Grave.
192. Of Battus.
Thy many Queries I in brief respond,
Not 'cause so many, but 'cause foolish, fond.
193. Sleep. Death.
Though in my sleep I seem as dead in sort,
Yet no part of my Life's the sweeter for it:
It Is strange what should in Death so bitter be;
Since Sleep, Deaths Image, is so sweet to me.
194. The Triumvirs.
Clients unto the Lawyer go, because
Wealth, their chief Good's secured by the Laws:
In Sickness the Physician comes; next Wealth,
The second thing to be secured, is Health:
Divines, who first to have been sent for ought,
Come last unto the sick ^^sent-unsought.
195. Lovers Patience.
Lover, would have thy wish? Be patient:
He that will live in Peace, must be content.
196. Of a certain Grammaticaster.
Thou Letters know, a good Grammarian:
And nothing know but them; A learned man.
197. To a pompous Dame.
Be like Men'laus, or Ulysses Wife,
If thou would famous live beyond thy Life:
For Vice, not only Virtue does survive:
Helen's, Penelope's Names are yet alive.
198. Of Aulus, a Grandee.
Truth-telling Fools speak things to be concea^'d,
But wise men see what is sit to be revealed:
Aulus to trust his Servants wits afraid,
Keeps four fools still about him, for their Aid.
199. Gold from Dung.
Virgil from Ennius Dung did Gold extract:
What Virgils was, is now Physicians act.
200. Loves Secret.
A Lover's seldom loved: Be loveless, if
Thou will not be beloved, love then in chief.
201. Mon Tout, To Marcia.
Often thou me call'st all thine: That I deny,
All thine I am not; But thine, all am I.
202. Of Quintus and Orus.
Quintus and Orus have of late declared
Themselves Papistical: On what regard?
That for their Faiths Antiquity: And this
For Novelty thereof a Papist is.
203. Ariadne' s Thread.
As Theseus by Ariadne's Thread*
Was Led, so Men, One Faith to Truth does lead.
204. Of Wills and Vows.
In Testaments or Wills the Last must stand:
In Vows, if good, the first has chief command.
When God created all things with one vote,
Two Wills or Testaments he made-he wrote.
205. To a Covetous Friend.
The Covetous has all himself, not giving:
He nothing has Himself, but wants while living.
206. To Ponticus, A Lawyer.
Part of thy Life thou to thy wife do give,
Part to thy Client: When to the self wilt live?
207. Of Preachers and Players.
Preachers and Players check our crimes: With Tears*
The Preachers, and the Players with their Jeers:
To that I wretched, foolish seem to this.
This numbers, and that ponders mine amiss.
208. The Births of Christ, and J. Baptist.
John in the Summer, Christ in Winter came:
That did Baptize with Water; This with Flame:
Well did those Contraries, The two Baptisms of Christ and John.
Floods, Flames convene:
Our Sins Fire purges, Water washes clean.
209. No Man is hurt but from himself.
None's free from Crimes, nor Discords: For most times
Our Discords are procured by our own Crimes.
210. Upon a bawling Ass.
I do not call thee Momus, every Ass,
But that which the false Prophet Balaams was.
Not that which into Salem Christ did carry,
For this was mild and mute, but that contrary.
211. Of his Heirs.
To the Lawyers.
None of his wife, but Adam, was secure,
And none but Eve, was of her husband sure:
In Wedlock the poor husbands sole defense,
And comfort is, in's Wife to have confidence.
212. An hollow Tooth.
The Fire, Me cast therein does not consume,
But I am hollow made by Watrish Rheum.
213. Virtues Praise.
As the Suns constancy consists in Motion,
So Virtue's force in Action has best Notion.
214. Aesop' s Tongue.
No Member is, that does to man belong
More Noble, or Ignoble, than the Tongue.
215. To the Children of Winchester College.
I am not what I was, once all for Plays;
A Child of Festivals and Holy Days.
216. Wisdom leading, Fortune following.
Of Ancus.
If ill advice chance well, in vulgar Eyes;
Ancus the Fool, shall be reputed wise:
If good advice come by mischance to naught,
Wise Cato shall himself a Fool be thought.
217. Grief.
Loss present's to be grieved for We bemoan;
Past, ah, too late, and future loss too soon.
218. Vicissitude.
Mirth, Mourning ends, and Mourning Mirth concludes,
Hope, Fear, we are various by Vicissitudes.
219. To Germanicus.
Thy Wife has raised the Number of thy Friends,
This her fertility in part commends:
This Benefit in Wedlock does accrue,
A new Wife gains new Friends, and Friendship new.
220. Armed Wickedness.
Of Linus.
As the best Wine makes Vinegar most tart,
So the more witty, thou more wicked art.
221. Opinionist.
How, ah, Opinion reigns the World thoughout:
The Truth I know not, yet I must not doubt.
Who doubts errs not: Yet for both prepared:
Error b' Opinion, not by doubt's declared.
222. Alma Matter Academia Oxonia.
Fair Mother Oxford University.
Nature was Mother of my Brain, Thou Now:
She dura Matter, pia Matter Thou.
223. The Poet.
Rewards, not words Me^enas Poets gave;
The Grandee.
What more than words can I from Poets have?
224. Man is to Man a God.
A Man's a Man, though he but sparing lives:
A Wolf that spoils, a God who freely gives.
225. Homer.
If that be true, which some of thee do write,
Thou never sawst, thy Books yet see the Light.
226. Three Secretaries.
Thou must to the Lawyer thy whole case untwist,
To the Doctor thy Disease, thy Sins to the Priest.
If thou respect'st thy Soul's and Body's weal,
Nothing from this Triumvirate conceal.
227. To D. C. G.
The Gout thee vexes, and a pest contrary:
Thy Wife makes thee to run, the Gout to tarry.
228. Ubiquitaries.
All the Earth's before the poor, where e're he roam
He Is never exiled, ever is at home.
229. Lovers.
Love is in us, as in the Wood is Fire;
As Fire the Wood, Love burns us with desire:
But Fire in Air, Wood to Ashes does consume:
We Ashes are; And what is our Love but fume?
230. Speech.
A Speech is like to Grief, is like to sport:
If long, it is trivial, if grave, it is short.
231. On an esseminate old man.
Bacchus old age, Venus does youth engage,
This therefore fit for youth, and that for age.
232. On Harpalus, a covetous Youth.
The World thy Friendess is, wretch thou to adore it.
That Is old, thou youthful, it is enough to abhor it.
233. To the Reader.
Who writes, is famed of these, is blamed of those;
Himself to censure still he does expose:
He daily pleads his cause, desisteth Never,
And, Reader, unto Thee, the Judge is ever.
234. Of a Looking-glass.
Thou gav'st m'a Glass my Face to represent:
One to present thy Face would more content.
235. Of Quintia, a Hypocrite.
Learned, Comely, youthful, fair, Benign and Chaste
Thou, if not proud of these, some Goodness have.
236. A Problem.
The Prodigal the Miser does detest.
Why then do Misers Prodigals love best?
237. Sleep. Venus.
Shall I you call Death's Sisters, or Allies,
Thou pleasing Venus, Thou Sleep, easing Eyes?
You both indulge your Selves on Beds to lie:
And Feds are made your Pleasures to supply.
Dull Sleep, lewd Venus hate the light: And this
Is the Souls Death, the Senses Death that is.
238. Life's length and shortness.
To sloathful men the Day, Night, Month and Year
Seem long, though posting on with swift career.
We trifle out our long-thought time in vain,
Why of Life's shortness do we then complain?
239. The Treasury.
Birds are with Bird-lime caught, both young and old:
So Treasuries like Lime-twigs catch our Gold.
240. To self-loving Ponticus.
Thy mind and Eye, themselves did never see.
That thou so love thy self, how can it be?
241. Scrutiny.
O, that what Christ unt' his Disciples spoke,
Prince, Priest and people would their Query make;
What do men say of me? This askd, in the end
Men would their Errors see, and them amend.
242. Light of Grace.
The Moon enlight'ned by the Sun does shine.
So shines the Soul inspired with Grace divine.
243. Fame. Error.
Rumors and Errors further going; grow
Greater and greater like a Ball of Snow.
244. Historical Tradition of King Brutus, To William Camden.
Books may be burned, and Monuments may lie
Demolished; thy works and mine may die:
But a Tradition National, alive
While is that Nation, will in force survive.
245. To Roger Owen, A Learned Knight.
Thou know the Britains Laws, their old, new Rites,
And all that their whole History recites:
In thy Discourse, The art so profoundly read,
A living Library seems in thine Head.
246. On a Covetous Man.
Thou wretched man, why for a thousand year
Provid'st, and can not live one hundred here?
Why such vast sums of Moneys up do heap,
And seek'st long Joys in this short life to reap?
Thou say; I one day shall be rich, if I
Live close? Why say not, I shall one day die?
247. One Foot in the Grave.
We live upon Deaths shore, our life's as near
To death, as Seas unto the Shores appear:
Life, Death; are almost one thing in repute,
As Earth and Water one Globe constitute.
248. Britains Mercury. To J. H.
Of mundane things Moore wrote the best, and good:
Thou writ'st the worst, but Truth, if understood.
249. Of Himself.
Some say I am no Poet, it is no lie:
For I write nothing else but verity.
250. To William Butler Physician at Cambridge.
Some to desired Health prefer their Wealth;
Thou sleightest Wealth, thy care's for cure, for Health.
Thee the Physician, let none despair
Of Health, that is sick: Physic, as Phoebus Heir,
Thou giv'st: I flatter not, the truth I speak;
Nor comes this Praise from one that is Sick, or weak.
251. To Paulus, A Lawyer.
Why calls the common Law a Relict, her
Whose husband's dead? to the wedded that referr:
No need, a Wife her husbands death expect,
To lodge in mournful Bed with Face erect.
252. The last Divorce.
If man to Bliss, to Dis wife pass away,
Or contrary; No more one flesh are they.
253. The World.
The Earth is like a Gaol, like Walls the Skies,
The Gaoler's Sin, the Fetters Women's Eyes.
254. Laws Nullity.
We many Laws have made, almost not any:
For if not any kept, what good's so many?
That Laws be kept, this one Law more ordain,
Which if soon marred will soon be made again.
255. The state of man.
If one Foot down, Then the other is above:
Thus one man's Fall, another Rise does prove.
256. To a certain Man.
Doctor beginning, O begin to be
Now Ductior: more learned for thy degree.
257. Beside Women and Children.
Read through the sacred writ, though they surmount,
Mat. 14.21.
Women and Children pass not in account:
Women and Children are not Officers,
Nor are they trained up, or armed for wars:
Women and Children for their Garments have
Long Coats, they beardless are, and never shave:
Women and Children will Tears quickly shed,
And are by Flatterers soon led-misled.
O with what Arts do you mankind destroy
Thou woman Venus, Cupid thou, her Boy?
258. A Nose of Wax.
Do sacred Scriptures promise good unt' us?
Our Faith believes it, soon is credulous.
Do they require our duty? Then, O then
It Is durus sermo, difficult for men.
259. Heavens Ladder. 1 Cor. 13.8.13. y t h i t r e i a p a h o F C H
Three Virtues, as by steps, ascend int' Heaven,
Good Hope by four, by five Faith, Love by seven.
Hope to the Moon, Faith does to the Sun aspire,
But Charity to the highest Heaven, and higher.
260. Of Battus.
Thy Tongue thine Heart interprets, let thine Heart
Be silent, e're thy Tongue thy Mind impart.
The interpreter must silent stand, as long
As the Ambassador does use his tongue.
261. The Praise of the Ass.
Be ye not like an Horse or Mule which have no understanding.
With Horse and Mule, why was not the Ass brought on?
Because he was to carry David's Son.
262. A pair of impair Courtiers. The Carper, the Parasite.
They well agree not, nor keep equal ways,
This all things praises, that does nothing praise.
263. Four causes of man.
What is Man's form, but a bad mind, vain will?
What Principle Material? But Nily.
Suspect not matter with the form, respect
The Efficient and End: On these reflect.
264. The last Line.
Sad Death is of a merry Life last Act;
A serious Life does Joys in Death attract.
265. Upon the Death of Rich. Vaughan Bishop of London, 1607.
I who thee living did most justly praise,
Well knowing that thy worth deserved the Bays,
Ah, thee now dead, why praise I not more full?
Joys did my wit make brisk, Grief makes it dull.
While with more Tears, than Verse, I found thy knell,
My Tears confound my Verse, my words: farewell.
266. Of Life and Death.
One way to Life, to Death a thousand's had;
It Is well Death is a good thing, Life a bad.
267. Of decrepit Paul, A Builder.
Thou build'st an House, wherein to die, not dwell:
Whether thine House, or Tomb, thou can not tell.
268. Of Sextus, a Prodigal Robber.
We thee confess Munificent, who thine
Not only giv'st, but take from me, what is mine.
269. On Zoilus.
Thou spar'st the Dead, the Living do envy:
I will not therefore wish my self to die.
270. A Pair Royal of Friends. To the English-Scots, Britains. Scots-Welsh,
Britains. Welsh-English Britains.

In friendship this does seem a royal pair,
When three between, one love commands the Chair:
To make a pair in Love; if there be three,
Each of the three must then twice numbered be.
271. A Kingdom divided.
This world has nothing pertinent: And this-
World cannot stand, because divided it is.
272. The Ring of Concord, To the Britains in Parliament, 1607.
Scotland the Jewel brings, to make the Ring,
England the Gold, the Goldsmith is the King:
Speed Europes Peace, lest else the Ring-like year,
Before the Ring be finished, disappear.
273. Britain.
As thou were in the Beginning, now as then,
So, O so be, World without End: Amen.
274. Steganography. To the curious Reader.
Why, that my Verses are obscure, do say,
Not well to b' understood without a Key?
An Epigrammatist must not dilate:
It Is therefore fit he should abbreviate.
275. One God.
One Adam was the Father of all Men:
Nor can there be more Gods than Fathers then.
276. To the Lady Arbella Stuart.
If in bare words were honor, I could raise-
Could write a thousand Verses in thy Praise:
My Muse may by thy worth ennobled be,
But my poor Muse can nothing add to thee.
FINIS.
An Anagram of the Authors Name, Invented by D. Du. Tr. of Paris. JOANNES
AUDOENUS, Ad Annos Noe Vives.
Of the same, A Distich.
This Anagram is false concerning thee;
But of thy Book it verified may be.
D. Du. Tr. Med.

Of the same.
Of Thee, thy Book, this Anagram is right:
Thou brought thy Book, thy Book brings thee to light.
John Rosse, J. C. A Temples.

EPIGRAMS OF John Owen AN OXONIAN AND CAMBRO-BRITAN.

Three Books, Two Dedicated unto Henry Prince of Wales. One unto Charles Duke
of York.

Englished by Thomas Harvey.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Nevil Simmons at the Sign of the Prince's
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, and for Thomas Sawbridge at the three
Flower-de-Luces in Little-Britain. 1677.

The Author to the Reader.
IN the Authors Praise, according to the Mode;
Do wonder thou can find nor Verse, nor Ode?
No Patronage can to my Verses add;
For if they are good, they are good: if bad, they are bad.
The same, to the same.
MIne Epigrams are not like strifes, nor are
They like a Lawyers Client at the Bar:
None can our Verses (nor have Kings such power)
If low, make lofty, lofty if, make lower.
EPIGRAMS OF John Owen A CAMBRO-BRITAN. To Henry Prince of Wales. The First
Book.
1. To Prince Henry.
IN Love, for Custom Books we Dedicate,
And I the Prince choose for my Principate.
2. To Mecaenas.
I for my Verses no Mecaenas look,
I want one for my self, not for my Book.
3. To Marcellus, A Lawyer.
Thou were Paulinus Patient; for it
Let him thy Client be; Then are you quit.
4. To Henry, Prince of Wales.
Thy Breast, Brain, Reason, Head, Affections, Heart,
In thee with good Effects perform their Part:
Thy Wit thy Courage, Reason rules thy Sense;
Thine Head compleats thine Heart with Eminence.
Wales had three noble Princes, Three Princes of Wales, surnamed Great.
Great surnamed,
And Thou, Great Prince, shall be the fourth proclaimed.
5. Mercury Gallo-Belgick.
Not every Tree will make a Mercury,
This Artist yet does to it all Woods apply.
6. Orpheus.
Orpheus did fetch his Wife from Hell: But when
Fetched any Wife her Husband from that Den?
7. Academical Vests. To the Students of Oxford and Cambridge.
Why are you Students, and our Clergy clad
In black, their Vestments wearing fable, sad?
Is It that our Muses for Apollo mourn?
Or for Mecaenas closed in his Urn?
Mecaenas yet left Heirs: It Is true, some one
Heir of his Goods, but of his Goodness, none.
8. Wheter Peter were at Rome.
Whether at Rome Saint Peter ever were,
It Is doubtful: doubtless Simon was, is there.
9. To Be and Have.
It Is good to Be and Have, A Greek, I think,
Once said, an Alman added, and to drink.
10. To Ligurinus.
Arr'us thy Wife does till, does fill: The seed
He sowed, but thine's what Harvest it does breed.
11. Thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal.
Thou shall not steal, this Law's for Lawyers writ:
Thou shall not kill, this for Physician's fit.
12. Of Alanus, A decocting Chemist.
This Chemist Gold to Not-Gold brought, in Fact:
But he from not-Gold could not Gold extract.
13. To the Prince.
Ones own be first: If not, let none decline
Another to be, while he may be thine.
14. To Richard Earl of Dorset returned from France.
The change of Air has changed (which is most rare)
Thy Qualities and wit: both bettered arc.
More learned, more good thou now return'st: thy Fate
In both, great Earl, I do congratulate.
15. Nine Muses, Mutes.

When mute the Muses be, what odds (in fine)
Whether thou say nine Mutes, or Muses nine?
If the Idiome the difference constitutes,
What difference 'twixt the Muses and the Mutes?
16. Honors Etymology. Genealogy.

In Hebrew wealth's called Hon, in French, Gold, Or:
Hence Hon-or has its name and Metaphor.
17. To Cornutus.
Pythagoras his Letter has upon it
A Bipartite; That Letter's on thy front.
18. To Dindimus.
Of Salt a Bushel thou with me must eat
Thou say, to make our Amity complete:
Thou never eatst, as I remember, Salt:
What, shall thy friendship then for ever halt?
119. A Cannical Woman.
A Woman's like a Rule that is general:
Which many times deceives, so women all.
20. Solomon's wish.
Why did the wise King wisdom wish, not Health?
Had Solomon been wise h' had wished for wealth?
But Solomon wished wiser, He did prize
Wisdom before Wrath, (...) was not (...).
21. What News?
Here Is nothing, new says Solomon; yet, bold
Columbus found a new World in our old.
22. A Trine of British women from whom came the British union.
Henry the seventh.
Henry's wife, Mother Roses red and white
Margaret, the Wife to James the fourth King of Scots; Mother of the Union.
Conjoined, his Daughter did the Crowns Unite:
Happy, O Son, happy O Husband rather,
James the First, Britains Monarch.
Thrice happy Henry seventh as a Father.
23. Doron Basilicon. A Kingly Gift.
To thee the Wisdome's wished of Solomon:
Thy wish thou have Doron Basilicon.
24. Blessed are Munisicents. Pacisicents.

King James the Britains state munites, unites:
Munificent, unificent he writes.
25. Of Gaurus, a Church-Canon.
Wisdom is read in Texts Apocryphal,
Thou, though unwise, art yet Canonical.
26. A Snayl: Emblematical.
Like Snayls are disagreeing Man and Wife:
One House will not contain them in their strife.
27. Christopher Columbus.
The Dove.
Columba was the first which did relate
That Land appeared, and waters did abate:
And thou Columbus was the first, whose hand
Discovered to the World the America.
New Foundland.
This Gold, an Olive Branch that did produce,
That Pleasures, and this Treasures for man's use.
28. Against Regicides.
Cut off thy Mat. 9.43.
Right Hand, if it make thee sin:
Thy v. 45.
Foot likewise, if errors it walk in:
If that thy v. 47.
right Eye cause thee to transgress,
Then pull it out, what Member more or less
Is peccant in the Body, strike it dead:
Except, Divines and Physicians.
Doctors say, the Head.
29. A Gratulation. To George Archbishop of Canterbury, 1511.
At Oxford Rector, thence thou did arise
A Dean, two Cities did Episcopize:
Thou Londons Bishopric soon had; and thee
The Metropolitan we soon did see:
Thou in the Triple Senate fitt'st on high:
What more remains for thee to do? To die. Litchueld and Coventry.

30. To Decianus, a Judge.
I would not have thee deaf, nor dumb, but blind:
Not lame, but maimed; not cruel, nor too kind.
31. To Caesar, Caesar's, to God, Gods.
All Power on Earth, beginning has and end:
God solely does beyond them both extend:
Indefinite not infinite are Powers:
On Earth God's Infinite, but finite Ours.
32. Three Sabbaths.
Saturn, The Sun, and Venus in a Trine,
To the Jews, Turks, Christians Sabbaths three design:
The Jews their Sabbath have: And they the same
From pale-fac'd-leaden colored Saturn name:
The Turk, whose Law permits many Wives,
His Sabbaths Name from Venus Name derives:
But Christians their Sabbath, on the Day
The Sun of Righteousness arose, display.
33. To David Murray, Knight, one of the Bedchamber unto Prince Henry.
Kings Favors to their Favorites impart;
Wise Kings to those alone of best desert:
Our King in this excels: For, Favors he
Daigns sole to worthy men, to Thee, like Thee.
34. I can, will, will not.
Anomals.
I will, but cannot, what I can, I nill.
Man's total Life is only Nill, and will.
35. Patience.
The man that suffers, overcomes: But then
The suffering woman's overcome by men.
236. Of Genu-flexion, A Problem.
When Honor is conferred, or Friend to Friend;
Why man but one Knee, Woman both does bend?
Man once, but Woman twice must serve in Life:
While Maid, her Father: Husband, when a Wife.
37. To William Earl of Pembroke, one of the Kings privy Council.
Not old in years, nor young in Judgment sound,
The King, thee fit for him, -thy Country found;
Shall I for this thine Honor, praise thy Fate?
Or thy Desert? I both congratulate.
38. To the Bishop of London.
The learned King, of the Metropolis
Thee Pastor made: The City wished for this:
The See-seat vacant, many sought for it,
As their Reward for Learning and for Wit:
The King, the Archbishop; thee the City called:
And thou the See-seat vocant art installed.
39. Of rising and setting.
Remember at Sunsetting Death, thine Urn:
And at Sunrising mind thy thence return.
40. To Peter Junius, a Scot-Britain, formerly Tutor to King James.
He Is born unworthy, from whom none is born,
But thou thy birth, thy being do adorn:
For seven from thy Loins are issued forth,
The Idea's of thy Body, Wit and worth.
So many learned from thee their Father sprung
As Wise men did to learned Greece belong.
41. Of Gaurus.
Thou wise, and foolish art: Who credits it?
Wise in conceit, Foolish, for want of Wit.
42. S. T.
S T. though a note of silence, does expound,
Without a Vowels help, a vocal sound.
43. The saying of Henry Earl of Northampton, Uni and Univoce.
One and Only.
We Britans are univocal, serve one.
Only King James, uniting us alone.
44. Of Quintus a Dreamer.
Often in the Morn I thee complaining heard
That in thy Dreams by Night no Truth appeared:
What wonder? while by day thou speakst but lye^,
That all thy Dreams by Night are falsities?
45. To Robert Carre of the Kings Council, etc.
The vulgar seldom love whom Kings prefer,
The King as seldom loves the popular:
It Is difficult to purchase both their Loves;
Thy Motion's double, for with both it moves.
46. Of a certain Hypocrite.
Thy left hand knows not what thy right hand gives:
True: For it gives to none, nor one relieves.
47. The death of Justus Lipsius, 1606.
The seventi'th and sixth year of thine Age
Finished (oh Grief) thine Earthly Pilgrimage:
That Day brought first mine Epigrams to Light,
When thon did die, my morning was thy night.
48. Sir Thomas Overbury 's ingenious Poem of a Complete Wife.
Thou do describe a Wife in such a dress
As Tully does an Orator express:
And if to such a wife thou wedded were,
She would be far too short of thy desert.
49. Conferring Benefits.
Good done to a Child is lost, at least forgot:
Good done to an old man, is as good as not.
50. Ambiguous Right.
Physicians and Lawyers expert are,
These for our wealth, those for our Health take care.
These to the Clients their just Portion give,
With just proportion those the sick relieve:
Do ask what difference is between their Notions?
These arid Portions give, those liquid Potions.
51. To Prince Henry, born the nineteenth of February, 1594. The Numbers of the
Figure 1549. by Arithmetical Addition are reduced to the Golden Number (viz.)
19. v. g. 1.5.9. and 4. put together make 19.
( good or) Golden luck, 1612. 19. Jun.
Thou have attained thy Nineteenth year of Age,
The 19.
Golden Number does much good presage:
And this a Golden year (if I not err)
A Golden verse.
Will Honor, Gold, and Good on thee conferr.
52. To the King.
Noah, who lived before the Flood, and since,
Di'd in his Nineteenth Jubily: Great Prince,
Might my Vote pass, thou shall our A King before and after the Union of
Britain.
Noah be:
Likes ages, as he Jubilies, to see.
53. On a Certain Miser.
I praise thy Tongue, but not thine Hand: None knows
To promise more than thou, none less bestows.
54. Of Thomas More formerly Chancellor of England.
To Thomas Baron of Elesmere Chancellor of England.
Integrity of Life, sweet Eloquence,
Rare Wit advanced More to more Eminence.
And thee, thy Wisdom, Candor, grave Aspect
Makes Eminent, sublimed from Vulgar Sect.
Thy Life with such Integrity, so led,
Proves thee to More more like; but that he is dead.
And thou to More shall be more like in all,
Except his fatal end, and final fall.
55. Natura Brevium.
Praise of Brevity.
To the Reader.
Some praise prolixe Polysticks, I affect
Short Disticks, Dwarf-like, a short dialect:
Not sole in Epigrams, but in what sort
Of Things soever, What Is Neat, Good, Sweet, is short.
56. Thou shall marry a Wife, and another shall sleep with her.

Deuteronomy. 28.
This Scripture is in these our Days complete,
One weds a wife, another does her treat.
57. The Original of Britains union.
British I Will Mona, Monads Owen Theodore, Grandfather to Henry the seventh-by
the Father.
Author bare:
Rare Daughter Monas, In English called Anglesley, in British Mon.
Mona Parent rare.
58. To the learned King James.
To b' a good Poet's rare, if understood:
As rare a thing, a man to be that is good:
But a good King is a transcendent thing:
Yet thou good Poet art, good man, good King.
59. Of Cotta.
Saint Paul's Rule Cotta keeps to his wife: He Is one*
That has a Wife, and is as if h' had none.
60. As well to Mars, as Mercury.
Neptune to Bacchus, Mars to Apollo join,
Art calmeth Rage as Water cools Wine.
61. To John Harington, Knight.
Nobility, Wit, Virtue, these in thee
Strive for Precedence: Honorable three.
These noting to speak Truth why should I fear:
Of youths in Court thy Peer does scarce appear.
62. The Lottery: in French, Every thing is to be named from the major Part.
the Blank.
Here mourn the White, the Black rejoice; Yet this
Black color proper more for mourning is.
Why gains the Black? the White the while does lack?
Is It for that Dis give Wealth? And Dis is black.
63. To G. R. A Batchelour.
A Wife is good, a good Wife better; best
No Wife; I wish thee this; me that, at least.
64. On trifling Cotta.
In serious things thou trislest seriously;
Thy folly's serious, thy Wit's laid by.
65. On Paetus.
Thy Front has Horns: It Is asked who fixed them there?
An Author gave them, write; what-ere he were.
Write, Authors gave them; On the Moon-like front,
There must be two that fixed those Horns upon it.
66. Deltoton, Or the Letter D.
Rocks to man's Life three Deltaes are; these be
Riches.
Dives, Delights and Devils: Deltaes three.
67. The Gallows: To P. L.
A Robber's End's a Rope; Death circles it.
And Ropes for Thieves I think are Robes most sit:
But many escape: It Is true: some have some scope:
Yet commonly a Robber's End's a Rope.
68. Of Women's Wit. A Problem.
Why is a woman, than a Man, less wise?
Because Eve from man's Rib, not Head did rise.
69. Minerva, Evah.
Minerva, Joves Brains issue, wedded none:
But Eve was wedded, born from Adams Bone.
70. Of Helius.
Lawyers grow rich by Clients, at Debate:
Thus Helius has gained a vast Estate.
71. The State of Britains Union.
To the King.
This I Will, Elisa reigning, was like Wool,
By thee spun, Henry will make it Cloth in full.
72. Whether Bacchus be a God? To Germanus.
See not when drunk with Wine, that Bacchus shakes
Thine Head above, thy low Feet lofty makes?
He raising humble Feet, Heads list on high
Dejecting, proves himself a Deity.
73. To Sir Thomas Chaloner Chamberlain to Prince Henry.
Thee from thy youth endowed with noble Arts,
Advanced by Caesar for thine able Parts,
Thee who to thy poor friends a friend do prove,
Not, as so great, but, as so good, I love.
74. I love, a Passive; I am loved, an Active Voice.
Who loves, does serve: Who Is loved does bear the sway;
This Active is, that Passive; must obey.
75. On Julius, a pretended Monk.
Not in the World is Julius; but rather
The World's in him: This from his Life I gather.
76. Priest and People.
Priests pray for People, for Priests People toil:
Those praying, these are ploughing all the while.
77. On Pope Julius 2.
Behold two Swords said Peter, armed with Sword:
Behold two Keys O Peter, said his Lord.
Peter left Sword, and did the Keys receive,
But thou do take the Sword, the Keys do leave.
78. Like to like.
Females deformed though, find Males by kind.
And knavish Dav^s will a Master find.
79. Know thy Self.
Would know thy Self? Then Nature join to Grace,
This shows the Souls, and that the Bodies Face.
80. Death's Equity.
Rivers from Rivers differ; Man from Man:
While Men in Life, Rivers in Channels ran.
Ingulph'd in Seas, all Rivers have like Taste:
So Death does all men equal make at last.
To Thomas Button, 1612.
From Britain, almost all the World apart;
I wish fair Gales, thou sailing Westward art.
Seek, thou shall find the great Seas Mysteries;
Prince Henry's way's found by the Destinies.
82. On Gellia, painted.
Thy Picture is not like thee: But it is plain
Thou like thy picture art, as vile, as vain.
83. Conjurers contest.
In Magic Art the Conjurers contest,
Scottus Parmensis did excel the rest:
He with the Devil had a contract made,
Who knew most, could do most in that black trade:
Like as chief servants in the Courts of Kings,
Under great Masters can perform great things.
84. Of Ruffus, An Hypocrite.
Thou say that Ignorance makes men devout:
Thou then shall be the chief of all that Rout.
85. To the English. A Problem.
Wherefore do Spanish, French, Italian
Slight Wives? They reckon Women not Hommes, Femmes: Hombres, Mugeres:
Huomini, Done.
Humane.
86. To Cinna, A Physician.
Thou cur'st Diseases, How? Thou kill'st the Sick:
And what thou do (like Judas) thou do quick:
Thy Patient is blessed: Thou will not wrong
His Patience, to let him languish long.
87. We have one Advocate in Heaven.
One Advocate we have in Heaven, says Paul;
Are no more Advocates within that Hall?
88. To one young in years, old in manners.
Why does the Gout, which does unt' age belong,
Thee vex, A Soldier, Scholar, and so young?
The Gout mistook, it saw thee grave and sage,
And took thee for an old man, ful^ of age.
89. Anger is a short fury.
Though wrath be short, it is not for fury sit:
If furious, it is fit to shorten it.
90. To Henry Good-yeer, Knight, Kal. Jan. 1610.
What new years Gift shall I present to thee?
I wish, A good year.
thy Name thou many years may see.
91. Love Active and Passive. To Pontia.
Wilt know what differs I Am loved, from I love?
That, I suppose: My knowledge this does prove.
92. To the Prince.
My dreams by night are much of Royal Gold,
But in the morning there is no Gold, all is cold.
If thou, O Prince, wilt with thine Hand assist,
I shall have Real Gold, not in a Mist.
93. Arithmetical Division. To J. S. Merchant. 1607.
Though living thou give nothing to thy Friends,
The total Sum at Death in nothing Ends.
94. The Court Louse.
The prattling Parasite, through all the court,
To Grandees Chambers make their most resort:
So this vile Beast the Louse does ost infest
Men's Bodies, but their Heads above the rest.
95. Aesculapius Three-fac'd.
The Physic Doctor seems three-fac'd to be
Unto the Sick; God, Man, and Devil's he:
In giving Physic, he does seem a Man:
If the disease be cured a God he is than.
If Health's restored, and the disease destroyed:
When Doctor comes for Fees, Satan avoid.
96. Of Galatea.
The Stag, it is said, his Horns does yearly mew:
Thine Husband daily does his Horns renew.
97. Waters and Earths Epithalamy.
All generated are in Earth and Water:
Both these God has united, former, later:
That nothing to Mankind unkind should prove,
The Earth lies under, Water flows above.
Earth's waters Wife, Both one Globe constitute,
And well concur, Humor does The Ground.
Hume salute.
98. Of the same.
Why Water, which flows round, does slow from the Earth?
'Cause Thirst this should not suffer, nor that Dearth.
99. Death's in the Pot. To Court Critics.
Is Death in the Pot, or Port (that is) in With the ancient Latins Olla and
Aula signify the same.
Court?
For Plautus says, Pot, Court the same import.
100. The Deluge. A double Problem.
Why says the So sound as a Fish.
Proverb, As a Fish so sound?
Fish sole was saved when all the World was drowned.
All drowned, why were the Fish from drowning freed?
Because the Mother would preserve her breed.
101. A Cole of Wood.
Born in the Fire, and perishing thereby:
Woods spoiling, I deserve by Fire to die.
102. Of Gellia.
Thou from thy youth a Papist were: But now
Worse Papist art; How? Catholic art thou.
103. Of Aulus.
As ost as Sickness casts thee on thy Bed,
Or hollow Tooth does ache; or stupid Head:
O would I were in Heaven from this smart,
Thou say: Thine Heir says, O would thou were.
104. A Woman, what Creature.
Virgins untouched want sense, and Husbands grant
To them their sense, but then they Reason want.
105. Reason and Oratory.
Rhet'rick's the Palm, and Dialect's the fist:
This Combats, that Triumphs within the List.
106. Testicles.
To signify the Sex? or is our Name
Called Testicles, to attest thy Sin-thy Shame?
107. Upon the Death of Hen. Cuff, 1600.
Learned well in Greek, happy thine Alpha was,
But thine Omega hapless proved; Alas.
108. Of Festus.
Wilt marry now the art old? If thou b^^ wise
With Lillies learned Grammar first advise:
There indeclinable the Horn thou wilt find;
Old men have seldom that hard Rock declined.
109. Sir Thomas Moore.
Imprisoned Moore, to guess what would befall,
Inspects his Urne in an Urinall:
He saw no signs of Death: But had he seen
The Kings, the signs there of his death had been.
110. Of Cornelius.
Thou know The art Horned, tacit Cornelius:
Now thou shall be Cornelius Tacitus.
A Tripple Lie Vented, Invented, Painted.

111. On Tullus.
Carvers invent, the painters paint a Lie,
Who vents it? Thou. Thou do adventure high.
The End of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF JOH. OWENS Epigrams. To Prince Henry.
1. To Henry Prince of Wales.
GOD grant thee will the best, the Truth to know:
Who gave these gifts can It is good to be Great, better to be Learned, best to
be Good.
greatest Gifts bestow.
2. To James of Great Britain, etc.
King, the Best-Greatest.
Tyrants are feared of all, fear all: Nor wants
Their fearing force, fearful concomitants:
No need for thee (O thou great King of Kings,
Best King) to fear such formidable things.
3. Hysteron Proteron.
In English^ The Cart before the Horse.
Cambridge and Oxford, words so placed in force
Are like to these, The Cart before the Horse.
4. On a decrepit Husband of a third Wife.
First Clotho, Lachesis thy second wife,
Thy third wife Atropos cuts off thy life.
5. Love.
Imprison'd-Liberty, Peace-war, sweet-sowre,
Hope-fear, Gall-honey, Love does laugh and lowre.
6. Minos.
A Judge, who to be Just, on Bribes does look,
Is like a Fish, which while it takes, is took.
7. Doubtfulness.
Both I suspect, know neither, ready either
To credit: Phoebus he can tell me whether.
8. To the Princes Secretary.
Honors men's former Manners' change in Fine;
It Is the worlds course, but it is no course of thine:
Thou changed do not change: It Is strange to see
Some follow fortune, but she follows thee.
9. To Thomas Puckeringe, Knight and Baronet.
Dear Thomas, if to speak such things be fit,
I first did exercise thy noble Wit:
I thy first Tutor was, thou Pupil mine:
I am not what I was, but still am thine.
10. Three Draughts.
First draught thirst past, present the next abates.
And the third future thirst anticipates.
11. A double Riddle.
Tell me to her Mother that was spous'd what Eve.
woman
Her Adam.
Mother being Man: Her Go^
Father no Man?
12. Of Faith.
A five-fold Anagram.
True Faith is sure, no Schismatic, nor Greek,
Nor Creete, whose Faith is fleeting, or to seek,
13. To Sir Edward Cook, Knight, a learned Lawyer, Judge, etc.
The Laws of Nature, Nature of the Laws
Thou know, thou judge Clients and their cause:
Thine Answers, (our Apollo) are more clear
Than the Oracles, that were at Delphos, were.
Thou cutt'st off present strifes, do countermand
The future: Those with Tongue, and these with hand.
14. A Mathematical Instrument vulgarly called a Jacobs Staff.
To the Mathematician.
Take Jacob's Staff, his Jacob' s Ladder, Genesis 28.13.
Ladder give to me,
I more by this, than thou by that, shall see.
15. Earth's Situation.
The Earth ever stands, if Solomon we credit:
If Naso, then it sits, for Naso said it.
Sitting, it weary would be quaking found,
If standing fallen: What then? it lies round.
16. To Henry Davers, Baron of Dantesay.
Thy Valor, Fortune; Prudence conquers Chance:
Thine Hopes above vile-servile fear advance:
Thee Fortune follows, fellows; Prudence leads;
None but the Almighties Arm, thine Armor dreads:
March on, where e're the King thee calls; Thee guide
Leading, or serving conquest's on thy side.
17. Death' s Epitaph.
To the Death of Death.
The cross flew Death, no more from Death to rise:
Thy Death was Death's, thy Cross his Obsequies.
18. Of the Pope, and Luther.
The Pope, indulgent Father, frees, for fees,
Men's Souls, with indulgencies, from the Lees
Of Purgatory: But more Indulgence
Luther does grant; He Souls exempts from thence.
19. Of God and Man.
God is the Word, and with his Word made all,
We Men make Words, and like our Words do fall.
20. To Sir George Carew, Knight, Master of the Pupills, 1612. Jun. 13.
The King Commending Pupills to thy care,
He does his care of thy deserts declare.
21. Of fasting.
Why keeps the Pope so many fasts in the year?
'Cause Peter's successor he might appear.
22. A New Metamorphosis.
A loving Man and Wife make up one Man.
Which four feet has, that with two Feet began.
23. Of Anonyma.
Thou Fabians nerve inflamed have: Now he
May truly say, I ^urn with love of thee.
24. Good from the Dung.
The Scavenger from Dung does Gold extract:
The like Physicians and Rusticks act.
25. To Face no Trust.
The Wives offense in the Husbands front is writ;
Yet Man for Pen, Woman for Paper's fit.
26. To Will. Ravenscroft, J. C.
A Bachelor.
In single Life leading a Life divine,
What few can be thou can be, solely thine:
Thy Friends and kindred are as Sons to thee:
While I thy Kinsman or thy Friend may be.
27. History of this time.
The old Law for History was this, none might-
Nor dared untruth, nor feared the truth to write:
But Hist'ries now-new Law does the old oppose,
None fears untruth, nor dares the truth disclose,
28. A fair Dowry.
I like a naked Beauty, but not bare:
I would, that matter, with the form should square.
29. A Gallick Virgin.
Gallick virginity belongs to a Child,
For in their Speech Pucelle, that is a little one, the Fre^ call Virgin.
a Child's a Virgin styled.
An English Virgin.
^est English with French words should near assent,
^latonick men are by our Virgins meant.
30. Upon a new Nobleman.
Thy Mother spun, thy Father fished with nets:
^hence thy Descent from a long Line thou get'st.
31. Penelope's Riddle to her Suitors.
^here is Osculum, a Kiss, Os, the Mouth, Culus, the Posteriors.
a thing, my Verse dares scarcely name,
Thou would I should on thee bestow the same;
The former Syllable's mine husbands due;
Take thou, I am not hard, those other two.
32. Bias.
Who said, that all that is mine, with me I carry,
^ias, the wise, It seems did never marry.
33. Chrysostom in Greek by H. S. exactly set forth at Eaton.
To H. S. 1612.
Good-godly Chrysostom lived in the flesh;
^n Spirit, now deceased, he lives afresh.
He lives in's Books: First life was Natures Fee,
The next to God, the third is due to thee.
34. The Philosophers Wife.
Vulcan fair Venus, Jove did Juno wed,
But chaste Minerva was not married;
Why so? She, wisest of the Deities,
Would wed no man, why? because no Man's wise.
35. Omni homini soli et semper.
Propria quarto modo.
He falsely spoke, who said that Thais was common;
Each, every man has singly Thais, as Woman.
36. A pair of Fools.
Claud'us like Mule comes from a He-Ass and a Mare.
Mule, Gorgon like A little Mule comes from an Horse and a Shee-Ass.
Hin, is slow,
Both for their dullness to their Parents owe.
37. To Edward Sack-ville, the Earl of Dorsets only Brother returned from
France.
Nature thy prudent Mother gave thee Wit,
Experience abroad improved it.
From Sirens Songs, and Circes charms the art come
More sage, though with more age, unto thine Home.
38. Of Jealousy. English-French-Italian.
Why do the Italians, in more grievous sort
Than French or English, take their Wives stolen sport?
Beast's worse than Bird; The Italians wife's loose smile.
Him Becco Cornuto, an He Goat:
bestiates: French-English Un cocu in French, in English a Cuckold; Cuculus.
Birds the while.
English and French are Birds: the Italian
Sole horned Beast, of these three must lead the Van.
39. Socratical Wisdoms.
All things I thought I knew; But now confess
The more I know, I know, I know the less.
40. King Arthur's round Table.
The Delphick Oracle willed write (no Fable)
The seven wise men's Names in a round Table.
So thy Knights Names wise Arthur, first and last
On the round Table were in order placed.
41. Subsidy.
Clergy, Purse-Prayers; People Bodies bring,
The Nobles Courage-Coyn, to assist the King.
42. A new World.
The Cabalists of many Worlds assure us:
Innumerous they be, says Epicurus.
But count aright, sole two the account affords,
That old of Deeds, our now-new World of Words.
43. Two-fac'd Janus.
Thy force of Wit, and strength of Memory
Before, behind, to see thou do apply.
44. Earth 's Body.
The Earth's Bones are Stones, Skin, Surface, Metalls, Nerves,
The Grass for Hair, for Blood the Water serves.
45. To Pannicus, of Maurus.
What Maurus has, between thy Wife and Thee
^e does divide, thou Words, and Deeds has she.
46. Of Paula, an English Dissimulatrix.
With painted Face, with counterfeit Address
^hy Custom is, to dress thy wickedness.
^hou driv'st the Drones, dull Cattle, from thy Stall:
and what is thy Love, but Honey mixed with Gall?
47. A Physician, and Lawyers.
^ost'nan gives Honors, Galen Wealth, so be
^his be no Patient, nor Client he.
48. To Edward Wotton, Baron, etc.
One of his Majesty's privy Council.
He Is dead who did his place to thee resign,
Which was before, in Pallas Judgment, thine.
None worthier than thou this place to inherit;
And thy great worth a greater place does merit.
49. Galen; Anagram, Angel.
Galen, art Angel good or bad? A good-
Angel, preserving Health, if understood.
50. Blind Love is Deaf.
Their Wives defaults kind Husbands will not see.
Who truly love, by love all-blinded be.
Against their Dears they trust nor Eyes, nor Ears:
Thus Love not only Blind, but Deaf appears.
51. Of Dind^mus, amerchant.
Arithmeticks three first parts learned thou have;
Learn but the fourth, thou shall be blessed at last.
52. Anagramma Uxoris, The Anagram of a Wife.
Orcus and Uxor: But the English words will not complete it.
Prove. 30.13.
The Womb and Tomb insatiable are,
Says the wise King: He did them both compare:
Who falls on Wife, descends into the Pit:
A Wife in sense, not sound is like unt' it.
53. The Answer.
A Wife I Am named, not that I vex the man,
But that mine Housewifes care's Quotidian:
Is Man in Woman as Belzeb's in Hell?
Man's Satan then, if Woman be that Cell.
54. The Religious.
What Is well done's ill done, if in public done:
The Politician.
What Is ill done's well done, if revealed to none.
55. Three Goddesses.
Chaste Juno, wanton Venus, Pallas learned-
Pure Virgin, 's rare between those two discerned.
56. English Proteus.
New-fashions in Apparel 'states do wast:
Sole Pleasure pleases us, though lost at last.
57. One protects two.
The saying of H. 4. The French King.
One King protects two Kingdoms, yet both failed
Thee to protect but one when Death the assailed.
58. The Birth and Site of the Sun.
The Sun, fourth, midst is of the Planets seven:
The Sun was created the fourth day, Genesis 1.
The fourth day made, placed in the midst of Heaven.
59. The Sepulchers of Caesar, Pompey and Crassus.
Africa for Pompey, Asia does mourn
For Crassus, Europe has great Caesar's Urn.
60. City Buildings most City-like, of Henry Earl of Northampton.
The Structure of an House, Beneath, Above
The Builders Ingenuity does prove.
Who raise rude Piles of Buildings (to thy Praise)
By thine Example may their Buildings raise.
61. To Oranus.
Thy Wifes rich Sire often said, This Daughter mine
In stable Wedlock I to thee will join:
Too stable Wedlock has you joined, since she
So much unstable is in love to thee.
62. Of Faelix.
Faelix through all the City walks per deiu,
Who scarce two Cities in the World did view.
Who many Men and Cities saw, the Poor
In his own City beggeth at the door.
63. Francis Drake.
No time shall Drake forget; He crossed the Seas
And Drake-like swam unto the Antipodes.
Or This.
Drakes Name and Fame no time shall ravel out,
He sailed, amid the Seas, the World about.
64. Man.
Before thy Birth (which thou remembrest not)
Thou nothing were; Dead, something is thy lot.
65. Of Phoebus and Neptune.
The Sun's of swift, the Sea's of swister force;
That runs but once, this twice a day its course.
66. Uxor Vi(n)cta, that is, A Wife bound, Conquered.
The Brides Tongue brid'led, the Husband's Conqueror:
He sole o'recomes his Wife, that quiets her.
67. Naked Truth, Of Alethus.
If (as says Plato) Virtue, naked might
Be seen, 'twould fill men's hearts with rare Delight.
Alethus (as it is said) saw Four Curtizans, called by the names of the four
Virtues.
Virtues four
Naked, at Venice, and did them deflour.
68. Of Bacchus and Byrrhia, Wine and Beer.
Wine simple-single's praised, but double Beer:
Double is good, but single best does cheer.
69. Of Gellia.
To the first Matter Gellia inclines,
That all forms fancies, this sole Masculines.
70. Of Papilus, pulling off his hoar Hairs.
Thou need'st not pull thine hoar hairs from thine head,
Proceed in Riot.
Greek, they of themselves will shed.
71. Be not many Masters.
While none would Scholars be, but Masters all;
All Scholars, none we can a Master call.
72. Hen. 8. Defender of the Faith.
This Title, Leo the tenth, a Florentine by Nation, 1521.
Leo Pope, a Florentine,
To the King of Flowers and Lions did assign.
73. To Pope Leo.
That Title, with the Sword thou gav'st the King:
He thee denies; the Sword thy Death did bring.
74. The Pride of Life.
Man, though of vile Earth made, with Pride does swell,
The Earth made of nothing swells with man as well.
So man like the Earth aspires above his kind,
The Earth mounts in Mountains, Man mounts up in Mind.
75. To Guarene Tounsend, J. C.
Thy Tongue no Law-court courts, nor avaricious
Is prostitute to excuse the guilty, vicious:
Thou do contemplate Natures Mysteries,
Scripture, Laws, History thou do revise:
Three Graces, seven Arts, Sisters thrice three
Causes to know, but not to plead, teach thee.
76. Genesis and Saint Matthew's Gospel.
Christ's Birth in this, Adam's that Book is in;
Gospel and Law from Genesis begin.
77. Some Body, No Body.
The sacred Hebrew Text Men, Souls does style,
As if that Man were solely Soul the while.
None, no body, one, some body we call
In English, as if we were Bodies-All.
78. A Love Fancy.
If Lesbia, thou were the Zodiac,
I would I were the Sun, for thy sweet sake:
The Sun compleats the Zodiac once a year,
But once a Night I would complete thy Sphere.
79. To Book-gelders.
If wise, then gild my Book, but geld it not
That other Books by this may be begot.
80. To Gellia.
In earnest speak; Why do thou so profuse
Give that to many promised for ones use;
It Is an old custom, common as a Clock,
That many Keys should be to a single Lock.
81. Eve's and the Serpents Conventicle.
By Eves and Satan's Parley, sin did come;
O would she had been deaf, or he been dumb.
82. To Robert Johnson, a Scottish-Britain.
Reading thy British Of the affairs of great Britain and Ireland, In his Time.
History, I love
Thy self, I like thy Method, both approve:
No such Book's extant, that is more genuine,
More genial, than that same Book of thine;
Excepting Sir Tho. Moore.
Moore: Who wrote the Life-the fate
Of Richard the third.
Richard: Thee, next him, I emulate.
83. Of Himself.
I, of the Minor Brothers orders am:
My Fathers Lands to the Major Brother came.
84. Sell all that thou have, and give to the Poor. To Paetus.
Of this Advice thou kept'st the former part,
But not the latter: There remiss thou were.
The have sold, and given all; Part to thy Whore,
Part to thy Riot; nothing to the Poor.
85. Nor Of Evils the least. Of Good the greatest.

Though she were best, I would not have my Bride
A Giant, nor a Dwarf, though worst beside.
86. Sirens Songs.
If thou thy Reins would keep from Blain-from ^ane;
Flee Sirens Songs, thou shall be safe, and sane.
87. A Love Letter.
Love wants not Hope, in hope the Lover lives:
But Hope without thee,- thine, me nothing gives.
88. Blind Love.
Love and Ebriety are like: They blind
Men's Eyes, of Body this, that of the Mind.
89. The Will of rich T. S.
Thou give all, no longer here to live,
Nor hence to take it: Could? The would nothing give.
90. Air, Water, Earth, Hell.
The fordid Earth receives the dross of the Air:
Earth's dregs unto the infernal Caves repair.
What Evil's in the World shall to Hell descend:
As ponderous things unto the Center tend.
91. The Christian Zodiac.
The twelve Apostles, their Stars, four times three,
My Zodiac, Faith, and Christ my Sun shall be.
92. Erasmus Praise of Folly.
Thou did not folly praise, Erasmus, solely:
Thee many praise, and many praise thy folly.
93. Of Gymnicus, A Pastor.
Thou feed'st thy flock with words, they thee with weeds;
Thy care's for Tithes, no care to cure misdeeds.
94. Of Dardanus.
Paleness in Face, Leanness in Corpse does sit,
Thou nothing have that is fat, but thy gross Wit.
95. Pleas in the year 1609. between Rob. Calvin, Plaintiff; and John Bingley,
and Richard Gryffin, Defendants.
When the Post-nati were in Law of late,
Robert the Son of James o'recame; blessed fate:
The one English, the other Welsh, the Victor Scot
O'recame them, guilty both: A lucky lot.
I love good luck: Britains, Hearts-Hands unite;
This Island shall no more be bipartite.
Their Sons Sons Sons shall see, there shall be then
One Kingdom under but one King, Amen.
96. Of our times Discords.
Logic does things define, divide beside:
But we no things define, all things divide.
97. Evil Manners produce good Laws.
God to Adam gave a Law before his Sin,
Ill manners therefore all Laws brought not in.
98. Four Articles of Faith, 1, 2, 3, 4.
One God believe, two The two Testaments.
Bibles, Symbols The Apostles, Athanasius, and Nicene Creed.
three,
Let Faith the fourth, with the four Councils be.
99. To the Prince.
As a great Bear a little Lion flees,
So flees great Hope, when small things come it sees:
Most happy Prince, mine hope depends on thee;
From me take Hope, and I shall happy be.
100. To the Reader.
Self-love.
Narcissus I leave off, when Verse I write,
Do thou the same, when thou my Verse do cite.
The End of the Second Book.
EPIGRAMS OF John Owen A CAMBRO-BRITAN To Charles Duke of York, Brother to the
Prince the Kings Son. The Third Book.
1. A Jove Principium, Begin in God.
GOd's the beginning, in the beginning's God,
Before and after, without Period,
Without beginning the beginning: From
This sole beginning all beginnings come.
2. To the Reader.
I published former Books with Verses clad,
I, to the former this, not naked add.
If more remain, they better will appear,
Kind Reader thou do hope, but I do fear.
3. To Charles, Duke of York.
The Kings, the Kingdoms next Hope-Happiness,
Great Charles, yet then the Prince of Camb'ra less:
Thy Tutors Counsel use, thee which instruct:
Sage-sane advice, a Duke will safe conduct.
Be like thy Father, Second to thy Brother;
Thy Second, or thy like will be none other.
4. The Art of Memory.
Simonides invented Mem'ries Art,
But the Art of Wit none yet, in whole or part.
5. Things, Names and Words.
God all things did Create, Man gave them Names,
Woman gave words: But word for word inflames.
6. Redemption and Regeneration.
Satan from Eve bought Man, Christ man re-bought:
Adam did death procure, the cure Christ wrought.
7. The Praise of Liberality.
A Gift's eternal, follows him that gives;
The Giver and Receiver It relieves.
8. Oxford's new Library. To the Readers, 1610.
Authors seek ye? Ready, before your Eyes,
Each Classick Author in his Classis cries:
Of this great Work, scarce paralleled on Earth,
Seek ye the Founder? Bodley gave It birth.
9. To the University of Oxford.
No Library there is with thine that dare
Compare, nor with thy Wits that can compare.
10. To Queen Anne.
Sister, Wife, Mother, Daughter of a King,
Queen Anne: What greater Titles can we bring?
Four Virtues thou with these four Titles have;
What can thou to thy Virtues add at last?
11. To Elizabeth the Kings Daughter.
Born of a Kingly,-long continued Line,
A King, a Caesar meriting for thine:
Should for an Husband stay, who could outvie
Thy worth, thou might a Virgin live and die.
12. Speech and Writing.
Mute Hand's the speaking Tongues Interpreter,
As speaking Tongue's the mute Hearts messenger.
13. A new Man.
Depel, Dispel that old-grown Man of Sin,
And, with the new Man, a new life begin.
14. An healthful Anagram, Opto, I wish, Poto, I drink.
I wish much Health, but drink no Health to thee:
Better's a dry, than drunken Health for me.
15. The forbidden Fruit.
It was not sole an Apple, It was worse,
Adam brought Sins Original, the Curse.
16. Call. January.
Greeks and Gift-givers, Tros thus says, I fear:
Who Is Greek? The Poor: Who Tros? The Usurer.
17. Of Alcon.
Alcon wants credit, he will credit none;
All credit him; His credit then is not gone.
18. To Robert Carey, Knight, Governor of Charles Duke of York.
Great Queen Elisa, in Alliance nigh
Unto thy Parent, graced thy family:
The King of Britains Son thy Pupil is;
That Is the Honor of thy Kind, of thy Mind, this,
19. Example.
Virtue by good Example's taught and learned:
In teaching me, my Teacher is concerned.
20. A double Medium.
The Earth in the middle stands, yet low does lie:
And Virtue's in the midst, yet soareth high.
21. N. O.
N leads, O follows: Nothing's more Old than All:
For God of Nothing made what the Orb we call.
22. To James Fullerton, Knight, Governor of Charles Duke of York.
Learned Fullerton, the credit of thy Nation,
Thou the Kings Son have in thine Education:
And that the Son may like his Father move,
Thy Labor that, thine Honor this will prove.
23. Holiness, Healthfulness.
All wish long Life, few to live well endeavor:
Would thou live long? live well, and live for ever.
24. Sheep and Goats.
The Goats climb Rocks, and Promontories steep,
The lower Ground depasture flocks of Sheep:
It Is so now, but it will not still be so,
The Sheep on high, the Goats below shall go.
25. A Ship.
The Stern's the Train, Bulk, Belly, Bill the Prore;
The Sayls are Wings; Ships sail, as Birds do soar.
26. To Thomas Murrey, Tutor to Charles Duke of York.
If Jacobines be the Kings Friends, I will
My self a Jacobine acknowledge still:
If Scotists be the Regal favorites,
I will a Scotist be by days, by nights:
Learned Thomas, thou me Thomist make to be;
And Scotist, thou Scotch-Britain make me.
27. Blood not Virtue.
Virtue, than Blood, 'twas said, is more preclare:
But Blood is better than all Virtues are:
Blood better is than Virtue: Not by Merits,
But by thy Blood, O Christ, man Heaven inherits.
28. The Sun, and time.
The Sun is swift, but the Hour's more swift: Josh. 10.12
The Sun
Sometime stood still, but the Hour that time did run.
29. The Blood.
I Am Crude, called Blood: A circled course I keep,
And Snake-like through the bodies Veins I creep.
30. Of Pannicus, a rich Fool.
Forture does favor Fools: Or credit me,
Or else believe thy Self, thou then shall see.
31. Brevity.
Perspicuous Brevity does please in chief:
In words, which things concerned contain, be brief.
32. The Tomb of John Puckeringe, Keeper of the Great Seal.
This Tomb presents three Brothers, Sisters five,
One Sister's dead, one Brother's yet alive.
33. Homer.
No wonder, Homer, former was of Lies;
His Ears were his Informers, not his Eyes.
34. Erasmus.
It Is asked, why men Erasmus thee do call?
Answer.
If Mouse, I was the best, or none at all.
35. A little, nothing; too much, enough.
The Poor have little, Beggars that are common,
Have nothing, rich too much, enough has no man.
36. To Henry Wotton, Knight, the Kings Ambassador, etc. 1612.
In dubious things thou did remember me,
In serious, though late, I think on thee:
At Venice, at A Town between France and Germany.
Sabbaudies for our King
Thou Legate were, fair Winds thee back did bring.
The King must pay thee what he thee does owe,
It Is secret when: But that he will I know.
37. Foresee thine End.
Man's death, not birth declares his bane, or bliss:
None blessed before his death, nor wretched is.
38. The Polar Sabbath.
To the Polars.
One day, one Night, does your whole year display:
So that your Seventh year, 's your seven^h day.
39. To the Desirers of the Salick Law.
In France the Virile Law sets men at the Helm,
The female Distaff must not rule the Realm.
Would ye the Salick Law should here come in,
O Britains? Be robust: At home begin.
46. To G. Gwyn.
That I no Disticks in thy praise design,
It is because thine better are than mine.
41. Irus and Croesus Epitaph.
Croesus and Irus thus are different,
Both dead, that has, this has no Monument.
42. The Inter-Calar Month, 1612.
Why February sole each fourth year grows?
'Cause it is the least month from the Moon that flows.
43. Of Faelix.
Rich, while alive, thou were, now dead, poor art:
Wishing with Lazarus a place, a part.
44. Ten Principles.
One Substance does nine Predicaments in Logic.
Categors confine,
As one Apollo does the Muses nine.
45. Logic.
A Creature horn in the dark, Rude, Infant, Child;
Unt' Oxford sent, will soon a man be styled.
46. To Samuel Daniel, Poet.
A. Pen thy right Hand, Sword thy left does follow:
Mars is Sinister, Dexter's thine Apollo.
47. Lover of Truth. To Paulus.
Fond Novelties, sottish Antiquities
Me please not, truth is all I praise-I prize:
I follow neither new, nor old: It Is true:
But Truth I love, whether it is old, or new.
48. Humility.
Long Grass in valleys, short on Mountains grows:
Low minds more Wisdom have, than lofty Brows:
A Mind's a Mount, whose Top's a Type of Wit,
Each Top is bare, and Type is like unt' it.
49. Three Self-Lovers.
I next my self, and thou, thy self art next;
What hinders, but that he should be context?
50. Saint Marks Festival.
To Marianus, a Shepherd.
Why marks Saint Mark's day Sheep, not Goats? Tell why?
Sheep Shall hereafter live, when Goats shall die.
51. To Dindimus.
Devouring time devoureth all that is our:
But thou mispending time, do time devour.
52. Of Heaven and Earth, a double Paradox.
Heavens Motion errs not, erring is the Earth's Station,
Fast, steadfast though, yet full of Variation.
Trod under foot, Plough'd, Harrow'd every Morn,
Poor Earth, while I am Earth, I shall be torn.
53. The Year.
Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, make the year:
Autumn does Summer, Spring does Winter cheer.
54. A Client.
Have care to cure, and to secure thy Cause?
Incline then, Client, to thy Lawyers Laws.
55. Of the Covetous.
Shoes wider than thy Feet thou will not have;
Why then more Wealth than's fit, or needs, do crave?
56. Patience.
I will, or must be patient, hoping still:
All things by this I suffer can, or will.
57. The Serpent, Eve, Adam.
The Serpent, not deceived, deceived poor Eve;
Adam deceived not, but he did believe
His Wise, and was deceived: The Woman's fault
Was Active, Passive: Caught her self, she caught.
58. The Swan.
When Fates me call, the Rivers Bank close by,
I sweetly sing my Requiem, and die.
59. To Polydore.
The Dative case than Ablative is better;
The Taker to the Giver is a Debtor.
Ah, the Ablative does here too long remain,
When will the Dative case return again?
60. To N. N.
Unhappy Servant of two Masters thou,
This Nothing does, that Nothing has to allow.
61. A Threefold Continency of the Eyes, Ears, and Tongue.
Lest ill thou see, or hear'st, thy Windows close:
Lest ill thou speak Locks on thy Lips impose.
62. Saturns three Sons.
Nummipotent is one, Hells President:
Next Amnipotent, third Omnipotent.
63. The old man speaks to the young Man.
My Life is short, nor can long time import;
Thy Life seems long; but shortly will be short.
64. Of my Book.
Salted at Oxon (youth then) it is the Mode;
Peppered at Winton (then Child) I abode:
If this my Book of Salt, or Pepper taste,
First, Winton Pepper gave, Salt Oxon last.
65. To Theo-dore, Gods Gift, A Physician.
In Greek and Latin Theodore's thy Name;
Thy skill in The most high created the Physician, The most High created
Physic out of the Earth, Ecclesiasticus 38.1.4.
Physic makes it thrice the same.
66. Of Quintus.
At School, a Boy, thou learn'dst four Swearing Adverbs,
Now grown a Man, thou swear'st four thousand Mad Verbs.
67. To an Angry man.
Let Anger set; but not rise with the Sun;
Still let it with the Sun to Antipo^es run.
68. Of a Cloak and Coal.
Blew Coats, with Sleeves and Badges, yearly new
Here Serving Men did wear, a lazy crew:
Now Cloaks they wear: Why Cloaks? Because they may
Flagens or Capons, under Cloaks convey.
69. Death.
Nothing's here humane, but inhum'd must be;
Earth swallows Earth, but Souls from Earth flee free.
70. Of Pontius, A Poet.
Pont'us on one Foot halts, with the other stumbles;
Hexameters, Pentameters he rumbles.
71. Of Fabian.
Do what thou say, or say what thou do do,
But Fabian does neither of the two.
72. Edition of Books.
It happens, that when Verses I have penned,
Fasting or full, Edition is their end.
73. God loves a cheerful Giver.
Regard not what Reward thou giv'st the poor:
God will Regard, and it Reward with more.
74. Of Quintus Ramista his Fathers third Son.
As if one Tree bare two ^oughs, none beside;
So thou do all things in two Parts divide.
If all thing else should bipartited be,
What of thy Fathers Goods would come to thee?
75. Cupid's Arms, Bow and Arrows.
Offensive not Defensive weapons, why
Does Cupid use? He conquers all thereby.
76. Of Prose and Verse.
A Problem.
Why runs a Speech in Verse than Prose more fleet?
Because that wants not, this wants Feet.
77. Heaven.
Heaven's the specious-spatious House of God;
All-potent Lord, House patent all abroad.
78. (...).
Water's made holy for Regeneration:
But it is but simply water in Creation.
79. A Nest of Boxes Suscipio Pyxidum Trias. Scipio Pyxidum Trias. Pio Pyxidum
Trias.

The English cannot reach the conceit.
I for my Country, Fathers, People, I
Adventure dare, said Scipio, to die.
80. Of Pontilian.
The fawning Dog with wagging Tail does flatter:
Pontill for want of Tail with his Tongue does chatter.
81. We are Dust and Ashes. Horace.
Let none, though clad with Earth, of Heaven despair;
Nor any, though a Shadow, thin as Air:
Dust is our Flesh, Christ's Body's of like clod:
Our Soul's a shadow, shadow yet of God.
82. An Aenigma.
Tell what Felicitas.
whole world in Heaven does abound,
Gall.
First Syllable of which on Earth's sole found.
83. A Rich Man.
While I wish Wealth, I worse am, and in fine
Greatness to gain, I Goodness do decline.
84. Conversion of Paul.
Thou, lately Saul, art now Saint Paul; Thou late
Did persecute, but now do predicate.
85. Right Reason.
That in our times Reason's o're-rul'd it is grief.
'Twere Joy, if Reason might command in chief.
86. To Thomas Morrey, Tutor unto Charles Duke of York.
I thee, thy Genius, ingenious head;
Know, read thy Writings worthy to be read:
Thou Doctor-ductor to the Duke, than thee
None fitter, by thy Rules while ruled is he,
Not forced, but by Propensity; What Praise
Have gained, to lead thy Leader in his ways?
87. To the Hebrews.
Your Law is your Religion, Faith is ours,
Our want's to do well, to believe well's yours.
88. Irus, a Beggar.
By this word Hospes Host, and Guest's expressed:
I am to many, none to me's a Guest.
89. God.
Though God's Infinitie's dispersed most clear'^
Through the whole World, God yet is sought for there.
90. An Eagle.
In Temples the Eagle sacred Scripture bears,
Now great Jehovah's Bird, once Jupiter's.
91. Toby Matthew.
Thy first Name from the old Testament, thy Next
Is from the new: Both Names from sacred Text.
Strange, that a Gentiles name Canonical
Should he, which in the Fount's Apocryphal.
92. On a Paraphrase.
This Paraphrase is circle-like wrought round,
From Center to circumference it is found;
It touches the Diameter's both ends,
But to the Center in no part extends.
93. Of Corbulo.
Thou ruinest, and raisest, Corbulo;
Thy Wealth thou ruin'st, raisest nothing: No.
94. Of Gellia, a Grammaticastrix.
Grammar was the Art of speaking called of old;
Thou needst not learn it, thou can speak, and scold.
95. On a certain Grammaticaster.
A Shred, an Hair, a Nut-shell, half a Groat,
Thou me do prize at: What I thee? for naught.
96. War.
War, sole to Soldiers seems pleasant: Why?
Because sole Soldiers gain,^live thereby.
97. Riches.
Sole Gold's a God: Goods, Gods: Coin, Queen ^^ some
Pluto speaks with applause, but Plato's dumb.
98. Three Genders.
Wives (though most chaste) of the Doubtful are, of t^^ common
Are Whores, of the feminine is every Woman.
99. S T. a note of Silence.
What mean this Roman S T? What? Express:
S, stands for Silence, T, for Taciteness.
100. Patria est ubicunque est been.
Where I do well, there I dwell.
I count my Country, not where born, or bred;
But that, where known, where with mine own I'^ fe^^
My Country, that I count, where I do well;
Where I have my subsistence, there I dwell.
101. (...)
That Wife is for a Duke, and King unfit,
Which will not be led, ruled, nor submit.
102. Rhetoric and Dialect.
Rhet'rick to speak, Logic to teach is the Art:
This Wisdom, that to the Wise does strength impart
That neater, this compleater couched than it;
That seasoned, this seasoneth the Wit.
Rhet'rick does veil, Logic does Truth reveal;
This warns, that moves, that wounds, this does heal.
103. Actaeon.
Actaeons Dogs devoured his Flesh, Bones, Skin;
But yet his Horns some Cities are within.
104. Arithmetical Multiplication and Division.
Division Right, left Hand Multiplication
Respects, why? Virtue's that, this a Privation:
Why upward that, why downward this aspects?
This unto man, that unto God directs.
105. A Tree.
Spring makes me green, me Summers heat does scald;
Autumn hoar-headed, Winter makes me bald.
106. To Theodore Prise, an Oxonian Divine.
One Verse my love to thee cannot declare;
^f two will serve, lo, here two Verses are.
107. One God.
Heaven.
Coelum's an Hetroclite, as Lily notes;
And Deus with the Plural Number quotes:
O, what Blasphemers our Grammarians are,
Who, that we Go^^
Deus may decline, declare.
108. Dei genus.
The Godhead.
Numen to the Neuter gender does incline;
^Tis neither Masculine, nor Feminine.
109. Government of the body.
^ools strain, but prudent men restrain their voice:
Which has least labor, silence, or a noise?
110. Malorum signifies Apples or Evils.
Malorum, the least and greatest, To Maximus.
^t Table sitting choose of ills the least,
^he great'st of Apples, if the great'st be best.
111. Unda.
^bate a Letter Water.
Unda's Moist.
Uda, add
^Tis Clean.
Munda, Naked.
Nuda, it is transposed, unclad.
112. Of Dreams. A Paradox.
^^d Dreams are good, good, bad: Why? when I wake
^f bad, I Am glad, if good, mine heart does ache.
113. Waters Original.
(^) Unda, the Latin word has Declination:
^sk'st, whence derived? It has no derivation:
The year and River circulating run,
Ending, without an End, where each begun. (a) w^^^

114. Covetousness.
To the Ocean, Rivers run all places from:
It says not whence d' ye come, but hither come.
115. The Adamant.
To Lovers Adamants ought to be sent:
Cupid can make an Adamant relent.
116. Dog and Hare.
Though light-foot Hare more swift than Grey-hou^^
They run in hope, she (light) does hopeless flee.
117. Speech and Writing.
The nimble Tongue the Hearts secrets does expound,
But writing has a voice without a sound.
118. The Laurel.
I, Phoebus Tree, still frondent, flourishing,
Nor bald, nor grisled, verdant as the Spring.
119. Dicacity and (...).
Wit without Wisdome's as without Meat, Salt:
Inurbane wit's what? Salt-less Meat, like fault.
120. Something of nothing.
An Arithmetical Riddle.
01.
Add one to nothing, nothing's left, but then
1^.
Add to one nothing, thence arises ten.
121. To William Sutton, an Oxonian Divine.
I owe thee more than can my Verse express;
Me thy perpet'al debtor I confess.
122. Three Sons of Saturn and Ops, Coheirs.
Saturns three Sons, all rich, Dis, Neptune, Jove;
Whose Mother Ops, Beneath, About, Above
Them placed; I should be richer than those three,
Would Mother Rich^^ 123. O^^
Opes lend her help to me.
123. Of a certain superfluous Orator.
When all the have said, Thou want to say, I Have done;
^ut word would please me more than those fore-gone.
124. To the Readers.
^ Readers, Hearers all I will not please,
^r am I pleased with all of those, or these.
The End of the Third Book.
EPIGRAMS OF John Owen AN OXONIAN AND CAMBRO-BRITAN.

Three Books dedicated to three, Each a Mecaenas. To Edward Noel, Knight and
Baronet, one. To William Sidley, Knight and Baronet, another. To Roger Owen, a
Noble Knight the third.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Nevil Simmons at the Sign of the Prince's
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, and for Thomas Sawbridge at the three
Flower-de-Luces in Little-Britain. 1677.

EPIGRAMS OF John Owen AN OXONIAN AND CAMBRO-BRITAN. To Sir Edward Noel,
Knight, and Baronet. The First Book.
1. To the Prince of Wales.
MEcaenas (gracious in Caesar's Eyes)
Virgil and Horace daign'd to patronize.
And thou, great Prince, do not disdain to lend
Thine Help unto mine Hope, for better end.
Three Knights me patronize; though each to me
Mecaenas is, thou shall my Caesar be.
2. To his three Patrons, E.N. G.S. R.O.
When old friends me forsook, as it is in use,
Unhop'd for Help you three did me produce:
Your three Names therefore, next the Prince his name
I join, Mecaenas sole deserves such fame.
3. Lawyer and Physician.
Unless he subtle be, this rashly bold,
They both perhaps may beg their bread, when old.
4. The Courtiers Ladder.
None, but by many steps does rise at Court,
But falling, one's enough, too much, though short.
5. To Edward Noel, etc.
Though I, Mecaenas, send this Book to thee;
Others may read it, if it worth reading be.
How is my Patron better by this sped
Than Readers? Thus, he reads, and is read.
6. On Tomasine.
Many, these times, in praise of Asses writ,
I read a Book, and read thy praise in it.
7. To -- A Courtier.
The bold by Fortune, the eaters are by meat
Aided: Wilt something be? be bold and eat.
8. Honor and Riches compared.
God gives men Riches, Honor claims as Donor.
Preferred before all Riches therefore's Honor.
9. On fabulous Poets.
Poets of old, making small difference
'Twixt Truth and Lies, made something of each Ens:
Their proper name, from making, Poets gather,
From making something, making nothing rather.
10. On Fabianus.
Some bald without, thou bald within, it is plain:
They want their Hair, thou want as much of Brain.
11. Osculum, a Kiss.
Lovers affect three Syllables; this word
Is given by the Lovers that accord.
Is the first given? Doubtless, then, in fine
The rest will follow from the femi^i^e.
12. Dalilah.
Strong Sampsons Wife, despoyl'd him of his hair,
Our times have many Dalilahs, as fair.
13. Coventry and Warwick, Midland Cities.
Not the same Prelate, the same Judge you see;
Your Spirits differ, but one flesh you be.
14. The Birthday.
To present born, reborn to future things,
The present's first, the last more comfort brings.
15. On the Art of Love.
I think 'twas rudeness the Art of Love to impart,
Love is the work of Nature, not of Art.
16 On Gallio.
Rare Judge, who giftless does his office; Why?
Because with gifts he did his office buy.
17. On Phyllis.
The Love of Phyllis for a Solar year
Endures not; Lunar it is, like Phoebe's Sphere.
Her love is like her Body, monthly sick:
Lunar's her Love, her self is Lunatic.
18. On Paetus. A Problem.
Nor Father, Step-father, nor kin to those
Thy Wife brought forth: What shall we thee suppose?
19. On Pontiliana.
Why were thou wedded on bright Lucy's light?
Because 'twas shortest Day, and longest Night.
20. To Fronto, a Lawyer.
I many Penal statutes, Fronto, saw
But not one Premial in all your Law:
Laws Penal, Premial support a State;
This age has lost the last, the first's in date.
21. To Edward Noel, etc.
Wise Nature did to thee much Wit impart
To Natures strength thou do add helps of Art.
Good Fortune with thy Virtue does combine,
Unto thine Art and Wit thou Wealth do join.
Fortune enables thee to succor wants,
And Virtue makes thee willing: Both God grants.
22. On Festus, an unjust Judge.
What Judas did, or Pilate, do the same:
Hanged would not be? Wash then thine hands from blame.
23. Paronomasia, ( i.) Gingling with words.
A Maid looks on her Lovers face, not mind:
If wedded, it is enough, her Husband's kind:
Venus had rather courted be than painted;
With Acts, than Complements she is more acquainted.
24. To Martha, Of Quintus.
Quintus in Love is prodigal, recluse:
Of thy Love covetous, of's own profuse.
25. Of
Man's Back-parts are in Latin Neuters styled:
But all his parts please Women, well compiled.
26. Of Colinus dying Intestate.
Dying Colinus nothing did bequeath,
Lest all: In Life a Dog, an Hog at's Death.
27. Of Virginity and Wedlock.
Virginity's a narrow way; a broad
Is Wedlook: Hence most People ride this road.
28. Of Pansa.
Great strife 'twixt Pansa and Eunomius
Arose about Church Rites, which they discuss:
Eunomius to prove his Period
The Scripture cites, the undoubted word of God:
With Scripture what have I to do, replies
Pansa, my Bible in my Law books lies.
29. To D. T.
Thou followest two Masters; strange to me
If, or thou please both, or both please thee.
30. Merchants Faith.
Where Debtors credit's less, less credit give
The Creditors; by trust how should they live?
Sole trust, these times has many Merchants split:
To trust now therefore it is nor safe, nor fit.
31. Gerunds and Supines.
Di-do-dum while Aeneas was away
Did want her Gerunds, and Un-supine lay.
32. Give me an Angel, and I will give thee the Spirit.
The Spirit here, an Angel, Michael
Is promised there; here Gifts, there Hands excel.
33. To a certain rich Man.
If now thou give much, thy love's complete:
If much thou creditest, thy Faith is great.
34. To a servant of two most penurious Sisters.
Three Parce, fatal Sisters, once were known;
Thou now, poor wretch, two such do serve and own.
35. A Louse.
Thou me do bite, I kill thee: True, but small
Thy Crime's, thy Punishment is Capital.
36. From bad to worse.
He falls on Scylla that Charybdis shuns,
Who newly sick to the Physician runs:
Fools one extreme to avoid act the contrary,
When trifles men to Law to Lawyers carry.
37. Of the Prodigal and Covetous.
Both these are wretched: And it often does fall
That the Heirs of Cov'tous men prove Prodigal.
38. Divine Vengeance on G. R. 1603.
Thou kept'st the Prelates House against his mind;
Against thy mind the art now to an a Prison
House confined.
39. Of Damas.
As often as I thy promise claim, and I
Claim it more often, fith thou do not comply;
Thou never say, I have, often say I will;
No more I will, but say, I do fulfill.
40. On unfortunate Linus.
What wonder, fortune is to thee contrary?
Thy front is bare and bald, her Front is hairy.
41. To Gaurus.
Thy Whispers did of me some samll gift crave;
Wilt have a Culus gift? Thou shall it have.
42. Man all-eating.
Air, Water, Earth, with all the vast Extents
Of the Elements, scarce serve Man's Aliments.
If all man eats, int' his Substance ran,
As it is supposed, what Monster would be man?
43. The broad way.
Broad is the way, much trod, unt' Hell that leads;
The Blind, himself the Guide, this broad way treads.
44. To, In, Of.
Of, In, To, these three words my Book inhems:
Of, Teaches, To, Commends, In, Condemns.
45. On unmerciful Quintus.
When any Poor, or Naked, at thy door
Beg Alms, how can deny, while such implore?
Thou say, none ought to Beg by the English Laws,
But no Law bars relief to the poor, when cause.
46. Error is humane.
I read a just man falls seven times a day:
How often a Woman falls, I cannot say.
47. On a certain foolish writer.
O, that all black had been thy Papers white;
Or tinctured with no black, when thou did write.
48. The usurers Apology.
What good does me my Money without use?
Gold's bright with use, use does me gain produce.
49. On a Cuckold.
Had Horns by Nature, them thou might Cashier:
But the Horns, thy Wife thee gave, thou needs must wear.
50. Things adjudged.
Though Cicero call Law the sum of Reason,
And that Law's best which thence proceeds in season:
Few Lawyers are Logicians; Use, Example,
The Laws and Statutes are of either Temple.
51. A Woman.
Fair women, famous: Youthful, sportful are:
If Witty, Wise: Buxome and Chaste are rare.
52. The four Terms at Law.
The first Term's from Saint Michael declared;
For now The form of the Archangel in this English Piece of Gold.
the Archangel does the Lawyers guard:
The next is Hilary, this Term does cause
The Lawyers Hilarity by the Laws.
The third from Easter Feast its Title took,
The Lawyers Dockets are like The Parsons Easter Book.
the Easter Book.
The fourth Term's called Trinity: But why?
Because The Client, Lawyer, Judge
, each cause has a Triplicity.
53. The Cross in the Poultrey.
To Christ.
The Crosses Image stands, thine's took from thence:
Than thee, the Cross has greater Reverence.
54. That the Lawyers two Colleges, the Middle and Inner Temple are the same.
One house both have, and both one Law apply,
No Middle-Inner sense in the Law does lie.
What Is Middle, is the great World's inner Cell;
For than the Center, what does inner dwell?
The Middle Temple then, though Middle wrote,
From the Inner Temple differs not one Jot.
55. Of the same.
Two Parl'aments you have, one convocation;
Two Kitchens, but one Altar for oblation:
One Master calls to Supper, but the same.
One Horn does not your Dinner time proclaim;
Nor the same winding both your Horns inflates,
Yet one mind both your bodies animates.
56. A bountiful Mecaenas.
Thou liberal and free do nourish many,
And me thou nourishest as well as any.
57. To Faustinus.
Thou say my Book is good: O, if it be good,
I wish I were my Book, and understood.
58. O the times!
The Times are Changed, and in them Changed are we:
How? Man as Times grow worse, grows worse we see.
59. Stammering. To Balbinus.
Though thou do stammer in thy Speech, yet none
Can The Pope
, Pa-pa- Father.
pater say, but thou alone.
60. Agna-Oxon.
Thou Bride to Benedict (not so well named)
Supposed a Lamb, a Wolf art found, art famed.
61. To Aulus, a Physician, a vernal Gratulation.
Sick persons purge their Bodies in the Spring:
I thee salute, Spring does thine Harvest bring.
62. A Poet Laureate.
In Fire the Bay Leaves crackle, Poets live
In Death; Hence to the Poet Bays we give.
63. To a Citizen.
Sick of a Fever, thou do make repair
From Town to Country, for exchange of Air,
And going thither, leaving Cities gain,
Thy former Health thou do again attain:
Returning home to London healthful, poor
Thou do increase in Wealth: But, as before
Thy Fever comes: Now which is better, try,
Sickness with Wealth, or Health with Poverty?
64. Of Labienus, A Self-Lover.
He solely loves himself, beside loves none;
Loves sole himself, and loves himself alone.
65. A Widow.
Who weds a Widow, buys (as't may be scanned)
A Garment in Long-Lane, at second hand:
For all such Garments more or less were wore;
So more or less all Widows were before.
66. Pyramus and Thisbe.
A fatal wall us parted: O how near
How far asunder we two lovers were.
67. To Pollux, a Client.
Thy Suit depends in law: Better suspend
Than it should long depend: Pay, there is an end.
68. Hot Cold.
Women, though cold, their lovers yet inflame;
So Lime in water cast, does heat the same.
69. By my Faith.
None swear by Love, too many by their Faith:
Yet Jo. Ep. 1. cap. 4. v. 16.
that is God, but this no Godhead has.
70. Astrology.
Physiology.
Sublime Astrology soars in the Sky;
And Natures secrets in the Center lie.
I neither of these Mysteries can sound;
That for me's too sublime, this too profound.
71. Of Ponticus.
Thou nothing giv'st, but dying wilt: Then die:
He gives twice, who gives speedily.
72. Unequal Conflict.
His Sword at all Times Matho cannot wield,
But Pontia still ready has her Shield.
73. Of Lands and Money.
To Pontilian, a Merchant.
All Money with its Interest has bounds;
But (doubtless) bottomless are Lands and Grounds
Founts better are than Cisterns, Ground than Chest:
Though Cisterns greatest are, and Fountains least.
74. Of Fame.
Fame seldom praises good, bad often proclaims
Freely; from thence, evil the name of Fame's.
75. Of Galla.
Thine Eyes inflame me Galla; Touch me not:
If seeing burn, touching will be more hot.
76. Of decrepit Linus.
Saturn from Saturate, or full of years
Was called; thine age now Saturn-like appears.
77. A Dance.
The Heart dictates Love, Tongue's silent, Feet advance
Love's cunning meaning in a wanton Dance.
78. The Meditations and Vows of Joseph Hall of Cambridge.
Thou vowing vow'st, writ'st to be read, blessed man,
Who reads thy Vows, if them perform he can.
79. Anagram to Priscus, an old man.
Priscus, thine Hairs were Crisped; Why no more?
I Priscus am, who Crispus was before.
80. The Britains Night.
The Britains with short Night are pleased, Juvenal. Sat. 3
, it is said:
But British Maid no long Night has dismayed.
81. To Naevia.
We wish for the absent Sun, the present shun:
O how our Love in this is like the Sun?
82. Of Festus, a Liar.
All men are Liars, Festus will confess:
Then call him man, he is Liar called; no less.
83. Of Carpophorus.
From home he laughs with Lasses which he keeps:
At home, with his weeping wife, dissembling weeps.
84. The World.
Two Worlds are in the World; one undefiled;
This most defiled; yet each the World is styled.
85. To an Usurer.
The more thou giv'st, the more thou against a Friend:
But get'st a Foe, where thou the more do lend.
86. Of Giving and Satisfying.
Give, cries Laws voice in the West-minster Hall;
Though satisfy says Law Pontifical:
Lawyers take much, give little; much apply
Themselves to speak, little to satisfy.
87. A Wichamite.
I no Pompeian, no Caesarian,
No Syllan I, I am a Of Winchester College, and New College in Oxon; both
founded and endowed by William Wicham, Bishop of Winton, and dedicated to the
Blessed Virgin Mary.
Marian.
88. Against that common Proverb, (viz.)
The younger Brother is the ancienter Gentleman.
Adam was first of generous Mankind,
For him his maker next himself designed:
Then he that is nearest to Adam's period,
More generous is, and nearer unto God.
89. No man has seen God.
Dark minds see not Gods might, nor Owls the Light;
These see not day, nor those the God of might.
90. An old man is no man.
A young Man's laughing; weeping, Child and Woman;
An old man dry, both has unlearned, he is no man.
91. Of a Saracen Atheist.
Blessed Abr'hams Bosom seems a tale to thee;
In Sara's bosom thou would rather be.
92. Custom.
Custom and usage seems to have force of Law:
Now wickedness the balance down does draw.
93. Of Albinus.
Merchant Albinus is of all berest,
Goods, Credit; He to lose has nothing left:
In Love he lost Faith, Hope; All ill did prove;
What Is left him now to lose at last? sole Love.
94. An Anagram, Gerere, Regere.
To bear Rule, and to bear, are proper, where
Is Man and Wife: Let Man Rule, Woman bear.
95. A forsaken Lover.
As Tophets Fire is burning without light,
So me thy Love does burn, though nothing bright:
My Love to thee's like Elementar fire,
It shines, but burns thee not with my desire.
96. The punishment of Thais, A Problem.
Since in her former; not her hinder part
Thais did offend, why should her hinder smart?
Whether, because the sin before was signed,
The Punishment must therefore come behind.
97. Irus his Obsequies.
The Poor is like a Quartan; not one Bell
For the Poor's tacit Funeral rings a knell.
98. The Epitaph of Croesus and Irus.
Under a Marble Tomb lies Croesus, there;
But Irus where? The Poor lies every where.
99. Of Momus.
That I might love, approve, or praise in thee,
Or that I envy might, I nothing see.
100. Unite no number.
Of Foreign writers, and Britannicks Tone,
I of no number am; yet I am one.
The End of the First Book.
EPIGRAMS OF John Owen AN OXONIAN AND CAMBRO-BRITAN. To William Sidley, Knight
and Baronet. The Second Book.
1. To a Critical Courtier. Labor, Labos, Englished Labor Arbor, Arbos,
Englished A Tree Honor, Honos, Englished Honor.

THese words, the same in sense, but not in sound:
He Is wise that with the last of them is crowned.
2. Faith.
Reason demonstrates God, makes it our Creed;
And by this Reason, Faith is Reasons deed.
3. God.
God all things sees, and yet is seen of none;
Sole in all places seen, unseen alone.
4. To William Sidley, Knight, and Baronet, etc.
Thy sundry Languages, thy skill in the Laws,
Arts, Piety, sublime thee with applause.
Thy counsel many, poor thy money have;
Thus Virtue leads the Journey to the Grave.
Live so to Christ, thy Country, to thy King,
Thy self, till Angels thee to Glory bring.
5. To John Sidley, only Son of the aforenamed William Sidley.
Thou Janus art, but sole in name, now young;
Thy Father emulate, in Deed ere long.
Thou shall be Janus, hard it is to precel
Thy Father, if thou equal'st him, it is well.
6. A perpetual Equinoctial, To a blind man.
Thy Days and Nights are equal; thou can see
Nor Day, nor Night, Aequators all to thee.
7. To Ponticus, an Anabaptist.
Would keep good diet, for thy Souls Salvation?
Sup often, wash once in thy Regeneration.
8. The Gods of Inconstancy.
Romans, Vertumnus, Greeks, Proteus adored;
What people make not each of these their Lord?
9. Wheel-grease.
Men grease their Axle-trees left Wheels should creak:
But Lawyers must be greased to make them speak.
10. Of Harpalus, the reputed Father of two Sons.
The Son, that bears thy name, is not thine own:
But he that bears another, thine is known.
11. The Creation of Woman.
When Paul the Gospel preached, his language then
Was used, Men, Fathers and Brethren.
not unto Women, but to men:
O Brethren pray, (but not O Sisters pray)
The Priest in saying of the Mass does say.
When Moses most exactly does relate
The things, which God in order did create,
God solely good, who nothing made in vain
Or useless, God (says Moses) did explain,
And call his Works all good, excepting one,
When he the Woman made of Adam's Bone.
12. Of Papinianus and Ponticus.
He says he cannot err, and yet does err;
This that he may, but errs not does averr.
13. Of Tustonus.
Tuston is dead: Now dead, his Coin does come,
Rising out of his Chest, as from a Tomb.
14. Of Sin and Punishment.
The Doctors place Sin with Non-Entities:
Why place they not its Punishment there likewise?
15. Of the Moors who paint Angels Black, and Devils White.
Art cannot Metamorphose Black to White;
But Art roakes White take Black, though black as night.
Divines affirm no Devil can repent:
Satan's not White, then Black's his Element.
16. L' Argent faict tout.
Whence comes it that after so many slain,
English and French each in their own Land reign?
The L' escu.
Shield, O generous France, advanced thy Van:
L' Angelot.
An Angel, England, was thy Guardian.
17. Of a certain Drunkard.
Nothing's more thirsty than dry prattling: Bess-
Thy Wife prates more than thee; why drinks she less?
18. Verona, Placentia, Beneventum, To an Italian.
Few pass Verona from, to Benevent;
Thou shall be Placent, if Ben-venuto per tutto.
Bene-volent.
19. Time, Truth, Hatred.
Truth is Times Daughter, Hatred's Mother is,
Then Hatred's Nephew unto Time by this.
20. Daughter of Time.
I who Times Daughter was in times of yore,
Am I Times Daughter now, as heretofore?
Daughter of those, not of these Times am I:
Times Daughter's Christ, the Eternal Deity.
21. Wedlock Love.
No weddings, but much Love's in Heaven above:
On Earth are many Weddings, but no Love.
22. The Decalogue, the Lords Prayer, and the Apostles Creed.
One Love, ten Precepts: One Hope, seven votes:
Twelve Articles, one Faith, Religion notes.
23. To Calistratus.
Pained with the Spleen, said I, 's a painful thing?
The Spleen does laughing cause, does weeping bring.
24. The Sun.
Three Planets higher, lower three there be;
Thy Virtue, Sol, 's amid the double three.
25. A Metaphor.
Bare knowledge knows not Natures voice; no sound
Of Natures words in Dictionary's found.
Farmers by Figures do their Sense express,
Rusticks their talk with City language dress.
Man's as to words, to his life does figures give;
It Is figured all, and, as we speak, we live.
26. Christ a Divine, Physician, Lawyer.
Christ, here on Earth was a Physician,
A Preacher, is in Heaven, a Judge, God-Man.
27. Of Law, English-Welsh-French.
Di-rect Droit.
the French does say, Cys-raith.
Welsh say Cor-rect,
But Law's called Right.
Right in the English Dialect.
Erring's directed, Errors are by Law
Corrected, Laws Rule rules, keeps all in awe.
28. Castor and Pollux.
In Heaven the two Brother-Stars agree;
In Earth, I doubt, scarce two such Brothers be.
29. What is deferred is not auferr'd.
Long Life deferrs but takes not Death away;
What differs then, to die this, or next day?
30. Venale Honors Apology.
To the Baronets.
Gold, Honor, Lands, are Goods which Fortune lends;
And what on man's Arbitrament depends:
Health, Beauty, Strength, the Bodies Goods: These three,
And the Minds Goods from Price- from sale are free.
It Is madness to sell Bodies, sinful, Souls:
Fortune to sell, to buy, no Law controuls.
31. Authority and Reason.
In humane words, not who, but what I weigh:
In words divine, not what, but who does say.
32. Luci-fer.
The splendid Planet Venus does adorn
With her resplendent Ray the Night, the Morn;
In Heaven she still waits upon the Sun:
Why then, the light on Earth, should Venus shun?
33. Of the end of the World.
The Worlds beginning, Genesis unt' us
Moses declared; could not its Exitus.
Exodus.
34. To Pontilian.
Whether two Wives, both good; or one, a bad
Were best to marry with, thy Querie's had?
If I must choose, I then would choose the least
Of both these Evils, one, though bad, is best.
35. Love is the fulfilling of the Law.
Of the ten Precepts keep two, of the two
Keep one, that is Love; it will suffice: This do.
36. Devotion.
The pious people caused the Clergy's weal;
Ungrateful offspring of religious Zeal.
37. Of Heaven and Earth.
The Earth's greatest part is hid, Heaven spreads abroad:
I think that the Earth's ashamed of Men, her load.
38. To Aulus, On Sextus, Of Quintus.
Me Sextus envies, him I pity, I:
Quintus, who me not envies, I envy.
39. Of Pollio.
Thy Wife thou do forsake, but why? Before
Thou did her wed, thou said, she was a Whore.
A Pre-contract does Wedlock break, I know;
But why a Pre-contact should do it, me show?
40. Mere trifles. To --
Thou truly said that Whores mere trifles are;
For Harlots skins are always base and bare.
41. To banished Pannicus.
A Problem.
In Exile, free thou liv'st as't were, the while
Thy native Soil did thee from it exile.
Which of these Fortunes gives thee best content?
Freedom abroad, or from home Banishment?
Rather I would (for I disclose my mind)
From home live free, than live at home confined.
42. The Evening.
The Sun declined behind leaves little light,
So Gods sole back was showed to Moses sight.
The Morning.
We see bright Phoebus shine in the Orient,
The Antipodes on's Back, look discontent.
43. Baptism, to the Jew.
Baptism does cure, but Circumcision wound;
The Laws wounds are by Baptism rendered sound.
44. Heatuontimoroumenos.
Self-vexing.
While Death to shun, Life to preserve, poor Man
Does vex himself the space of all his span.
^rute Beasts enjoy the present Life's supply,
Living they live, and when they die, they die.
45. To William Sidley, Knight and Baronet.
Thy noble worth does Gold, does Honor merit;
Yet both flag far beneath thy generous spirit.
46. To J. P.
A brisk, wise Wife, that Latin speaks and Greek,
That can dispute in Logic, thou do seek;
One, that the Major and the Minor takes,
And from bad Premises worse sequence makes.
One that was versed in puny Naturals
While puny Maid, now Mistress of her Art in all is.
One that can render all Opponents mute,
And of all entities can well dispute.
^f such a Wife, so rational, were mine,
^ would exchange with thee, though brute were thine.
47. On Ramista, bipartite.
Thou first definest, then what was defined
Thou do divide, defin'st-divid'st each kind;
The whole thou in so many parts dissect'st,
That now thy comment's longer than the Text's.
48. To Saint Paul, Of the City of God.
Thou for thy self, when threatened with the Scourge,
A Citizen of Rome to be, did urge:
But in the fatal day of final Doom
Wilt serve to plead that privilege of Rome?
49. Christ.
Christ came into this World, saw mortal men,
Death overcame, returned into Heaven.
50. To W. Cambden, Of his Britannia.
Great Britains Isle, almost forgot, almost
In Lethe's Lake of black Oblivion lost,
In name, in fame by thee reduced alive,
Thou shall in her, while she survives, survive.
51. To Perpenna.
Like a Parenthesis thy forehead is
Horned, Crescent-like: An hard Parenthesis.
An hard Metathesis; Thy Wife too free-
Of flesh, all flesh, does make all Horn of thee.
52. Of Vices and Riches.
No man does crimeless live, or Coinless here,
A full filled Purse from crime is seldom clear.
53. Apology of Death, and the Shambles.
If Death no Youths, Butchers no Bullocks killed,
The World with Fools and Calves would soon be filled.
54. Eve and Proserpine compared.
The Serpent Eve seduced, and Proserpine
Was caught by Pluto's specious design:
Eve fell from Paradise to prejudice
For eating the Apple which she thought no Vice.
And Proserpine might have escaped Dis,
Had she not been surpised in that Abyss.
Death captived Eve, and Pluto Proserpine,
This, of feigned Jove, that, Child of Jove divine.
Both took forbidden things, this Flowers, that Fruit,
Like Punishments to their like Sins did suit.
55. Astrologer and Geographer.
You two the total World divide: The Stars
Astrologers, the Earth claim Geographers.
56. To Fannia, Noble, Fair, Poor.
Fann'a, thou-fain would with some rich man wed,
But for thy Poverty can not be sped:
Though thou be nobly born, of fair aspect,
The sordid Lover Wealth does more affect:
In Categoricks, substance sole we find
More prevalent in Love, than form or kind.
57. Con-sci-ence.
Love's Verbal now, not regal as of yore;
Belief depends on sense, not reasons score.
Religion scars in the Head, not sinks in the Heart,
It in the Brain, not Breast does act its part.
58. An unspotted Sacrifice.
Gods Temple's the Earth, Altar, the Cross, the Priest,
The Sacrifice, and Sacrificer's Christ.
59. Of Mortal and Venial Sin, To Christ.
Thy Death has cleared the Sins men double call;
Thy Cross does Mortal Sins make Venial.
60. Upon in-hospitable persons.
(...) to those houses am no Page, nor Guest,
Whose Gates are to the Thresholds fast, when Feast.
61. Another, the same.
His own, none others let him be that is mine,
Let him be friendly that is my Friend, in fine.
62. Suffer little Children to come unto me.
The wanton flesh does youth to sin seduce;
Old age in wickedness is more profuse.
Hence I suspect that few (scarce one in seven)
Of old men, or of young men enter Heaven.
63. Of Paracelsus.
She Salt of the Earth Christ his Disciples named:
Why then that the Earth is salt have Paracelsians.
Chemists famed?
64. Of Eggs.
The second Person humane form assumed,
The third like an Egg-breeding Dove was plumed:
The great Creator Birds and Fishes blessed,
Egg-breeders, not Life-breeders had his Test.
65. Of Rome, and the World.
Old Rome was square, and then the World was round,
The World's now square, and new Rome Wheels has found.
66. Magical Generation.
If Satan man succumb in Woman's stead,
No Child from such coition can proceed:
But if like man h' incumb a Woman, thence
Some monstrous birth may chance to have Effluence.
67. Of Bread and Butter.
In Genesis, I Bara, the first Word in Genesis.
Bara; Menin the first in Homers Iliads. Bara, in Welsh signifies Bread, Menin,
Butter.
Menin find
In the Iliads; two Welsh words, one by Scripture.
divined.
68. The Age of Moses and David.
Man's life is Genesis 6.3.
six-score years, as Moses said,
And Deuteronomy. 34.7.
he, so many years lived, undecay'd:
King David said, man in his Pilgrimage
Lives Psalm. 90.10. This Psalm is called a Prayer of Moses the man of God.
threescore years and ten, 2 Samuel 5.4.
such was his age.
Each of them lived so long, before they di'd,
As each had said; his Death each propheci'd.
He who taught Moses, David, (the Divine)
Their days to number, wills thee Psalm. 90.12.
number thine.
69. Even and uneven Number.
Each Number has its mid, odd half does want;
What Is even has its half, of mid is scant.
70. Physicians and Lawyers compared.
To Galen.
Galen, the feared Tyrants fear thee; Why?
The Life and Death of Kings in thee does lie.
Physicians next to God, are Arbiters
Of Life and Death; none can their Power reverse.
A Judge may Sentence give of Death (though loath)
Not without Crime and witness, thousans both.
71. Of King, People, Law.
Kings, Shepherds: People, Sheep: Laws, Fodder are:
For sick Sheep, Doctors, Kings, Laws cure prepare.
Orthography, and Orthodox Faith, To the Hebrews.
If the Right hand the Right side should decline,
And the left hand the left side: Both disjoyn.
But if the left incline to the right, the right
Incline unto the left hand, Both unite.
You Jews right Writers, we right Teachers are,
The Spirit's ours, yours is the Letter bare.
73. Few are chosen.
Each, and sole man adores the Power divine;
Each and sole man offends against the trine:
Each, and sole man the Savior came to save;
Sole man, yet not each man this Boon shall have.
74. Of salt Pits. Ambiguous.
Though generous English have Ingeniousness,
Yet Salt they prize at little, Wit at less:
Though English Salt be white, and Gallick brown;
Yet that French Salt sells dearer than our own.
75. Novelty.
What Is new, will not continue new; nor will
A pleasing Novelty be pleasing still.
What new then solely pleases not, 'cause new,
But that best pleases whence good does ensue.
76. Man, no man.
Man's born by Nature, man did Arts invent;
Art is man's work, not man Arts instrument:
None follow Natures Rules, by Art all live:
And now man's work to Himself a Work does give.
77. Authors of Sin.
To Grammarians, Authors of Errors.
Author and Auctor you too much confound;
Pythagoras his (a) saying was renowned.
The unhappy Tree produced Original Sin;
Whence Adam are; but did not first begin.
The Serpent Author was, Eve did proceed:
Adam not Beginner, or Author.
Author, Increaser.
Auctor was indeed. Ipse dixit; He has said it.

78. Anagram of Diabolus, The Devil.
(...).
Vis, Fraus, Force, Fraud.
The Devil like a Lion seeks to find
Souls, to devour with force, more fierce than Wind:
He, Fox-like, spreads close frauds, and secret snares,
Surprising, or by Force, or unawares.
79. To Teach and Do, Acts 1.1.
Preachers good words teach people to believe;
But their good Works more lively Doctrine give.
He preaches best, whose Words and Works do preach;
Their ill Works hurt more, than their good Words teach.
80. Usury and Lot.
Be with thy Lot content, Usurious gain
Is sinful, with thy Lot content remain.
81. Invention of Truth.
To the Dubious.
Pythagoras ('it is said) when Truth he found,
Lid sacrifice an Ox, with Garlands crowned:
Truth now is so rarely seen with mortal eyes,
A Calf's enough for thee to sacrifice.
82. Circumcision and Baptism.
Thou, Christ, wast Circumcised, thou wast Baptized,
Though neither thou did need; yet both were prized:
Sins, which both cannot purge, though joined together,
Why may not I, O Christ, have one of either?
83. The Wisdom of Solomon, and of Siracides.
Wisdoms two Books Apocryphal we call;
Wise men must then be still Apocryphal.
84. On Covetous Persons.
Sell all that thou have, and give to the Poor.
This killing Letter does all misers kill;
What, say they, does the Spirit herein will?
The Spirit wills, what you will not, your store
To give, but you give nothing to the poor.
85. Of Sextus.
Is the Church visible? Thou ask'st: Why? Ours
Is visible, invisible is yours.
86. An Exiles Comfort.
Not banished while I live, while Earth does stand,
Nor exiled shall I be while the Earth's called Land:
When dead, exiled from Earth I shall at rest
In Heaven be blessed among the blessed.
87. Man, an Hunter, Fisher, Fowler.
I hunt for Riches, Fowl for Praise and Honor,
I Fish for Mysteries: Would know their Donor.
While Fool, I strive to know, Proud, Honors crave,
Sordid seek Wealth, I travel to my Grave.
88. Of the same.
The Dog hunts on the Ground, Fish swim in Seas,
The winged Birds poys'd are in the Air at case,
A wise man Fish-like sounds things hid-profound;
Proud men soar Bird-like, covetous hunt like hound.
89. Foot-mens Comfort.
An Horse int' Heaven did not Castor bear,
Nor rode Triptolemus in's Chariot there:
Heavens way's strait-narrow, Footmen travel it;
The broad way's most for Horse and Chariot fit.
90. Of Wax.
I trebly useful am, for Church, Laws, Health:
I bring Divines, Physicians, Lawyers, Wealth.
91. Of a certain Fair Fickle Woman.
The King of Stars thee decks, the Queen directs
The Sun thy Face, the Moon thy Breast aspects.
92. Of the Soul and Body.
A Problem.
The Greeks their Slaves did Bodies call, because
The Soul's free from the servile Bodies Laws:
A Lord's the Bodies Lord, a King's its King,
But not the Souls: From God Souls solely spring.
Bodies begotten are; But Souls divined,
Deduce from God their unbegotten kind.
93. Of Christ's Miracles.
To one incredulous.
Thy Faith's not great, wonders thou can do none;
Nor have thou Faith to credit what are done.
94. The old Testament.
A Testament, while the Testator lives,
Is of no force, invalid, nothing gives:
Yet Gods word's called the old Testament: But why?
Since God, who did ordain it, cannot die.
95. The New Testament.
This was of Christ called the new Testament,
By few first, now by general consent:
Yet not a letter of this Book was writ,
While the Testator lived to attestate it.
96. All things are full of Errors. Cic.
Physicians are sick, Lawyers mistake,
Many Divines pass to the infernal Lake.
97. Against all Nations.
One only God, one man did make on Earth;
One man, once made, to many Gods gave Birth.
98. On Atheists.
Fear first taught to fear God: But now, alas,
The fear of God without all fear does pass.
99. To his Mecaenas, William Sidley, etc.
Who to thee wishes not old Nestors years,
Would wishes serve, before thou climb the Spears?
I wish thee not more years, one year wish I,
I wish thee Plato's year, before thou die.
100. On Cotta, a poor and foolish writer.
Thou say thou wantst new Clothes; That Is true, I grant:
But I think, rather, thou new Wit do want.
The End of the Second Book.
EPIGRAMS OF John Owen AN OXONIAN AND CAMBRO-BRITAIN. To his Mecaenas, Roger
Owen, Knight. The Third Book.
1. To Roger Owen, his Mecaenas.
IT is thy Virtue, Virtue to propose
To be thy Study, this thy Judgment chose:
Where thou most Virtue find'st, thou love it there,
While thou with the most vert'ous art Compeer.
2. To Ponticus, Sound-unsound.
In health and wealth thou do with Pride abound:
But, when thou shall be sick, thou will be sound.
3. What a Clock is it?
Death creeps on Life, and Age on youth: The while
It Is asked, What is it a Clock? Hours us beguile.
4. Bacchus his Deifying.
Wine Truth does speak, does secret things display;
Dry Souls are silent, moist things open lay:
Wine hearts does open; Rhenish Wine descries
The Reins; Who Bacchus then a God denies?
5. Of silent Labienus.
If wise, the art foolish not to speak; but if
A Fool (as the art) it is thy Wisdom chief.
6. Faith in Wax.
Without or Wax or Seal men once lent money;
But now without them both none will lend any.
7. To Firmicus. Of the seven Planets.
The Sun's like Gold, the Moon shows Silvers smile;
Venus like Coppress ( Cyprus was her I Will)
Quick-silver'd Mercury; stern Mars strikes dead
With fatal Steel; Jove's Time, and Saturn Lead.
The last five of the seven take to thee:
One Sun's enough, one Moon's enough for me.
8. Of a certain Niggard.
Verses can from the Skies deduce the Moon,
As soon as from thy Purse produce one Boon.
9. Wedlocks Primacy.
The man by day, by night the feminine
Bears rule: So Sun and Moon alternate shine.
10. Of a certain Woman.
Thine Head wears Feathers, Corks thy Feet up rear:
From Head to foot thy lightness does appear.
11. Faith.
I see the Stars, the Pole's imaginary;
Eyes view the Skies, but Faith to God does carry.
12. To Thomas, Baron of Ellesmer, Chancellor of England, etc. 1612.
Thou late one Son, one-only Daughter late
Have lost, yet have one Son preserved from fate:
He of the three like John, sole Son to thee;
Summest of all, the Sum of all the three.
13. Contempt of the World.
Wilt live an happy life? Thy Life contemn:
He wretched lives, whose life unt' him's a Jem.
14. To Robert Carry, Viscount Rochester, and Henry Danvers, Baron of Dantesay,
etc.
Five Jacobines you gave me, even then
When I five Distichs gave you from my pen.
I merit not your Love, nor Gifts; by which
(If so dear were the rest) I might be rich.
15. To his Friend, A Bachelor.
Do burn with lust? It Is sin: Espouse a Bride;
The flesh will be the better mortified.
16. Of Baldinus.
He Books unworthy light, to Light brought forth:
Yet Books deserving Fire, else nothing worth.
17. The Decalogue and Creed.
Why's my Belief, than Life, bound more unto?
'Cause it is more easy to believe than do.
18. Knowledge and Charity.
I must know two things, two things love must I,
God and my Self, God and my Neighbor by.
19. Of Tithes. To the Laity.
What Fruit comes hence, best fruit's beyond compute,
After the Ninth, before the Eleventh Fruit:
How good is God? who takes not for his due
More than the tenth, but gives the tenth to you.
20. Of God and the World.
This World in God exists, God is not here:
We are in the World, O would in God we were.
21. The Right of Tithes and First Fruits.
God is the First and Last; most justly then
The First Fruits and the Tithes he claims of men.
22. Faith, Hope, and Charity.
Sole Love with us does Heaven penetrate,
Faith, Hope are useless; Both within that Gate.
There Is nothing to believe, all is in our Eine;
Nothing to Hope for, for w' enjoy the Trine;
Love's ever there, Love after Death's alive,
While God himself in Heaven does survive.
23. Of Polydorus.
Closed in a Chest, as dead, he money keeps;
Quicksilver it is not, it is or dead, or sleeps.
24. To my self.
Owen, the Printer sought thy Book to buy,
The price thou ask'st, he gave it readily.
The Book is printed, and thou buyest it;
Owretched man, thou sell'st and buy'st thy Wit.
25. Of one Uxorious.
Thou sitt'st at Stern, but thee thy Boat does guide;
Which Pinnace-like thee bears with Wind and Tide.
26. Of Husband and Wife.
Two in one Flesh.
If Love unite not Hearts, espoused together,
Both of them are not one, but two are either.
27. Man Solar.
The Sun contrary to the Globe does run:
Let then man's course of Life be like the Sun.
28. Of Sylvanus.
The force of's wit is fi'ry, Sylvan says;
And thence concludes, that Fire does nothing raise.
29. London.
The barren City fruits converts to dung;
The fertile Fields turn Dung to fruits e're long:
Thou debtor art for Food and Life to the Clown;
He debtor is for compost to thy Town.
30. To his Friend and Kinsman Theodore Prise, Theologer.
In things uncertain thou my certain Friend
Have been, and still to be so do intend:
What words profess, thy Deeds express, I grant;
Thy life to the vocal tongue is consonant.
31. Of Atheists and (a) Polytheists.
The poor his wants, as many Gods does fear;
Rich Averice does wish no Gods there were.
Poor Penury sins less than Plenty does;
That thinks on Gods, but this to have God is loath. Many Gods.

32. Solicitude. To Ponticus.
By day, by night thy Wife with clamours fills
Thine Ears, and with solicitude thee kills:
What cure is there from this thee to secure?
In Solitude thou may be safe and sure.
33. Fides, Amor; Spes.
F A S.
Faith, Hope, and Love's the way to scale the Sky,
Without these three no man can soar so high.
Hope on the left, Faith is on Love's right hand;
Love, the chief Virtue, in the midst does stand.
34. To the Learned and Judicious Knight, Roger Owen.
Thou may seem to be young (most learned) to some,
If either I were Deaf, or thou were Dumb:
None will thee young, unless he is Deaf, suppose;
Nor old, unless he does his Eyelids close.
35. Eight.
The Savior of the world twice four did bless;
And Noah's saving Ark saved eight; no less.
36. Of man's Primacy. A Problem.
Why did the Lord from Adam, Eve create?
Because with him she should not b' adaequate.
Had she been made of Earth, she would have deemed
Her self his Sister, and his equal seemed.
37. Conjux. Man and Wife.
Since Wives their Husbands subjects are: Then why
Does Conjux Wife and Husband signify?
Why does this Word Conjux conioyn them, when
Wives most perverse, are most averse to men?
38. Epigram.
We, that have fancies to Epigrammatize,
Can out of any Wood make Mercuries:
I Am versed in Words, as Galenist in Herbs;
He Is master of his Herbs, I of my Verbs.
39. Of Paula, a most lectick Woman.
Do wonder, why the art called most lect? It Is soon
Resolved, because thou sleep'st in Bed.
Lect till Noon.
40. Of a certain litigious Lawyer.
Were not cause-maker thou, thy need to serve,
Thou, no cause-pleader, might for hunger starve.
41. Scripture Reading.
The Thief, the Traveller are armed with Sword;
Phanaticks, Catholics, all read Gods word.
42. To John Williams, a Cambro-Britan, Dr. in Divinity, Principal of Jesus
College in Oxford.
Thou do the Scriptures search, both old and new;
Thou Janus art, before-behind do view.
43. To John Williams, a Cambro-Britan, a Divine, and fellow of St. John's
College in Cambridge
Ingenious youth, do not thy Talent hide,
The Cambrians Honor shall by thee abide.
44. To John Williams, a Cambro-Britan, the Kings Goldsmith in London.
Thy civil wit does more than civil seem;
Thee wiser than a Citizen I deem.
45. To all those three.
You three my Kinsmen are, and each my Friend,
Three John's, and I your John am to mine end.
46. To the Creditor.
Thy Debtor is thy Servant, he, that pays
Thy Friend, thy Master Payment that gainsays.
47. Truth in the deep. To one painted.
False things appear, Truth's hid; It Is seen in thee;
Thy Face is painted, thy facts tainted be.
48. Of Phyllis.
Thou take, but wilt not Gratis give a kiss;
Thy Gift not grateful, but ungrateful is.
49. Gravity and Levity.
Though light and ponderous things are oppos^te,
I would not have mine head too grave, too light:
Ills opposite I hate: I would not have
My Wife to be too light, nor yet too grave.
50. Of a Pratler, sick with the Cholick.
Thy Tongue is loose, thy Body close; Both ill:
With Silence this, with Loquence that does kill.
51. Of Theologaster, a Sophister.
What is thy knowledge without Goodness? Vain.
Cease then to know much; rather Goodness gain.
52. Action and Passion.
Who does much ill, shall suffer much for it;
But who much suffers, does less ill commit.
53. Repentance and Reminiscence.
I wretch am grieved when I recount my sins;
But, when I count my sufferings, Joy begins.
54. The Damned.
Thy sad Fate's like Decembers 'leventh Ray;
A long night follows thy short-cloudy Day.
55. The Blessed.
Like Junes eleventh Day thy Fate shines bright,
A long-long day succeeds thy short-short Night.
56. Foelix and Festus.
Festus Unlucky.
infestus was to thee Saint Paul;
And Foelix was Unhappy.
infoelix, worst of all.
57. Democritus and Heraclitus.
This wept for the then times Defaults, and Crimes;
That laughed at the Follies of the times.
Mortals will still be foolish, wretched, frail;
That this may laugh, that ever may bewail.
58. Always the same.
Let Faith, Hope, Charity be still the same;
The same thy Wit, still kept within its frame.
59. Of ignorant-arrogant Linus.
Thee, double ignorance does captivate,
Thou nothing know, and know not that thy state.
60. Of the Poet Maevius.
Non-Entities and Evil, like we call;
Thou make, though many Verses, none at all.
61. Helena and Penelope.
Fame has fair Helen mounted to the Skies;
Glory Penelope does Eternize.
Penelop's- Helen's Names shall never die:
Because this would, that would not falsify.
62. Of Life.
Nature man's life, as Spiders Webs, does weave;
Each Labor's long, apt to decay-deceive.
63. Of Paula.
Thou with thy Bodies use, with usury
Thine Husband trades; He this, thou that, do ply.
64. Of a Covetous Miser.
To number, add, or multiply thy store,
It Is nothing; but divide, thou shall have more.
65. Verity and Virtue.
Never so few, who now learn well to live;
Never so many, who good Doctrine give:
Many, these times, the ways of Faith display;
But they who taught the ways, taught not the way.
66. Modern Writers.
We carp at former Works, and Words; yet we
Now writers, but the formers Echoes be.
67. The Worlds three Rulers.
Let the Divine be sage, to b' all unt' all;
The Lawyer wise, Physician literal.
68. The Authors Vote.
I wish not Poverty, nor riches great,
Too little, nor too much: Enough's complete.
69. Forbidden Books.
We covet things forbid, denied, desire;
A Wife cloggs youth, a Dams^l sets on Fire:
One, though deformed, enjoyed, seems fair by night:
Forbidden Books are read witth most delight.
70. On Festus.
I Am to thee trusty, trustless the art to me;
But why? Thou say, the art next thy self, so be.
Be next thy self; Thou shall not me be next;
I love not by bad Neighbors to be vexed.
71. The false Church.
What Church does not her self Christ's Spouse declare?
How many yet of them but Harlots are?
If the false Church does not her self deceive,
Christ shall, than Solomon, more Spouses have.
72. To Decianus.
The World, thou say, is wicked: True; but thou
Art one of them that makes it wicked now.
73. Of Dindymus.
A Bachelor in Venus Art thou art;
Thou shall (when Pander) act a Masters part.
74. To G. T. 1606.
Thy Servants Scholar, and his Lord to be,
An Honor is, a Misery to thee.
75. Rule of State.
The common Wealth was once the Rule of Right:
But now new Rules of Right are brought to light.
76. Of a certain Cross-wearing Hypocrite.
Belzebub's thought to the Cross an Enemy,
Which seeing, he does turn, return, and fly;
But not from every Cross: For though thy Breast
Thou cross, yet Satan in thine Heart do rest.
77. Christ's Life and Death.
For me Christ did, and suff'red many things:
God in his Deeds, Man in his Sufferings.
78. The wise men's Star.
A Star to Astronomers unknown, was lent
To light the Kings, to Christ, from the Orient:
The wise men by that Star found Christ, the King:
O may my Star, my Faith, to Christ me bring.
79. The Golden Calf broken by Moses. Exodus 32.20.
The Golden Calf which Aaron did calcine,
Moses destroyed, made it less Belluine.
80. The Triumvirs Divines, Lawyers, Physicians.

These of the World the grand Triumvirs be:
What are Divines? Divinest of the three.
81. To the Histor^^grapher.
In History speak free? That bad may be:
Speak nothing false? Silence may censure thee.
Dissimulate or simulate, who writes
An History, must serve all appetites.
82. Of the Deluge, and end of the World.
The wicked World with sinful Lusts inflamed,
Was drowned by Water: So those Lusts were tamed.
The now-new World, in Charity grown cold,
Shall be consumed with Fire as was that old
With Water: Physic thus makes cures entire
By contraries; Fire Water, Water Fire.
83. Debtor and Creditor.
I owe thee naught but Evangelick Love;
The with Apostolic Faith, I prove, approve.
84. Of God and the Devil.
God would have all men saved; The Devil none:
These no men's persons do respect, not one.
85. Of Good and Evil.
Thee Good, shall have Rewards, the Bad, severe
Torments hereafter: That has hope, this fear.
86. Do likewise. To Atta^us, J. C.
Thou practice must to Theory conjoyn;
Read the Saints lives; do likewise then in thine.
87. The Redeemer.
To thee my Sight, my Taste has sole relation;
Thou art my Sun, my Salt, my sole Salvation.
88. Money's Method.
It Is virtue great, of Gold to get tuition;
Its good use greater, greatest its fruition.
89. Of Writers in these times.
A fatal error causes fools to write:
Enough they seem to gain, when seen in Light:
While they self-pleasing, rashly write, poor Elves;
They seldom others please, who please themselves.
90. A Paradox.
Though Atheists all descend int' Hell, there roar:
None Atheist now is in Hell, there was before.
91. Of Gaurus.
Thou praisest nothing, all reprovest; see
While thou none please, no man pleases thee.
92. To my self.
Owen, would know what friends thou can procure?
By weight, not number count, thou shall be sure:
The number, and the Finger often beguile;
Though Love be Fire, it ponderous is the while.
93. Difference between Kings and Tyrants.
Good-Godly Kings what is Just and Right perpend:
But Tyrants, what they will, command-commend:
A good Kings Treats I prize Tore Tyrants Threats;
This, what he speaks, commands; that but entreats.
94. Of a certain --
Bedlam for Fools, Bride-well for Knaves is best;
To which of these thou will thou may b' a Guest.
95. The Mother Church.
You be Christ's Brethren, I his Spouse; thereby
I am your Sister, called your Mother, why?
96. Of Sects.
Five Senses in a man the Sophist finds,
Three Souls: But who can tell how many minds?
97. Life in the Blood.
Moses, the Legislator, did confine
Life in the Blood; In Christ's Blood I do My Life.
mine.
98. To Thomas, Baron of Ellesmer, Chancellor of England, a Consolation upon
the death of Mary, his only Daughter, an excellent Woman, 1612.
Nestor, no doubt, and old Mathusalem
Saw many Funerals, and wept for them:
Long livers live, often see their Childrens Urns:
An happy man, unhappy Fortune mourns,
I, of thy Children grieve thy Loss to see;
But glad, that they saw not the loss of thee.
99. On a foolish Writer.
Thy Books eternal are: My vote I spend;
For neither they beginning have, nor end.
100. To his three Mecaenates, E. N. G. S. and R. O.
You strive, still may you strive, which of you three
Should be the best Mecaenas unto me.
This Strife (a strife-less strife) I will foment;
And wish your Emulation permanent.
You by this noble Strife have nothing lost;
And I thereby great profit have ingrost.
101. Upon the Death of Prince Henry, 1612.
Dead is the Prince, bewall'd with Floods of Tears,
Great Britains Hope, his Parents Joys and Fears.
His second no man, but his German Brother;
And, but his German Sister, not another.
A Prince, while living, honored, dead, beloved;
Both of his Country, while he lived, he proved.
While I these things with weeping Eyes perpend
Salt Tears from both mine Eyes like Floods descend,
Reader, believe me, this me so does touch,
That I can speak no more I weep so much.
102. To the Prince his Ghost.
Thou, living, did m' an yearly Stipend give;
Lost now, because thou did no longer live.
Yet, O I wish thou had survived, thought
Had nothing gained by thy superstity.
Though neither of us now can to each incline,
Yet who can bar my thanks unto thy Shrine?
103. To the same Prince Henry.
I said Epigram 1. lib. 1. To E. Noel.
thou shall my Caesar be, but I
Must now, alas, Thou wast my Caesar, cry.
The End of the Third Book.
The Epilogue.
To the Readers.
The British Owen, with his Latin verse,
Is here raised up in English from his Hearse:
Here many things of note accost your Eye:
'Twere pity such-so many things should die.
Not, but that they survive in what he writ,
Yet all our English understand not it.
If any thing seem in the Scene obscene,
It Is washed, and here wrapped up in Linen clean;
You need not fear to lodge between the Sheets,
They be perfumed with Aromatic Sweets.
I wish to ye all a sweet-a safe repose
By day, by night: And thus the book I close.
Tho. Harvey.

Epitaphium Johannis Owen in Templo Divi Pauli Londini.
Parva T^be Statua est, quia parva Statura, Supellex
^ Parva, volat parvus magna per ora Liber;
Sed non parvus honos, non parva est Gloria, quippe
Ingenio haud quicquam est majus in Orb tuo:
Parva domus texit, Templum sed grande; Poetae
Tum vere vitam, cum moriuntur, agunt.
Posuit Reverendus Pater D. Johannes Williams, Episcopus Lincolniensis, Magni
Sigilli Anglia custos.

This Epitaph thus Englished.
Thy Statue, Stature, thine Estate, thy Book,
All little, great Men yet on this do look:
Nor is thine Honor, or thy Glory small,
For greater wit than thine, is not at all:
Thy little house in a great Temple lies,
A Poet lives not truly till he dies.
Tho. Harvey.

FINIS.

