A Catalogue of BOOKS Printed at the Theater in Oxford, since the first
Printing there, which was in the Year 1672, to 1682 (With several others): And
sold in London, by Moses Pit at the Angel against the Great North-door of St.
Pauls-Church. 1682. Those with an Asterisc are Printed at the Theater.
IN FOLIO.
*BIble for Churches with Chronology and an Index. * The English Atlas Vol.
1st. containing the description of the North Pole, as also Muscovy, Poland,
Sweden and Denmark. * The second Vol. of the Atlas containing half the Empire
of Germany. * The 4th. Vol. containing the 17 Provinces. * And the third Vol.
containing the other half of the Empire of Germany. now in the Press. * (...)
sive Pandectae Canonum S. S. Apostolorum and Conciliorum ab Ecclesia Graeca
receptorum, nec non canonicarum S. S. Patrum Epistolarum una cum Sholijs
antiquorum singulis annexis, and Scriptis alijs huc spectantibus, quorum
plurima e Bibliothecae Bodleianae, aliarumque MSS. codicibus nunc primum edita,
reliqua cum iisdem MSS. summa fide and diligentia collata. Totum opus in duos
Tomos divisum, Gul. Beveregius Ecclesiae Angl. Presbyter recensuit,
Prolegomenis munivit, and Annot, auxit. * Catalogus impressorum Librorum
Bibliothecae Bodleianae in Acad. Oxon. * Historia Universitatis Oxoniensis
duobus voluminibus comprehensa. Autore Antonio a Wood. * Oxonia illustrata,
sive omnium celeberrimae istius Universitatis Collegiorum, Aularum etc.
Scenographia per Dav. Loggan. * Plantarum Umbelliferarum distributio nova per
tabulas cognationis and assinitatis, ex libro naturae observata and detecta,
Aut. Rob. Morrison, Prof. Bot. * Plantarum Historiae Universalis Oxoniensis
pars 2d. seu Herbarum distributio nova, per tabulas cognationis and assinitatis
ex libro naturae observata and detecta. Autore Rob. Morrison medico and
Professore Botanico Regio 1680. * The History of Lapland English. * Marmora
Oxoniensia, ex Arundelianis, Seldenianis, aliisque conflata, etc. cum notis
Lydiati and aliorum. per Humph. Prideaux. * The Natural History of
Oxfordshire, being an Essay toward the Natural History of England. By R.
Plot, L. L. D. * Theatri Oxoniensis Encaenia, sive Comitia Philologica, Jul. 6.
Anno 1677. Celebrata. * Dr. Pocock's Commentary on Micha and Mal. On Hosea, now
in the Press. * Iamblichus Chalcidensis de Mysteriis Aegyptiorum Graec. Lat.
Interpret T. Gale. * Regis Aelfredi vita, cum Notis. * A short view of the
late troubles in England from the year 1637 to 1660 by Sir William Dugdale Knight.
Garter King of Arms (this book was presented the Queens Majesty by the
University of Cambridge when they entertained the King and Queen in the year
1681). * D. Cypriani opera Notis illustrata. In the Press. * Gualteri
Charletoni M. D. Onomasticon Zoicon, Editio secunda, priori long auctior. *
Josephus Gr. Lat. cum Notis. In the Press. Irenaej opera. Gr. Lat. Provinciales
Constit. Angliae, per G. Lyndwood. Hugonis Grotij opera omnia Theologica in
tres Tomos divisa. Land. 1679. Labbaei Glossaria Latino-Graeca and
Graeco-Latina. Paris 1679. Huetii (Pet. Dan) demonstratio Evangelica ad
serenis. Delphinum Paris 1679. Episcopij (Simonis) Opera Theologica cum horis
Hebraicis and Talmudicis in Acta Apostolorum. 1678. Charras Pharmacopoea,
Galenical and Chemical. Websters display of Witchcraft, wherein is affirmed
that there are many sorts of deceivers and imposters. 1677. The History of the
Council of Trent written by Patre Paolo, translated into English, to which is
added his Life. The Journal of St. Amor Dr. of Sorbonne, concerning the sive
famous propositions. * Johan. Scotus de Divisione Naturae. De Ratione ac Jure
finiendi controversias Ecclesiae Disputatio Authore Herb. Thorndike. Theses
Theologicae variis Temporibus in Academia Sedanensi editae, and ad disputandum
propositae. Authore Ludovico Le Blanc verbi Divini Ministro and Theologiae
professore. In quibus exponitur sententia Doctorum Ecclesiae Romanae, and
Protestantium. 1675. Price 20 s. Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. 1675. A Table of
ten thousand Square Numbers, by John Pell D. D. sticht, 1 s. 6 d. Tuba
Stentoro-Phonica, or the Speaking-Trumpet; being an instrument of excellent use
both at Sea and Land; by Sir Samuel Morland. Price of the Book 1 s. of the
Instrument 2 l. 5 s. Ludolphi Hist. Ethiopica. Idem in English. Catalogus
Librorum in Regionibus Transmarinis nuper Editorum. The Commentaries and Life
of Julius Caesar, Containing his Wars in Gallia, and the Civil Wars betwixt him
and Pompey, with the Notes of Clement Edmonds. 1677. 16 s. Taverneirs travels
into Persia, the East Indies, Tounquin etc. Vol. 2.
IN QUARTO.
* SEveral English Bibles with the Liturgy, Apocrypha, singing Psalms and
Chronology. * Icones and Descriptiones rariorum Plantarum Siciliae, Melitae,
Galliae and Italiae. Autore Paulo Boccone. * Common Prayer-Books. * Theophilus
and Philodoxus, 4 controversial dialogues, Of Prayer in an unkown tongue. The
half Communion. The worshipping of Images. The Invocation of Saints. by Gilb.
Cole D. D. * The Divine Authority of Scripture, a Sermon by Dr. Allestree. *
The Character of the last days, a Sermon by Dr. John Fell Lord Bishop of
Oxford. * Tractatus Maimonidis de donis Pauperum, cum versione latina and Notis
Hum. Prideaux A. M. * Historia Jacobitarum in Aegypto, Lybia, Nubia, Aethiopia
tota, and part Cypri insulae habitantium, per Jos. Abudacnum. * A view and
survey of the dangerous errors to Church and State in Mr. Hobbs his Book
entitled Leviathan, by Edward E. of Clarendon. * Votum pro pace Christiana
Autore An. Sall. D. D. * Benefits of our Savior to Mankind. * A Sermon before
the House of Peers Dec. 22d, 1680. by John Lord Bishop of Oxford. * A discourse
of Unequal Glasses. * Dr. Willis de Anima Brutorum. * Pharmaceutice Rationalis
vol. 2. * Claudii Prolomaei Harmonica Gr. Lat. ex recensione and cum Notis Joh.
Wallis S. T. D. Geom: Prof. Archimedis Opera, Apollonii Pergaei Conicorum Libri
IIII. Theodosii Sphaerica, Methodo nova Illustrata and succincte demonstrata.
per Isaac. Barrow. Lectioncs Geometricae per Isaac. Barrow. Apologia pro
Ecclesiae patribus adversus Johannem Dalleum de usu patrum Auth. Math.
Scrivener. Beveregii Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Primitivae vindicatae. Hereboordi
(Adriani) Melitemata Philosophica Amsterdam 1680. Vita selectorum aliquot
virorum, qui Doctrina Dignitate aut Pietate inclaruere London 1681. History of
Tyths, by John Seldom London 1618. Johannis Bonae (Cardinalis) Opera Theologica
1677 16 s. Dr. Pell's introduction to Algebra 7 s. Nich. Mercatoris
Logarithmo-Technia, sive methodus construendi Logarithmos, 1668 and Jac.
Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668 2 s. Snellii Typhis Batavus, Ludg.
Bat. 1624 5 s. Dr. Thomas Jacomb, on the eighth Chapter of the Romans 8 s. Dr.
Wallis Opera Mechanica, 22 s. Hieronymi Mercurialis de Art Gymnastica Libri
sex cum siguris, 1672. J. Crellii Ethica Aristotelica and Christiana, 16 s.
Huic Editioni Praeter praefixam Auctoris vitam, accedit Cathechesis Ecclesiarum
Polonicarum, a Jo. Crellio, Jona Schlethtingio, M. Kuaro, and A Wissowatio
recognita atque emendata, Casinop. 1681. Joan. Binchii Mellificium Theologicum,
16 s. Holy Fast of Lent defended, 1667 6 d. A Looking-Glass for all new
converts, 1667 1 s. There is newly published two Recantation-Sermons, (Preached
at the French Church in the Savoy) by two converted Romanists, Mr. De la Motte,
late Preacher of the Order of the Carmelites, and Mr. De Luzanzy, Licenciate in
Divinity? wherein the corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome are laid open and
confuted. Both Printed in French and English. A Modest Survey of the most
material things in a discourse, called the Naked Truth, 6 d. by G. Burnet
Marshal Turene's Funeral Sermon 1677. Jer. Horrocis. Angl. Opusc. Astron. 1673.
An Historical Vindication of the Church of England in point of Schism, by Sir
Rob. Twisden. Dr. Tillotson's Sermon before the King, April 18 1675. Dr.
Wilkins's two Sermons before the King, March 7 1669 and Feb. 7 1670. Dr. Jo.
Tilletson's Rule of Faith, 1676. * Coopers Hill, Latin redditum ad
Nobilissimum Dominum Gulielmum Dominum Cavendish, Honoratissimi Domini Gulielmi
Comitis Devonioe Filium unicum * St. Cyprian of the Unity of the Church.
IN OCTAVO
* THO. Lydinti Canones Chronologici, nec non series summorum Magistratuum and
Triumphorum Romanorum. * Saul and Samuel at Endor, or the new ways of salvation
and Service, which usually tempt Men to Rome, and detain them there, truly
represented and refuted by Dan. Brevint D. D. with the vindication of his
Missale Romans the second Impression. * A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the
Epistles of St. Paul to the Romans, Corinthians and Hebrews. * The Ladies
Calling. * The Government of the Tongue. * The Art of contentment. * The Lively
Oracles given to us, Or the Christians Birthright and duty in the custody and
use of the Holy Scripture: these four by the Author of the whole duty of Man. *
Zenophon Cyrop. Graec. * A short Dissertation concernining Free-Schools, being
an Essay toward a History of the Free-Schools of England, by Christopher Wase
of St. Mary Hall Oxon. Superior Beadle of the Civil Law in the same
University. * Epicteti Enchiridion, Cebetis Tabulae, Theophrasti Caract. Gr. L.
cum Notis 1680. * Parecbolae, sive excerpta e corpore statutorum Univ. Oxon.
etc. * M. Fabii Quintihani Declamationes undeviginti, cum ejusdem (utnonnullis
visum) dialogo de causis corruptae Eloquentiae, quae omnia notis illustrantur.
* Nemesit Philosophi and Episcopi de natura hominis lib. unus, denuo recognitus
and manuscriptorum collatione in integrum restitutus, annotationibusque insuper
illustratus. Graec. Lat. * West Barbary, or a short narrative of the
revolutions of the Kingdom of Fez and Morocco, with an account of the present
customs, sacred, civil, and domestic, by D. Addison. * Homeri ilias, cum
Scholiis Didymi Gr. * Theocritus cum Scholiis Graecis. * Aratus cum Scholiis
Gr. * Suetonius Tranquillus, cum Notis. * De Ecclesiae Graecae statu hodierno
Epist. per Tho. Smith S.S. Th. Bac. * Gul. Oughtredi opuscula hactenus inedita.
* Caii Plinii Caecilii Secundi Epistolae and Oration Panegyrica, cum Notis
illustratae. * Rhetores selecti, Gr, Lat, Demetrius Phalereus, de Elocutione;
Tiberius Rhetor, de Schematibus Demosthenis; Anonymus Sophista, de Rhetorica;
Severi Alexandrini Ethiopaeiae. Demetrium emendavit, reliquos e MSS. edidit and
Latin vertit; omnes Notis illustravit Tho. Gale, Sc. Co. M. * (...). Georgii
Diaconi. Primarii Judicis, atque Scriniorum custodis Pachymerii, Epitome
Logices Aristotelis. * Reflections upon the Council of Trent, By H. C. de
Luzancy, M. A. Chapter Chapter * Psalterium Gr. Juxta M.S. Alexand. cum verse. Vulg. per
Dr. Tho. Gale. * Herediani Hist. Gr. La. cum Notis. * Zozomi Historia Gr. La. *
Catholico-Romanus Pacificus. per Jo. Barnes. * Common Prayer. * Lucii Caecilii
Firmiani Lactantii Liber ad Donatum Confessorum de mortibus persecutorum cum
Notis Steph. Baluzii. Oxon. 1681. * A discourse of the Original of Arms with a
Catalogue of all the Nobility, Bps. and Baronets of England by Sir William
Dugdale Knight. Garter King of Arms. To which is added a Catalogue of all the
Nobility and Bishops of Scotland and Ireland according to their precedence. *
Bibles with References and Chronology. * Dr. Isaac Vossius de Poematum Cantu. *
De Oraculis Sibyllinis. * Dr. Mayow Tractatus quinque de Spiritu nitroaereo
etc. * Lactantius cum Notis now in the Press. * The Certainty of Christian
faith by Dr. Whitby. * Didascalocophus or the deaf and dumb Man's tutor.
Historiae Poeticae scriptores antiqui, Apollodorus, etc. Gr. Lat. cum notis and
Indicibus necessariis. Sophocles Gr. Lat. cum Notis. Gradus ad Parnassum. A
Scriptural Catechism, according to the method observed by the Author of the
Whole Duty of Man, 1676. How, of delighting in God, and of the Blessedness of
the Righteous, Two Vol. Art of speaking, by M. du Port Royal. 1676. A Discourse
of Local Motion, undertaking to demonstrate the Laws of Motion, and withal to
prove, that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Des Carts on this subject he
has mistaken Six: Englished out of French, 1671. 1 s. The History of the late
Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogol, with a description of the
Country, in two Volumes, 7 s. The History of the Conquest of the Empire of
China by the Tartars, 1671. 4 s. Mystery of Iniquity unvailed in a Discourse,
wherein is held forth the opposition of the Doctrine, Worship, and Practices of
the Roman Church, to the Nature, Designs, and Characters of the Christian
Faith, by Gilbert Burnet 1 s. Theod. Turqueti, De Mayerne, De Arthritide,
Accesserunt ejusdem consilia aliquot Medicinalia, 1 s. A new way of curing the
Gout, and Observations and Practices relating to Women in travel, 3 s. Elenchi
Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia pars tertia. sive Motus Compositi. Ubi G. Monchii e
Scotia progressus, nec non Aug. Caroli Secundi in Angliam Reditus; ejusdemque
Regiae Majest. per Decennium gesta fideliter enarrantur, 1676. Gualteri Needham
Disputatio Anatomica de Formato Foetu. 1677, 3 s. 6 d. Buxtorfius's Epitome of
his Hebrew Grammar Englished, by John Davis, 1658. 1 s. 6 d. The Fortunate
Fool, or the Life of Dr. Cenudo, a Spanish Romance, 1670. 2 s. The adventures
of Mr. T. S. an English Merchant, taken prisoner by the Turks of Argiers, with
a description of that Kingdom, and the Towns and Places thereabouts, 1670. 1 s.
6 d. Contemplations on Mortality, 1670. 1 s. A Discourse written to a Learned
Friar, by Mr. Des Fourneillis, showing that the Systeme of Mr. Des Carts, and
particularly his Opinion concerning Brutes, does contain nothing dangerous; and
that all he has written of both, seems to have been taken out of the first
Chapter of Genesis: To which is annexed the Systeme General of the Cartesian
Philosophy, 1 s. The Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africa, by Roland
Frejus of Marseilles, by the French King's Order, 1666, to Muley Arxid King of
Taffaletta, etc. with a Letter in Answer to diverse questions concerning their
Religion, Manners, etc. 1671. 1 s. 6 d. A Genuine Explication of the Visions in
the Book of Revelation, by A. B. Pegamus. 1671. 2 s. Prodromus to a
Dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within Solids, laying a
foundation for the rendering a rational account, both of the Frame and the
several Changes of the Mass of the Earth, as also the various Productions of
the same, By Nich. Steno, 1671 1 s. 3 d. The Poetical Histories, being a
complete Collection of all the Stories necessary for a perfect understanding of
the Greek and Latin Poets, and other ancient Authors, written Originally in
French, by the Learned Jesuit P. Galtruchius. Now Englished and Enriched with
Observations concerning the Gods worshipped by our Ancestors in this Island, by
the Phaemcians and Syrians in Asia; with many useful Notes and occasional
Proverbs, gathered out of the best Authors: Unto which are added two Treatises;
One of the Curiosities of Old Rome, and of the difficult Names relating to the
affairs of that City; The other containing the most remarkable Hieroglyphics
of Egypt. The third Edition, with Additions. By Marius D. Assigny, B. D. 3 s.
6 d. An Essay about the Origin and Virtues of Gems, by the Honorable Robert
Boil. 1 s. 6 d. Idem Latin twelves, 1 s. A Complete Treatise of Chyrurgery,
containing Barbetts Chyrurgery. Mindererus of Diseases Incident to Camps and
Fleets: with a Chyrurgion's Chest of Medicines and Instruments, etc. 6 s. Dr.
Lower de cord. Amster. 1671 3 s. Crowei Elenchi Script. in Scripturam 3 s. 6
d. Eugelenus de Scorbuto. Grotii via ad Pacem. Mr. Boil of hidden Qualities of
the Air against Hobs, and of attraction by Suction, 2 s. 6 d. Mr. Boil of
Effluviums of fire and flame, and of the perviousness of Glass 3 s. Memoires of
Mr. Des-Ecotais formerly styled in the Church of Rome, The most Venerable
Father Cassianus of Paris, Priest and Preacher of the Order of the Capucins; or
the Motives of his Conversion. In English 2 s. In French 2 s. In French and
English 4 s. All Printed 1677. Les Memoires De Madame la Princess Marie
Mancini Colonne G. Connetable du Royaume de Naples 1677. La vie and les Actions
Memorables de Lieut. Amiral Michel de Ruyter, 1677 5 s. A vindication of the
Primitive Church and Diocessan Episcopacy, in answer to Mr. Baxters Church
history by H. Morice Fellow of Jesus Col. Oxon. * A brief explanation of the
Church Catechism. by Dr. Marshall. Hugo Grotius de Jure Belli ac Pacis cum
Notis 1680.
IN DUODECIMO.
* (...). Novi testamenti lib. omnes. Accesserunt parallela Scripturae loca,
nec non variantes lectiones ex plus 100 MSS. God. and antiquis versionibus
collectae. * De Secretione animali cogitata, Aut. Gilb. Cole. M. D. * H.
Grotius de Veritate Relig. Christi. * St. Clementis Epist. Gr. Lat. cum Notis.
* Cornelii Nepotis vitae Excellent. Imper. Collat. 4 MSS. recognitae. Accessit
Aristomems vita, ex ^ausania. * Ars Rationis, maxima ex part ad mentem
Nominalium. lib. 3. * Guil. Lilii Grammatica Latina, additis subinde
observationibus utiliss. ex Despaut. Alvar. Sanct. Sciop. Voss. Busbeo, and
quotquot nuper scripsere, Gram. Latinis. * The Education of Young Gentlemen, in
two parts. * The Christian Sacrament and Sacrifice by way of Discourse,
Meditation and Prayer, upon the nature, parts and blessings of the Holy
Communion, by Dan. Brevint, D. D. * Missale Romanum, or the Depth and Mystery
of the Roman Mass. * Maximus Tyrius, Gr. Lat. * Willisii Pharmac. rationalis.
* Archimedis Arenarius, and de dimensione circuli, cum Eutocii comment. Gr.
Lat. ex versione and recens. Dr. Wallis Prof. Geom. Savil. * M. Juniani Justini
Historiarum, ex Trogo Pompeio lib. 44 ex Cod. MS. collatione recogniti. *
Catholic Religion maintained in the Church of England, by A. Sall, D. D. *
Sallustii Hist. cum Notis. * Antomnus. Gr. Lat. * Faustini Presbyteri
Scriptores Seculi quarti and fidei Orthodoxae adversus Arianos, vindicis
acerimi, Opera. 1678. * Elegantiae Poeticae. * Testamentum Latinum. * Senecae
Tragediae, cum Notis. Horatius cum Notis Menellii. * Bibles large Letter. *
Testaments several sorts. * Common Prayers of several sorts. * -- Idem in 24,
several sorts. Biblia Francois, 18. Voyage d'stalie, de Dalmatie, de Graece and
du Levant fait in aux annes, 1675, and 1676. par Jacob Spoon, D. M. Et George
Wheeler Gentlehomme Anglois, 3 Vol. 1678. Abrege de la Philosophiae de Gassendi
en VIII Toms, par F. Bernier Lion, 1678. A Paradise of Delights, or an Elixir
of Comforts offered to Believers, in two Discourses, the first on Heb. 6.17,
18. the second on Romans 8.32. by Robert Wine 1 s. Grotii Sophompaneas. Gronovius
in Livium. Primyose Ars Pharmaceutica. Schook de Pace. Suetonius. Swalve
Alcali. Severini Synopsis Chyrurgiae. Terentii Flores. Trelcatii loci Communes.
Balduinus de Calceo and Nigronius de Caliga Veterum. Accesserunt ex Q. Sept.
Fl. Tertulliani, Cl. Salmasii and Alb. Rubenii Scriptis plurima ejusdem
Argumenti, 1667. Ottonis Tachenii Hyppocrates Chymicus, 1671. Theodori
Kerckringii, D. M. Commentarius in Currum Triumphalem Antimonii Basilii
Valentini a se latinitate donatum, 1671. Jo. Pincieri M.D. Aenigmatum Libri
Tres cum solutionibus. 1655. Francisci Redi Experimenta circa res diversas
naturales, speciatim illas quae ex Indiis adferuntur, 1675. Aulus Gellius.
Besterfeldus Redivivus. Herls Wisdoms Tripos. Wilkins Beauty of Providence. *
Gramatica Rationis. * Bishop Andrews Devotions Gr. Lat. * Athenagerae Apologia
pro Christianis and de Resurrectione Mortuorum. Gr. Lat. * Lactantius de
Mortibus persecutorum and passionibus S. perpetuae and Felicitatis. Several
other ancient books and MS. preparing for the press.

