THE REPORTS Of that late REVEREND and LEARNED JUDGE, THOMAS OWEN ESQVIRE; One
of the JUSTICES of the COMMON PLEAS. WHEREIN Are many choice CASES, most of
them thoroughly argued by the Learned Sergeants, and after argued and resolved
by the grave JUDGES of those times. WITH Many Cases wherein the differences in
the Year-books are reconciled and explained With two exact Alphabeticall
Tables, the one of the Cases, and the other of the Principal Matters therein
contained.

LONDON, Printed by T.R. for H. Twyford, T. Dring, and J. Place, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Vine-Court Middle Temple, at the George in Fleetstreet,
near Cliffords Inn, and at Furnivals Inne-Gate in Holborne, 1656.

TO THE READER:
THis Learned and Reverend Judge, the Author of the Reports following, as he
was highly honored for his profound knowledge in the Laws of this Nation; and
upon that account chosen one of the Queens Sergeants at Law, by that Wise
Princess, Queen Elizabeth: and not long after for his fidelity in that
Service, preferred by her to be one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas;
So he had the happiness to have his Name and Memory perpetuated in those
Excellent Parts and Abilities of that accomplished Gentleman, Sir Roger Owen,
his Son and Heir, an Eminent Patriot of his Country, who performed the office
of a pious and dutiful Son, in Erecting a Monument to the Memory of his worthy
Father, in the Abby-Church at Westminster; where you may see a short History of
this Reverend Person. There yet remains one Monument more, Omni aere
perenniu^. These excellent REPORTS drawn by his own hand in a Language then in
use, and most expedititious for that purpose. The pains of an Industrious
Gentleman has translated them into another Language, more proper to the
Meridian of this Nation; which Work thou shall find faithfully performed, and
so strickly and religiously, that even those very things that most required
alteration, Viz. Such Cases as are misplaced in respect of order of time, keep
still the same place and station that the Author left them in. The Work it self
is a Miscellany and Collection of choice and select Cases in the Law, and
bespeaks thy acceptance and entertainment, not only from the variety of the
Subject and matter, which nevertheless is so comprehensive, that there is
scarce any doubt or question in the Law can be raised, but it gives light
toward the decision and resolution of it: but from the Authority of the
Authors sage Wisdom and Prudence, which, like a precious Limbeck, derives unto
thee the Spirit and Quintessence of those many learned Arguments that were made
in these Cases, both at the Bar and Bench. If in natural Births and
Productions it gives value and esteem to the Issue to be descended from wise
and noble Parents, upon that common presumption, that Robora Parentum filii
referunt. The consideration should much more take place in the Results and
Emanations of the mind and brain, wherein those Tendeys and Traditions must
necessarily be conceived to have the greatest authority, which are most
heightened with Experience and Observation. Such are the Reports of this
Reverend, Judge, from which I shall no longer detain Thee.

THE NAMES OF THE PRINCIPAL CASES
A.
ALmeskey against Jackson, fol. 46 Arundell, Sir John fol. 49 Audleys Case fol.
17 Austin against Courtney fol. 93 Allens Case fol. 113 Air against Joyner
fol. 141
B.
BRagg against Brook fol. 4 Beverley against the Archbishop of Canterbury fol.
2 Bretts Case fol. 7 Bishop of Lincolns Case fol. 5 Bucknels Case fol. 7
Bartues Case fol. 13 Bartwrights Case fol. 19 Barnards Case fol. 22 Browns Case
fol. 24 Bliss against Stafford fol. 37 Bindon Viscount fol. 37 Britman against
Stamford fol. 41 Bond against Richardson fol. 45 Beaumonts Case fol. 46 Baldwin
against Martin fol. 48 Bloss against Holman fol. 52 Brown against Brinckley
fol. 58 Bagnall against Porter fol. 65 Brokesbies Case fol. 85 Bretton against
Barnet fol. 86 Bishop of Lincolns case fol. 89 Bottenham against Herlakenden
fol. 92 Beron agst. Goodwin fol. 95 Beale against Carter fol. 98 Bedford
against Hall fol. 104 Brown against Harvey fol. 115 Butler against Archer fol.
152 Butler against Rudsey fol. 118 Bishop of Rochesters Case fol. 73 Bethels
case fol. 132 Brooks case fol. 132 Barnes case fol. 137 Bolton against Bolton
fol. 149
C.
CArters case fol. 13 Clear, Sir Edward fol. 24 Cosens case fol. 29 Caltons
case fol. 38 Crawleys case fol. 126 Crisps case fol. 47 Cook against Balwin
fol. 52 Carter against Low fol. 56 Castleman against Hobs fol. 57 Clarentius
against Dethick fol. 61 Chandler against Grils fol. 62 Carrel against Read fol.
65 Carter against Kunstead fol. 84 Cleygate against Bachelor fol. 143
Cuddington against Wilkin fol. 150 Carew against Warren fol. 157
D.
DOwninghams case fol. 17 Duchess of Suffolks case fol. 81 Dacres, Lord fol.
23 Dabridgcourt against Smalbrooke fol. 97 Doctor Lewin against Monday fol. 41
Dorothy Michels case fol. 54 During against Kettle fol. 26 Damport against
Symson fol. 158 Dogrel against Perks fol. 66 Day against Fynn fol. 133 Doggets
case fol. 144 Day against Austin fol. 70 Drury against Waller fol. 151
Drinmock, Sir Henry fol. 149 Dixy, Sir Walston against Spencer fol. 81
E.
EArl of Kent against Bryan fol. 54 Earl of Northumberlands case fol. 124 East
against Harding fol. 63 Earl of Lincolns case fol. 113 Earl of Rutlands case
fol. 156 Elmer against Thatcher fol. 101 Escot against Lanreny fol. 109 Ewer
against Henden fol. 7^
F.
FUlgeambs case fol. 14 Fenners case fol. 25 Fitz-James fol. 33 Farmer, Sir
George against Brook fol. 67 Farrington against Charrock fol. 67 Foster against
Mapps fol. 100 Ford against Helborow fol. 104 Feners against Borough fol. 116
G.
GOddards case fol. 10 Gaytons case fol. 12 Greyes case fol. 20 Gibbs case fol.
27 Gorge, Sir Thomas fol. 53 Gowood against Binks fol. 56 Goosayes case fol.
146 Green against Wiseman fol. 86 Glover against Pipe fol. 92
H.
HAles case fol. 6 Haveringtons case fol. 6 Haslewoods case fol. 13 Hambletons
case fol. 25 Higham against Deff fol. 74 Hunts case fol. 42 Holman against
Collins fol. 50 House against Grindon fol. 53 Hund against Preston fol. 58
Higham against Beast fol. 58 Holt against Lister fol. 146 Hugo against Pain
fol. 61 Hone against Clerk fol. 64 Henningham against Windham fol. 68 Holborn
against Rawlins fol. 111 Haddon against Arrowsmith fol. 72
J.
JElsey against Robinson fol. 88 Ireland against Higgins fol. 93 James against
Portman fol. 102 Jordan against Atwood fol. 121 Information against West fol.
134
K.
KEnt against Wichal fol. 48 Kinton against Hopton Knots against Everstead fol.
66 Kayre against Deurat fol. 91 Knowles against Powell fol. 116 Kempe against
Laurence fol. 134 The King against the Bishop of Canterbury fol. 755
L.
LEonard against Stevens fol. 1 Leigh against Burley fol. 122 Leighs case fol.
15 Lane against Cotton fol. 127 Lilly against Tailor fol. 148 Lewin against
Monday fol. 153 Leyes case fol. 20 Lambert against Austin fol. 117 Lord Rich
his case fol. 34 Lane against Coups fol. 64 Leek against the Bishop of Coventry
fol. 131 Lassels case fol. 90
M.
MIchels case fol. 8 Moss against Read fol. 47 Mercer against Sperks fol. 51
Moyle against Moyle fol. 66 Mark Ives case fol. 108 Malloy against Jennings
fol. 69 Mores against Conham fol. 123 Morris against Padget fol. 138 Mathewson
against Trot fol. 141 Marsh his case fol. 147
N.
NEwman against Berwood fol. 50 Norton against Jennet fol. 72
O.
OWens case fol. 24 Ow seleys case fol. 23 Oldfeild against Wilmor fol. 153
P.
PAlmers Case fol. 17 Palmers case fol. 18 Penn against Merivall fol. 63
Powtrels case fol. 83 Perrin against Allen fol. 97 Pelling against Langden fol.
114 Pendigate against Audley fol. 118 Pecks case fol. 129
Q.
THe Queen against Allen fol. 2
R.
RIchmonds case fol. 9 Rouses case fol. 27 Rawley, Sir Robert fol. 44 Rainer
against Grimston fol. 62 Rotheram against Crawley fol. 71 Rudd against Topsey
fol. 142
S.
SPittles case fol. 8 Smiths case fol. 29 Slander fol. 30 Stinkley against
Chamberlain fol. 33 On the Statute of Recusancy fol. 37 Styles case fol. 39
Stephens against Leighton fol. 40 Sticklehornes case fol. 43 Saveries case fol.
51 Souths case fol. 145 Stephens case fol. 152 Smiths case fol. 87 Stones case
fol. 94 Stantons case fol. 95 Suttons case fol. 96 Soles case fol. 99 Scarret
against Tanner fol. 105 Sawyer against Hardy fol. 107 Sackford against Philips
fol. 109 Stroud against Willis fol. 110 Shopland against Radlen fol. 115 Sperk
against Sperk fol. 125 Shaw against Sherwood fol. 127 Swan against Gateland
fol. 127 Streetman against Eversley fol. 114 Smith against Jones fol. 133
T.
TAuntons case fol. 14 Thurstons case fol. 16 Totten against Bedingfeild fol.
35 Trussels case fol. 69 Tanfeild against Rogers fol. 119 Townsend against
Waley fol. 155
W.
WAkefeilds case fol. 4 Wardfords case fol. 11 Wisdoms case fol. 18 VValters
case fol. 19 Wrights case fol. 21 Webbs case fol. 26 Watkins case fol. 137 Wood
against Ash fol. 139 Winter agrinst Barnham fol. 33 Winter against Loveday fol.
34 Wentworth agst. Wright fol. 144 Willis against Whitwood fol. 45 Willoughby
against Gray fol. 59 Wentworth against Russell fol. 60 Woodward against Nelson
fol. 103 Worsley against Charnock fol. ^6 Wiseman agaidst Balwin fol. 112
White against Gerish fol. 126 VValgrave against Skinner fol. 120 Waller
against the Dean of Norwich fol. 136
Y.
YArdley against Pescan fol. 43
G.
GOodway against Michel fol. 71 Gibson against Mutes fol. 76 Gresham against
Ragg fol. 114 Goodrick against Cooper fol. 143 Goodrigde against Warberton fol.
154
H.
HUnt against King fol. 75 Hall against Wood fol. 131 Howards case fol. 138
Forest against Ballard fol. 142 Halling against Command fol. 157
Errata.
FOl. 8. for there was a remainder, read there was a demurr. fol. 10. for will
determine r. will not determine, f. 12. for assessionem r. assentionem, f. 19.
for in the Judgment r. in the Indictment, f. 21. for the writ of Dower r. of
the writ of Error, f. 23. for Littleburies case r. Littletons case, f. 25. for
issued r. issue, f. 29. for when r. whereas, f. 40. for Washley r. Walmesley, f.
41. for grant adjudged r. grant adjudged good, f. 47. for buying tithes r.
buying of tithes, f. 43. for non dierunt r. non dixerunt, f. 45. for the house
r. a horse, f. 47. for is r. are, f. 59. for here r. where, f. 63. for after a
copyholder r. and after a copyholder, f. 64. for per servantes r. per
presents, f. 68. for action of error r. writ of error, f. 70. for before r.
because, f. 70. for intent r. extent, f. 76. for and the same r. and he, f. 83.
for inheritance r. disinheritance, f. 85. for least r. best, f 86. for baned r.
barred, f. 89. for it the rent r. for if the rent, f. 90. for tenant r.
tenancy, f. 92. for her r. per, f. 93. for promises that r. and it is
covenanted that, f. 96 for donas r. donees, f. 96. for per r. sur, f. 99. for
may the damage r. may not the damages, fo. 111. for his band r. bound, f. 112.
for Pewis r. Newis, f. 19. for also of the Manor r. and also of the Manor, f.
123. for Court r. Count, f. 123. for nor damages r. but damages, f. 150. for
hadhad issue r. had issue, f. 158. for those inform r. those who inform.

THE REPORTS OF JUDGE OWEN.
Termino Pasch. anno 26 Eliz.
Leonard against Stephens. Rotulo. 1702.

LEONARD chief Prothonotary, brought an Action of Trespass against Stephens;
who justified, etc. for that Sir Christopher Heyden Knight, was seized in Fee,
and enfeoffed the Defendant, and gave color to the Plaintiff; The Plaintiff
replied, that true it was that Sir Christopher Heydon was so seized, but he
being so seized, died seized of the Premises, and that after his death, they
did descend to his Son and Heir, who entered and was seized, and being so
seized did enfeoff the Plaintiff: Without that, that the said Sir Christopher
Heyden did enfeoff the Defendant, whereupon Issue was joined, and the Jury gave
an especial Verdict to this effect.

That the said Christopher Heyden was seized as aforesaid, and made a Lease for
years to the Defendant by Deed, containing these words, Dedi and concessi and
confirmavi to the Defendant and his Heirs, with a Letter of Attorney to make
Livery.

The Question was, whether this was a Feoffment, or but a Confirmation.
Walmsley Sergeant, It is but Confirmation being by Deed, and has the word
Confirmation. Anderson, By that reason he in the Reversion cannot enfeoff his
Lessee for years by Deed as he may without Deed: but I conceive, that it is at
the liberty and choice of the Lessee either to take it as a Feoffment or a
Confirmation. Walmsley, As soon as the Lessee has accepted the Deed, by that
he has declared his meaning to have it as a Confirmation. Anderson, And when
the Lessee does accept the Livery, does not that show his express meaning to
take it by the Livery, and shall the Livery signify nothing?

And in Bracebridges Case, where the Tenant in tail made a Bargain and Sale,
and made Livery, and the Deed was enrolled within the six months: this was
adjudged to be a Discontinuance, and yet the Bargain and Sale makes no
discontinuance, which little differs from the case in question. Walmsley, If
Tenant in tail be disseised, and it is agreed between the Disseisor and the
Disseisee, that the Disseisee shall make a Deed to the Disseisor, who makes a
Deed accordingly, it is not in the election of the Disseisor to take this as a
Feoffment. Anderson, The Cases differed, for the Disseisee has no power to
make a Feoffment. And adjudged by the Court that it was a good Feoffment, vide
17 Ass. 20.22 H. 6.43.

Scire facias by the Queen against Allen.
THe Case was, A man recovers damages in an Action on the case, and he assigns
parcel of his debt to the Queen before execution, and the Queen thereupon
brought a Scire facias. Manwood chief Baron, and all the Court held clearly,
that parcel, or a Meyety of this debt could not be assigned over to the Queen.
See 22 H. 6.47. where parcel of a debt upon an Obligation was attached by a
foreign Attachment.

Beverley against the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Quare Impedit.
THomas Beverley brought a Quare Impedit against John Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Gabriel Cornwall, the case was, That the Queen being entitled
to an Advowson by Lapse because that the Incumbent had two Benefices, each of
them being of the value of eight pounds per annum, whereby the first by the
Statute of 21 H. 8. became void, and after the said Incumbent died, and diverse
others were presented by the Patrons, who died also, whereby the Church becomes
void again. If the Queen may now take her turn to present, in regard she took
not her turn when the first Lapse happened immediately at the first avoidance,
was the question. And after long and serious debate, all the Justices of the
Common Pleas did resolve.

That the Queen shall not now have her Presentment, but the Patron, because the
Queen has such presentment by Lapse as the Bishop had, and no other, and could
present but to the present avoidance then void: and although Nullum tempus
occurrit Regi, yet we must distinguish it thus, for where the King is limited
to a time certain, or to that which in its self is transitory, there the King
must do it within the time limited, or in that time wherein the thing to be done
has essence or consistence, or while it remains, for otherwise he shall
never do it. For if the Grantee of the next avoidance, or Lessee Per auter vie
be attaint, here the King must take his interest and advantage during the time,
viz. during the life of Cestui que vie, or within the years of the next
avoidance, or otherwise he shall never have it: the same Law is where a second
presentment is granted to the King, and he does not present, he shall not
present after. Shuttleworth, we have an Outlawry against the Plaintiff,
whereupon Judgment was stayed: But after Hill. 29 Eliz. The Queens Sergeants
showing that the Plaintiff was outlawed; It was argued by Walmsley, that that
could not now come into debate, for the plaintiff has no bay in Court after
judgment, and it is but a surmise that the plaintiff is the same party.
Windham, In a debt upon an Obligation, the Sergeants may pray the debt for the
Queen, and yet it is but a surmise.

And the opinion of three Justices was (for Anderson was absent) that the Writ
to the Bishop ought to be stayed; but in what manner process should be made if
the Scire facias shall issue against the Plaintiff, they said, they would
advise concerning the Course: But Periam said, that a Scire facias might have
issued against the ancient Incumbent, and then the Queen shall bring a Scire
facias again, because she had no presentation. And the Scire facias was brought
against Beverly. Walmsley, I conceive the Queen shall have no Presentation, for
although we have acknowledged our Presentment, yet before execution we have but
a right; As if a Disseisee be outlawed he shall not forfeit the profits of his
Land; also he has brought a Scire facias, and a Scire facias lies not but by
him that is party or privy. Periam, After that we have this Chattell, it is
forfeit by Outlawry. Anderson, The Judgment that he shall recover, shall not
remove the Incumbent, and then the Plaintiff has but a right; to which Periam
and Walmsley agreed: but as to the other point, that the Queen shall not have a
Scire facias for default of privity, they saw no reason, for in many Cases she
shall have a Scire facias upon a Record between strangers: Anderson, If I
recover in debt and then I am outlawed, shall the Queen have this debt?
Walmsley, If I recover in a Quare Impedit, and dye, who shall have the
Presentment my Executor or my Heir? To which no answer was made: But the Court
would take advice for the rareness of the Case. And it was said to Walmsley
that he might demur in Law, if he thought the matter insufficient, to which
Walmsley agreed, and did demur, etc.

Annuity to a woman who marries and dies.
AN Annuity is granted to a woman for life, who after marries, the Arrears of
the Annuity encur, and the wife dies, whereby the Annuity is determined. It was
adjudged that the husband shall have an Action of Debt at the Common Law: for
that an Annuity is more then a Chose in Action, and may be granted over. And it
was agreed by the Court in this case, That if a man grant an annual Rent out
of Land in which he has no interest, yet this is a good Annuity to charge the
person of the Grantor in a Writ of Annuity, 14 H. 4.29 A. Coke 4th. Rep. 51. A.

Bragg against Brook.
Second deliverance.
LUcas Bragg brought a Writ of second deliverance against Robert Brook, for
taking his Cattle in a place called East Burlish in the County of Surrey, the
Case was.

That Sir Thomas Speck was seized of a Manor, containing in it several
Copyholds, and the place where, etc. was Copyhold. And the said Sir Thomas
being so seized, married, and then died, and the wife 5 Edw. 6. demands the
third part of the Manor for her Dower. Per nomen centum Messuagium centum
gardinum, tot. acr. terrae, prati, etc. And the wife had Judgment to recover;
and the Sheriff assigned to her part of the Demesnes and parcel of the
Services and of the Freeholders and Copyholders. And it was resolved clearly
that the Copyholds did not pass by the assignment; and that she could not
grant a Copyhold, for when she demanded her Dower it was at her election and
liberty, to demand either a third part of the Manor, or of the Messuages, and
when she demanded Per nomen Messuagiorum, etc. she cannot then have the Manor,
nor can a Manor be claimed unless by his name of Corporation, as Anderson
termed it, and not otherwise. And the Lands and Acres cannot be called Manors,
and then the grant of a Copyhold by one who has no Manor cannot be good. And
so was the opinion of the Court, and yet the Sheriff had assigned to her
Demesnes and Services, and all things which make a Manor. And 29 Ed. 3.35. If
a Manor to which an Advowson is appendant be delivered by the Sheriff in
execution by the name of a Manor, cum pertinentiis, the Advowson passes also;
but it is otherwise if it be delivered in extent, by the name of Acres, Lands,
Meadow, Wood, etc.

Wakefeilds Case,
28 Eliz. Rotulo 607.

Replevin.
WAkefeild brought a Replevin against Cassand, who avowed for Damage-feasant:
And the Plaintiff prescribed that D. is an ancient Town, etc. and that all the
Inhabitants within the said Town (except the Par^ion, Infants, and some
particular houses) have used to have Common to their houses, etc. The Avowant
showed that the house to which Common was claimed, was built within thirty
years last past. And whether he shall have Common to this new erected house was
the question on a Demurrer?

Shuttleworth, he shall have this Common by prescription, but not of common
right. Gaudy, the Prescription is against common reason that he should have
Common time cut of mind, etc. to that which has not been thirty years, and he
has excepted the Parson, Infants, and such particular houses, and by the same
reason may exceptall, and therefore it is not good. But it was adjudged no good
Prescription, for if this be a good Prescription, then any body may create a
new house, so that in long space of time there will be no Common for the
ancient Inhabitants. Periam, By such Prescription the Lord shall be barred to
improve the Common, which is against reason. Anderson, The Common is entire,
for if H. has Common appendant to three Messuages, and enfeoff one of one
Message, another of the second, and another of the third, the Common in this
case is gone: But all agreed that it is impossible to have a Common time out of
mind, etc. for a house that is builded within the thirty years.

Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 2299.
Bishop of Lincolns Case.
Quare Impedit.
THe Queen brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Lincoln, and Thomas
Leigh, to present to the Church of Chalsenut Saint Giles in the County of
Bucks. The case was thus; H. being qualified took two Benefices which were
above the value of eight pounds, and after took a third Benefice above the said
value, whereby the first Benefice became void, and so remained for two years,
whereby Title of Lapse accrued to the Queen, and (before presentment made by
the Queen) the Patron did present one A. who being admitted, instituted, and
inducted, did refuse to pay 38 l. 2 s. ob. due to the Queen for the Tenths,
which matter was certified by the Bishop into the Exchequer, whereupon and by
force of the Statute of the 26 H. 8. the Church is ipso facto void; wherefore
the Bishop the now Defendant being Patron in right of his Bishopric, did
present Thomas Leigh the other Defendant, against whom the Queen brought her
Quare Impedit: And it was adjudged by the Court that the Quare Impedit very
well lies; for the Recusancy to pay the Tenths was his own act, and is a
Resignation, and by that reason she Church is void, and this shall not hinder
the Queen of the Lapse: But if A. the Incumbent who was presented, dies, being
presented by usurpation upon the Lapse to the Queen, yet afterward the right
Patron shall present again: But when A. the Incumbent does resign and make the
Church void by his own Act, viz. by Recusancy, as in this case is done, this
may be done by Collusion, and by such means the Queen may be deprived of her
Little by Lapse: for if this Collusion between the Bishop and the Incumbent be
suffered, then may a stranger present upon the Title of the Queen, and
presently such Recusancy and Certificate may be made, by which the Church shall
become void, and so the Queen deprived of the Lapse. Fenner, this Lapse is
given to the Queen by her Prerogative, but on condition that she take it in due
time, for such is the nature of the thing Lapsed, as is in this case adjudged,
viz. That when the Queen has Title to present by Lapse, and does not present,
but the Patron presents, and after the Church becomes void by the death of the
Incumbent: In this case (adjudged by the Court also) the Queen cannot present;
but in this case, the avoidance being by privation and not by death, Judgment
was entered for the Queen.

Trin. 19 Eliz. in Com. B.
Hales Case.
Debt on ^ Bond.
SAmuel Hales brought an Action of Debt on a Bond against Edward Bell, and the
Condition of the Bond was, that if the said Bell should pay to the said Hales
forty pounds within forty days next after the return of one Russell into
England from the City of Venice beyond the Seas, that then the Obligation to be
void: and the Defendant pleaded in Bar that the said Russell was not in Venice,
upon which the Plaintiff demurred: And adjudged by all the Justices that it was
no good plea; for in such cases where parcel is to be done within the Realm,
and parcel out of the Realm, the trial shall be within the Realm, 7 H: 7.9.

Trin. 28 Eliz. in Com. Ban.
Haveringtons Case. 1974.
Debt by an Administrator.
HAverington and his wife as Administratrix of one Isabell Oram, brought an
Action of Debt against Rudyand and his wife, Executrix to one Laurence
Kidnelly, the Case appeared to be thus.

Farmer for thirty years did devise to his wife so long as she shall be sole
and a Widow, the occupation and profits of his term: And after her Widowhood,
the Residue of the term in the Lease and his interest in it to Reynald his
Son, the Devisor dies, and the wife enters according to the Devise: And
afterward he in the Reversion by Indenture Dedit and concessit, vendidit and
Barganizavit totum illud tenementum suum, to the wife and her Heirs, and did
also covenant to make further assurance, and to discharge the said Tenement of
all former Bargains, Sales, Rights, Joyntures, Dowers, Mortgages,
Statute-merchants, and of the Staple, Intrusions, Forfeitures, Condemnations,
Executions, Arrearages of Rents; and of all other charges (except Rents
Services which shall be hereafter due to the Lords Paramount) And then the
Reversioner and his wife levied a Fine to the uses aforesaid; and after the
Devisee takes husband, and thereupon the Son enters in the term. And the
Administrator of the wife brought an action of debt upon an Obligation, for the
performance of the Covenants of the Indenture against the Administrator of the
Reversioner: And Judgment for the Plaintist.

And it appeared by the Record that these points following were adjudged to be
Law, although that the latter matter was only argued.

1. That the wife of the Reversioner who had Title of Dower in the Land, is
concluded of her right of Dower, by the Declaration of the uses of the Fine by
the husband only, which Fine is after levied by them jointly, because no
contradiction of the woman appears that she does not agree to the Uses which
the husband selely by his Deed of Indenture had declared.

2. To Devise that the wife shall have the occupation and profits during her
Widowhood is a good Devise of the Land it self, during such time. See Plow.
524. And that no Act which she can do in purchasing the Inheritance by which
the Term is extinct, shall bar the possibility which Reynald the Son has to
come, upon the woman's marriage.

3. That a Lessee for years being in possession may take a Feoffment although
it be by Deed, and may take Livery after the delivery of the Deed, and shall be
deemed to be in by force of the Feoffment, as in this case is pleaded, although
that the Lessee may take the Deed by way of confirmation, and then the Livery
is but Surplusage and void.

4. It was resolved, that this possibility which was in Reynald the Son to have
the residue of the term upon the inter-marriage, which at the time of the
Feoffment and of the Fine, was but Dormant, shall be accounted a former charge
and before the Covenant, because of the will which was before the Covenant, and
shall awake, and have relation before the marriage. As if Tenant in tail of a
Rent, purchases the Land out of which the Rent issues, and makes a Feoffment,
and covenants that the Land at that time is discharged of all former charges,
although this charge is not in esse, but is in suspense, as it is said 3 H.
7.12, yet if the Tenant in tail dye, his Issue may distrain for this Rent, and
then is the Covenant broke, for now it shall be accounted a former charge
before the Feoffment.

Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. in Com. Ban.
Bretts Case.
Debt on ^ Bond.
BRett brought an action of Debt on a Bond against Averden, and the Condition
of the Bond was to stand to the Arbitrament of J.S. who did award that the
Defendant should pay ten pounds to Brett, and no time was limited to pay it.
The Defendant confessed the Arbitrament but pleaded in Bar that the Plaintiff
has not required him to pay the money: And the Plaintiff hereupon demurred.
Adjudged by the Court, that it is no good plea, for the Defendant at his peril
ought to pay the money, and the Plaintiff need not make any request. wherefore
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 29 Eliz. in Com. Ban.
Bucknells Case.
Action for Robbery on the Statute of Winchestster.
BUcknell was robbed in a Hundred within the County of Bucks. and thereupon
brought his Action upon the Statute of Winchester, because the Thieves were not
taken: And Not guilty being pleaded by the Inhabitants, the Jury gave this
special Verdict, viz. That he was robbed the same day alleged in the
Declaration, but in another place and within another Parish then that he has
alleged in the Declaration, but that both the Parishes were within the said
Hundred: Upon which they prayed the Judgment of the Court whether the
Inhabitants were guilty. Adjudged by the Court for the Plaintiff, for it is not
material in what Parish he was robbed, so it were within the same Hundred.

Hill. 30 Eliz. in Com. Banc. Rot. 904.
Spittles Case.
Replevin.
SPittle brought a Replevin against Davis, the Case was this.

Turk being seized of Land in Fee, did devise parcel thereof to his youngest
Son. Proviso, and it is his intent, that if any of his Sons, or any of their
Issues, shall alien or demise any of the said Lands devised, before they shall
attain the age of thirty years, that then the other shall have the Estate, and
does not limit any Estate: And then the eldest Son made a Lease before his age
of thirty years; and the youngest Son enters, and afterward, and before the
age of thirty years he aliens the Land he entered into by reason of the
limitation: the elder Brother reenters, and demised to Spittle the Plaintiff
for three years, who put a Horse into the ground, and Davis by the commandment
of the younger brother entered and took the Horse Damage-feasant; and Spittle
brought a Replevin. And upon the whose matter there was a Remainder: It was
resolved.

1. That this is a limitation, and that the Estate shall be to such use as by
the Will is directed until there be an Alienation, and upon Alienation the
Land shall go to the other Brother.

2. When the youngest Brother has once entered for the Alienation, then is the
Land discharged of all Limitations, for otherwise the Land shall go and come to
one and the other upon every Alienation ad infinitum, wherefore all the Judges
agreed, that after the one Brother has entered by reason of the limitation, the
Land is then for ever discharged of the Limitation made by the Will: And
Judgment was given accordingly.

Michaells Case.
Debt on a Bond:
THomas Michaell brought an Action of Debt on a Bond against Stockworth and
Andrews; the Jury gave this special Verdict: That the said Stockworth and
Andrews did seal a Bond and delivered it to the Plaintiff as their Deed: and
after Issue joined, and before the Nisi prius the Seal of Andrews was taken
from the Bond.

Shuttleworth, The Plaintiff shall be barred, for it is one entire Deed, and
the Seal of one is wanting. And admit (in case it goes against us) the
Judgment be reversed by Writ of Error, the Plaintiff can have no Action on such
Bond: But it was adjudged to be a good Bond; and Judgment for the Plaintiff.
See the like case in Dyer, Trin. 36 H. 8.59. A.

Hillari 33 Eliz. in Com. Ban. Rot. 1315.
Richmonds Case.
Debt for rent.
RIchmond brought an Action of Debt against Butcher, the case was; A man makes
a Lease for years, reserving Rent to him and his Executors and Assigns, and
during the term the Lessor dies, and his Heir, who has the Reversion, brings
an Action of Debt. And it was urged, that the Rent was incident to the
Reversion, and the Heir having the Reversion shall have the Rent also as
incident to it, as the case is in the 27 H. 8.16. If H. makes a Lease for
years, rendering Rent, without saying any more words, the Heir shall have this
part, because it shall go along with the Reversion: So in the fifth of Edw.
4.4. If two Ioynt-tenants make a Lease for years, rendering Rent to one of them,
yet the other shall have the Rent also, although no mention were made of him;
so in the 7 H. 4.223. By the Court, If I make a Feoffment in Fee, rendering a
Rent to me, my Heirs may distraine: And if I grant over this Rent, my
Assignees in this case may distraine and avow: so in this case an Action will
lie for the Heir, although he be not mentioned. But adjudged to the contrary
by the Court; for when H. passes Lands from himself, the Law gives him liverty
to pass them in such way and manner as he himself will, and this liberty ought
to take effect according to the express words, for the Law will not extend the
words further, for the intent shall appear by the words, and then it cannot be
here intended that his will was that his Heir shall have the Rent, because the
words are not sufficient to give it to his Heirs: And therefore note a
diversity when the Law makes a Tenure, and when the party; for if the Law makes
a Tenure, the Heirs shall have the Rent: but otherwise where the party makes
it, unless there be express words for the Heir, as in 10 Edw. 4.19. by
Moile, If H. makes a Gift in T. and reserves no Rent: yet shall the Donee hold
of the Donor and his Heirs, as the Denor holds over; but if he make a Lease
for years, rendering Rent to the Lessor, the Heir shall not have this Rent,
for it is a Tenure made by the act of the party. So in the Book of Assizes 86.
If a man lets two acres of Land, rendering Rent ten shillings for one of them to
himself by name, without naming his Heirs, it is adjudged that the Heir shall
not have the Rent of this acre. And this is resembled to the case of 12 Edw. 2.
Where a man made a Lease for years, rendering Rent to the Lessor and his
Assigns, here none shall have the Rent but the Lessor, and it is void by his
death, for his Assignee cannot be privy to the Reservation; and the words of
the party shall not in any case be enlarged, unless there be great
inconvenience to be avoided: and his intent and will is performed if he himself
have the Rent. And if a man reserve such Rent to him and his Executors, this
word Executors is to no purpose, for that the Rent cannot be reserved to them,
but the Rent shall be extinct by his death: And if he reserve the Rent to his
Heir, and not to himself he shall not have it, but his Heir, for he shall be
estopped to claim it, against his own words and reservation. And if I make a
Lease for years, rendering Rent to me during the term, if I dye without Heir
during the term, the Lord by Escheat shall not have the Rent: which case may
be compared to the case of Warranty, 6 H. 7.2. That without mention of the
Heirs, the Warranty shall not bind them: But if a Rent be reserved to his
Assigns, and he grants over the Reversion, here because the Assigns were
mentioned in the Reservation, and for that now there is a privity, the
Assignees shall have the Rent, for it shall be intended that when he speaks of
Assigns in the Reservation, he prefixeth thereby to whom he will. Assign the
Reservation, wherefore it was adjudged for the Defendant, vide Dyer 2 Eliz.
180, 181. H. bargains and sells Land: Proviso, that if the Vendor shall pay a
hundred pounds to the Vendes his Heirs or Assigns, that then the Bargain and
Sale shall be void: by two Justices.

The Tendor shall not be made to the Executors, because the Law will determine
to whom the Tendor shall be made, when the parties themselves are expressly
agreed.

Mich. 33, and 34 Eliz. in Com. Ban.
Goddards Case.
Confirmation by the Lessor to the Assignee of Tenant for years.
H. makes a Lease for years of twenty acres, rendering Rent, the Lessee grants
all his Estate in one of the acres to I.S. the Lessor confirms the Estate of
I. S. Resolved by the Court,

1. That by this confirmation the entire Rent is gone in all the other acres,
for being an entire contract and by his own act, there cannot be an occupation
for part, and an extinguishment for the other part; and in this case there is
no difference between a suspension in part, and an extinguishment. If A. makes
a Lease for years of twenty acres, rendering Rent, upon condition that if he
does not do such a thing, that then the Lease shall be void for ten acres; if
he performs not the condition, and the Lessor enters, the entire rent is gone.
And it was resolved that a Lease for years was not within the Statute of Quia
emptores terrarum, for that Statute extends to an Estate in Land of Fee-simple.
See the Report of Sergeant Benlowes in 14 H. 7. A Warren did extend into three
Parishes. And a Lease was made for years rendering rent, and after the Reversion
was granted to another of all the Warren in one of the Parishes, and the Lessee
did attorne. The question was, if the Lessor should have any part of this rent
during the term, so that the rent may be apportioned or not. And the Justices
said in this Case, that neither the Grantor nor the Grantee shall have any
rent, for the Law is, that no Contract shall be apportioned.

2. It was resolved, that no Lessor shall avow for the arrearages of rent,
before the time of Confirmation and extinguishment; for H. shall not avow for
the rent determined; but he may defend himself by way of Justification. See
where a man may justify the taking by special evidence, 19 H. 6.41. by all
the Court, except Askew.

Mich 33, and 34 Eliz. in Ban. Reg. Rot. 471.
Wardfords Case.
Error.
HAddock brought a Writ of Error against Wardford upon a Judgment given in the
Common Pleas; the case was thus: Two Coparceners of a house, one of them lets
her part to a stranger, and the other lets her part to a stranger also, and
then both Leases come to the hands of one H. and then one of the Coparceners
bargains and sells her reversion to the other Coparcener. The Lessee commits
Wast Permittendo dictum Messuagium cadere, and the grantee of the Reversion
brought an action of Wast. The Errors assigned were,

1. That he brought but one action of Wast, although of several Demises by
several Lessors, whereas he ought to have two actions of Wast. Godfrey, He
cannot have an Action in other manner then his Grantor might have before the
Grant, and when the reversion came to him, it can be in other plight then it
was before. Gaudy, There is a diversity when the right is several, and when
the possession is several; for although the possession be several, yet if the
right be entire, but one action will lys, as appears F.N.B. fol. 2. Godfrey,
There is difference between the Writ of Right in F.N.B. and this action, for
there he was never entitled but only to the action, but in our case the
action was once several, and is like the case in F.N.B. 60. where it is said,
that a man may have one action of Wast, and declare upon diverse Leases, but
that is intended where the Leases are made by one person, and he cited the case
in 21 H. 7.39. where it is agreed by all the Justices, that if a man hold two
acres of one H. by several Services, and dies without Heir, the Lord shall
not have one Writ of Escheat, but ought to have two Writs.

Popham chief Justice did agree with Gaudy, for although that at first the
Lessors were entitled to several Actions, yet by matter ex post facto, the
Actions may be united: and said, that H. might have an action of Waste, and
declare ex assignatione, and also ex dimissione.

2. Error was assigned, that he had assigned the Waste to be committed in the
whole house, whereas he had but part of the house, and Waste may be brought for
part of a house.

3. Error was, because the other Coparcener was not joined with him in the
Action. But resolved that it was good enough: And the Justices made this
diversity, viz. When both the parties have an equal Estate and Inheritance,
and when one of them has but a particular Estate, as in the 27 H. 8.13. Lessee
for life, and he in the remainder shall join in an Action of Waste, but where
they had equal estate of Inheritance, as two Coparceners, or two Tenants in
Common, and one makes a Lease, and the Lessee commits Waste, there the Writ of
Waste shall be brought by the Lessor only, for it is not like to a personal
injury done upon an Inheritance; for an action of Waste is now in the nature of
the realty, although that at the Common Law (before the Statute of Gloucester)
there was but a Prohibition, yet the Statute gives the place wasted, and
damages, and therefore it is mixed, wherefore both of them shall not join, and
the Writ says, to his ^isheritance that made the Lease, vide 22 H. 6 24. by
the Court, and agreeing with this resolution.

4. Error was, that the Waste is a permissive Waste, and no such Waste lies
between Coparceners, for each of them are bound to contribution and reparation:
but the Court would take no notice of this.

5. Error was in the entering Judgment, for Judgment was entered by default,
whereupon a Writ of Inquiry of damages issued out to the Sheriff, and the
Sheriff went to the place wasted, which he needed not have done. And the
Judgment was Quod recuparet locum vastatum per visum Juratorum, which was
naught, for the going to the place was Surplusage. But diverse Presidents were
produced to prove that, that was the course: as Hilar. Rot. 501. between the
Earl of Bedford and William Smith, upon a Demurrer, and a Writ of inquiry of
damages, and the Judgment was, Quod recuparet locum vastatum per visum
Juratorum, and Trin. 31 H. 8. Rot, 142. and the book of Entries, fol. 620.
wherefore Judgment was affirmed.

34 Eliz. in Com. Ban.
Gaytons Case.
Resignation of a Benefice.
RObert Gayton Parson of the Church of little Eyesingham in the County of
Norfolk, did by Instrument in writing resign his Benefice before Edmund Langdon
public Notary, and others, into the hands of the Bishop, and the resignation
was absolute and voluntary, and to the use of Miles Moss, and Paul Britback,
or either of them: And it was further inf^rred in the said Instrument of
Resignation, Protestatione and sub condition quod si aliqui eorum non admissi
fuerant per assessione^ Episcop. infra sex menses, quod tunc haec present.
resignatio mea vacua and pro nulla habeatur, and nunc prout tunc, and tunc
prout nunc: and Cestuy que use, came within the time limited to the Bishop, and
did offer to resign to him, which the Bishop refused to except, etc.

Crook for the Plaintiff, Forasmuch as the Plaintiff may resign on Condition
as well as a particular Tenant may surrender upon condition: and two Parsons
may exchang^, and i^ the estate be executed on the one part, and not on the
other, that Parson whose part was not executed may have his Benefice again, as
it is adjudged in the 46 Ed. 3. But Coke Solicitor, and Godfrey were on the
contrary opinion: For that the Incumbent may not transfer his Benefice to
another without presentation, as appears in the recited case of 46 Edw. 3.
Also the resignation is not good, and the Condition void, because it is against
the nature of a Resignation which must be Absolute, sponte, pure, and
simpliciter and is not like to a Condition in Law, as in the said case of
Exchange in 46 Edw. 3. for the Law does annex a condition to it, but a
collateral condition cannot be annexed by the parties themselves: Also this is
an Act Judicial to which a condition cannot be annexed, no more then an
Ordinary may admit upon condition, or a Judgment be confessed on Condition,
which are judicial Acts.

But admitting the Condition good, yet a new Induction ought to be made by the
Ordinary, for the Church became one time void; and is not like to the case in 2
R. 2. Quare Impedit 143. where sentence of deprivation was given, and the
sentence presently reversed by Appeal, there need no new Institution, for that
the Church was never void. And after in Easter Term, 36 Eliz. upon Arguments
given in writing by the Civillians to the Judges, the Judgment was entered, Quod
querens nihil capiat per billam.

Hiliar. 35 Eliz. in the Kings Bench. Rot. 56.
Carters Case.
Action on the case for words.
WIlliam Crow brought an Action on the Case against Warham Carter for speaking
of these words; The said William is forsworn and perjured in swearing at the
common place Bar upon the Deeds which he then had in his hand.

Harris Sergeant did move in Arrest of Judgment, for that the words shall be
construed according to the common and vulgar sense, viz. That he is forsworn
upon the Deeds. But the Court was against him: For the vulgar sense is, that
men do not use to swear but upon a Book, and the Plaintiff had Judgment.

Hill. 36 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
William Bartues Case.
Prohibition.
WOodroffe and Cook brought a Prohibition against Bartue; the C se was thus.

The Abbot of Langley did let Land to one Raston for ninety nine years, who let
the same to Woodroff for sixty years, who granted parcel of the said Land to
Cook during the whole term. And Bartue did libell against them both in the
Spiritual Court for Tithes, and they joined in a Prohibition.

Godfrey, They may not join in a Prohibition, for by the Statute of* 34 H.
6.13. If two men are sued in the Court Christian for slander, b^ttery, etc.
which are several in themselves, there they cannot join in a Prohibition: but
where they be sued for the finding of a Lamp, etc. by reason of their Land,
there they shall join; but in this case the Tithes are several. But it was
resolved,

1. That their joining in the Prohibition was good enough.

2. That the death of one of them shall not abate the Writ of Prohibition,
because nothing is by them to be recovered, but they are only to be discharged
of Tithes.

Pasch. 33 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, Rot. 292.
Haslewoods Case.
Error in Avowry.
THe Lord of a Manor did avow on the taking of a Gelding as an Estrey within
his Manor, and had Judgment to have return and damage to twenty pounds: And
hereupon a writ of Error was brought, and adjudged that no Damages shall be had
in such case: For the Avowant cannot recover damages at the Common Law, and by
the Statute of the 7 H. 8. and 4. no damages shall be given to the Avowant for
Damage-feasant; but where he avowes for Rents, Customs, or Services, and this
is neither Rent, Custom, or Service, for that of common right the Estrey
belongs to the King, and no common person may have it unless by grant, or by
prescription, and the Statute is to be taken strickly: for the Avowant for
Damage-feasant, or for Rent Charge should not recover Damage by this Statute,
before the Statute of 21 H. 8.19. where the Plaintiff has remedy, as it is
holden in Dyer 141. B. But because diverse Presidents were shown out of the
Common Pleas from time to time since the making that Statute, that damages
shall be recovered by the Avowant, who avowes for Amercements, etc. it was
said, that it would be very difficult to control so many Presidents.

Gaudy, no great credit is to be given to such Presidents as pass sub
silentio, without any exception taken to them. Another Error was assigned,
because the Judgment was to have return averiorum predictorum, whereas there
was but one Guelding: wherefore Judgment was reversed, and the Roll marked.

Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R.
Fulgeambs Case.
Trespass against the Constables of Cambridge.
FUlgeambe brought an Action of Trespass against the Constables of Cambridge;
the Case was.

The Plaintiffs horses estrayed into Cambridgeshire, and were thereupon
Impounded in Cambridge, and then one A. came with a Commission from the Lord
Hunsdon Captain of Barwick, to take Horses to ride to Barwick, and the
Constables delivered to him the Plaintiffs Horses, and then one of the Horses
died.

And the opinion of all the Justices was, that the Action did well lie, for the
Constables cannot take Horses out of the Pound to deliver them to any by virtue
of such a Commission.

Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R.
Tauntons Case.
Lease on condition.
Coals made a Lease to Taunton for ninety nine years, on condition that if he
demised it in other manner, then in such manner as he let the same to him, that
then it should be lawful for him to re-enter; the Lessee devises it by his
Will to his youngest Son. Resolved, that Rigore Juris, this is a breach of the
Condition: for a Devise is an Alienation, as is holden 31 H. 8 Dyer 6. and
although Conditions shall be taken strickly, yet not directly against the
intent of the parties, and the reasonable disposition of the words; and
therefore a Devise shall be intended to be within this word, Demise; yet it was
said, that it was very hard according to equity that the Estate should be lost:
For he intended by this Will to prefer one of his youngest Children, and not to
break the Condition, and thought not it was any breach of the condition, and
for this cause some doubt was made of the Case, but Hill. 38 Eliz. Judgment was
given as aforesaid.

Pasch. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 41.
Leighs Case.
Ejectment.
THe Queen being seized of lands as Duchess of Lancaster, did make a Lease
thereof to the Plaintiff, the Lessee is outed by A. the Plaintiff makes a Lease
to B. for years, and B. being outed brought an Ejectione firmae.

1. It was resolved, that the Queen as Duchess of Lancaster cannot be
disseised, for although she be not seized in jure Coronae, yet is it in Seisin
of the Queen, and cannot be taken away from her in respect of her person.

2. Gaudy, and Fenner held that the Lessee being outed, the term is turned
into a Right. and therefore it has been adjudged that an Ejectment will lie:
as the case is in Dyer 29 H. 8. It Tenant in tail, the reversion in the King
suffers a Recovery, although this shall not be to the prejudice of the Kings
Reversion, yet shall it bar the Estate-tail. So if a Parson makes a Lease for
years, and the Patron and Ordinary confirm it, and the Parson dies, and during
the Vacation the Lessee is outed, he is hereby outed of his term, yet is not
the Frank-tenement touched.

Clench on the contrary, That he who is outed has an Estate but at sufferance,
for he cannot have an Estate for years without a Lease, and it is agreed he
shall not have an Estate of Freehold by reason of the Reversion in the Queen,
and the possession of the Lessor, shall maintain the possession of the Lessee,
as well as the possession of the Lessee shall keep the Freehold of the Lessor:
and if he have but an Estate at sufferance, then cannot the Lease to B. he
good: For if Tenant at sufferance of a common person makes a Lease for years,
this is a Disseisin.

And Popham was of opinion with Gaudy and Fenner, wherefore Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff.

I have seen a Report 24 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, upon a Demurrer between
Edmund Frough and Henry Dixe, where the better opinion was, That if one enters
on the term of the Queen, he shall not thereby gain any possession; but
notwithstanding the Termor may grant over his Term: but it was agreed that he
shall have an Ejectione firmae: for by Plawden an Assise will lie of a Mill,
where the water is diverse, for the possession of the Mill continues in him. But
the Justices doubted whether it was an Ejectment, wherefore the parties did
compound. In the 4. H. 6. Intrusion. If Lessee for life, the Remainder in the
King be outed, he shall have an Assise.

Trin. 36 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 134.
Thurstons Case.
Ejectment.
GOffe brought an Ejectment against Thurston, the Case was this.

The Abbot of Kingswold in Wiltshire, being seized of Land in the 28th year of
H. 8. did (with consent of the Covent) make a Lease for years by Deed indented,
and then the Abbey came into the hands of H. 8. and from him to Edw. 6 and from
him to the present Queen.

And it was pleaded that the Defendant has the Lease, and that Henry Thin
did intrude on the Defendant, and made a Lease to the Plaintiff, who being
ejected by the Defendant brought this Action, and on this matter the parties
demurred.

1. It was said that the Plaintiff cannot bring this Action, inasmuch as Henry
Thin by his entry on Lessee for years, the Reversion being in the Queen
cannot gain any possession, so that nothing passes by his Lease to the
Plaintiff. But the Court was against this, for he is a sufficient Lessee to
maintain an Action of Ejectment: And it was adjudged in the Exchequer Chamber,
that the Queens Lessee for years being outed may have an Ejectione firmae,
which proves that he is put out of possession of his term, and this very point
was in a manner agreed the last term, in the case of Norris.

Fenner, If H. enters on the possession of the Queen, and makes a Lease for
years, nothing does pass, and the Lessee cannot maintain an Ejectione firmae,
for he gains no possession at all: but it is on the contrary he^e when he
enters on the Queens Lessee.

Gaudy, That is no difference, for the Lessee for years of an Intrudor shall
maintain at Ejectione firmae: And I have seen a Report 34 Eliz. between
Badinton and Hawle in the Kings Bench, adjudged, that if the Queens Copyholder
be outed, and a Lease be made for years by the Intrudor, this Lessee shall not
have an Ejectment if he be outed, but he shall have an Action of Trespass
against any stranger.

The second exception was taken to the pleading, because the Defendant pleaded
in que estate del Lessee del Abbe, without showing how he came to the Estate.
And by the Court a good exception, for he shall be compelled to show how he
came to an Estate in the term, inasmuch as it cannot be by loyal means, vide
1. and 2 Eliz. Dyer 171. that a Que Estate of a particular Estate of a term is
not good, and 7 Eliz. Dyer 238. where the Plea was of a que Estate of a Termor,
and exception taken to it; and the difference between it and a Freehold, so in
the 7 H. 6.440. it was agreed that H. could not convey an Interest by a que
Estate of a particular Estate, as Intail for life, or years, without showing
how he came by the Estate, be it on the part of the Plaintiff or the Defendant.

The third exception was, that the Defendant pleaded a Lease made by the Abbot
and Covent by Indenture as it ought to be, without saying Hic in curia prolat.
which exception was also clearly allowed by the Court, for he is privy to it,
and therefore he ought to show it. And for these two exceptions, but especially
for the former. Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz. in C. B.
Palmers Case.
Action on the case for words.
PAlmer an utter Barrester of Lincoln's Inn, brought an Action on the Case
against Boyer for these words; Palmer being Steward to I.S. the Defendant in
discourse had with I.S. said; I marvail you will have such a paltry Lawyer for
your Steward, for he has as much Law as a Jack a Napes: And the Plaintiff
showed all the matter in the Declaration, and that by reason of such words he
was displaced of his Office.

Williams Sergeant did move, in that the words were not, That he has no more
Law then, etc. for then those words were actionable, but, that he has as much
Law as, etc. for which words no Action will lie. But resolved by the Court that
the Action will lie, for the words are standerous and prejudicial to his
credit, and by reason of them he was discharged of his Stewardship, also an
Action will lie for saying. That he has as much Law as a Jack an Apes, or my
Horse, because they are unreasonable creatures, but if he had said, that he
has no more Law then I.S. that is not actionable, although I.S. be no Lawyer.
And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Pasch. 35 Eliz. in B. R.
Audleys Case.
A Man brought an Action of Debt on an Obligation made by the Father of the
Defendant, in which Writ the Defendant was named Son and Heir apparent of the
Obligor, and Judgment was given against the Defendant, whereupon he brought a
Writ of Error, for the Writ does imply that his Father was living, for he is
his Heir in truth and in fact, if his Father be dead, and not apparent: To
which was answered, that that was but Surplusage which shall not abate the
Writ, as appears by the Book of the 10 Edw. 3. But the Court held that
Judgment should be reverst, for he ought to be named Heir, as in debt against
Executors; he shall be named Executor. And Judgment was reverst.

Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R.
Downinghams Case.
Ejectment.
THe Defendant in an Ejectione firmae pleaded that the Lord of the Manor did
enter into the Land of a Copyholder by reason of forfeiture for Waste committed
in suffering the houses to be uncovered,by which the timber is become rotten,
and did not allege in facto that the Custom of the Manor is, that such Waste
is a forfeiture, for it was said, that although other Waste by the Common Law
is a forfeiture, yet this permissive Waste is not. Sed non allocatur: for all
Waste done by a Coppholder is forfeitable.

2. It was resolved, that if a Coppholder made a Lease for years which is not
according to the Custom of the Manor, yet this Lease is good; so that the
Lessee may maintain an Ejectione firmoe; for between the Lessor and the Lessee,
and all other, except the Lord of the Manor, the Lease is good, and so has it
been several times adjudged in this Court.

Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R.
Wisdoms Case.
Action on the case for words.
STich brought an Action on the Case for slanderous words against Wisdom, the
words were, There is many a truer and honester man hanged, and that there was a
Robbery committed whereof he thought him to be one, and that he thought him to
be a Horse-stealer.

And it was moved in Arrest of Judgment that these words were not actionable;
for it is not said in facto, that he was in the Robbery, or that he was a a
horse-stealer in fact, but only by imagination, that he thought he was such a
one: but Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 815.
Palmers Case.
CHristopher Palmer brought an Ejectione firmae against John Humphrey, and
declared that one George Hanger the eighteenth day of May, in the six and
thirtieth year of Eliz. by his Indenture did demise unto him a certain piece of
Land called the great Ashbroke, and other piece of Land called Stocking, and
also diverse other pieces of Land naming the pieces, and of one Garden called
Muchins Gardein, and of another piece of Meadow called Michins Meade, and of
seven acres of arable Land, for the term of two years: by virtue whereof the
said Christopher entered, until the Defendant by force and arms, etc. did
eject him, and did set forth in his Declaration that the Defendant ejected him
out of the said pieces of Land, and yet did not express the contents thereof
in certainty: And upon not-guilty pleaded it was found for the Plaintiff, and
for the seven arable acres of Land and the Garden, the Court gave their
Judgment that it was certain enough, but as to the other pieces of land, the
Court was divided: For Popham and Gaudy held that it was certain enough being
in an Ejectione firmae, which is but in the nature of an Action of Trespass,
and the damages are the principal, and a man may bring an Action of Trespass
for a piece of land, without any other certainty: But Clench and Fenner were on
the contrary, for he ought to set forth his term in the land, and then to show
the contents thereof, as well in an Ejectment, as in a Precipe quod reddat, by
which land is demanded, and a man shall have an Ejectione firmae de una visgata
terrae, but shall not have a Precipe quod reddat of one portion of land, by
Skeene and Hill, 7 H. 4.40. 9 H. 6.3. 5 H. 7.9. And afterward vide Mich. 37,
and 38 Eliz. It was adjudged that this was good enough in an Ejectione firmae,
for there the damages are the principal; but otherwise in a Precipe, for there
ought to be a certainty; but in an Assise of Novel Disseisin it is good enough,
but afterward Mich. 38, and 39 Eliz. the case was debated in the Exchequer
Chamber by Writ of Error, and the Judgment was reversed.

Hill. 36 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 34.
Walters Case.
LOve brought an Action of Debt against Wotton, who pleaded the Statute of
Usury in Bar, and by reason of Mispleader, it was awarded by the Court, that
the parties should plead De novo, and this Award was entered in this manner,
viz. Et quia placitum illud in modo and forma placitat. est sufficiens in lege,
the Court awarded that the parties should replead; and hereupon they pleaded,
and Judgment for the Plaintiff: and the Defendant brought a Writ of Error in
the Exchequer Chamber, which was certified accordingly.

And there Gaudy moved that the Record in this point might be amended, and to
have the Record certified de novo into the Exchequer Chamber; for that the
first Award is repugnant in it self, for it is awarded that they shall replead,
because the Plea est sufficiens, whereas it ought to be that they shall
replead, because est minus sufficiens, as the paper books are, and the opinion
of the Court was that it could not be amended, because that the fault is in the
Judgment it self, which is the act of the Court, and therefore cannot be
amended.

Glanvill, It is no Error in the Judgment, for the Judgment is only that they
shall replead, but the Error is in the Judgment to the Judgment, and may be
well amended, and of the same opinion was Popham.

Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 579.
Bartwrights Case
BArtwright brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against Harris, the Condition
was, that if the Defendant did acquit, discharge, and save harmless the
Plaintiff against an Obligation, in which he and the Defendant were bound to
I.S. in 601 l. that then the Obligation should be void. The Defendant said,
that Bartwright was sued on this Obligation by I. S. and upon default I.S. had
Judgment to recover, and that the Defendant before execution did deliver to the
Plaintiff the 601 l. and hereupon the Plaintiff demurred.

Humbert, It is no plea, for he confesses that the Plaintiff was not yet taken
in execution, yet inasmuch as he may be taken, therefore his body, goods, and
lands are liable to the execution, and he has not acquitted nor saved him
harmless against the Bond of I.S. vide Dyer 186. And the Plaintiff had
Judgment, etc.

Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 25.
Greyes Case.
Gray brought an action of Trespass against Bartholmew; the Case was: A man
did purchase diverse Fishes, viz. Carpes, Tenches, Trouts, etc. and put them
into his Pond for store, and then died.

The question was, whether the Heir or the Executors should have the Fish.

Popham, The Heir shall have the Deer in the Park, and by the same reason, the
Fish.

Clench, If the Fish be stolen it is Felony, so that it appears there is a
property in them, vide 18 Ed. 4. 10 Ed. 4.14. 22 Ass. 98. that stealing of
Tench out of a Pool is Felony, by which it seems they are but Chattels.

Popham, the Book is so, and so is the Law, but that is of stealing Fish out of
a Trunk, or some narrow place where they are put to be taken at will and
pleasure; but otherwise it is where they are put into a Pond.

Fenner, He which has the water shall have the Fish: And Popham ex assensu
curiae gave Judgment for the Heir. And in the principal case the Executors
did take the Fish with Nets, and the Heir brought a Trespass and adjudged
maintainable. See what Chattels Executors shall have, and what not, in 21 H.
7.26, 10 H. 7.6. and 30. an account will lie for Fish in a Fish Pond, so in the
5 R. 2. Waste 97. an Action of waste did lie against Guardian in Chivalry for
taking Fish out of a Pool by the Statute of Magna Charta; but quaere if it lies
against a Termor or Guardian in So^age upon an Account for Fish.

36 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 767.
Leighs Case.
LEigh brought an Ejectione firmae for a Chamber against Shaw, the Case was; A
Lease was made of the Rectory of Chingford in Essex, and of the Glebe,
excepting the Parsonage house, saving and allowing to the Lessee a Chamber over
the Parlor next the Church.

It was adjudged that the Lease of the Chamber was good, for as well as a man
by his exception may except part of a thing, so as it shall be intended that it
was never let or granted; so in this case when he says, except the Parsonage
house, saving and allowing to the Lessee a Chamber, this saving makes the
Chamber, as it were excepted out of it, as if it had been leased; so a saving
out of a saving, is as much as there had been no saving at all, and then this
Chamber not being excepted out of the Lease shall pass clearly by the Lease of
the Rectory. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

37 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 242.
Wrights Case.
WRight brought a Writ of Error against the Mayor and Comminalty of Wickombe,
to reverse a Fine levied by his Ancestor of twenty acres of Land, the
Defendants in abatement of the Writ of Error did plead that the Plaintiff after
the death of his Ancestor did disseise the Defendants of the Land, and made a
Feoffment to a stranger. Judgment, etc. The Plaintiff replied, that they did
re-enter upon him, without that, that he did enfeoff a stranger modo and forma.
The Jury found, that there was a Fine of twenty acres, and that the Plaintiff
being Disseisor of all, made a Feoffment of six of the acres to a stranger. Et
si supra totam materiam, etc. And it was objected that the Record was entire,
and the Error is a Chose in Action, and not a Chose in Droit, and therefore
cannot be divided, but if it were a Chose in Droit, it is otherwise, as if a
Disseisee of twenty acres releaseth all his right in five acres, this does
extinguish all his right in the five acres: so upon a Feoffment of parcel, yet
the right remains as to the remnant: But of a Chose in Action which is merely
entire, no apportionment can be, as in the 31 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, between
Charnock and Wrothesley, the case was; Husband and Wife levied a Fine of the
Wives Land, and after because the Wife was within age, they sued a Writ of
Error to reverse the Fine. The question was, If this should be reversed as to
the Wise only, or against the Husband according to the opinion of Belknap in
the 50 Ed. 3. And after long debate it was resolved that it should be against
both, for it is entire, and cannot be affirmed in part and disaffirmed in
another part. And the Lord Norris case is very agreeable to this, where Tenant
for life did levy an erroneous Fine, and then was attaint by Parliament, and
all the right which he had to any Land was given to the Queen; and it was
adjudged that there is no title of Error, nor was it given to the Queen by this
word, Right, and then if it be so, the Title of Error is not of any right in
the land, but only to the Suit, and if it be a Suit, it is a Suit entire, for
he cannot have several Suits, as is agreed in Sir Richard Knightleys case. A
man had judgment to recover 150 l. and did release 20 l. of it, and after sued
execution, and the other brought an Audita querela upon the Releases, and
defeated all the execution. But it is otherwise where such apportionment of
such Suit is done by act in Law, as in 7 Ed. 4. fol. ultimo. The Sheriff levied
parcel of the debt by Fieri facias, yet shall he have an Action of Debt for
the Residue upon the Record: But in this case it is the act of the party
himself that destroies his Suit for part of the Land, for which it shall
destroy the other suit, for the Error is entire as to all the land and cannot
be divided, as in the 38 Ed. 3. and 12 H 6. if a false Verdict be found, and
the party greived does make a Feoffment of parcel he shall not have an attaint
for any part: So in the 19 H. 6. and the 39 Ass. If he who has cause to bring
a Writ of Error or Attaint, does take a Lease for years of parcel, he does
suspend his Action, and if he takes in fee, it is quite gone,. But it was
resolved by the Court that the Feoffment does not destroy the Title of the Writ
of Dower, for more then so much as a Feoffment was made of; and thereupon they
first took a difference between suspension and extinguishment of an Action, for
peradventure if he suspend his Action as to any part for any time, this is a
suspension unto all, but extinguishment of part; is a Bar to that part only;
and Gaudy cited the case in 9 H. 6. where Judgment was reverst for part only,
and it is not unusual to have a Fine reversed for part: as if a fine be levied
of lands in ancient Demesne, 47 Ed. 3.9. a. there by Parsley, If there be Error
in Law as to one parcel, and Error in Fact as to another parcel, the Judgment
as touching the matter of Law may be reversed.

Fenner; He who has Title to reverse a Fine, or recovery by Writ of Error,
has right in the Land, and if he release all his right in the land, the Error
is extinct, and the reason of the Lord Norris Case was not that the Title to
the Error was an Action in privity annexed to the party to the Record and his
Heirs, and cannot be transferred over to another, no more then a Writ of
partition between Coparceners, or a Nuper obiit.

Popham, He who has Title to have the Writ of Error has no Title to the Land,
although that thereby he be to be restored to the Land for if the Land descend
to one who has Title to have the Writ of Error, without doubt it shall not be
accounted a remitter: But as to the matter now in question, he said, that if
two men bring a Writ of Error in the Realty, and the Tenant plead the release
of one, this is a good Bar against both, because the Error in the Record is
released: But if one who has Title to a Writ of Error, does make a Release of
all his Right in one acre, this is a Bar but for so much, inasmuch as the
Release is a Bar but as to the Restitution of the Land only, and no Release of
Errors in the Record, for by the Reversall of a Fine or Recovery, the party may
annihilate the Record, and have Restitution of that which the Record before
took from him, and therefore it shall bar the Plaintiff. And the opinion of all
the Court was, that the Fine should be reversed for that part of the Land
only, whereof no Feoffment was made, but for some defects in the Writ of
Error, Judgment was stayed.

Mich. 37, and 38 Eliz. in B. R.
Barnards Case.
SMith brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against Barnard, the Defendant
pleaded that the Plaintiff was outlawed, and a day was given him to bring in
the Record, at which day he made default.

Daniel moved that the Judgment for the Plaintiff in this case should be that
the Defendant should answer, for that the plea of Outlawry was but a dilatory
Plea, and no Plea in Bar, as appears 21 Ed. 4 15. but this difference was taken
by the Court. In an Action of Debt upon a Bond, Vtlary of the Plaintiff is a
Plea in Bar, and the reason is, because all the Debts in specialties are
forfeited to the Queen by reason of the Outlawry, and because the Queen is to
have them, it is a good Plea in Bar: But in a Trespass or Debt upon a
Contract, the Outlawry is but to the abatement of the Writ, and the Queen shall
not have Debts upon simple Contracts, but after the Outlawry pardoned, the
Plaintiff may have an Action for them again. And because he failed to bring the
Record at his day appointed, the Plaintiff recovered. vide Dyer 6 Eliz. 227,
228.

Hill. 32 Eliz. in C. B.
Lord Dacres Case.
GRegory Lord Dacres was summoned to answer Richard Gawton in a Plea of Debt
for 26 l. 14 s. and did declare, that the Defendant did retain the Plaintiff to
be his Bailiff of his Manor of Moreford, etc. and to receive the Defendants
money for a certain time, and to do other businesses for the Defendant, and to
render an account: and afterward before one Lancelot Love, the Auditor
assigned by the Defendant, the Plaintiff did account. Super quo computo
praefatus Richardus pro diversis costagiis and expensis quae idem Richardus
circa prosecutionem and executionem negotiorum praefati Gregorii in
surplusagiis in praedict. 26 l. 14. s. erga ipsum Gregorium, ultra omnes
denariorum summas per ipsum Richardum ad ipsum dicti Gregorii recept.
permansisset. And thereupon he brought his Action; and the Defendant pleaded
Nil debet, and it was found for the Plaintiff, and yet he had not Judgment.

First, because the Declaration was insufficient, because the Plaintiff was not
in Surplusage to the Defendant, but the Defendant to the Plaintiff, and so are
all the Presidents directly; and he ought to allege he was in Service, and
that he had received Goods, whereof no mention is made.

Secondly. Because neither day nor place is alleged where the Auditor was
assigned.

Pasch. 33 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 409.
Owseleys Case
ROger Owsely brought a Replevin against Edmund Brach and others, the Defendant
made Conulance as Baily to John Levison; and said, that long time before the
taking, etc. one William Coup was seized of a house and eight acres of Meadow,
etc. whereof the place is parcel, in his Demesne as of Fee, and did demise the
same to Richard Coup for one and twenty years, reserving Rent, and the Lessee
died, and the Land came to his Wife as his Executrix, who married Roger
Owseley, and that William Coup did levy a Fine of the Premises to Stephen Noke
and others, to the use of Stephen and his Heirs, and after Stephen entered and
outed the Termor, and infeoffed John Leveson and his Heirs, and then the
Termor reenters, claiming his Term, and for Rent arreare the Defendant made
Counsans as aforesaid, and it was adjudged against the Defendant, because this
entry and Feoffment by Noke to Leveson, and the re-entry of the Termor is no
Attornment, and this varies from Littleberries case, where the Lessor entered
and made a Feoffment, and the Lessee re-entred, for Noke the Lessor had not any
Attornment, and can have no Distress, and his Feoffee cannot be in better case
then he himself: And if the first Feoffee makes Feoffment to B. who enfeoffs C.
and the Lessee reenters, that is Attornment but to the first Feoffee, and not
the other, for he may be misconusant of it, because he was outed by the Lessor,
but note Judgment was not given till Trin. 36 Eliz.

Pasch. 36 Eliz. in C. B.
Owens Case.
EDward Owen brought an Action of Waste against Peerce for land in ancient
Demesne, the Defendant made defense, and pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the
Court, because the land was ancient Demesne, and the Defendant was ruled to
plead over, for it is but a personal Action, and the Statute is a beneficial
Statute for the Commonwealth, and (by the opinion of all the Court, except
Walmsley) does extent to ancient Demesne, and 40 Ed. 3.4. Ancient Demesne is a
good plea in Replevin, 2 H. 7.17.21 Ed. 4.3. it is no good plea in an action
upon the Statute or Gloucester.

Mich. 33, and 34 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 2122.
Sir Edward Cleeres Case.
SIr Edward Clear brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Norwich,
Edward Peacock, and Robert Hinston Clerk, to present to an Addowson holden in
Capite.

Anderson. A Devise of an Addowson in gross is void, because it is of annual
value, whereof the King shall have the third part. But Owen, Beaumont, and
Walmsley held the contrary, and so it it was adjudged. See the Case of the
Earl of Huntington against the Lord of Montjoy, of a Devise of Liberties of
Cramford, which were not of any annual value, and yet the opinion of Wray and
Anderson Justices was certified to some of the Council being Arbitrators, that
the Devise was not good.

Trin. 36 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 2145.
Brownes Case.
ANthony Brown brought an Action of Trespass against Richard Pease, the Case
was this; John Warren was seized in fee of the Manor of Warners, and of the
Manor of Cherchall, and demised his Manor of Warners to the youngest Son of
Richard Foster his Cousin in fee. at which time Richard the Father had issue
George Foster and John Foster. And he demised his Manor of Cherchall in haec
verba.

I will my Manor of Cherchall to Margery Water for her life, and if she die,
and then any of my Cousin Fosters Sons then living, then I will my foresaid
Manor of Cherchall unto him that shall have my Manner of Warners, and after
the Devisor died without issue, and the Reversion of the Manor of Cherchall
descended to Henry Warner as Brother and Heir of the Devisor. And after the
said Henry Warner by Deed Enrolled, did bargain and sell the Manor of
Cherchall to Anthony Brown, who devised it to the Plaintiff: And then George
Foster dies without issue, and the Manor of Warners does descend to John
Foster his Brother and Heir, who enters and enfeoffs the Lord Rich, and after
marriage the Tenant for life of the Manor of Cherchall dies, and the Plaintiff
enters, and the Defendant enters upon him as Servant to John Foster, whereupon
the Plaintiff brought this Action: And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
because that the words and the intent of the Devise was, that the Manors of
Warners and Cherchall should go together, and therefore the Manor of Warners
was sold before the death of Margery, by John Foster, and after the death of
Margery, John can take nothing by the Devise.

Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 2325. or 2929.
Hambletons Case.
JOhn Hambleton had issued four Sons, John the eldest, Robert the second,
Richard the third, and Thomas the fourth, and devised to each of them a parcel
of land, to them and the Heirs Males of their body begotten, and if it happen
that any of their Heirs dye without issue Male of his body lawfully begotten,
then the Survivor to be each others Heir. If these words make a Remainder, or
are void, was the question. And it was adjudged against the Plaintiff, for the
Court held that all those that survived were Ioynt-tenants, and one
Ioynt-Tenant cannot have a Trespass against the other, for by the intent of
the Will, it appears that the Survivors should have that part, and the
survivority of each other Heir, each Survivor, that is, all that survive shall
be each others Heir, and so the remainder should be to every one of them.

29 Eliz.
Fenners Case, argued before the Lord Mayor of London at Guildhall.
IN this Case it was adjudged, that if a man Covenants that his Son then within
age, and infra annos nubiles, before such a day shall marry the Daughter of
I.S. and he does marry her accordingly, and after at the age of consent he
disagrees to the marriage, yet is the Covenant performed, for it is a marriage,
and such a one as the Covenantee would have, until the disagreement, vide 7 H.
6.12. Dyer 143.313. and 369.

25 Eliz.
Web against Potter.
IN an Ejectione firmae by Web against Potter, the Case was; Harris gave Land
in Frank-marriage to one White, and the Deed was Dedi and concessi Johan. White
in liberum maritagium Iohannae filiae meae habend. dictae Ioannae and heredibus
in perpetuum tenend. de capitalibus Dominis feodi illius, with Warranty to John
White and his Heirs. Periam, The usual words in Frank-marriage shall not be
destroyed, for the words of Frank-marriage are, Liberum maritagium cum Ioanna
filia mea, in the Ablative case, and although here it be in the Dative case, it
is good. And of the same opinion were all the Judges.

Also a Gift in Frank-marriage made after the Espousals was held good by all
the Justices, 2 H. 3. Donor 199.4 Ed 3.8. Dyer 262 B. And a Gift in
Frank-marriage before the Statute was a Fee-simple, but now special tail, and
if it be not a Frank-marriage, he shall have an Estate for life, and to prove
this his opinion, he relied upon the intention of the Donors which ought to be
observed: For if the Habendum does cross the Premises it shall be void, but a
Remainder is good for the benefit of a stranger, but a Rent cannot be reserved
upon such a Gift, during the four degrees, but after the Reversion is good, if
he do attorne to the G^ntee of the Reve^sion.

Windham, Frank-marriage is not an Estate in tail, for there wants the word,
Heirs, Coke lib. 1.103. So a Gift to a man and semini suo, 10 Ass. 26. and
after Meade ^gree^ with Windham although the grounds of Frank-marriage were not
observed, yet that it was good; for although there be no Tenure between the
Donor and Donee, yet is it a good Frank-marriage.

Dyer, It is no good Frank-marriage, because the usual words are not observed,
and if the word Liberum be omitted, it is not Frank-marriage, neither is it
good given to a man, but it must be to a woman, for a man cannot give land to a
woman Causa matrimonii praelocuti: And in this case the party ought to be of
the blood of the Donor, who by possibility may be inheritable to him, and there
ought to be a Tenure between them, and an acquittall, and if any fail, it is
no Frank-marriage, and he said further, that if it once takes effect as
Frank-marriage, and then the Donor grants the Reversion, or the Reversion
discends to the Donees, yet it shall not be destroyed, but shall remain as an
Estate in tail, and not for life, because it once took effect in the Donees
and their issues, and if land be given to a man in Frank-marriage, the
remainder in tail, yet this shall not destroy the Frank-marriage, and the
Donee shall hold of the Donor, and not of him in the remainder: And if one give
land in Frank-marriage, the remainders to the Donees in tail, yet is this a
good Frank-marriage, and if the Donor grants over his Services, yet does the
Frank-marriage continue, although the Donees attorn, for they are incident to
the Reversion, and therefore the Grant is void, but if the Reversion be granted
the Services will pass, and he concluded that the Husband had all, and the
Wife nothing, because no Estate to her is mentioned in the Premises, and he
could not construe the words to be the intent of the Donor, for here is an
express limitation of the fee to the Husband and his Heirs, which cannot be
controlled by intendment. And after 25 Eliz. It was adjudged to be no
Frank-marriage, nor gift in tail, but a Fee-simple: And the Justices said,
that the ancient Books were that where it took not effect as a Frank-marriage,
it should be in especial tail, yet those at this time are not Law: But they
agreed, that this at one time took effect as Frank-marriage, and by matter ex
post facto may be made an Estate in tail.

Mich. 30 Eliz.
Gibbs Case.
GIbbs brought an Action of Trover against Basil, for a Gelding; the Case was.

One Porter stole this Gelding from the Plaintiff, and sold him to the
Defendant in open Market, by the name of Lister, and it was entered so in the
Toll Book that Lister sold him.

The question was, if this alteration of his name shall make any alteration of
the property, although the sale was in open Market.

Windham and Rhodes Justices, held this no good sale to bar the Plaintiff, and
grounded their opinion on the Statute of the 2, and 3 Phil. and Mar. cap. 7.
which provides that no property of stolen Goods shall be altered that are
sold, unless the name and surname of the parties to the sale be written in the
Toll-book: And Shuttleworth moved, that it should be in the Market, and walked
there for an hour together, which is not set forth by the Defendant in his
Bar; but the Justices said, that such special plea need not to be, but shall
be intended.

Rouses Case.
IT was moved in this Case, that if Tenant for term Dauter vie, does continue
and hold in his Estate, after the death of Cestuy que vie: If he be a
Disseisor, and whether in pleading, the plea ought to be seized and not possessed,

Shuttleworth, He was legally in at first, and therefore cannot be a Disseisor,
15 Ed. 4.41. A Freehold could not be gained where he came in by the agreement
of the party, and 12 Ass. 22. Where the Husband and Wife were seized of a
Freehold, and after were divorced by Suit, on the woman's part, whereby the
woman is to have all the land, yet if the Husband continue possession and dies
seized, this descent shall not take away entry, because he was no Disseisor.

Gaudy, He is Tenant at sufferance and no Disseisor, and there it was moved,
that if Tenant at sufferance, or a Disseisor makes Copies of Copyhold Lands, if
they be good or voidable: And note that Wild took here a diversity between a
Termor that holds over, and a Tenant at sufferance; for in case of a Tenant at
sufferance, there is no Freehold taken from the Lessor, which the continuance
of possession does not take from him, but where the Tenant holds over his
term, there the Freehold is disturbed, and therefore there is a disseisin: But
at that present it seemed to the Judges that there was no diversity. But the
next term Godfrey moved, that if Tenant for another life held over his Estate
he had Feesimple, and he granted that it was otherwise in some cases, for if he
claim to be Tenant at the Will of the Lessor, he shall not gain a Fee-simple:
For Littleton in his Chapter of Releases. 108. says, that Tenant at sufferance
is where a man in his own wrong does convey Lands and Tenements at the will of
him that has the Freehold, and such Occupyer claims nothing but at Will. But
in this case the Tenant claims otherwise then at Will of the Lessor, he does
not claim any thing but at the Will of the Lessor; as in the case of Littleton,
but claims to hold over against the Will of the Lessor, which is no Tenant at
sufferance, and 10 Ed. 4. If a man makes a Lease at Will, and the Lessor dies,
and he continues possession and claims fee, the Heir shall have a
Mortdancester, and 18 Ed. 4.25. If Cestuy que use dies, and the Tenant
continues in, and the Tenant is impleaded, the Lessor shall not be received,
and the reason is, because there is no reversion in him, but the Tenant has
it, and 22 Ed. 4.38. by Hussy Justice, If a Termor holds over his Term, there
an Estate in fee is confessed to be in him by matter of Law, but it is a deubt
whether he be a Disseisor or not, but it seems not, for a Trespass does not
lie against him before Regresse, and in the 7 H. 4.43. If a Guardian holds the
possession at the full age of the Heir, or Tenant for years after his term
expired, the Estate shall be judged in Fee. And in our case he has not claimed
to hold at Will, for he has done contrary, for he has made Copies.

By all the Justices, if Tenant at will, or for years, or at sufferance, make a
Lease for years, this is a Disseisin, and a Tenant at will does thereby gain a
Freehold, and thereby does claim a greater Estate then he ought, and so it is
in this case.

2. Admitting him to be Tenant at sufferance, the question is, if he may grant
Copies, and if whether they be good: and it seems he may, for no trespass lies
against him, because he is Dominus pro tempore, and it is not like a Copy made
by an Abator or Disseisor, for it has been adjudged that Copies made by them
are void, but in this case his act of making Copies agrees with the Custom; as
in Grisbrooks case, If an Administrator sells Goods, and paies debts with the
money, and after he who is Executor proves the Will, he shall never avoid this
sale, for that it was done according to the Will which the Executors were
compelled to do: So in the 12 H. 6. If a Baily cuts Trees and repaires an
ancient Pale, this is good, and 6 R. 2. if he paies quit-rents it is good.

Coke, He comes in by right, and therefore is Tenant at sufferance, and like
this case is Dyer 35 H. 8.57. Lord Zouches case, where Cestuy que use for life,
the remainder over in tail, made a Lease for the term of the life of the
Lessee, and dies, and the Lessee continues his Estate. And the opinions of the
Justices of both Benches were, that he is but Tenant at sufferance.

Popham, If a Manor be devised to one, and the Devisee enters and makes
Copies, and then the Devise is found to be void, yet the Copies of Surrender
made by such Devisee are good; but contrary where new or voluntary Copies are
made by him, 7 Eliz. and in the Lord Arundells case, a Feoffment in fee was
made of a Manor upon condition, the Feoffee upon Condition grants voluntary
Copies, those are good.

Atkins, on the contrary: And he made a difference between a Tenant at will,
and a Tenant at sufferance, for a Tenant at will shall have aid, but so shall
not the other, as in the 2 H. 4. and a Release to one is good, to the other
not, etc. and when he holds over he does assume an Interest which shall not be
thought wrongful, for he is neither Abator nor Disseisor, and therefore
Dominus, and therefore the Copies made by him are good, 4 H. 7.3. Tenant at
sufferance may justify for Damage-feasant. And all the Justices held for the
Plaintiff, and that he that made the Copy was but Tenant at sufferance, and not
Disseisor, and that he had no Fee. And the Judgment was to be entered, unless
the Defendant showed better matter,

Trin 28 Eliz. Rot. 329.
Smiths Case.
SMith assumed upon himself, that when I.N was indebted to I.D. in an
Obligation of forty pounds, that if I.D. would not implead the said I.N. that
then if the money were not paid at such a day, that then he, viz. the said
Smith would pay the money: Upon which Assumpsit after the day I.D. brought his
Action on the case, and did set forth in his Declaration that he did not
implead I.N. and it was moved by Kingsmill, that he could not have this Action
until I.N. be dead, for so long as he lives I.D. has time to implead him. As
if a man promises another that he will be named in his Action that he has
against a third person, and if the third person pays not the money at such a
day, then he will, he cannot sue unless he shows he has discharged the other
of the Obligation.

Clench, It is implied that he will never implead him.

Shuttleworth Justice, not so, for if hereafter he sue him contrary to his
promise, then the other who made the Assumpsit shall have his Action on the
case, and recover to the value of the sun^m in the Bond. And after the case was
moved again, and the Plaintiff brought the Obligation in Court, and thereupon
the Obligation was entered, so that now the Plaintiff could not implead I.N in
posterum, for which Judgment was entered for the Plaintiff.

29 Eliz.
Cosens Case.
COsen the Father had issue three Sons, John, George, and Thomas, John the
eldest died in the lifetime of his Father, his Wife Enseint with a Daughter,
the Father makes a Devise in these words:

That if it shall please God to take to his mercy my Son Richard, before he
shall have issue of his body, so that my Lands shall descend to my Son George
before he shall be of the age of one and twenty years, then my Overseers shall
have my Land until George come to the age of one and twenty years.

If Richard who is yet living had an Estate in tail by these words, was the
question. And all the Justices agreed that it was a plain implication to make
an Estate-taile in Richard the second Son, 13 H. 7.17.

29 Eliz. in C. B.
Warrens Case.
WIlliam Warren brought an Action of Debt for forty pounds, and in his
Declaration confessed satisfaction of twenty pounds, and hereupon a Writ of
Error was brought in the Kings Bench, and the Judgment reversed: For by his
Declaration he had abated his own Writ, and he ought to have Judgment
according to his Writ, and not to his Count. And Error was brought upon the
Outlawry; for if the first Record was reversed, the Outlawry thereupon is
reversed.

4, and 5 Phil. and Mar.
BEnlowes Serieant moved this case, a man seized of Lands and Te^ements in
London, devises them by these words.

I will and bequeath unto my Wife Alice my livelihood in London for term of
her life. By this Will the lands in London pass to the Wife by this word,
Livelihood. Nota, for Brook Justice said, that it was in ancient time used in
diverse places of this Realm, and had been taken for an Inheritance: To which
Dyer agreed.

Case of Slander.
BRook said, that if a man speak many slanderous words of another, he who is
slandred may have an Action on the case for any one of these words, and may
omit the others: But if a man write many slanderous things of another in a
Letter to a friend, an action upon the case will not lie, for it shall not be
intended that it is done to the intent to have it published.

Mich. 1, and 2 Eliz.
N. Archbishop of York, and I.B. Executors of the last Will and Testament of
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, did bring a Writ of Ravishment de Guard, and then he
was deprived by his own consent: The question is, if the Writ shall abate.

Benlowes, It shall abate, for if a Dean and Parson of a Church bring an Action
for such a Custom, and then resign, the Writ shall abate, because it is their
own Act.

Dyer, The Writ shall not abate; for the Action is not brought in their own
persons, but in their Testators, and therefore the Action shall continue. And
if a man be outlawed he may bring an Action as Executor, and the Writ shall not
abate.

Brown, If I make I.S. my Attorney, and he (the Warrant of Attorney still
continuing) is made a Knight, yet is not the Warrant of Attorney determined,
although the word Knight, which is now part of his name be not in the Warrant,
therefore in this case the Writ is good.

Mich. 7 Eliz.
NOte, it was said by Brown, that if H. does let the Cite of his Manor, with
all his Lands to the said Manor appurtenant, hereby all the Demesne lands do
pass; but if it were with all the Lands appertaining to the said Cite, nothing
passes but the Mannor-place.

Pasch. 6 Eliz.
A Man seized of the Manor of Dale, does let the same with all the Members and
Appurtenances to the same, to have and to hold all the members of the said
Manor to the Lessee, for term of years.

Walsh and Weston were of opinion that this was a Lease for years of the Manor
only, and that the limitation of the word, Members, being after the Habendum
was void. But Dyer and Brown were of the contrary opinion: And Brown said,
that when the Habendum is used by way of limitation, it shall not be void. As
if he let his Manor of Dale, to have and to hold one acre parcel thereof for
a term of years, the Lease is void for all, but if there had been no Habendum
but the Lease for years had been limited in the Premises of the Lease, that is
good enough: And if the Lease had been Habendum every part thereof, that had
been a good Lease of the Manor, for all the parts comprehend all the Manor.
And Dyer said, that the word, Members, shall be taken for the Towns and
Hamblets wherein the Manor has Jurisdiction.

Note, it was said by Dyer, that if partition be made by the Sheriff, although
the Writ be not returned, yet it is good enough, and none of the parties shall
except against it, and so was the better opinion concerning the Estate of
Culpeper and Navall in the County of Kent.

Sutton brought a Writ of Ravishment of a Ward against Robinson, wherein it was
resolved by Dyer, Carus, Weston, and Benlowes, That if the Tenant enfeoff his
Lord and others, all the Seigniory is extinct: also if the Tenant does infeoff
the Lord but of a Moiety, yet is all the Seigniory extinct: And Dyer said, that
if the Tenant does infeoff the Lord and a stranger to the use of another and
his Heirs, and makes Livery to the stranger, this is no extinguishment of the
Seigniory, but if the Livery were made to the Lord, it is otherwise; and yet is
the possession instantly carried away to the stranger by the Statute of 2 H.
7.13.

A man seized of lands devises the same to his Wife, to dispose and employ them
for her self and her Son, according to her will and pleasure.

Dyer, Weston, and Walson held that the Wife had a Fee-simple by the Intendment
of the Will, and the Estate is conditional, for ea intention will make a
Condition in a Devise, but not in Grant, vide Dyer 2^.6.

A woman Tenant in tail makes a Lease for one and thirty years, and after
takes a Husband, who have issue, the Husband (being Tenant by the Courtesy)
surrenders, the Heirs does oust the Lessee, and the Lessee brings an Ejectment:
And it was held that the Surrender was good, and that the Privity was
sufficient.

Mich. 40 Eliz.
IN an Action of the Case for calling one Bastard; Dyer and Walsh said an
Action would lie, but Brown on the contrary, because it shall be tried in the
Spiritual Court. And Dyer said, That at Barwick Assizes a Formedon in the
Discender was brought, and one said, that his Father by whom he claimed was a
Bastard, and thereupon he brought an Action against him for those words, and
recovered.

Catlin said, That if Lands be given to a man and to the Heirs, he shall
engender on the body of an English woman, and he marries a French woman, and
she dies, and then he marries an English woman, that now this is a good Estate
in special tail.

Pasch. 7 Eliz.
THe Prior and Monks of the Charter House (before the dissolution) made a Lease
for four years, reserving the ancient rent of twenty five Quarters of Wheat
per annum, and then the house was surrendered into the hands of King Henry the
eighth, and then the Lord Chancellor did let the said rent of twenty five
Quarters of Wheat to I.S. for four and twenty years. And it came into question
between I.S. and the Termor, if this was warranted by the 27 H 8.28 Harper and
Portrell, it is not, for the Statute is, that they may make Leases of any
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments for one and twenty years, etc. and
this Wheat is neither Land, Tenement, nor Hereditament, but a Chattell, and
shall be demanded in an Action of debt. But the opinion of all the Court was,
that the Lease was good, and they did agree that it was directly within the
word Hereditaments, for it may descend or escheat, and the wife shall be
endowed thereof. Also upon a Lease of Corn a Rent may be referved, for a man
may reserve a Rent upon a Lease of a Rent, and the Rent is not parcel of the
Reversion, but only incident thereunto, and the Lessor has the same
inheritance therein as he has in the Reversion.

Trin. 7 Eliz.
AN assurance was made to a woman, to the intent it should be for her Ioynture,
but it was not so expressed in the Deed. And the opinion of the Court was, that
it might be averred that it was for a Ioynture, and that such averment was not
traversable; and so was it in the case between the Queen and Dame Beaumont.

Winter brought an Action of the Case against Barnam for these words; viz. Thou
Murderer: Dyer and Walsh said, that the Action would lie, for there are some
words that cannot be qualified, as Murderer, Thief, Extortioner, false Knave,
and in such Case an Action will lie, but contrary where such words are spoken
in a jesting way.

Note by Dyer, that the Lord Fitz-James, late Lord chief Justice of England,
did devise his land to Nicholas Fitz-James in tail, with diverse remainders
over, and in the same devise he devised diverse Jewels and pieces of Plate, viz.
the use of them to the said Nicholas Fitz-James, and the Heirs Males of his
body. In this case it was the opinion of the Court, that the said Nicholas had
no property in the said plate, but only the use and occupation. And the same
Law where the Devise was that his Wife should inhabit in one of his houses
which he had for term of years, during her life, because the Wife takes no
interest in the term, but only an occupation and usage, out of which the
Executors cannot eject her during her life, but Walsh held the contrary.

Hill. 8 Eliz.
IF a Bishop make a Lease for years the second of May, and the Dean and Chapter
confirm it the first of May, this is a good Lease after the Bishops death by
Catlin and Southcote.

Wray, How can a Lease be confirmed before it be made. Catlin and Southcote,
The assent before is a good confirmation after.

Hill. 40 Eliz.
AN Obligation wanted these words, In cujus rei Testimonium, and yet adjudged
to be good, 7 H. 7.14. Dyer 19 A.

It was said by Catlin in the Star Chamber, that if an Infant being a Feme
Covert, or other Infant does levy a Fine by grant and render to her or him in
tail, or for life, and the Husband dye, the Wife shall not have a Writ of
Error, because she is Tenant of the land, and she cannot have a Writ of Error
against her self, so that she is without remedy, so in the case of the other
Infant.

Cardell, Master of the Rolls, in the case between Stinkley and Chamberlain
said, that when Executors had Goods of their Testator, to dispose of to pious
uses, they cannot forfeit them, for that they have them not to their own use,
but their power is subject to the controlement of the Ordinary, and the
Ordinary may make distribution of them to pious uses. And it was said at the
Bar, that the Ordinary might make the Executors account before him, and to
punish them according to the Law of the Church if they spoil the Goods, but
cannot compel them to employ them to pious uses.

Hill. 28 Eliz.
IN an Action of Slander, the words were, Thou art an arrant Whore and had
the French Pox. It was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the words were not
actionable, because part of them relate to the time past, but by the Court
adjudged that the action is well brought, because it is a discredit to the
woman, and thereby others will shun her company.

Trin. 31 Eliz.
Inter Winter and Loveday.
IN this Case which was put by Coke, it was agreed, that a stranger as Cornwall
in this Case was, could not tender the money to be paid upon the Mortgage, for
it ought to be one who has interest in the land: and so was it in the 28 H. 8.
between Whaydon and Ashford, where the Mother ought to have made the tender for
her Son within age, and because it did not appear within the Verdict what age
the Infant was, whether he was of the age of fourteen years, or more, so that
his Mother could be Guardian to him by reason of his Nurture or not, It was
awarded that she could not make a loyal tender.

In an Assumpsit for a hundred pounds, the case was; That the Defendant in
consideration of a French Crown given him by the Plaintiff, did assume and
promise, that if he did not such an act before such a time, that then, etc. It
was moved by Godfrey, that the Plaintiff can only recover so much as he is
damnified by the French Crown: and the like case was before the Chancellor,
where a Gentlewoman took the death of her Husband so heavily, that she said,
she would never marry again; and her Son comforted her, and said, God will
provide a new Husband, and said, that he would give her ten pounds to pay a
hundred, when she should marry, which money she accepted of, and then the Son
brought an Assumpsit for the hundred pounds within half a year after she
married. And the matter was brought into the Chancery: And the Master of the
Rolls awarded ten pounds only, and said, he would give never a penny more,
because it was unreasonable to bar a Gentlewoman from marriage.

The Lord Rich was seized of Hadley Park, and of all the Tithes thereof, and
paid for the Tithes but one Buck in the Summer, and a Do in the Winter for
thirty years past. The Park was disparked and turned into arrable land, and the
Parson would not receive this Fee Buck and Do, but would have tithe Corn, and
thereupon brought him into the Spiritual Court, and he brought a Prohibition.
And Carus and Catlin said, that he need not pay other Tithes but Buck and Do,
for although they be not tythable, yet may they be paid by composition, and he
may not take them, but they are to be delivered to him: and in like manner
Partridges and Pheasants in a Garden are not tythable, yet may they be paid in
lieu of Tithes, and shall be brought dead to the Parson, and although there be
no Park, yet may he give a Buck out of another Park, and perhaps it may be made
a Park again.

Mich. 13, and 14 Eliz.
NOte* it was said by Dyer, that an Adminiscrator durante Minoritate, cannot
bring an Action of debt, for he is but as a Servant or Bailiff in such cases.

A Devise was made to the Major, Chamberlain, and Governors of the Hospital
of Saint Bartholmews: whereas they were Incorporate by another name, yet the
Devise held good by Dyer, Weston, and Manwood, for it shall be taken according
to the intent of the Devisor: And Weston said, that a Devise to A.B. a man's
eldest Son is good, although his name be not B. because the other words do make
a sufficient certainty.

It was said, That by the Grant Panagium Hoggs may eat the grass, but if a man
grant his Acrons, the Grantee must gather them; and where Panagium is granted
the Grantee may put in his Hoggs into the place granted.

If Tenant for years hold over his term, he is Tenant at sufferance, and his
descent shall not take away entry: But if Tenant for term of another life
holds over his term, he is an Intruder, and his descent shall take away
entry. Quod fuit concessum per Dyer.

A Court Baron may be holden at any place within the Manor, but not out of the
Manor, and so a Leete may be held in any place within the Liberty and
Franchise, and although no Court has time out of mind been holden within the
Manor, yet it is not thereby lost, for it is incident to a Manor of common
right, Coke L. 4.26.6.27. A.

Mich. 14, and 15 Eliz.
AN account was brought by Tottenham against Bedingfeild, who pleaded Ne unques
son Baily pur account render.

Gaudy prayed the opinion of the Court if the Action would lie. And the Case
was thus.

The Plaintiff had a Lease of a Parsonage, and the Defendant, not being Lessee,
nor claiming any interest, took the Tithes being set forth, and carried them
away. If the Lessor may have an account against such Trespassor, was the
question.

Manwood Justice, An Account will not lie because there is no privity, and
wrongs are always without privity, yet I will grant that if H. receive my
Rents, I may have an account against him, for my assent to have him receive it
makes a privity, and when he has received the Rent, he has not committed any
wrong against me, because it is not my money till it is paid: and therefore in
this case I may resort to my Tenant, and compel him to pay the Rent to me
because the receipt is no wrong: But it is otherwise in the first case, for when
the Tithes are set forth, they are presently in the possession of the Parson,
so that when the Defendant takes them, he is a wrong Seisor of them, and
therefore no account will lie against him. And so was it adjudged in a case of
a Manor in London, where one under color of a Devise did occupy the Land for
twenty years, which Will afterward was made void; and thereupon he to whom the
right of the land belonged brought an account, and it was adjudged that it
would not lie.

Harper, An Account will lie against a Procter, so that the Plaintiff may
charge him as Procter, and it is no plea for him to say he is no Procter, no
more then it is for a Guardian in Socage to say, he is not Prochein amy.

Dyer, there are three Actions of Account. One against a Baily, another against
a Receiver, the third against a Guardian in Socage. And if an Account be
brought against a man as Receiver, he must be charged with the receipt of the
money: but if the Defendant pretends he is Owner of it, it is contrary to the
nature of an account, and therefore he is not chargable in such Action, but he
may plead Ne unque son Baily pur account render: for in an Account (as my
Brother Manhood said) there must be privity: But an Abator or an Intruder shall
not be charged in an Account, because they pretend to be Owners. But in this
case the Lessee may have an Action of Trespass against him, for the Tithes
were immediately upon the setting forth in the possession of the Lessee, and by
the Statute of the 31 H. 8.7. he may have an Ejectione firmae: but an account
will not lie in this case.

Mich. 14 Eliz.
TEnant in Dower commits Waste, and the Waste was assigned in this Case, that
the Lessee had destroyed a hundred Does of the Plaintiffs, whether this was
Waste or no, was the question.

Dyer, I think it no Waste, unless she had destroyed all the Deer.

Manwood, If a Lessee of a Pigeon house destroy all the old Pigeons, except one
or two, yet it is a Waste, and so is this, although all be not destroyed.

Mich. 15 Eliz.
A Man is indebted by Obligation in a hundred pounds to a Testator, this
Obligation is not Assets in the hands of the Executors until it be recovered
by them, because it is but a Chose in Action; but if in such case the Executor
release the Debt now he has determined the Action, and has made it Assets in
his hands to the whole value of the Bond.

Bliss against Stafford.
MArgaret Bliss who was in Remainder after an Estate in tail, did bring an
Action on the case against Edward Strafford, for standring her Title in
affirming that A. had issue one B. who is alive, and the Defendant pleaded not
guilty, and the Action adjudged good by all: But did abate for an exception to
the Count.

Pasch. 13 Eliz.
UPon the Statute of Recusancy made the 29. of Elizabeth, Thomas Salherd and
Henry Evered being committed of Recusancy, for not paying twenty pounds for
every month, a Commission was awarded to enquire of their Goods and Lands in
Suffolk to levy the said Debt; and amongst other Lands certain Copyhold Lands
were seized, and being returned, the parties came in, and by way of plea did
set forth, that some of their Lands seized were Copyhold, and did pray Quod
manus Dominae Reginae amoveantur, and hereupon the Queens Attorney demurred;
upon which the question was, if Copyhold Lands were within the said Statute of
the 29 Eliz.

Snagge, The Lands and Hereditaments which the Statute speaks of, are such as
are known by the Common Law, and not by Custom, for it I grant all my Lands
and Hereditaments in D. my Copyhold lands will not pass: so that it seems to
me Copyholds are not within the Statute.

Popham contra. If Copyhold Lands are not within the Statute, some persons
shall be free; and he held that Lands in ancient Demesne were within the
meaning of the Statute, although not within the words: and he agreed, that
where a Grant is made of all my Lands and Tenements in D. that Copyhold Lands
pass not, because they cannot pass by such assurance, and that Copyhold Lands
were not within the Statute of Bankrupts, if they be not particularly
expressed, and a Copyhold cannot pass by grant but by surrender. But after
great debate it was adjudged, that Copyhold Lands are not within the Statuto by
reason of the prejudice that may come thereby to the Lord, who has not
committed any Offense, and therefore shall not loose his Customs and Services.

Trin. 30 Eliz.
IN the Case of Viscount Bindon, it was holden that if a man has Judgment in
Debt upon an Obligation and no execution, yet he may commence another Action
upon the same Obligation, but otherwise of Contract, 9 Ed. 4.51.

A question was moved, that if a man grants Vesturam terrae what does pass:
and it was said by Clerk, that one man may have the Vesture and another the
Soil. Lord chief Baron, he who has Vestura^ terrae cannot dig the Land: And if
many have a Meadow together, viz. to be divided amongst them every year by lots
how much every one shall have of grass in such a place, and how many in such a
place, and so to change every year according to the lots, they have not a
Freehold, but only vesturam terrae, Dyer 285.6.14. H. 7.4. and 6. 21 H. 7.37.
Dyer 375.6. 13 H. 6.13. 14 H. 8.6.

In the Case of a Dean and Chapter, the question was, that if Lessee for years
be rendering Rent with clause of re-entry for non-payment, and then the
Reversion or Rent be extended by a Statute, or seized into the hands of the
King for debt, if the Lessee shall pay the Rent according to the extent, and no
breach of the Condition although he pay not the Lessor. And the chief Baron
held it was no breach of the Condition, because he is now compellable to pay it
according to the extent.

Caltons Case.
IT was moved by Sergeant Fenner, and agreed by all the Barons, that if the
King make a Lease to A. rendering Rent, and there the Lessee lets parcel
hereof, rendering Rent, in this case the second Lessee shall not have the
privilege of the Exchequer to fly thither to be sued concerning this Land,
because that by such means all the causes in England, may be brought into the
Exchequer, and hereupon Fenner said, that he had demurred upon a Bill exhibited
into the Exchequer Chamber by such a Lessee, and prayed the Court that he might
not answer, and he was thereupon dismissed.

Upon not guilty pleaded, the parties joined issue, and after evidence given,
and the Jury dismissed from the Bar, some of them had Apples, and Figgs, whereof
the Court taking notice when they came to give their Verdict, did examine them
upon their Oaths, and they who had eaten were fined five pounds, and committed
to the Fleet. And some of the Justices did doubt if the Verdict were good; and
upon many Presidents had, it was adjudged good: and they relied much on the
President of the 12 H. 8. Rot. 102. where one of the Jury did eat before they
were agreed, and yet the Verdict was good: And after a Writ of Error was
brought, and the Judgment affirmed, 20 H. 7.3. 13 H 4.13.

Pasch. 27 Eliz.
A Man gives land to I.S. in the Premises, Habendum to him and three others
for their lives, Et eorum diutius viventium successive: The question was, what
Estate I.S. had, and whether there be any occupancy in the case.

Coke h^ld, that I.S. had but an Estate for his own life, because he cannot
have an Estate for his own and another life, where the interest of both begin
at one instant, and the Habendum by no means can make a Remainder; as if a
Lease be made to one for life, habendum to him and his first begotten Son, this
makes no remainder to the Son, although some have held to the contrary: so of a
Lease to one for years, habendum to him and another, does not make any
remainder to the other: also the word, Successive, will not make a remainder,
as in the 30 H 8. Br. Joynt-tenant 53. Also one cannot have an Estate for life,
and for another life also in present interest, for the greater does drown the
less, but if the greater be present and the other future, as a Lease to him
for life, the remainder to him for another life, or a Lease for life and three
years over, this is good; but if a Lease be made for life and for years, the
Lease for years is drowned, 19 Ed. 3. Surrender 8. where Tenant for life of a
Manor did surrender to him in the Reversion, etc.

Gaudy, If a Lease be made to one for life, and so long as another shall live,
quaere, what Estate he has.

And as to the second point, certainly there cannot be an Occupancy, for if the
Estate be void, the Limitation is void; also the Occupancy is pleaded Que un
tiel, and does not say, Claymant comme occupant, etc. for if a man comes a
hawking on Land, he is not an Occupant, and the Book of Entries is, that he
ought to plead it.

Clinch Justice, every Occupant ought to be in possession at the time of the
death of the Tenant, for otherwise the Law casts the Interest upon him in the
Reversion. But Gaudy and Chute denied this: and after, viz. 29 Eliz. the Case
was moved again by Popham, and he made three points. 1. If the other three had
a joint Estate. 2. If they had a Remainder. 3. If there be an Occupancy.
And he was of opinion that they had nothing by the habendum, for they were not
named in the Premises, and they cannot have a Remainder for the incertainty,
but if those three had been named in the Premises, habendum to them
Successive, as they had been named, there they had a Remainder, for there the
certainty appeared, 30 H. 8.8. Dyer 361. Also there can be no Occupancy during
the lives of the other three: but he agreed to the Book of the 18 Ed. 3.34.
that a Lease for life, the Remainder to him for another life was good: And
that if a Lease be made to I.S. and a Monk, it is void to the Monk, and the
other has all, and that during the life of the Monk there can be no Occupancy.
And if I make a Lease to I. S. for the life of a Monk, it is a good Lease: And
till the same term Judgment was given, that they could take nothing in
possession jointly, nor by way of Remainder, and that no Occupancy could be in
the Case, and that I.S. had Estate for term of his own life only.

Style against Miles.
Style Parson did suggest that the Land was parcel of the Glebe of the
Parsonage, and that the said Style did let the said Glebe, being four and
twenty acres to Miles for years, rendering thirteen shillings four pence Rent;
and in a Prohibition the case was, if Tithes were to be paid. And Wray said,
that although it was parcel of the Glebe, yet when it was leased out Tithes
ought to be paid, and if no Rent be reserved, Tithes ought to be paid without
question: but there may be a doubt where the Rent is reserved to the true value
of the Land; but here the Rent is of small value, wherefore Tithes shall be
paid also. And the Reservation of the Rent was Pro omnibus exactionibus and
demandis; yet the Justices took no regard of those words. But Godfrey said,
that those words would discharge him; but Wray on the contrary, for that this
Tithe is not issuing out of the Land, but is a thing collateral, and if a
Parson do release to his Parishioners all demands in the Land, yet Tithes are
not thereby released, for such general words will not extend to such a
special matter. And in the 15 of R. 2. Avowry 99. one held of another by ten
shillings for all Services, Suits, and Demands; yet the Tenant shall pay
Relief, because it is incident to the Rent, and 8 Ed. 3.26.

Mich. 29 Eliz. Rot. 2574. or, 2375.
Stephens against Layton.
IN an Ejectione firmae upon issue joined, the case in a special Verdict was,
that a Lease by Indenture was made by William Beale to one William Pyle and
Philip his Wife and primogenito habend. to them, and diutius eorum viventi
successive for term of their lives, and then the Husband and Wife had issue a
Daughter: The question was, if the Daughter had any Estate. And three Justices
held that she had no Estate, because she was not in being at the time of the
Lease made, and a person that is not in esse cannot take any thing by Livery,
for Livery ought to carry a present Estate, where the Estate is not limited by
way of Remainder, 18 Ed. 3.3 17 Ed. 3.29, and 30. adjudged: but it was said at
the Bar, that if the Estate had been conveyed by way of use, it is otherwise.
And the said Justices held clearly that the word Successive, would not alter
the case: And the case was further found, that William Beale and Sampson Beale
did covenant with one Lendall, that if Tho. Beale Son of Sampson Beale, should
marry Margaret the Daughter of the said Lendall (if she would assent) and also
that the said Lendall did covenant that the said Margaret should marry the said
Thomas (if he would assent) Pro quo quidem Maritagio sic tum postea habendo,
the said William Beale covenanted, that he would make, or cause to be made an
Estate to the said Thomas and Margaret, and to the Heirs of their bodies for
the Ioynture of the said Margaret, and it was further found, that afterward a
Fine was levied between the said Thomas and Margaret Plaintiffs and Sampson
Beale and William Beale Deforceants, Qui quidem finis fuit ad usus and
intentiones in Indentura praedict. specificat, by force whereof the said Thomas
and Margaret were seized: but the Jury found nothing of the Marriage, whether
it took effect or not; and further found that William Pile and Philip his Wife
had Primogenitam prolem a Daughter, and then died, and then Thomas Beale died,
and his Wife inter married with one Lamock, who made a Lease to the Plaintiff,
who was ousted by Layton the Lessee of Philip Pile. And hereupon it was moved
by Gaudy Sergeant, that inasmuch as the Marriage took no effect between Thomas
and Margaret, the uses cannot be in them, but the Fine shall be to the use of
the Conusor, which was opposed by Walshey Sergeant, who said, that it was not
like a Covenant in consideration of marriage to stand seized of such a Manor,
for there if the considerations fail, the uses fail also, for the
consideration only is the sole and entire cause that makes the uses to arise:
but in this case the consideration is not material, but the Fine effectual,
without consideration of money paid: and if a Feoffment be made to the use of I
S. although no money be paid, yet I.S. shall have the Land.

Windham, The Cases differ much, for here the Fine is not expressed to be levied
to the use of Thomas and Margaret, but to the uses and consents contained in
the Indenture: but he said, that the common course was to limit the use to the
Conusor, until the Marriage took effect, and after, as before was urged by
Walmsley. And the Jury found that Thomas and Margaret, were seized accordingly.

Winham, They are no Judges to determine doubts in Law.

Rhodes Justice, Herein they have taken notice but of the matter in fact, and
he affirmed the difference put by Walmsley.

Windham, The case de matrimon: praelocut: is stronger then this Case, for the
secret intention shall reduce the Land, if the marriage take no effect. And
after (the Court being full) they all agreed to the difference put by Walmsley,
and also that the sale afterward was not good by reason of this Limitation.
And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff accordingly.

Hill. 26 Eliz.
Britman against Stanford.
UPon a special Verdict, the Case was. A House, Stable, and Hayloft were
demised to one for years, rendering four and twenty pounds Rent per annum, and
four and twenty pounds for an In-come, quarterly by equal portions, upon
Condition that if any of the Rent, or In-come be behind at the time it ought to
be paid, that then the Lease shall cease and determine. The Lessee makes a
Lease of the Stable to the Lessor, and after part of the In-come is behind and
unpaid, and the Lessor enters for the Condition broken, into the house: And if
this was a good entry, was the question. And Judgment was given that the
Condition was gone and void, by reason of the Lessors taking part of the thing
demised, because a Condition is special and entire, and not to be severed. And
in this Case Fenner said, that a Grantee of a Reversion cannot take benefit of
a collateral Condition, as in case of a gross sum, but in case of a Rent,
waste, etc. it was otherwise.

Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 2529.
Doctor Lewin against Monday.
IN a Replevin by Lewin against Monday, it was found by Verdict, That a Fine
was levied the 14th. of Elizabeth, between Lowla and Rutland, Plaintiffs, and
Fook and seven others Deforceants of the Manors of Gollochall, whereby the
Defendant did grant the Manor to the Plaintiffs, and the Heirs of one of
them, who granted and rendered twenty pounds per annum to the said Fook and his
Heirs, with a Distress for non-payment. Fook seized of the Rent, makes a
grant to a stranger in this manner; That whereas a Fine was levied the 14. of
Eliz. of the Manor aforesaid, and diverse other lands, etc. and mistook the
Manor, for he put the names of the Conusees in place of the Conusors, and so e
contra, and that it was levied of the Manor, and diverse other lands, whereas
the Fine was levied of the Manor solely; and that he did grant the said Rent
granted unto him to the said stranger and his Heirs: And this grant was
adjudged by Anderson who said, that if one recite that he has ten pounds of
the grant of I.S. whereas it was of the grant of I.D. yet it is good.

Hill. 30 Eliz. Rot. 17.32.
Hunts Case.
HUnt brought an Action on the Case against Torney, and declared that he being
seized of lands in Swainton in Norf. in fee, Secundum consuetudinem Mannerii;
the Defendant did promise to the Plaintiff, in consideration the Plaintiff
would permit him to occupy the same for the space of five years, that he would
pay him at the Feast of All Saints next coming, and so yearly twenty pounds at
the Feasts of the Annunciation, and All Saints by equal Portions, during the
term aforesaid, and alleged that he had enjoyed the lands by the space of a
year and half, and so brought his Action on the Assumpsit. And Anderson was of
opinion that until the five years were expired, no money was to be paid,
because the Contract was entire. But all the other Justices on the contrary,
for the consideration was to pay a certain sum yearly, which made several
duties and so several Actions. For by Periam, if a man be bound to pay I.S.
twenty pounds in manner and form following, viz. ten pounds at such a day, and
ten pounds at such a day, in this case the Obligee cannot have an Action of
Debt for the first, before the day of payment of the last ten pounds be past,
because the duty in it self is an entire duty, but if a man be bound to pay
I.S. ten pounds at such a day, and ten pounds at such a day, here the Obligee
shall have his Action for the first, because the duty was in it self several.

Anderson at another day said, that if a man makes a Lease for ten years,
rendering Rent, in that case he may have an Assumpsit for the Rent due every
year: So if I covenant with you to build you twenty houses, the Covenantee
shall have a several action for each default.

Periam, That Case of the Assumpsit is much to the purpose, for an Assumpsit is
in the nature of a Covenant, and is indeed a Covenant without writing.

Rhodes cited this Case. Gascoigne promised in consideration of a marriage of
his Daughter with such a man's Son, to give seven hundred marks, and to pay a
hundred marks every year, until all the sunun were paid, and it was held
clearly in this Court, that a several action might be brought upon every
hindered pounds, but because the action was brought for all the seven hundred
marks before the seven years were out, Judgment was given against him, for if a
man be bound in a Bond of a hundred pounds to pay twenty pounds for so many
years, he shall not have an Action of Debt until the last year expired. And
after Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. viz. Mich. 29. Eliz. Rot. 2248.

28 Eliz.
Between Sticklehorne and Hatchman.
ADjudged by the Court, that if for not scouring of a Ditch or Mote, the
Groundsells of the house are putrified, or Trees cut down which are in defense
of the house, whereby the house by tempests is blown down, Waste shall be
assigned in Domibus pro non Scourando, etc.

IN an Ejectione firmae, Broker Prothenotary said, that where the title of him
in the Reversion is not disclosed in pleading, nor comes in question, aid
shall not be granted.

Pasch. 28 Eliz. in C. B.
Yardley against Pescan.
THe Queen seized of an Advowson being void, the Ancestor of Pescan presented,
and so gained it by usurpation, and then the Church being void, he presented
again, and his Clark is now dead, and then the Queen grants the Advowson to
Yardley the Plaintiff, and he brings a Quare Impedit in the name of the Queen,
supposing that this usurpation did not put the Queen out of possession, and it
was argued that the Grant could not pass without special words, because it is
of the nature of a Chose in Action, and this was moved the last term, and then
Dyer, Meade, and Windham held that this usurpation did gain possession out of
the Queen, and that she should be put to her Writ of Right of Advowson, and now
this term Fenner moved the case again, and the opinion of Anderson that was
the chief Justice of the Common Pleas, was clearly, that the Queen was not out
of possession, for he said, that it was a rule in our Books, that of a thing
which is of Inheritance, the act of a common person will not put the Queen out
of possession, but if she had but a Chattell, as the next Advowson, then
perhaps it is otherwise: But Meade, and Windham held very earnestly the
contrary, and they relied on the Book of 18 Ed. 3.15. where Shard said, that if
the King had an Advowson in his own right, and a stranger who had no right did
happen to present, that put the King out of possession. And the King shall be
put to his Writ of Right, as others shall. vide 47 Ed. 3.14 B. 18 Ed. 3.16. The
Defendant there did allege two Presentiments in his Ancestor after the Title of
the King, and demanded Judgment if the King should have a Writ of possession,
and the plea was admitted to be good; but after Pasch. 25 Eliz. Judgment was
given for the Queen, for that she might very well maintain a Quare Impedit, and
the two Presentiments did not put her out of possession.

31 Eliz. Rot. 211.
SIr Robert Rowley made the Lord Keeper Sir Robert Catlin, and the Master of
the Rols, his Executors, and did devise a term to Sir Robert Catlin, and died:
and they writ their Letters to the Ordinary, certifying that they were made
Executors, but that they could not attend the executing of the Executorship,
and therefore they required him to commit the Administration to the next of
kin, ut lex postulat. The Ordinary enters in the Register, Quia Executors
praedicti per testamentum praedictum distulerunt, etc. and thereupon committed
the Administration over: Afterward the Lord Catlin received the Rent of the
Farm, and after granted it to a stranger; The Administrator ousted the Lessee,
and he brings an Ejectment. And if this writing was a refusal in the
Executors, or not, was the question: And it was said by Ford Doctor of the
Civil Law, that it was a refusal, and he said, that if Legatees being
Executors do refuse to prove the Will, yet by the Civil Law they shall have
their Legacies. But adjudged by the Court, that if Legatees do refuse to prove
the Testament, that by the Common Law they have no remedy for their Legacies,
for by the refusal there is a dying Intestate, and then nothing could be
devised; and also, said, that this Writing was a refusal of the Executors, so
that the Ordinary might presently commit Administration, and therefore Sir
Robert Catlin could take nothing as Legatee.

Pasch. 31 Eliz.
THe Array of a Pannell was challenged, because the Sheriff was Cousin to the
Plaintiff, and upon a Traverse it was found that they were Cosins, but not in
such manner as the Defendant had alleged; and per curiam the Array was quasht,
for the manner is not material, but whether he be a Cousin, or not, 18 H. 6.18.

Pasch. 31 Eliz.
IT was resolved in the case of Miles against Snowball, that if the Sheriff
return one who has no Freehold, yet he shall be sworn in the Jury, if he be
not challenged by the parties: And after upon the evidence it was moved, If a
woman make a Deed of Feoffment to several persons, of a house and land,
wherein she her self inhabiteth, and is seized, and delivers the Deed to the
Feoffers, without saying any thing, if this be a good Feoffment: of which
Periam doubted, because she did inhabit there all the time, but if it were of
other lands on which she did not dwell, and she comes there to make Libery, and
delivers the Deed upon the land and says no words, yet is this a good
Feoffment, because she comes thither to malte Livery.

Anderson, The Feoffment in this case is good, for if she has an intent to
make Livery, the delivery of the Deed is good Livery, Quod Periam and tota
Curia concesserunt, if she had intended to make Livery, vide Co. lib. 6 26. and
lib. 9.136. Dyer 192.

Pasch. 31 Eliz.
A Woman brought an Action of Debt as Administratrix to another, the Defendant
pleaded that the Plaintiff was an Alien born in Gaunt, under the obedience or
Philip King of Spain, the Queens enemy. And Walmsley moved for the Plaintiff
that this was no plea, because that the recovery is to another use: but the
Court was against him, for the Court will not suffer that any enemy shall take
advantage of our Law; and then he moved that that King was no enemy, because
Wars were not proclaimed. But Anderson said, that a more open enemy then King
Philip cannot be, who had conspired the death of the Queen, and had endeavored
to invade the Realm, and subvert the State: which Windham granted; but Periam
haerebat aliquantulum whether he could be called enemy in law before such
proclamation. But Walmsley said, that the plea was that the woman was born
under the obedience of the Emperor, who was in amity with the Queen, and the
Court replied, Plead as you will abide by it.

Pasch. 13 Eliz.
IN a trespass of Assault and Battery, the Plaintiff declared to his damages
of twenty pounds, and the Jury found for the Plaintiff, and gave thirty pounds
damages, And by the Court the Plaintiff shall recover no more then he has
declared for, and this ought to be done of course by the Clarks, 2 H. 6.7.8 H.
6.4.42. Ed. 3.7.

Mich. 30. and 31 Eliz. Rot. 610.
Bond against Richardson.
In Debt, the Defendant pleaded payment at the day, and gave in evidence
payment at another day, before the day of payment, and so was it found by the
Jury in a special Verdict. And Anderson said, We are all agreed that Judgment
shall be given against the Plaintiff, for payment before the day, is payment at
the day, and Judgment was given that the Plaintiff should be barred.

Willis against Whitewood.
A Man was seized of lands in Socage, and made a Lease for years by Paroll, and
died, and his wife was Guardian in Socage to his Son, and the Lessee accepted
of a new Lease by Deed of the Guardian in Socage, and then the Guardian died,
and a new Guardian entered, and outed the Lessee; and if the second Guardian
could do this, was the question.

Anderson, It cannot be a surrender, for a Guardian, has no Estate that may be
surrendered, but it is an extinguishment of the Lease; and if a Woman Guardian
in Socage takes Husband^, and dies, the Husband shall not be Guardian in Socage.

Almeskey against Johnson.
JOhnson had a second deliverance returned, which was returned Averia
eloigniata, etc. whereupon he prayed a Withernam of the Cattle of the
Plaintiff, and it was granted; and then came the Plaintiff and satisfied the
Defendant, his damages and charges, and praid a Writ of Restitution to have his
Cattle again taken in Withernam.

Fleetwood, Cattle taken in Withernam are not repleiditable, how then can you
have your Cattle, and then we shall not be paid for the meat. And the Court
held, that the Cattle were not repleivisable, but for satisfaction of damages
he shall have restitution of the Cattle, and so is the course, which was
confirmed by the Clarks. And Walmesley cited 16 H. 6. Replevi^ to warrant this:
And as to the meat, he had the use of the Cattle, whereby it was reason he
should sustain them: And a Writ of Restitution was granied.

Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz.
IN case of a Farmer of Dame Lineux Manwood, it was said, that the Order called
the Cistrenses Order, have a privilege that they should pay no Tithes for the
lands that Proprils manibus excolunt: but if they let it to Farmers, then they
were to pay Tithes, and now comes the Statute of Monasteries 31 H. 8. If the
Queen should pay Tithes, was the question. And it was said, that the Queen, and
her Farmers also should hold the land discharged of Tithes, as well as the
particular persons of the Order should, for the King cannot be a Husband, and
therefore his Farmers shall hold the land discharged, so long as the King has
the Freehold in him, although he make a Lease thereof for years, at will, but
to if the King sell the land to another, or the reversion to another, then the
Farmers shall pay Tithes.

Mich. 31 Eliz.
IT was said by the Barons in the case of one Beaumont, that a Debt which is
not naturally a Debt in it self, but a Debt only by circumstance may be
assigned to the Queen. As where a man is bound in a Bond to save another
harmless, and fails thereof, the Obligation may be assigned to the Queen. But
in such case a present extent shall not be awarded but the Process shall be
only a Scire facias against the party, to see if he has any thing to plead
against it, which note well.

And where a man recovers damages in an Action on the case, parcel of the
damages cannot be assigned to the King before execution, for he must bring a
Scire facias upon such Record. And Manwood chief Baron held clearly that a
moyely hereof could not be assigned over, 22 H. 6.47.

One was indicted of Treason at S. Edmundsbury, Coram Justiciariis ad diversas
felonias, etc. audiendas, and after the Indictment made mention of Bury, and
did not say praedict. and by the opinion of the Justices the Judgment was
quasht.

Trin. 30 Eliz.
AN Action of the Case was brought against one Gilbert, for saying that the
Plaintiff was a Suitor to a Widow in Southwark, and that he consened her of her
money in procuring false witnesses to consen her: And a Verdict found for the
Plaintiff. And in Arrest of Judgment it was said, that in the case of Kerby it
was adjudged that Cousener will not bear Action, and so was it adjudged in
this case.

Moss against Read.
THe Defendant called him Thief, and thou forgest a Deed; and a Verdict was
found for the Plaintiff: and in Arrest of Judgment, it was said, that Thief
generally, without saying of what nature specially, will not bear Action. But
Wray chief Justice denied that, and said that it had of late been adjudged to
the contrary; and Gaudy against him. But as to the words, that he had forged a
Deed, adjudged that the Action will lie, although it be not specially alleged
what manner of Deed was forged.

Pasch. 32 Eliz.
COllings informed upon the Statute of buying of Tithes against Robert Davyes
and Stock: And it was said by Periam, that although the words of the Statute be
Pro termino diversorum annorum, yet if a Lease be made but for one year, yet is
it within the penalty of the Statute.

Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz.
CRipps brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Canterbury, and others,
and declared upon a Grant of the next avoidance, and the Defendant demanded
Oyer of the Deed, and the Plaintiff showed a Letter which was written by his
Father to the true Patron, by which he had writ to his Father that he had given
to his Son that was the Plaintiff the next avoidance; and upon this there was a
Demur. And the whole Court for the Demur, for that such Letter was a mockery,
for the Grant was not good without Deed: and Judgment was given accordingly.

In Tymbermans Case it was said, that if a Sheriff took one in Execution by
force of a Capias, although he return not the Writ, yet an Action of Debt will
lie against him upon an escape; and Periam said it had been so adjudged.

Katherine Gilham brought an Ejectment as Administratrix to her Husband, Quare
determino eject. and bona and catalla sua ibidem inventa cepit etc. and a
Verdict for the Plaintiff, and it was alleged in Arrest of Judgment, that this
word Sua shall not be intended her own Goods, and not the Testators. And the
Court was of opinion that Sua shall be intended in such manner as
Administrator, and no otherwise. And therefore Judgment was affirmed.

Mich. 31, and 32 Eliz.
Baldwin against Mortin.
USe to the Husband and Wife, habendum to the Husband for thirty years, the
Wife shall take nothing thereby, and this case was argued at the Bar and Bench,
and was called the Earl of Cumberlands case.

Fleetwood moved that an Action was brought against the Husband and his Wife,
and dit declare a trover of the Goods of the Plaintiff, by the Wife, which she
converted to her own use, and prayed that the Action might be against the
Husband only, because that the woman could not convert them to his own use
during the Coverture, but only to the Husbands use. And the opinion of the
Court was, that the Writ was good against them both, and that the conversion
was in nature of a Trespass, and so the Action would well lie.

Mich. 32. and 33 Eliz.
Kent against Wichall.
IN a Trespass Quare clausum fregit and herbam conculcavit, the Defendant
pleaded that he tendied sufficient amends to the Plaintiff. and he refused the
same, and demanded Judgment, etc. And upon a Demurrer, the opinion of the Court
was, that this is no plea in Trespass, but in a Replevin it is a good plea,
Sed non dierunt causam diversitatis, 21 H. 7.30.9 H. 7.22. F.N.B. 69. G. 31 H.
4.17.

Drew demanded of the Court, that whereas Edmund Leusage had bound himself in
an Obligation by the name of Edward Leusage, if this was good or not; and it
seemed to the Court Quod non est factum, and Anderson and Walmesley said
expressly that it was void, 34 H. 6.19 6. Dyer 279, 21 H. 7.8.

Sir John Arrundell and his Wife, brought a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of
Gloucester and others, who pleaded in Bar that William Sturton was seized of a
Manor to which the Advowson was appendant, and bound himself in a
Statute-merchant of two hundred pounds to one Long, and the Statute was
extended, and conveyed the interest of the Statute to one of the Defendants,
and then the Church became void: And by the Court the Advowson may be extended,
and if it become void during the Conusees Estate, the Conusee may present.

Note, it was said by the Justices of the Common Pleas, that if a man promise
another that he shall have a Lease in his land for eight years, or it is agreed
amongst themselves that one shall have a Lease of the others land for eight
years, that is no lease of the land, but only a Contract and Agreement; but
if one promise another that he shall have his land for eight years, or openly
agree that one shall have the others land for eight years, this is a good lease
for eight years by force of the agreement.

A. came before the Major of Lincoln, and acknowledged a Statute-merchant, and
the Seal of the Major was not put to it: and it was adjudged that the Statute
was not good, but a man may sue upon it as an Obligation, because the Seal of
the party is to it.

Pasch. 36 Eliz.
IN a Waste the Case was, that a Lessee for years purchased Trees growing upon
the land, and had liberty to cut them within eighty years, and after the said
Lessee purchased the inheritance of the land and devised it to his Wife for
life, the Remainder to the Plaintiff in see, and made his Wife Executrix, and
died, who after married with the Defendant, who cuts the Trees, whereupon the
Action is brought. And by opinion of all the Court the Action was maintainable,
for although the Trees were once Chattels, yet by the purchase of the
Inheritance they were united to the land: and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff accordingly.

Pasch. 36 Eliz.
UPon an Exigent, the Sheriff returned, that after Divine Service he made
proclamation, and did not say, that there was no Sermon: and therefore the
Judges held that the return was not good; for by the Statute, if there be a
Sermon in the Church, the Sheriff shall make his proclamations after the
Sermon, and if there be no Sermon, then after Divine Service: and because it
did not appear whether there were any Sermon or not, the opinion of the Court
was ut supra.

It was said that a man shall not aver against a Postea in the Kings Bench, or
the Common Pleas, to say that it was contrary to the Verdict, nor shall he be
received to say, that the Judges gave a Judgment, and the Clarks have entered it
contrary to their Judgment: but otherwise is it in Court Barons, or other base
Courts, not Courts of Record, 10 Ed. 3.40.

35, and 36 Eliz.
Newman against Beaumond.
IF the Ordinary grants the Administration of the Goods of B. to A. and after
grants the Administration to R. this second Grant is an appeal of the first,
without any further sentence of repeal, for the Administrator is but a servant
to the Ordinary, whom he may charge at any time.

In an Action of Debt on a Bond bearing date the nineth of July, the Defendant
pleaed a Release of all Actions the same day, usque diem dati ejusdem scripti,
and it was adjudged that the Obligation was not discharged, because the Release
does exclude the nineth day on which it was made.

Mich. 37, and 38 Eliz. Rot. 211.
Holman against Collins.
HOlman brought a Writ of Error against Collins, upon a Judgment given in the
Court of Plymmouth, in the County of Devon, the case was;

Collins was possessed of a piece of Ordnance, and in Consideration that he
would tender this to Holman for to put into his Ship which was then going to
Sea, and that Collins would stand to the hazard of losing it: The said Holman
did assume upon himself, and did promise to give Collins certain Goods which he
should gain by the Voyage, and after the said Ship did return laden with
certain Goods, and for non-satisfaction the said Collins brought his Action on
the Assumpsit, and had Judgment to recover. And Crook assigned these Errors;

1. That the Style of the Court was not good, for it was Curia Dominae Reginae
Burgi praedict. tent. coram Majori de Plymmouth, without saying, secundum
consuetudinem villae praedict. and he who is Judge of the Court, ought to be
either by Patent or Prescription, and then for not expressing the style of the
Court, nor by what authority they held their Court, it is error; and he cited
the case in the Lord Dyer 262. and a Judgment, 30 Eliz. Rot. 32. given in the
very point: Another Error was, that no day was prefixed for the Defendant to
appear, but generally ad proximam curiam, which is Error, although it be held
every monday. And for these Errors Judgment was reversed.

Trin. 28 Eliz. Rot. 948.
Mercer against Sparks.
MErcer had Judgment to recover against Sparks in the Common Pleas, upon an
Action of the Case for words; and Sparks brought a Writ of Error in the Kings
Bench, and assigned for Error, that the Plaintiff did not express in the
Declaration that the Defendant spoke the words malitiose, but it was adjudged,
that it was no Error, because the words themselves were malicious and
slanderous, wherefore Judgment was affirmed.

Savacres Case.
IT was adjudged in the Common Pleas, that if a Baron, or others mentioned in
the Statute of 21 H 8. take diverse Chaplains which have many benefices, and
after they discharge their. Chaplains from their Service, they shall retain
their Benefices during their lives, and if the Baron takes others to be his
Chaplains, they cannot take many Benefices during the lives of the others,
which are beneficed and discharged of their Services; for if the Law were
otherwise, the Lords might make any capable of holding Benefices by admitting
them to be their Chaplains.

In an Action of false Imprisonment brought against the Mayor, Citizens,
Sheriffs and Commonalty of Norwich; it was moved where the Issue should be
tried: And by the Court the Issue shall not be tried there; and in the same
case it was moved, whether the Sheriff could summon himself, and it was
answered by the Court that he could not: and Periam said that so it had been
after adjudged.

Mich. 29. and 30 Eliz.
IN an Avowry adjudged by the Court ( Anderson being absent) that in an Avowry
it is sufficient for the Avowant to say, Son Franktenement, but if the
Plaintiff traverse it, it is no plea without he makes to him a Title, and that
is the difference of pleading Son Franktenement, on the part of the Avowant,
and on the part of the Plaintiff. And Welson said, that so were all the
Presidents, that it is no plea to traverse the Bar in the Avowry, without
making Title: And Periam said, that it is no Title to plead De son seisin
demesne, but he must make out his Title Paramount, his Seisin Demesue.

Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz.
Bloss against Holman.
JOhn Bloss brought an Action of Trespass Quare vi and armis for taking of his
Goods, against Holman, and the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the Jury gave
a special Verdict, viz. That the Plaintiff at the time of the Trespass was of
the Mystery of the Mercers, and that at that time the Defendant was his
Servant, and put in trust to sell his Goods and Merchandises in Shopa sua,
ibidem de tempore in tempus, and that he took the Goods of the Plaintiff named
in the Declaration, and carried them away, and prayed the advice of the Court,
if the Defendant were culpable or not; and upon the Postea returned,
Shuttleworth prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff. And the doubt was because the
Declaration was Quare vi and armis, because it appeared that the Defendant had
custody of the Goods: but Shuttleworth doubted whether he had Custody, and
cited the case of Littleton, viz. If I give my Sheep to Compasture, etc. and he
kills them, an Action of trespass lies: and the Justices held that in this
case the Action did well lie; and Periam said, that the Defendant had only an
authority, and not custody or possession, and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, 3 H. 7.12.21 H. 7.14. And Windham said, that if he had imbezelld his
Masters Goods, without question it was felony. Quod fuit concessum, (Anderson
absente) and the Law will not presume that the goods were out of the possession
of the Plaintiff; and the next day came the Lord Anderson and rehearsed the
case, and said, that the Defendant had neither general nor special property
in the Goods, for it is plain, he could have no general property, and
special he had not, for he could not have an action of Trespass if they were
taken away, then if he had no property, a trespass lies against him, if he
take them; so if a Shepherd steal Sheep, it is felony, for he has no property
in them, wherefore he gave Judgment accordingly.

Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 1410.
Cook against Baldwin.
A Lease was mate for one and twenty years, to one Truepenny and Elizabeth, if
she, and he, or any Child, or Children between them lawfully begotten, should
so long live, and then they were married, and the Wise died without Issue. If
the Lease be determined or not, was the question. And it was moved that it was
determined, because it is conjunctive, if he and she, etc. and now one of them
is dead without issue, and it is not like the case of Chapman, where a man
covenants to enfeoff one and his Heirs, for it is impossible to enfeoff his
Heirs, he living, and therefore in that case it shall be taken for a
disjunctive: and if I make a Lease for years to two, if one of them dye, the
other shall have all, because they take by way of interest; but it a Lease be
made to two, during the life of one of them, if one dye, the Lease is gone.
Quod fuit concessum: And here the meaning is, that the Lease shall be
determined if one of them dye.

Rhodes Justice, The meaning is against you, for by the word (or) which comes
after, it appears that they are to have their lives in it.

Anderson, By the words it is plain, that after the death of one the Lease is
determined, and that which moves me to think it was so intended, is, because it
was intended (as it seems to me) to be a Ioynture for the wife, which was made
by them before marriage; and then if by the death of one it should be gone, and
she have nothing, could not be the meaning; To which the other Justices
assented. And all the Judges agreed that the Lease was not determined by the
death of one; and Judgment given accordingly.

Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz.
IN a Quare Impedit by Sir Thomas Gorge Knight, against the Bishop of Lincoln,
and Dalton Incumbent, the Case was; That a Manor with the Advowson appendant
was in the hands of the King, and the Church became void, and the King grants
the Manor with the Advowson: If the Grantee shall have the Presentation; or
the King, was the question. And all the Justices held clearly that the
avoidance would not pass, because it was a Chatiell vested. And Periam said,
that in case of a common person without question an Advowson appendant would
not pass by such Grant; for if the Father dye, it shall go to his Executor,
but if it be an Advowson in gross in case of a common person, there is some
doubt: But in the principal case all the Judges held ut supra, and said, that
so it was in 9 Ed. 3.26. Quare Impedit 31. And in Dyer in the case of the
Church of Westminster, but F.N.B. is contrary, 33 N.

Mich. 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 728.
HOuse and Elkin brought an Action of Debt upon an Obligation made to them,
against Roger Grindon, as Sheriffs of London, upon condition of appearance at a
certain day in the Kings Bench: The Defendant pleaded that he being arrested by
a Precept out of the Kings Bench appeared at the day: And upon this they were
at issue to be tried by the Country: And a Repleader was awarded, because it
was triable by Record, for although the Sheriff do not return the Process, yet
the Defendant ought to come into the Court at the day, and there special entry
shall be made of his appearance. And so was it adjudged this term in the Case
between Bret and Shepherd: But Bradford Prothonotary said it was well enough,
for it may be that he appeared there, and there was no Record of it, To which
it was answered, that it was no appearance unless there were a Record: But the
Case in Court was ut supra.

Hill. 30. Eliz.
IN an Ejectment by Dorothy Michell against Edmund Dunton, the Case was; A
woman makes a Lease for years, rendering Rent, with a Covenant that the Lessee
should repair the house, with other Covenants, and then devised the same lands
to the same Lessee for diverse years more, yiedling the like rent, and under
such Covenants as were in the first Lease, the Remainder over in fee, and dies,
and then the first Lease for years does expire, and the Lessee continues in by
force of the second Lease by vesture of the devise, and repaires not the
houses, so that if the first Lease had been in being, he had broke the
Covenant. If this shall be such condition as he in the remainder may enter, was
the question.

Shuttleworth, It is a Condition, for he cannot have a Covenant, and then it
shall be intended that i^ is conditional: But by all the Court. There appears
no such intent, for it appears that he holds under like Covenants.

Anderson, The nature of a Covenant is to have an Action, but not an entry, and
therefore there shall be no entry.

Shuttleworth, To what end then serves these words (under like Covenants)
Periam, They are void. And at last it was resolved by all the Justices, that
the Will expressing that the first Lessee should have the Land observing the
first Covenants, it shall not be now taken to be a Condition by any intent that
may be collected out of the Will: for a Covenant and Condition are of several
natures, the one giving Action, the other entry, and here the intent of the
Will was, that although the Covenants were not performed, yet the Lessee should
not forfeit his term, but is only bound to such pain as he was at the
beginning, and that was to render damages in an Action of Covenant. And
Judgment was given that the Plaintiff should be barred.

Mich, 29, and 30 Eliz. Rot. 2449.
THe Earl of Kent brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond against William Bryan,
which was indorsed with a Condition, That if the Defendant did permit the
Plaintiff, his Executors or Assigns, not only to thresh Corn in the
Defendants Barn, but also to carry it away from time to time, and at all times
hereafter convenient, with free egresse and regresse, or else to pay eight
pounds upon request, etc. that then, etc. And in truth the Defendant permitted
the Corn to lie there two years, in which time the Mise and Rats had devoured a
great part of it, and then the Defendant thresht it, and the Earl therefore
brought this Action: And upon Demur it seemed to Walmsley that there was no
forfeiture of the Bond, because the Earl took not the Corn away in convenient
time, for convenient time is such as shall prejudice no person (Quod fuit
negatum per Justitiar.) and here is great prejudice to the Detendant, because
the Plaintiff did not carry away the Corn: And he put many cases, where things
ought to be done in convenient time, as in the 21 Ed. 4. where an Arbitrament
ought to be performed in convenient time. But the opinion of the Court was,
that he might come in covenient time, although he comes long after, and the
words are not within convenient time. Windham said, That if the words had been
within convenient time, it would have made a difference.

Anderson, If the words of the Condition had been, that he should suffer the
Plaintiff in time convenient to come, and thresh and take away his Corn, then
perhaps he ought to send within a year according to Walmsleys saying, but the
words here are at all convenient times, and that day that the Servant came was
a convenient day to thresh and carry away; and the words, At all convenient
times shall be construed, that at any time when it pleases the Earl he may
come, unless it be night, or Sabbath day, and if the word, convenient, had not
been mentioned, then by the words, from time to time, and at all times after,
then the Earl may come at any time either in the day or night, and that a
hundred years after as he pleases, and then the word, convenient, does
restrain him that he cannot come but in the working days, but does not
restrain any time in which he shall come, but only in convenience of time,
which is at times of laboring and watching. And so was the opinion of the
Court. ut supra.

An Action of Debt was brought upon a Lease for years, the Defendant pleaded
Nihil debet per patriam, and did intend to give in evidence an entry of the
Plaintiff before any Rent behind. And by the Court he could not do it, for it
is contrary to the issue.

Hill. 30 Eliz. Rot. 904.
Between Spittle and Davis.
IN a Replevin, the case was; One Turk seized of lands in fee, devised parcel
thereof to his eldest Son in tail, and the other parcel to his youngest Son
in fee. Provided, and his intent was, that if any of his Sons or any of their
Issues, do alien or demise any of the said lands, before any of them comes to
the age of thirty years, that then the other shall have the Estate, and does
not limit what Estate, and then one of the Sons makes a Lease for years before
such age, whereupon the other enters, and before he comes to the age of thirty
years, he aliens that part into which he made entry, and the other brother
being the eldest enters and makes a Lease to Spittle the Plaintiff for three
years, and Davies by commandment of the younger brother enters, and takes the
house Damage-feasant, and Spittle brought a Replevin: And upon Demur, it seemed
to the Court, that this was a limitation, and by virtue of the Will the Estate
devised to them until they aliened, and upon the alienation to go to the
other, and upon such alienation the land is discharged of all limitations, for
otherwise the land upon one alienation shall go to one, and upon another
alienation shall go back again, and so to and fro ad infinitum, vide Dyer 14.
and 29. And afterward all the Judges agreed, that after one brother had entered
into the land by reason of the alienation, that land was discharged forever of
the limitation by the Will; And Judgment was given accordingly.

Trin. 27 Eliz. Rot. 190.
Carter against Low.
IN an Ejectment, the Case was; A Termor devised his term to I.S. and made his
Wife Executrix and died, the Woman enters and proves the Will, and takes
Husband, who takes a Lease of the Lessor, and after the Devisee enters and
grants all his Estate to the Husband and wife, and herein two questions were
moved.

1. If by this acceptance of the new Lease by the Husband, the term which the
woman had to another use, viz. to the use of the Testator shall be deemed a
surrender: And the opinion of the Court was clearly without argument, that it
was a surrender. But admitting it was no surrender, but the first term
continues, then the second question is,

2. If when the Devisee enters into the term devised to him, without consent
of the Executor, by which entry he is a wrongful Seisor, and a Disseisor, and
after he grants his right and interest to the Executor; if this Grant be good
or no, because he had not any term in him, but only a right to the term
suspended in the land, and to be revived by the entry of the Executor, And
adjudged that it was a good Grant, and it shall inure first as the agreement of
the Executor by the acceptance of the Grant, that the Devisee had a term in
him as a Legacy. And secondly the Deed shall have operation by way of Grant to
pass the Estate of the Devisee to the Executor, and so no wrong, and the case
was resembled to the case of surrender to the grantee of a Reversion, which
first shall inure as attornment, and after as surrender, and so was it adjudged.

Trin. 37 Eliz.
IN an Action on the Case for these words; Carter is a prigging pilfering
Merchant, and has pilfered away my Corn and my Goods from my Wife and my
Servants, and this I will stand to: And the Action was commenced in a base
Court in the Country, and Judgment given and the Record removed by Writ of
Error: And it seemed to the Court that the words were not actionable, wherefore
Judgment was reverst. Sed quaere rationem.

Gowood against Binkes.
A Man did assume and promise to I.S. in consideration that he would forbear a
Debt due to him until such a time: That he would pay the Debt if A.B. did not
pay it, and he that made the promise died, and the money was not paid, and
therefore an Action was brought against his Executors, who traversed the
Assumpsit, and a Verdict found against them; and in Arrest of Judgment it was
moved, that an Action grounded on a simple Contract. lies not against Executors
unless upon an Assumpsit for a Debt or Duty owing by the Testator himself, and
not of such a collateral matter as the forbearance of the Debt of another: but
by Gaudy, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff; whereupon Popham said, that he
believed this Judgment would be reversed by Writ of Error in the Exchequer
Chamber, and the same day at Serjeants-Inn such a case was depending in the
Exchequer Chamber to be argued, and reversed for the cause ut supra. And the
case was between Jordan and Harvey, and entered Trin. 36 Eliz. Rot. 384.

Hill. 37 Eliz. Rot. 34.
Castleman against Hobbs.
IN an Action of the Case for saying, Thou have stolen half an acre of Corn,
(innuendo) Corn severed, the Defendant demurred upon the Declaration.

Fenner, It is not Felong to move Grain and take it away.

Popham agreed to it, and that the word Innuendo would not alter the Case,
unless the precedent words had vehement presumption, the Corn was severed;
and in this case no man can think that the Corn was severed, when the words
are, half an acre of Corn: on the contrary, if the words had been, that he had
stolen so many loads, or bushels of Corn; And Gaudy was of the same opinion:
and Judgment against the Plaintiff, etc.

Hill. 38 Eliz.
IN an Account the Plaintiff declared, that he delivered Goods to the Defendant
to Merchandise for him, the Defend* said, that the Goods with diverse other of
his own proper goods were taken at Sea, where he was robbed of them. And it was
moved that this was no plea in Bar of an Account, but if it be any plea, it
shall be a plea before Auditors in discharge: But admitting it be a good Bar,
yet it is not well pleaded, for the Plaintiff as it is pleaded cannot traverse
the robbing and try it, for things done super altum mare is not tryable here,
wherefore the Defendant ought to have pleaded that he was robbed at London, or
any other certain place upon the Land, and maintain it by proofs that he was
robbed on the Sea.

Gaudy, It is no good plea, for he has confessed himself to be accountable by
the receipt, 9 Ed. 4., and it is no plea before Auditors, no more then the Case
was in 9 Ed. 4. for a Carrier to say, that he was robbed.

Popham, It is a good plea before Auditors, and there is a difference between
Carriers and other Servants and Factors; for Carriers are paid for their
carriage, and take upon them safely to carry and deliver the things received.

Gaudy, If Rebels break a Prison, whereby the Prisoners escape, yet the Jailer
shall be responsible for them, as it is in the 33 H. 6.

Popham. In that case the Jailer has remedy over against the Rebels, but there
is no remedy over in our case.

Gaudy, Then the diversity is when the Factor is robbed by Pirates, and when by
enemies.

Popham, There is no difference.

Hill. 38 Eliz. Rot. 40.
IN a Writ of Error upon a Judgment given in Nottingham, the Error assigned
was; because the Defendant had no addition, for it appeared the Action was in
Debt; and the Record was, that H. Hund complained against Richard Preston of,
etc. in the County of Nottingham, Husbandman, the which addition is not in his
first name, but in the alias, and that could not be good, and therefore it was
prayed that Judgment might he reversed. But by the Court, the Court of
Nottingham had no authority to outlaw any man, so that addition is not
requisite, wherefore it is no Error: and Judgment was affirmed.

Trin. 37 Eliz. Rot. 553.
Brown against Brinkley.
IN an Action of the Case for words; the Declaration was, That the Plaintiff
was produced as a Witness before the Justices at the Assizes at Darby, where
he deposed in a certain cause, and the Defendant said, Brown was disproved
before the Justices of Assise at Darby, before Mr. Kingsley (Innuendo) that he
was disproved in his Oath, that he took before the Justices: And adjudged
against the Plaintiff; for although he was disproved in his Oath, yet it is not
actionable in this case, for that disproof might be in any collateral matter,
or any circumstance; but otherwise if the words had been, that he was perjured,
and the (Innuendo) will not help the matter, and so was it adjudged. The chief
Justice and Fenner being only in the Court.

Trin. 36 Eliz.
Higham against Beast.
IN an Action of Trespass by the Parson of Wickhambrooke in the County of
Suffolk, against the Vicar of the same place, for taking of Tithes, and on the
general issue the Jury gave this special Verdict:

That the place where, etc. was a place called B. the Freehold of I.S. and
parcel of the Manor of Badmanshall, and found that the Pope as supreme
Ordinary heretofore made such an Indowment to the Vicaridge in these words;
Volumus quod Vicarius, etc. habebit tertiam partem decimarum Bladorum and Foeni
quomodocunque pervenientem de maneriis de Badmanshall; and the question was, If
the Vitar by this Indowment shall have the third part of the Tithes growing
upon the ^and of the Freeholders within the Manor, or not. And it was said, by
the Court, that a Manor cannot be without Freeholders, and inasmuch as they
are to be charged with the payment of Tithes, one and the other together shall
be said to be the Tithes of the Manor, and so it was adjudged that the Vicar
should have Tithes of the third part of the land of the Freeholders, as well of
the Demesnes, and Copyholders.

Trin. 37 Eliz. Rot. 438.
Willoughby against Gray.
A Venire facias did bear Test out of the Term, and also there was no place
mentioned in the Writ, here the Visne should be impaunelled, and after the Writ
said Coram Justiciariis, and did not say, apud Westmonasterium, and a trial
was had hereupon, and Judgment given which was prayed might be reversed for
these causes. But it seemed to the Court, that notwithstanding all that was
alleged, it was good enough, for although the Venirefacias was not good, yet
if the Distringas had a certain return and place therein: And the Jury appeared
and gave their Verdict, so that a Verdict was had, the Statute will aid the
other defects: as in the case adjudged between Marsh and Bulford, where the
Venire bore Test out of the Term. But Fenner said, that the Test was in the
Term but on the Sabbath day, which was not Dies Juridicus.

Trin. 38 Eliz. Rot. 622.
KInton brought an Appeal of Mayhem, against Hopton, Flam, and Williams; Hopton
pleaded, not guilty; Flam pleaded that he was mis-named, and demanded Judgment,
etc. Et quoad feloniam and mahemium, not guilt^, and de hoc ponit se super
patriam, and praedict. Kinton similiter: And Williams pleaded, no such man in
rerum natura, as Flam, and demanded Judgment of the Writ, and as to the Mayhem
and Felony, not guilty, Et de hoc ponit se super patriam, etc. And as to the
other two pleas to the Writ Kinton demurred, and prayed that the Writ might be
awarded him, and a Venire facias to try the issue. For Tanfeild urged, that by
pleading over to the felony, he waved the plea to the Writ, for there was a
diversity between an appeal of Murder, and of Mayhem, for in Murder, as it is
7 Ed. 4. and 3 Ed. 6. although he plead to the Writ of appeal, yet of necessity
he must plead over to the Murder, because it is in favorem vitae, or else if
he will join in Demurrer upon the plea to the Writ, he does confess thereupon
the Felony, and therefore he must plead over, not guilty. But in Mayhem it is
otherwise for although the Declaration was for Felony, yet is a Mayhem but a
Trespass only, and all are pru^cipalls, and the life of the Defendant is not
questioned, but he shall only render damages, and therefore it he plead over
to the Felony that is a waver of the plea, and so a Venire facia^ ought to
issue out, to try if he be culpable or not, and of this opinion were Popham
Fenner, and Gaudy clearly, and agreed to the diversity between the appeal of
Mayhem and Murder.

Mich. 38, and 39 Eliz.
King against Brain.
A Man sells Sheep, and warrants that the yare sound, and that they shall be
sound for the space of a year, upon which Warrant an Action of the Case was
brought, and it was moved that the Action did not lie, because the Warranty is
impossible to be performed by the party, because it is only the act of God to
make them sound for a year. But Clench and Fenner on the contrary; for it is
not impossible, no more then if I warrant that such a Ship shall return safe to
Bruges, and it is the usual course between Merchants to warrant the safe
return of their Ships.

Mich. 38, and 39 Eliz.
Wentworth and Savell against Russell.
IN a Writ of Parco fracto, the Plaintiffs declared that they were Tenants pro
indiviso, of a Manor in Yorkshire, and that the Defendant held of them certain
lands as of their Manor, rendering Rent, which Rent was behind, and for which
they distrained and impounded the Distress, and the Defendant broke the Pound
and rescued the distress, and thereupon they brought this Action; and the
Defendant demurred on the Declaration, because the Plaintiffs did not show how
they were Tenants pro indiviso, or Tenants in Common, or Coparceners. But the
Court ruled the Declaration to be good: And Gaudy said, that a Tenant in Common
alone, without his companion, may have an Action De parco fracto. And Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

Hill. 39 Eliz.
POphamsaid, that in Lancashire there is a Parish called Standish, within which
are many Towns, and one of the Towns is called Standish: And if a man seized
of lands in the Town of Standish, and also of land in the other Towns, do let
all his land in Standish only, his land within the Town of Standish does
pass, and not all his land within the Parish of Standish in the other Towns.
For where a man speaks of Standish or of Dale, it shall be intended to be a Town
and not a Parish, unless there be express mention of the Parish of Standish,
or of Dale. Gaudy and Fenner on the contrary, for the Grant of every man shall
be taken strongest against himself, and therefore all the land as well within
the Parish of Standish, as within the Town of Standish shall pass: And Fenner
said, that when Dale is mentioned in any Precipe, it shall be intended the Town
of Dale, because Towns are noted at the Common Law, and not Parishes, for
Parishes were ordained by the Council of Lions, but notwithstanding in Grants,
there shall be no such intendment, but the intendment shall be according to the
common usage and understanding of the Country, and Countrymen in favor of the
Grantee: and when a man speak of Standish, or any such place, it shall as well
be intended to be a Parish as a Town.

Hill. 29, Eliz.
Clarentius against Dethick.
CLarentius brought an Action of the Case against Dethick, by the name of
Dethick, alias Garter: The Defendant demanded Judgment of the Writ, for the
Queen by her Letters Patents had created him King at Arms, Et quod
nuncuparetur Garter principalis Rex armorum, and that he should sue and be sued
by such name, and because he was not sued according to his creation, he
demanded Judgment, etc.

Tanfeild prayed that the Writ might abate, for this case had been here in the
Court in question before, where Dethick was indided by the name of Dithick
only, and because he was not named according to his creation, he pleaded that
matter, and the Indictment was quashed.

Gaudy, I remember the case very well, and it was adjudged at my first coming
to this Court, and in truth the Judgment passed against my opinion, which then
and still is, that when he is sued as King at arms, in such case wherein his
Office or other thing belonging to his Office comes in question, then he ought
to be named according to his Patent, but when he is sued as I.S. then it is
sufficient to name him by his proper name.

Popham, Upon the creation of any Deanery which is ordained and granted by
Patent of the King; the Dean shall sue and be sued by the name of Dean of such
a place, yet if such Dean does sue or is sued about any matter concerning his
natural capacity, it is not necessary to name him Dean. Fenner. But this is a
name of dignity, and by his installation is made parcel of his name, and if a
man be made a Knight, in all Actions he shall be so named; wherefore it seemed
to him that the Writ ought to abate. Et Adjournetur.

Hill. 37 Eliz.
Hugo against Pain.
HUgo brought a Writ of Error against Pain, upon a Judgment given in the
Common Pleas upon a Verdict, the Error assigned was, That one Tippet was
returned in the Venire facias, but in the Habeas Corpus and the Distringas he
was named Tipper, and so another person then was named in the Venire tried the
issue. Curia, Examine what person was sworn, and what was his true name, to
which it was answered that his name was Tippet according to the Venire facias,
and that he was summoned to appear to be of the Jury, and he inhabits in the
same place where Tipper was named, and that no such man as Tipper inhabited
there, and therefore it was awarded by the Court that the Habeas Corpus and
Distringas should be amended, and his true name put in, and Judgment was
affirmed, etc.

Hill. 38 Eliz. Rot. 944.
Rainer against Grimston.
RAiner brought an Action of the case against Grimston in the Kings Bench, for
these words, He was perjured, and I will prove him so by two Witnesses; without
speaking in what Court he was perjured, and the Plaintiff had Judgment, and
upon Error brought by the Defendant, it was moved that the words were not
actionable: But in the Exchequer Chamber, the first Judgment was affirmed.

Hill. 39, Eliz. Rot. 859.
Chandler against Grills.
IN a Trespass, the parties were at issue, and a Venire facias was awarded on
the Roll returnable Octabis Trinitat. and the Venire was made six days after
the day of Octabis returnable at a day out of the term, and the Distringas was
made, and the Jury Impanelled, and a Verdict and Judgment for the Plaintiff:
And in a Writ of Error brought this matter was assigned. And the first Judgment
affirmed, for this is aided by the Statute, being it is the default of the
Clark: and the case was cited between Thorn and Fulshaw in the Exchequer
Chamber, Mich. 38, and 39 Eliz. where the Roll being viewed, and the Venire not
good, it was mended and made according to the Roll, being that which warrants
it and is the act of the Court, and the other matter but the mistake of the
Clarks. But if the Roll were naught then it is erroneous, because the Venire is
without warrant, and no Record to uphold it, and so was it held in the case of
Water Hungerford and Besie.

Hill. 39 Eliz.
During against Kettle.
DUring brought an Action against Kettle after a Trial by Verdict in London,
and in Arrest of Judgment, it was alleged, that the Venire facias is, Regina
vicecomit. London salut. praecipimus tibi quod, etc. where it should be
praecipimus vobis, etc. But ruled by the Court that this Venire being as it
were a Judicial Writ that ought to ensue the other proceedings, it was holden
to be amendable, and so it was accordingly.

Pasch. 39 Eliz.
East against Harding.
IT was moved, Whether if a Lord of a Manor makes a Lease for years, after a
Copyholder commits a Forfeiture, the Lessee for years shall take advantage
hereof: and it was said by Popham, that the Feoffee or Lessee shall have
advantage of all Forfeitures belonging to Land, as in case of Feoffment, and
the like, but on the contrary for not doing of Fealty.

Mich. 39 Eliz.
Collins against Wills.
THe Father makes a promise to Wills, that if he would marry his Daughter, to
pay him 80 l. for her portion, but Wills demanded a 100 l. or else did refuse
to marry her, whereupon the daughter prayed her Father to pay the 100 l. and in
consideration thereof she did assure him to pay him 20 l. back again. The 100 l.
is paid, and the marriage took effect. And the Father brought his Action on the
case against the Husband and Wife, for the 20 l. Gaudy, and Fenner said, that
the Action would lie: but Popham held the consideration void.

Mich. 39, and 40 Eliz.
Penn against Merivall.
IN an Ejectment the Case was, If a Copyholder makes a Lease for years which is
a forfeiture at the Common Law, and after the Lord of a Manor makes a
Feoffment, or a Lease for years of the Freehold of this Copyhold to another; if
the Feoffee or Lessee shall take advantage hereof was the question. Popham, He
shall not, for the lease of the Freehold made by the Lord before entry, is an
assent that the Lessee of the Copyholder shall continue his Estate, and so is
in nature of an affirmance and confirmation of the Lease: to which Clench and
Fenner agreed; and therefore upon motion made by Yelverton Sergeant, and
Speaker of the Parliament, Judgment was given, Quod querens nihil caplat per
Billam.

Mich. 6 Eliz.
ONe enters a plaint in a base Court to pursue in the nature of a writ of entry
in the Post, and had Summons against the party until such a day, at which
time, and after Sunset, the Steward came and held the Court, and the Summons
was returned served, and the party made default, and Judgment given: the
question was, If the Judgment was good. Dyer, Welsh, and Benlowes held the
Judgment good, although the Court was held at night: and Dyer said, that if it
were erroneous, he could have no remedy by Writ of false Judgment, nor
otherwise, but only by way of petition to the Lord, and he ought in such case
to do right according to conscience, for he has power as a Chancellor within
his own Court.

Lane against Coups.
IN an Ejectment by John Lane against Coup, and the Plaintiff declared on a
Lease made by William Humpheston, the Case was; William Humpheston being seized
of land in see, suffered a common recovery to the use of himself and his wife
for life, the remainder Seniori puero de corpore Gulielmi Humpheston, and to
the Heirs Males of the body dicti senioris pueri. Plowden, One point is, that
when a remainder is limited Seniori puero in tail, if Puer shall be intended a
Son, or a Daughter also; and methinks it shall be intended a Son only, for so
are the words in common and usual speech, and words in Deeds ought to be
expounded as they are commonly taken, and not to go to any strict construction
of the words as (Heirs) in the Latin is used also for goods by the Civil Law,
but we use it only for lands, and so Libra in Latin signifies a Weight; and
yet if I am bound in Vigint. Libris. if I forfeit my Bond, I must pay money,
and not Lead, or the like. And so the word Puer is sometimes taken for a servant
Claudite jam rivos pueri, etc. and the same reason that it may be intended for
a Daughter, may be for a Servant also. Gaudy. I suppose the Son shall have it
and not the Daughter, for although Pueri was taken for Male and Female, yet now
it is taken for Male in any Modern Author, but to omit curiosity of words, we
ought to consider rather the intent of the parties, and there are many
circumstances to prove that he intended this to his Son, and not to his
Daughter, for he made it for settling his Inheritance, and it shall not be
supposed that he intended his Daughter should have it. Also where the case may
be taken two ways, the most usual shall be intended; as in case of a
reservation of a Rent at Michaelmas, that shall be intended at the chiefest
Feast: also in this case it shall be intended that he would advance the most
worthy of his blood, and therefore to that purpose the conveyance shall be
expounded; for if there be two I. S. and I give land to I.S. it shall be
intended to my next Neighbor, but if one be my Cousin, although he dwells forty
miles from me, yet he shall have the land: And to this Southcote accorded.

31 Eliz. in B. R.
Hone against Clerk.
A Woman Lessee for life takes Husband, who by Indenture makes a Feoffment of
the land to I.S. for these words; Sciant per Servantes Richardum How and
Katherin. uxor. ejus dedisse I.S. unum messuagium habendum praedict. I.S.
heredibus suis ad solum opus and usum of the said I.S. and his Heirs, during
the life of Katherine. The question was, if this was a forfeiture because the
wife was Tenant for life; and the Attorney argued that it was, for the words
Pro termino vitae Katherin. are referred to the use only and not to the estate;
for by these words habendum to him and his Heirs the estate is limited, and
therefore it is a forfeiture: but after comes the limitation of the use, ad
usum I.S. and his Heirs during the life of the woman, and after the death of
the woman the use remains in the Feoffor: and he cited the Lord Sturtons case,
in the beginning of the Queens Reign; The Lord Sturton gave land to Clerk and
his Heirs, to the use of Clerk and the Heirs of his body, and adjudged that it
was not an estate in tail, for the limitation of the estate was before in the
Premises. Coke, on the contrary, and said, that those words, For life of the
wife, are to be referred to the limitation of the Estate, for if a double sense
be in words, such sense shall be taken as shall avoid all wrong, and therefore
it shall not be so expounded, as that the Grant shall not take effect, and that
a forfeiture shall ensue, 4 Ed. 2. and see a notable case for exposition of
words, and for relation of words and sentences, 34 Ed. 3. Avowry 58.28 H. 8.
Dyer. Gaudy, It is a forfeiture. Clench said he would advise; but afterward it
was adjudged a forfeiture: for as Wray said, the estate given was forfeit.

Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz.
Bagnall against Porter in B. R. Rot. 353.

A Man by Indenture bargains and sells his land, and if the Bargainor pay 100
l. at such a day, that then he shall be seized to the use of the Bargainor and
his heirs, and did assume to make such assurance for the security of the land
as should be advised by the Council of the Bargainor, and the Bargainee bound
himself in a Recognizance to perform the said Covenants. And in debt upon the
Recognizance, it was shown that the Bargainor paid the money at the day, and
had tendered to the Bargainee a Deed in which was comprised an acquittance of
payment of the money, and also a release of all his right, and the Bargainee
refused to seal it. Coke was of clear opinion that he ought to have sealed it,
for it is necessary to have the Deed to mention payment of the money, for
otherwise the Bargainee and his heirs may claim the land for default of
payment. Gaudy of the same opinion, and cited 19 Ed. 4. Popham, The case is not
so clear, for if he had tendered an acquittance only, there is no doubt but the
Bargainee might refuse to seal it, and by the same reason he may refuse when
it is joined to a thing that he is bound not to do, viz. to seal the release:
but at last the matter was referred to Arbitration.

Hillar. 37 Eliz.
COke demanded this question, A man having two Daughters his Heirs, does
demise his Land to them in Fee; What estate had they by this Demise? For if a
man devises Land to his eldest Son, it is void, and he is in by descent. That
it was holden by the Court, that they shall hold by the Devise, because that he
gives another estate to them then descended, for by the descent each of them
had a distinct moiety, but by the Devise they are Joyn-renants, and the
survivor shall have all. And Fenner said, If a man had Land in Burrow-English
and Guildable Lands, and devised all his Land to his two Sons, and dies, both
of them shall take jointly, and the younger shall not have a distinct moiety in
the Burrow-English, nor the elder in the Guildable Land, but they are both
Joyn-tenants.

Pasch. 37 Eliz.
Carrell against Read, in B. R. Rot. 270.

A Lease for years was made of diverse Fenny grounds in Cambridge ss. and the
Lessee covenanted to defend the ground, for being surrounded with water, and to
drain the water out of other lands that were demised to him in the said County.
And upon an Action of Covenant for not performing, the Defendant pleaded that
the Plaintiff had entered in the land demised. And adjudged no plea by the
Court, because the Covenant was not in respect that the Lessee should enjoy the
land, nor was it a Covenant abhering to the land, but to a collateral thing;
but if it had been in respect of enjoying the land, there it is a good plea to
say that the Plaintiff had entered but where the thing to be done is
collateral, it is otherwise, and also if he did plead such plea, yet it is not
a bar, unless he holds him out of possession, Coke lib. 3.221. 4 Ed. 3.29. the
Lord shall not have a Cessavit after entry in parcel, 10 Ed. 4.11.35 H. 6. Bar
162.19 Ed. 4.2.

Trin. 37 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 1076.
Dogrell against Perks.
IN an Action of Covenant, The Defendant pleaded, that it was enacted by the
Major of London, and common Council, that if any Citizen takes the Son of an
Alien to be his Apprentice. that the Covenants and Obligations shall be void,
and he showed that he was the Son of an Alien, and became an Apprentice to the
Plaintiff who is a Citizen, and made the Covenants with him for his
Apprentiship: And demanded Judgment. And it was held no Bar; for
notwithstanding the Act, the Covenant is good, for it is the Act of the
Defendant, although the Act of the Common Council be against it: but the said
Act may inflict punishment on any Citizen that breaks it. And Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 41 Eliz. in B. R.
Knotts against Everstead.
LEssee for life, the remainder for life, the remainder in tail, he in the
reversion who had the fee does enter and enfooffs the Lessee for years; and
adjudged that by this Feoffment Nihil operatur. Popham said, that he who has a
term cannot license another that has nothing in the land to make a Feoffment,
for he who has the Freehold wants nothing but possession to make a good
Livery: but in this case he who makes the Livery had not the Freehold, and
therefore the license is void. But Tanfeild said, that if Lessee for life gives
leave to a stranger to make Livery, it is void, but if he consent that the
stranger shall make a Feoffment, it shall amount to a Disseisin, and the
Feoffment is good. Which was denied by the Court. And Clench said, if a Lessee
for ten years makes a Lease for one year to him in reversion, there he in the
reversion who has the land for a year, may make a Feoffment to the Lessee for
ten years, and it is good.

Trin. 41 Eliz. Moyle against Mayle.
MOyle brought an Action of Waste against Mayle, and declared that he had
leased to him a Manor and a Warren, and that he had destroyed a Cony-borough
and subverted it, and assigned otherwastes in cutting down certain Thorns.
Williams, The Action of waste will well lie, and said that a Warren consisted
or two things, of a place of Game, and of liberty, and to prove that a waste
did lie for a liberty, he cited the Statute of Magna Charta, Cap. 5. in which a
Warren is intended, also the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 24. and the Statute
Articuli super Chartas, cap. 18. by which Statutes it is evident that a waste
does lie for Warrens, and a Warren is more then a liberty, for a Writ lies
Quare warrenam suam intravit, and by the 12 H. 8. if Lessee of a Warren does
break the Pale, it is a waste, also if Lessee of a Pigeon-house stop the holes,
so that the Pigeons cannot build, a waste does lie, as it has been adjudged.
Also if Lessee of a Hop yard ploweth it up and sowes Grain there, it is waste,
as it has been adjudged. Also the breaking a Wear is waste, and so of the
Banks of a Fish Pond, so that the water and fish run out: To all which cases
the Court agreed, except to the principal. For the Court held it was not waste
to destroy Cony-boroughs, for wast will not lie for Conies, because a man has
not inheritance in them, and a man can have no property in them but only
possession, and although by a special Law, Keepers are to preserve the land
they keep, in the same plight they found it, yet thi^ does not bind every
Lessee of land. Walmsley. The subversion of Cony-boroughs is not waste, and it
was usual to have a waste against those who made holes in land, but not
against those who stop them up, because thereby the land is made better: And it
was said, that to dig for stones was a waste, unless in an ancient Quarry,
although the Lessee fill it up again. And Walmsley said, that in Lancashire it
is waste to dig Marle, unless it be employed upon the land: And said it was
not waste to cut thorns, unless they be in a Wood stubbed and dug up by
the roots; but if they grow upon the land then they may be stubbed, and it is
no waste: But to cut down Thorne-trees that have stood sixty or a hundred
years, it is waste.

Hill. 32 Eliz. in B. R.
Sir George Farmer against Brook.
IN an Action of the Case the Plaintiff claims such a Custom in the Town of
B. that he and his Ancestors had a bake-house within the Town to bake white
bread and houshold-bread, and that he had served all the Town, with bread, and
that no other could use the Trade without his license, and that the Defendant
had used the Trade without his license upon which the Defendant demu^'d.
Morgan, This is a good Prescription, and it is reason that a Prescription
should bind a stranger, vide 11 H. 6.13. A. prescribed to have a Market, and
that none should sell but in a Stall, which A. had made, and was to pay for the
Stall, and held there a good Prescription. And the Archbishop of Yorks Case in
the Register. 186. is a good case. A man prescribed that he had a Mill, and he
found a horse to carry the Corn thither, and that therefore they ought to grind
there, and because they did not, he brough his Action on the case. Buckley
contra. It cannot be intended to have any commencement by any Tenure, 11 H 4.
A. procured a Patent that none should sell any thing in London without paying
him a penny, adjudged not good, and the case of the Archbishop was good,
because he had it ratione dominii and tenuri. And adjudged the principal case,
that the action will not lie.

23 Eliz. in C. B.
Farrington against Charnock.
KIng Henry the 8 granted Turbariam suam in D. at Farrington rendering rent sur
21. years and then the Lessee employed part of it in arable land, and
relinquisht part of it in Turbary: and then Q. Mary grants Totam illam
Turbaria^ before demised to Farrington; and adjudged that that passed only
which was Turbary, and the other part, that was converted into Tillage did not
pass.

Mich. 18 Eliz. in B. R.
SIr Arthur Henningham brought an Action of Error against Francis Windham to
reverse a common recovery had against Henry Henningham his brother: and the
Error assigned was, that there was no warrant of Attorney of the Record. And it
was agreed by the Bar and Bench, and adjudged error. But the great point was,
if the Plaintiff could have a writ of Error? The Case was; Henry the Father had
Henry his Son and three Daughters by one Venture, and the Plaintiff by another
Venture, and died seized of the land intailed to him, and the Heirs Males of his
body. Henry enters and makes a Feoffment, the Feoffee is impleaded, and
voucheth Henry, who loses by default in the recovery, and dies without issue,
and whether the Daughters which are Heirs general, or the Plaintiff which is
Heir in tail shall have the Error. Gaudy and Baker for the Defendant, who said,
that the Plaintiff could not have the Error, but the Daughters who were the
Heirs to Henry, for an Action always discends according to the right of land,
and it seems that the Heir in Burrow English shall have Error or Attaint, and
not the Heir at the Common Law, which was agreed by all on both sides: but it
was said, that this varies much from the present case, for two reasons; One,
because he came in as Vouchee which is to recover a Fee-simple, and he shall
render a Fee-simple in value, which is discendable to the Heirs at the Common
Law. Secondly, he has no Estate-tail. Bromley Solicitor, and Plowden contra,
and laid this ground, that in all cases where a recovery is had against one by
erroneous process, or false verdict, he which is grieved shall have redress
of it, although he be not party or privy to the first Judgment, and therefore
at the Common Law if a Recovery be had against Tenant for life, he in the
Reversion shall have Error of Attaint after his death, and now by the Statute
of R 2. in his life, so in a Precipe, if the Tenant vouches, and the Vouchee
loses by default, the Tenant shall have Error, for the Judgment was against
him, and he loses his term: and in the 44 Ed: 4.6. in a Trespass of Battery
against two, one pleads, and it is found against him, and the plea of the other
not determined, damages by the principal Verdict is given against them both,
which (if they be excessive) the other shall have an Attaint. And Bromley said,
there could not be a case put, but where he that has the loss by the recovery
should have also the remedy; and Baker cited 9. H. 7.24.6. that if a Recovery
be had against a man that has land on the part of the Mother, and he dies
without issue, the Heir of the part of the Father shall have the Error. But
Bromley and Plowden denied this case, and that 3 H 4.9. it was adjudged to the
contrary: And Wray said to Baker, that he ought not much to rely on that case,
for it was not Law, and said, that if Tenant for life makes a Feoffment, and a
Recovery is had against the Feoffee, the first Lessor shall not avoid this.
Bromley there is no use, for he may enter by forfeiture; but in our case, of
whatsoever estate it be at the time of the recovery, the right of the
Estate-tail is bound, and therefore it is reason that the Heir in tail shall
avoid it. Jeffrey of the same opinion, and cited 17. Ass. A Conusor makes a
Feoffment, and then execution is sued against the Feoffee by erroneous
process, the Feoffee shall have the Writ of Error, although he be not party to
the first Record, but the reason is, because of his interest in the land. And
Bromley and Plowden said further, that notwithstanding the Feoffee recovers
against the Vouchee, and the Vouchee recover over the land, yet this recovery
shall go to the Estate-tail. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 32 Eliz. in B. R.
TRussell was attainted of Felony by Outlawry, and after an Execution is sued
against him at the suit of a common person, and he is taken by force thereof,
and after he takes a Habeas Corpus out of the Kings Bench, and Coke prayed that
he might be discharged of this execution, for where a man is attaint of Felony
he has neither Goods nor Lands, and his body is at the Kings disposal, and so
is not subject to the execution of a common person, 4 Ed. 4. But Harris
Sergeant and Glanvill on the contrary, For although he be attaint of Felony,
yet may he be in execution, for his own offense shall not aid him: and so was
it in Crofs case in the Common Pleas; where a man being attaint of Felony was
taken in execution at the suit of a common person, and he escaped out of
Prison, and an escape was brought against the Sheriffs of London, and a
Recovery against him. And at last by advise of the Court, because he was
indebted to many persons, and to discharge himself from his Creditors, intended
to have a pardon for his life, and so deceive them, therefore he was committed
to the Marshalsey upon this execution.

Trin. 42 Eliz.
Malloy against Jennings. Rot. 1037.

IN a Replevin the Case was; A man seized of land in fee, is bound in a
Recognizance of 100 l. and then bargains and sells all his land to the
Plaintiff, and then the Recognizance is forfeit, and the Conuzee sues out a
Scire facias against the Conuzor before the Deed was enrolled, and had Judgment
to have Execution. And the question was, if the Bargainor was a sufficient
Tenant against whom the Execution was sued. Williams Sergeant, The Bargainor
was Tenant at the time of the Scire facias before inrolement, and although it
was enrolled after, shall have relation to the first livery to prevent any
grant or charge: And if an Action be brought against an Executor, as in his own
wrong, and the Suit depending he takes Letters of Administration, this shall
not abate the Writ. So* in our case, the Bargainor was seized of the land when
the Scrie facias was brought; and if a man makes a Lease for life, rendering
Rent, and then the Lessor bargains and sells the Reversion, and before the
Inrolement the Rent is behind, and the Bargainer demands the Rent which was not
paid, and then the Deed is enrolled, yet he cannot enter for the forfeiture,
which I have seen adjudged: and in the 28 H. 8. Dyer. Disseisee of one acre
makes a Release to the Disseisor of all his lands, and delivers it as an
Escroll to be delivered to the Disseisor, and then he disseiseth him of another
acre, and then the Deed is delivered to the Disseisor, yet the right in the
second acre shall not pass. And he much rolled on Sir Richard Brochets case,
26 Eliz. who made a Recognizance to Morgan upon condition to convey unto him
all his lands whereof he was seized the first day of May, and it happened that
one Corbet had sold him land by Indenture the 24. day of April, but the Deed
was not enrolled until the 24. day of May after: And the question was, if the
Conuzor was bound to convey these lands, or not, and adjudged that he was not,
for inasmuch as the Deed was not enrolled the ffrst day of May, he was not
seized, and great mischief would ensue if the Law should be otherwise: for no
man will know against whom to bring his Action, for a Bargain and Sale before
Inrolement may be done secretly. Herne Sergeant, The Bargainee is seized before
Inrolement, and by the Statute of 5 Eliz. which wills, that none shall convert
land used to tillage, unless he puts other land to tillage within six months,
yet none will say that it is a breach of the Statute, although Pasture be
presently converted to tillage, and he cited Chilburns cafe, 6 Eliz. Dyer 229.
that proves that before the Inrolement land passes to the Bargainee, and the
Bargainee has a Freehold in him before the Inrolement, and whereof his wife
shall be endowed, and if the Bargainor levies a Fine, or acknowledge of
Statute, the Bargainee shall avoid them, and deased the case of Morgan, cited
by the other side, and cited the case of 6 Ed 6. where were two Ioynt-tenants,
and one of them bargained and sold his Moiety, and then the other Ioyntenant
died, and then the Deed was enrolled, there nothing passed but a Moiety, but it
seems in that case that by the Bargain and Sale the Ioynture is severed before
the Inrolement, so that there is no Survivorship, but the Book speaks not of
it; and if a Bargainee be of lands held of the King without license of a
alienation, there the forfeiture to the King shall relate to the first delivery
of the Deed. Warberton contra. Before the Inrolement there is but a
commencement of the Bargain, and before all circumstances in the Deed
mentioned, are performed, it is no Bargain; and I hold the Deed shall have
relation to the delivery to prevent all Charges, and Contracts, but as to
strangers it shall not have such relation. If Tenant for life bargains and
sells his land to another and his Heirs, and then makes a Feoffment in fee to
another before inrolement, this is no forfeiture. Anderson, A release made to a
Bargainee before inrolement is void, then if this Scire facias be well brought,
no Act of the Bargainee shall avoid it. Walmsley, If there be a Bargainee, and
before the Inrolement the Bargainor enfeoffs him, he is in by the Feoffment and
not by the Bargain, which proves that no estate is really in the Bargainee
before Inrolement, Kingsmill, The reason of that is, because it is out of the
Statute, for the Bargain and Sale was only delivered, and he said that the
wife of the Bargainee in such case shall be endowed: But the Court denied that,
and all agreed that the wife of the Bargainee before Inrolement shall not be
endowed. Kingsmill said. that it was a usual course in a Recovery to make the
Bargainee Tenant of the Precipe. And it was said by all the Justices, that if
Tenant for life be impleaded, the Bargainee of the Reversion after Inrolement
shall be received, and yet (if hanging the Writ) he purchase the Reversion, he
shall not. And after many arguments it was adjudged that the Scire facias was
not well awarded: And Judgment given for the Plaintiff.

37 Eliz. in C. B.
Day against Austin.
IN a Trespass, the Defendant justified the taking of a Furnace fixed to the
earth; because the Sheriff upon an intent sold it to him. And by the Court it
was held a good discharge: for if a stranger takes my Horse, and sells him, a
Trespass will not lie against the Vendee, but a Detinue. But if one sells my
Horse, and a stranger takes him, he is a Trespassor. Walmesley and Beaumond,
Although such Furnace be fixed by the Termor, yet he may take it away within
the term, but the Sheriff cannot attach it; and the Termor may pull down a Wall
made by him, and it is not waste. And at another day the case was recited to be
thus. The Lessee made a Furnace for the use of a Dyer, and fixed it to the wall
of his house, and the Lessee being condemned in debt, the Sheriff came to the
Furnace, and put his hands upon it, and delivered it to the Defendant; and the
Lessee brought a Trespass. Glanvill, A Furnace may be delivered in execution,
and the house never the worse, but otherwise of the doors, because the Lessee
cannot be without them, 42 Ed. 3.6. it is not waste to take away a Furnace, 21
H. 6.26. said there that the Heir shall have such Furnace, but this does not
prove that it is not a Chattell, but the cause wherefore the Heir shall have
it, it is because it is annexed to the land, as in the case of writings which
are mere Chattels. Beaumound, It is doubly fixed, to the land and to the wall;
and it is clear that the Sheriff cannot take it from the wall. Dyer, The
diversity is when the Furnace is fixed to the middle of the house, and when to
the wall, for the Termor may take it from the middle of the house, but not from
the wall, for the wall is worse for taking it away, and therefore it is waste:
And to this Owen agreed.

Pasch. 35 Eliz. in B. R.
Rotheram against Crawley. Rot. 332.

IN debt upon a Bond, the case was; Diverse questions were made between the
Plaintiff Lord, and the Defendant Tenant, concerning Relief, whereupon they
referred themselves to the Arbitrament of I.S. who did award, that the
Plaintiff should make a Release to the Defendant (which was done) of all
Actions, Duties, and Amercements: and then upon this Action brought by the
Plaintiff for a collatterall thing, the Release was pleaded in Bar. Coke
Attorney, The Plaintiff shall not be barred by this Release, for Deeds ought to
be expounded according to the intent of the parties, and the intent of the
party was to release no Duty but the Relief, which was only in question, and
this word, Duties, being interposed between Reliefs and Amercements, shall be
intended Duties of such nature as Reliefs and Amercements, and no otherwise, as
it is in Dyer 23 Eliz. A man grants and to farm lets such land with wood, this
is no grant of the wood, and yet there are words sufficient to pass the wood,
but being conjoined with the words, And to farm let, it shall be expounded that
it was not intended to have it be an absolute Grant. But adjudged that it was a
good Bar, and Judgment was given accordingly.

Hill. 37 Eliz.
Goodway against Michell
GOodway brought a trespass against diverse persons, Quare clausum fregerunt
and duas Ramas and perches of hedge, fregerunt The Defendant by way of
justification said, that the place was in the Parish of Hadnam in Ely, and that
all the Parishioners time out of mind, have used to have passage through the
said Close in Rogation week, to make their Perambulation of the Parish, and
because that the Plaintiff hindered the Defendants as Parishioners, Ramas and
sepes fregerunt, whereupon the Plaintiff demurred. Sperling, The justification
is not good, for although Parishioners may justify the having a way over my
ground, yet they cannot break the Hedges; Also they have broken two Perches,
and two Gates, which is excessive for a footpath. 15 H. 9.10.6. A Commoner
cannot break all the hedge upon the land where he has Common. Savile cont. All
the Parishioners ought to go their Perambulation, and being a great number they
may well enough justify, for they are not compelled to keep the foot-path. 6
Ed. 2. F.N.B. 185. b. Parishioners may pull down a wall that hinders them in
their way to the Church: and in the book of Entries, there is a President where
the Vicar and Parishiones did justify an entry for this very cause, and
prescribed as we do in this case; so they may prescribe in a way, or other
thing of easement or pleasure, 7 Ed. 4.26 a. 15 Ed. 4.29. a. Anderson, There is
no question but Parishioners may justify their going over any bodies land in
their Perambulation. Warberton, Parishioners shall not prescribe in an
easement, as in ^y way to the Church. Owen, The books make a difference between
things of interest, as in common, for in such things Parishioners cannot
prescribe, and things of easement, as a waste, for in such things a man may
prescribe. Anderson. It is plain that Parishioners cannot prescribe, for none
may prescribe but those that have perpetual continuance, and therefore Tenant
for years or for life, or Parishioners cannot prescribe, but must be aided by
custom. Walmsley of the said opinion, for there is no descent or succession in
Parishioners. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Trin. 37 Eliz. in B. R.
Norton and Sharp against Gennet. Rot. 178.

A Prohibition was sued by the Plaintiff as Executors to I.S. who surmised
that the Defendant sued them in the Court Christian for a Legacy of 200 l. and
that the Testator had goods but to the vale of 350 l. and set forth how he was
Keeper of the Prison of Ludgate, and that he was bound to A. and M. Sheriffs of
London, to discharge and save harmless the same Sheriffs from all escapes,
which bond was to the value of a 1000 l. And showed that one Holmes was taken
by a Capias utlegatum at the suit of a stranger, and how the Testator suffered
him to escape, whereupon an action of debt was brought against the Sheriffs,
and a Judgment, whereby the Obligation made to them by their Testator is
forfeit, and pleaded riens intermaines, and because the Court Christian would
not allow this plea, they prayed a Prohibition, upon which Coke
Attorney-generall demurred. And it was agreed by Gaudy Justice, Coke, and
Tanfeild, that if the Bond to the Sheriff be not forfeit, then is the Surmise
good, and the Legacy shall be paid: But Fenner said to Coke, Quomodo probas?
Who answered, The difference is when a bond is made by the Testator for payment
of money in a Suit at the Court Christian for a Legacy, such a bond is a good
plea, although the bond be not forfeit, as in the 9 Ed. 4.12, and 13. for the
Condition of the Bond is part of the Bond, and a duty, but otherwise it is
where the Condition is collateral for the performance of Covenants: but in our
case the Condition is not broken as is supposed, for the Capias utlegatum
issued the 25 of Eliz. and so the Arrest merely void, for every Capias ought to
be returned the next term after the Test, 21 H. 7.16.6, and 8 Ed. 4.4. and 6.
Sed alii contra. But after a Consultation was moved for, if a Recovery was
afterward had against the Executors: And it was answered, that it was not the
course to make a Bond to the party but to the Court. But Fenner said, that it
such course be allowed, no Legacy would be paid. And Judgment was given that a
Consultation should be awarded if the Legatee would enter into a Bond to the
Executor to make restitution if, etc. or otherwise not.

Hill. 38 Eliz. in B. R.
Haddon against Arrowsmith.
IN an Ejectment, the case was; The Queen being Lady of the Manor of
Winterburne in the County of Berks, by her Steward did license a Copyholder for
life to make a Lease for three years, if he should so long live, the Copyholder
did make a Lease generally to the plaintiff for three years, who being ejected
brought this Action. Stephen. The Action will not lie because the Copyholder
has not pursued his license, for license or authority must be pursued very
strictly as well in form as substance, 10 H. 7. license to enfeoff by Deed, or
license to impark 300. acres, he cannot enfeoff by paroll, or impark but 100.
acres, and it was resolved the last Term in the Exchequer, that if the King
license his Tenant to alien, he cannot alien to one in tail, the remainder to
the Donor in fee: And so in our case where he makes a Lease for 3. years
absolutely, he has not performed his license. Gaudy contra, for when his
license is to make a Lease for years, if he so long live, these words (If he
so long live) are but Surplusage; for the Law says, that if Copyholder for
life makes a Lease for years, and dies, the Lease is determined, and therefore
the clause in the License is no more then the Law says, and so is void. Quod
suit concessum per totam curiam. Fenner, The Condition in the License is merely
void, for the Lord gives nothing by the License, but only does dispense with
the forfeiture, and the Lessee is in by the Copyholder and not by the Lord, for
the Lord cannot condition with him in his License. Clench, The Lord may license
on Condition, as where the Lord does license his Copyholder on condition that
the Lessee shall repair the house, or shall not cut Trees, for otherwise the
Copyholder may cut them, and the Lord has no remedy, for his License is a
dispensation of the forfeiture. Popham contra, A Condition to a License is
void, as a License to make a Lease for years, on condition that he pay 20 l.
the second year, this is void for the reason given by my brother Fenner, for
the license does not give a right, but only executes it, as a Livery, or
Attornment; but a Limitation to such License is good, as license to alien for
two years, he cannot alien for three, but in our case the Condition and the
Limitation made by the Lord is void: and the difference is between a Copyholder
in fee, and a Copyholder for life, for if the Lord does license his Copyholder
in fee to make a Lease for three years if he so long live, and he makes a Lease
absolutely, this is no forfeiture, for this Lease shall be a good interest
against the Heir of the Copyholder, but otherwise of a Copyholder for life. And
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Pasch 38 Eliz. in C. B.
Bishop of Rochesters Case.
THe Bishop of Rochester brought a Writ of Annuity against the Deane and
Chapter of Rochester, and declared of an Annuity by Prescription, from the
Prior of S. Andrews of Rochester, which Priory was dissolved the 28 H. 8. and 31
H. 8. their possessions were committed by the King to the Dean and Chapter of
Rochest. Anderson, The Annuity does not remain, for an Annuity charge the
party and not the possession, and therefore when the Corporation is dissolved
which is the person, the Annuity is gone. Walmesley, But in 2 H. 6 9. it is
said there, If a Priory be charged with an Annuity, the Annuity shall continue,
although it be charged to an Abbey. Anderson, That is true, for there the
Corporation is changed only, but here it is dissolved. Williams, But that is
saved by the 3^ H. 8 for Annuities are expressed in the saving. Anderson, But
this is an Annuity or Rent with which the land is charged. Beaumond, If it be
any thing wherewith the land is charged, it is saved, but the person is only
charged with this Annuity. Walmsley, But the 21 H. 7. is, that an Annuity out
of a Parsonage is not a mere personal charge, but charge the Parson only in
respect of the land. And the Court would consider on the case.

Pasch. 38 Eliz. in B. R.
The Case of the Dean and Chapter of Norwich.
THe Case was, A Church in which there had been a Parson and a Vicar time out
of mind, and the Parson used to have the great Tithes, and the Vicar the small,
and for the space of forty years last past, it was proved that the Parson had
Tithes paid him out of a field of twenty acres of Corn, and now the field is
sowed with Saffron, and the Vicar sued for the Tithes of Saffron in the Court
Christian, and the Parson had a Prohibition. Coke. I conceive the Parson shall
have the Tithes, for by the Statute of 2 H. 6. it is enacted that Tithes shall
be paid as has been used the last forty years, and this has been always
tythable to the Parson, and although the ground be otherwise employed, yet the
Parson shall have the Tithes; and so was it in Norfolk, in the Case of a Park,
where the Parson proscribed Pro modo decimandi, to be paid three shillings
fours pence, for all Tithes rising out of the said Park, and although the Park
was after converted to arable, yet no other Tithes shall be paid.

Popham, It has been adjudged otherwise in Wroths Case of the Inner Temple in
the Exchequer. But the Law is clearly as has been said; and the difference is,
when the Prescription is to pay so much money for all Tithes, or when the
Prescription is to pay a shoulder of every Buck, or a Do at Christmas, for
there if the Park be disparkt, Tithes shall be paid, for Tithes are not due for
Venison, and therefore they are not Tithes in Specie. And I conceive that
Tithes of Saffron-heads shall be comprehended under small Tithes, and although
the Tithes of this Field have been paid to the Parson, yet it being converted
to another use, whereof no gross Tithes do come, the Vicar shall have the
tithes: and so if arable land be converted into an Orchard, the Wicar shall
have tithe of the Apples; and so if the Orchard be changed to arable, the
Parson shall have tithes. Quod Fenner concessit.

36 Eliz.
Higham against Deff.
IN a Trespass, the Case was, That a Vicaridge by composition was endowed of
the third part, Omnium Bladorum decimarum, of the Manor of D. If he shall have
tithes of the Freeholders of the Manor, was the question. Johnson, He shall
not have them, for a Manor consists of two things, viz. of Demesns and
Services, and the Freeholders are neither parcel of the Demesnes nor the
Services, and therefore no parcel of the Manor, and this is proved in 12 Ass.
40. a Rentcharge was granted out of a Manor, the Tenancy escheats, it shall
not be charged with the Rent.

Tanfeild contra, For this word, Manor, does extend to the Precincts of the
Manor, and not to the Demesnes and Services only, and therefore if a Venire
facias be awarded De viceneto Manerii de D. the Freeholders shall be returned;
also a survey of a Manor shall be as well of the Freehold lands, as of the
Demesnes, and if the King grants a Leet within the Manor of D. all the
Freeholders are bound to appear.

Fenner, Grants ought not to be restrained to their strict words, but are to be
construed according to the intent of the parties.

Trin. 38 Eliz. in B. R.
Ewer against Henden. Rot. 339.

IN an Ejectment the Jury found that I.S. being seized of a Capital Message
in the County of Oxford, and also of a house and land in Walter, in the County
of Hartford, makes a Lease for years of his house and land in the County of
Hartford, and then by Will does demise his house in the County of Oxon,
Together with all other his Lands, Meadows, Pastures, with all and singular
their Appurtenances in Walter in the County of Hartford, to John Ewer: and
whether the house in Walter, in the County of Hartford does pass, or not, was
the question.

Tanfeild, The houses shall pass, for if a man builds a house upon Black acre,
and makes a Feoffment of the acre, the house shall pass, and so if a man does
devise una jugata terrae of Copyhold Land, the house of the Copyhold does pass
also, for so is the common phrase in the Country; and so if a man be rated in a
100 l. subsidy, that does include houses, and by the grant of a Tenement the
house passes, but if a man demand a house in a Precipe, there the house ought
to be named.

Whistler contra, It is true that if a man generally does devise his Land, the
houses pass: but in this case the Devisee has particularized his Land, his
Meadow, and his Pasture, and if he intended to have passed, his houses he would
have mentioned them as well as his Land.

Fenner, I am of the same opinion, for this special numbering of particulars,
does exclude the general intendment; and if the Devisor had a Wood there, that
would dot pass by these words.

Popham contra, For if a man sells all his Lands in D. his houses and woods
pass by this word, Lands, and so was it agreed in a case which was referred to
Dyer and Wray chief Justice, and there reason was, because that a Warrant of
Attorney in a Precipe of a House, Woods, and Land, is only of Land, which
proves that land does comprehend all of them, and therefore I conceive, if a
man does devise, or bargain and sell all his lands in D. the Rents there shall
pass, for they were issuing out of the land: But if a man be seized of three
houses and three acres, and he devises all his land in D. and one of his
houses, the other houses will not pass, for his express meaning is apparent,
but here the words are in general as to the lands in Walter, and therefore the
houses do pass. But afterward it was adjudged that the house did not pass,
for by the particular mentioning of all his Lands, Meadows and Pastures, the
house is excluded.

Pasch. 4 Eliz.
Hunt against King.
IN a Writ of Error upon a Judgment given in the Common Pleas in a Formedon
brought there; the Case was, Tenant in tail enfeoffs his Son, and then
disseiseth his Son, and levies a Fine to a stranger, and before the
Proclamations pass, the Son enters and makes a Feoffment to a stranger, the
Father dies, and the Son dies, and the Issue brings a Formedon. The question
was, Whether by the entry of the Son the Fine was so defeated that the
Estate-tail was not barred. Dyer, The Estate tail is barred, and made a
difference where the Fine is defeated by entry, by reason of the Estate-tail,
and where it is defeated by entry by reason of another estate-tail, as in 40
Eliz. Tenant in tail discontinues, and disseiseth the Discontinuee, and levies
a Fine to a stranger, and retakes an Estate in Fee, before the Proclamations
pass, the Discontinuee enters, and then the Tenant in tail dies seized, and
adjudged that the Issue is not remitted, for the Statute 32 H. 8. says, That a
Fine levied of lands any way intailed by the party that levies the Fine shall
bind him, and so it is not material whether he were seized by force of the
Estate-tail, or by reason of another Estate, or whether he have no Estate.

And all the Justices were of opinion that the Estate was barred, for although
the discontinue had avoided the Fine by the possession, yet the Estate-tail
remains concluded, and the same shall not enter by force of the Estate-tail,
but by force of the Fee which he had by discontinuance.

Popham, Avoidance of a Fine at this day differs much from avoidance of a Fine
at the Common Law, for it appears by the 16 Ed: 3. that if a Fine at the Common
Law be defeated by one who has right, it is defeated against all, but at this
day the Law is contrary, for if a man be disseised, and the Disseisor die
seized his Heir within age, and he is disseised by a stranger who levies a
Fine, and then five years pass, the Heir shall avoid this by his nonage, yet
the first Disseisee is bound for ever, for the Infant shall not avoid the Fine
against all, but only to restore the possession. And therefore it was adjudged
in the Lord Sturtons Case, 24 Eliz. where Lands were given to him and his Wife,
and the Heirs of him, and he died, and his Issue entered and levied a Fine to a
stranger, and before the Proclamations passed, the Mother enters, it was
adjudged that the Issue was barred, for the Wife shall not avoid this but for
her own Estate: And so if a stranger enters to the use of him who has right,
this shall not avoid the Fine.

Fenner did agree to this, and said that it had been so adjudged; but all the
Justices agreed, that the Estate-taile being barred, the entry shall go to the
benefit of him who has most right to the possession, and that is the
discontinue; and therefore the Plaintiff in the Formedon has good Title to the
Land, but only to the Fee, and not to the Intaile, for that is barred by the
Fine.

28 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 2130.
Gibson against Mutess.
IN a Replevin the Case was; John Winchfeild was seized of Lands in Fee, and by
his Will did devise all his Lands and Tenements to Anthony Winchfeild and his
Heirs, and before his death made a Deed of Feoffment of the same Lands, and
when he sealed the Feoffment, he asked, If this Feoffment will not hurt this
last Will, and if it will not, I will seal it? And then he sealed it, and made
a Letter of Attorney to make Livery in any of the said Lands, the Attorney made
Livery, but not of the Lands which were in question, and then the Testator
died. And the question was, if the Devisee or Heir of the Devisor should have
the Land. And it was said in behalf of the Heir, that if the Testator had
said, It shall not be my Will, then it is a Revocation. Quod curia concessit:
But it was the opoinion of the Court, that it appears that it was the intent of
the Testator that his Will should stand, and if it be not a Feoffment it is not
a Revocation in Law, although that the Attorney made a Livery in part, so that
the Feoffment was perfect in part, yet as concerning the Land in question,
whereof no Livery was made, the Will is good; and the Jury found accordingly
that the Land does not descend to the Heir.

Fenner cited a Case of Sergeant Jeffereys, where it was adjudged, that where
one had made his Will, and being demanded if he will make his Will, does say,
he will not, that this is no Revocation.

(...)

Sir Wolston Dixy against Alderman Spencer,
20 Eliz. in C. B.
IN a Writ of Error brought upon a Judgment given in an Assize of Fresh-force
in London. The case was, Sir Wolston Dixy brought an Action of Debt for rent
arrear against Spencer upon a Lease for years made to him by one Bacchus, who
afterward granted the reversion to Dixy, and the Tenant attorned, and for rent
arrear Dixy brought an action, etc. The Defendant pleaded in Bar that before
the Grant made to Dixy, the said Bacchus granted it to him by parole, according
to the custom of London; whereupon he demanded Judgment, if* etc. and the
Plea was entered on Record, and hanging the suit, D^xy brought an assize of
fresh force in London, and all this matter was here pleaded, and it was
adjudged a forfeiture of the Land; and hereupon Spencer brought a Writ of
Error, and assigned this for error, that it was no forfeiture.

Shuttleworth. It is no forfeiture until a Trial be had whether the reversion
be granted, or not; as in wast: the Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff had
granted over his estate, this is no forfeiture; and in the 26 Eliz. in a Quid
Juris clamat, the Defendant pleaded that he had an estate Tail, and when he
came to have it tried, he acknowledged he had an estate but for life, and that
was no forfeiture: But the Court said, they could remember no such Case.

Walmesley, It was so adjudged, and I can show you the names of the parties.

Periam Justice. If there be such a Case, we would doubt of it, for there are
Authorities to the contrary, as the 8 Eliz. and 6 Rich. 2.

Anderson. If the Defendant in a Trespass prays in aid of an estranger, this
is a forfeiture; and if it be counter-pleaded, it is a forfeiture, and the
denial alters not the Case.

Walmesley. The Books in 15 Ed. 2. Judgment 237. and 15 Ed. 1. that Judgment
in a Quid Juris clamat, shall be given before the forfeiture.

And^rson. In my opinion he may take advantage before Judgment as well as
after, if the Plea be upon Record. And so was the opinion of the Court.

The Duchess of Suffolks Case.
Pasch. 4 and 5 Ph. and Mary, in C. B.
IN a Quare impedit against the Bishop of Exeter, the Writ was ad respondendum
Andrew Stoke and Dennisae Franciscae de Suffolk Uxori e^u^. Benlowes demanded
Judgment of the Writ, etc. because she lost her name of dignity by marriage
with a base man, as it was adjudged, 7 Ed. 6. Dyer 79. where Madam Powes and
her husband brought a Writ of Dower, and the Writ abated, because she called
her self Dame Powes, whereas she had lost her dignity by marrying with her
husband.

Stanford agreed, for Mulier nobilis, si nupserit ignobili, desinit esse
nobilis.

Brooks. There is a difference where a noble woman marries a noble man of less
noble degree than she is, and when she marries one that is not at all noble;
for in the first case the shall hold the dignity of her second husband, but in
the last case she shall retain her ancient dignity. And so it was observed,
where the Marquis of Dor^e^ had two daughters, the elder was married to the
Lord Audley, and the youngest to a Gentleman, and the eldest took place
always, as wife to a Baron, but the youngest kept her place as a Marquisses
daughter.

Dyer. I was a Counsel in the Case of the Lady Powes already mentioned, and she
would by no means lose her dignity, and an Herald was brought into Court, that
said she had such dignity, although it was held clearly on the contrary by our
Law by Montague and Hales, and the Writ did abate.

Stanford. A noble man loses his honor by his own act, as by attaint, and so
has the woman here by taking such husband, and the nobility of such woman is
lost also by attainder.

Brooks said, That he knew where the sons of a Duke and Marquiz had a trespass
brought against them for hunting a Park by the name of Squires, and it was
good; wherefore it was said to Benlows, that he must plead to the Writ.

Pasch. 4 and 5 Ph. and Mary in C. B.
A Feme sole having the custody of the land, and body of an Infant took
husband, and she and her husband did tender convenient marriage to the Infant,
which he refused, and married himself elsewhere, and at his full age entered
into the land; if it be necessary that both shall join in a Writ of forfeiture
upon the marriage, or that the husband alone shall have it, was the question.

Brown Justice. Both shall join, and so is it ruled in a Book.

Dyer contr. The husband alone shall have this Writ, for he may discharge it,
or release it; and by the 5 Ed. 3.14 and 6. the husband alone may have a Writ
of Trespass; and if the wife have an advouson, and a stranger present, the
husband alone shall have a Quare impedit; and the same Law is, where the woman
has a Rent, and the husband distreyns, and Rescous is made, the husband alone
shall have a Rescous.

Prideaux. The Wardship of a Ward and Land is a thing real, and the Survivor
shall have it, and not the Executors of the Baron; and if an Action be accrued
before marriage, as if a Bond be made to her before marriage, she shall join
with her husband in the Action upon the Bond: but if a right to an Action does
accrue after marriage, there she shall not join, as here the right of the
husband does not accrue until marriage: for the Action is not in respect of
the Wardship, but of the tender and refusal, and his marriage elsewhere, all
which do accrue after the Coverture.

Stanford. If a man bring a Quare impedit for an Advowson which he has in
right of his wife, and has Judgment to recover, and dies, the wife shall
present, and not the Executors of the husband; so if he recover in a Trespass,
the wife shall have execution for the damages.

Prideaux. If a Lease be made to a woman, and a Rent reserved ^mine poenae, and
she takes husband, and the Rent is behind, both shall join in the Action for
the pain. Dyer. This Action is grounded upon a real Covenant. Stanford. Damages
recovered in a Trespass are not real, yet the wife shall have them, if the
husband dye before Execution. Dyer. The Trespass is done to the inheritance of
the wife, and therefore she shall have damages; and in 43 Ed. 1. Statham. The
husband alone brought a ravishment of a Ward, for a Ward he had in right of his
wife and the Writ held to be good; but there it is said, that otherwise it is
in right of a Ward; and if they join in a Writ of ravishment of Ward, and
recover, and the husband dye before Execution, his Executors shall have
Execution, and not the wife: but it is said there (Quaere) and at last it was
agreed that the Action should be allowed: but the surest way is to have bosh
join.

Pasch. 6 Eliz.
Powtrells Case in C. B.
IN an Ejectment the case was, a woman-tenant in Tail did make a Lease for 31
years, and took husband, and had issue; the wife dies, and the husband is
tenant by the curtesy, and surrenders to the heir, who puts out the Lessee, who
brings this Action.

Dyer. I doubt whether this surrender be good, for tenant by the curtesy is but
in reversion, and has nothing in possession, and it is dubious how he can
surrender.

Weston and Brown. He may surrender for a term* or franktenement may be
surrendered to him that has the estate in reversion or remainder, if it be not
a mean estate, as tenant for life, the remainder for life, the remainder in
fee, the first tenant for life cannot surrender to him that has the fee. But
the great point of the Case was, if the issue could avoid the Lease during the
life of the tenant by curtesy; and the Court held he could not, for the tenant
is in as a purchaser. And by Walsh and Carus. If tenant by the curtesy grants
over his estate, and then enters into religion, the Grantee shall have his
estate during the tenants natural life, Quod omnes concesserunt; and it was
said also, that if the heir had been impleaded during the life of the tenant by
curtesy, he shall not have his age, quod fuit concessum.

Mich. 14 and 15 Eliz.
Tottenham against Bedingfield.
IN an Account the Defendant pleaded he was never his Baily for to render
account.

Gaudy prayed the opinion of the Court if the Action would lie, for otherwise
he would not trouble the Court. The Case was, the Plaintiff had a Lease of a
Parsonage, and the Defendant being no Lessee, nor claiming any interest, takes
the Tithes being set forth, and carries them away, if the Plaintiff could have
this Action was the question.

Manwood. It will not lie; for an account lies where there is privity, but
wrongs are always without privity; but I agree, that it one receive my rents,
I shall have an account against him, for by my consent afterward I do make a
privity; for although that he has received the Rent, he has not done wrong to
me inasmuch as it is not my money until it be paid to me* but otherwise it is
where a man disseiseth me of land, for that is merely a wrong, and so is it in
this case; for when the Tithes were set forth by the Parishioners, the Law
says they are in the possession of the Parson; and therefore when the
Defendant took them away, he does it wrongfully, and therefore no account will
lie against him; and so was it adjudged in Lond^ in the Case of one Monax, who
under color of a Devise, did occupy land for 20 years, and after the Devise
was adjudged void, he that had right to the land, brought an account against
him, and adjudged that it does not lie.

Harper contr. For an account does lie against a Proctor, and the Plaintiff may
charge him as Proctor, and it is no Plea for him to say that he did not occupy
as Proctor, no more than it is a Plea for him who occupies as Guardian, to say
he was not the prochein amy.

Dyer. There are three Actions of Account. 1. Against a Baily. 2. Against a
Receiver. 3. Against a Guardian in socage; and if an Account be brought against
one as Receiver, he ought to charge him with the receipt of money, and I
conceive that there ought to be a privity to charge one with the receipt of
money: but if one claim as Baily* or as Guardian in socage, he is chargeable in
account: but an Abator or a Disseisor is not, because they pretend to be owners
and in this case, because by the setting forth the Tithes the property is in
the Parson, therefore he being Lessee for years, he shall have an ejectione
firma, and not an Account.

Hillar. 32 and 34 Eliz.
Carter against Kungstead, in C. B. Rotulo 120.

IN a Trespass the Jury gave this special Verdict. John Berry was seizin of the
Manor of Stapeley in Odiam, and of other lands in Odiam, and the 32 H. 8.
suffered a common recovery of all his lands in Odiam, Stapeley and Winkfield,
to the use of himself and his wife for life, the remainder to the heirs males
of his body, and quod ^lterius starent of the Manor of Stapeley, with the
appurtenances, to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the heirs males
of his body, whereby they were seized prout Lex postulat. The husband dies, the
wife makes a Lease for 19 years, and whether the Manor of Stapeley were
conveyed or not, was the question.

Harris. She shall have all; for when the whole estate is limited at the
beginning of a Deed, it shall not be abridged afterward.

Periam. The estate is by way of use, which shall be expounded according to the
intent and will of the Limiter; and if this had been done by will, it is clear
the woman should not have the Manor of Stapeley.

Anderson. If I devise my land to J.S. and afterward by the same Will I devise
it to J.D. now J.S. shall have nothing, because it was my last Will that J.D.
should have it: But otherwise it is of a use; for if I do limit an estate to
the use of J.S. and in the last clause do limit the same estate to J.D. the
limitation to J.D. is void for the repugnancy.

Periam. As to the case of the Will, I conceive it is void to both, because it
cannot be known who shall have it.

Anderson. I am sure the Law has been taken as I have said; and there was a
Case in the Upper Bench, where a man one day made part of his Will, and another
day made another part, which was repugnant to the first part, and adjudged that
the last was good, and the first void.

Periam. I agree to this Case, for here is a difference in time.

Anderson. So is there in my Case; for when I am writing my Will, I am thinking
how I shall dispose of my estate, and it shall be intended that I have least
advised concerning that which I have done last.

Walmesley. A Use is not to be compared to a Will, for the Statute of 27 H. 8.
has made it an estate and then by the 19 of Edw. 3. If a man limits an estate
at the beginning of a Deed, he cannot after abridge it.

Periam. I put this Case: If a man covenants upon consideration to be seized to
the use of himself for life, and after to the use of his son: but he further
says, that his meaning is, his wife shall have it for her life, this is not a
void Clause, but good to the wife; and the Case was adjourned till next Term.
And Harris argued again, and said, that a Use was but matter of trust, and for
that it is apparent that the intention was that the wife should have nothing,
there is no reason that another construction should be made.

Walmesley. The limitation of the Use is but a declaration how the Use shall
be, and does not give any thing; and the opinion of the Court was against the
Plaintiff who was Lessee of the woman, and that the last Clause does
countermand the first, as to the Manor of Stapeley.

Michael. 31 and 32 Eliz.
Brokesbyes Case, in C. B. Rot. 18.15.

BArtholomew Brokesby brought a Quare impedit, and it appeared by his
Declaration, that the next avoydance was granted to him, and one Humphrey
Brokesby, and then the Church became void, and Humphrey did release to
Bartholomew totum statum and titulum, etc. and then Bartholomew being
disturbed, brought a Quare impedit in his name alone.

Harris. The Plaintiff shall be barred, for the other shall be named with him,
for the Release is void; for when the Church becomes void, it is a thing in
action, and of privity and confidence, and cannot be released nor transferred.

Dyer 283. a. 28 H. 8.26. a. Where it is said, that it cannot be granted over,
no more than an Executor may release his Executorship to his companion.

Beaumont. In my opinion it is not a Chose in action, but an interest which the
Executors have; and by the 14 H. 4. and 14 H. 6. If a man be seized of an
Advowson in the right of his wife, and the Church is void, and the wife dies,
yet the husband shall present, which proves it is not a Chose in action; for in
the 49 Edw. 3.23. the husband shall not have an obligation that was made to his
wife; and in our case by this avoydance the Church is become an interest and a
Chattell: and therefore one Ioyntenant may release to another by reason of
their privity: although they have no possession.

Fenner. The release is Totum Statum jus and titulum, but here he has no
estate nor possession, and therefore the release is void. And to prove that
there is no estate nor possession, it is proved by the pleadings of the grant
of the next avoydance, for he shows that the Church became void, and that ea
ratione pertinet ad ipsum presentare, and not by force, whereof he was possessed,
and if none has the advowson which becomes void, and the Lord claymes the
advowson, yet he shall not have the present avoydance, and as to the case of
the Ioyntenants, one cannot release to the other for default of possession for
the release inanes by reason of their joint, possession which is out of them,
but release of the Demandant to the Vouchee is good by reason of the privity of
Law that is betwixt them; and in 11 H. 4. He who has right after the Incumbent
is instituted and inducted, may confirm his estate, and therefore the Release
here is good.

Anderson. We are all agreed that the Release is void, and gave Judgment that
the Plaintiff should be baned.

Bretton against Barnet.
Mich. 41. and 42. Eliz.
A Man delivers money to J.S. to be redelivered to him when he should be
required: which J.S. refused, and therefore an action of debt was brought, and
the defendant demurred, for that an action of debt would not lie, but an
account, as in the 41 Ed. 3.31. and 33.

Walmesley. An action of debt will very well lie. And he took a difference
between goods and money: for if a horse be delivered to be redelivered, there
the property is not altered, and therefore a Detinue lies, for they are goods
known: but if money be delivered, it cannot be known, and therefore the
property is alterd, and therefore a Debt will lie. And if Portugalls or other
money that may be known be deliverd to be redelivered, a Detinue lies.

Owen and Glanvill agreed to this, and Glanvill cited a Judgment given in
Hilary Term, wherein he was of Council, which was that a man delivers money to
another to buy certain things for him, and he does not buy them, the party may
bring an action of debt, but he said that the Plaintiff ought to aver that the
Defendant had not redeliverd them. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Mich. 41. and 42. Eliz.
Green against Wiseman. in C. B.
IN an Ejectment. The Defendant pleaded, that a Feoffment was made to the use
of J.S. the Lessor of the Defendant, who by force thereof, and of the Statute,
was seized, and made a lease to the Defendant; and that one Green entered and
made a Lease to the Plaintiff, and did not say that he entered upon J.S. And all
the Question was, whither when a feoffment is made to the use of another, if he
have such a seisin before his entry, whereof he may be disseised.

Glanvill. He has no freehold, neither in Deed nor in Law before entry.

Walmesley. This is contrary to all the Books: for a possession in Law is so
translated from the Feoffee to Cestuy que use, that the wife of the feoffee
shall not be endowed.

Owen. He ought to have alleged a Disseisin.

Anderson. As he might have possession by force of a Devise at Common Law, so
he shall have possession of the land here by force of the Statute, and it is in
Cestuy que use, before agreement or entry, but if he disagree, then it shall be
out of him presently, but not before he disagree. And after viz. Hillar. 42.
Eliz.

Williams moved the case again, and Walmesley said then, that he might be
disseised before his entry or agreement, and the pleading shall be that he did
enter, and did disseise him, but he shall not have a trespass without actual
entry, for that is grounded on a possession: Glanvill agreed to this, and
advised Williams to adventure the case thereupon.

Hillar. 41 Eliza.
Smiths Case in C. B.
THe Patron of an advouson before the Statute of 31 Eliz. For Symony, does sell
Proximam advocationem, for a sum of money, to one Smith, and he sells this to
Smith the Incumbent: After which comes the general pardon of the Queen,
whereby the punishment of Smith the Incumbent is pardoned, and of Smith the
Patron also. If the Incumbent may be removed was the Question: Williams said,
that the Doctors of the Civil Law informed him, that the Law Spiritual was
that for Symony the Patron lost his presentment, and the Ordinary shall
present, and if he present not within six months, then the Metropolitan, and
then the King.

Spurling Sergeant. This punishment cannot discharge the forfeiture, although
it discharges the punishment.

Glanvill contra. And said that this point was in question, when the Lord
Keeper was Attorney, and then both of them consulted thereupon, and they made
this diversity viz. between a thing void and voidable, and for Symony the
Church is not void until sentence declaratory, and therefore they held, that by
the pardon before the sentence all is pardoned, as where a man committs Felony,
and before conviction the King pardons him, by this pardon the Lord shall lose
his Escheate, for the Lord can have no Escheate before there be an attaindor,
but that is prevented before by the pardon, and so here this pardon prevents
the sentence Declaratory, and so no title can accrue to the Ordinary.

Walmesley cont. If the patron be charged by the sentence, he may plead the
pardon. But if a Quare Impedit be brought by a third person, the pardon of the
King shall be no bar to him, for the title appears not to him, but only the
punishment.

Anderson. They may proceed to sentence Declaratory, notwithstanding the
pardon; for the pardon is of the punishment, but the sentence does not extend
to that, but only to declare that the Church is void.

Glanvill in 16 Eliz. a man was deprived of his Benefice for incontinency, and
after he was pardond and restored.

Walmsley. I doubt much whither the King can pardon Symony:

And Williams said, that the Doctors of Civil Law said, that neither the Pope
nor the King could pardon Symony, quoad culpam, but only quoad poenam they may.
And the Court at last said that if the parties would not demur, they would hear
the Doctors upon this matter.

Jelsey against Robinson.
Trinit. 25. Eliz. continued until Pasch. 28 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 704. and 1544.

UPon a special verdict upon an Ejectment, the Jury gave this special
verdict. That the King was seized of the Manor of Freemington, and of the
hundred there, and granted this to H^pton to hold of the Manor of
East-Greenwich by fealty, and 13 l. Rent, and then the King being seized of the
Manor of Crankford, of which the place in Question was parcel, does grant his
Manor of Crankford, and his Manor of Freemington, to the Marquess of Exceter
and his heirs, who by his Will does devise Legacies to his servants, and does
devise that all his Legacies shall be paid out of the Manors of Freem ngton
Uplaing and Crankford. All which Manors I give to my Cosen Blunt and his
heirs. And the Defendant, as servant to Baker who was heir to the Marquess,
did eject the Plaintiff; the question was, if by the Devise of the Manor of
Freemington the Rent of 13 l. did pass or not. if it does not pass, then by
the Statute of 32 H. 8. the 3. part of the Manor of Crankford does not go to
the deuisee, but descends to the heir at the Common Law.

Shuttleworth for the Plaintiff. The seigniory does not pass by the devise of
the Manor, for the intent thereof shall be collected, by the words of the
Will. 15 H. 7.12. a. 19 H. 8.9. and 6. but here he limits a distress out of a
Lordship, which cannot be 3 H. 6. Also it is doubtful if the seignory being
entire, may be divided by force of the Statute of the 32 H. 8. And I think
not; for when the Statute says that the lands devised shall be devised into
three parts, and that is to be understood of such an estate as may be divided,
but so cannot a Seigniory: For put the case that the Lord held by a Hawk, the
whole Manor shall descend and cannot be divided, and so de catalla Fellonum.
Fenner contra. For it seems to me that the seignory passes, and so it shall
be, if he held but a mesualty 7 Ed. 4. A man held by Frankalmoigne, he shall
say, infra feodum suum, and in reputation amongst men, a seigniory is a Manor:
for if a man makes a feoffment of a Manor, with livery where he has no
Manor, yet shall it pass, 7 E. 3. Where a Manor passes by the name of
Knights Fee. And as to the intirenes of the seigniory it is easily answered for
although the rent were entire, yet it may be severed, for a Rent Charge is
entire, yet a proportionment may be made thereof 44 Ed. 3. To which the Court
agreed that the Rent without doubt might be severed.

Walmesley. For the Plaintiff, the Question is if the Rent passes by the name
of a Manor to the Devisees. If a Grandmother devises land to her daughter
J.S. Whereas she is her daughters daughter, yet this is good, because in common
speaking she is so called, but here the words are not apt, nor used in common
speaking, viz. That Rent should be taken for a Manor, and therefore it is
void, as a gift to the right heirs of J.S. who is attaint 19 H. 8. And he
concluded with this difference: that where the words have any affinity or
likelihood to the Manor, then it will pass by the name of a Manor. As if a
man devises his house and land by the name of a Manor it shall pass. But
here being but a service, it is otherwise.

Gaudy cont. For if it the Rent pass not nothing shall pass, which is a hard
construction on a Will. For 21 Rich. 2. Devise 27. a Devise Ecclesiae sancti
Andreae is a good devise to the Parson of the Church.

And in Brett and Rigdens Casea man devised a Manor in which he had nothing,
and after purchased the Manor, the devise is good. And in 26 H. 6. feoffment
12. Land will not pass by deed by the name of a house, but land will pass by
the name of a Carue, and a Carue by the name of a Manor, and I hold that the
Rent in this case will pass by the name of the Manor, for a Manor does
consist of Demesnes services, and rent may be called a Manor as well as a
Carue, and and the King gives it by the name of a Manor to the Devisor, and
that is the reason that the Devisor calls it a Manor: And if you grant to me
an Advowson by the name of the Church and Rectory, and I devise the Rectory,
the Advowson and the Church will pass by the name of Rectory: And in Plouden.
194. A man did let his house and great demesnes rendering Rent, and did devise
to another all his Farm; there the Devisee shall have all the Rent and the
Reversion also.

Michaelm. 29. and 30.
Bishop of Lincolnes Case. Rot. 1528. and 2200.

IN a quare impedit, brought by the King, against the Bishop of Lincoln and
Leigh, the Incumbent: The Case was. The Bishop had an Advowson in gross, and
presented J.S. who took a second Benefice with cure, whereby the first became
void, and continued so until Lapse fallen to the Queen, and after the title of
Lapse fallen to the Queen, the Bishop presented one J. who was inducted, and by
reason of Recusancy to pay Tithes, was deprived, and by the Statute 26 H. 8.
the Church became void ipso facto, whereupon the Bishop presented one Leigh
within six months, and now the Queen would present. Fenner. This Case is the
same with Bosherulls, lately adjudged. But the Court said, that here was a
privation for Recusancy; and therefore it would make a difference. And
afterward Pasch. 30 Eliz.

Walmesley. For the Queen said. That if a Lapse be fallen to the Ordinary, if
the Patron does present before the Bishop has Collated, he ought to receive
his Clerk, but where it is divolved to the King, the Patron by no means can
defeat the King, but he may remove his Clerk at his pleasure, but if such
Incumbent be present after such Lapse, and die, then the title of the King is
gone, and his time passed by the act of God: but in our Case the avoydance
which does oust the King from his Lapse, is avoidance by reason of Recusancy to
pay Tithes, which is the proper act of the Incumbent, as is a resignation, and
no such avoydance being by the act of the party himself shall oust the King of
his Presentation. for in the 2 H. 9. In annuitie against an Abbot, who resigns
the Writ shall not abate, for then the Plaintiff shall never have a good Writ.
So in our case, if the King be outed of his Lapse by such devises, he shall
never have a Lapse, for every one will usurp upon the Kings Lapse, and will
presently resign or misdemesn himself whereby to avoid the Lapse. And in the 18
Ed. 4. the 19.

By Pigot. A writ brought against a Prior shall not abate, although the Prior
be not deposed, for it is his own fault.

Fenner. This Lapse is given the King by his prerogative, but on this
Condition, that he take it in due time: for so is the nature of things lapsed,
for if after a title accrued to the King he suffer usurpation, and the
Incumbent die, his Lapse is lost, for the nature of the Lapse is such that it
must be taken at its time, and where the title of the King is limited to a
time, there he shall not have his prerogative: for a prerogative cannot alter
estates. As if the King grant a seigniory in gross rendering Rent, and the
Tenant to the Lord dies without heir, whereby the tenant escheates, the
seigniory is extinct, and the Rent of the King is gone, as well as it is in the
case of a Common person. And so if the King have a Rent feck for life out of my
land, if I die he cannot distreine in my land for the arrerages as he may in my
life time. And so where the Statute gives Annum diem and vastum to the King,
yet he shall not have it after the death of the Tenant for life, so if the King
reserve a Rent upon a Lease to an Estranger, and the stranger enters in respect
of the land, whereby his entire rent is suspended, now the condition as to the
King also is suspended during that time, for the nature thereof is to be
attendant upon the rent 22 H. 3. If a man grant a Rent upon condition to cease
during the minority of his heir, and after this Rent comes to the King, and the
Grantee dies, the Rent shall cease during the minority of his heir: so that by
all these cases the reason appears that the nature of the Lapse is to be taken
hac vice, and the King must take it then, or not at all: and where it is
objected that by this means every Lapse may be taken from the King: I conceive
that far greater inconvenience will be to the Patrons on the other side: for
when a Lapse is devolded to the King, and a stranger presents, if then the true
Patron may not present until the death of such Incumbent, perhaps the
Incumbent will resign, or be deprived, and a stranger shall be presented again
and again in like manner, and so by this means the Patron shall never continue
his advowson, for by the Couin between the stranger, and the neglect of the
King to take his Lapse, the Inc^mbent shall never die. And afterward in this
term, it was adjudged that such usurpation shall not take away the Lapse from
the King, because the avoydance accrued by the act of the Incumbent. Cook ib.
7.27. a.

Hillary. 29 Eliz.
Lassell's Case.
LAssell brought an action of debt upon an obligation, the Defendant pleads,
that the condition was, that he should personally appear before the Justices,
and set forth, how he was taken by a Latitat by the Plaintiff who was Shiriff,
who took this obligation upon his deliverance: and urged the Statute of 23 H.
6. and said that the obligation was not according to the Statute. And by the
Opinion of three Justices (Anderson being absent) If it were in such an action
wherein a man may appear by Attorney, then it is void. And the Plaintiff showed
a Judgment given in the Kings Bench, wherein in such case Judgment was given
for the Sheriffs, and it was between Seekford and Cutts 27. and 28. Eliz. Rot.
373. And the next Term it was moved again.

Anderson. The Obligation is void; for when an express form is limited by the
Statute, no variance ought to be from it. But the other three Justices were
against him, for they held that he ought to appear in his proper person in case
of a Latitat.

Anderson. I deny that, for Latitats have not been of above 60 years
continuance; Vid. Cook, lib. 10. Beufages Case; and his first Institutes, 225.
a.

Pasch. 25 Eliz.
Kayre against Deurat, in C. B. Rot. 603.

IN a Waste, the Plaintiff declared how the Defendant was seized in Fee, and
made a Feoffment to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the Plaintiff
in Fee, after which he committed waste. The Tenant said, that he was seized in
Fee, without that he made a Feoffment as the Plaintiff declared; and upon issue
joined, it was found that the Defendant was seized in Fee, and that he made a
Feoffment to the use of himself for life of J.S. without impeachment of waste,
the remainder ut supra; and whether this was the Feoffment which the Plaintiff
alleged, they prayed the advice of the Court.

Anderson, Chief Justice. If the impeachment of waste be not part of their
issue, then the Verdict is void for that point, and that which is found more
than their issue is void, 33 H. 6. the Defendant pleaded that he was not Tenant
of the Freehold, and the Jury found that he held jointly with another there
the Plaintiff shall recover. And then at another day it was said by the
Justices, that the Jury had found such an estate as was alleged by the
Plaintiff; and although that they further found this privilege to be
dispunisht of waste, which upon the matter proves that the Plaintiff has no
cause of action, yet because the Tenant may choose whether he would take hold
of this privilege or not, the Jury cannot find a thing that is out of their
Verdict, and whereof the Defendant will not take advantage by pleading, and for
this cause their Verdict was void. 7 H. 6.33. 21 H. 7.12. where one pleaded in
Bar a Feoffment, and traversed the Feoffment, and hereupon they were at issue,
and the Jury found that he had enfeoffed the Tenant after the Fine levied to
the Plaintiff: this cannot be found because it is out of their issue, 31 Assi.
12. and Judgment was given for the Demandant.

Hillar. 29 Eliz.
Michell against Donton, in C. B. Rot, 639.

IN an Ejectment a man makes a Lease, rendering Rent, with a Covenant that the
Lessee shall repair the houses, with other Covenants and Conditions of re-entry
for not performance, and then he devised the same land to the same Lessee for
diverse years after the first years expired, yielding the same Rent, and under
the same Covenants, as in the former Lease, and he devised the remainder in fee
to the Plaintiff, and the first Lease expires, and the Defendant being possessed
by force of his second Lease, does not repair the houses; and if the Plaintiff
might enter, was the question.

Shuttleworth. In as much as he devised the land under the same Covenants as
the first Lease was, and the first was with Covenants and Conditions, the
second shall be so also, the rather because he devises the remainder over, so
that the Devisee cannot take advantage of the Covenants, but of the Conditions
he may, and the second Lease is conditional. But the whole Court was against
him.

Shuttleworth. To what purpose then are these words in the Devise, Under the
same Covenants.

Periam. They shall be void. And by all the Justices the intent of the Will was
not that the Lease should be conditional, for Covenants and Conditions differ
much, for the one gives an action, but not the other; but the intent was, that
he should perform the Covenants upon pain to render damages in a Writ of
Covenant.

Bottenham against Herlakenden,
29 and 30 Eliz. in C. B. Rot. 1620.

HErlakenden was seized of land, and devised the same to the Plaintiff for
years, the remainder to his wife for life, Proviso, that the Plaintiff should
pay to the woman 20 l. per annum; and if he failed of his payment, etc.
wherefore the woman entered, and if this shall be called reservation or
reversion, was the question.

Anderson. A man cannot make a Reservation on a Devise.

Periam. A man may to himself and his heirs, but not to a stranger.

Anderson. Every Devisee is in, in the sier by the Devisor, and why shall not
this then be a reservation to the Devisor, and a grant of the reversion to the
woman.

Gaudy. Wherefore cannot a man devise land, reserving rent, when by the Statute
32 H. 8. he may devise at his pleasure?

Periam. Because his pleasure must correspond with the Law.

Anderson. If I devise land to another, reserving rent to me and my heirs and
then devise the reversion, he shall have the rent as incident to the reversion,
and the Judges were divided, wherefore, etc.

29 Eliz.
Glover against Pipe, in B. R. Rot. 838.

IN debt upon a Bond the Condition was, that where Glover the Plaintiff had a
Copyhold of inheritance, and had leased it to the Defendant, if the Defendant
should not commit any manner of waste, and should do no other thing that should
be forfeiture of the Copyhold, that then, etc. The Defendant pleaded conditions
performed; the Plaintiff replied, and alleged waste committed in a shop that
fell down during the term for want of reparation: but the Defendant in
rejoinder alleged, that the shop was ruinous at the time of the Lease, and by
reason thereof fell down.

Tanfield. It is no waste, as the Books are, 42 Ed. 3. 19 Ed. 3. 2 H. 7.3. a.
12 H. 8.11. a. If a house be ruinous at the time of the Lease, and fall during
the term, it is no waste: yet the Book in 7 H. 6. is otherwise. And in the 12
H. 4. a man lets his house, promises that the Lessee shall not suffer any
voluntary waste, if the timber be so good as it will endure the whole term,
although it be not covered, yet is the Lessee bound to reserve it during the
term.

Godfrey for the Plaintiff, and agreed to all the cases aforesaid. But here the
Defendant is bound by his obligation, and therefore it differs from the case in
42 Ed. 3.6. and of Perkins 142. where a diversity is between a waste and a
covenant; for if a man makes a Lease for years, and by sudden chance waste is
committed, this shall excuse the Lessee: but if he covenant to leave the house
in as good a condition as he found it, if the house fall down by tempest, yet
he ought to re-edify it. Also in this case it is a waste in Law, although the
house were ruinous at the beginning of the Lease; for in a waste brought in
such case, if he pleads null waste fait, he shall not give such matter in
evidence, but it is only to excuse him. And with him agreed all the Court, and
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Austin against Courtney,
30 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 165.

AUstin and his wife, as daughter and heir of one Webb, brought a Writ of
Error against Thomas Courtney to reverse a Fine leavied in a base Court by the
said Webb to himself.

Cook assigned these errors, 1. Because the Fine was levied de uno tenemento,
which is not good for the generality, for it may be land, or common, or rent.
And in 3 Ed. 4. a Plea in Bar was rejected, because it was pleaded that one was
seized de uno tenemento, for this is uncertain. And in 38 H. 6. an Action is
brought upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. for entry into certain tenements, that is
not good, for it ought to be brought of so many acres. The second error was,
because Webb the Conusor did acknowledge the land to be his right, whereas it
ought to be the right of Courtney the Conusee. The third error was, because
the Fine was levied in a base Court, which prescribes to hold Pleas but they
cannot levy Fines there, for then the King shall lose his silver 50. Assi^. And
so was it adjudged between Bambury and Peers, that a Fine levied in Chester
which had such prescription, is not good; wherefore Judgment was given that
the Fine should be reverst.

Trinit. 30 Eliz.
Ireland against Higgins. Rot. 403, vel 43.

IN an Action of the Case the Plaintiff declared, that whereas a dog came to
the hands of the Defendant which belonged to the Plaintiff, the Defendant did
assume to deliver the said dog to the Plaintiff upon request, and that the
Plaintiff had requested him, and he did not deliver the dog, ad damnum, etc.
and hereupon the Defendant demurred.

Leigh for the Defendant. Here is no consideration; for when the Plaintiff is
out of the possession of his dog, he has lost his interest in him, for a dog
is ferae naturae, and therefore when he is out of possession, he has no
remedy. 22 H. 6. 10 H. 7.^.6 Ed. 4. and he cited Fyne^ and Sir Joh^ Spencers
Case in Dyer, where a Trespass will not lie for a hawk. Also, by the Grant of
omnia bona and catalla, dogs do not pass, nor are tithable nor are Assets.

T^field contra. Horses, cows, and all cattle which are most profitable for
service of man, were at first ferae naturae, and so were dogs also: but since
by use nothing is so familiar and domestic to man than is a dog, and then he
cannot be ferae naturae; and therefore a Trespass will lie for a dog, if he
declare his dog, for that word does imply it is his domestic dog; and he much
relied on a Book, the Roll whereof he had seen, Tr^n^t. 15 H. 7. R. 35. where a
man justified in a Trespass of Battery in defense of his dog. And in 2 Ed. 2.
Avowry 182. a Replevin was brought of a Ferret. And in 23 El^z. Leeks Case,
where one had Judgment to recover great damages for a bloodhound And as to the
Case of F^ne^ and S^e^ce the reason why the Plaintiff had not Judgment was,
because he did not show that the hawk was reclaimed, but after he brought a new
Action, and had great damages. And at last it was adjudged by all the Court
that the Action is maintainable, and Judgment commanded to be entered, nisi,
etc.

Trinit. 30 Eliz.
Stone against Withepoole, in B. R. Rot. 771.

IN an Action of the Case the Plaintiff declared, that J. S. wan indebted to
him for velvet and other things to such a value, and was bound in a Bond to pay
money for them, and that afterward the Defendant (being his Executor) did
assume and promise to pay the money. The Defendant pleaded that the Testator
was within age at the time of the making the Bond, and hereupon the Plaintiff
demurred.

Egerton S ll citor for the Plaintiff. A Contract made by an Infant is not
void, but voydable; and if the Infant at his full age had assumed as the
Defendant has, it had been good, and by the same reason the Executors
assumsion is good, 9 Eliz. 13. where the Lord Gra^, being heir to the former
Lord Gray, although he was not bound to pay the debts of his father upon simple
contract, yet in regard he did assume to pay them, he was made chargeable. And
in 15 and 16 E iz. it is a good consideration where an Administrator undertakes
to pay debts upon a simple contract: but admitting the Executor be not
chargeable by Law, yet in equity and conscience he is chargeable in Chancery;
and when he promises in consideration that the Plaintiff will not sue him,
that is a good consideration.

Cook. The consideration is the ground of every Action on the Case, and it
ought to be either a charge to the Plaintiff* or a benefit to the Defendant, 17
E^. 4 5. where a man promised and assumed to a Chyrurgean money for curing a
poor man: that was a good consideration; for although it is no benefit to the
Defendant, yet it is a charge to the Plaintiff* and where there is no
consideration* there can be no good action; as where a man promises a debt
that he never owed, this is void. And after, viz. 31 Eliz. It seemed to all the
Justices, that the consideration was not good, and therefore the contract void:
But if goods he delivered to an Infant to be re-delivered, if Afterward his
Executor assumeth to re-deliver them, this is good.

Gaudy, in the 13 H. 6. If a man be indebted in a simple Contract, and dye, and
his Executors assume to pay the debt, it is good: but ^his seems to be contrary
to the Law, for it is contrary to that which has been lately adjudged in the
Common Pleas. And Egerton cited a Ca^e, 10 H 6. where an Infant brought an
Action of Trespass, and submitted himself to an arbitrament, this shall bind
him at his full age; and this was agreed by the Court, but differs much from
the Case at Bar; for when an Infant commits a Trespass, he is chargeable in an
Action of Trespass, and shall lose damages: but it is not so here. Wherefore
Judgment was given, that the Plaintiff should be barred.

Mich. 30 Eliz.
Stanton against Chamberlain. Rot.

IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond, upon non est factum pleaded, the Jury found,
that the Defendant sealed the Bond, and cast it on the Table, and the Plaintiff
came and took up the Bond, and carried it away without saying any thing; and if
this shall amount to a Delivery by the Defendant to the Plaintiff, was the
question. And it was resolved by all the Justices, that if the Jury had found
that he had sealed the Bond, and cast it on the table toward the Plaintiff, to
the intent that the Plaintiff should take it as his Deed, who took the Bond and
went away, that had been a good delivery; or that the Plaintiff, after the
sealing and casting on the table, had taken it by the commandment or consent of
the Defendant: but because it is found that the Defendant only sealed it, and
cast it on the table, and the Plaintiff took it and went away with it, this is
not a sufficient delivery, for it may be that he sealed it to the intent to
reserve it to himself until other things were agreed, and then if the
Plaintiff take it, and go away with it without the Defendants consent, that
will not make it the Descendants Deed. But it was said, that it might be
accounted to be the Defendants Deed, because it is found that he sealed it, and
cast it on the table, and the Plaintiff took it, etc. and it is not found that
the Defendant said any thing, and therefore because he did not say any thing,
it will amount to his consent, Nam qui tacet consentire videtur. But to this it
was answered, that it is not found that the Defendant was present when the
Plaintiff took it; and if the Defendant had sealed, and cast the Bond on the
Table when the Plaintiff was not there, and then the Defendant went away, and
then the Plaintiff came and took it away, then clearly it is not the Deed of
the Defendant.

Hill. 31 Eliz.
Beron against Goodyne.
IN an Ejectment the Case was, the King was seized of lands in Fee, and a
stranger intruded, and the King grants this land to J. S. in Fee, and the
Intruder continues possession, and dies seized: The question was, if this
descent shall take away the entry of I.S.

Johnson. It shall not; for none will affirm that an Intruder shall gain any
thing out of the King, but that the land shall pass to the Patentee, and the
continuance of the Intruder in possession, and his dying seized, shall not take
away the entry; for he cannot be a Disseisor. because he gained no estate at
the beginning; as if a Guardian continues possession after the heir is of full
age, he is no Disseisor, nor shall gain any estate. And 10 Ed. 3.2. where a
tenant of the King dies, his heir within age, and a stranger enters, and after
the heir is of full age dies seized, this shall not take away the entry of the
heir.

Cook contr. By his continuance of possession he shall be accounted a
Disseisor, and the Freehold out of the Patentee, for another estate he cannot
have, for tenant at sufferance be is not, for he comes in at first by a title,
as in the 12 Assi. The Dona's in Frank-marriage are divorced, and the husband
continues the possession; and so where a Lessee continues possession after the
death of the tenant for life, these are tenants at sufferance; and the Patentee
has a Freehold in Law, which is taken away by descent, and denied there was
any such case as was vouched in the 10 Ed. 3. but compared the case to the 21
Ed. 3.2. where a Fine was levied per conusans de droit come ceo, etc. if before
the Conusee enters, a stranger enters, and dies seized, the entry of the
Conusee is barred. So is it where an Advowson is granted to J.S. and his heirs,
and a stranger usurps, the Grantee has no remedy. And if a man devises land
to J.S. and before he enters, a stranger does enter, and dies seized, the entry
of the Disseisee is taken away; and so it is in our case. But a further day was
given Cook to show cause why Judgment should not be given against him.

Hillar. 31 Eliz.
Suttons Case, in C. B. Rot. 533.

IN an Ejectment, the Jury gave a special Verdict, that the Defendant (nihil
habens in terra) did make a Lease thereof to the Plaintiff by Indenture,
according as the Plaintiff had declared, and then the Defendant entered on the
Plaintiff; and whether this entry be good, was the question.

Walmesley for the Defendant. Jurors are sworn ad veritatem dicendum, and
therefore they shall not enquire of Estoppels, because it is not in evidence.
But the whole Court was against him, who held that the Jury might find a
matter that is not showed in evidence; for by Anderson, in an Assize they may
find a Release, although it be not given in evidence; and he and Periam held,
that the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment, for that there was a good Lease
between the parties, and if Rent were reserved, an Action of Debt would lie.

Windham contr. For it is only an Estoppell between the parties: but the Court
is at liberty, and are not estopped, when the truth appears to them; and it is
a Maxim in Law, that he who has nothing in the land cannot make a Lease. and
then the Plaintiff has no cause of Action. And afterward, viz. 32 Eliz.
Anderson and Periam were expressly for the Plaintiff; for whereas it has been
said that it was a Lease by Estoppell, they held it was not so, for that in
Debt the Rent should be recovered. And Anderson said, If I levy a Fine of your
land to you for years, if you be put out, I shall have an Assize: but Windham
was of opinion with Walmesley: wherefore Periam said, we will have the opinion
of the other Justices in the Exchequer Chamber; wherefore, etc.

Trinit 30 Eliz.
Perryn against Allen in C. B. Rot. 611. and 612.

IN a debt upon a Lease for years, It was found that on Gibson was seized of
Land in Lease for thirty years, and he let the Land to Perryn for 19. years
rendering 10. l. rent, and that afterward, it was articled and agreed between
Gibson and one J.S. that P^rryn should have and hold the Lands which he had,
and also other lands which he had, for term of 3. years rendering a greater
rent, to which Articles Perryn at another time and place afterward agreed, but
the intent of the articles and agreement betwixt them, was not that the first
Term to Perryn should be extinct. That afterward Perryn let this Land to
the Defendant Allen for 17. years rendering Rent, and then the three years
expired, and Gibson grants his term to J.S. who enters, etc. If this agreement
amounts to a surrender, was the question.

Hanam, for the Plaintiff. It is not: for to a surrender three things are
incident. First, an actual possession in him who surrenders. Secondly, an
actual remainder or reversion in him, to whom the surrender is made. Thirdly,
consent and agreement between the parties: But to all these, the Plaintiff was
a stranger, and therefore no surrender. For if I let land to you for so many
years as J.S. shall name, if he names the years, it shall be good from that
time, and not before: but if I let land for so many years as my Executors shall
name, this is not good, for I cannot have Executors in my life time, and when I
am dead I cannot assent, so in this case there ought to be a mutual assent
between the Lessor and Lessee.

H^i^ Cont. It is a surrender, for if he concluded and agreed at another time,
or accepted a new Lease, it is a surrender. 37 H. 6. 22 Ed. 4. 14 H 7. and then
when a stranger does agree that he shall have other lands and pay a greater
Rent, this is a surrender.

Anderson. If I covenant with you that J.S. shall have my land for ten years,
this is only a Covenant and no Lease, quod Wa^m^sl^y concessit. And so if I
covenant that your Executors shall have my land for a term of years after your
death, this is no Lease. And all the Court held, that this was not a good
Lease, for the act of a stranger cannot make a surrender of the Term.

Peryam. You at the Bar have forgotten to argue one point material in the
Case, videlicet. If Lessee for 20. years makes a Lease for ten years if the
Lessee for ten years may surrender to the Lessee for 20. years. And Hanam said
privately, that he could not surrender, for one Term cannot merge in the other.
And Anderson said, that by opinion of them all, that the Lessee for 10. years
cannot surrender. But to the other point. All the Judges agreed that it was no
surrender. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Dabridgecourt against Smallbrooke.
IN an action of the Case, the Plaintiff declared that he was Sheriff of the
County of Warwick, and that a writ came down to him to arrest J.S. at the suit
of the Defendant, who requested the Plaintiff to make Russell, who was the
Defendants friend, his special Baily, in consideration of which the Defendant
did assume, that if the said J.S. did escape, that he would take no advantage
against the Plaintiff, whereupon he made Russell his Bailiff, who arrested the
said J.S. who afterward escapt from him, and that notwithstanding the
Defendant had charged the Plaintiff for this. And a verdict was found for the
Plaintiff. And in this case it was agreed, that where a Sheriff did make a
Bailiff upon request of any one, it is reason that the party should not charge
the Sheriff for an escape, by reason of the negligence of such Bailiff: for the
Sheriff has security from every one of his Bailiffs to save him harmeless:
wherefore it is great reason that if upon request he makes a special Bailiff,
that the party should not take advantage of such an escape, but that the
Sheriff may have his action against him again, upon his promise. And Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

Hillar. 31 Eliz.
Beale. against Carter. Rot. 331.

IN an action of false imprisonment. The Defendant justified the imprisonment
for two hours, because the Plaintiff brought a little infant with him to the
Church intending to leave it there, and to have the Parish keep it: and the
Defendant (being Constable of the Parish) because the Plaintiff would not carry
the child away with him again, carried the Defendant to prison, all the said
time, until he took the child away with him. And hereupon the Plaintiff
demurred. And it seemed to the Justices that it was no good plea: for although
the Constable at the Common Law is keeper of the Peace, yet this does not
belong to his Office, but if he had justified as Officer, then perhaps it had
been good. And afterward, viz. Hillar. 33 Eliz. the Case was argued again, and
then Glanvill said. That it was a good justification, for any person may do it.
For if I see A. ready to kill B. I ought to hinder him of his purpose. And in
the 22 Ass. 50. the Defendant justified because the Plaintiff was madd and did
a great deal of mischief, wherefore he imprisoned him. And in 10 Eliz. which
case I have heard in this Court. The Constable took a madd man, and put him in
prison. where he dyed, and the Constable was indicted of this, but was
discharged: for the act was legal, and so here in this Case, if the infant had
dyed for want of meat, it had been murder in the Plaintiff. For it was held in
20 Eliz. at Winchester before the Lord Bacon, if one brings an infant to a
desert place, where it dies for want of nourishment, it is murder.

Gaudy. It was ill done of the Plaintiff, but that ought to be reformed by due
course of Law, for a Constable cannot imprison at his pleasure, but he may stay
the party, and carry him to a Justice of Peace to be examined.

Wray. Then such matter ought to be pleaded. Quod Gaudie concessit.

Fenner. If he had pleaded that he refused to carry the infant away, then it
had been a good justification, for a Constable is Conservator of the peace, but
because it was not so pleaded the Plea is naught; But the Judges would not give
Judgment, for the ill Examples sake, and therefore they moved the parties to
compound.

Pasch. 31 Eliz.
Sale against the Bishop of Lichfield in C. B.
SAle Executor of J.S. who was Grantee of the nomination and presentation to
the Archdeaconary in the County of Derby, brought a Quare impedit against the
Bishop of Lichfield, and declared of a presentment and disturbance in vita
Testatoris, and quod Ecclesia vacavit and adhuc vacata est. The Defendant
pleaded Plein d'Incumbent, before the writ purchased, and Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff. And it was moved, If a Quare Impedit does lie of an
Archdeaconary, for it is but a function or dignity, and therefore a Quare
Impedit will not lie of an office of a Commissary, but the 24 Ed. 3.42. is
express in the point. And 30 Edw. 3.21. a Qure Impedit did lie of a Priory. And
therefore notwithstanding this exception, Judgment was given for the the
Plaintiff. But there were two other doubts in the Case. First, If a Quare
Impedit will lie for an Executor for disturbance done in vita Testatoris, and
that by the Statute of 4 Ed. 3.7.

Snigge. The action will lie by the Executors, for in all Cases where damages
are to be recovered, they shall have an action by that Statute. 11 H. 7.2. An
action of trespass was brought for taking of goods in the life of the Testator,
but no action will lie for entry into land in the life of the Testator, for it
ought to be such an action as will survive in damages, and may be a damage to
the Executor 7 H. 42. An ejectement lies for Executors, upon an ejectment in
the life of the Testator. And if an ejectment be maintenable in which a Term
shall be recovered, it shall be also maintenable in a Quare Impedit, in which a
presentment may be recovered.

Drew cont. At the Common Law Executors have no remedy for a personal wrong,
quia moritur cum persona: for upon the death of the Testator, Executors have no
remedy for arrears of Rent at the Common Law, but only the Statute of 32 H. 8.
And it cannot be that the Executors in this case are within the Statute of 4
Ed. 3. For that Statute intends only to remedy such things as are avaylable to
the Testator, and are assets to pay debts: and although Executors may have a
Quare Impedit, that is intended of a disturbance, fait al eux, but contra, if
it be done in vita Testatoris.

Walmesley. I conceive no actions will lie. For the Statute gives an action for
the taking of goods and such like things, but here is no taking, but only a
disturbance, which may be done by Parol.

Perryam Justice cont. For the Statute, says that they shall have an action of
trespass for a trespass done to their Testator, and not for taking goods, so
that the taking of goods is but by way of resemblance, and not that they shall
have an action of trespass for taking of goods only.

Windham, and Anderson. agreed with Perryam, and whereas it has been said,
that this cannot be Assetts. Put the case that the Testator had judgment to
recover damages, shall not that be Assetts? and why may the damages here
recovered be Assetts, and why shall not the grant of the Advowson be Assetts in
the hands of the Executor as well as in the hands of the issue. And so was the
opinion of the Court.

32 Eliz.
Foster and Wilson against Mapps. in B. R. Rot. 71.

THe Case on a special verdict was thus, Mapps the Defendant made a Lease of
the Parsonage of Broncaster by Indenture, and Covenanted by the same Deed, to
save the Plaintiff harmless and indemnified: and also all the proffits thereof
and premises, against Philip Blount, the Parson of Broncaster; and hereupon a
writ of Covenant was brought against Mapps, and the breach assigned was, that
Blount had entered and ejected the Plaintiff. And one point was, if this shall
be accounted the Deed of the Defendant, because the Defedant delivered his part
of the Indenture to the Plaintiff as his Deed, but the Plaintiff did not
deliver the counterpart to him. But the opinion of the Court was, that this was
a good Deed of the Defendants, and Gaudy said, that the safest way had been to
deliver his part as an Escroll to be his Deed, when the Plaintiff delivered the
Counterpaine: But a great doubt was made in this case, because it was not
showed that Blount entered by a Title, and then he shall be taken to have entered
by wrong, and so the Covenant not broken, for to save harmeless is only from
legal harms, as it is in Swettenhams Case Dyer 306. Where the Warden of the
Fleet suffered a prisoner to escape, and took a bond of him to save him
harmeless, and then the Warden was sued upon an escape, and thereupon he sued
the Obligation, and adjudged that the bond was not forfeit, because the party
was not legally in execution, and therefore the Warden could not be damnified
for the escape.

Padsy cont. The Diversity is where the Covenant is general, and where it is
special, for in this case it being special to save harmeless from Blount, he
ought to defend against him his entry, be it by good title or by wrong, and so
is Catesbies Ease. Dyer. 3.28. Where the Lessor covenanted, that the Lessee
should enjoy his term sine ejectione vel interruptione alicujus, the Lessee
brought an action of Covenant because a stranger entered, and did not say he had
any title, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Gaudy. The Covenant is broke. For if Blount disturb him so that he cannot
take the proffits, this is a breach of the Covenant, for hereby the Plaintiff
is damnified. 2 Ed. 4.15. where the Condition of a Bond was, that the Obliger
should warrant and defend the Obliged for ever, and against all, and the
Defendant pleaded, that he had such a Warrant, and there it was held by Danby
to be no plea, because he cannot warrant unless the other be impleaded. And
there it was said by Danby and Needham, that if the obligee be outed by a
stranger, who has no title, the Obligation is forfeit by reason of this word
defend.

Wray agreed, and said, that this case was not like to the Ease of 26 H. 8.3.
where the Lessor Covenanted to warrant the land to the Lessee, for there he
shall not have a Covenant, if he be wrongfully outed; but our case is to save
harmeless, which is of greater force than to warrant, for to warrant Land is
only upon the title, but here, be the Lessee outed by wrong or by title, yet is
the Covenant broken, to which the other Justices agreed.

Fenner Vouchf. 18 Ed. 4.27. where a man is obliged to save J.S. harmless
against me, if I do arrest J.S. although wrongfully, the obligation is
forfeit, which the other Justice denied, And at last Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

Pasch. 33 Eliz.
Elmer and his wife against Thatcher in C. B. Rot. 1125. And Cooks 1. Inst. 355.

IN a Quod ei deforceat of a third part of an acre of Land whereof the wife was
tenant in Dower: The defendant confesed she was tenant in Dower, but showed how
she committed waste, Statut Westminster. 2. cap. 4.
wherefore he brought his action of waste, to which she appeared and pleaded
nothing, for which he had Judgment to recover. The Plaintiff said that no waste
was committed, and the Defendant Demurred.

Owen for the Defendant. a Quod ei deforceat, lies not in this case, for such
Writ is grounded upon a recovery by default in a real action, but a waste is a
mere personal action. And therefore in the 2 H. 4. in a waste against the
husband and wife, the wife shall not be received: also it will not lie in this
case, because here is no default within the intent of the Statute, for the
Statute intends to relieve defaults after appearance, and therefore all the
Judgment in this Writ is that the recovery was by default, and if there was a
default in pleading, it is a default, but not within the Statute.

Glanvill cont. No waste is committed, and so the recovery shall not bind, for
it appears in the 8 Ed. 4. by West. That this action was provided instead of a
Writ of right, and there is no question but a Writ of right will lie here, and
this Writ is of the same nature. And Mr Plowden in his Reading said, that this
action will lie upon a recovery upon a Writ of waste, as well as in other
actions, for the recovery is not upon the Inquiry of the Jury, but upon
default. And it is also a real action 7 Ed. 3. 28 Ed. 3.30. If the husband
make default herein, the wife shall be received.

Anderson. There is no question but this action lies upon a recovery in waste,
but if this be a default within the Statute is a doubt, for if this should be
suffer d, it were very mischievous: for then contempts shall be favored, which
was never the intention of the Statute, and therefore it will not lie where
there is a default after appearance.

Walmesley. of the same opinion, for this case differs much from the Statute of
Gloucester, for this Statute gives remedy to a third person upon default of the
particular Tenant, and therefore upon this Statute, the intent of the party,
who makes default, is more regarded, than the manner of the default, and
therefore it shall be taken largely. But here is default in the party himself,
and he shall have no favor against his wilful default, for every nihil
dicit, is a confession of it self, for thereupon it is supposed that nothing
can be said.

Windham. I hold that a Quod ei deforceat will not lie in a Writ of waste, for
the inquiry of the Jury is the cause of the Judgment. But he agreed that
default within the Statute is intended such default, that in it self is the
cause of the Judgment, but here the Judgment is given upon contempt and
refusal of the party and therefore no favor.

Perryam. This action cannot be compared to a writ of right which is grounded
upon the right, and not on the Judgment, but the form in the Quod ei deforceat
is set down in the Statute which ought to be observed, and the Statute gives
this action upon a default, and here is no default, for it cannot be a default
where the party appears and has no day in Court, but he doubted much if it
lay in awrit of waste, because the damages are the principal: but as the case
is here, it will not lie. And to prove that a nihil dicit is a confession he
cited Pepyss Ease in the Comentaries 438. And at last Judgment was given that
the Writ would not lie.

Pasch. 35 Elizab.
James against Portman.
WIlliam James and Thomas James Ioyntenants for life of a lease made by
Portman, William James does assent, covenant and agree that Thomas James occupy
all the land alone, and sow it with his own Corn: After the land is sowed
Thomas James dies, William James the survivor grants the Corn to Portman, who
takes it, and the Plaintiff as executor to Thomas brought an action of trespass.

Ewens, for the Defendant, one Ioyntenant cannot make a Lease to his companion,
no more than one may infeof the other, by reason they have joint possession 10
Ed. 4.3. 2 R. 2. Extinguishment 3. Also the words here are not sufficient to
make a Lease, but admitting this, yet the survivor shall have the corn of that
part which belongs to him, for by this Lease the Ioynture is severed, and then
the Survivor shall have that which grows on his part: For it two Ioyntenants
sow their land, and one of them letts his moytie for years; and he, who did
not let, dies, the other shall have the corn as Survivor.

Pyne cont. Although one Ioyntenant cannot inteof another, because he cannot
make livery, because he has possession before, yet may he Release to his
companion, and so may he make a Lease for years, for there is no need of any
livery, and by the 22 H. 6.43. If one Ioyntenant infeofs another, this shall
enure by way of confirmation. And 14 H. 6.10. One Ioyntenant may put out his
companion by this means, for he may claim a Lease from him, and then a
Release, and if it be a good Lease, then the Executors shall have it.

Popham. The action is good, for one Ioyntenant may make a Lease to the other,
although he cannot infeof, for a Lease is but a contract. And 11 H. 6.33. one
Ioyntenant commanded the other to occapy all, and in a trespass he was
compelled to plead this as a Lease, and then if one Ioyntenant does sow all and
dies, the other shall have the Corn by Survivor: and it is not as in case
where a man has an estate determinable upon uncertainty, for there his
Executors shall have the Corn, but in our case, the Survivor had contracted
with his companion, and thereby had bound himself not to meddle with the land,
and the other bestowed great costs in manuring and sowing the Land, and
therefore the Executors shall have the Corn.

Fenner agreed, but doubted whether one Ioyntenant could make a Lease to the
other: but said, that by the contract he had excluded himself from the
proffits; and by the 39 Ed. 3.27. one Ioyntenant may have an account against
the other. And he said, that if I agree that you shall sow my Land with me, you
shall gain no interest in the land, and yet you shall have the corn. And one
Ioyntenant may distreyn for himself, and as Bailey for the other. And the Cause
was adjourned: and afterward viz. Hillary 36 Eliz. the case was repeated.

And Gaudy said. That if there be two Ioyntenants, and one grants to the other
that he may sow the Land, yet may the other occupy with him, for these words
do not transfer any sole interest, but if he says that he shall occupy all the
Land, and shall sow it solely, this does exclude him from having any interest
with him.

Popham. Agreed, because this is but a contract, and so of a Lease for years.

Gaudy. If one Ioyntenant says to the other, that he will not occupy the Land
with him, or that he will not put in his Cattle, this does not transfer any
interest, but that he may occupy with him, and so in this case, if it had not
been said that he should occupy solely.

Popham of the same opinion: for where he says he will not occupy, the words
are in the negative, which will not exclude him of his interest, but in the
Case at Bar they will, because they are in the affirmative so. That he shall
occupy the Land solely. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Pasch. 3. Eliz.
Woodward against Nelson in B. R.
WOodward, Parson of Wotton in consideration, of 120 l. paid by Bretman, one of
his Parishioners, did accord and agree with him, that he and his assigns
should be discharged of Tithes during the time that he should be Parson.
Bretman made a Lease to Nelson, Woodward did libell against him for Tithes and
Nelson prayed a prohibition upon the said contract. And it this was sufficient
matter for a prohibition was the Question, because it was by word only, and
without writing, which amounts only to a cause of action upon a promise for
Bretman, but no action for his lessees, neither can this amount to a Release of
Tithes, for as Tithes cannot be leased without Deed, so they cannot be released
or discharged without Deed.

Gaudy Justice. Tithes cannot be discharged without Deed, unless by way of
contract for a sum of money, and he cited the 21 H. 6.43.

Fenner: for that year in which the discharge was made, it was good by way of
discharge without Deed, because the Parson for that year had as it were an
Interest, but such discharge can have no continuance for another year, for
default of a Deed; and so a promise being no discharge, it is no cause of a
prohibition. But Gaudy, held as before. And about this time Wray Chief Justice
dyed, and Popham succeeded, and the same day he was sworn, Cook moved this Case
again. And the Court held that the agreement being by parol was not good: And
Fenner, then, said that without writing the agreement could not be good between
the parties but for one year. And the Court awarded a consultation. But upon
search made, no Judgment was entered in the Roll.

Trinit. 35 Eliz.
Dr. Foord against Holborrow, in B. R. Rot. 367.

IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond, the case was, Dr. Drury (to whom the
Plaintiff was Executor) made a Lease to Holborrow of the Manor of Golding for
years, and Holborrow the Lessee entered into a Bond, that if he, his Executors
or Assigns, did pay to Anne Goldingham, widow, the sum of 20 l. for 17 years,
if the said Goldingham should so long live, and so long as Holborrow the
Lessee, or any claiming by or under the said Holborrow shall or may occupy or
enjoy the said Manor of Goldingham; and then Holborrow surreudred his Lease
to the Obliges, praecextu cujus the Defendant pleaded, quod non occupavit, nec
potuit occupare, etc. wherefore he did not pay the said sum to Anne Goldingham,
and the Executor of the Obligee brought an Action of Debt upon this Obligation.

Johnson for the Defendant. The term is gone, for he cannot occupy after the
surrender, and also the Obligee is a party to the cause why it is not
performed, and therefore he shall take no advantage, 4 ^. 7.2. But the whole
Court was against him, for he to whom the surrender is made, comes in
quodammodo by him, and is his Assignee, for he shall be subject to the charge
that was before the surrender; and also the Defendant shall be bound by these
words in the Obligation, viz. so long as he shall or may: and although these
words were not inserted, yet he shall pay the annuity: for where the first
Cause does commence in himself, he shall not have advantage thereby: but
otherwise, where he is not party to the first Cause. As if two Ioynt-tenants
with Warranty make a partition, the Warranty is gone, because they are parties
to the act which made the extinguishment: but if one makes a Feoffment of his
part, the Warranty as to the other remains, 11 Ed. 4.8. and in the Case at Bar,
the Obligor made the surrender, and therefore he is party, and the first cause:
and there is a diversity when the thing to be done is collateral, and when not:
for if a Lessee does oblige himself to do a collateral thing, as payment of
money, there he ought to do it, although that he surrender: for although the
Obligee do accept of the surrender, yet no act is done by him to hinder the
performance of the condition: but where the Obligee does any act to hinder the
performance of the Condition, the Condition is saved: as if the Lessee be bound
to the Lessor to suffer J.S. to enter into a Chamber during the Lease, and he
surrenders to the Obligee, who will not suffer J.S. to enter, the Obligation is
saved, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

36 Eliz.
Bedford against Hall, in B. R.
IN an Action of Covenant, wherein the Plaintiff declared, that the Defendant
did devise and grant to him certain land, with all his goods contained in a
certain Inventory for 20 years, and said, that in the Inventory, amongst other
things, were five Cows, which the Defendant seized and that one J.S. took them
away as his proper goods, as indeed they were, and hereupon he brought this
Action.

Fenner The Action will not lie, for no interest in the Cows does pass to the
Lessee by this Lease* neither was there any right to them in the Lessor: As if
I demise to you the land of J. S. by these words, Them si and concessi and you
enter, and J S. reenters, no Covenant lies against me. And so in the 11 H. 4.
a Prebend made a Lease for years, and resigned, now is the term of the Lessee
quite destroyed; and if after he be outed by a new Prebend, yet he shall have
no Action of Covenant. And so is it, 9 Eliz. Dyer ^57. Lessee for life makes a
Lease for years, and dies, the Lessee shall not have a Covenant if he be outed
by him in the reversion, because he is not in as a Termor at the time of the
disturbance. But if in the principal Case the Lessor had been possessed of the
goods although by a wrong title and the Owner had seized them, then a Covenant
would lie. And so if a Disseisor makes a Lease, and the Disseisee reenters,
the Lessee shall have a Covenant.

Gaudy. If a man lets lands wherein he has no estate together with his goods
although the land will not pass, yet the goods do and if a man lets goods for a
year, and re takes them within the year, no Covenant will lie, for the property
was never in the Lessee

C^c^. If a man lets another goods to me by Deed if I seize them and the Owner
re-takes them a Covenant will lie and so will an Action on the Case, if it be
without Deed, 42 Assi. 8. If I be in possession of another goods, and sell
them, a deceit lies against me by the Vendee; and so is the Book of Ass. 42.8.
con^ra, where the Vendor has not possession at the time of the sale. And if I
sell goods by Deed which are in my possession, and they are evicted by the
right Owner a Covenant will lie: contra if I have not possession at the time of
the letting them, and if I let land and J.S. enter before the Lessee, the
Lessee cannot have a Covenant, Quod nota. Et ad journe^ur.

35 Eliz.
Scarret against Tanner, in C. B. Rot 1458.

IN a false Imprisonment, the Defendant justified, that he was High Constable
of the Hundred of E. in the County of ^p, and that the Plaintiff made an affray
within the said Hundred upon one Walm, who came presently to the Defendant, and
told him of it, and took his oath that he was in fear of his life: whereupon
the Defendant came to the Plaintiff, and arrested him and carried him to Prison
until he could find sufficient Sureties of peace.

Glanvill A Constable cannot arrest one to find surety of the peace upon a
complaint made to him, unless he himself sees the peace broken, 7 Ed. 4.

Kingsmill contr. For he is at Common Law Conservator pacis, 12 H. 7.18. And
how can he keep the peace, if he may not compel them to find surety. 44 Ed.
3. Bar. 2^2. If a man that is threatened complain to the Constable, he may
compel the party to find surety for his good behavior, and may justify the
imprisoning him, or putting him in the Stocks, 22 Ed. 4.35. 10 Ed. 4.18. where
a Constable in such case may take a Bond.

Anderson. I grant that Constables are keepers of the peace at the Common Law,
and are to keep the peace as much as in them lies; and that is, to take men
that they find breaking the peace, and to carry them to a Justice of peace to
find surety: but the Constable cannot take security, nor recognizance, nor
bail, for he is not an Officer upon Record; and if he do take a Bond, how shall
he certify it, and unto what Court?

Walmesley contr. Who said, that the Constable might take security by bond,
although not by recognizance or bail.

Beaumond. A Constable may put him that breaks the peace within the Stocks, but
it must be where the breach of peace is committed in his view, for he has no
authority to take an oath that a man is in fear of his life, and then the
foundation of his justification does fail.

Owen. The oath is not material; for although he cannot take such oath, yet his
taking of surety is good; and before Justices of peace were made, the peace was
preserved by Constables; and the Statute that creates Justices, does not take
away the power of Constables, and therefore he may justify. Sed adjournatur.

Pasch. 38 Eliz.
Worsley against Charnock, in C. B.
IN an audita quaerela the Case was thus, The father and son were bound in a
Statute-Merchant to Charnock, who sued out an Execution against them, and their
lands were severally extended; and they supposing that the Statute was not
good, because it was not sealed with both their seals, according to the
Statute, they both brought a joint audita querela; and whether they could join
in this Action, or not, was the question.

Warburton. They shall not join; for in all cases a man must make his complaint
according to his grief; and here their grief is several, as it two men be
imprisoned, they shall not join in a false imprisonment. The same Law in a
Battery, 8 Ed. 4. 18 H. 6. 10 Ed. 4. It J.S. has goods of diverse men, they
shall not join in a Replevin; and 33 H. 6. two men shall not join in an audita
quaerela, unless the land in execution is in them jointly; and 29 Ed. 3. two
Ioynt-tenants Infants alien, they shall have several Writs of Cum fuit infra
ae^atem: But he confessed the Case in 30 Ed. 3. Fitzherbert, audita quaerela,
where two men were in Execution, and the Conusor did release to one, and then
to another by another Release, yet both shall join in an audita quaerela: but
this is not Law: and besides, they cannot recover damages jointly, by reason of
their several vexations; and this Action being personal, damages cannot be
severed. Vid. 2 Ed. 3. Execution 45. 9 Ed. 4.31. 12 Ed. 4.6.

Harris contra. And as to the last reason, the Book in the 20 of Elizabeth is,
that no damages shall be recovered in an audita quaerela, which (if it be Law)
then is the doubt at an end. And whereas it has been said, that they shall not
join because their griefs are several, methinks there is no reason, but that if
he that survives shall be charged with the whole, that they shall join also in
their discharge; for if their charge be joint, their discharge shall be joint
also. And in the 34 H. 6. and 30 Ed. 3. where an audita quaerela may be brought
jointly; and he resembled this to the Case of a Monstraverunt, where if a
Tenant in ancient demesne be distreyned, all the Tenants shall join, because the
grievance to one may be a grievance to all the rest.

Yelverton of the same opinion. Tho suing of the Execution was the cause of the
audita quaerela, but not the ground, for the ground was the Statute-merchant,
and therefore it is here brought according to the Statute.

Anderson. If two men do me several Trespasses, yet I may have a joint Action
against them, and the death of one of them shall not abate the Writ: but if two
are Plaintiffs in a personal Action, the nonsuit of one shall be the nonsuit
of the other; and in our case the Statute was joint, and also the Execution:
then if all the Writs are so, the audita quaerela which is to discharge them,
shall be joint also, especially in this Writ where they are as it were
Defendants; and therefore he resembled this Case to a Writ of Error, or an
Attaint brought by two jointly, and one is non-sued, yet this shall not abate
the Writ, because they are in a manner Defendants.

Walmesley contr. The Action ought to be brought according to the cause of the
wrong, and the wrong begun in suing the Execution, and that was several, and
therefore the audita quaerela ought to be several also: but if this Statute had
been good, and had been discharged by release or defeasance, then the audita
quaerela might be brought jointly, for then the ground of the execution was
joint: but here is but a colorable Statute, and the cause of the Action is not
begun before the Execution sued.

Owen and Beaumond agreed: and after by assent of Anderson, Judgment was given
that they ought to have several Writs.

Note, Pasch. 36 Eliz. in B. R. and Rot. 323. or 521. between Curteise and
Overscot. If A. did recover against B. by two several Judgments, whereby B. is
in Execution, it was adjudged that he shall not have one audita quaerela, but
two several Writs.

Pasch. 37 Eliz.
Sawer against Hardy, in B. R. Rot. 254.

IN an Ejectment, the Case was this; A woman was Lessee for forty years, sub
hac condition, si vixerit vidua and inhabitaret super pr^m ssos: the woman
dyed before the Lease expired, and her Executors entered, and being outed, they
brought this Action; and the question was, if the Lease were determined by the
death of the woman, by limitation, or by condition, or if it yet remain.

Gaudy. It cannot be a condition, because the sentence is imperfect; for if a
man makes a Lease for life, rendering rent, sub hac condition, that if the rent
be behind, without any further words, this cannot be a condition, by reason of
the imperfection of the sentence; and without doubt, if a Lease for years be
made to a woman, if she so long live, and inhabit the premises, this is a
limitation, so that the term is ended by her death.

Clench. It is neither condition nor limitation; for a condition ought always
to be a full and perfect sentence, and not uncertain. As a Lease for years,
upon condition that the Lessee shall pay 181. at the house of the Lessor, this
is a full sentence: but a Lease made, rendering rent, and if it be behind, (and
no more said) this is no condition. And in all cases where these words, quod
si, do make a condition, it is requisite that these words, quod tunc, do ensue.
Neither can it be a limitation, because the words, quod si, spoil the sentence.
And Popham was also of opinion, that it was neither condition nor limitation:
but if the words had been sub condition quod tamdiu vixerit and inhabitaret,
etc. this is a perfect sentence, and by her death, or not inhabiting, the
estate might be determined; and he put this difference, that if a Lease had
been for 20 years, si tamdiu vixerit super praemissos, the Lease had been
determined by her death: but if a Lease had been for 20 years, si tamdiu
inhabitaret, quamdiu vixerit, vel durante vita super praemissos; there if she
dies within the term, yet the term continues, for in the first case the
limitation goes to the interest, and in the other to the time; and Judgment
was given, that the Plaintiff should recover, for that the term continued.

Michaelm. 37 and 38 Eliz.
Mark Ives Case, in B. R.
IN a Debt upon a Bond the Condition was, that if the Obligee should go to
Rome, and return from thence again before the 5. of July after the date of the
Bond, that the Obligor should pay to him 20 l. upon the 20. day of July at
Paul's. And it was moved by Williams Sergeant, that if the Obligee returned
within the time, whether he ought to give notice of his return to the Obligor,
for otherwise by his secret return he may make a forfeiture of the Obligation;
for if the Obligor of necessity be to tender this money without notice of his
return, inconvenience would ensue; for perhaps the Obligee is not returned at
the time the money is due, and then the tender is in vain, and the Law will not
compel a man to make a tender, unless it be to some purpose, and therefore the
Obligee ought to give notice, to the intent that the Obligor may know whether
the money he due to him or not. And it is like a Mortgage upon condition, that
if the Mortgager does pay 20 l. before Michaelmas at Paul's, that the^, etc.
here the Mortgager ought to give notice at what day before Michaelmas he will
tender the money, or otherwise he cannot enter for the time that the Law
prescribes to make the tender, is the last instant before Michaelmas; and if
the Mortgager will make his election to tender it before the day, he ought to
give the Mortgagee notice thereof. And the Case of one Gurney was cited by
Cook, Adjudge 27 Eliz. where a Lease was made for years, and the Lessor made
another Lease for years, to commence after the surrender, determination, etc.
of the first Lease, and then a private surrender is made to the Lessor of the
first Lease, the second Lease shall not begin until the Lessee has notice of
the surrender of the first Lease. But Tanfield said, that the Case was ruled
contrary, and that the Lease did begin presently without notice. (ideo quaere)
and as to the principal point, the Court was divided. But Fenner said, that if
the Obliges should give notice, perhaps the Obligor will not be found, and
therefore good reason that the Obligor should make tender to the Obligee at his
peril.

Trinit 36 Eliz.
Escot against Lanreny. in B. R.
IN an action on the Case the Plaintiff declared that the Lord Barkley by his
Indenture, dimisit and ad firmam tradidit totam firmam suam tolnetum and
proficuum nundinarum and dierum Faerialium infra manerium and Bergum de
Thetbury. for 21. years, and that the Defendant had disturbed and hindered him,
from taking of diverse pieces of Wool infra manerium and Burgum, praedict. etc.
and after Issue joined, exception was taken to the Declaration: because he
declared of a demise made by the Lord Barkley, and did not set forth, that the
Lord Barkley was seized at the time of the Demise 7 H. 7.3.34 H. 6.48. But the
exception disallowed by all the Court, because the Plaintiff in this action is
to recover damages only, and the right or title of Land does not come in
debate, but contra, if it were in such action where the right of the Toll did
come in debate, and to prove this Glanvill cited 20 A sis. 3.47 E^. 3. and 33
H. 6. and upon this reason he said that the Plaintiff of necessity is not bound
to set forth the Market day* nor the quantity of the Toll. 34 H. 6.48. Where it
was pleaded that J.S. made a Lease to him and did not show that he was seized,
and yet held good.

Clench took another exception, because he did not set forth that Toll was to
be paid by common usage for no Toll is due for Hens or Geese, or for many other
things of such nature, and so it might be that Toll was not due for wool.

Fenner was of the same opinion, but Popham Contra, who said that the Plaintiff
had declared that the Defendant had disturbed him from the Toll of diverse
pieces of Wool, and by that is employed, that Toll ought to be paid for Wool.
And at another day Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Pasch. 36 Eliz.
Sackford against Philipps. in Camera Scaccarii. Rot. 484.

IN a debt, this Case was moved by Williams Sergeant. A. is indebted to B. in
10 l. upon a Bond, and R. did promise to B. that if he would forbear A, that if
A. did not pay him, he would, B. for non-payment by A. does recover so much in
damages upon the assumpsit against R. If in Debt upon this obligation against
A, A. may plead this recovery in Bar.

Walmsley, he cannot, for he is a stranger to the recovery (ideo Quaere:) And
it was assigned for error that it was alleged in the Declaration, that the
Defendant did promise to pay the 10 l. before Michaelmass, in consideration the
Plaintiff would forbear to sue A. and that he has forborne and adhuc absti^et,
and does not say that he made request as he ought to have done* But the Court
held it was well enough, and there is a difference when the Defendant does
promise to pay generally and at a certain day named, there the Plaintiff ought
precisely to allege a request made in certain: but when the Defendant
promises to pay at a day certain, he is bound to pay it at his peril without
request, and therefore to allege quod saepius requisitus, is sufficient
without alleging a special request, otherwise it is if the Defendant assume
to pay it upon request, for there it ought to be specially pleaded. Another
error was because the consideration was that the Plaintiff should forbear to
sue A. and does not set forth for how long time, for perhaps the forbearance
was but for a quarter of an hour.

Peryam. The consideration upon which an assumpsit is grounded ought to be of
value, but of what value is it, where the forbearance is but for half an hour?

Fleming. By his promising not to sue, he is engaged never to sue.

Peryam. There is great difference between a promise not to sue, and a promise
to forbear to sue, for a promise not to sue excludes him from suing at all,
but a promise to forbear to sue, is only to forbear for a time; so that
notwithstanding such promise he may sue after; and it being not here expressed
how long he will forbear, there is no consideration.

Walmesley. There is a difference when the Defendant s^eaks the words, and when
the Plaintiff. For if the Plaintiff says I will forbear to sue you, so you
will promise to pay me* and upon this the Defendant makes a promise
accordingly, the Plaintiff in this Case ought to forbear to sue him for ever:
But if the Defendant only speaks the words, as here he does. If you will
forbeace to sue, I will promise to pay you, and the Plaintiff agrees and
forbeares a certain time, yet he may have his action afterward, sed adjournatur.

Pasch. 38. Eliz.
Stroud against Willis in B. R. Rot. 66.

IN Debt upon a Bond, the Condition was: If the Obligor shall well and truly
pay the Rent, or sum of 37 l. yearly at two feasts according to the tenure and
true intent of certain articles of agreement indented and made between the
Obligor and Obligee during the term therein mentioned, that then etc. The
Defend int^e^ded that these articles ut supra, contain that the said Stroud the
Obligee, Dumisit and ad firmam tradidit to the Defendant, Omnia talia do^s
tenementa and terras in Parochia de Petminster, de and in quibus, the said
Stroud has an estate for life by Copy according to the Customs of the Manor.
Habendum to the Defendant for 21 years, if Stroud should so long live, rendering
to the said Stroud during the said term 37 (...). to be paid at the Castle of
Canton; and pleaded further that at the time of the making the said Articles,
the said Stroud had not any estate in any Lands, houses etc. in Petminster
aforesaid* for the term of his life or by Copy. And upon this plea the
Plaintiff demurred, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff in the Common Pleas
and now was removed by Vrit of Error. And in this Case were two questions.
First If nothing pass by these Articles, and so the reservation of the Rent is
also void. Secondly, If the Obligation for payment of the said sum be also
void; and it was said, that this could not be payable as a Rent upon the 14 H.
4. and 4. 20 Ed. 4. 20 H. 6.23. for no Rent is reserved, because there is no
land out of which it can come, and then the obligation is also discharged. 2.
Admitting the Rent is not vayable as Rent, then whether it be an ^stoppell to
plead (as here is done) against the Articles, and therefore, they took a
difference where the recital is general, and where not; as if A. be bound to
infeof me of all his lands of the part of his Mother, and he has no lands of
the part of his Mother: but otherwise if it were to infeof me of Black acre,
for he shall be estopped to say that he had not Black acre, and so here he
shall be estopped to say, that there are no Articles: but he may plead that he
has no land by Copy: Cook 2. Rep. 33.6.

Fenner. When a man makes a void Lease, rendering Rent, the Reservation is also
void, because the land is the consideration and recompense for the Rent: but
where a man reserves Rent upon a grant or Lease, which grant and Lease are
good, but the thing out of which the Rent is issuing cannot be charged with the
Rent, there the reservation is good, as where a Rent is reserved out of an
advowson or menaltie, but in the Case at Bar the Lease did never begin, and
therefore Rent shall not, then is it to be considered whether the Rent is to be
paid by reason of the bond, as a sum in gross or not, and as to that matter the
condition of the bond is to pay the Rent according to the true meaning of the
Articles, which is, that if the Lessee have not the Land, the Lessor shall not
have the Rent, therefore it shall not be paid as a sum in gross.

Popham cont. But he agreed that the reservation was void, for if no Land do
pass, no Rent is reserved, and the reservation only does not make any
estoppell, and he took a difference upon the 14 Ed. 4. A man makes a Lease
generally, and the Lessee is bound to pay the Rent in such manner as it was
reserved, there such Rent ought to be demanded, otherwise the Obligation is not
forfeit, and the demand ought to be upon the Land; but if such Lessee for years
do oblige himself to pay the Rent at a Collateral place out of the land, there
he ought to pay it at his peril without any demand, for now he pays it in
another nature than as Rent; so here if the payment had been limited at a place
out of the Land, the Obligor is bound to pay it, although nothing were demised
to him, for by the bond he has made it a sum in gross. And it is altered from
the nature of Rent upon the first reservation, and he is bound also to pay the
Rent or sum, and if this be any of them, he must pay it: As to the second
point: he made this difference. A his bound to J.S. to Release to him all his
right which he has in the Land descended to him, on the part of his Mother;
there, in Debt upon this bond, the Obligee cannot plead that he has no right
descended to him on the part of his mother, but must Release at his peril. But
if he binds himself to infeof the Obligee of all the Land which he has by
descent of his Father, there he may plead that he has no Land from his Father:
for all may be Released, although the Releasor has no right: but a feofment
cannot be made of land which a man has not.

Pasch. 38 Elizab.
Holcombe against Rawlins. in B. R. Rot. 401.

IN a trespass Quare Clausum fregit, with a continuando from the 31 Elizab. to
the 36. the Defendant pleaded that J.S. was seized in Fee and made a Lease to
him etc. The Plaintiff replied, that long time before J.S. was seized, he
himself was seized, until the said J.S. did disseise him; and J.S. being so
seized did make the Lease to the Defendant for years, whereupon the Plaintiff
reentred.

Tanfield. It appears by the Plaintiffs Replication that the Defendant was in
under the title of J.S. viz. the Lessee of the Disseisor of the Plaintiff, and
therefore he cannot be a Trespassor to the Plaintiff, notwithstanding his
regress. 34 H. 6, 30. 37 H. 6, 35. 2 Edw. 4, 17. 13 H. 7.15.

Atkinson contra. At the Common Law the Disseisee being out of possession shall
not recover any damages, but only against the Disseisor, and not against any
other that comes to the land afterward, and for this cause the Statute of
Gloceste^ was made. But at the Common Law when the Disseisee reenters, he is
remitted, as if he had not been out of possession at all, and he shall have a
trespass against the mean occupiers as in the 4 H. 7. A man was restored to
his land by Parliament, as if he had never been out of possession at all, and
he shall have a trespass against the occupiers that are in by title, as well as
here he had against the Kings Patentee.

G^wdy. If a Disseisor be disseised, and the first disseisee enter, he shall
have a trespass against the second Disseisor.

And Popham and Fenner agreed, but Clench cont. But at last adjudged for the
Plaintiff. vid. Cook. 11. Rep. fol. 57. Lyfords Case, to the contrary.

Pasch. 37. Eliza.
Wise Man against Baldwin. in B. R. Rot. 341.

IN a writ of error to reverse a judgment given in the Common Pleas, the Case
was thus. R^chard Baldwin did demise his land in Tail upon condition, that the
Devisee, should pay to J.S. 20. l. and if he failed of the payment, that then
the land should remain to J.S. and his heirs for ever, and whether this be a
Condition in Law, that the heir shall take advantage of, or a limitation of the
estate, so that J.S. shall take advantage, was the Question.

Gaudy. It is a limitation and not a condition as is apparent in Dyer, Wilfo^ds
Case 7.128 and Pewis and Scholasticas Case in the Comentaries, and there is
great diversity between an estate in Law, and a devise, in which the intent of
the Devisor is to be observed, and here if this shall be taken for a condition,
the intent of the Devisor is defrauded.

Clench agreed. For this should be as a new devise to J.S. and not as a
remainder, as a devise to a Monk, the remainder to J.S. the remainder is not
good, as a remainder, but as a new devise.

Fenner of the same opinion, and said, it had been so adjudged in this Court in
an Attournies Case of Devonshire, and also in Sir Edward Cleeres Case.

Gaudy. The received opinion of all learned Lawyers has been such as has been
said, viz. that to the end the intent of the Devisor should be observed, it
shall be a limitation. Then I put this Case. A man devises his Land to J.S.
upon condition, and for non-payment, be devises that his Executors shall sell
the Land, if J.S. fail of the payment, it is clear that the Executors may
sell the Land.

Godfrey. I agree, because the Executors have nothing devised to them, but only
an authority given them by the Will to sell.

Gaudy. But when the Executors have sold, the Vendee is in by the Devisor, and
then it is no other than a devise to one in Fee on condition of payment, etc.
and if he fail, then to another. And the three Justices agreed; but because the
Chief Justice was absent, it was adjourned to another day, at which time Fenner
said, that he had spoken with ^wen, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas,
who said, he never agreed to the Judgment, but in case of a perpetuity. And
therefore the Judgment in the Common Pleas was reverst.

The Earl of Lincoln against Fisher.
THe Steward of the Leete being in Court, did say in Fisher who was resident
within the precinct of the Leet, that he must be sworn for the Queen to make
presentiments at the said Court. To which Fisher replied, in saying I ought to
be sworn, you lie. For which Fisher was fined at the Court 20 l. And the Earl
who had the Leet brought his action for the same.

Yelverton. The action will not lie, for he is not finable for such words, for
they are no disturbance to the Court, nor hindrance of Justice: for this word,
you lie in ancient speaking is no more than to say, you do not say true.

Gaudy agreed that the action would not lie. But Fenner, Clench, and Popham
cont. For this is a misdemeanor for which the defendant is finable: for every
Leet is the Queens Court, and a Court of Justice, to which respect and
reverence ought to he given, and these words are in great contempt to the
Court, and the authority thereof, which is supreme: And Posito, that he should
here say to the Judge of a Court when he delivered his opinion in any Case. Mr.
Judge, you lie, without question he may be fined and imprisoned; and as it is
of a Judge here, so is it of a Judge of any inferior Court, because it is a
Court of Justice.

And Popham said, That if any misdemeaned himself in the Leet in any outrageous
manner, the Steward may commit him.

And Gaw^y changed his opinion, Wherefore the Plaintiff had judgment to
recover.

Pasch. 36. Eliz.
Allens Case.
A Scire facias issued out in the name of the Queen, to show cause why
execution of a debt which is come to the Queen by the attainder of J.S. should
not be had: The Defendant pleaded that the Queen had granted over this debt by
the name of a debt which came to her by the attainder of J.S. and all actions
and demands, etc. upon which the Plaintiff demurred. And the question was, if
the Patentee might sue for this in the name of the Queen, without special
words. And two presidents were cited, that he may. 1 Pasch. 30 Eliz. rot. 191.
in the Exchequer, where Green to whom a debt was due, was attainted and the
Queen granted over this debt, and all actions and demands, and a ^c^re facias
was sued for him in the name of the Queen; also in the 32 El^z. rot. 219.

Mabb of London was indebted by bond, and the debt came to the Qu. by the
attainder, and she granted it to Bones, and all actions and demands, and a
scire facias was issued out in the name of the Queen. And the principal case
was adjourned: but the Patentee had express words to sue in the name of the
Queen, although it was not so pleaded.

43 Eliz.
Pelling against Langden. in B. R. Rot. 438.

IN a trespass for breaking his Close, and killing 100 Conies. The Defendant
justified, because he had common time out of mind, and because the Conies were
damage Feasant in the place where he killed them. The Plaintiff demurred, and
judgment given for the Plaintiff: for Conies are beasts of Warren, and
profitable as Deer, and are not to be compared to Foxes and vermin which may
be killed, but the Owner of the soil may keep Conies where the Common is as well
as other cattle, also he may make Fish Ponds in the Common, and the Commoner
cannot destroy them Cook 5. Rep. 104. 22 H. 6.59. and so it was adjudg^d.

Trinit. 43 Eliz.
Gresham against Ragge. in B. R. Rot. 1295.

IN trepass for entering into a house. The Defendant pleaded that the Plaintiff
was indebted to the Defendant in 100 l. and that he by the permission of the
Plaintiffs servant, (the doors being open) did enter to demand his debt: Upon
which the Plaintiff demurred. And adjudged for the Plaintiff. For the servant
of the Plaintiff could not license any to enter into the house of his Mr. also
a man cannot enter into another house to demand money, unless the debtor be
within the house.

Gaudy. If it had been averred, that the Plaintiff had been then in the house,
the Plea had been good.

Hillar. 44. Eliz.
Streetman against Eversley. in B. R.
IN an ejectment, the Case was, a Lessee for 80. years upon condition, that if
the Lessee his Executors or Assigns did not repairo the house within six weeks
after warning, that the Lease should be void the Lessee made a Lease for ten
years, who suffered J.S. to occupy the house, and then the Lessor came to the
said occupation of the house, and at the house gave notice, and said, that the
house was defective in reparations and did show in what, and so gave warning to
have it repaired, and after for default of reparations he entered, and the
Defendant as servant to the Lessee re-entred: And his entry adjudged lawful,
for notice given to J.S. who was but an Occupier of the house, and not Lessee
or Assignee of any interest of the term, was not sufficient; but it ought to
be to the person interessed in the term, who is liable to reparations. Vid.
Cooks 6. Rep. Greens case. Also the notice at the house is not sufficient, but
it ought to be to the person of the Lessee, and Popham agreed to this.

Trinit. 1 Jacobi.
Shopland against Radlen, in C. B. Rot. 853.

IN a Replevin the question was, when a Guardian in socage holds a Court in his
own name, and does grant Copies in reversion; if this be a good Grant or not,
and adjudged to be good against the Heir.

Walmesley. Dominus pro tempore of a Manor may hold a Court, and make a Grant
of Copyholds, but this is to be understood of perfect Lords, which a Guardian
is not, but only ad commodum haere^is, and is rather a servant to the Lord,
than Dominus pro tempore: and he cannot be called Dominus, because he can
neither grant nor forfeit his estate, and has nothing to do to meddle in the
Manor, but to account for the profits: and a Writ of Ward does not lie for
the land, but only for the body.

Gaudy chief Justice. Warburton and Daniel Justices to the contrary. Who held,
that a Guardian in socage is Dominus pro tempore, and that he has interest in
the land, and may make a Lease thereof for years, Commentar. 293. and may avow
in his own name, 29 Ed. 3. Avowry 298. But a Guardian in socage cannot present
to an Advowson, because he cannot be accountable. But Daniel Justice said, that
the Guardian may present where the heir is not of years of discretion, and a
Guardian in socage shall have a Trespass, and a ravishment of Ward, 24 Ed.
3.52. and he has the Ward by reason of looking to him, and therefore he has
interest sufficient to keep Court, and admit Copyholders, who are not in by
him, but by the custom, But a Bailiff of a Manor has no interest, and
therefore cannot make Grants and Copies: but a Guardian has interest
provisione legis, although it be such interest as cannot be forfeit, and the
heir cannot be at any prejudice, for he shall have an account made to him of
such Fines; for the heir himself cannot grant them, and the Law cannot compel
the Guardian to occupy them; neither can the Court be held in the name of the
heir, but the Guardian, and therefore he may grant Copies. And if a Guardian in
socage has such interest that he can make a Lease for years and his Lessee
shall maintain an Ejectment a f^r ^oti, he may grant Copies. Neither is it any
argument at all to say that a Guardian in socage has no interest, because he
cannot grant or forfeit his estase; for the reason is, because these things are
annexed to his person. And after, Mich. 3 Jacob. it was adjudged, that the
Grant was good, and shall bind the heir. Vid. Keloway, 46.6.

37 Eliz.
Brown against Hercey, in C. B. Rot. 620.

IT was found by office, that J.S. who held the Manor of D. of the King, did
dye without heir; whereupon W.S. as heir to him, did traverse the said Office,
and hereupon was at issue with the Queen, if he were heir or not: (and
depending this suit) he made a Feoffment in Fee, with a Letter of Attorney to
make Livery, and after it was found for him against the Queen, and Judgment
given against the Queen: but before the Writ of Amoveas manum, the Attorney
made Livery, and adjudged good, for it cannot be said that the heir at the time
of the Feoffment had nothing, or that the Queen at the time of the Livery was
in possession, for by the Judgment given, the possession of the Queen was
utterly defeated, and possession in the party before any amoveas manum sued
out, for that serves but to compel the Eschaetor to avoid the possession, it
he hold the land after Judgment. Vid. Stanford, praerogat. 78. 10 Ass. 2. 10
Ed. 3. and the difference is where the King is seized by title, and where
without title; for when the King is seized by title, and his title is
determined, he ought to make Livery to him that has right: but when he is
seized without title, and he who has right has Judgment against him, he may
enter without Livery, 5 Ed. 5. Quare impedit 34. But it was here said by Owen
Justice, that if a man makes a Feoffment of White-acre, with a Letter of
Attorney to make Livery, and then he purchase White-acre, this is not a good
Feoffment for White-acre.

Michaelm. 29. and 30. Eliz.
Knowles against Powell, in Scaccario.
THe Queen seized in Fee, made a Lease for years to one who was outlawed at
the time of the Lease, rendering rent; and after he was outlawed again, and
before seizure, comes out the general pardon of all Goods and Chattels
forfeited; and in this Case it was agreed, that a man outlawed was capable of
a Lease from the Queen, as Farmer to the Queen. And Manwood said, that the
pardon with restitution is sufficient to revive the term forfeited by the
second out-lawry; and it was also agreed, that a man outlawed and pardoned,
had property in his goods.

Egerton Solicitor said, that in the 4 Eliz. it was adjudged in the Common
Pleas, that if the Queen made a Lease under the Exchequer-seal to begin
immediately after forfeiture, surrender, or expiration of a former term, and the
Lessee is outlawed, shat the second Lease shall not commence, for it is a
Royal forfeiture.

Trinit. 41 Elizab.
Ferrers against Borough, in B. R. Rot. 185.

UPon a special Verdict the Case was thus, A man makes a Lease for years, upon
condition that if he paid 10 l. before Michaelmas, that it should be lawful
for him to re-enter; and before Michaelmas, he lets the land to another by
Indenture for years, and then performed the Condition, and entered; the first
Lessee brought a Trespass, and it was adjudged that it does not lie.

Trinit. 35 Elizab.
Lambert against Austen, in B. R. Rot. 185.

IN a Replevin the Case was thus; A man seized of land in Fee, grants a
Rentcharge out of it to A. for life, with a Clause of Distress, and then makes
a Lease to B. for years, and grants the reversion for life to J.S. the Rent
becomes behind the 15 of Eliz. until the 18 of Eliz. and the Grantee makes the
Defendant his Executor, and dies, the term of B. ends in the 33 Eliz. and then
J.S. enters, and makes a Lease to the Plaintiff; the Executor of A. distreyns
for the arrearages, and the Plaintiff brings a Replevin.

Gaudy and Fenner. This Distress is well taken for the arrearages upon the
Statute of the 32 H. 8. cap. 37. for the Rent does not issue out of the term
for years, but out of the Freehold; and upon grant thereof, as Littleton
says, the Tenant of the Freehold ought to attorn, and not the Termor; and so
is it, 9 H. 6. and if an Assize be brought for this Rent, it ought to be
brought against the Tenant of the Freehold, and all the Tenants of the
Freehold ought to be named in a Rentcharge, by Cook, 6 Rep. 58. but otherwise
for a Rent-service, for that is against the Termor only, and a Termor cannot
give seizin of the Rent to maintain an Assize, by Cook, 6 Rep. 57. and for the
same reason Executors shall have an Action of Debt at the Common Law for
arrearages, because the estate is determined, Cook, 4 Rep. 49. but an Avowry is
given by this Statute, Only so long as the land shall continue in the seisin
and possession of the said Tenant in demesne And they much relied on this word
(demesne) which ought to be intended of a Freehold; and of a Reversion upon a
Lease for years, it is pleaded, quod seisitus in dominico suo, etc. and so
cannot a Tenant for years say; for which reasons it seemed to them that the
Distress was well taken.

Clench contr. For the Termor ought to pay it, for he takes the profits of the
land: as if a Lease be made to a woman, rendering Rent, who takes husband, and
dies, the husband shall pay the Rent, by the 10 H. 6. for he has taken the
profits; and by the words of the Statute, they are (in the possession or
seisin) and seisin refers to the Tenant of the Freehold, and possession to the
Tenant for years; and the words are, (which ought immediately to pay the Rent)
and so ought the Termor in our Case, who is chargeable to the Distress of the
Testator.

Popham chief Justice, of the same opinion. The Distress is not well taken; for
he who has the profits of the land, ought to answer for the Rent.

Gaudy. Although the Cattle of the Lessee be distreynable by the Testator, that
is only because they are upon his land; as a strangers Cattle may be so
distreyned, and therefore this proves not that the Lessee should pay the Rent.
And if a man grants a Rentcharge, and lets the land at will afterward, the
Rent is behind, and the Grantee dies, and the Lease at will determines, without
question in that Case the Lessor is subject to the Distress of the Executor.
And in our Case, if the Grantee had released to the Tenant for life, this had
extinguished the Rent, otherwise of a Release to Tenant for years.

Fenner. If Tenant in Tail granta a Rentcharge, and after makes a Lease for 21
years according to the Statute, and dies, the Rent by the death of the Tenant
in Tail is determined. To which Gaudy agreed; which proves, that the Rent
issues out of the Freehold. Vid. Cook, 5 Rep. 118.

Hillar. 37 Eliz.
Butler against Ruddisley.
IN a Trespass, the Defendant pleaded the Freehold of Edward Devereux, and so
justified as his Bailiff, without saying (at his commandment) the Plaintiff
replied, that the said Edward was seized in Fee, and made a Lease to him, by
virtue whereof he was possessed absque hoc, that the Lessor made the Defendant
his Bailiff post dimissionem; and hereupon the Defendant demurred.

Crook. By this Lease a Freehold passes to the Plaintiff, and then the
Plaintiffs traverse is naught, for he has now traverst that the Defendant is
Bailiff, whereas he ought to traverse the Freehold in the Lessor, for that
would have destroyed the justification of the Defendant. And to prove that the
Freehold does pass, he cited the Case of Littleton, where if a Lease be made
to the husband and wife during Coverture, they are Ioynt-tenants for life. So
in the 30 H. 6. a Lease to a woman, dum sola vixer^t. And 14 Ed. 2. a Grant to
a man till he be promoted to such a Benefice, or dummodo se been gesserit, all
these are Free-holds. And it is clear, that a Tenant at will cannot assign
over. And also an estate at will is an estate at the will of both parties: but
here it is at the will of the Lessor only, when he will make a Bailiff.

Haughton contr. An estate at will does pass, and not a Freehold; for here he
has not pleaded that Livery was made; and Livery shall not be intended in this
case, unless it be specially alleged: but if Livery had been made, then he
agreed that a Freehold conditional had past; and for the pleading of a Livery,
he took a difference, that where an express estate either in fee or for life be
pleaded, there Livery shall be intended: but where a Freehold passes by
implication or operation of Law, and not by express words, there Livery ought
to be pleaded, as a Lease to one for years, the remainder to another for life,
there Livery ought to be pleaded. So in the 21 Assi. If a man pleads a
Feoffment and Livery within the view, he must plead Livery within the view
expressly; and so upon Grant of a reversion, attornment ought to be pleaded. And
whereas it was said, that it cannot be an estate by will, because it was not
the will of both parties. Vid. 9 Ed. 4.1. and 15 Ed. 4. But Gaudy and Fenner
denied the diversity put by Haughton, for in pleading of an estate for life,
all necessary circumstances in pleading shall be intended. And so it was
agreed, that an estate for life should pass, for Livery shall be intended. Sed
adjournatur.

Pasch. 35 Eliz.
Pendigate against Audley, in B. R. Rot. 242.

IN a Writ of Error upon recovery of a Debt, the Error was assigned, because
the Action of Debt upon the Obligation was brought against the Father of the
Plaintiff, and in the Writ he was named the Son and Heir apparent of the
Obligor, for this implies that the Father was alive; for if he were dead, then
is the Plaintiff Heir in facto, and not apparent.

Gaudy. It is but Surplusage; and in the 11 Ed. 3. the Writ was good, although
he was not named Son and Heir omnino. But this was denied, and agreed, that he
ought to be named Heir; and Judgment was reverst.

Hillary 37 Eliz.
Tanfield against Rogers, in B. R.
IN a Replevin, the Case was thus; Tenant in Tail seized of a Manor with 3
Acres thereof in Demesne, makes a Lease of the three Acres also of the Manor,
habendum the three Acres, and the Manor for 21 years, rendering Rent for the 3
Acres, and all other the premises, therewith demised 5 l. The question was, if
this be a good Lease within the Statute of the 32 H. 8.

Stephens. This Lease is not within the Statute, for this Lease of 3 Acres, and
of the Manor whereof they are parcel, is an entire Demise, and not several,
as in 13 H. 4. Grants 88. A man seized of a Manor, with an Advowson
appendant, makes Feoffment of one Acre of the Manor; and then in the same
Deed he grants the Advowson appendant, and not in gross, and yet they are in
several clauses. Vid. 48 Ed. 3.41. 33 H. 8. Dyer 48.

Gaudy and Clench. When the Lease is of three Acres, and of the Manor,
although the Manor comprehends the three Acres, yet in construction of Law
they shall be taken as several Demises.

Fenner. I am of the fame opinion; and as I remember, in the 10 Assis. is this
Case; A Lease is made of the Grist, and also of the Mill, reserving by the year
5 s. and for the other 10 s. they are several Leases; and so is it here. Note,
that Popham was absent. But after in the same term he declared, that he agreed
with the other Justices; and Judgment was given, that the Lease was good for
the three Acres.

Pasch. 37 Eliz.
Carus Case.
PEter Carus was indicted for drawing his Sword in Westminster Hall, the Court
then sitting, in resisting the Sheriff who was making an Arrest; and being
found guilty upon his Arraignment, it did appear that this fact was done upon
the stairs of the Court of requests, out of the view of the Courts; yet it was
held, that being in the Hall, it was as much as if it had been in view of the
Court. But because the Indictment was not good, for it was not coram Regina. as
it ought to be, the Judgment was only to have perpetual Imprisonment, and to
pay 1000 l. Fine to the Queen. But if the Indictment had been as we have seen a
president in 1 Ed. 4. then the Judgment ought to be, to have his hand cut off,
and to forfeit all his lands and goods, and to have perpetual Imprisonment. 22
Ed. 3.13. Cromptons Justice, 246.

Mich. 3 Jacob.
Walgrave against Skinner, in B. R. Rot. 174;

IN a Trespass, the Plaintiff declared that he was robbed of 20 l. and that he
pursued the Felon with hue and cry to such a Town, where he discovered the
Felon to the Defendant, who was Constable of the said Town; wherefore he
apprehended the Felon, and found the 20 l. about him, which sum the Defendant
fook, and detained in his own possession. The Defendant confessed the taking the
20 l. ut supra: but because the Town was of no strength, he carried the 20 l.
to the next Town, and as he was going upon the Highway, he was robbed of it;
and so he concluded that he ought not to be charged in this Action.

Johnson for the Plaintiff. It appears in 4 H. 7. that the Thief has no
property in the money which is found in his possession: and in the 15 Ed. 4. it
is resolved, that if A robs B, and C robs A, yet C has not gained any
property; and if the Constable takes this out of his possession, he cannot
seize it to any other use than to the use of the King; and therefore if he
takes Felons goods, and does not keep them safe, the first Owner shall have a
Trespass against him; for by the 21 H. 7. If a man does carry the Parsons tithe
to the Parsons barn because it is like to perish, yet the Parson may have a
Trespass against him. And by the opinion of Stanford, 44 Assi. If goods are
taken from a Felon, and he will give sufficient surety, he himself shall have
the keeping of them, or else the Town, and therefore the ^o^stable has no
authority to meddle with them.

Erby contr. For a Constable is Conservator ^acis, and (...) the peace does
consist as much in keeping of goods, as of (...) a Felon. And here the
Constable doubting of the (...) Town by reason of the Inhabitants who were
riotous, (...) he thought it the best course to carry them to the next Town,
and so no default was in him, for his taking and meoling with them was lawful.
And 22 Assi. 96. If a Felon flying be taken in any Village, the Bailiff thereof
may take the custody of the goods; and I suppose that a Constable may keep
goods as well as a Bailiff, for he is a Minister of the Law; and if they be
taken from him, he is no more chargeable than if goods were taken out of the
possession of my servant.

Williams Justice, Pasch. 2 H. 7. Common same is enough to apprehend any man;
but if you arrest a person who is possessed of money, and he dye, you are
chargeable with the money. And so here, although the taking of the Felon by the
Constable be justiciable, yet he is to keep safe the money at his peril; and
because he has not, he is liable to this Action.

Popham. He might have pleaded not guilty; for he said, that if a Town has the
possession of my goods a Detinue lies, und not a Trespass; but if a stranger
takes them out of their possession, there a Trespass lies; and therefore he
conceived in this Case, that the Plaintiff should have brought a Trover and
Conversion, and not a Trespass, quod ^li Justicia^ con esserun; and therefore
the Case was deferred till next term, to be argued upon the general issue.

Mich. 3 Jacob.
Jorden against Atwood, in B. R. Rot. 561.

THe Case upon the whole pleading appeared to be thus, A seized of a Message
called Bodsw^en, had a way appendant to it in the land of J.S. in a Close
called B^ac^e; after A purchased the said Close, and infeoffed the Plaintiff
thereof; and this Action was brought by the Feoffee against the Feoffor for
using the said way; and the question was, if the way were extinguished, or not;
and it was argued at the Bar, that unity of possession does make no
extinguishment 3 H. 6.31. where (...) prescribed to have a way to a Wood in a
place called England; against which was pleaded, that time out of mind ^. S.
was seized of the said place, and of the said Wood, and held no plea. 2^ Ed.
3.2. 11 H. 7.25. it was argued on the other side, that the Case of 31 H. 6. was
a quaere; and because the Feoffor had not reserved a way it did pass by the
Feoffment.

Tanfield Justice. Unity of possession does not confound a way; and he cited 19
Ed. 2. 21 Ed. 3.2. A way was appendant to a Mill which was allotted to one
partner, who assigned over her interest, and the Assignee brought an Assize of
nasance, and unity of possession was pleaded in Bar, but not allowed.

Yelverton Justice con^r. For the 21 Ed. 3.2. confirms my opinion; for Brook in
his abridgement of the Case says, that the partners have that as in case of
ane o^ Brant, which proves if they had it as heir, it should be gone. And the
Case of Gutter in 1 H. 7. is only by reason of the Custom. But here the
Feoffor might have reserved his way upon the Feoffment, and it was his folly he
did not.

Williams of the same opinion. And he took a difference between the Case of
Gutter which is preserved by Custom, and the Case of a way or Common which are
extinguished by way of unity of possession, according to the 35 H. 6.

Fenner contr. For the case of a Way differs from the case of a Common, for
unity will extinguish a Common, but not a Way, for then he shall lose the
profit of all the land to which the Way is appurtenant, for without the Way he
cannot use the Close, and therefore there is no reason that the Law should
extinguish it.

Popham accorded and took a difference between a Common appendant, which is of
necessity, and a Common in gross; for in case of a Common appendant, if one
Tenant of the Manor does purchase the Seigniory, and then grants over the
Tenancy, the Common which he had before shall be still appendant, for it is not
extinguished by the unity, but shall pass with the Tenancy: but otherwise of a
Common in gross: and so he said was the same difference in this Case; for if
the way be a way of ease or pleasure, there it shall be extinguished by unity:
but if it be a way of necessity there it is otherwise, for without it a man
shall lose the benefit of his land or house. And he compared this ad viam
Regiam, which lies by my house: yet if I do make a Feoffment of the land. I
shall have a passage also. And he said, that if a man had three Fields
adjoining, and makes a Feoffment of the middle Field, the Feoffee shall have a
way to this through the other Close. where it shall be most easy and beneficial
for him. And at last, because the two Justices agreed, although others were of
the contrary opinion, Judgment was given, Quod quaerens ^il capiat per billam,
and that the way is not extinguished. Vid. 11 H. 4, 5.

Michaelm. 7 Jacob.
Leigh against Burley.
LEigh sued Burley and Cradock in the Court of Admiralty, whereupon a
Prohibition was prayed. The Case was thus: Burley, Master of a Ship, gave money
to Cradock to buy Sailors Clothes for him; Cradock bought such Clothes for him
of Leigh in the Parish of Saint Katherines near the Tower in London, whereby
Leigh delivered the Clothes to Burley in his ^ip that was in the ^hames
adjoining to Saint Katherines; and because the money was not paid, he sued
Burley in the Admiralty Court; and a Prohibition was awarded for two causes; 1.
because the Contract was made on land, and infra corpus comitatus, and
therefore the Admiral can have no jurisdiction; for the Statutes of the 13 and
15 of Rich. 2. and 2 H. 4. cap. 11. are, that the Admiral shall not have
conusance but of things done super altum mare. V^d. Cook, 5 Re^. 107. And so
was it resolved by the Justices; and then said, that the 15 of Richard the 2.
is mis-printed, viz. that the Admiral shall have Jurisdiction to the Bridges:
for the Translator mistook Bridges for Points, that is to say, the Lande-end.
And Cook said, that the Admiral should have no Iuris^iction where a man may see
from one side to the other: but the Coroner of the County shall enquire of
Felonies committed there; which was held to be good by all the other Justices;
And he gave this difference, that where the place was covered over with
saltwater and out of any County or Town, there est altum mare: but where it is
within any County, there it is not altum mare, but the Trial shall be par
vicenetum of the Town; Doderidge sergeant demanded this Question. The Isle of
Lunday is de Corpore Comitatus of Devonshire and lies twenty miles within the
Sea. Whether is that within the County.

Foster. If the Sea there be not of any County, the Admiral has Jurisdiction
or else not. And note Cook and Foster said, that the Statute 25 H. 8. cap. 15.
for criminal offenses upon the Sea is to be intended if Felony be super altum
Mare, for if it be committed in a Creek or a place where the Admiral has not
Jurisdiction, the Commissioners have nothing to do to meddle with it. And the
Prohibition was granted.

Michaelm. 7 Jacob.
Mores against Conham in C. B.
IN an action on the Case upon an assumpsit, the Plaintiff declared that Lover
was indebted to him in a certain sum, for which he pawnd to the Plaintiff
certain goods to the value of 100 l. and the Defendant promised the Plaintiff
to pay the debt, if he would deliver the pawn, and hereupon the Defendant
demurred. And two points were moved, one to the form, and the other to the
matter. First, the Plainti^f declared that the assumpsi: was pro diversis bonis
and Catallis delivered to Lover without showing what goods or of what kind,
for this is the consideration of the contract, and therefore ought to be
pleaded in certainty. But resolved by the Court that the plea was good: for the
goods themselves are not to be recovered in this action nor damages for them,
and so they are but collateral to the action, as in 10 Edw. 3.30. In a
Rescous: the Court was for taking of Cattle, without showing what Cattle, and
the Jury found them to be two horses; and the Plaintiff had judgment; where
note that a verdict did help an insufficient Court, and 22 A^si 21 Ed. 3. a
trespass was brought for taking away of Writings concerning land, without
showing what they were, or the quality of the land: But otherwise in a detinue
for Charters, for there the Writings themselves are to be recovered. The second
and great doubt was, when a man does promise to another that if he will deliver
the pawn, he will pay the debt, if this be a sufficient consideration to
maintain an Assumpsit.

Foster Justice, It is not: for he that has the pawn has not such an
interest in it as he may deliver it over to another, or make a legal contract
for it, and that his delivery being illegal, he cannot by his own wrong raise
an action to himself, and a man shall never maintain any action, where the
consideration is illegal and not valuable. 9 Ed. 4. In an action on the Case
the Defendant pleaded an accord, and that he delivered the writing to the
Plaintiff which concerned the land, and it was held no plea, because the
Plaintiff having land, the writtings belonged to it. And cited Reynolds Case:
where a man promised another 100 l. to solicit his business, and it was holden
that no action would lie for the money, because the soliciting his business was
illegal, he being no man of Law. Dier 355, 356.

Cook, Warburton and Daniell cont. Who said, that the consideration was good,
legal and profitable, and sufficient to maintain an assumpsit: for he who has
goods at pawn has a special property in them, so that he may work such pawn,
if it be a Horse or Ox, or may take the Cowes milk, and may use it in such
manner as the owner would: but if he misuseth the pawn, an action lies, also he
has such interest in the pawn as he may assign over, and the assignee shall be
subject to a detinue, if he detaines it upon payment of the money by the owner
as in the 2. assise. Land was leased until he had raised 100 l. he has such
interest as is grantable over. And Foster agreed to this, because he had power
to satisfy himself out of the profits. And it was agreed by the Court, that if
a man takes a distress, he cannot work the distress, for it is only the act of
the Law that gives power to the distress, for he has no property in the
distress, nor possession in jure as in the 21 H. 7. Replevin. A man has
return Irreplevisable, he cannot work them, for the Judgment is to remit them
to the pound, ibid. remansurum. vid. 13 R. 2 Brook. 20 H. 7, 1, a. 34 H. 8. B^.
pledges 28.22 Edw. 4, 11. goods pawned shall not be put into execution until
the debt be satisfied. And it was agreed by Cook and Warburton, that when a man
has a special interest in a thing by act in Law, that he cannot work it, or
otherwise use it: but contrary upon a special interest by the act of the
party as in case of a pawn.

Daniell. There is difference between pawns, which are chargeable to the
parties as Cowes and Horses, and things that are not chargeable, and also there
is a difference between pawnes that will be the worse by usage as Clothes, etc.
For if the pawn be the worse by usage an action of the Case will lie against
him that has them pawned to him: But contra of goods that are not the worse
for usage.

Cook. If I deliver goods to you, until you are promoted to a benefice, you
may use them, which Foster denied.

And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, and that they may be granted over,
and so a good assumpsit will lie.

26 Eliz.
Earl of Northumberlands Case.
THis case was privately argued before the Lord Treasurer, because the parties
agreed to refer themselves to the opinion of Wray and Anderson. And the case
was this, the Earl of Northumberland devised by his will, his Jewels to his
wife. And dyed possessed of a Collar of Esses, and of a Garter of gold and of a
Buckle annexed to his bonnet, and also of many other buttons of gold and
precious stones annexed to his robes, and of many other chains, bracelets and
rings of gold and precious stones. The question was if all these should pass
by the devise, under the name of Jewels. And both Justices did Resolve that
the Garter and Collar of Esses did not pass, because they were not properly
Jewels but ensigns of Honor and State, and that the Buckle in his bonnet,
and the buttons did not pass, because they were annexed to his Robes, and were
therefore no Jewels. But for all the other chains, rings, braceletts and
Jewels, they passed by virtue of the said Will.

Michaelm. 40 and 41 Eliz.
Sperke against Sperke. in C. R. Rot. 2215.

IN an ejectment, the Case was this. M. Sperke made a Lease of the land in
question to William Sperke for 89. years if William should so long live, the
remainder after his death to the Executors or Assigns of the said William for
40. years: afterward William dies Intestate and administration is committed to
Grace Sperke his wife, who entered clayming the 40. years, and the Defendant
clayming by another Lease entered upon him and he brought this action.

A^d^on. Executor is as good a name of purchase as Heir is. And I conceive the
points in this case are two. First, if the Administrator be an assignee.
Secondly, If the lease for 40. years, be a Chattell vested in the Intestate in
his life, for if it be, then his Administrator shall have it. And as to the
first. I conceive that she is not assignee to take these 40 years. For in the
19 Ed. 3. It is there said that Administrators are not assignees, for
administration is appointed by the ordinary and assignees must be in by the
party himself and not by a stranger, and therefore an Administrator cannot be
an assignee, as an Executor that comes in by the party, or as a husband for
his wife.

Walmesley and Glany^ accorded. But Kingsmill cont. for he said, that although
one could not be assignee in Deed without the act of the party, yet one may be
assignee in Law by the act of the law. And so the opinion of the ^. Justices to
the first point was, that the Administrator could not have it as assignee, and
as to the second point. Anderson said, that it could not vest: for if a man
have a Lease for life, the remainder for 40. years, the remainder is void,
because there is no person named to whom it is limited: but if a man make a
Lease for life, and after his death to his lessee for 21. years, that is good,
and the Executor shall have it as in right of his Testator. But where a man
makes a Lease for years or life, the remainder after his death for 40. years to
his Executors, the Executors shall have it as purchasors, for this word
remainder divides it from the Testator, and makes the Executors purchasors.

Walmesley, Glanvill and Kingsmill cont. And their chief reason was from the
intent of the parties, and their intent was that the Lessee should have an
estate during life, for it is to him for 89. years, if he so long live, and
because by common intendment he cannot survive those years, their intent was
that his Executors should have it after his death, and that the certainty of
the time might be known it was limited for 40. years.

And W lmsley said, that the Administrator could not have this by purchase, for
when a man takes by purchase, he must be named by an apt name of purchase by
which he may be known; as if there be tenant for life, the remainder to the
right heirs males of J.S. and J.S. has issue two sons, and the eldest has
issue a daughter, and J.S. dies, this daughter shall never take any estate,
because she is not heir male, she has no name of purchase; and therefore here
the Administrator cannot take by purchase, for the Administrator comes in by
the ordinary, and therefore cannot be an assignee. And at last. Judgment was
given. That the Administrator should hold it, as a thing vested in the
Intestate.

Michaelm. 41 and 42 Eliza.
White against Gerish. in C. B. Rot. 366.

IN a Replevin the Defendant avowd for Rent. The case was this. Two persons did
join in leavying a fine to J.S in Fee ^ur co^ns de droit come ceo, etc. J.S.
by the same Fine renders the Lands to one of the Conusors in tail, reserving
Rent and further would quod tenementa pre^cta remanerent to the other who is
the avovee.

Walmesley. The Rent shall pass: as if a man grants land for life, and also
grants quod tenementa predicta remane^unt to another, these words (Quod
tenementa predicta) do make a grant of the reversion: and also these renders
are as several Fines, and so it shall be taken as a grant in Tail rendering
Rent, and after a grant of the reversion.

Glanvill accorded. Warburton. If a man makes a gift in Tail rendering rent,
the remainder over in Fee, the Donor shall have the Rent and not he in the
remainder.

Walmesley. That is true in a grant, but not in a Fine.

Anderson. If a man makes a gift in Tail rendering rent, and at the same
instant grants the Reversion, and the Deeds are delivered, accordingly, this
shall pass as a reversion. And after it was adjudged to be a grant of the
reversion, and that the rent passes.

Crawleys Case.
IN Replevin the case was thus. A Rent is granted to two during the life of
J.S. to the use of J.S. the grantee dies, and if the Rent were determined was
the Question.

Walmsley. The rent remains to J.S. for the grantees have an estate during the
life of J.S. and by the Statute of the 27. l. 8. the use is raised and conjoynd
with the possession, whereby the Rent it self is carried to J.S. whereby J.S.
has an absolute estate for his life, and the life of the grantees is not
material: as if Rent be granted to two for the life of J.S. if he does not
grant over the rent, their lives are not material. And if they grant over and
dse, the Rent shall not cease, but the grantee shall have it during the life of
J.S. And here the Statute 27 l. 8. vests this in cestuy que vie, otherwise if
it were before the Statute of use. quod fuit concessum per curiam.

Pasch. 41 Eliz.
Shaw against Sherwood. Rot. 2504.

THe Executors of Shaw brought an Action of Debt for 20 l. upon a Bill, and the
Bill was thus, I William Shaw have received of Thomas Pret 40 l. to the use of
Robert Shaw and Eliz^beth Shaw, equally to be divided: which said sum I
acknowledge my self to have received to the use aforesaid, and the same to re
deliver again at such time as shall be most fit for the profit and commodity of
the said Robert Shaw and E^zabeth.

Walmesley. Two points are here; First, if this be a Debt to cestuy que use, or
to him who gave it. Secondly, if it be divided, so that each of them shall have
an Action for 20 l. And as to the first, he held, that it was a debt to him for
whose use the money was delivered; and as to the second that they shall have a
debt as of several debts, by reason of these words equally to be divided.

K^g^m. Here is no Obligation, for the words are not obligatory, but only an
acknowledgement of the receipt. Glany^ll accorded.

Walmesley. When he acknowledged the receipt to both their uses, without
question such Receiver is a Debtor. And agreed by the Court, that admitting it
was a Debt, that then it shall be a divided Debt, and not joint. Quod nota.

Lane against Cotton.
IN Debt upon a Bond, on condition to pay 20 l. within a month after, the
Obligee had a son, that did or could speak the Lords P^er in English, that he
could be understood; the Plaintiff pleaded, that he had a son, qui loqui potui^
praecationem Domini, u^intellig^ potuerit; and the Defendant demurred, because
it was pleaded that he had a son qui loqui potui, for that is a secret ability
that cannot be known.

Kingsmill. The plea is good, and shall be tried, as in case of a Writ of non
com^s mentis.

Glanvill accorded: for it may be proved by the testimony of those who have
heard him speak; and if he ever spoke it, it is good evidence that he had
ability to speak.

Walmesley contr. Because it is a secret thing it cannot be tried.

Kingsmill. A man is bound in a Bond to give me 20 l. when the River of Var^ is
novigable, it is a good plea to say that the River is navigable, without saying
that some have navigated upon it.

Her^ Sergeant cited a Case adjudged in a Quare impedit by the Patron against
the Bishop, who had pleaded that the Parishioners were Welshmen, and that they
could not understand English, and that the Clerk he presented could not
understand Welsh; and the Patron pleaded, that the Clerk could speak Welsh; and
upon Demurr it was adjudged a good issue, and that such matter might be tried.

Anderson. The issue is good, and it is at the election of the party to plead
quod loqui potuit, vel loquutus est. And if I am obliged to you to give you a
100 l. when I am able to go to Paul's, this may ^e tried, although in facto I
never went to Paul's; and if I am able, I shall pay the money. And he cited
Broughtons Case, where in Maintenance the Defendant pleaded that he was peritus
in legibus Angliae, and that he was retained to he of Council, and adjudged no
good plea, for he should allege that he was Student for a certain time, and
was elected by the Benchers to be a Barrester. And Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

Michaelm. 41 and 42 Eliz.
Swan against Gateland. Rot. 3267, or 3667.

IN a ravishment of Ward, the Plaintiff demurred, that T. B. was seized of land
in socage, and dyed, and J B his son is of the age of two years, and that the
Guardianship belongs to him, because he is next friend (...) part ma^s J.B.
viz. the brother of E.B. the infants mother. The Defendant pleaded, that E.B.
the infants mother was his mother also, and that he was begotten by one
Gateland on the said E.B. and the said Gatela^e dyed, and the said E.B. did
marry the said T.B. and had issue the infant* and so concluded, quod erat
propinquior am cus absque hoc, that the Plaintiff is propinquior amicus; and
upon this was a Demurr.

Hern for the Plaintiff. The question is, whether the uncle shall be Guardian
in socage, or the brother of the half blood* and he said, the uncle should have
the Wardship because there is a more natural affection between the uncle and
the infant, than between the infant and the brother of the half blood; and if
there be not love, he cannot be the procheme amy, although in judgment of Law
he be the next of kin. 31 Ed. 3. Gaudy 157. In a Writ of Ward, the Plaintiff
declared that he was next of kin of the Plaintiff the mother of the infant, and
it was pleaded against him, that the infants mother was alive; but he replied,
that the mother had made a Charter of Feoffment to the disherison of the
infant, and that she was attaint of Treason. And in 15 Eliz. the brother who
claimed the Wardship of his younger brother, was also within age, and therefore
it was ruled that the uncle should have the Wardship, because alterum ^qu^r
rege^ qui se^psum nequit. And 5 Ed. 6. the brother of the half blood is next of
kin, to whom administration shall be given before the mother; for the Statute
of 27 H. 8.15 says, that the next of kin shall have it, and the brother of the
half blood is the next of ^in: but Guardianship shall be given by the Law to
the nearest friend and that is the uncle

Williams contr. For although the brother be but o^ the half blood. yet he
shall have the Wardship* for the brother is the next of kin, to whom the
inheritance cannot descend; and the 31 Ed. 1. does not gainsay this, for the
mother was denied the Wardship, because she was attaint of Treason: for the Law
will not suffer that the infant shall be in Ward to any, who may be suspected
to do wrong to the infants land, or to his person, and therefore he shall not
be in Ward to any that may inherit him, for there is a suspicion that he may
kill the infant. And 5 Ed. 6. Brook, Administration 47. it is agreed that the
brother of the half blood is next of kin, and that is the cause of the nearness
of love; and it cannot be intended that there should not be love between
persons so nearly allied. And 30 Assi. 47. a remainder was limited
propinquioribus de sanguine, and there it is agreed that the brother is next of
blood.

Warburton contr. The uncle shall have the Wardship for two causes, for there
is not such natural love between two brothers of the half blood, as is between
the uncle and the infant of the whole blood. Also, the Statute says, that he
shall be in custody parentum haeredis, and therefore he ought to be in custody
of those who are of most ancient degree, who are the parents: but one brother
cannot be parent to the other.

Walmesley contr. For the brother is the procheine amy; and so has it been
ruled in the time of the Lord Dyer, in 7 Eliz. in C. B. for he ought to be in
Ward to him that is next of blood, and most remote in succession. And the 5 Ed.
6. proves, that he is next of kin, and such nearness must needs procure love:
and although it sometimes happens that there is not such love, yet this cannot
alter the Law that always intends amity; and although the Statute of
Mariebirdge speaks of parents, that is intended of such as are of full age, and
of sound memory; for if he be not, then some other that is the next of kin
shall have the Wardship; and he told Warburton, that he would show him a report
of such a Case, where it was ruled accordingly before the Lord Dyer.

Hillar. 43 Eliz.
Peck against Charnell, in C. B. Rot. 1703.

IN an Ejectment upon a special Verdict, the Case was this; John Burly seized
in Fee of land, does devise it to his wife for life, the remainder to William
Burly in tail, the remainder to his next heirmale, being of his surname, in
Fee, and dies, and then his wife does intermarry with William Burly, who had
the remainder in Tail, and then they levied a Fine come ceo, etc. to J.S. and
by the same Fine J.S. rendered to the wife for life, the remainder to the
husband in Fee, and then a common recovery was had against the husband and
wife, and that was to the uses contained in the Fine: then the wife dies, and
the husband dies without issue, and the right heir male of the surname of the
Devisor enters, and makes a Lease to the Plaintiff, who being outed by the
Lessee of William Burly, brought the Action.

Williams. Here are two points; first, if this be a discontinuance ^y the wife;
secondly, if the recovery bars him in the remainder. And as to the first
point, when woman tenant for life, and he in the remainder in Tail being her
husband, do join in a Fine, this shall not be a discontinuance of the estate
Tail; for by Littleton, discontinuance cannot be by way of grant, although it
be in case of a Fine, but ought to be by Livery. And as to the second point,
Knivetons Case, B^. 252. is express in the point, that notwithstanding the
common recovery, yet the entry of him in the remainder is legal; for as to the
point of recovery, a base Fee does pass to the Conusee of the Fine, which is
rendered back again to the woman for life, and her husband in Fee; and by the
Common Law there was no remedy for him in the reversion against a recovery had
against Tenant for life, 7 H. 7.12. 5 Ed. 4.2. until the Statute of
Westminster the 2. which gives to him a Writ of ad terminum qui praeteriit, and
by the Statute of the 23 of H. 8. he may enter: but now the question is,
whether this recovery will bar him in the remainder of his entry, because the
recovery was of another estate, and not against his Tenant for life. But I
conceive that the wife is not in her former or ancient estate, but takes hereby
a new estate; for if Tenant for life grants his estate to J.S. and his heirs,
and J.S. grants a Rent, and then re-grants an estate to the Tenant for life,
the Tenant for life shall be liable for the Rent, Dyer 252.

Harris contr. For by the rendering of the estate by the Fine, she shall be in
her ancient state; and he cited the Case of Peter Carry here adjudged, who being
Tenant in T. the remainder to the Earl of Devonshire, was attainted, and then
the King pardoned him, and gave him his land again, and then he suffered a
common recovery, and thereby barred the remainder in the Earl of Devonshire.

But Anderson was against this Case, and said, that by the render the woman was
in her ancient estate, and so the remainder discontinued, and the entry of him
in the remainder taken away.

Warburton. The Fine does make no discontinuance, for they give away but that
which they may lawfully do; and so is Bredons Case, Cook, 1 Rep. 67. and as to
the common recovery, it is out of the Statute of the 32 H. 8. because she
remains party to the Fine; and by the render upon the Fine, they shall be as in
by a new estate, and then the recompense shall not be to the ancient estate,
and therefore he in the remainder is not barred nor impeached by this Fine, but
he may enter within five years.

Kingsmill accorded; for it is plain, that by the render to the husband and
wife, they are in a new estate, and the recompense shall go as to that, and not
to the ancient estate: but contr. if it had been by way of voucher.

Walmesley accorded: but notwithstanding the Fine, and recovery, the entry of
him in the remainder is good; and as to the woman, it is clear, that there is
no discontinuance to him in the remainder in Fee, for he in the remainder in
Tail cannot discontinue, because he is seized by force of the estate Tail; as
the 4 H. 7.17. Tenant in Dower, and he in the reversion in Tail, join in a
Fine, this is no discontinuance of the estate Tail, because he was never
seized, and therefore it is a forfeiture in the Tenant for life, although he in
the remainder joined with him, by the 41 Ed. 3. but otherwise if Tenant for
life, and he in remainder in Fee, join in a Fine. Vid. Bredons Case, 1 Rep. 76.

Anderson. I conceive he in the remainder may enter, for all passes from the
Tenant for life, and it is her Feoffment, and the confirmation of the other,
and so the estate Tail being spent, he in the remainder shall enter for
forfeiture, and the recovery shall be no bar, because it was of another estate:
and also this title of entry for forfeiture shall not be barred by the common
recovery, no more than if a Feoffee upon condition does suffer a common
recovery, yet may the Feoffor enter for the condition broken: and Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff: so that his remainder was neither discontinued by the
Fine, nor his entry taken away by the Recovery.

43 Eliz.
Hall against VVood, in C. B.
IN an Action on the Case for a Trover, and conversion of 40 l. on not guilty
pleaded, it was found for the Plaintiff.

Walmesley. How can an Action lie for a Trover of money, if it be not within a
bag? for this Writ supposes a loss; and when the money was lost, how does it
appear that the money found is the same money that was lost?

Davies. There are many presidents in the Kings Bench to prove that this Action
will well lie for corn and money, and I have been of Counsel in many of those
Cases.

Warburton. If the money were lost in view of a third person, upon such Trover
the Action will lie, for there it may be proved that it was the money of the
Plaintiff. And Walmesley agreed. And note, that a president was shown, tempore
40 and 41 Eliz. inter Holloway and Higgs, which was thus; a master delivered to
his servant 30 quarters of corn to be sold, and the servant sold them, and
converted the money, and the master brought his Action on the Case for the
Trover and conversion against the servant, who pleaded, not guilty, and it was
sound against him; and two things were moved in arrest of Judgment; first,
that the master was never possessed of the money, and therefore could not lose
it; secondly, because the money cannot be known, and so non constat whether it
was the money of the masters, or no. But notwithstanding this Case, Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff, because the possession of the servant was the
possession of the master; and when the servant converts this to his own use, by
this the master loses the property, and is also a conversion in the servant.

Mich. 42 and 43 Eliz.
Leeke against the Bishop of Coventry, in C. B. Rot. 3579.

IN a Quare impedit the Case was thus; Langford and Bussy were Patrons of an
Advowson, to which they and their Ministers use to present by turn. Langford
presented according to his turn, and his Clerk dyed, and then Bussy presented
in his turn also, and his Clerk was deprived, after which Langford grants his
Advowson in Fee to Leeke the Plaintiff, and then the Bishop without any notice
does collate Dr. Babington, who dies; after whose death the question was, if
Leeke should present, or Bussy; and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff,
because that notwithstanding the Church was void by deprivation, yet the Patron
may transpose his Advowson over.

Bethell against Sir Edward Stanhop.
IN Debt against Sir Edward Stanhop, as Executor to Francis Vaughan, he pleaded
that he is not Administrator; and the said Vaughan gave 40 l. to his daughter
within age, with power of revocation upon the payment of 20 s. and it was found
that this was done to defraud Creditors, and then he dyed possessed of the goods,
and the Defendant sold these goods, which made him Executor in his own wrong,
and afterward takes Letters of Administration.

Walburton. I conceive the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment, for the Statute
of 21 Eliz. of fraudulent conveyances, annuls this gift of the Intestate,
because he did it to defraud his Creditors, and then when he dyed it was assets
in the hands of the Administrator. And if a Testator have goods wrongfully
taken from him out of his possession, these are not Assets to the Executors or
Administrators: but if they be taken out of the possession of the
Administrators or Executors, they shall be Assets, for they may take them
again: but for goods taken from the Testator, they have but an Action. But here
the Administrator may take the goods which were given by the Intestate to
defraud Creditors, for the gift was void, and therefore they shall be accounted
Assets. And as to the Action, it is well brought; for when a man does
administer as Executor, and then takes Letters of Administration, it is at the
election of the Plaintiff to sue him as Executor or Administrator, 9 Ed. 4.33.
21 H. 6.8. 2 Rich. 2.20. 18 Ed. 4.

Walmesley agreed; for the Statute of the 27 Eliz. has made void the Testators
gift, and sub^ata causa toll ^ur effectus, and the gift being taken away, the
property is also taken away from the Donee, and settled in the Donor, as to any
Creditor: To which the other Justices agreed; and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff.

Trinit. 43 Eliz.
George Brooks Case, in C. B. Rot. 1822.

GIbson recovered in a Debt against Bro^k, as Executor to J.S. 60 l. and 6 l.
damages, and upon a scire facias to the Sheriff, he returns no Assets, and then
upon the estate which was in L^ndon, which the Defendant had wasted and so^d, a
fieri fac^as was awarded to the Sheriff of L^don, with a Commission to the
Sheriff of London, to enquire if he had Assets at the day of the Writ, etc and
by the inquest it was found that he had Assets at the day of the Writ
purchased, etc. and that he had wasted the estate, which was thus returned by
the Sheriff, against which the Defendant took issue that he had not Assets; and
upon this was a a Demurr.

Walmesley. A man may avert against the return of a Sheriff, if the return be a
matter collateral; as if upon a Ca^ias the Sheriff returns a Rescous, there may
be an averment against this, 4 Eliz. 212. a. But if it be in pursuance of the
Writ, as non est inventus, there no averment shall be taken against this: but
here the return is the saying of the Inquest, and not his own saying.

Warburton. I conceive he shall have an averment and traverse, or else he shall
be without remedy, for he cannot have an Action on the Case against the
Sheriff, because he returns that which was found by the Inquest, and so not
like where the Sheriff returns falsely without such Inquest; and no attachment
lies, because it is but an Inquest of office; and after it was moved at another
day, and a president shown, 33 Eliz. in B. R. between Westner and Whitenore,
and there it was adjudged that such return of the Sheriff was traversable: and
Anderson and Kingsmill agreed to it; wherefore Judgment was given for the
Defendant, and that the issue was well taken.

Day against Fynn.
IN an Ejectment, the Plaintiff declared of a Lease for years of a house and 30
acres of land in D. and that J. S. did let to him the said Message, and 30
acres by the name of his house in B. and ten acres of land there, sive plus,
sive minus, it was moved in arrest of Judgment, because that 30 acres cannot
pass by the name of 10 acres, sive plus, sive minus, and so the Plaintiff has
not conveyed to him 30 acres; for when 10 acres are leased to him, sive plus,
sive minus, these words ought to have a reasonable construction to pass a
reasonable quantity, either more or less, and not twenty or thirty acres more.

Yelverton agreed, for the word 10 acres, sive plus, sive minus, ought to be
intended of a reasonable quantity, more or less by a quarter of an acre, or two
or three at the most: but if it be 3 acres less than 10. the Lessee must be
content with it. Quod Fenner and Crook concesserunt; and Judgment was staid.

Smith against Jones.
IN an Action of the Case upon an Assumpsit, the Case was; that the wise of
Jones was Executrix to J.S. and had Assets to satisfy all Debts and Legacies.
The woman dies, and the goods remained in the hand of her husband, who was the
Defendant; and Smith the Plaintiff being a Legatee, demanded his debt of the
husband, who said to him, Forbear t^ll Michaelmas, and I will pay you; and if
this was sufficient cause of Action, was the question on a Demurrer.

Davies. The promise is void, because it is after the death of the wife.

Yelverton. The Action will lie, because he has the ^oods in his possession,
and therefore is chargeable, and must answer for them, and therefore there is a
good consideration. And he cited Godfreys Case, who laid claim to a Copyhold,
and the Copyholder in possession said to him. If the opinion of the Lord Cook
be, that Godfrey has a good title to it, I will surrender it to him; and
because he did not surrender to him, Godfrey brought an Action on the Case, and
it was adjudged that the staying of the suit was a sufficient consideration to
have an Action on the Case.

Yelverton. If the promise had been to pay this Legacy in consideration he
would not sue him, then it had been good.

Williams. If there be no cause of suit, there is no assumpsit, and here is no
just cause, for he cannot be sued for Legacies.

Flemming of the same opinion, for the husband cannot be sued by the Plaintiff,
and although perhaps the Legatee may sue him in the spiritual Court, yet that
is only for the temporal administration. And afterward Judgment was given for
the Defendant.

Michaelm. 9. Jacob.
Kempe and James against Laurence in C. B. Rot. 3648.

IN a scire facias the case was thus, Gant having two daughters made his wife
Executrix, until his daughters came to the age of 21. years, or should be
married, and then the Executorship should cease, and that then his daughters
should be his Executors; and the woman did recover a debt upon a bond made to
the Testator, after which the daughters married the Plaintiffs, and they
brought the scire facias upon the said Judgment against the Defendants as
terre-tenants, and the Sheriff returned the Defendants terre-tenants, and no
others, and upon Oyer of the scire facias the Defendants pleaded, that H. was
se^sed of those lands die Judicii reddit, and made a Lease for years to them:
Judgment, etc.

Nichols. The daughters shall have this judgment as Executors, for they are in
privity and in by the Testator, and are not like an Administrator who comes in
by the Ordinary after the death of the Executor. 6 H. 8.7. Cook. 5. Rep.
Brudnells Case: and the daughters are Executors and subject to debts of the
Testator. And as to the plea he said* that forasmuch as the Defendants are
returned terre-tenants, they cannot plead that they are but tenants for years,
and that their Lessor is not warned: for the scire facias is a personal action
to have execution, but of the goods: but in a real action it is a good plea,
because the lessor himself cannot plead in discharge of such action 8 H. 6.32.
And note that Michaelm. 43 and 44. Eliz. Rot. 834. Judgment in the very same
point was given accordingly.

Trinit. 9 Jacob.
Information against West. in C. B. Rot. 1246.

IN an Information upon the Statute of the 5 of Ed. 6. cap. 14. for buying of
wheate-meale, and converting it into starch. It was resolved by three of the
Justices ( Cook being against it) that this is not within the Statute: but they
agreed, that if one bought corn and thereof made meal or oat-meale, and sold
it, that this was within the Statute, for that is usual, and is no alteration,
and therefore remains the same corn, but starch is altered by a trade or
science, which is a mystery, and so it is not the same thing that was sold.
But Cook Chief Justice contra. And cited one Franklinghams Cass Michaelm. 39
and 40 Eliza. in B. R. where one bought Barley, and because it was of such
Quantity that he could not make Malt of it in his own house, he made Malt
thereof in another house by his own servants. And it was resolved.

First, That the conversion of corn into Malt, in his own house, with an intent
to sell it was within the Statute, unless there be a saving for it.

Secondly, Forasmuch as it was in another house, he is out of the proviso, and
so within the penalty of the Statute. And in Pasch. 42 Eliz. between Reynolds
and Gerret. That if a Miller buys corn, and grinds it and sells it within his
house, this is within the Statute. And in the Checquer Chamber in a writ of
Error there between Baron and Brise, adjudged there, that a Coster-monger, who
buys Pippins to sell them again was out of this Statute, because they are
necessary victual. And diverse exceptions were taken to the Information: viz.
where he says Ligamen anglice Starch, whereas there is no such word, but it is
Ligumen, and the anglice will not help this mistake. Cook 10. Rep. 134. and
this exception was taken by Justice Winch.

But Warburton Justice cont. for Starch is a thing newly devised, and there is
no Latin word for it, and therefore the anglice there is good.

Foster Justice took an exception, because the information concluded contra
formam Statuti, whereas it ought to have been contra formam Statutorum. For
this Statute was of force until the 8 Elizab. and then was determined until
the 13th of Elizabeth, and then it was revived, so there are two Statutes; but
'twas agreed, that where a Statute continued de tempore in Tempus, and was
never discontinued, nor determined, there it shall be said contra formam
Statuti, and this diversity has been twice adjudged upon this very Statute.
viz. 9 Eliz. in Palmers Case, and in the 35 Eliz.

Warburton. cont. for the Information does intend only the Statute of 5 Ed. 6,
and 14. and he did recite the words thereof in his Information: also this
Statute only makes the offense and declares the manner of it, and no other
Statute makes any addition to it, or increases the penalty, but only revives
it to endure in perpetuum. But if a Statute does prohibit a thing, and another
Statute gives a penalty, there, upon Information upon the penalty, both
Statutes ought to be recited and to conclude contra formam Statutorum, vid.
Commentar. 206. Morgans Case. And so the Statute of Usury, 37 H. 8. is revived
the 13th Eliz. and an addition made to it, there such inclusion ought to be
contra formam Statutorum, but where the Statute is only revived, it is
otherwise: as the Statute of Perjury 5 Eliz. was continued until the 14 Eliz.
and then it was determined, and 27 Eliz. was revived, yet all informations upon
that Statute, are contra formam Statuti 5 Elizab. Cook. This is no good
exception and cited Talbot and Sheldens Case. Hillar. 33 Eliz. who were indicted
for Recusancy contra formam Statuti 23 Eliz. and in a writ of Error, the
Judgment was reversed, because the penalty was demanded: for the 10th Eliz.
made the Offense, and the 23 Eliz. gave the penalty, but if the Information be
for the offense only, there it had been good. See the new Book of Entries 182.
but if there be diverse Statutes in the point of Information contra formam
Statuti is good, because the best shall be taken for the King. Vid. 5 H. 7. 17.
8 Ed. 3.47.^.

Pasch. 10 Jacob.
Waller against the Deane and Chapter of Norwich.
IN an action of Covenant the Plaintiff declared on a Lease made from the
Deane, the Case was thus. The Deane in the 38 Eliz. had made a Lease for 99.
years, to one Themilthorpe, and then in the 42 Eliz. made a Lease to the
Plaintiff for three lives, rendering Rent, with a Letter of Attorney to make
livery, and a Covenant to save the Plaintiff harmless against Themilthorpe,
afterward the Attorney makes livery sc. after Michaelmass which was a Rent
day, and he being disturbed by Themilthorpe, brought this Covenant. And two
points were moved in the Case.

First, Inasmuch as the Lease was void to Walter, whether that the Covenant was
void also.

Secondly, If the livery made after the Rent day be void.

Hoghton Sergeant, If the Covenant depended on the interest of the Lease, as a
Covenant to repay the thing devised, or to pay rent, these had been void,
because the Lease it self is void, for they do immediately depend upon the
Lease, but where the Covenant is for a thing collateral, as a Covenant that
the Lessor is owner at the time of the Lease, or that the Lessee shall enjoy
it, or shall be discharged and saved harmeless, these Covenants being
collateral to the Lease and interest are good, although the Lease be void, and
the 43 Ed. 3. proves this: where a Lease was made by a Baron and Feme, a
Covenant by them shall not bind the wife, contra where the Covenant concerns
the interest, as payment of Rent, etc. Also the Covenant was broken immediately
upon the sealing of the Lease to the Plaintiff. And as to the second point, he
held it was a good livery, because no time was limited in the Letter of
Attorney.

Dodderidge Sergeant; The Covenant is void, because the Lease is void, but
contra, if it had been a Covenant to enjoy for three lives, and he relied much
on the difference between tempus annorum and terminum annorum in Cook 1. Rep.
124.

Nichols cont. The Covenant is good, and yet in force, for when an estate is
created in which is employed a Covenant in Law, there if the estate be void, the
Covenant is void also, but when there is an express Covenant in Deed, there it
is otherwise, although the Lease be void or voydable, as if he Covenant that
the Lessee shall enjoy during the term, and the lessee resign, yet is the
Covenant good although the term is gone. And as to the second point. The
livery is good, for until the livery be made, the lessor shall retain his
land, and no Rent is due. vid. Commentat. 423. for by intendment the possession
is better than the Rent. And Cook agreed to this. And the Justices agreed with
Nicholls.

Trinit. 10 Jacob
Barnes Case.
TEnant for life the Reversion in the Lessor, a Formedon is brought against the
tenant for life, who prays in aid of him in the remainder for life, without
him in the Reversion.

Warburton. I conceive he shall have the Aid 7 H. 4.2. where aid is prayed
against him in the Remainder and Reversion, and and he cited a Manuscript 11 R.
2. direct in the point that the aid would lie. But the other Justices cont.
for the Tenant for life has as high an estate as he in the remainder, and may
plead all that the other may, but if there be Tenant for life, the remainder in
Tail, there he shall have aid of the Tenant in Tail. 23 H. 6.6. 11 Edw.
3.16. If there be Tenant for life, the remainder for life the remainder in Fee,
tenant for life shall have aid of them both, for else he in the remainder
shall not come in to plead. 11 E. 3. aid 32. Where it is resolved, that tenant
for life shall have aid of the Reversioner for life.

Hillar. 28 Eliz.
Watkins against Astwick.
A Man makes a feofment on condition that if he, his heirs or Executors do pay
the Rent of 100 l. before such a day, that he may re-enter. the Feoffer dies,
his heir within age, the mother (without any notice of the son) requests J.S.
that he would pay the money for her son. And all this was found by special
verdict, but it was not found of what age the son was.

Clinch. If the Jury had found that the son was of the age of 17 years, the
payment had been good.

Wray. If a Bond be upon condition that the Obligor or his heirs should pay 100
l. and the Obligor dies, his heir within age, I conceive payment by the
Guardion, or by some other friend is good. And afterward all the Justices
agreed. That if the Infant were within the age of 14. years, the tender of the
money by his mother had been good, but contra, if he had been more than 14
years, and because no age was proved here, but that he was within age, it shall
not be intended that he was within the age of 14. years. and therefore they
advised the party to begin de novo, and that it may be found that the Infant
was within the age of 14. years.

Trinit. 25. Eliz.
Moris against Paget. in C. B. Rot. 2215.

IN a Replevin, a special Verdict was found, that Sir Francis Ascough was
seized of the Manor of Castor in Lincoln, which Manor extended it self into
four Towns v z. Castor, North Kelsey, Dale, and ^ale: and that there were
demesne lands and Freeholders in each of the said Towns, and that Moris the
Plaintiff held the land where etc by Fealty and suit of Court to the Manor of
Castor, and the lands did lie in one of the Towns viz. in Norch Kelsey: And
Ascough being so seized, sold to the Defendant Totum illud Manerium sive
Dominium de North Kelsey cum pertinentiis in North Kelsey, ac omnia ac singula
Messuagia, redditus, Herriot, and all other things used or reputed as parcel
thereof, with all Courts etc. To have and to hold to the Vendee and his heirs:
and Moris the Plaintiff and other freeholders in North Kelsey, did attorne to
the Vendee. The Question was, if the Vendee had the Manor of North Kelsey, or
not.

Peryam, He has not; yet by the feofment and attornment all the Tenants and
services are conveyed to him: but not as a Manor: for a Manor is made and
incorporate by continuance of time, and this entire Manor of Castor cannot be
divided no more than other liberties; as if the King grant to three partners,
who have three Manors, a Leet or Warren, and one of them makes a feofment, the
Feofee shall not have the Leet, and he^tted Dyer 362. a. and he said, if I
grant my Manor of ^except certain Demesne lands and services, the feofee shall
have the Manor, and I shall have the Lands and services in gross: and so if I
have a Manor that extends into two Towns, and I grant my Manor to you in one
Town, you shall have no Manor, but the lands and services in gross.

Windham Justice cont. For where he grants his Manor of North Kelsey in North
Kelsey, there it shall be construed his Manor in reputation.

Ander on agreed, for although a Manor cannot be created at this day, yet is
it not so entire but it may be divided.

Hillar. 30. Elizab.
Sir Thomas Howards Case.
A Man makes a Lease for years the 10th of May, and then the Lessor bargains
and sells this to another by Deed enrolled, bearing date the 10th of April,
and it was entered to be conveyed the 10th of April before, but in truth it was
delivered and acknowledged and enrolled afterward: And it was held that the
bargain was without remedy at the Common Law, for he cannot plead that it was
acknowledged or delivered after the date of the day of acknowledging it, and so
was the opinion of Rhodes.

Peryam and Windham, Anderson being absent: for he cannot aver, that it was
enrolled or acknowledged at another day then it is recodred, because it is
contrary to the Record, for it is entered, that it was acknowledged the 10 of
April, and then if such a plea should be admitted, it would shake most of the
Assurances in England.

Note, Shuttleworth put this case. A man makes a Lease, rendering Rent at two
Feasts, and if the Rent be behind at any of the said Feasts or 40. days after,
and no distress to be found, that the Lessor shall re-enter, the Lessor comes
upon the ground the last day of the 40. and demands his Rent, and because no
distress was sound on the land at the time of his demand, he entered. But it was
averred that always before this day there was sufficient distress, and the
question was, if his entry were good.

Fenner and Rhodes said they had seen a Report of the same Ease. 8 Eliz. That
the distress ought to be on the Land on the last day, yea at the last instant
of the day, which is a legal time to make a demand, or else the Lessor may
enter.

Walmsley. The same Ease was resolved a year ago in the Kings Bench between
Ward and VVare. But if it were, (and no distress to be found at any time within
forty days) there if there be a distress found at any time, it is sufficient.
Vid. 1. Inst. 202. a.

28 Eliz.
VVood against Ash.
IN a Replevin, the Ease was thus. Puttenham made a Lease of Land with a Stock
of Sheep for 20. years rendering Rent, and the Lessee does Covenant to render
back to him at the expiration of the Lease 1000 Sheep of the age of three or
four years, and that the Lessor grants all his Chattells, and this stock of
Sheep to Elizabeth Vavafor the Defendants now wife: but in Truth, the Sheep
of the old stock were all spent, and others supplied, part by increase, and
part by buying of other Sheep.

Walmesley, for the Defendant. The grant made by the Lessor is good; for the
general property does remain in him, although that the Lessee has a special
property. To which it was answered, that if the ancient stock of Sheep were
still, it had been godd; but it was not, and therefore the grant is void.

Walmesley. Although the first stock was changed, yet the new stock does supply
it, and is in place thereof, and shall be in the same condition as the other
stock is, and therefore the Lessor shall have property in it. But the whole
Court was against him: for they said, that the increase of the stock of Sheep
should be to the Lessee, and the Lessor shall never have them at the end of the
term: but they agreed, that if the lease were of the stock with Lambs, Calves,
and Piggs, there the increase belongs to the Lessor. And all the Court took
this difference, sc. when a lease is made of dead goods, and when of living;
for when the lease is of dead goods, and any thing is added to them for
reparations or otherwise, the Lessor shall have this addition at the end of the
term, because it belongs to the principle: but in case of a stock of Cattle,
which has an increase, as Calves and Lambs, there these things are severed
from the principle, and Lessor shall never have them, for then the Lessor shall
have the Rent, and the Lessee shall have no profit.

Trinit. 29
Wise Man against Rolfe. in in C. B. Rot. 1454.

IN a Writ of right the Case was thus. A man selfed of Land in Fee makes his
will, and gives to D. his wife such Land for life, the remainder to T. his son
and heirs of his body, and also gives to T. his son his Land in B. and also
his Land in C. and also he gives his Land called Odyum to the seed of his son
habendum all the demised premises to his T. son and the heirs males of his
body. The Question was it T. should have an estate in Tail in B. and C. or if
the last words shall relate only to that which was last named.

Fenner for the Plaintiff. For the last Clause is a new Clause, and shall not
be preferred to the first, for it begins with a verb viz. I give my Land
called Odyum, and therefore the limitation afterward shall be referred only to
this. And 10 H. 7.8. There was a grant by Dedi custodiam. Parci and Arbores
vento prostrat. The Grantee shall have the trees by this Clause, and 14 Eliz. A
man devises thus. I give my Manor of C. to my second son: Item I give my
Manor of S. to my second son to have and to hold to him, and to his heirs. And
by Dyer, Welsh and Weston he had an estate but for life; but Brown cont. for if
a Lease be made to A. B. and C. successively, it is adjudged that they are
Ioyntenants, but if it be to them as they are named, they shall have it one
after the other: and if a devise be to one and his heirs, and after to another
for life, the Law will conster that the estate for life is to proceed, for that
words of Relation in Wills shall be taken stricttly, as if a devise be to A.
and his heirs of his body, and he does devise other land in Forma praedicta,
this shall be but for life.

Walmesley cont. and said that this limitation did go to all, whereof no
limitation was made before; for the rules of reason are uncertain, and
therefore such matters shall be expounded according to the best sense that may
be, and here the sense is most natural to refer it to all, and the word all
imports this* and the Case of the fourth of Elizabeth (under favor) accords
with this viz. that the Devisee shall have Fee in both. But if the Devise had
been, I devise D. to my son Thomas, and also to him and his heirs the Manor of
S. there he shall have D. but for life. And if a man devise to his 4. sons, A.
B. C. and D. to have to the persons last named to them and their heirs, there
all shall have Fee. 19 Ed. 4. In a precipe of a house and an acre of land in
three several Towns, and that the Defendant Ibidem ingressus est, and did not
say into the house and land, and yet it was held good.

Periam and Rhodes. He shall have an estate Tail in all, and the relation
shall be to all. Anderson doubted at first, but agreed afterward and Judgment
was given accordingly.

32 and 33 Eliz.
Mathewson against Trott. in C. B. Rot. 1904.

UPon a special verduit, the Case was this. A man seized of land in soccage
devised it to his younger son, and died seized, the elder son enters and dies
seized, and his heir enters, and the younger son enters upon him, the Question
was, if his entry be taken away by this descent.

VValmesley. It is not, and he compared this case, to a title of entry for a
condition broken, or a Conusee of a Fine upon grant and render etc. in which
Cases no descent shall take away entry.

Anderson. The Devisee has interest presently, and the land does not descend;
for the devise prevents the descent, and the Freehold is presently in the
Devisee, and the Statute 32 H. 8. which gives power to Devise lands, does make
a Title in the Devisee as a Title of entry for condition of Mortmaine, and the
Devisee shall not have an ex gravi querela upon this Statute, but he must enter.

Walmesley. The Devisee has not a Freehold presently, for if it were so, the
Devisee at the Common Law ought not to sue an Ex gravi Querela: but certainly
if the freehold be in the Devisee, his entry is taken away. And afterward
Judgment was given by Anderson that descent does not take away the entry of the
Devisee, but delivered no reason for it.

Hillar. 33 Eliz.
Mosgrave against Agden. Rot. 2529.

IN an action of the Case on a Trover and conversion of six barrells of Butter.
The count was that they came to the hands of the Defendant, and after the
trover they were impared, and decayed, ratione negligentis custodiae. And the
Court held clearly that the action would not lie, for he who finds goods, is
not bound to preserve them from putrefaction, but it was agreed, that if the
goods were used, and by usage made worse, the action would lie.

44 Eliz.
Air against Joyner, in C. B. Rot. 2529.

IN a second Deliverance, it was said by the Court, that if Lessee for years
does assign over his term, and yet continues possession, that he has but a
naked possession, and no interest nor estate, but the estate and interest does
remain in the grantee, so that he may grant it over.

And Walmesley said, that if the Lessee makes waste, the Lessor may have an
action of waste against him: and there is a cas^, that if a man makes a Lease,
and the Lessee waves the possession, and a stranger commits waste, the Lessor
shall have an action of waste against the Lessee, but the principal question
was upon the pleading.

Tailor being Lessee for years, 9 Elizabeth did grant and assign this to Air
the Plaintiff. The Defendant pleaded, that before the grant made to Air sc. 8
Elizabeth Tailor did grant and assign his estate to the Defendant, without
traversing the gift made to the Plaintiff.

Williams. There needs no traverse, for being granted the 8 Elizab. it is
impossible it should be granted 9 Eliz. 2 Edw. 6. and 1 H. 5.

Anderson. He ought to travers, for it is impossible to confess and avoid a
grant by confession that was granted to another before, for if it were so, the
second grant is void, and so being so, confessed, here ought to be a travers.

Walmesley cont in 32 H. 6. it is sufficient to say, that at another day, etc.
there was another arbitrament, etc. for by that the first arbitrament is void
in Law. And it is a good plea in a Will, that after that, there was another
Will made, without Traversing, and there is difference between Lands and
Chattells: for land may be gotten out of a man by wrong, and therefore it may
be that after the feoffment the Feoffor entered and it disseised the Feoffee,
and did infeoffe another, but it cannot b^ so here of a term for years for no
man can take it away from the Lessee by wrong.

Glanvill and Kingsmill cont. There must be a Traverie, for there ought to be a
confession before there can be an avoydance, but here he does not confess the
grant, but pleads matter that denies it being granted. And at last Anderson
gave Judgment that he ought to Travers.

42 Eliz.
Rudd. against Topsey. in C. B. Rot. 135.

IN a Quare Impedit. The Jury found that Edward Capell was seized of an
Advowson in Fee, and did let it to the Defendant for years and during the Lease
he presented the Defendant, and the doubt was whether this were a surrender or
an Extinguishment. And it was held by all the Justices, that this could not be
a surrender, but is clearly an extinguishment: For if a man does present to his
own Church as Proctor to another, by this he loses his advowson. Not. Br.
25.17 Ed. 33.24. H. 6.

Hillar. 42 and 43 Eliz.
Forest against Ballard. Rot. 2480.

AN Audita querela was brought upon a Statute, which was acknowledged before a
Mayor, who had no power to take it.

Anderson. An Audita querela will not lie upon a void Statute.

But Kingsmill, Walmesley and Warburton cont. and Walmesley cited (...) Br.
102. where an Audita querela was brougt upon a forged Statute, and there it
would lie upon a Statute made by Duress: 20 Ed. 3.28.

Trinit. 40. Eliz.
Goodrick against Cooper. in C. B. Rot. 1259.

IN a Replevin the Defendant justified for Rent granted to the Master and
Scholars of Emanuell College in Cambridge. And the Jury found, that one
Spendelose being seized of the land where etc. by his Deed did grant to the
said Master and Fellows, a Rent Chapter of 40 l. per annum for ever: and that
Spendlose did seal his part of the Indenture, and delivered it to the use of
the Master and Fellows to one J.S. to deliver it accordingly, but there was no
dead to show their receipt thereof: and then they sealed the other part but they
made no Attorney to deliver it, and it was ^ound that the Rent was paid for
diverse years after.

VValmesley. Although no Letter of Attorney were made, yet it is good, for by
their sealing of the Counterpart there is a sufficient agreement to the grant.
As it a Reversion be granted to a Corporation by Deed, although they cannot
accept of this, but by Attorney, yet if they bring a waste, this is a
sufficient agreement to vest it in them. Quod assi Justiciarii concesserunt,
And judgment was given for the Avowant.

Michaelm. 43 and 44. Eliz.
Claygate against Bachelor. in C. B. Rot. 3217.

IN debt upon a Bond of thirty pound, the Condition was, that if Robert
Bachelor, son to the Defendant, did use the Trade of Haberdasher as Iourneyman
servant, or Apprentice, or as a Master, within the County of Kent, within the
Cities of Canterbury and Rochester, within four years after the date, that
then, if he pay twenty pound upon request, the Obligation to be void. And all
the Justices agreed that the condition was against Law, and then all is void,
for it is against the liberty of a Freeman, and against the Statute of Magna
Carta cap. 20. and is against the Commonwealth. 2 H 5. and 5. And Anderson
said, that he might as well bind himself, that he would not go to Church. And
Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

Michaelm. 43 and 44 Eliz.
Dogget against Dowell. in C. B. Rot. 65^.

IN an action on the Case upon an Assumpsit, The Plaintiff declared, that at
the request of the Defendant he had lent to him 30 l. the 10th day of May 5
Eliz. and the Defendant in consideration thereof, viz. the second day of May
aforesaid did promise and assume upon himself, that he at the end of the year
would lend the Plaintiff other thirty pounds for a year, or give to him five
pound. It was said, that the consideration is good, for although the promise
was made at another day, yet is it in pursuance thereof, so that in Law it
shall be accounted all at one time, and is not like to the case in Dyer 372.
where the Master promised one who was bail for his servant, that he would save
him harmless, this is no consideration, for the Ballment was of his own will,
and was executed before the Assumpsit, but if the Master had first requested,
and afterward assumed, there it is good; and so was it adjudged in the case of
one Sydenham against Worthington, Trinit. 27 Eliz. Rot. 748. Where the request
was before, and the promise after, and there it was a good Assumpsit.

VVarburton agreed. And it is like as if I should say to you, do such a thing,
and I will give you five pound, this is no good contract.

But all the Justices on the contrary; for when at the first day the Plaintiff
did lend to the Defendant thirty pound that was absolute, and the speaking on
the second day cannot have such reference to the first agreement, that it shall
be accounted all one.

Anderson. If I say to one: In consideration you will serve me, for a year, I
will give you five pound, here is no cause of action, for the consideration is
precedent and not mutual, and so judgment was entered for the Defendant.

Hillar 41 Eliz.
Wentworth against Wright. Rot. 2529.

IN a Quare impedit, two points were moved 1. If the Parson be made Bishop,
whether the Patron should present or the King by his prerogative.

Williams. The King shall, for before the Statute the Pope should present, and
the reason was, because the Bishop had received his presentment gratis from the
Pope: and by the same reason the King now shall present, for there is no reason
the patron should, for by his precedent presentment he has dismissed himself
until resignation or death, as if a man lets land for another man's life, he
shall not have the land during the life of Cestuy que vie, and great mischief
would be, if it should not be so, for else all the presentiments, that the King
has made, shall be usurpations. The second matter was, that no presentment is
pleaded against the King by the Patron, for it is pleaded that the Parson was
admitted and instituted, but not that he was inducted (but the Court held it
good notwithstanding that omission) But as to the first point, the Court asked
Williams, if he could show presidents that the King should have such
presentment, for they said, that the usage by the Pope is no argument at all,
for that he used to usurp many things.

Walmesley, I conceive this custom began by the Popes usurpation, but he said,
there is a Book in the time of Ed^. 2. where this point is argued and adjudged,
that the Patron shall present and not the King.

Williams showed eight or nine Presidents in the time of H. 8. that the King
used to present in such case, but all of them were between spiritual persons.
And the Court said, they did not regard those presidents, for all spiritual
persons were the Popes servants vid. 6 Elizab. 72.8.

South against Whitewit.
IN a prohibition, the case was thus, the wife of VVhitewit had spoken
scandalous words of South, and therefore the was excommunicated by the high
Commissioners, and by Letters Missive a Pursevant came at twelve of the clock
at night, and broke the house of VVo^tewit and took the body of Whi ew^ wife,
who was rescued: wherefore VVhitewit her husband was called before the
Commissioners, and hereupon VVhitew t prayed a prohibition. And the question
was, if a Pursevant could break a house by such Commission or not. And it was
agreed, that by the Common Law, neither the Pope, nor any other spiritual
Judge had any thing to do with the body and goods of any one, for only the
sword spiritual belongs unto them.

VValmesley: At the Common Law, after Excommunication a Capias Excommunica^um
was awarded, and I conceive this writ is of force at this day, and is not taken
away by the Statute of 5 E^z.

Kingsm^ll agreed, for this Statute gives power only to correct the spiritual
law, and to take away the authority of the Pope, but gives the same means to
execute it as before, and he further said, that the Statute that did erect the
Court of Wards, does appoint a Seal belonging to it, and other process
according to the course of the Common Law: and therefore by the same reason, if
this Statute of ^ Eliz. intended to give them such authority, they would have
appointed a Seal also, and a course according to the Common Law, but as the
course is here used, a man may be robbed in his house by a beggarly Pursevant
which is no Officer known by the Law. And so was the opinion of the Justices.

Pasch. 40 Eliz.
Goosey against Pot, in C. B.
IN a Replevin the Case was thus; two Hundreds were adjoining together to two
several Mannoure of two several persons, and the avowant was seized of one of
them, and he prescribed that all the Tenants of the other Hundred have used to
make suit to the Leet within his Hundred; and also that the Lord of the other
Hundred used to appear, or to pay him 4 s. pro anno futuro; and if it were not
paid, the Defendant prescribed, that he and all those, whose estates he has,
have used to distreyn any Inhabitant within the Hundred for the same; and
therefore for 4 s. not paid, he did avow the Distress whithin the Manor of
the Plaintiff, who was one of the Inhabitants.

Williams. A man may prescribe by a que estate in a Hundred, for a man may have
it by disseisin, and there are diverse presidents which the Prothonotaries have
showed me to warrant this in a Replevin, for the seisin is the matter of the
title. And to this Littletons rule may be added, that of all things which lie
in grant, and whereof a man cannot be disseised against his will, a man shall
not plead a que estate,

Kingsmall. A que estate cannot be pleaded of a Hundred, unless if be appendant
to the Manor; and a second matter was moved in this Case, viz. that he
prescribed to distreyn the Cattle of a stranger for the essence of the Lord.

Williams. It is not good, by the 41 Ed. 3. but by the 47 Ed. 3. for suit and
service, the Cattle of the Lord may be distreyned on any land within the
Hundred.

Anderson. I do agree to the Case of my Lord Dyer, that the Cattle of a
stranger cannot be taken for a Herriot.

Walmesley. In the 12 of H. 7. it is said by Fineux, that a Lord of a Manor
may enlarge his services by prescription, and so the Cattle of a stranger may
be taken: but for a personal matter, as for amercement in default of suit, no
stranger may be distreyned. And afterward agreed by all the Justices, that the
strangers Cattle could not be distreyned.

Holt against Lister.
IN a Replevin the Case was thus, he in the reversion after Tenant in Dower,
grants it over to the use of himself for life, the remainder to his nert son in
Tail, the remainder to the use of himself in Fee, and after this he levyes a
Fine to the Plaintiff and his heirs of land which he claims de haered tate
sua, after the death of the Tenant in Dower. The Plaintiff brought a Quid Juris
clamat against the Tenant in Dower, and upon non sum informatus, Judgment was
given that the Tenant should attorn, and now he prayed that she should not
attorn, for if she atterns, she will torfeit her estate.

Walmesley. If he in the remainder for life grants over by Fine, it is no
forfeiture, for he gives no more right than he has; and so has it been
adjudged in the time of my Lord Dyer.

Glanvill. I agree to that: but in this Case he grants that which he has de
haereditate sua, and this recital will make a forfeiture; and then if the
Tenant in Dower attorn, this is a forfeiture.

Anderson. This attornment is no forfeiture, because it is by judgment of the
Court.

Walmesley. I agree, for the Grant it self is no forfeiture, unless it be by
reason of the recital, but the Attornment shall have relation only to the
substance of the Grant. And it was much disputed between Walmsley and Glanvill,
If Lessee for life of a Rent grants this in Fee by Fine, if this be a
forfeiture; and Walmesley vouched a Judgment, that it was no forfeiture; and
Glanvill voucht 31 Ed. 3. Grant 60. to the contrary, and 15 Ed. 4.9. by
Littleton. If Lessee for life of a Rent grants this by Fine in Fee it is a
forfeiture, by reason of the Estoppell, otherwise if it were by Deed. Vid. 1 H.
7.12.

Mich. 32 and 33 Eliz.
Marshes Case, in B. R. Rot. 1011.

MArsh and his wife brought a Writ of Error as Executors to Nicholson to
reverse an Outlawry upon an Indictment of Felony pronounced against the
Testator.

Altham of Grayes-Inne. The sole point was, whether the Executors may have a
Writ of Error, and I hold that they may; for if there be no heir, it is great
reason that the Executors should have it, for otherwise the erroneous judgment
cannot be at all reverst; and every one shall have a Writ of Error that is
damaged by the erroneous judgment, and Executors have right to the personal
estate to have Error: For if a man recovers damages in a Writ of Cosenage, and
the land also, and dies, his heir shall have Execution for the land, and the
Executors Execution for the damages, by the 19 Ed. 4.5. 43 E^. 3. 13 Ed. 4.2.
If a man does recover my villain by a false Verdict, the heir shall have an
attaint for the villainy, and the Executors for the damages, and a Writ of
Error shall be given to him to whom the right of the thing lost does descend,
as it was adjudged in the Case of Sir Arthur Henningham, and he cited two
presidents in the point, 1 T^ity, 11 H. 8. Rot. 3. where an Administrator
brought a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in an exigent. Vid. 2
Rep. 41. a.

Cook contr. In Natura Brevium, 21 M. he says, an Executor shall have a Writ
of Error upon a Judgment given in Debt against the Testator and the heir
shall have Error to reverse Outlawry in Felony, and to restore him in his
blood, and he said that it was part of the punishment in Felony to have the
blood corrupted, and sic filius portat iniquitatem patris; and by reason of the
attainder, he cannot inherit any Ancestor; wherefore he having the damage, it
is reason that he should reverse it. And although Executors shall have a Writ
of Error for Chattels personal, yet they shall not have one when they are mixed
with things real, 5 H. 7.15.18 Ed. 4. If Writings be in a Box, the heir shall
have the Box, because real things are more regarded than personal.

Nevertheless in this Case the Writ of Error is in a real Action, for the Law
says, that it is in the same nature as in original action, whereupon it is
brought; as if Error be brought to reverse a Judgment given in a personal
action, the Writ of Error is personal; and so in like manner is it real, if
the first action be real, 47 Ed. 3.35. 35 H. 6.19, and 23. and although the
first action be mixed, yet the Law does rather respect the reality, 30 H. 6.
Bar. 59. where two brought an assize, and one did release, and there it was
said, that although this were a mixed action, yet it shall be according to the
most worthy, and that is the reality: and 16 Assi. 14. diverse Disseisors being
barred in an assize, did bring a Writ of attaint for the damages, and summons
and severance was suffered, for damages were joined with the reality: and
Stanford, 184. If a man be indicted before a Coroner, quod fugam fecit, if he
after reverse the Indictment, yet he shall have his goods, for de minimis non
curat Lex: But note, that the Justices said, that the fugam fecit was the cause
of forfeiture of the goods, and not the Felony. And as to the presidents, he
agreed to the Case of the 18 H. 7. for an Executor shall have a Writ of Error
to reverse Judgment given in an exigent, for there nothing but the goods are
forfeit, 30 H. 6. Forfeiture 31. and for the president in 11 H. 8. it cannot be
proved that the Outlawry was for Felony. Vid. Rep. fol. 3.

33 Eliz.
Lilly against Tailor, in B. R. Rot. 467.

MArsh seized of the land in question, did devise this to Rose Lilly for life;
and if she fortuned to marry, and after her decease should have any heirs of
her body lawfully begotten, then that heir should have the land, and the heirs
of the body of such heir; and for default of such issue, the land shall revert
to Philip Marsh, his son and his heirs, and the question was, if the husband of
Rose shall be Tenant by the curtesy, or not; and so if Rose had estate Tail, or
for life only.

Godfrey. She has estate but for life; and he cited a Case adjudged in
Benlowes Reports, 40 Eliz. where lands are devised to A for life, and after his
decease to the male children of his body, and it was adjudged that the male
children have an estate Tail by purchase, and nothing by descent, and so A had
nothing but for life.

Gaudy agreed, for she has but for life, and when she dies, her issue shall
have it.

Popham agreed, if the words were, that if she had issue, that he should have
it.

But Clench held, that she had an estate in Tail executed, and that her husband
shall be Tenant by the curtesy.

Fenner. The issue is as a Purchaser, for the Devisor intended that Rose should
not have a greater estate than for life. And also it was agreed by all the
Justices, that a Devise to a man and his heir shall be accounted a Foe-simple,
for that the word, heir, is collective: and so is the 29 Assi. where land was
given to a man, and to the heir of his body, and uno haeredi ejusdem haeredis,
this is an estate Tail.

Popham. He shall be Tenant by the curtesy; and he agreed, that heir of the
body was a good name of purchase: but if a Frank-tenement be limited to his
Ancestor, and by the same Deed it is also limited to his heir, the heir shall
be in by descent. But Fenner on the contrary.

Pasch. 38 Eliz.
Bolton against Bolton. Rot. 882. and 582.

TEnant for life being impleaded, does pray in aid of him in the Reversion, who
join and lose, etc. and the Tenant for life brings a Writ of Error, and the
Record is removed, and he in the remainder brings a Writ of Error also, De
Recordo quod coram vobis residet; and the question was, upon which Writ of
Error the Judgment should be reverst: and it was objected, that if it should
be reverst by the Tenant for life, that he in the remainder should be restored.

But Gaudy, Fenner, and Clench contr. Who held, that it should be reverst at
his suit who first brings the Writ, as in case of Interpleader, it shall be
always upon the first Writ. And notwithstanding the removing of the Record by
the Tenant for life at the next term, the Court said, it was at their
discretion to reverse this at suit of an^ of the parties, as they pleased: and
because they observed some indirect practices by him in the remainder, it was
reverst at suit of Tenant for life.

Pasch. 5 Jacob.
Sir Henry Dimmocks Case, in the Court of Wards.
TEnant of the King by Knights service, bargains and sells his land to Sir
Henry Dimmock and his heirs, and Sir Henry Dimmock dies, his heir within age,
and then the Deed is enrolled; the question was, if the King should have
premier seisin.

Trist. The King shall not, because Sir Henry did not dye within his homage,
but the land was in the Bargainor; as if there be a Bargainee of the reversion,
and the Tenant makes waste, the Bargainee shall not have waste, unless the Deed
be introlled before the waste committed, 3 Jacobi. Bellingham against Alsop.
Bargainee before inrolment sells the land over, and it was adjudged that the
second bargain was void, 10 Eliz. Mockets case. Disseisee releaseth to the
Bargainee of the Disseisor before inrolment, and adjudged void. 5 Eliz. in
Pophams Case it was said, that the Statute of inrolments had altered the Common
Law; for now by the delivery of the Deed, no use is raised until it be
enrolled, But all the Justices held, that the heir should be in Ward, and pray
premier seisin if he were of full age; for the Statute says, that no use shall
be, unless the Deed be enrolled: but if it be enrolled, it passes ab initio,
and then the Bargainee shall be Tenant ab initio. But it was also agreed by all
the Justices, that the wife of Sir Henry shall not be endowed, and that Rent
paid to the Bargainor at the Rent-day incurred after the bargain is good, and
the Bargainee has no remedy, because it is a thing executed.

Trinit. 12 Jacobi.
Cuddington against VVilkin, in C. B. Rot. 924.

IN an Action of the Case for calling the Plaintiff Thief, the Defendant
justified, because the Plaintiff had stolen Sheep, 37 Eliz. the Plaintiff
replied protestando, that he had not stolen Sheep, and pleaded the General
Pardon, 7 Jacobi, upon which the Defendant demurred, and adjudged for the
Plaintiff, for the Pardon had so purged and abolished the Offense, that now he
was no Thief, 1 Ed. 3. Corone 15. 2 Ed. 3. Corone 81. 1 Assi. 3. So if one call
another Villain after he is infranchised. And in one Baxters Case, in Banco
Regis, it was adjudged, that where a man was accused for Perjury, and acquitted
by Trial, if he be afterward called perjured, he shall have his Action on the
Case. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Seaman against Cuppledick.
IN a Trespass of Assault and Battery, the Defendant justified in defense of
his servant, scil. that the Plaintiff had assaulted his servant, and would have
beaten him, etc. and the Plaintiff demurred.

Yelverton. The bar is good, for the master may defend his servant, or
otherwise he may lose his service, 19 H. 6.60. a.

Crook Justice. The Lord may justify in defense of his villain, for he is his
inheritance.

Williams contr. The master cannot justify, but the servant may Justify in
defense of his master, for he owes duty to his master, 9 Ed. 4.48.

Yelverton. The master may maintain a plea personal for his servant, 21 H. 7.
and shall have an Action for beating his servant; and also a man may justify
in defense of his cattle.

Cook. A man may use force in defense of his goods, if another will take them;
and so if a man will strike your cattle, you may justify in defense of them;
and so a man may defend his son or servant, but he cannot break the peace for
them: but if another does assault the servant, the Master may defend him and
strike the other, if he will not let him alone.

Williams. It has been adjudged in Banhams Case, that a man cannot justify a
battery in Defense of his soil, a fortiori he cannot in defense of his
servant. vid. 19 H. 6.31. 9 Ed. 4.48.

Trinit. 12. Jacob.
Drury against Waller.
IN an action on the Case upon a trover and conversion of 200 l. delivered by
the Plaintiff to the Defendant; and upon not guilty pleaded, the Question was,
if denial by the Defendant to pay it upon request, would bear this action.
And the case of Isaac was urged, who brought an action of Trover, etc. for 200
l. in a bag, and by verdict it was found that demand was made thereof, and a
denial to pay it. And by Dodderidge it was a Conversion.

Crook accorded, but Haughton doubted the case. And Man Prothonotarie said,
that he remembered a president in the Case, where it was resolved, that in such
case denial of a horse was a conversion.

Haughton. I remember an action of Trover was brought for a Trunk, and it was
ruled there, that if one has Timber in my land, and he demands liberty, to
carry it off my Land, and I deny it, this is not a sufficient conversion.

Dodridge, there is great difference in the Cases, for a Horse or money cannot
be known, if they be used, but Timber may. Et adjournatur.

Michaelm. 8 Jacobi.
Alfo and Dennis against Henning. in B. R. Rot. 969.

IN an action of Covenant, the Case was thus. Thomas Tavener by Indenture primo
Jacobi, did demise land to one Salisburie for 7. years: and by the same
Indenture Salisburie did Covenant, grant, condescend and agree with Taverner
his heirs and assigns, that he, his Executors and Administrators should pay to
Taverner his heirs and assign 75 l. per annum. And after Taverner demised the
same land, to Mary Taverner for life, and he demised the reversion for 40.
years to the Plaintiff, if he so long lived, and the tenant attorned, and for
rent due at the Feast of St Michaell he brought his action of Covenant. And the
first question was, if this were a sum in gross, because the Lessee covenanted
to pay this as a Rent. And resolved by Cook Chief Justice, and the Court, that
this is a good reservation of Rent, for it is by Indenture, and their intention
was to have it as a Rent, and the words of the Indenture shall be accounted to
be his, who may most properly speak them. 26 H. 8.2. 10 Eliz. 275. 22 H. 6.58.
28 H. 8.6. And the Case between Whitchett and Fox in Replevin this term, where
a man made a Lease for 99. years rendering rent, and the Lessee covenanted by
the same deed with the Lessor, that he would not alien without his assent upon
pain of forfeiture, and after he aliened, and the Lessor entered. And it was
held by the Court that this was a condition, although the Plaintiff did
covenant: for being by Indenture, they shall be the words of both, and the
words sub paena ^orisfacturae are the words of the Lessor. The second point
was, if the assignee for 40 years, may have a Covenant, and it was held he
might; for it is for payment of rent, and if the Lessee covenants to do any
thing upon the land, as to build or repair a house, there a covenant will lie
for the assignee, by the common Law, but if it do not by the Common Law, yet it
is clear that it will lie by the Statue of the 32 H. 8. And the Court held,
that an Assignee of part of the reversion might take advantage of the condition
or covenants, so that he has part of the reversion of all the thing demised.
And Cook, Chief Justice said, that the opinion of Mourson 14 Eliz. 309. a. is
good Law.

Pasch. 36 Eliz.
Butler against. Archer.
IF two Ioyntenants be of land holden by Herriot service, and one dies, the
other shall not pay Herriot service, for there is no change of the tenant, but
the survivor continues tenant of the whole land. But if a man seized of land in
Fee, makes a feofment to the use of himself and his wife, and the heirs of
their two bodies begotten, the remainder to the right heirs of the husband,
and the husband dies, a Herriot shall be paid, for the ancient use of the
reversion was never out of the husband

Michaelm. 29 and 30 Elizab.
Stephens Case. in C. B.
IN an Ejectment, the Case was, Sir William Beale made a Lease by Indenture to
William Pile and Philip his wife, et primogenito proli Habendum to them and the
longer liver of them successively during their lives, and then the husband and
wife had issue a daughter. And it was holden by three of the Justices, that the
daughter had no estate, for that she was not in esse, at the time of the grant.

Michaelm. 30 and 31. Eliz.
Lewin against Mandy. in C. B. Rot. 2529.

IN a Replevin the Defendant avowed for 20 l. Rent, which was pleaded to be
granted by Lovelace and Rutland by Fine to Stukeley and his heirs, who being
seized thereof, did recite that he with 7 others were Plaintiffs in a Writ of
Covenant against Lovelace and Rutland, upon which a Fine was levied, by which
Fine the said Lovelace and Rutland amongst other things, did grant a rent of 20
l. out of the Manor of D. and other Lands to the said Stukely, who granted it
to Hoveden, under whom the Defendant claymes in Tail. The Question was if this
were a good grant, because, there are many misrecitalls in the Indenture: for
whereas he recited that in the Writ of Covenant for the fine Lovelace and
Rutland were Defendants, in truth they were Plaintiffs, and Stukely and the
others Defendants, and whereas he recited that the said grant was made to him,
it was made to him and his heirs, also he said, that the said Rent Charge
amongst other things was granted whereas nothing but the 20 l. Rent was
granted, and that only out of the Manor of D. and not out of other Lands.

Anderson. If a man recites that he has a Rent of 10 l. of the grant of J.S.
whereas he has this of the grant of J.D. yet is the grant good. And at last it
was adjudged that the grant was good.

Note that Fenner at this time said, that it had been resolved by Anderson and
Gaudy and other Justices very lately. That if the Kings Tenant dies, his heir
within age, yet the heir at full age before livery sued may bargain and sell by
Deed enrolled, or make a Lease for years and it is good: but if he makes a
feofment or leavie a fine ^ur conusance de droit come ceo, etc. this is void,
because it cannot be without intrusion upon the King.

Trinit. 39 Eliz.
Oldfeild against VVilmore. in C. B Rot. 2715.

IN Debt upon a Bond to perform the award of J.S. who did award that the
Defendant should pay 10 l. or cause two strangers to be bound for the payment
thereof, the Defendant pleaded performance, the Plaintiff replied that he had
not paid the money, and the Defendant demurred.

Walmesley for the Plaintiff. For although the award be in the disjunctive, yet
forasmuch as it is void as to one part, now upon the matter it is single, and
on the non payment of the ten pound is forfeit 17 Ed. 4.5.

Windham and Rhodes, held that the Plaintiff should have pleaded so much of the
award as was for it is a thing entire, and the Law will adjudge that one is
only to be done, because the other is contrary to the Law.

Anderson and Peryam. The plea is good, for a man shall not be compelled to
show a void matter, and although the Defendant had caused the two strangers to
be bound, the obligation is broken, for as to this arbitrament, it is merely
void, and at another day the Plaintiff had judgment.

Goodridge against VVarburton.
IN an Ejectment. The Jury gave a special verdict, that Francis was seized of
the land in Tail, and suffered a Recovery to the use of him and his heirs, and
afterward did devise the same lands to his wife Margery until his daughter
Prudence came to the age of 19. years, and then that Prudence should have the
Land to her and the heirs of her body, upon condition to pay twelve pound per
annum to the said Margaret during her life in recompense of her dower, and if
she failed of payment, then Margaret should enter, and hold the Land during her
life, and afterward, it shall go to Prudence as before. And after this John
Francis the heir did reverse this recovery, by a Writ of Error, and entered
upon Margaret, and she brought her Writ of Dower, and was endowed of the third
part, and then she levied a Fine of that third part to the said John Francis,
and he infeoft Tyndall, who made the Lease to Goldsing, and then Margaret
married Warburton, and Prudence came to the age of 19. years, the Rent of
twelve pound is not paid, and Warburton and his wife entered, and Goldsing
brought this action.

VValmesley. By the recovery of the third part in the Writ of Dower, the Rent
of twelve pound, which was in recompense thereof is gone. For at the Common
Law, if a woman recover in Dower, she has waived that which was assigned to
her in lien of her Dower, as in case of Dower ad ostium Ecclesiae, and 10 Edw.
4. If the husband discontinues the Land of his wise, and she brings a Writ of
Dower, she is concluded to have a Cui in vita.

Shuttleworth cont. By this recovery the estate tail is revived, yet as this
case it is is, not material, for because he entered without a sult, he is a
Disseisor, and that was agreed by all at the Bar and the Bench. And he cited 26
H. 8. 3d. 4th H. 7.11. And I conceive that the Dower will not conclude her of
the twelve pound per annum, for it is not a Rent, and the title to have the
Land for her Ioynture for non-payment the Rent was not in esse at the time of
the recovery of her Dower, but afterward, as if a Lease he made to a woman who
marries the Lessor, who dies within the term, and the wise enters, this shall
not conclude her Dower, after the Lease is expired by the eleventh of H. 4.
Also the twelve pound is not appointed to be issuing out of the Land, and so it
cannot be a Ioynture, and therefore, the wife is at large to have the twelve
pound, and her Dower also. But the Court held, that she could not have her
jointure, for by the recovery of the Dower her jointure is barred, for the Rent
was given her in recompense of her Dower, so that it cannot be intended that
she shall have Rent and Dower also, wherefore it was adjudged that her entry on
the Land was not good.

30 and 31 Eliz.
The King against the Bishop of Canterbury and Hudson. Rot. 1832.

IN a Quare impedit, Hudson the Incumbent did plead, that King Edw. the 4th did
grant the Rape of Hastings, Et bona and catalla Fellonum Fugitivorum and ategat
of all Residents and non-residents within the said Rape to the Earl of
Huntington. And pleaded that John Ashborne was seized of the Manor of
Ashborne, and of the advowson appending to it, and held the same of the Earl of
Huntington as of his Rape of Hastings, and that the said John Ashborn, was
outlawed, during which, the Incumbent of the said Church dyed, and the Earl
presented the said Hudson.

Shut. I conceive this avoydance does not belong to the Earl, by reason of this
grant, for by the same Patent liberty is given to the said Earl and his heirs
to put himself into possession, and of such things as he cannot put himself
into possession, they will not pass, and here this is a thing in action, which
by these words will not pass. 19 H. 6.42. by the grant, de Catalla Fellonum
obligations do not pass.

VValmesley, Stanford in his prerogative, says, that by the words, Bona and
catalla the King shall have the presentation to the Church of him that is
outlawed or Attaint, and by the same reason he may grant it by such a name, and
although the party cannot seize such a thing, yet it shall pass 39 H. 3.35.
Rent for years shall pass by the grant of bona and Catalla.

Periam. It will pass by these words, for it is an ancient grant, for in that
time the Patents, of the King were not so specially penned, as now they are.

Anderson. I conceive the avoydance will not pass by thse words, for within
this word bona movables are contained both dead and living, and Avoydance is
no Chattell nor right of Chattell. Quod Peryam negavit, etc.

Mich. 37 and 38 Eliz.
Townsend against Whales.
IN an Ejectment, the Jury found that J.S. was seized of land in possession,
and also in reversion for term of life, and made a Devise by these words, That
his Executors take the profit of all his Lands and tenements Free and Copy, for
ten years for the payment of his debts, and Legacies, and after the end of the
said ten years, that all the aforesaid lands and tenements with their
appurtenances, should be sold by his Executors or one of them, and the silver
to be bestowed in the performance of his Will, or by the Executors of his
Executors, or any of them, and then one of the Executors dyed within the ten
years, and the two surviving Executors did grant all, as well in possession as
in reversion to House, who made a Lease to the Plaintiff. And two points were
resolved. 1. That the Executors may grant the reversion (34 H. 6.) for by these
words ( Free and Copy) his intent appears, that all should be granted. 2. That
although one of the Executors died, yet the other two Executors may sell.


Anderson. If such bevise had been at the Common Law, and one Executor had
refused, the two others could not sell, but if one die, the survidors may sell
the land; for there the authority does survive. Which difference the other
Justices agreed to. And at another day Anderson said, there was difference,
where the Devise is, that Executors should sell his and the money divided
between them, there if one die, the others shall not sell, but otherwise here,
because the money is the performance of his will.

Walmesley. The sale by the two Executors is good, for it is said; the
Executors or any of them, etc. And Beaumond agreed, Wherefore judgment was
given for the Plaintiff. Note that there were two verdicts in this case, and
the first only found, that the Executors shoull sell after the ten years, and
that one dyed, and the other two did sell within the ten years, and the opinion
of the Court was that the sale was void, but in the 39 and 40 Eliz. all the
whole will was found and Judgment given ut supra.

The Earl of Rutlands Case.
Roger Earl of Rudand, and John Manners and others Executors to John late Earl
of Rudand Executor to Edward Earl of Rutland, brought an action on the case
against Isabell Countess of Rutland. And Declared for diverse Jewels and goods,
etc. that came to the hands of John Earl of Rudand as Executor to the said
Edward, and the said John the 10th of July 29 Eliz. did casually loose them,
which after came to the hands of the Defendant, and licet saepius requisita,
she would not deliver them to the said John in his life time, nor to the said
Plaintiffs after his death, but knowing the goods did belong to the Plaintiffs
in D. in the County of Notingham converted them to her proper use. And a
verdict for the Plaintiff. And it was moved often in arrest of Judgment, but
all the Justices agreed, that the action of Trover and converversion would lie
by the Executors upon the Satute of the 4 Ed. 3. upon a conversion in vita
Testatoris, and so has it been adjudged in the Kings Bench, and although the
Statute mentions only a Writ of trespass, that is only put for example. Also
they all agreed, that the sole cause of action to the Conversion, for it there
were no conversion, they shall be put to their Detinue, therefore the great
doubt did arise because the day and time of the conversion was not showed, for
perhaps it was after the Writ and before the Declaration: And also if it was in
vita Testatoris they should have this action by the 4th of Ed. 3d. But at
length Walmesley said, That all Justices of the Common Pleas, and of Sergeants
Inn in Fleet Street (besides Peryam Chief Baron) were of opinion that Judgment
should be given for the Plaintiffs, for that some of them held, that the day of
the Conversion is not material to be shown, and others, that of necessity as
this case is, it shall be intended that the conversion was in the Plaintiffs
time, wherefore Judgment was entredfor the Plaintiffs, but a Writ of Error was
brought, and the Case much debated.

Michaelm. 38 and 39 Eliz.
Carew against Warren. in C. B. Rot. 1945.

GUnter Tenant in Tasle of Lands in ancient Demesne made a Lease for 60. years
to J.S. and for security thereof levied a Fine to Lee and Loveland, who rendered
to Gunter in Fee, who devised the reversion to his wife for life the remainder
in Fee and dyed. And then the Lord of Andover, (which is an ancient Manor) by
an Ostensum est nobis, returned in the Common Bench against Lee and Lovelace,
upon a scire Facias awarded against them. and two Nihils returned, the Fine was
reversed.

Anderson. The scire Facias is not well awarded, for it ought to be brought as
well against those in possession, as the Conufors, and this appears by the 21
Ed. 3.56 by which they in possession and those in remainder ought to be made
privy.

Walmesley agreed, for the Freehold, which is in me shall not be taken from me
without making me privy, no less, then if A. bring a Precipe against B. of my
land and recover, for I shall have an Assise upon this. Also another matter is
in the Case. For the land now in question is alleged to be parcel of the
Manor of Andover, and therefore cannot be ancient Demesne. But no Judgment was
at this time given, because there were but two Justices.

Halling against Command.
IN an action of Covenant, the case was thus. Command the Defendant did covenant
with the Plaintiff, that at the Costs and charges of the Plaintiff be would
assure certain land for the Ioynture of the Plaintiffs wise before M^ch^e mas.
And the Plaintiff declared that no assurance was made, nor tender before the
said Michaelmas. And hereupon the Defendant demurred, for that the charges
should have been offered before the assurance, 3 H. 74.23 Eliz. Dyer. Anderson
in the 35 and 36 Eliz. F^ste^ did covenant with Frank to make an assurance at
the costs and charges of Frank, and Frank brought a Covenant and Foster
Demurred because no charges were tendered to him, and it was adjudge against
Fester, for Frank could not have cognizance what manner of assurance should be
made, and so could not tell what charges to tender, and therefore he ought
first to show him what manner of assurance he should make, and according to
that he ought to tender reasonable Charges.

Walmesley. But the charges ought to precede the assurance, but the declaring
of what manner of assurance should be made ought first to be done, Beaumond of
the same opinion.

Michaelm. 38 Eliz.
Damport against Sympson.
IN an action on the Case, the Plaintiff declared that he had given to one
Spilman certain Jewels to Traffic with them beyond the Seas, and that he had
not fold them. but had delivered them to the Defendant, who had spoild them,
whereupon the Plaintiff brought an action against the said Spilman, and upon
not guilty pleaded they were at issue: and the now Defendant at that evidence
did Depose upon his oath, that the Jewels were worth but 200 l. whereas they
were worth 800 l. by reason whereof the Jury gave indeed but 200 l. damages,
and for this false oath he brought this action: and the Jury upon not guilty
pleaded, found for the Plaintiff, and assessed 300 l. damages. And now it was
moved in arrest of Judgment that the action would not lie, no more than against
those inform a Justice of Peace of Felony upon his oath against J. S. 20 H.
7.11. Also the party grieved has his remedy in the Star Chamber. And Walmesley
said that for perjury there was no remedy, and so is it in the 7th Eliza. Dyer
243. a. for it is not to be thought that a Christian would be perjured, and in
the 2d H. 6.5. a Conspiracy will not lie against Indictors, who inform their
company of their oath. Wherefore, It was adjudg'd that this action did not lie.
Note that Anderson was against this Judgment: but Walmesley Owen and Beumond
were against him.

FINIS.
The Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
Abatement.
WHere the Resignation of a Bishop, Dean, or Parson, shall abate the writ, and
where not 30, 31 Where the writ shall abate for not naming the party according
to his Dignity or Office, and where not 61 In trespass against two, the writ
shall not abate for the death of one 107
Admiral.
Where he has Jurisdiction, and where not 122, 123
Action, and what words will bear Action.
Slanderous words of several kinds 13, 17, 18. vide Slander where the Lessee
for years by intrusion shall have an Ejectment, and so in case of the King 18
What Action the Lessee of an Intruder or Copyholder of the King shall have if
he be outed 16 Where an Action will lie for slanderous words spoken, or for any
of them, and of a slander in writing 30 Action of Trover good against the
Husband only; though the wife made the conversion 48 Action of debt by an
Administrator, durante minoritate, not good 35 Where a second Action for the
same matter shall be brought, and where not, 37 For warranting sheep sound 60
Where a Trespass or Detinue shall lie for Goods taken and sold 70 What Action
for a Dog, Ferret, or Hawk 94 Where two shall join in the action, and where
not 106 Nonsuit of one Non-sult of both in a personal action 107 For a Fine
in the Leet brought by the Lord 113 Where an action of Trover will lie for
money 113
Account.
For fish in a Pond 19 Account will not lie where is no privity 35, 36 Against
a Receiver 36 Several actions of Account 36 Administrator vide Executors
Advowson.
Where by the presentment of another the King shall be said to be out of
possession 43 Grant of the next avoidance by a Letter 47 Advowson appendant to
a Manor, and the Manor is granted, yet the Advowson will not pass 53 Where
the Patron shall dispose of the Advowson, though three be a deprivation 151
Age.
The Heir of the Tenant in tail that is impleaded during life of the Tenant by
Courtesy, shall not have his age 33
Aid.
Difference between Tenant at will, and Tenant at sufferance, in case of praying
aid 29 By him in reversion 43 Where the Tenant prays in aid of a stranger,
it shall be a forfeiture 81
Alien.
Debt by an Administrator alien Born 45 Who shall be accounted an alien enemy 45
Amendment.
Where the Habeas Corpus and distringas shall be amended, though the Venire be
well returned 62
Amends, vide payment. Annuity.
Where the husband shall have an action of debt for the arrears of an Annuity
granted to the wife before marriage 3 Granted by him that has no Estate, what
remedy for the Grantee 3 From a Corporation 75
(...) No Dower to the Bargainees wife before inrolement 70 Where the suing or
recovering of Dower, shall be accounted the waving of the Assignment of Dower
150
Entry.
WHere the Entry of the Lessor on the Lessee, shall not avoid the Covenant of
the Lessee 65 The Lord shall not have a Cessavit after entry in parcel 66
Where the entry of the Discontinuee shall avoid the fine of the Tenant in tail
75, 76 Where the descent of the Intruder on the King shall not take away the
entry of the Kings Feoffee 45 Entry into a house to demand money, where good 114
Error.
Error in Judgment whether amendable 19 Where a writ of Error by the husband
and wife within age, shall reverse a fine levies by them against both 21 Where
two persons bring a writ of Error, and the Tenant pleads the release of one, it
shall bind both 22 Against the style of a Court, for not saying. secund^m
consuetudinem 50 For want of the addition of the Defendants name 58 Who shall
have a writ of Error to a-avoid a recovery, and whether the heir general or
special shall have it 68 Where the heir shall have this writ, and where the
Executors 147
Escheat.
No Escheat to the Lord where the Felony is pardoned before attainder 87
Estovers.
Turbary leased, and the Lessee converts half to arrable, and then grants totum
turbarium 67
Execution.
Where the Sheriff delivers a Manor cum pertinentiis in execution, what
passes thereby 4 Where a writ of execution is good against one attaint of
felony 69
Executors.
Where an action grounded on a simple Contract will be against Executors 57
Where the second administration shall repeal the first 50 In what case
Executors shall have an action for things done in the life of the Testator 99
Where Executors shall be said to be Assignees 125 Where an Administrator or
Executor shall be said to take by purchase 125
Extent.
Where the Sheriff extends a Manor by the name of acres, land, Meadow, and
wood, what passes 4
Felony and Felons.
FElony of a Shepherd, to steal Sheep 52 What persons shall keep felons goods
121
Fine
Where the husband and wife shall bring a writ of Error to reverse a fine
levied by them 21. in error. Where in a mistake in a fine shall be remedied 42
Fish.
Whether the Heir or Executors shall have the fish in a Pond 20 Where waste
will lie for taking fish 19
Forfeiture.
Executors cannot forfeit goods to charritable uses 33
Frankmarriage.
The necessity of the word Frankmariage in the gift, and the nature and quality
of the estate 26 Gift in Frankmarriage after the Espousall, good 26 Where a
gift in Frankmarriage shall be by matter ex post facto, be made an estate in
tail, or other estate 27
Grants.
WHat passes by this grant, Panagiu^ and by the grant of acorns 35 What
passes by the grant of pastura terrae 37 Grant to I.S. and there be many of
that name to whom it shall be intended 64
Habendum.
LEase of a Manor habendum with all the members, what passes 31 Lease to one
habendum to three others for their lives, and the longer liver successively,
what estate 38, 39 Lease to husband and wife and primogenito, what estate 40
Heir.
Where the heir shall have the rent reserved in a Lease for years 9 Where the
Heir Tenant of the King in Socage shall enter without livery 116
Indictment.
FOr drawing a Sword in Westminster Hall, the Courts then sitting 120
Infant.
Where payment or tender of money for an Infant is good, and at what age, 137
Inrolement.
Where the Bargainee shall be accounted Tenant of the land before the Inrolment
69 When the use passes by the Inrolm. 149 Joynt-tenants and Tenants in Common.
Lease made by them, rendering rent to one of them, both shall have the rent 9
Many cases declaring what acts are good by one Joynt-tenant to another, and
what not 102
Jointure.
Where an assurance made to a woman for her Joynt-ture, shall be good by
averment, although not expressed in the Deed 33
Judgment.
Reverst in an action of debt, for declaring less then is alleged in the writ
35
Jury.
Jury eat before verdict, the verdict good 38 Jury finding out of their Issue
91 Jury-man returned that is no freeholder 44
Leases.
LEase to a man by these words, Dedi concessi and confirmavi. 9 Of a house
excepting one Chamber 20 Of him that has nothing in the land 96 Sub hac
condition si vixerit vidua and habitaret super pramiss. the Lessee dies, how
the term continues 107.108 Of three acres, and of the Manor habend. three
acres, and the Manor for 21. years several Demises 119 Lessee assigns over,
and continues possession 142
Lord and Tenant.
Feoffment of the Tenant to the Lord 31 Where the Tenant enfeoffs the Lord of a
Moiety, and the Seigniory is extinct, how to be observed 37.73
Manor.
WHat passes by this word, Cite of a Manor 31 Lease of a Manor habend. all
the Members, what passes 31.138 How a Manor may be divided 138 Grant of a
Manor in one Town that extends it self into two Towns 138
Master and Servants.
Where the Master may justify for the man, and where the man for the Master 151
Nobility.
Where the woman shall lose her Nobility or Dignity by marriage 81 By what act
a man shall lose his Nobility 82
Obligation, Statute-merchant, and Staple, Recognizance.
WHere trial on a Bond shall be within the Realm, though the Condition to be
performed without 6 Two bound in a Bond, and the Seal of one taken away. yet
the Bond good 8 Action brought againg the Heir of the Obligor, as heir
apparent, the Father being dead, not good 17.119 Obligation wants in cujus rei
testimonium, good 33 Where an action of debt on a bond for money to be paid at
several times, shall be sued before the last payment, and where not 42 One
bound by a wrong name 48 What shall be said to be no delivery of a bond,
althoug the Defendant seal it, and lays it on the Table, and the Obligee takes
it up 95 In what case the Obligee shall be accounted a party to the cause, why
the Obligation cannot be performed 104 Where two shall join in Audita quaerela,
on a Statute, and where not 106 Where Conditions on Bonds shall be void in Law
143
Outlawry.
A Disseisee outlawed shall not forfeit his Lands 3 Where an Outlawry pleaded
shall be taken for a Dilatory plea, where not 22
Pious uses.
GOods given to pious uses not forfeitable by Executors, and what remedy against
the Executors 33, and 34
Pawn.
He that has a Pawn has no interest therein to deliver it one to another 123
How a man may make use of Goods or Cattle pawned to him 124
Parceners, and Partition.
Where they shall join in waste 11 The writ of Partition returned, how good 31
Payment, Demand, Tender, Amends.
Where request to pay money must be made and where not 7 Where the Law will
expound to whom a tender must be made 10 Who shall tender for the heir within
age 34 Where payment of rent to him that extends the land, shall save the
Condition against the Lessor 38 Where several actions for payment shall be
brought on a Bond or Contract, at the several d^ies, and where not, till all
the da es are past 42 Payment in debt, on a bond pleaded at the day, and given
in evidence before the day good 45 Tender in trespass not good, otherwise in
Replevin 48 Where the Obligor shall give the Obligee notice, when he will
tender the money, and where not 108 Where on Bon^ given for payment of rent,
the Lessee shall demand the rent, where not 111
Pleas and pleading.
By the Lessee of an Intrudor 16 Where a Lease must be pleaded, hic in curia
praelat. 16 By the Obligor on a bond to save harmless, plea that he was not
taken in execution, etc. 19 Where ancient Demesne is a good plea 24 Where in an
Avowry a man shall plead for Frank-tenement 51 Difference in plea between
appeal of Mayhem and Murder 59 Where a man shall be bound to set forth Seisin
of him who made the Devise, and where not 103
Prescription.
For a Common 4, and 5 To buy and sell, etc. 6, and 7 Who shall prescribe to a
way, and who not 72
Presentation.
Where the King shall be limited in time to present by Lapse, and where not
2.89.90 Where Recusancy of the incumbent shall cast the Lapse on the King 5
Where the King shall not lose his Presentment by Lapse, though he do not
present in time 5 The Church, how void for Symony 87 Prohibition vid. Writs.
Promise vid. Assumption. Proviso vid. Condition.

Property.
Where the property of stolen Goods shall be altered according to the Statute
of 2, and 3. Phil. and Mar. 27 A man outlawed has property in his goods 116
What property the Constable shall be said to have of Felons goods 120
Quare Impedit.
IN what cases it lies, and what not 99
Releases
DIfference of a Release to Tenant at sufferance and Tenant at will 29 Of a
Bond, the Release bearing date the same day, not good 50 Of the avoydance of a
Church, why void 86
Remainder.
Lease for years with Remainder to the said persons, where good, and where not
38, 39 Seniori puero, whether a Female shall take 64
Reparations.
Notice to the Astignee of a Lease to repair, not good 114
Rents.
Where the Confirmation to the Assignee of the Lessee of part of the land shall
extinguish the Rent of the whole 10 Where an entry for breach of the Condition
in part of the Land, shall extinguish the Rent for the whole 10 Rent granted
out of Land not chargeable therewith, how good 111 Where the Tenant of the
Freehold shall be charged with the Rentcharge, and where the Termor 117
Reservation.
Rent reserved to his Executors or Assignees where good, and where not 9, and
10 Reserved at Michaelmas, what time of Michaelmas shall be intended 64
Resignation.
Of a Benefice without presentation, or on Condition 12 The Nature of a
Resignation 12
Sheriff.
WHere an action of debt lies against him for an escape, though the Capias be
not returned 43 No escape against the Sheriff when especial bails are
requested 98 Where a man shall aver or traverse against the return of a Sheriff
132
Slander, and slanderous words, vide Actions
Calsing one Bastard 92 Calling one Whore, and that she had the French Pox 34
For saying, Thou Murderer, good 33 By him in remainder, for saying the
immediate Tenant was alive 33 For the word Cousener 47 Thief, and thou have
forged a Deed 47 For pilfering 56 Thou have stolen half an acre of Corn,
innuendo, Corn sowed 57 He was disproved before the Justices 58 He was
perjured, and I will prove him so 62
Statutes.
Mistaking the Parish, on an action for Robbery on the Statute of Winchester 7
Lease for years, not within the Statute of Quia emptores 10 Lease on the
Statuce of 27 H. 8.28.32. Who are within the Statute of Monasteries, 31 H. 8.56
Lease for one year within the penalty of the Statute of buying of Tithes 57 21
H. 8. for Noblemens Chaplains 51 In the 8. of H. 6. how to plead the entry 93
Exposition of the Statute 5 Ed. 6.14.135. Where a man shall plead Contra formam
statuti, though there be more Statutes of the same matter 135 Traverse by
Executors on the 4. of Ed. 3. good 156
Surrender.
By the Husband, Lessee for years of his wives estate, how good 32 What, and
how may things belong to a Surrender 97
Tenure.
NO Tenure between Donor and Donee in Frankmarriage 26
Tenant at jufferance, Will, D'auter vie, etc:
Where such Tenants holding over shall gain a Feesimple, or make a Disseisin,
and where not 27.28 Tenant at sufferance shall justify Damage-feasant 29
Difference where a Tenant at sufferance holds over, and where a Tenant at Will
35
Tithes.
Where Tithes by composition shall be paid, according to agreement, although
they be not ty^hable 34, 35 Where they shall be paid of the Glebe land 39 By
the Parsons release of all Demands, Tithes are not released 40 Where altering
the Crop of the Land, shall alter the Tithes from gross to small Tithes 74
Where a discharge to pay Tithes without Deed is good, and where not 103
Trial.
Where the trial shall be on the land, though the cause or matter were on the
Sea 54
Uses, and Cestui que use.
USe to the husband and wife, habendum to the husband for three years 48 How
Cestui que itse shall be said to be seized before entry 86
Wardship.
WHere the husband alone shall have a writ of Ravishment of Ward, without the
wife 82, and 83 Whether the brother of the half blood or the Uncle of the whole
blood shall have the Wardship in Socage 128
Warranty.
The exposition of the word, To warrant Land 100 Two Joynt-tenants with
Warranty make partition, the Warranty is gone 104. Otherwise of a Feoffment 104
Warren.
What it is, and whereof it consists 66 Of Waste committed there 66 Warren
in a Common is good, and the Commoners cannot kill the Conies Damage-feasant 184
Waste.
Where a man shall have but one action of waste on several Leases, and where
not 11 The form of entering Judgment in a writ of waste 12 For taking Fish out
of a Pool 19 Waste in the house for not scouring a Ditch 43 In Pigeon houses,
Hop-grounds, and Fish ponds 66 Where the Lease is ruinous at the entry of the
Lessee, and falls down afterward, the Lessee is excused, and where not 93
Way.
How extinguished by unity of possession 127
Wills, and Testaments, Executors, Administrators, and Legacies.
Where a man devises that his wife shall have the occupation and profits
during her widowhood 6, and 7 Where a Devise shall be intended within the word
Demise 14 Where a Devise shall be taken as a Demise for breach of a Condition
14 Where a Devise of several parcels of Land to several persons, and the
Survivors to be each others heir, what Estate passes 25 Where an
Administrator paies debts, and there a Will is found, yet the payment good 28
Where a Devise shall make an Estate tail by implication 29, 30 What passes
by this word, Livelihood, in a Will, according to the custom of London 30
Where Ex intention shall make a Condition in a Devise 32 Where an uncertain
Devise shall be construed good, as to a certain intent 35 Legatees refusing to
prove the Will, shall lose their Legacies 44 Devise of a Tenant in
Borough-english to his two Sons 65 Devise to his two Daughters, his Heirs 65
Devise of all Lands, Meadows, and Pastures, whether the house passes 75 Will
made, and the party says he will not make his Will, no Revocation 76 What
passes by the Devise of a Manor 88, 89 Devise of Jewels, what shall remain to
the Heir, and will not pass by the Will 124
Writs.
Where a Scire facias lies, and where not 3 Where certainty in a writ of
Ejectment is requisite, and where not, and difference between such writ, and a
writ of Novel Disseisin 18, and 19 Quod ei deforceat, how it will lie in waste
102
FINIS.

