THE LAST TRVE INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND.Being a Letter sent from Chester:
Dated the second of April, 1642. from Mr. William Owen, to a friend of his in
LONDON. In which is Related, the taking of Carreggmayne-Castle, seven Miles
South-East from Dubline, from the Rebels, where Sir Simon Harcott was slain,
being shot from the Castle in the side, with a shanker Bullet, out of a long
Peeice. Also, Sergent Major Berry, is mortally wounded in the FLANK.

A LETTER SENT From Chester, dated the second of April, 1642.
Sir,
I Saw nothing from you the last week, not so much as my printed papers, which
I atribute to your absence, or much bussinesse, and do desire you to make good
by the next: I have not much news to send you, but that which is not pleasing,;
by the Letters of Ireland, which I understand came well unto your Office, by
Master Ware, the last Monday, I doubt not, but that you have heard of the good
success, which then happened, which I pass over: since which time, the State
having notice of some Rebels, to have met at Careggmayne-Castle, 7. miles
South-East from Dublin, sent out Sir Simon Harcott, with a strong party of
Horse, to scout and clear the Country, where at his arivall at the said
Castle, he found it to be of that strength, more then the power which He had
with Him, could master: and thereupon sent for more men from Dublin; where
imediately, 800. Foot, and as many Horse, as made up his party to 250. with
which number* He begirt the Castle, placing a Musketteer between each Horse,
and in that Posture, stood all night: the Rebels having that Night, made a fire
upon the Battlements of the Castle, which was answered by another fire from the
Mountain, which our Men took to be the Allarum to the Rebels, and then 400.
more was sent for from Dublin, who with two pieces of Battery, came thither at
12. at noone on Sunday last, but in the mean time, neither Party was idle, for
the Rebels by break of day, attempted to Isue out toward the Mountain, which
Major Berry with his Fire-lockes, forced back to their Fort; in which
Skirmish, He was shot into the flancke, and his wound feared to be Mortal: The
rest of the day was spent in exchange of Shot with the Rogues, till the
arivall of the Battery, where Sir Simon Harcott being over careful about his
men, exhorting them to Fall on, so soon as they saw any breach made; was
unfortunately shot in the right side, with a shanker-bullet out of a long
Peeice, which fell him to the ground: this shot was made at him out of the
Castle, by a notable Marks-man, who by his habit, was known to have made many
shot, who seldom fayl'd: The noble Collonell was presently taken up, and
walked of between two, but could not go far: VVhereat his Soldiers grew so
enraged, to see Him so sore wounded, as that Impatient of the Battery, which
did little good; fell to undermine a corner of the Wall, where they made a
Breach, that two might enter; who going in, were both cut off: yet the rest no
ways daunted, fell in, and in fine, slew both Man, Woman, and Child, left not
one to say, who they were, and after blew up the Castle, Sir Simon Harcott was
brought three mile farther toward Dublin, where being not able to travel,
stayed, and upon Monday dyed, whose body is now at Dublin. Sir Major Berry is
also at Dubline, whose Lieutenant was killed upon the same ground, as the other
was shot: The number of the Common-souldiers of our side, which was lost in
this service, is uncertain, under 40. Of the Rebels 200. and odd of all
condition; and this is all I can acquaint you of this bussinesse: In have I am:

Your assured friend, William Owen.
Chester, the 2. of April, 1642.
FINIS.

