A Certificat in order to the Collecting and Reporting the State of the present
English FREE-SCHOOLS.
THERE being an intention of giving some account of the Free-schools in
England; their Founders, Masters, Exhibitioners, Overseers, and Visitors with
other memorable circumstances which may occur: And application having been made
to us the Vice Chancellor, and the Regius Professor of the Civil Law in the
University of OXON, to testify our sense of the undertaking whereby the
Compiler of the Work may stand recommended to the Registers, Officers in the
respective Dioceses, or any who may assist him in those Enquiries.

In condescension to this request we readily allow that amongst the public
Monuments of Christian Charity one of the most early and constant cares of the
first Reformers has been by the erecting these Seminaries, together with good
Arts, and the Learned Languages to propagate, especially, true Religion, by
infusing the Principles of it, from the established Catechism.

A Survey therefore of those Foundations, to such as have an affection for the
prosperity of the Church, or Advancement of Learning, we judge will be no less
pleasing in the Review, then profitable by the Example.

And we do hereby own the industry of CHRISTOPHER WASE Superior Bedle of the
Civill-Law in the said University in making this Collection and farther give
assurance that we will promote his pretense in those particular Districts to
which our Government or Interest shall extend.

ENQUIRIES. 1 From Registers. What Free-Schools in each Diocese? 2 From
Schoolmasters for their particular Schools.
1. Who Founder? 2. When Founded? 3. How Endowed? 4. What Schoolmaster and
succession of Masters? if at hand; otherwise such as are in memory to have been
eminent, or Authors of any extant Work. 5. What Exhibitions and in whether
University? 6. Who Governors, Patrons and Visitors? 7. What Libraries in them,
or in Towns adjoining, with what Manuscripts?
P. BATH and WELLS Vice Chancellor Oxon.
T. BOVCHIER Reg. Prof. of the Civil Law in Oxon.
OXON, Aug. 16. 1673.

