Die Veneris. 20 April. 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir William Masham do
give hearty thanks from this House to Mr. Owen, for his great pains in his
Sermon Preached before the House yesterday at Margarets Westminster; And that
he be desired to Print his Sermon at large, as he intended to have delivered it
(if time had not prevented him) wherein he is to have the like liberty of
Printing thereof, as others in like kind usually have had.

HEN: SCOBELL Cler. Parliament.

OYPANON OYPANIA. The Shaking and Translating of HEAVEN and EARTH. A SERMON
Preached to the Honorable House of COMMONS in Parliament Assembled: On April
19. A Day set apart for extraordinary Humiliation. By JOHN OWEN.

Isaiah 66. 14. 16. And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your
bones shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the Lord shall be known
toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies.

For by fire, and by his sword, will the Lord plead with all flesh: and the
slain of the Lord shall be many.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold by John Cleaver, at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard near the School. 1649.

Where also are to be sold the Authors former Sermon, Preached the 31th. of
January, 1648. And likewise his 2 Sermons for A memorial of the Deliverance of
Essex County and Committee.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the COMMONS of England Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
SIRS,
ALL that I shall preface to the Ensuing Discourse, is, that seeing the Nations
welfare and Your Own actings are therein concerned; the welfare of the Nation,
and Your own prosperity in your present Actings, being so nearly related as
they are to the things of the ensuing Discourse, I should be bold to press You
to a serious consideration of them as now presented unto You, were I not
assured by your ready attention unto, and favorable acceptance of their
delivery, that being now published by Your Command, such a request would be
altogether needless. The subject matter of this Sermon being of so great
weight and importance as it is, it had been very desirable, that it had fallen
on an abler hand, as also that more space and leisure had been allotted to the
preparing of it, first for so great, judicious, and Honorable Audience; and
secondly, for public view, then possibly I could beg from my daily troubles,
pressures and templations, in thee midst of a poor, numerous provoking people.
As the Lord has brought it forth, that it may be useful to Your Honorable
Assembly, and the residue of men that wait for the appearance of the Lord
Jesus, shall be the sincere endeavor at the throne of Grace, of

Coggeshall: May 1. 1649. Your most unworthy Servant, in the work of the Lord,
John Owen.

A SERMON Preached to the Honorable House of COMMONS, Upon Thursday the 19th.
of April 1640. being by Order of that House especially appointed for a Day of
Humiliation.
HEBR. 12. 27. And this word, Yet once more, signifies the removing of those
things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which
cannot be shaken may remain.
THe main design of the Apostle in this Scripture to the Hebrews, is to
prevail with his Contrymen who had undertaken the Profession of the Gospel,
to abide constant and faithful therein, without any Apostasy unto or mixture
with Judaisme, which God and themselves had forsaken, fully manifesting, that
in such back-sliders the soul of the Lord has no pleasure. Chap. 10. 38.

A Task, which whosoever undertaketh in any Age, shall find exceeding weighty and
difficult, even to persuade Professors to hold out, Chap. 10. 36.
and continue in the glory of their profession unto the end, Prove. 22. 13. 26.
13.
that with patience doing the will of God, they might receive the promise;
especially if there be Lions in the way, if opposition or persecution do attend
them in their professed subjection to the Lord Jesus.

Of all that deformity and dissimilitude to the Divine Nature which is come
upon us by the fall, there is no one part more eminent, or rather no one defect
more evident, then Inconstancy and unstablenesse of mind, in embracing that
which is spiritually Good. Man being turned from his unchangeable Rest, Psalm.
116. 7.
seeks to quiet and satiate his soul with restless movings toward changeable
things.

Now he who works all our works for us, and in us, Isa. 26. 12. 1 These. 1. 3.
works them also by us: and therefore that which he will give, 2 These. 1. 11.
he persuades us to have, Deuteronomy. 10 16.
that at once his bounty, and our duty, Chap. 30. 6.
may receive a manifestation in the same thing. Ezekiel. 18. 31.
Of this nature is Perseverance in the faith of Christ, which as by him it is
promised, Chap. 36 26
and therefore is a Grace, so to us it is prescribed, Acts 11. 18.
and thereby is a Duty. Petamus ut det, quod ut habeamus jubet: August. Let us
ask him to bestow, what he requires us to enjoy. Yea, Da Domine quod jubes, and
jube quod vis: Give what thou command, and command what thou please.

As a Duty it is by the Apostle here considered, and therefore pressed on them,
who by Nature were capeable, and by Grace enabled for the performance thereof.
Patheticall exhortations then unto perseverance in the profession of the
Gospel, bottomed on prevalent Scripturall Arguments, and holy Reasonings, are
the sum of this Epistle.

The Arguments the Apostle handles unto the End proposed, are of two sorts:

1. Principal.

2. Deductive, or Emergencies from the first.

1. His principal Arguments are drawn from two chief Fountains:

1. The Author, And,

2. The Nature and End of the Gospel.

The Author of the Gospel is either

1. Principal and immediate, which is God the Father, Who having at sundry
times and in diverse manners formerly spoken by the Prophets, herein speaks by
his Son; Chap. 1. 1.

2. Concurrent and immediate, Jesus Christ, this great salvation being begun to
be spoken to us by the Lord. Chap. 2. 3.

This latter he chiefly considers, as in and by whom the Gospel is
differenced from all other dispensations of the mind of God.

Concerning him to the End intended, he proposes 1. His Person, 2. his
Employment.


For his Person, that thence he may argue to the thing aimed at, he holds out,

1. The infinite glory of his Deity: being the Brightness of his Fathers
glory, and the express Image of his Person: Chap. 1. 3.

2. The infinite Condescension of his Love, in assuming humanity, for because
the children were pertakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of
the same. Chap. 2. 14.

And from the consideration of both these, he presses the main Exhortation
which he has in hand, as you may see, Chap. 2. 1, 2. Chap 3. 12, 13, etc.

The Employment of Christ he describes in his offices, which he handles

1. Positively, and very briefly, Chap. 1, 2, 3.

2. Comparatively, insisting chiefly on his Priesthood, exalting in sundry
weighty particulars, above that of Aaron, which yet was the glory of the Jewish
worship, and this at large, Chap. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

And this being variously advanced and asserted, he lays as the main
foundation, upon which he places the weight and stresse of the main end
pursued, as in the whole Epistle is every where obvious.

II. The second head of principal Arguments he takes from the Gospel it self,
which considering as a Covenant he holds out two ways:

1. Absolutely, in its efficacy in respect of 1. Justification, in it God is
merciful to unrighteousness and sins, and iniquities he remembers no more:
Chap. 8. 12. Bringing in perfect remission, that there shall need no more
offering for sin: Chap. 10. 17. 2. Sanctification, He puts his Laws in our
hearts, and writes them in our minds, Chap. 10. 16. in it, purging our
consciences by the blood of Christ, Chap. 9. 14. 3. Perseverance, I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a people: Chap. 8. 10. all three being also
held out in sundry other places.


2. Respectively to the Covenant of works, and in this regard assigns unto it
principal qualifications, with many peculiar eminencies them attending, too
many now to be named: now these are,

1. That it is new, he says a New Covenant, and has made the first old. Chap.
8. 13.

2. Better; it is a better Covenant, and built upon better promises: Chap. 8.
6, 7. 22

3. Surer, the Priest thereof being ordained, not after the Law of a carnal
commandment, but after the power of an endly life: Chap. 7. 16.

4. Unalterable, so in all the places before named, and sundry others.

All which are made eminent in its peculiar Mediator Jesus Christ, which is the
sum of Chap. 7.

And still in the holding out of these things, that they might not forget the
end for which they were now drawn forth, and so exactly handled, he interweaves
many patheticall entreaties, and pressing Arguments by way of Application, for
the confirming and establishing his contrymen in the faith of this glorious
Gospel, as you may see almost in every Chapter.

2. His Arguments less principal, deduced from the former, being very many,
may be referred to these 3. heads.

1. The benefits by them enjoyed under the Gospel.

2. The example of others, who by faith and patience obtained the promises:
Chap. 11.

3. From the dangerous and pernicious consequence of backsliding, of which
only, I shall speak. Now this he sets out 3. ways.

1. From the nature of that sin, it is a crucifying to themselves the Son of
God afresh, and putting him to open shame. Chap. 6. 6. a treading under foot
the Son of God, counting the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, and doing
despite to the Spirit of grace: Chap. 10. 29.

2. The irremedilesse punishment which attends that sin: There remains no more
sacrifice for it, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation that shall consume the adversaries: Chap. 10. 26, 27.

3. The Person against whom peculiarly it is committed, and that is he who is
the Author, subject, and Mediator of the Gospel, the Lord Jesus Christ;
concerning whom for the aggravation of this sin, he proposes two things.

1. His Goodness and Love, and that in his great undertaking to be a Savior,
being made like unto his brethren in all things, that he might be a merciful
and faithful high Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation
for the sins of the people: Chap. 2. 17. and of this, there is a sweet and
choice line, running through the whole Discourse, making the sin of
backsliding, against so much love and condescension appear exceeding sinful.

2. His Greatness or Power, which he sets out 2. ways:

1. Absolutely, as he is God to be blessed for ever: Chap. 1 and it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God: Chap. 10. 31.

2. Comparatively, as he is the Mediator of the new Covenant in reference to
Moses. And this he sets forth as by many and sundry Reasonings in other
places of the Epistle, so by a double testimony in this 12th. Chapter, making
that inference from them both, which you have v. 25. See that you refuse not
him that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him who spoke on earth,
how much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him who speaks from
heaven.

Now the first testimony of his Power, is taken from a record of what he did
heretofore; the other, from a prediction of what he will do hereafter. The
first you have, v. 26. in the first part of it: His voice THEN shook the Earth:
then, that is, when the Law was delivered by him, as it is described v. 18, 19,
20. foregoing. When the mountain, upon which it was delivered, Exodus 19. 18, 19
the Mediator Moses, into whose hand it was delivered, and the people, for
whose use it was delivered, did all shake and tremble, Chap. 20. 18.
at the voice, power and presence of Christ, who, as it hence appears, is that
Jehovah who gave the Law. Exodus 20. 2.

The other in the same verse is taken from a prediction, out of Haggai, 2. 16.
of what he will do hereafter, even demonstrate and make evident his Power
beyond what ever he before effected, He has promised, saying, Yet once more I
shake not the earth only, but also the heavens.

And if any one shall ask, wherein this effect of the mighty power of the Lord
Jesus consists, and how from thence professors may be prevailed upon to keep
close to the obedience of him in his kingdom, the Apostle answers, v. 27. And
this word, yet once more, signifies the removing of those things that are
shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken
may remain. And thus am I stepped down upon the words of my Text, finding them
in the close of the Arguments drawn from the power of Christ, to persuade
professors to constancy in the paths of the Gospel; and having passed through
their coherence, and held out their aim and tendance, their opening and
Application comes now to be considered: and herein these 3. things.

1. The Apostles Assertion, The things that are shaken shall be removed, as
things that are made.

2. The proof of this Assertion, This word, once more, signifies, no less.

3. His Inference from this Assertion, thus proved: The things that cannot be
shaken must remain.

In the first I shall consider,

1. What are the things that are shaken.

2. What is their shaking.

3. What their removal being shaken.

For the first, there is great variety of judgment amongst Interpreters; the
foregoing verse tells us it is not only the Earth, Nescio an facilior hic
locus fuisset, si nemo cum opposuisset. Mald: ad Luc. 2. v 34.
but the Heaven also; but now what Heaven and Earth this should be, is dubious,
is not apparent. So many different apprehensions of the mind of God in these
words, as have any likeness of truth, I must needs recount and remove, that no
prejudice may remain from other conceptions, against that which from them we
shall assert.

The Earth (say some) is the men of the Earth, living thereon: and the Heavens
are the Angels, their blessed Inhabitants: both shaken, or stricken with
amazement upon the nativity of Christ, and preaching of the Gospel. The heavens
were shaken, when so great things were accomplished, as that the Angels
themselves desired to look intt hem. 1 Pet. 1. 12. And the Earth was filled
with amazement when the holy Ghost being powered out upon the Apostles for the
preaching of the Gospel, men of every Nation under Heaven were amazed, and
marvelled at it. Act. 2. 5, 6, 7. Thus Ro^locus, Piscator, and sundry other
famous Divines: But,

1. The shaking here intimated by the Apostle, was then when he wrote under the
Promise, not actually accomplished as were the things by them recounted: for
the holds it forth as an issue of that great Power of Christ which he would one
day exercise for the further establishment of his kingdom.

2. This, that now is to be done, must excel that which formerly was done at
the giving of the Law, as is clearly intimated in the inference, Then he sho^k
the Earth, but now the Heavens also, (it is a gradation to an higher
demonstration of the power of Christ) which that the things of this
interpretation are, is not apparent.

3. It is mavelous these learned men observed not, that the Heavens and Earth
shaken, v. Ephesians. 1. 10. (...) Oecumen. in Loc.
26. are the things to be removed, ver. 27. Now how are Angels and men removed
by Christ? Are they not rather gathered up into one spiritual body and
communion? Hence, ver: 27. they interpret the shaken things to be Judaic^ll
Ceremonies, which, v. 26. they had said to be men and Angels.

2. Others by heaven and earth understand the material parts of the worlds
fabric, commonly so called: and by their shaking, those portentous signs and
prodigies, with Earthquakes, which appeared in them, at the birth, and death of
the Lord Jesus. Matthew 2. 2.
A new Star, preternaturall darkness, shaking of the Earth, Matt. 27. 45.
opening of graves, Luk 23. 44. 45
renting of Rocks, Mat 27 51, 52
and the like, are to them this shaking of Heaven and Earth. So Junius, and
after him, most of ours.

But this Interpretation is obnoxious to the same Exceptions with the former,
(...)
and also others: for,

1. These things being past before, how can they be held out under a Promise?
Romans 8. 28.


2. How are these shaken things removed, which with their shaking they must
certainly be, as in my Text?

3. This shaking of Heaven and Earth is ascribed to the power of Christ as
Mediator, whereunto these signs and prodigies cannot rationally be assigned,
but rather to the sovereignty of the Father bea^ing witness to the Nativity
and death of his Son: so that neither can this conception be fastened on the
words.

3. The fabric of Heaven and Earth is by others also intended, not in respect
of the signs and prodigies formerly wrought in them; but of that dissolution,
or as they suppose Alteration, which they shall receive at the last day: So
Paraeus Grotius, many more. Now though these avoid the Rock of holding out as
accomplished what is only promised, yet this Gloss also is a dress
disfiguring the mind of God in the Text. For,

1. The things here said to be shaken, do stand in a plain opposition to the
things that cannot be shaken, nor removed; and therefore they are to be
removed, that these may be brought in. Now the things to be brought in are the
things of the kingdom of the Lord Jesus: what opposition, I pray, do the
material fabric of Heaven and Earth stand in to the kingdom of the Lord
Jesus? doubtless none at all, being the proper seat of that kingdom.

2. There will on this ground, be no bringing in of the kingdom of the Lord
Jesus, until indeed that kingdom in the sense here insisted on is to cease,
that is after the day of judgment, when the kingdom of Grace shall have place
no more.

Those are the most material and likely mistakes about the words; I could
easily give out, and pluck in again 3. or 4. other warping senses, but I hope
few in these days of accomplishing will once stumble at them; The true mind
of the Spirit, by the help of that Spirit of truth comes next to be unfolded.
And first what are the things that are shaken.

1. As the Apostle here applies a part of the Prophecy of Haggai, so that
Prophecy even in the next words gives light into the meaning of the Apostle.
Look what Heaven and Earth the Prophet speaks of, Nunquam Pauli sensum
ingredieris, nisi Pauli Spiritum imbiberis: Ber: ser. de Monte.
of those and no other speaks the Apostle. The Spirit of God in the Scripture
is his own best interpreter. See then the order of the words as they lie in the
Prophet. Hagg. 2. 6, 7. I will shake heaven and earth: I will shake all
Nations. God then shakes Heaven and Earth, when he shakes all Nations: that is,
he shakes the Heaven and Earth of the Nations. (...) 1 Ioh. 2. 27. (...)
Theophilac. in Ioh. 10.
I will shake Heaven and Earth, and I will shake all Nations, is a Pleonasme,
for, I will shake the Heaven and Earth of all Nations. These are the things
shaken in my Text.

The Heavens of the Nations what are they? even their Political heights and
glory, those Forms of Government which they have framed for themselves and
their own interest: with the grandeur and luster of their Dominions.

The Nations Earth is the multitudes of their people, their strength and power,
whereby their Heavens or political heights are supported.

It is then neither the material Heavens and Earth, nor yet Mosaicall
Ordinances, but the Political Heights and splendor, the popular multitudes
and strength of the Nations of the Earth, that are thus to be shaken, as shall
be proved.

That the Earth in prophetical descriptions or predictions of things, is
frequently, yea almost always taken for the people and multitudes of the
Earth, needs not much proving. Psalm 68. 9.
One or two instances shall suffice. Revel. 12. 16. The Earth helped the woman
against the stood of the Dragon, Hab. 2. 20.
which that it was the multitudes of earthly people, Matthew 24. 7.
none doubts. 1 Samuel 14, 25.
That an Earthquake or shaking of the Earth, are popular commotions, is no
less evident from Revel. 11. 13. where by an Earthquake great Babylon receives
a fatal blow.

And for the Heavens, whether they be the Political heights of the Nations, or
the grandeur of Potentates, let the Scripture be judge; I mean when used in
this sense of shaking, or establishment.

Isa. 51. 15, 16. I am the Lord thy God, who divided the Sea, whose waves
roared: the Lord of hosts is his name. And I have put my words in thy mouth,
and have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the Heavens,
and lay the foundations of the Earth, and say unto Sion, Thou art my people.

By a repetition of what he has done, he establishes his people in
expectation of what, 1. he will do. And first he minds them of that wonderful
deliverance from an Army behind them, and an Ocean before them, by his
miraculous preparing dry paths for them in the deep. I am the Lord who divided
the Sea, whose waves roared.

2. Of his gracious acquainting them with his mind, his Law and ordinances at
Horeb, I have put (says he) my words in thy mouth.

3. Of that favorable and singular protection afforded them in the
wilderness; when they were encompassed with enemies round about: I covered
thee in the shadow of mine hand.

Now to what end was all this, why, says he, that I might plant the Heavens,
and: lay the foundation of the Earth. What! of these material visible Heavens
and Earth? 2460 years before at least, were they planted and established: it is
all but making of Zion a people, which before was scattered in distinct
families. And how is this done? why the Heavens are planted, or a glorious
frame of Government and Polity is erected amongst them, and the multitudes of
their people are disposed into an orderly commonwealth, to be a firm foundation
and bottom, for the Government amongst them. This is the Heavens and Earth of
the Nations which is to be shaken, in my Text.

Isa. 34. 4. All the host of heavens shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall
be rolled together as a scrole, and all their host shall fall down as the leaf
falls from the vine. Now these dissolved, rolled Heavens, are no other, but
the power and heights of the opposing Nations, their government and tyranny,
especially that of Idumea, as both the foregoing and following verses do
declare. The indignation of the Lord (says he) is upon the Nations, and his
fury upon their Armies, he has delivered them to the slaughter, their slain,
etc.

Jerem. 4. 23, 24, 25. I beheld the earth, and lo, it was without form and
void: and the heavens, and they had no light. I beheld the mountains, and lo,
they trembled, and all the hills moved lightly. Here Is Heaven and Earth shaken;
and all in the rasing of the Political State and Commonwealth of the Jews by
the Babylonians, as is at large described in the verses following.

Ezekiel. 32. 7. I will cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof dark: I will
cover the Sun with a cloud, and the Moon shall not give her light. And all the
bright lights of Heaven will I make dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy
land, says the Lord God: behold Heaven and Earth, Sun, Moon and stars, all
shaken and confounded, in the destruction of Egypt, the thing the Prophet
treats of, their Kingdom and Nation being to be ruined.

Not to hold you too long, upon what is so plain and evident, Isa. 13. 13.
you may take it for a rule, that in the denuntiations of the judgments of
God, Psalm. 68. 8.
through all the Prophets, Joel 2. 10.
Heavens, Revel. 8. 12.
Sun, Moon, stars, and the like appearing beauties and glories of the
aspectable Heavens, Matthew. 24. 29.
are taken for Governments, Governors, Luke 21. 25.
Dominions in political States, as Isa. Isa 60. 20.
14. 12, 13, 14, 15. Jer. 15. 9. Chap. 51. 25.

Furthermore, Obad. 4.
to confirm this Exposition, Rev. 8. 13.
St. John in the Revelation holds constantly to the same manner of expression.
Chap. 11. 12.
Heaven and Earth in the book are commonly those which we have described. Chap.
20. 11.
In particular, this is eminently apparent, Chap. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15, ver: And I
beheld, and when he had opened the sixth seal, there was a great earthquake,
and the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon became as blood.
And the stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth: And the Heaven departed as a
scrowl when it is rolled together, and every mountain and Island were moved out
of their places, etc.

The destruction and wasting of the Pagan Romish State, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
lib 9. c 8. 10. li. 8. ca. 27.
the plagues and commotions of her people, the dethroning her Idoll-worship,
and destruction of persecuting Emperors, and Captains, De vita Constan. li 1.
ca. 50, 51, 52.
with the transition of Power and Sovereignty from one sort to another, is here
held out under this grandour of words, being part of the shaking of Heaven and
Earth in my Text.

Add lastly hereunto, that the Promises of the Restoration of God's people
into a glorious condition after all their sufferings, is perpetually in the
Scripture held out under the same terms; and you have a plentiful
demonstration of this point.

Isa. Isa. 66. 22, 23, 24.
65. 17. Behold, I create new Heavens, and a new Earth: and the former shall
not be remembered, nor come into my mind. v. 18. Be you glad and rejoice for
ever in that which I create, etc.

2 Pet. 3. 13. Nevertheless we according to his promise, look for new Heavens
and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

Revel. 21. 1. I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, for the first Heaven and the
first Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. The Heaven and Earth
is restored, but the Sea that shall be no more.

Those gatherings together of many waters, Genesis 1. 10.
Rivers from all places, or pretended Clergy men from all Nations, into
General Counsels, Revel. 17. 1.
which were the Sea or many waters on which the whore sat, shall have no place
at all, in the Churches restored condition.

I hope it is now fully cleared, what is meant by the things that are shaken:
even the Political Heights, the splendour and strength of the Nations of the
Earth, the foundation of the whole is laid, Dimidium facti, etc.
and our heap (or building if your favor so accept it) will go on apace; for
to the Analogy hereof, shall the residue of the words be interpreted.

The second thing considerable is, Part: II.
what is the shaking of these things? to this the Answer is now made brief and
facile. Such as are the things shaken, such must their shaking be. Spiritual,
if spiritual; natural, if natural; civil, if civil. Mat. 24 6, 7.
Now they being declared and proved to be civil things, Ier. 4. 19.
such also is their shaking. Now what is a civil shaking of civil
constitutions? Isa. 9. 5.
How are such things done in the world? what are these Earthquakes? truly the
accomplishment hereof is in all Nations so under our eyes, as that I need not
speak one word thereunto.

Neither shall I insist upon the 3d Inquiry, Part 3.
viz: when this shaking shall be? The Text is plain, that is must be previous
to the bringing in of those things that cannot be moved: (...)
that is the prosperous estate of the kingdom of Christ. Only we may observe,
that besides other shakings in particular Nations of less general concernment
and importance; Acts 1. 7.
this prophecy has and shall receive a twofold eminent Accomplishment, (...)
with reference unto a twofold eminent Opposition, Matthew. 24. 7.
which the kingdom of Christ has met withal in the world.

First from the Pagan Roman State, (...)
which at the Gospel's first entrance held in subjection most of the chief
Provinces of the then known world. What were the bloody endeavors of the
Heaven and Earth of that State for the suppression thereof is known to our
children: The issue of the whole in the accomplishment of this promise, Luke 2.
1.
shaking those Heavens and Earth to pieces, I before pointed at from Revel. 6.
12, 13, 14, 15. beginning in the plagues of the persecuting Emperors, and
ending in the ruin of the Empire it self. But,

2. The unmovable things were not yet in their glory to be brought in. More
seed of blood must be sown, that the End of the Gospels year may yield a
plentiful Harvest. That shaking was only for Vengeance upon an old cursed,
and not for the bringing in of a new blessed State. The vials of Gods wrath
having crumbled the Heavens and Earth of Pagan Rome into several pieces, (...)
2 These. 2. 6.
and that Empire being removed as to its old form, by the craft of Satan it
became molded up again into a Papal Sovereignty, to exercise all the power of
the first Beast, in persecution of the Saints. Revel. 13. 12. This second
pressure though long and sore must have an end; the new molded Heaven and
Earth of Papal Antichristian Rome, running by a mysterious thread, through all
the Nations of the West, must be shaken also: Revel. 18. 2.
which when it is accomplished there shall be no more Sea. Isa 60. 12.
There is not another Beast to arise, nor another State to be formed; Psalm. 2.
6.
let endeavors be what they will, the Lord Jesus shall reign. And this for
opening of the first general head. II General Head.


Secondly, what is the Removal of Heaven and Earth being shaken: The word here
translated removal, is (...) whence that is come to pass, I dare not
positively say. This doubtless is a common fault amongst Translators, that
they will accommodate the words of a Text, to their own apprehension of the
sense and matter thereof. Heb. 11. 5.
Understanding, as I suppose, Jude 4.
that the things here said to be shaken, were the Jewish ordinances, Gal. 1. 6.
they translated their disposition, Heb. 6. 18.
a Removal; Heb. 7. 12.
as the truth is they were removed. But the word signifies no such thing. As
it is natural importance from it is rise and composition is otherwise, so
neither in the Scripture or any profane Author, does it ever signify properly
a removal. Mutationem: Trem: Translationem Erasm. Ar: Mont.
Translation, or changing, is the only native, genuine import of it: and why
it should in this place be haled out of it is own sphere, and tortured into a
new signification, I know not. Removal is of the matter, Translation of the
form only. It is not then a destruction, and total amotion, of the great
things of the Nations, but a change, translation and new moulding of them, that
is here intimated. They shall be shuffled together almost into their primitive
confusion, and come out new molded for the interest of the Lord Jesus. All the
present States of the world, are cemented together by Antichristian lime, as I
shall show afterward: unless they be so shaken as to have every cranny
searched and brushed, they will be no quiet habitation for the Lord Christ, and
his people. This then is the (...) of the Heaven and earth of the Nations.

Now this is evident, from that full prediction which you have of the
accomplishment hereof, Revel. 17. 12, 13, and 16.

Ver: 12. the Kingdoms of the West receive power at one hour with the Beast.

Ver. 13. in their constitution and government at first received, They give
their Power to the Beast, and fight against the Lamb.

Ver: 14. the Lamb with his faithful and chosen ones, overcomes them. There,
their Heaven and Earth is shaken.

Ver. 16. Their Power is translated, new molded, and becomes a power against
the Beast, in the hand of Jesus Christ.

This then is the shaking and removal, in my Text: which is said to be, as of
things that are made: that is, by men, through the concurrence of divine
providence for a season (which making you have, Revel. 17. 12: and 17.) not
like the kingdom of Christ, which being of a purely divine constitution, shall
by no humane power receive an End.

The other parts of the Text follow briefly.

The next thing is the Apostles proof of this Assertion. And he tells you, this,
once more, the beginning of the sentence he urged from the Prophet signifies no
less. The words in the Prophet are, (...) yet once, it is a little, meghat hi
it is a little, is left out by the Apostle, as not conducing to the business
in hand. (...), (as he renders hod achath) are a sufficient demonstration of
the assertion. In themselves they hold out a commutation of things, and as they
stand in conjunction in that place of the Prophet, declaring that that shaking
and commutation must be for the bringing in of the kingdom of the Lord Christ.
In brief, being interpreted, by the same Spirit whereby they were indicted, we
know the exposition is true.

The last Head remains under two particulars.

1. What are the things that cannot be shaken.

2. What is their remaining.

For the first, the things that cannot be shaken, v. 24. are called a kingdom
that cannot be removed, v. 28. A kingdom subject to none of those shakings and
alterations, Psalm. 2. 6.
which other Dominions have been tossed to and fro with all. Psalm. 110. 2.
Daniel calls it, Acts 2. 36.
A not giving of the kingdom to another people. Rev. 1. 18.
Dan. 2. 44. not that oecumenicall kingdom which he has with his Father, 1
Cor. 15. 24. 25, 26, 27.
as King of Nations, but that oeconomicall kingdom which he has by
dispensation from his Father, as King of Saints. Now this may be considered two
ways:

1. As purely internal and spiritual, which is the rule of his Spirit in the
hearts of all his Saints; Luk 6. 20.
this comes not with observation, Mark. 12. 34. etc.
it is within us. Luke 17. 20, 21. consisting in righteousness, peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost. Romans 14. 17.

2. Psalm. 45. 6.
As external, and appearing in Gospel Administrations; so is Christ described
as a King in the midst of their kingdom, Psalm. 145. 13.
Revel. Isa. 9. 7.
1. 14, 15, 16, 17. as also Chap. 4. as also Chap. Obad. 21.
11. 15. And both these may be again considered 2. ways.

1. In respect of their essence and being, and so they have been, are, and
shall be continued in all Ages: He has built his Church upon a Rock, and the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Matthew. 16. 18.

2. Isa. 11. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
In reference to their extent in respect of Subjects, with their visible
glorious appearance, which is under innumerable promises to be very great in
the latter days. Chap. 18. 18, 19.
For it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, Chap. 30. 18, 19.
and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. Isa.
2. 4. Micah. 4. 1.


These then are the things which cannot be shaken, which we may reduce to 3.
heads.

1. Isa. 49. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
The growth of righteousness, peace and joy in the Saints, being filled with
light and love from the special presence of Christ, Chap 54. 1, 2, 3, etc. v.
11, 12.
with a wonderful increase of the number of them, multitudes of the Elect
being to be born in those days: Chap. 60. 16, 17.
the residue of the Jews and fulness of the Gentiles meeting in one fold, Ezekiel.
48. 35.
and there dwells righteousness: 2 Pet. 3. 13. Amos 9. 11.


2. Romans 11. 15, etc.
The administration of Gospel ordinances, in power and purity, Isa. 49. 22, 23.
according to the appointment, and unto the acceptance of the Lord Jesus.
Chap. 66. 21.
The temple of God and the altar being measured anew, Mal. 3. 3.
the outward Court defiled with Gentile-worship is left out, Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11
Revel. 11. 1, 2.

3. Revel. 21. 3.
The glorious and visible manifestation of those Administration, Chap. 54. 11,
12, 13, etc.
in the eyes of all the world in peace and quietness, Zach. 14. 9, 10, 11.
None making afraid, or hurting in the whole mountain of the Lord. Isa. 65. 25.

For the Personal Reign of the Lord Jesus on Earth, Acts 3. 21.
I leave it to them, with whose discoveries I am not, and curiosities I would
not be acquainted.

But as for such, who from hence do, (or for sinister ends pretend to) fancy to
themselves a terrene kingly State, unto each private particular Saint, so
making it a bottom vivendi ut velis, for every one to do that which is good in
his own eyes, to the disturbance of all order and Authority, civil and
spiritual, as they expressly clash against innumerable promises, so they
directly introduce such confusion and disorder, as the soul of the Lord Jesus
does exceedingly abhor.

It is only the three things named, with their necessary dependencies that I
do assert.

And lastly, of these it is said they must remain, that is, continue, and be
firmly established, as the word is often used: Romans 9. 11.

The words of the Text, being unfolded, and the mind of the holy Ghost in them
discovered, I shall from them commend to your Christian consideration this
following Position.

The Lord Jesus Christ by his mighty Power, Obs:
in these latter days, as Antichristian Tyranny draws to it is period, will so
far shake and translate the political Heights, Governments, and strength of
the Nations, as shall serve for the full bringing in of his own peaceable
kingdom; the Nations so shaken, becoming thereby a quiet Habitation for the
people of the most high.

Though the Doctrine be clear from the Text, yet it shall receive further
Scripturall confirmation, being of great weight and concernment.

Dan. 2. 44. And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to
other people, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these kingdoms, and
it shall stand for ever.

That this is affirmed of the kingdom of Christ under the Gospel, none ever
doubted.

Three things are here remarkably intimated of it:

1. The time wherein it shall most eminently be established: and that is in the
days of these kings, of which Daniel was speaking.

2. The efficacy of it being set up, it shall break in pieces all these
kingdoms.

3. Its own stability, it shall never be destroyed.

For the first, there is great debate, about the principal season of the
accomplishing of this prediction: much hesitation who those Kings are in whose
days the kingdom of Christ is eminently to be established. In the days when
the two legs of the Roman Empire shall be divided into ten Kingdoms, and those
kingdoms have opposed themselves to the power of Christ, that is in the days
wherein we live, say some. Yea most of the Ancients took this for the Roman
Empire: and to these the bringing in of the kingdom of Christ, is the
establishment of it in these days: Others understand the Syrian and Egyptian
branches of the Grecian Monarchy, and the bringing in of Christ's kingdom, to be
in his birth, death, and preaching of the Gospel, wherein certainly the
foundations of it were laid: I will not contend with any mortal hereabouts.
Only I shall oppose one or two things to this latter interpretation: as,

1. The kingdom of Syria was totally destroyed and reduced into a Roman
Province 60. years before the Nativity of Christ: and the Egyptian 30. So that
it is impossible that the kingdom of Christ by his birth should be set up in
their days.

2. It is ascribed to the efficacy of this Kingdom that being established, it
shall break in pieces all those kingdoms: which how it can be, when at the
first setting of it up, they had neither place, nor name, nor scarce
remembrance.

So that it must needs be the declining divided Roman Empire, shared amongst
sundry Nations, that is here intimated: and so consequently the kingdom of
Christ to be established, is that glorious administration thereof, which in
these days, their days, he will bring in.

Be it so, or otherwise, this from hence cannot be denied, That the kingdom of
Christ, will assuredly shake and transtate all opposing Dominions, until it
self be established in and over them all, (...), which is all I intend to prove
from this place. The ten-partite Empire of the West, must give place to the
stone cut out of the mountain without hands.

Dan. 7. 27. The Kingdom, and Dominion, and Greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High:
whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey
him. Hitherto is the end of the matter.

Either Antichrist is described in the close of this Chapter, or one very like
him, St. John painting him in the Revelation with all this man's colors.
Plainly intimating, that though in the first place, that mad raging Tyrant
Antiochus the Illustrious was pointed at, yet that another was to rise in his
likeness, with his craft and cruelty, that with the assistance of the ten
Horns, should plague the Saints of the Christians, no less then the other had
done those of the Jews. Now what shall be the issue thereof? v. 26. His
Dominion with his Adherents shall be taken away, and consumed: and then shall
it be given to the people of the most High, as before. Or they shall enjoy the
kingdom of Christ in a peaceable manner; their officers being made Peace, and
their exactors Righteousness.

It is clearly evident from these and other places in that Prophecy, that he
who is the only Potentate, will sooner or later shake all the Monarchies of
the Earth, where he will have his Name known, that all Nations may be suited to
the interest of his kingdom, which alone is to endure.

Isa. 60. in many places, indeed throughout holds out the same.

V. 12. The Nation and Kingdom which will not serve thee, shall be broken to
pieces: that is, all the Nations of the Earth, not a known Nation, but the
blood of the Saints of Christ is found in the skirts thereof. Now what shall be
the issue when they are so broken:

V. 17, 18. I will make thine officers Peace, and thine exactors
Righteousness: Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
destruction within thy borders, but thou shall call thy walls salvation, and thy
gates praise.

See at your leisure to this purpose: Amos 9. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Jerem. 31.
23, 24, 25. Isa. 33. 21, 22, 23, 24.

I shall only add that punctual description which you have of this whole
matter as Daniel calls it in the Revelation, with respect unto it is
accomplishment. Chap. 17. the Roman Harlot, having procured the ten Kings or
kingdoms, into which the last head of the Roman Empire sprouted about the year
450. by the inundation of the Northern Nations to join with her, they together
make war against the Lamb: v. 12, 13, 14.

12. The ten Horns which thou saw (upon the last head of the great Beast the
Roman Monarchy) are ten kings, which have received no kingdoms as yet, (to
wit, when John saw the vision) but receive power as Kings one hour with the
Beast (about 400. years after this, the Pope ascending to his Sovereignty, and
these Western Nations growing into distinct Dominions about the same time.)

13. These have one mind (that is as to the business in hand, for otherwise
they did and do vex one another with perpetual broyls and wars) and shall give
their power and strength to the Beast (or swear to defend the Rights of holy
Church, which is no other then Babylon, and act accordingly).

14. These make war with the Lamb, (having sworn and undertaken the defense
of holy Church, or Babylon, they persecuted the poor heretics with fire and
sword, that is the witnesses of the Lamb, and in them the Lamb himself,
striving to keep his kingdom out of the world) and the Lamb shall overcome
them, shaking and translating them into a new mould and frame) For he is Lord
of lords, and King of kings, and they that are with him (whose help and
endeavors he will use) are called, and chosen, and faithful.

16. The ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast, (being now shaken, changed
and translated in mind, interest, and perhaps Government) these hate the
whore, and shall make her desolate, (are isntrumental in the hand of Christ
for the ruin of that Antichristian State, which before they served) and naked,
and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

Hence Chap. 18. 2. Babylon, and that whole Antichristian State, which was
supported upon their power and greatness, having lost it is props, comes
topling down to the ground; Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen: v. 2. and
the Saints take vengeance on the whore for all her former rage and cruelty.
Double unto her double according to her works. v. 6.

V. 9. And the Kings of the Earth (being some of them shaken out of their
dominion for refusing to close with the Lamb) who have committed fornication,
and lived deliciously with her (learning and practicing false worship of her
institution) shall bewail her, and lament for her, (as having received succor
from her, her monstaries and shavelings, in their distress, whereunto indeed
they were brought for her sake) when they shall see the smoke of her burning,
(beholding her darkness, stink and confusion, in her final desolation.)

Now all this shall be transacted with so much obscurity and darkness, Christ
not openly appearing unto carnal eyes, that, though many shall be purified and
made white, yet the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall
understand, but the wise shall understand. Dan. 12. 10. there shall be no such
demonstration of the presence of Christ, as to open the eyes of hardened men:
but at length having suffered the poor deceived wretches to drink of the cup
prepared for them, he appears himself gloriously, Chap. 19. 13. in a more
eminent manner then ever before, to the total destruction of the residue of
opposers. And that this will be the utmost close of that dispensation wherein
now he walks, I no way doubt.

The Assertion being cleared and proved, the Reasons of it come next to be
considered: and the first is, that

It shall be done by the way of Recompense and Vengeance. Reas. 1.
It is the great day of the wrath of the Lamb: Psalm. 2. 4, 5.
Revel. 6. Psalm. 137. 8, 9.
17. The land shall be soaked with blood, Isa. 47. 1, 2, 3.
and the dust made fat with fatness. Isa. 49 26.
For it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompense for the
controversy of Zion. Ier. 50. 33, 34.
Isa. 34. 7, 8. The day of vengeance is in his heart, Chap. 51. 24, 25, 34. 35.
when the year of his redeemed is come. Isa. 63. 4.

The Kings of the Earth have given their power to Antichrist, Zech 12. 2, 3, 4.
endeavoring to the utmost to keep the kingdom of Christ out of the world.
Chap. 14. 12.
What, Rev. 18. 6, etc.
I pray, has been their main business for 700. years and upward, even almost
ever since the Man of Sin was enthroned? How have they earned the Titles,
Eldest Son of the Church, The Catholic, and most Christian King, Defender of
the Faith, and the like? has it not been by the blood of Saints? is there not
in every one of these kingdoms, the slain, and the banished ones of Christ to
answer for? in particular;

Has not the blood of the Saints of Jesus, yeleped by Antichrist and his
adherents, Wicklieffes and Lollards, cried from the ground for vengeance upon
the English Heaven and Earth for a long season? did not their bodies lie in the
streets of France, Acts, and Mon: Histor. Pap.
under the names of Waldenses, Albigenses, and poor men of Lions? Has not
Germany, and the annexed Territories, her Husse, and Hussile, Hierome and
Subutraguians to answer for? is not Spaine's Inquisition enough to ruin a
world, much more a Kingdom? Have not all these, and all the Kingdoms round
about washed their hands and garments in the blood of thousands of Protestants?
And do not the Kings of all these Nations as yet stand up in the room of their
Progenitors with the same implacable enmity to the power of the Gospel? Show me
seven Kings that ever yet labored sincerely to enhance the kingdom of the Lord
Jesus, and I dare boldly say, Octavus quis fuerit nondum constat. And is there
not a cry for all this, How long, Lord, holy and true, do thou not avenge
our blood on them that live on the earth? Revel. 6. 10. Does not Sion cry, The
violence done to me and my flesh, be upon Babylon, and my blood upon those
Heavens of the Nations? And will not the Lord avenge his Elect that cry unto
him day and night, will he not do it speedily? Will he not call the fowls of
Heaven to eat the flesh of Kings, and Captains, and great men of the Earth?
Revel. 19. 18. Will he not make these Heavens like the wood of the vine, not a
pin to be taken off them to hang a garment on, in his whole tabernacle?

The time shall come, wherein the Earth shall disclose her slain, and not the
simplest Heretic as they were counted, shall have his blood unrevenged:
neither shall any atonement be made for this blood, or expiation be allowed,
whilst a toe of the Image, or a bone of the Beast is left unbroken.

That by his own wisdom he may frame such a power, Reas. 2.
as may best conduce to the carrying on of his own kingdom among the sons of
men. Psalm. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.


He has promised his Church, Rev. 17. 14.
that he will give unto it, Matt. 28. 20.
holy Priests and Levites, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
Isa. 66. 20, 21. which shall serve at the great feast of tabernacles, Ephesians 4.
11, 12, 13.
Zech. 14. 16. a sufficient demonstration that he will dwell still in his
Churches by his ordinances, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14.
whatsoever some conceive; So also, That he will make her civil officers
Peace, Psalm. 45. 16.
and her Exactors Righteousness: Isa. 60. Isa. 49. 7, 13.
17, 18. they shall be so established, that the Nations, as Nations, may serve
it; and the kingdoms of the world, shall become the kingdoms of our Lord. Revel.
11. 15.

For the present, the Government of the Nations, (as many of them as are
concerned therein) is purely framed for the interest of Antichrist. No kind of
Government in Europe, or line of Governors so ancient, but that the Beast is as
old as they, and had a great influence into their constitution or
establishment, to provide that it might be for his own Interest.

I believe it will be found a difficult task, to name any of the kingdoms of
Europe (excepting only that remotest Northward) in the setting up, and
establishment whereof, either as to persons or Government, the Pope has not
expressly bargained for his own Interest, and provided, that that should have
the chiefest place in all the oaths and bonds that were between Princes and
people.

Bellarmine, Revel. 18. 3.
to prove that the Pope has a temporal power indirectly over all Kings and
Nations (if he mean by indirectly, (...)
gotten by indirect means, it is actually true as too too many of them) gives
sundry instances in most of the most eminent Nations in Europe, Bell de Romans
Pon. li 5 c. 8.
how he has actually exercised such a power for his own interest.

There have been two most famous and remarkable changes of the Government of
these Na^ions, and into both of them what an influence the Pope had, is easily
discernable.

The first was between the years 4. and 500. 2 These. 2. 6, 7
after Christ, when the Roman Empire of the West, that which withheld the Man
of Sin from acting his part to the life, Dan. 2. 41.
was shivered to pieces by many barbarous Nations: who settling themselves in
the fruitful soiles of Europe, began to plant their Heavens, and lay the
foundations of their Earth, growing up into civil States: for the most part
appointing them to be their kings in peace, who had been their leaders in war.

This furious inundation settled the Franches in Gall: the Saxons in England,
the West Goths in Spain, the East Goths and Longobards into Italy, (...)
and set up the Almans in Germany, from some whereof, though for diverse years
the Papal world was exceedingly tormented, and Rome it self sacked, yet in the
close and making up of their Governments, changing their manners and Religion,
they all submitted to the usurpation of the Man of Sin; so that in all their
windings up there was a salve for him and his Authority. Rev. 17. 13.


The second Great Alteration took up a long space, and was in action about 300.
years, reckoning it from the translation of the French Crown, from Childerick
the 4th, unto Pipin and his Son Charles, by Papal Authority, unto the Conquest
of England by the Normanes, in which space the line of Charles in France was
again by the same Authority and the power of Hugh Capet cut off: no State in
Europe the choice patrimony of the Beast, that did not receive a signal
alteration, in this space, nor was there any alteration, but that the Pope had
a hand in every one of them, and either by pretended collations of Right, to
pacify the consciences of blood-thirsty Potentates, in the undertaking and
pursuing their unjust Conquests, or foolish mitred confirmations of Sword
purchases, he got them all framed to his own end and purpose, which was to
bring all these Nations into subjection to his Babylonish usurpations, which
their Kings finding no way inconsistent with their own designs did willingly
promote, laboring to enforce all consciences into subjection to the Roman See.

Hence it is, Rev. 13. 15, 16.
as I observed before, that such an interposition was made of the Rights of
holy Church, that is Babylon the mother of fornications, in all the Ties,
Oaths, and Bonds between Princes and people. And for the advancement of the
righteous judgments of God, that the sons of men may learn to fear and tremble
before him, it may be observed, (...)
that that which does, and shall stick upon Potentates to their ruin, is not
so much their own or any other interest, 2 These. 2. 11.
as the very dregs of this Papal Antichristian interest, thrust into their
Oaths and Obligations, for no end in the world, but to keep the Lord Jesus out
of his throne.

This is a 2d. Roma seeds Petri, quae Pastoralis honoris, facta caput mundo,
quicquid non possidet armis Relligione tenet. Prosp. de Ingrat.
Reasons, why the Lord Jesus by his mighty Power at the bringing in of his
unmovable kingdom, will shake the Heavens and the Earth of the Nations; even
because in their present constitution they are directly framed to the interest
of Antichrist, which by notable advantages at their first moulding, and
continued insinuations ever since, has so rivetted it self into the very
fundamentals of them, that no digging or mining, with an Earthquake, will cast
up the foundation stones thereof. The Lord Jesus then, having promised the
service of the Nations to his Church, will so far open their whole frame to the
roots, as to pluck out all the cursed seeds of the mystery of Iniquity, which
by the craft of Satan, and exigencies of State, or methods of advancing the
pride and power of some sons of blood, have been sown amongst them.

Because as is their Interest, Reas. 3.
so is their Acting. The present Power of the Nations stands in direct
opposition to the bringing in of the kingdom of Christ. Two things there are
which confessedly are incumbent on him in this day of his advancement.

1. The bringing home of his ancient people, Ioh. 10. 16.
to be one fold with the fullness of the Gentiles; Isa. 37. 31.
raising up the tabernacle of David, Ier. 30 9.
and building it as in days of old: Ezekiel. 34. 23.
in the accomplishment of innumerable promises, Chap. 37. 24, 25.
and answer to millions of Prayers, put up at the throne of grace, for this
very glory in all generations. Hos. 3. 5.
Now there be two main hindrances of this work that must be removed: Amos 9.
11.
the first whereof is,

1. Real, the Great River Euphrates, the strength and fullness of whose
streams does yet rage so high, that there is no passage for the Kings of the
East to come over; Exodus 14. 21, 22.
wherefore this must be dried up as other waters were for their forefathers in
days of old. Josh. 3. 15, 16.
Revel. 16. 12. doubtless this is spoken in allusion to Abraham's coming over
that River into Canaan when the Church of God in his family was there to be
erected; Hal^ 3. 8.
whence he was called the Hebrew, that is, the Passenger, to wit, over that
River, Genesis 14. 13. and then it may well enough denote the Turkish Power, which
proud as it is at this day, possessing in peace all those Regions of the East,
yet God can quickly make it wither, and be dried up: or to the deliverance of
the Jews from Babylon, when it was taken and destroyed by the drying up of the
streams of that River, and so the yoke of her tyranny broken from the Churches
neck, Ier. 51. 31, 32.
and so it can be no other but the power of the Romish Babylon supported by the
Kings of the Nations, which must therefore be shaken and dried up.

2. Moral: or the Idolatry of the Gentile worshippers. The Jews stick hard as
yet at this, Revel 11. 2.
that God should abolish any kind of worship, which himself had once
instituted: But that he should ever accept any false worship, which he had once
strictly prohibited, and no where to this day appointed, to this they will
never be reconciled. Now such is all the invented idolatrous worship which the
Kings of the Earth have sucked in from the cup of fornication held out unto
them in the hand, and by the Authority of the Roman whore; this still they
cleave close unto, and will not hearken to the Angels preaching the everlasting
Gospel, that men should worship him, who made the Heavens, and the Earth, and
the Sea, and the fountains of waters. Revel. 13. 6, 7. that is, the God of
heaven in Jesus Christ, in opposition to all their Ieonolatry, Artolatry,
Hagiolatry, Staurolatry, and Mass abominations. This then must also be
removed; and because as you saw before it is so rivetted and cemented into, and
with all the orbs of the Nations, Heaven and Earth, that they must be shaken,
and brought (...), before it can be effected.

2. Psalm. 137. 8, 9.
The second thing he has to accomplish, is the tremendous total destruction
of Babylon, Isa. 47. 7, 8, 9.
the Man of Sin, and all his adherents that are not obedient to the heavenly
call: Ier. 51. 25, 26.
Revel. Revel. 17. 1, 2.
18. 4. Now as Sampson, intending the destruction of the Princes, Zach 2. 7.
Lords, and residue of the Philistines, who were gathered together in their
Idol temple, Ier. 51. 6.
he effected it by pulling away the pillars whereby the building was supported;
Judge. 16. 28, 29
whereupon the whole frame topled to the ground: So the Lord intending the
ruin of that mighty power, whose top seems to reach to heaven, will do it by
pulling away the pillars and supporters of it, after which it cannot stand one
moment. Now what are the Pillars of that fatal Building? are they not the
powers of the world as presently stated and framed? pull them away, and, alas,
what is Antichrist? It is the glory of the Kings put upon her, that makes men's
eyes so dazzle on the Roman Harlot. Otherwise she is but like the Egyptian
deities, whose silly worshippers through many glorious portles and
frontispeices, were led to adore the image of an ugly Ape.

Add hereunto, that in this mighty work, the Lord Jesus Christ, will make use
of the Powers of the Nations, the Horns of them, that is their strength, Rev.
17. 16. they must hate the whore, and make her desolate, and naked; and eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire: now whether this can be accomplished or no,
Petra dedit petro, Petrus diadema Rodulfo.
in their present posture is easily discernable. Does not the Papal Interest
lie at the bottom of all or the most ruling lines of Christendom? can that be
ejected without unbottoming their own dominion? do they not use the efficacy of
the Roman jurisdiction to balance the powers of their Adversaries abroad, and
to awe their Subjects at home? has he not a consider able strength in every
one of their own Bosoms? Are not the Locuists of their religious orders, all
sworn slaves to the Pope, for number sufficient to make an Army to fight the
greatest Emperor in the world? Are not most Potentates tied by Oath, or other
Compact, to maintain either the whole, or some part of the old Tower, under the
name of Rights of holy Church, Prelates, and the like? and can any expect that
such as these, should take up the despised quarrel of the Saints, against that
flourishing Queen? doubtless no such fruit will grow on these Trees before
they are thoroughly shaken.

4. Reas. 4.
That his own people seeing all earthly things shaken, and removing, may be
raised up to the laying hold of that durable kingdom that shall not be removed.
Heb. 11. 28.
All carnal interests will doubtless be shaken with that of Babylon. Many of
Gods people are not yet weaned from the things that are seen: 2 Cor. 4. 18.
no sooner is one carnal form shaken out, but they are ready to cleave to
another: yea to warm themselves in the feathered nests of unclean birds. All
fleshly dominion within doors, and all civil dominion that opposes without
doors, shall be shaken. Now these things are so glewed also to men's earthly
possessions, the talons of the birds of prey, having firmly seized on them,
that they also must be shaken with them. And therefore from them also will he
have us to be loosed: 2 Pet. 3. v: 12, 13.

And these are some of the Reasons of the Position laid down, which is so
bottomed, so proved, as you have heard: of the speedy accomplishment of all
this I no way doubt. I believe, and therefore I have spoken. Whether I shall
see any further perfection of this work whilst I am here below, I am no way
solicitous: being assured that if I fail of it here, I shall through the grace
of him who loved us, and gave himself for us, meet with the treasures of it
otherwhere. Come we to the Uses.

The Rise of our first Use I shall take from that of the Prophet: Use 1.
Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know
them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: but
the transgressors shall fall therein. Hos. 14. 9. Labor for this heavenly
wisdom and prudence, that we may know these things, and be acquainted with the
mind and will of God, in the season and generation wherein we live. His way is
not so in the dark, nor his footsteps in the deep, but that we may perceive
what he is about.

Luke 12. 54, 55, 56. our Savior gives it in as a sure testimony of the
Pharisees hypocrisy, notwithstanding all their pretenses, and possession of
Moses Chair, that they were wise in earthly things, and had drawn out
experiences by long observation, of what was like to come to pass as to the
weather, by considering the ordinary signs of the alterations thereof; but
notwithstanding that mighty effectual concurrence of signs in heaven and
earth, with the accomplishment of Prophesies, all pointing to the instant
establishment of the kingdom of God in the coming of the Messiah, not
discerning them at all, they come and cry, If thou be the Christ, give us a
sign; when without satisfying their sinful curiosity, heaven and earth was
full of signs round about them.

Men who will not receive God's signs, suppose they should be wonderful
proficients in credulity, might they have signs of their own fancying. (...).
The rich Glutton thought, that if his way of teaching might have been set up,
by men rising from the dead, there would have been a world of converts, more
then were made by preaching the Word of God. Men suppose, that if God should
now from heaven give in some discriminating prodigy, oh how abundantly should
they be satisfied: Luke 16. 29, ^0.
The truth is, the same lust and corruption which makes them dis-beleeve Gods
signs, moves them to look after signs of their own.

For this very thing then, were the Pharisees branded as hypocrites, that
having wisdom in natural things; to calculate and prognosticate from necessary
signs, yet in the works of the Lord, though the signs which in his wisdom he
was pleased to give, were plentiful round about them, yet they must have some
of their own choosing. I pray God none such be found in our days.

1 Chronicles. 12. 32. it is said of the men of Issachar, that they had
understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do. Israel is in the
dark, and knows not what to do, if the times and seasons be not discovered to
them. Esther 1. 13.
If the mind and will of the Lord in their generation, be not made out unto a
people, it will be their ruin.

Hence it is, that the Lord incourageth us to make inquiry after these things,
to find out the seasons wherein he will do any great work for his people,
knowing that without this, we shall be altogether useless in the generation
wherein we live.

Isa. 45. 11. Ask of me of THINGS TO COME concerning my sons, and concerning
the works of my hands COMMAND you me.

And what is this, that the Lord will have his people to inquire of him about?
even the great work of the ruin of Babylon, and restoration of his Church,
which yet was not to be accomplished for 240. years. And this he tells you
plainly in the following verses.

I have raised him up ( Cyrus) inrighteousnesse, I will direct his ways, he
shall build my cities, and he shall let go my captives, not for price, nor for
reward, says the Lord of hosts. v. 13.

The Lord is earnest with his people to inquire into the season of the
accomplishment of his great intendments for the good of his Church, when as yet
they are afar off, how much more when they are nigh at hand, even at the doors.
Who so is wise, and will ponder these things, they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 107. ult.

Dan. 9. 2. The Prophet tells you, that this was his great study, and at length
he understood by books, the approach of the time, wherein God would deliver his
Church from Babylonish captivity and pollution: now this discovery has two or
three notable products.

1. It puts him upon earnest supplications for the accomplishment of their
promised deliverance in the appointed season. Wide from that Atheistical frame
of spirit, which would have a predetermination of events and successes, to
eradicate all care and endeavor to serve that Providence, which will produce
their Accomplishment. A discovery of the approach of any promised, and before
fixed work of God, should settle our minds to the utmost endeavor of helping
the decree bring forth.

2. He finds great acceptance in this his address to the Lord by
supplications, for the establishing of that work which he had discovered was
nigh at hand: for,

1. An Answer is returned him fully to his whole desire in the midst of his
supplications: v. 21. Whilst I was praying, the man Gabriel came, etc.

2. The work which he had discovered to be approaching, was instantly hastened
and gone in hand withal: v. 23. At the beginning of thy supplications the
commandment came forth. Oh that God would stir up his Saints, in the spirit of
Daniel, to consider and understand by books, the time that he has appointed
for the deliverance of his people, that fixing their supplications for the
speeding thereof, the Commandment may come forth for it is full accomplishment.

3. Having attained this, the Lord gives him fresh discoveries, new light of
the time for the birth of the Messiah, which he thought not of, prayed not for:
Seventy weeks are determined, etc. 24. So delighted is the Lord with his
people's diligent inquiry into his ways, and walkings toward them, that
thereupon he appears unto them, in the revelation of his mind, beyond all that
they did expect or desire.

Now all this have I spoken to stir you up unto that, whereunto at the entrance
of this Use, you were exhorted: that you would labor for that spiritual
wisdom and prudence, which may acquaint your hearts, at least in some measure,
with the mind and will of God, concerning his work in the generation wherein
you live. And further to provoke you hereunto, know that you cannot but wander,
as in many other, so especially in four sinful things:

1. Sinful cares.

2. Sinful fears.

3. Sinful follies.

4. Sinful negligence.

1. Sinful cares. Anxious and dubious thoughts about such things, as perhaps
the Lord intends utterly to destroy, or at least render useless. Had it not
been the greatest folly in the world, Genesis 6. 13.
for Noah and his sons, when the flood was approaching to sweep away the
creatures from the face of the Earth, to have been solicitous about flocks and
herds, that were speedily to be destroyed. Many men's thoughts, at this day, do
even devour them, about such things, as if they knew the season, would be
contemptible unto them. Would thou labor for honor, if thou knew that
God at this time, Isa. 23. 9.
were laboring to lay all the Honor of the Earth in the dust? Could thou
set thy heart upon the increase of Riches, were thou acquainted, that God
intends instantly to make silver as stones, 1 Kin. 10. 27.
and cedars as sycamores, though not for plenty, yet for value. Would men be so
exceedingly solicitous about this or that form of religion, this or that Power
to suppress such, or such a persuasion, if they knew that the Lord would
suddenly* Hab. 2. 14.
fill the Earth with his knowledge as the waters cover the Sea? Should our
spirits sink for fear of this or that persecutor or oppressor, were it
discovered unto us that in a short time nothing shall hurt or destroy in the
whole mountain of the Lord? Isa. 65. 25.
Should we tremble at the force and power of this or that growing Monarchy,
giving it is power to the Beast, had God revealed unto us, that he is going to
shake it until it be translated? Certain it is, that the root of all the
sinful cares which sometimes are ready to devour the hearts of God's people,
is this unacquaintednesse with the work and mind of the Lord.

2. Sinful fears; Luke 21. 28. our Savior having told his disciples of wars,
tumults, seditions, famines, earthquakes, etc. which were to come upon the
Earth, bids them when they see these things, to lift up their heads for joy.
But how should this be? rejoice in the midst of so many evils and troubles, in
the most whereof they were to have a Benjamins mess, a double portion? Yea,
says our Savior, rejoice, for I have told you before, that then it is that
your deliverance and redemption draws nigh. It is for them to shake and
tremble, who are in the dark, who know not what the Lord is a doing. They may
be at their wits end, who know no other end of these things: but for you, who
know the mind of the Lord, what he intends and will effect by these things,
cast off all sinful fears, and rejoice in him who comes.

Amongst us in these days, new troubles arise, wars, and rumors of wars,
appearances of famine, invasions, conspiracies, revolts, treacheries, sword,
blood, oh how do men's faces wax pale, and their hearts dye within them?
Sometimes with David they could fly to the Philistines, and wind up their
interest with them, whom God will destroy: every new appearance of danger,
shuffles them off from all their comforts, all their confidence. Hence poor
souls are put upon doubling and shifting in the ways of God, in such a frame
as God exceedingly abhors. They know not why any mercy is given, nor to what
end, and therefore are afraid to own it, lest some sudden alteration should
follow, and make it too hot for them to hold it: and all this because they know
not the mind of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God; were they but
acquainted with it, so far as it is evidently revealed, they would quickly see
all things working together to the appointed end.

3. Sinful follies. Toil and labor in vain, is of all follies the greatest
folly, like the Jews under Julian, building of their Temple in the day, God
casting it to the ground in the night. When a man labors, toils, wearies and
spends himself, for the accomplishing of that, which shall never come to pass,
and that, which if he would but enquire, he might know shall never come to
pass, he cannot well want the livery of a brutish man. How many poor
creatures, that think themselves wiser then Charchan, and Dedan, and all the
children of the East, do spend and consume their days and time, in such ways
as this, laboring night and day to set up, what God will pull down, and what
he has said shall fall. Come on, let us deal wisely, says Pharaoh to his
Egyptians, Exodus 1. 10. to root out and destroy these Israelites: poor fool!
is there any wisdom or counsel against the most high? I could give instances
plenty in these days, of men laboring in the dark, not knowing what they are
a doing, endeavoring with all their strength to accomplish that, whereof the
Lord has said, It shall not prosper: and all because they discern not the
season.

4. Sinful negligence. You are no way able to do the work of God in your
generation. It is the commendation of many Saints of God, that they were
upright, and served the will of God in their generation. Besides the general
duties of the Covenant, incumbent on all the Saints at all seasons, there are
special works of Providence, which in sundry generations the Lord effects,
concerning which, he expects his people should know his mind, and serve him in
them. Now can a servant do his masters work, if he know not his will? The Lord
requires that in the great things which he has to accomplish in this
generation, all his should close with him. What is the reason that some stand
in the market place idle all the day? some work for a season, and then give
over, they know not how to go a step farther, but after a day, a week, a month,
or year, are at a stand? worse then all this, some counterwork the Lord with
all their strength? the most neglect the duty which of them is required: what
is the reason of all this? They know in no measure what the Lord is doing, and
what he would have them apply themselves unto. The best almost, live from hand
to mouth, following present appearances, to the great neglect of the work which
the Lord would have hastened amongst us: all this comes from the same root.

But now, Qu.
if all these sad and sinful consequences attend this nescience of the mind
of God, as to the things which he is a doing, in the days wherein we live, so
far as he has revealed himself, and requires us to observe his walkings, by
what ways and means may we come to the knowledge thereof, that we be not
sinfully bewildred in our own cares, fears, and follies, but that we may follow
hard after God, and be upright in our generation?

There be four things whereby we may come to have an insight into the work
which the Lord will do, Ans.
and accomplish in our days:

1. By, the light which he gives.

2. The previous works which he does.

3. The expectation of his Saints.

4. The fear of his adversaries.

1. By the light which he gives. God does not use to set his people to work in
the dark; they are the children of light, and they are no deeds of darkness
which they have to do. How ever others are blinded, they shall see. Yea he
always suits their light, to their labor, and gives them a clear discerning
of what he is about. The Lord God does nothing, but he reveals his secrets to
his servants. The light of every Age, is the forerunner of the work of every
Age.

When Christ was to come in the flesh, John Baptist comes a little before. A
new light, a new Preacher. And what does he discover and reveal? why he calls
them off from resting on legal Ceremonies, to the doctrine of Faith,
Repentance, and Gospel ordinances: tells them the kingdom of God is at hand;
instructs them in the knowledge of him who was coming: to what end was all
this? only that the minds of men being enlightened by his preaching, who was a
burning and a shining lamp, they might see what the Lord was doing.

Every Age has it is peculiar work, has it is peculiar light. Now what is the
light which God manifestly gives in, in our days? surely not new doctrines,
(as some pretend) indeed old errors, and long since exploded fancies. Plainly
the peculiar light of this generation, is that discovery which the Lord has
made to his people, of the mystery of Civil and Ecclesiastical Tyranny. The
opening, unravelling, and revealing the Antichristian interest, interwoven, and
coupled together in civil, and spiritual things, into a State opposite to the
kingdom of the Lord Jesus, is the great discovery of these days. Who almost is
there amongst us now, who does not evidently see, that for many generations,
the Western Nations have been Juggled into spiritual and civil slavery, by
the legerdemain of the Whore, and the Potentates of the Earth, made drunk with
the cup of her Abominations? How the whole Earth has been rolled in confusion,
and the Saints hurried out of the world, to give way to their combined
interest? Has not God unvailed that Harlot, made her naked, and discovered her
abominable filthiness? Is it not evident to him that has but half an eye,
that the whole present Constitution of the Governments of the Nations, is so
cemented with Antichristian mortar from the very top to the bottom, that
without a through shaking they cannot be cleansed? This then plainly discovers,
that the work which the Lord is a doing, relates to the untwining of this close
combination against himself, and the kingdom of his dear Son, and he will not
leave until he have done it.

To what degree in the several Nations this shaking shall proceed, I have
nothing to determine in particular, the Scripture having not expressed it. This
only is certain, it shall not stop, nor receive it is period, before the
interest of Antichristianity be wholly separated from the power of those
Nations.

2. By the previous works he does. How many of these does our Savior give, as
signs of the destruction of Jerusalem, and so consequently of propagating the
Gospel more and more to the Nations: Matthew. 24. Luke 21. How fearful and
dreadful they were in their accomplishment, Josephus the Jewish Historian
relates: and how by them the Christians were forewarned, and did by them
understand what the Lord was a doing, Eusebius and others declare.

When (says he) you shall see the abdomination of desolation (the Roman
Eagles and Ensigns) standing in the holy place, Matthew. 24. 15. or, Jerusalem
compassed with Armies, as Luke 21. 20. then know by that, that the end thereof
is come, and your deliverance at hand.

The works of God are to be sought out of them that have pleasure in them. They
are vocal speaking works: the mind of God is in them. They may be heard,
read, and understood; the Rod may be heard, and who has appointed it. Now
generally he begins with lesser works to point out to the sons of men, what he
is about to accomplish. By these may his will be known, that he may be met in
Righteousness.

Now what, I pray, are the works that the Lord is bringing forth upon the
Earth? what is he doing in our own and the Neighbor Nations? Show me the
Potentate upon the Earth, that has a peaceable Molehil, to build himself an
habitation upon? Are not all the controversies, or the most of them, that at
this day are disputed in letters of blood, among the Nations, somewhat of a
distinct constitution from those formerly under debate? those tending merely to
the power and glendour of single persons, these to the interest of the many. Is
not the hand of the Lord in all this? Are not the shakings of these Heavens of
the Nations from him? Is not the voice of Christ, in the midst of all this
tumult? And is not the genuine tendance of these things, open the visible unto
all?

What speedy issue all this will be driven to, I know not: so much is to be
done as requires a long space. Though a Tower may be pulled down faster then it
was set up, yet that which has been building a thousand years, is not like to
go down in a thousand days.

3. The expectation of the Saints, is another thing, from whence a discovery of
the will of God, and the work of our generation, may be concluded. The secret
ways of God's communicating his mind unto his Saints, by a fresh savor of
accomplishing prophesies, and strong workings of the Spirit of supplications, I
cannot now insist upon. This I know, they shall not be led into temptation, but
kept from the hour thereof, when it comes upon the whole earth. When God
raises up the expectation of his people to any thing, he is not unto them as
waters that fail. Nay he will assuredly fulfill the desires of the poor.

Just about the time, Luke 3. 15.
that our Savior Christ was to be born of a woman, how were all that waited
for salvation in Israel raised up to an high expectation of the kingdom of God;
such as that people never had before, and assuredly shall never have again* Yea
famous was the waiting of that season, through the whole Roman Empire. And the
Lord whom they sought, came to his Temple. Eminent was their hope, and
excellent was the accomplishment.

Whether this will be made a Rule to others or no, I know not: This I am
assured, that being bottomed on Promises, and built up with Supplications, it
is a ground for them to rest upon. And here I dare appeal to all, who with any
diligence have enquired into the things of the kingdom of Christ, that have any
savor upon their spirits of the accomplishment of Prophesies, and Promises, in
the latter days, who count themselves concerned in the glory of the Gospel,
whether this thing, of consuming the mystery of iniquity, and vindicating the
Churches of Christ, into the liberties purchased for them by the Lord Jesus, by
the shaking and translating all opposing Heights and Heavens, be not fully in
their expectations. Only the time is in the hand of God; and the Rule of our
actings with him, is his revealed will.

4. Whether the fears of his Adversaries, have not their lines meeting in the
same point, themselves can best determine. The whole world was more or less
dreaded at the coming of Christ in the flesh. When also the signs of his
vengeance did first appear to the Pagan world, in calling to an account for the
blood of his Saints, the Kings and Captains presently cry out, The great day of
his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Revel. 6. 17.

I am not of counsel to any of the Adherents to the Man of Sin, or any of those
who have given their Power unto the Beast, I have not a key to the bosoms of
the Enemies of Christ; I am neither their Interpreter, nor do they allow me to
speak in their behalf, yet truly upon very many probable grounds, I am fully
persuaded, that were the thoughts of their hearts disclosed, notwithstanding
all their glittering shows, dreadful words, threatening expressions, you should
see them tremble, and dread this very thing, that the whole world as now
established will be wrapped up in darkness, at least until that cursed
Interest which is set up against the Lord Jesus, be fully and wholly shaken out
from the Heavens and Earth of the Nations.

And thus without leading you about by Chronologies and computations, which yet
have their use, ( well to count a number being wisdom indeed) I have a little
discovered unto you some Rules, whereby you may come to be acquainted with the
work of God in the days wherein we live, and also, what that work is, which is
our first Use: The next shall be for direction, to guide you what you ought to
do, when you know what is the work of your Generation.

Be exhorted to prepare to meet the Lord, Use 2.
to make his way straight: and this I would press distinctly.

1. As to your Persons.

2. As to your Employments.

1. As to your Persons: Give the Lord Jesus a Throne in your hearts, or it will
not be at all to your advantage, that he has a throne and kingdom in the
world. Perhaps you will see the plenty of it, but not taste one morsel. Take
first that which comes not by Observation, that which is within you, which is
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Take it in it is power,
and you will be the better enabled to observe it coming in it is glory. Seek
first this kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things
shall be added unto you. Oh that it were the will of God, to put an end to all
that pretended holiness, hypocritical Humiliation, self-interested Religion,
that have been among us, whereby we have flattered God with our lips, whilst
our hearts have been far from him. Oh that it might be the glory of this
Assembly, above all the Assemblies of the world, that every Ruler in it, might
be a sincere Subject in the kingdom of the Lord Jesus. Oh that it might suffice
that we have had in our Parliament, and among our Ministers, so much of the
form, and so little of the power of Godliness: that we have called world
Christ, and lust Christ, and self Christ, working indeed for them, when we
pretended all for Christ. Oh that I could nourish this one contention in your
Honorable Assembly, that you might strive who should excel in setting up the
Lord Jesus in their hearts.

You may be apt to think, that if you can carry on, and compass your purposes,
then all your Enemies will be assuredly disappointed: do but embrace the Lord
Jesus in his kingly power in your bosoms, and ipso facto all your Enemies are
everlastingly disappointed: you are the grains, which in the sifting of the
Nation, have been kept from falling to the ground. Are you not the residue of
all the Chariots of England? Oh that in you might appear the reality of the
kingdom of the Lord Jesus, which has been so long pretended by others: that
sound righteousness, not a Pharisaicall rigid supercilious affectation, nor a
careless belief and comportment, the issue of novell fancies, might be found
upon your spirits; that you may be thought meet to rejoice with the Lord in his
kingdom: otherwise this day of the Lord which we have described, however
desired and longed after, will be dark^esse to you, and not light.

2. In reference to your great Employments, whereunto the Lord has called you,
and here I shall briefly hold out unto you one or two things.

1. That you would seriously consider, why it is that the Lord shakes the
Heavens and the Earth of the Nations, to what end this tends, and what is the
cause thereof. Is it not from hence, that he may revenge their opposition to
the kingdom of his dear Son? that he may shake out of the midst of them, all
that Antichristian mortar, wherewith from their first chaos they have been
cemented? that so the kingdoms of the Earth, may become the kingdoms of the
Lord Jesus: Is not the controversy of Sion pleaded with them? Are they not
called to an account for the transgression of that charge given to all
Potentates, Touch not mine Anointed? And what is the aim of the Lord Jesus
herein, whose mighty voice shakes them? Is it not to frame and form them for
the interest of his own kingdom? that he may fulfill the word he has spoken to
Sion, I will make thine officers, Peace, and thine exactors Righteousness.

Consider then (I pray) what you have in hand: wait upon your King the Lord
Christ, to know his mind. If you lay any stone in the whole building, that
advances it self against his Scepter, he will shake all again: dig you never
so deep, build you never so high, it shall be shaken. Nay, that there be no
opposition will not suffice; He has given light enough to have all things
framed for his own advantage. The time is come, yea the full time is come, that
it should be so, and he expects it from you. Say not in the first place, this,
or that, suits the interest of England, but look what suits the interest of
Christ; and assure your selves, that the true interest of any Nation, is
wrapped up therein. More of this in the Treatise annexed to my Sermon of Jan:
31.

2. Be encouraged under all those perplexities and troubles, which you are, or
may be wrapped in: lift up the hands that hang down, and let the feeble knees
be strengthened: I is but yet a little while, and he that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry. The more you are for Christ, the more Enemies you
shall be sure to have; but the Lamb shall overcome. He is come to revenge the
blood of his slain upon this Generation, and to free the residue from the jaws
of the terrible. He is our Rock, and his work is perfect: what he has begun,
faster, or flower, he will surely accomplish.

It is a thing of the most imaginable indifferency, whether any of our
particular persons behold these things here below or no: if otherwise, we
shall for the present have rest with him, and stand in our lot at the end of
the days: but for the work it self, the Decree is gone forth, and it shall not
be recalled; receive strength and refreshment in the Lord.

Wonder not when the Heaven is shaken; Use 3.
if you see the stars fall to the ground; we had some who pretended to be
Church-starres, that were merely fixed to all men's view, and by their own
confession, in the Political Heavens. The first shaking of this Nation, shook
them utterly to the ground. If others also tremble like an Aspen leaf, and know
not which wind to yield unto, or sail backwards and forwards by the same gale,
wonder not at that neither; when men lay any other foundation then the
immovable corner stone, at one time or other, sooner or later, assuredly they
will be shaken.

Let the professing people that is amongst us look well to themselves: Use 4.
The day is coming that will burn like an oven. Dross will not endure this
day; we have many an Hypocrite as yet to be uncased. Take heed you that act
high, if a false heart, a defiled heart be amongst you, there shall be no place
for it in the mountain of the Lords house. The inhabitants of Sion shall be all
righteous: Isa. 60. 21. Many that make a great show now upon the stage, shall
be turned off with shame enough; try and search your hearts, force not the Lord
to lay you open to all. The Spirit of judgment and burning will try you.
Tremble, I pray, for you are entering the most purging trying furnace, that ever
the Lord set up on the Earth.

Be loose from all shaken things: Use 5.
you see the clouds return after the rain: one storm in the neck of another.
Thus it must be, until Christ has finished his whole work. Seeing that all
these things must be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in all
manner of holy conversation. Let your eyes be upwards, and your hearts be
upwards, and your hands be upwards, that you be not moved at the passing away
of shaken things. I could here encourage you by the glorious issue of all these
shakings, whose soretast might be as marrow to your bones, though they should
be appointed to consumption before the accomplishment of it: but I must close.

See the vanity, Use 6.
folly, madness, of such as labor to oppose the bringing in the kingdom of
the Lord Jesus. Can thou hinder the rain from descending upon the earth when
it is falling? Can thou stop the Sun from rising at it is appointed hour?
will the conception for thee dwell quietly in the womb beyond it is month?
Surely thou may with far more ease turn and stop the current and course of
Nature, then obstruct the bringing in of the kingdom of Christ, in
righteousness and peace. Whence comes it to pass, that so many Nations are
wasted, destroyed, spoiled, in the days wherein we live? that God has taken
quietness and peace from the Earth? Doubtless from hence, that they will
smite themselves against the Stone cut out of the mountain without hands. Shall
not the Decree bring forth? is it not in vain to fight against the Lord? Some
are angry, some troubled, some in the dark, some full of revenge, but the truth
is, whether they will hear or forbear, Babylon shall fall, and all the glory of
the Earth be stained, and the kingdoms become the kingdoms of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

FINIS.

