Civitas Oxon. ss. The Oath of every Freeman of the City of Oxford.
YOU shall swear that you shall be faithful and true to our Sovereign Lord
KING (...) and to His HEIRS, and Lawful Successors, KINGS and QUEENS of this
Realm of ENGLAND. You shall be Obedient and ready to the Major, Alldermen, and
Bayliffes; Ministers, and Keepers of this City, (Officers under the KING'S
MAJESTY,) and to their Lawful Commandments. The Franchises, Liberties, and
Customs of this City, you shall keep and maintain to your power; and in as
much as in you is, you shall save this City harmless. You shall be partner of
all manner of Charges touching this City; as in Sommons, Contributions,
Watches, Taxes, Tallages, as another man of the same City is. You shall avow
no Foreign goods as your own, whereby the KING may loose His Custom. You
shall take none Apprentice for less time then for seven years; and you shall
cause him to be enrolled within the first year of his Apprentiship, and if he
serve you well and truly, so shall you certify at his out-going. You shall not
take nor Receive, nor consent to the taking or Receipt of any Incorporation, or
Fellowship; nor of any Book, or Confirmations of Acts, or Ordinances for any
Fellowship; Company, or Fraternity within this City, or the Franchises, or
Subur'os of the same; without the special Assent, Consent, and Agreement, of
the Major, and Bayliffes, and of the Council of this City thereunto, first
especially had and obtained. You shall know no Foreign Merchant in this City,
that uses any Craft, Buying or Selling; but you shall warn the Chamberlaines,
or else the Majors Sergeant thereof. You shall not Withdraw, Purloyne, or
Withold; nor consent to the Withdrawing, Purloyning, or Witholding, of any of
the Charters, VVritings, Evidences, Escripts, or Myniments appertaining, or
which of right ought to appertain to this City; but you shall do your best
endeavor to see them brought in and delivered to the use of this City. You
shall Implead no Person of this Franchises, and Guild, out of this Court, if
that you may have right within this Court; neither shall you Challeng, Claim,
or take the Privilege of any other Court or Courts, in any Action, or Suite,
here Commenced, by any Person that is Free of this Guild; except the same
Privilege be allowable by the Common Laws of this Realm; and in all things
you shall be justified by the Major of this City, and his Council, as a true
and Obedient Citizen ought to be. You shall not concent to the Decrease of a
Coffer, called [ Dame MARGARET NORTHEN, and CISSELEY HABERFIELD,] nor to the
Decrease of an other Coffer under five Locks, without the Assent of the Major,
and of his Council; and the Council of this City, you shall truly keep. These
points, and all other touching the Franchises, Liberties, and customs of this
City, or any of them; you shall keep and maintain to the uttermost of your
power. So God you help.

And by the same Oath, you shall give Mr. Major the Wine and Spice, when it is
asked of you.
OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, 1646.


