A prospective for King and subjects.

OR A schort discovery of some treacheries acted against Charles the I. and
Charles the II. Kings of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

With Some few advertisements to the people in the 3. Nations concerning the
cruel, exorbitant, and most Tyrannical slavery they are now under which they
have wrought themselves into, and still desiring to be, by upholding of a
pretended court of Parliament, altogether ruling contrary to the Laws of the
Lands or any branch there of, and according to there own Lustful and arbitrary
wills.

Romans the 11. chap: verse the 4. But I have reserved 7000. man who have not
bowed there Knees to Baal. Written by Wendy Oxford once an honourer of them and
there pretenses, but now as great an abhorrer of there Macheeslian practices.

Let St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, be now judge against such Antichristian
Romancing Rulers, as are assembled together at Westminster. Romans 1. Chapt.
and the 24. and 25. verses. Wherefore God gave them up to uncleassenesse, and
to the change the truth into alie, worshipping the creature more then the
creator. Printed to Leyden by John Pricton in the Ieare 1652.

To the Most High and Mighty sufferer of this age Charles the II. by the grace
of God, Right and true Borne King of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Most Gracious Souveraigne.
BEfore I beg your sacred Majestyes patronizing this mite, which shall be
conneighed into your nature all soyles, for as well correction to your enemies,
as also the cherishing of the starvinge and dying people therein, who have laid
long greived and languishing under an arbitrary power. I beseech you to
remember the advice given to your royal Father of blessed memory by a wise man.
Make not known the chiefest of your determinations to an open council (al
thoughstyled a privy council) least you fail in the disigne, vera, amicitia,
tantum modo est inter bonos mali nec interse amici sunt, nec cum bonis, Neither
do any thing of great concernme^t in council of a civil friend, in which your
Majesty cannot be safe in the execution thereof unless it be concealed:
Civilem amicum sic habeas ut putes posse in imicum fieri. Admire not (Gracious
Sr.) that in a corner of the earth I whisper this council unto you, for had
your sacred Father believed the same he had never been so unhappy as to be
murdered by his own people (nay by some of those he made his bosom friends)
and consequently your royal self had not been exposed to such terms as your
own soul, better knovves then any. But vincit qui patitur. No I writ this
small ensueing treatise unto your Majesty that you may have an insight of what
you have done, and the better you wal discern what is to be done, by
remooving al sychophauts who lay parsonally in the breast of your Fathers and
your Majestyes, but there hearts in the treasury of both your known enemies.
Latet anguis in herba! and still the seeds of those adamites are ingendring in
your councels which (gracious Prince) I hold my self bound induty to make
known to your Majesty, and thereby give a caveat to you for the future, seeing
the glory of God and the good of my Sovereign, and 3 commonwalths at stake If
your Majesty should discountenance the work, my comfort remains that the
frowe of my Prince may turn to the favor of my God nec mendacii utilitas est
diuturna, nec veritatis damnum diu nocet, neither shall flattery still hold in
credit, nor truth always continue in disgrace. No no (Great Sr.) none but such
as join with your Enemies (knowing you to be Heir apparent of so great a
monarch (who was not only defender of the faith, but martyr thereof) dares be
tacit (especially) when the christian faith lies wallowing in the blood of its
own saints over the whole earth in your Majesteys being so unlawfully kept
from that Scepter, which usvally did protect the innocent, and detect the
nocent: which that it may once more be put in the hand of your righteous self
the vicegerent of the Lords, I here on my bended knees offer unto the most high
my humblest prayers for your Majestyes safety, and in throning (not doubting
but your gracious goodness will grant protection to these my desires) and that
as days multiplies on your hairs and years on your people, that the weisdome
of God and savor of your own subjects may be joined with the help of al
christian princes (making it there own cases) to the restablishing of your
Majestyes 3. Crowns. This suit will I never give over, in all others, I will
remain

Your Majestyes faithful and obedient subject during life. Wendy Oxford.

The Epistle to every free borne subject of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Dear Countryman.
I Desire not to hold thee long in the porche, but entreat thee to enter into
the house, where if thou find any thing which thou can call thine, I pray
take it, and of the rest, if there be any thing which may do thee good in the
time of peace or war, tribulation or prosperity, accept thereof, but as thou
read it, I beg of thee to observe well, and be an impaitiall judge of the
truth thereof, which if thou be there in resolved, do not only of (what is
true) lay up, where thieves may break through and steal it away, but lay the
good so up, that thou Majest (upon a good opportunity) make good use thereof to
the freeing thy self from the thraldom thou art under, and the darkness of
thy Salvation thou art kept in by those who made the glory of God, and thy
freedom from Tyranny, there pretenses, and stalking horses, but they rule
notouer you as christians or as the beloved of the Lord but as Servants forcing
you to make brick without straw. Which that you may be freed from, by a most
Faithful Moses, shall be the hearty prayers and well wishis of

Thy loving countryman and Brother in Christ. Wendy Oxford.

A Prospective for KING AND SVBIECTS.
I Have read of William Rufus a King of England was slain with an arrow Shot
at a heart by a knight, and in an other History I find that Basilius Macedo A
Roman Emperor was killed with the stroke of a heart in hunting, Cajus and
Fulvius Valerius Anastasius (we read also) the Emperors perished by
lightning, as also young Drusus Pompey the Son of the Emperor Claudius was
choked with a pear which he cast up and caught it in his mouth in a sportiue
way, so likewise of Charles King of Navarre we read he came to a strange and
untimely death, for he being sewed up in a sheet by night that he might be
bathed in it, he that seued it, went to burn of the thread with the candle,
and set fire on the sheet, so that the King being so much scorched with the
heat, died threon in three days. You may likewise read of Euripiudes of very
great fame who was unawares torn to pieces by dogs and (as plyny writes) An
acreon was choked with the stone of a Raysin, and Marius with a hair in a
mess of milk, yea I read of Pliny himselfs perished by a strong fire of
mount Vevesus Whilst he was seeking to know the reason thereof, some ends there
lives in laughing as Valerius Maximus, others by sneezing, and as I began with
a King of England I will end with a King of England, whom weread was buggered
with a hot spitt through a horn into his fundament up into his body, but this
was a cruel act of privacy, but never did you read or hear of any Prince or
King murdered after such a manner as Charles the I. was on the 30. day of
Ianu. 1648. about 2. of the clock in the afternoon, niether did I ever hear
or read of any Kings or princes so much laid snares for and so much betrayed as
there have been together, vide: King James, King Charles the I. and King
Charles the II. And if you will force me to believe there has, I must confess
there has been tracheries, which have been acted against Kings, and Princes,
but still have been discovered, before execution, as Caesar whose life was
taken from him as he was goeing to the senate house; yet it was discovered to
him in a letter before, if he had read it, to have believed it; so, many plotts
there was against the late Queen Elisabeth, some dangerous ons against King
James, but put them altogether, they reach not at the throngs of treacheries,
in this our age. For the chiefest of your Royal Fathers Nobility, (Dread
Sovereign) and gentry, nay whom he made Noble, and whom he preserved from
perishing, nay let me go higher; some, whom he (by his gracious goodness)
redeemed from death, which they were condemned unto by Justice for treason
against him self, and others formurther; These very people being chosen
councillors to him, not only betrayed him from there very beginning of there
trusts reposed in them, as to the loosing his peoples hearts, but also in the
renting his Kingdoms, and all the territories thereunto belonging from him and
his posterity, nay not resting there, but in the conclusion (casting of the
name of treachery) they presumed to take away his life, under the color of
Justice by a Pylate and pharisaical judges openly to condemn him in the same
Hal, whre they should justly have died formerly, and then executed there cruel
murder on him at the gates of his own court, and onascaffold openly in the
face of his own people, as if he had been a traitor to himself, nay they
cut his sacred life of in the most ignominous way that could be inmagined,
even as the greatest traitor that ever was since England received christrianty
even by the hand of the common Hangman belonging to Tyburne. O prodigious
Monsters? whose persons and actions shall be some what laid forth in this book,
when I come to my advise to the poor blinded people: but they are more at
large painted out to the life in my book entitled. The banis head man's
complaint coming forth.

Should I begin at the sust of King James, and so descend to this very day of
all the treacheries which have been acted at home in councels, and a broad
against the States of the 3. Kingdoms, I should be in a laborinth, and weary
the readers patience, wherefore I will but cull out some remarkable ons, and
indeed but point at some of them, enough for for your gracious Majesty to
perseive what is meant in the whole.

Did not your royal Father of Blessed memory (al though so crusified by his
own subjects) put his whole trust of the managing, the whole affairs of his
Kingdoms in to the hands of his council: and was he not betrayed (before ever
a Parliament was called) by some of them, sworn privy councellers, was it not
plainly seen that there was a Spanish purse always open a among them, was
not the Spanish faction molded so high with the riches of the Indies, that
never since Queen Elizabeth died, revenge could be endeavored against the
insolent but subtle Spaniard. And was not there a French pox in other some of
his councillors causing a rottenness in there hearts, to the Keeping his then
Majesty from maiking wars and regaining the lost claim of that Crown, and
when at last, some more honest then the rest did persuade an army to besent
over, did not then golden french Pistols (by treacheary) overcome the English
Steel, whose edge formerly was a terror to al nations And with leave (Great
Prince) was not your royal Father betrayed in all his privy councels, councels
of war, and in his very bedchamber at York, Shrewsbury and Oxford, was there
ever any thing of consiquence, acted there in, nay but spoke on, or was ever
design but intended on his Enemies in the field, or upon any Garrison, but it
was presently sent away to the General, or Scontmaster General of his Enemies,
or to the Commander in chief, of the next Garrison of Enemies, or if time would
premit to the committy of safety, then sitting at Darby House, was it not that
your Fathers Enemies there treasury was greater then his (they having the
revenues of al his, the Royal Queens, and your then Princely self with your
Brothers the Duke of York, and most of all the nobility and greatest gentery in
the whole Kingdom, besides there daily assesments and loanes, and subsidies
with many other extraordinary taxes, as excises of al things, together with the
infinite and vast sums of monyes raised on Bishops, Deanes and chapters
lauds, enough to purhase whole Armies, Towns, and Cities, as in conclusion
they did, for were not thereby whole Armies, Cities, Garrisons of Towns, and
Forts sold to his then Maiestyes, and now continuing yours; are not the
proverbes too too much veryfied in these latterdayes. Monyes makes the mare to
go: and an ass laden with gold shall enter in to the strongest city or town
what ever, and the golden Key unlocke the strongest gates that are, yes, your
Maisty sees and feels the truth hereof. For no sooner was the sacred life of
your dear Father and our sovereign taken away, but immediately messages weere
sent to some about your sacred self for the holding of correspondency with
them at Westminster which the very business of Bredah speaks something
thereof, for no sooner was anything done (altough never so privately thought)
but with in 3. days the whole result was at Whitehal (that once a royal seat
for our Kings and Queens but now a den of thieves) which would have been
made good to your Majesty by some what wished happiness to you at the hague,
but truth was crusshed in the shel, and those blasted for there good
intentions: But pardon me (Gracious Sr.) that I am so plain, I most humbly
beseech your gracious Majesty. I must now go a long with your Maiestyes
councillors from Bredah into Schotland, from whence I must tell your gracious
goodness there was daily postings between some of your chrifest pretended
friends and your openest Enemies, (O Sr.) there have proceeded a world of
teacheries, as first concerning the holding your Majesty from taking the
Covenant until your through at was ready to be, cut the steel of your Enemies
being thereby prepared, those treacherous vermins that put triphles into your
conceience were hired thereunto, for that your Enemies knew, the schotts nation
would not trust you nor fight for you, until you had done it, and also
thescotts, Iuncto would not do there ut most in raising of an Army until they
had your conscience engaged, which was too late, when you had taken it, for by
that time, your Enemies became masters of the field. Next look upon that most
traitorous act of delivering up of Edinburgh, Castle and Leith, was not 20000.
paid down for it and the Governor thereof now the only man with your Enemies,
then was it not a sylver bridge that conveyed your Enemies over in to Fife, did
not the silver ore quench the heat of Brent I laud, and so al along in your
Maiestyes whole progress in Scotland, to be short has not monyes conquered al
Scotland.

Now (most suffering Prince) give me leave to march a long with your
councillors from sterling into England, where they laid the plott your
Majesty should be katched in a trappe, to that end you were sussered to go
without let or molestation, your Enemies being assured before hand, that you
should not march to London, where you had finished your desines. What was it
but monyes that hindered you from suffering the gallant Cavalery under the Duke
of Bucks, earl of Cleveland, and Massy, to fall on your Enemies at Torwood
where God had designed there for your prey had you not been betrayed. What was
it but monyes that when your Majesty was advised by some of your must faithful
subjects to march immediately to London, that you were advised too lay down
before Carlisle a day and night, on set purpose that Lambert and Harrison Major
Generals of 2. brigades of your enemies, horse might be joined together, and
that Cromwell General of your enemies might come up in the rear of your army
who was at least 9. days march from you, yes, it was monyes that did all this,
and those very persons that received it now lie in prison for a color, but
spend after that extraordinary manner, as if they were more then free subjects.
Again was it not 30000. paid to some appointed to receive it, that caused
David Lesly (when as your Majesty had given the Duke of Bucks and that gallant
gentleman Massy 500. horse to go a part from your army, and when the Duke sent
for 500. horse more with the hearty desire of doing some acceptable piece of
service in breaking an associated committee of Traitors met from diverse
counties for the raising forces against your Majesty, which the said Duke might
easily have taken and dispersed them every on had his grace had the 500. horse
sent for) what was it caused David Lesly to come unto your Majesty and tell you
that the Duke was a young soldier, and would engage your whole army, and so
cause a loss of al presently (which he by a lingering way lost in the end)
which caused your Majesty immediately to send an express order under your own
hand and seal for the calling back the Dake of Bucks to your body: and what
was it but a Sylver bar that crossed your rode to London, and what was it
that when your army had the bal at there ^eet at waring ton Bridge and your
enemies Lambert and Harnison at the mercy of your army, that they were suffered
to go a way untouched, nay suffering many faithful and gallant gentlemen (who
were on the for lorne hope) to be taken and carried away prisoners within less
then musket short of your whole army, and but by a small party of the enemy, yet
not released by your Generals command but contrary command given that none
should stir. Next let me remind your faced self of the many treachirous
acts at Worcester, as first the advice of being drawn to that place of no
strength, to be taken in a nett as a covey of partridges: Secondly when as
half of the army of your enemies were marched under the command of L. General
Fleet wood by up ton over the bridge and so came close to the other side
Worcester, which is in compass 18. Miles distant on part from the other part
of your enemies army, I say what was it that kept your Majesty from sighting on
or the other part of your enemies when your Majesty was advised to it in the
steeple of Worcester minster, again what was it that caused your Majesty to
susser a bridge of boats to be made within musket shot of the town of
Worcester, for your enemies to relieve on another as they should see occasion,
and the enemy to make it without disturbance; Lastly (as to Worcester
treachery) what was the cause that when some came and told your Majesty (as you
were at dinner) that the enemy was comeing on, and some persons of Honor
desired that they might go out with a party and charge that bold enemy which
was comeing on, but David Lesly gave order to the contrary (saying) let them
come on I-se make them to garre faether in one hour, then they shall come on in
three, which neglect and treachery in conclusion proved to the utter overthrow
of your Majesty, the great loss of your nobility and gentry, and as much as in
him lay the loss of 3. Kingdoms, O Sir, it was not for want of courage or
discipline, but your enemies purse that sealed un assurance of victory to your
enemies, it was that formerly which gave victory of above 28000. gallant men
under Duke Hamiltons command in 1648. to 8000. under Cromwels conduct in
Lancashire: for the nations know, there was not a blow struck to any commander
for the victory but to the Duke in Westminster halyard. So that your Majesly
plainly sees your self bereaved of duty sidelity and valor of al sides, as
your subjects beguiled of there allegiance, by being seduced with fair
pretenses on the on side, and your subjects in snared to slaufhter on the other
by treacherous vermins, O have not many armies in your royal fathers time been
strong in bulk, but weakened by factions amongst the chief, which caused his
commanders (not considing in on another) to provide for there own safety and
subsistence, what was it that bred these distempers but the Parliaments coin,
which the plain country man saw likewise and made him draw his neck out of
the choler. My duty (dread Sovereign) teaches me to let you know as much of
the treacheries and corruptions of your enemies as I well know, which in breife,
is, that which you cannot be ignorant of that there is such a large allowance
of monyes to the council of state (styled) for the rewarding of in formers,
Spies, and intelligencers even to betray there nearest friends in all
relations, so that where blood and the nearest consanguinity can not find
security of council and action, it is in vein for a Prince to hold himself
safe in many counselors: great emperors, Princes, and generals in these our
days (who have made use of counselors as to hear the opinions of every on of
them) but they had never effected such great attempts as they did, had they not
kept the result of al in there own hearts until the very hour which they
intended the enterprise: may I be on ce blessed with the sight of your Majesty
I shall be more plain in my expressions then now I am, for that I ossend some
so much, that this poor book could not find a press until the soarings were
a little clipped: and if by my expressions and confessions which I shall then
lay open to your Majestyes judgment, Ishal not irritate your displeasure, but
merit your gracious pardon, it will engage me too make the greater discovery
es, which I shall for bear to any what ever but my own Prince. But thus much I
shall presume on in the interim, that your Majesty be cautions of some near
you, and then fear not those far from you.

And let this be a cave at to the Dutch, for no question if it be possibly to
corrupt any of there greatest States, which God for bid those of Westminster
will not be wanting to the ut most of there endeavors and stocks (which England
with grief may say) are to great. (great Prince) cast of such sychophants (as
I said already) whose persons are with your Majesty, and there hearts in the
treasury of your enemies, look on those (I be seech your Majesty on my knees)
that have lost there fathers, brothers, and kindred, nay al there estates for
doing you service and your roy al father, I say cast not not of your nobility
and true hearted gentry, they have ever been formerly accounted ornaments to a
crown the on, and propps thereunto, the other, and al of most honorable
respects in a republicke; Although I must confess (in these our latter days)
even as some deadly hem lock has appeared in fertile ground, and the richest
ore has been dug out of barren soil, even so has vertuons and honorable
spirits proceeded from mean parentage, and appeared so in your service, and
base and ignoble, descended from Honorable progenitors, who have formerly
appeared as stars for there Princes, but now gone out as snusses of candles,
against them; wherefore well said a holy man, nobility of birth maney times
begets ignobility of mind, and untimely honor hinders many from honorable
attempts but; to such nobility, and such councillors I conclude thus (which I
desire may be a caveat to the remaining honest of Lords and privy counselors)
that greatness can not exempt them from the vengeance of God, nor all the
wealth in the Parliaments treasury bye them there from, which commandment
(contrary to there knowledge and conscience that they should honor God and be
true to there King) they do thus presumptuously transgress; which is neither
Gods commandment cannot deter, nor Gods Word advise them, nor his judgments
fear them, I will say as Saint John writes in the 12. Chap. of the revolations
and the 11. verse, he which is fylthy, let him by fylchy still. Wherefore (most
gracious Sr) I be seech you to leave such councillors in time, least your
Majesty be left by them in the lurch (A stander by many times sees more then he
that plays) as your Majesty has been too often already. Now (gracious King)
be pleased too give a poor subject of your Majestyes leave to set down a few
advertisements for the procuring your own rights and Kingdoms. And first of al
(Sr) I be seech your Majesty as to descend so much, as to address your self
to your people in a he avenly way of peace, and goodness by way of
declerations, and remonstrances, making there in a Covenant with God to follow
your vows and protestations made, or to be made to your subjects, although
they have been stubborn and stisse necked hitherto against you, yet behold
and see what the Lord God of hosts may do with there hearts: for (great Sr)
think not to overcome them by sword so easily as by word, no no, they have
been so long embrueng there hauds in bloods on af another, that there hearts
are hardened against forra igners you may bring in; they may be sooner smitten
with your assuance to them, that as you redeem your rights carefully, you will
not only spend them wisely, but that you will first of all settle the protestant
religion amongst them in the purity thereof according to the best reformed
churches, that when your Majestyes time shall come, when you must give an
account to the King of Kings of your vicegerency and Steward ship, the God of
al Gods may say to you welcomely, Euge bone serve? and give your gracious self
a Crown of glory which shall never fall from the head of your Majesty, and that
your people may have just cause to mourn for suchan earthly loss, and rejoice
that you are else where in glory remaining for ever hereafter, which that your
Majesty may attain unto here, and hereafter, God of his mercy grant, Amen.

2. Next that your Majesty promise to rule over them with love, and not by
fear, the loving way of government being easy and safe, but Tyranny is ever
accompanied with care and terror (O Sr) carry this saying in your breast. Ama
and impera; Qui terret, plus ille timet, sors illa Tyranno convenit. And truly
(Dear Sr.) could your Majesty be but quiet a while longer, your gracious self
should soon see this saying sulfilled in the now oppressors of your people,
there exorbitant oppressions will force the oppressed to take an advantage of
shaking of the yoke they are now under as not being able to bear any longer,
neither will Gods justice suffer the sway which is grounded on there cruel
Tyranny to continue.

Now to these two principles which I beg your Majesty to harken unto, let me
speak to my country men concerning them.

Remember (fellow commoners) that you by Gods ordinance, and humane laws, are
the true and lawful subjects of this King who now you deraine his rights and
your own due obdience from. For heis your naturally borne King, and these you
now yield obedience unto in all there false edicts, have surruptiously gotten
the stasse of government over you, and accordingly usurp there authority,
under pretense they have gotten it by conquest, but alas they have not
conquered there King, nor you, but it was you that conguered your selves, in
conquering your Prince, and those you fought against.

Next remember good country men, and repent as you will answer at the dreadful
day of judgment (when al your now usurping rulers and your actions of treason
and murders must be accounted for) of your holding down your Prince by the
hair of the head whilst these bloodsucking rulers cut it of from his Sacred
person remember when you did this murder, you wonded your God through the
sides, and so long as you fight against to keep your native Sovereign from
his rights and possessions, you deteyne God out of his right, the King being
the vice gerent of the Lords so that in plain terms you tobbe God of his dues
and the King of his, contrary quite to our Savious rule give unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's, and unto God those things which are Gods.

3. Next (most renowned Prince) promise to the people that you will do justice
to al (which is termed Regia mensura) even to the meanest as well as to the
greatest without partiality, neither inclining to the right hand of affection
nor to the left hand of hatred. I be seech you toread Sir Francis Bacons
Essaies of Judicature, wherein he speaks to Prince as well as to Judges if thou
per ceivest (says he) on the on side high hills of advantage, powerful
combination, and violent prosecution, and on the other side the low vallyes of
poverty and dejected nesse, prepose thy way as God did to judgment. Isaiath
the 40. Chap: and the 3. verse, by raising valleys and taking down mountains,
so shall thou lay the foundation of thy sentence on a sure ground. Then O King
as Iehosaphat said. Be of good courage, and do justice, and the Lord will be
with thee and al nations shall fear thee.

Now let me speak again to your people as to this 3. advise. And if so that
such promises be made to you (good countrymen) by a King, I and by your own
King, not a forreigner, by a protestant Prince of your own religion, and not
of astrangeon, that you shall have your religion resetled, your laws (now torn
to pieces) reestablished, so that in causes of justice and judgment you shall
have true sentence, Secundum allegata and probata, and that you shall have
Judges like Elohem upon life and death, and like Solomon when meum and tuum is
in dispute, and not like these Kingly usurpers, who (to your greifes I speak
it) had rather Ius dare, to make laws of there own upon there authorityes of
sic volumus, sic Iubermus, not fearing at all that fearful malediction in
Abekuke chapter the 5. and the 1. verse. Cursed is he that remooveth his
neighbors land mark, I say they had rather Ius dare, them Ius dicere then to
pronounce the old laws already made. If such things be promised by our dread
Sovereign; what shall let you (but an extraordinary judgment of God for your
sin of in gratitude) from in throning him in his native rights, and yours,
which will prove in conclusion your freedoms, and greatest gains. But some of
these men's, Baal priests may say what will you extirpate those you have chosen
to make and preserve your laws? I answer, they deserve it, having been chosen
by you to do so, (nay they having sworn so to do,) but they have prooved
false, for sworn, and gross covenant breakers, who have wrested the laws of
God, and the gospel of Jesus Christ to there own ends: the Justice of God
requires it and man also, melius ut pereat unus, quam pereat unitas, better for
on to perish, then unity to be destroyed: they term themselves a Parliament,
and as but on body, therefore let that on as a rotten corrupt, and putrified
body be cut of to save a whole stock from perishing, Fiat Iustitia.

Ense reseindendum, ne pars sincera trahatur, Look upon the Apostles rule. Nos
scimus bonam esse legam, modo index a legitima utatur. We know that the law is
good if a man use it lawfully.

To the end of what has been hitherto spoken by me I humbly beg of your
Majesty that I may return unto you, and your goodness hear me.

That your Majesty would not be advised (by any favorites) when you shall (by
Gods blessing) attain to your crowns to deal with your people, as physicians
sometimes deal with there patients, that they must be recovered by corosives,
and sharp remedies; no (Dear Sr.) that you please to cure them with a diat,
and assuage with fomentations. And if against the light of nature, and laws of
nations and rights thereof, your people shall persist in there obstinacy, and
contemn your many times offered grace, and goodness, then you are excused, in
the binding, cutting and pruning such stife stakes (that will rather burst then
bend) and al to be really looked on, as to the restoring your self to your
own, and them to your self, yet you may not extirpate all.

But for the a voyding of this latter I wish (great Sr) that your Kingdoms may
be settled without more blood, as firm as mountains, not to be remooved, your
cities return in obedience, and your strongholds with continuance of the same;
al your subjects obsequious, and not to hate monarchy under thoughts of
freedom, and so conspire still to with hold there obedience: O that is a
grievous sin, and absolutely unlawful by the laws of God and man, to
resolve a redemption by a wicked temptation of liberty: Such subjects must
expect to labor under general convulsions, and be wasted with unheard of
Lacerations. No, far be it from your people to entertain such precipitation
of thoughts and far be also contempt and rigor from your Majesty, least the
divine power of God bring to pass that which few fears, none dare attempt,
and Prince and people ab horre, wherefore (O Prince) resolve of comeing to your
own (if possibly, by love and peace, and rather suffer a little longer then
ruin al. Si vis vincere, disce pati.

Now you that call your selves the supreme power of England Scotland and
Ireland. I can compare you to no other then to the 30. Tyrants of Athens, or to
the Tribunes amongst the Romans, either like the 30. Tyrants who were chosen by
the people to be there conservators of there laws and liberties, (even so were
you) who held the people with goodwords and fair glozzed declarations (as you
have done) until they had the opportunity, and strength to persist in there
design of Tyranny then they turned the weapons of the people against there
own breacts and became absolute Tyrants whole names and deeds had never been
blotted out had not this age bred such monsters as you are to outvy them in the
highhest manner that may be, or else you may be compared to the Tribunes amongst
the Romans, to be appealed unto from inferior courts of Judicature, and
chosen Parliament men to be advisers about affairs, and assistants to the
King, which in a short time, you by your machevilian perjuries, and so
phisticated conjurations to the people namely your declarations, promises,
remonstrances etc. In your usurped authority have not only overtopped the Kings
power, like the Tribunes, but have cut of King, and power to al posterity.
Wherefore al people may justly say either you are without Christ, or Christ
without peace, A hard saying (I must confess) but yet more of truth then
wonder which the church of God mourns for such discords, where in her best
earthly Saints lie murdered by you, religion through out the world accuses
your errors, and you who seem to be professors accuse religion, by which
means, Heretics, Schismatickes, and Blasphemors, Turks, insidels, and
pagans, in sult over Gods children and al of you over the church. But wherefore
have you thus betrayed the honor of God, and battered his inheritance? O look
(ye vipers) what Kazienzen says, ubi nost est pax, non est Mundus: But I fear
the saying of Iehu is upon you, what have you to do with peace? The people
have just cause to say of you, nay God himself may say, you Hatter him with
your prayers, and wound him with your swords; you have the voice of Jacob, but
the hands of Esau, the visage of innocent Abel, but the hearts of murtherous
Cain; for you have made bonefires of whole towns in the 3. Kingdoms, and
exhibited emblemes of your inflamed minds to the world, and al at the same time
when you seem to congratulate your thankfulness to the Lord: but in these
things you make God your stalking horse, for whilst you seem to burn in
cense, whole towns are turned in to smoke, O, your weapons reake not with the
blood of Turks, but in the hartbloods of your native King and fellow subjects.
O what a miserable resolution have you clothed your selves with, even to
destroyall rather then be destroyed? Are you to be called ministers of State,
are you to be called peace makers, and physicians of a commonwealth, no, rather
to be called firebrands of a Kingdom, or (in more law like terms) States
barrators, who have blasted the happiness of 3. Kingdoms by your litigious
Iuglings, and you have deluded the people thereof into an universal sorrow and
complaint, groaning under the heavy pressures of your taxations, being tilted
(as empty barrels) in there fortunes by your avaritious and arbitrary
exactions. And those who have escaped your swords, you have bereaved of there
estates, which must cause famine inevitably to depopulate by lingering deaths,
others, who escaped, and yet under your power, live (as in apresse) under your
tyrannous calamity: So that al, not only being sequestered from light and
conversation of that which concerns there souls, but are also sequestered from
there country habitations, that they are in a worse condition then the souls
of the air, neither having rest nor food, and you are not only sufficed here
with, but your thirsty blood sucking souls (like the lapathae and Centaures)
who in warring seek nothing but war, such are your haughty minds, that you
thirst after the blood of your neibouring countries of Scotland and Ireland,
nay those being dry land territories, can not quench your thirsts, wherefore
you make war on the seas, and with those who were at peace with all the world,
until such time as your pride forces them to adfence, and I doubt not but they
(being borne under awatery climate) may satiate your bloody Stomachs and the
Sulphering heat of your bound less consciences with water enough, which the
Lord of hosts grant they may cut of as a curse from the earth, and make good
the saying of the Apostle. Cut them down, cut them down, why cumber they the
ground.

Now according to my promise let me whisper a word or two to my blind,
ignorant, and wilful countrymen, to such as when there King having so often
ventured his life for the saving there is, they like barbarians, and the worst of
heathens, requited good with evil.

O countrymen remember Worcester business, and remember that from the first
entrance of his Majesty out of Scotland through great dangers and hardship by
carlisle and so a long to Worcester that not 3. hundred of you came into the
assistance (casting of al duty and allegiance) to your Prince, but contrarily
you stocked into the help of those, that you cry daily tyrannizeth over you,
whose confusions in your cups you drink and the health and prosperity of
your Prince, yet you are the first that would cut his Majestyes throat, for
did you not endeavor it at Worcester when you came to the assistance of
Cromwell by Thousands, and when that your King had lost the day, you were worse
enemies to his nobility and gentry then any of Cromwels men, nay you hunted
after the life of his then dis comfited Majesty, like as the hunter does after
his prey: raping, and plundering al before you beating the brains out of the
meaner sort and hurrying the greater (after you had sufficiently robbed them)
to some traitorous committee or other for are ward. O Countrymen, think you
not that you must answer for these in humane, and bloody acts, for these
robberies, and murders, you then and formerly have committed contrary to the
commandments of, thou shall not steal, thou shallt do no murder. Who is it
for, that you have run a hazard of damnation of bodies, and souls, it is
even for those, whose power can be no other (by the laws of God and man) then
a robbed usurping power, so that other nations have just cause now to say,
Quales Magistri, tales servi. But he hold and read there petition presented to
his Majesty (whom they wilfully murdered) on the 16. day of July 1642. there
you shall find that these usurpers then called God of heaven and earth to
witness that they would defend his Majesty from all harms, and dangers, etc.
and that they would confirm your, laws, and redeem your lost liberties, veiw
likewise his Majestyes reply to this petition, that he should not count
himself safe until they had laid down there arms, and delivered up his
towns and magazines, which they detained from him, and that the tumults of
London were suppressed, then veiw the replication of these now usurpers to that
replication dated the 29. of July. That they desired his then Majesty to accept
of this there just reply, that they could not discharge the trust reposed in
them, for the safety of the King, and Kingdom (mark that country men King and
Kingdom) neither could they yield to these demands of his Majestyes, for (say
they in that replication) they took up arms, and the possession of such
towns and maguzines, for the security of religion the safety of his Majestyes
person, of the Kingdom and Parliament all which they saw to be in most eminent
danger. (Mark again al these resolutions) and there in they likewise desire
that the King would return to his court af whitehal, assuring him that his
royal person should be as safe there, as in any other place (they having
assurance of the loyalty of the city of London to his Majesty, and to that
purpose they have taken care to prevent al danger which his Majesty may justly
apprehend. (Countrymen) by this petition, and the 2. replications with the
order of Parliament made there on, Die Iovis Iul. 30. 1642. ordered by the
Lords assembled in Parliament, that the petition and replication of the Lords
and Commons be printed and published, and that they be read by the parsons and
curates in all churches of England and Wales. John Brown Cl. Parl.

I could give you many more of there declarations remonstrances, engagements,
protestations, nay there oaths, and Covenants, where in they have solemnly
sworn to maintain the King in his just priveledges, and to preserve the
person honor and dignity of the King with there lives and fortunes and that
they would maintain the just liberties and Freedoms of the people.

But now let an inquiry be made, if these usurpers you fight for, have done and
performed the least part of this replication, or any of their remonstrances
etc. and first let is inquire what they have acted as to religion. Which they.

1. Have not only lacerated and turn to pieces the fundamentals thereof, but
they have quite abolished and wholely extirpated the very roots and branches
thereof. Have they not in there very night marches (in which they were conducted
by the woeful light of Burning towns) few making resistance al being
astonished at the prodigy thereof seeing the churches themselves polluted with
horses and even committing beastly acts therein, virgins with rapes, and the
cries of the churchmen heard louder, and farther then the drums, and trumpets
of those you maintain, seeing the pollution of holy things thus trampled upon,
nay holy and godly ministers imprisoned and turned out from there stocks, and
(that not al) but put to death for preaching the word of God according to there
consciences, and this being done have they not put in anabiptistical,
schismatical fellows, do they not suffer your pulpits to be adulterated by
cobblers, tinkers, weavors etc. Who teaceth nothing but sedition conspiracy,
false doctrine and Heresy from which good Lord in his due time deliver you.

2. Next let us make an inquiry concerning the Kings person and dignity, which
they have so often called God to witness and other imprecations in there
printed acts (but dissembled deeds) that they desired God to deal by them and
there is, as they dealt by his then Majesty and progeny, which God grount.

I say (Countrymen) let us inquire if they have not (in stead of maintaining
him in his royal dignityes) imprisoned his sacred person, and in stand of
preserving his royal life if they have not wilfully murdered him in a most
ignominious way, as you already heard, and in stead of making his Crowns to
flourish upon him and his posterity, they have sold them to Goldsmiths, and
abolished his posterity for ever so far as in them lies, and this was there
chiefest aims of there first taking up arms.

3. Thirdly enquire after your freedoms and liberties (dear Countrymen)
behold whom you made as Gods amongst you, have they not sacrifized your bloods
to there fortunes, do they not drive you on, upon al occasions in the front of
battles and storms, as sheep to the slaughter. What navyes must be prepared,
what armies raised, what wars prosecuted, what cities destroyed, nations
depopulated on the only effects of there opinions, and none of all this against
Heathens or antichristian enemies; but even against there own fellow subjects,
and neighboring protestant brethren, with whom there ever was firm league
until such sycophants came to be rulers over you.

Must they not be judges and Iuries of your bloods; fortunes, behaviors, and
estimations? will they not utter things according to the dictates of there own
affections? do they not measure al things by the circle of there own
advantages? have they not made your public plentyes quitt the pre-eminence to
there private profits? have they not made all that is yours serviceble to there
amplitude; in a word, have they not sacrifized your blood and fortunes to there
arbitrary wills, and have they not effused blood in these wars at no rate and
cherished devisions purposely to purchase what they have obtrined hitherto, to
be Kings and emperors, over you, in treasuring up vast summis of monyes from
you, resolving to leap into an authority of a more hopeful permanency; and
have not you brought this upon your selves by sighting for and rising with them
upon al occasions; but goodness for bid that such earthtly worms should
continue over you after such a manner as they have done in making there
progresses through smoking cities, and over the trampled bodies of half dead
men, and continuing in the exhausting all that is yours, rather then they should
be exhausted.

O countrymen look but upon there ways a little better and take the length of
this my prospective glass, and you shall perceive, that they know if the
administration of the public should be regulated according to the laws of
God, by the judgment of a pious and godly Prince, then they must become base,
low, and most contemptible, that they should be exposed to prey and direption.

They are neither like the heathens a as Hannibal who said, Miles parce ferro?
and Marcellus, wishing he could quench the flames of burning Syracusa) no they
desire not to bye peace at so dear a rate, nor sell there dominations so
cheap, neither would they immitate Tytus (lifting up his hands and eyes to
heaven) wept over the Carcasses of the Jews. No, they choose rather to strutte
it out with pride, and make themselves inebriate with passion, and strengthen
there fury with desolation, naught but in exorable wrathes cohabite with there
disloyal minds. But let them besure that our merciful Lord, will be offended
with the long continuance and these lasting malignityes of there undertakings,
they having ceased to be what they professed long since, they have forgone
there declared innocence, and in stead of increasing in reputation of
godliness and a good cause (which they then pretended to have in hand) they
have built up there towers of fury and malice against al goodness, both as
concerning your religion and estates (nothing at al esteeming of what our
savior said) when he commanded al scandals to be remooved from religion and
out of the temple of the Lord dooming a Millstone to be hanged about there
necks and cast into the sea, and nothing esteeming of another rule of our
saviors, love they neibour as they self.

I must tell you countrymen the gentiles in times past were amazed at the
charity of Christians, to see how they loved each other but now the heathens,
behold amongst Christians brother against brother, father against Son,
destroying on another, and butchering each other, prosecuting, and persecuting
on another with endless hatred, which can not be but a sad Harmony in the
greatest of there Iubilations; now for all these things are daily seen by you,
yet you will cleave to these monsters of mankind, you have hitherto rather
chused to perish with them, then to live a godly, quiet, and a sober life,
under your King the chosen on of God.

O countrymen I be seech you by the mercies of God and in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, to forsake these rulers (who have forsaken God and you, these devourers
of holiness, who have enough to bestow on there own edifices but nothing to
bestow on the repairing the Temples of God, but rather pulling down the
churches as they do daily amongst you reedifiing there own buildings, as it
is in Agge the 1. and the 4. verse. It is time for your selves to dwell in your
houses and this house to lie waste.

O such wretched cormorants, who do not only let the houses of God liewaste,
but utterly pull them down, and purchase lands with the spoils thereof, yet
these sacrilegious persons are accounted by you good Christians, yet you stick
and adhere to them who make there buildings as it is spoken in the 6. chap. of
Joshua and the 26. verse. Not laying the foundations thereof in the blood of
there bodies, but in the spoil of there souls, which God in the conclusion
will make them as swallows nests, which in the winter fall down of themselves:
and will you yet think upon such people, will you still, deny your obedience to
your King, who would there on do as Noah did after the stood who built an
alter to the Lord Genesis the 8. and the 20. verse.

I will here conclude dear countrymen with this my last advise to thee. Which
is. That thou forsake this pretended Parliament who have brought thee to this
miserable condition that they have left no authority in England able to settle
peace; your lives and fortunes being liable to there lustful wills by illegal
accusations blanke impeachments, threatening declarations who have put out the
eyes of the Kingdom (the two universities of Oxford and Cambridge) knowing
that learning is a step to Religion, and both to your laws and liberties,
and al enemies to there barbarons, irrational and illegal way of Government, al
which when you took part first with these members, we that have Christianity
do believe that you were seduced by these fair pretenses of defending
Religion, King, laws, and liberties, which they first held to you; and you
thereby being unwilling to have a Parliament conquered by the sword and
consequently your selves, and you not thinking that they could so far
prevaricate as to conspire against King, Parliament, and your selves, to the
utter subversion of al laws, liberties, and the fundamental Government of the
Land, betraying religion unto Heretics, and Schismatikes, sharing the spoils
of 3. Kingdoms between them, and now resolving to enrich themselves more in
foreign Lands, I say that (as my self was once at the first blinded) you my
countrymen had no intention they should be so far entrusted as you have
found to your grief they have engaged you before you were aware: (but think
it not yet too late to draw back your feet, and yet stippe the bridle out of
your mouths, with which bit they think they have you at there check, having
girt the saddle so fast to your galled backs, and they as rank riders
mounted, who have not only spurred you out of your estates, laws; and
liberties, but will spur you into hell by new oaths, Treasons, Covenants, etc.
If you take not the more heed, and be not the more resolute, for now they have
Squeezed what they can out of the Kings party, they call them home, beginning to
make up there bottomless vessels full out of your estates who have been there
friends.

Now I have showed you the Lion whom they hunted after (the Lord of the
forest) not only to be sick and weak and so become a prey to them, he is not
only goared by the ox, bitten by madd dogs, and kicked by Asses, and as our
savior was spittedon by pharisees, but even as our savior was become a prey
and crusified for our sins, so was your King for your laws liberties, and
the sins of the whole three Kingdoms.

Now to al Christian Princes I speak to you especially of blood or the same
religion which this martired King Charles the, first was.

Look I say (you neibouring Kings and Princes) upon this sad example, unheard
of President, and unparelled violence, and the Lord grant you may apply it to
your own souls, and lay your councels and forces in conjunction to make
examples of such murtherous subjects, thereby you shall not only fear your own
people from the like attempt but reestablish him who no doubt may be able to
help any of your greatnesses in such or any other distress, and I am
confident will be willing to his utter most power. And you will have (O Princes)
the hearts and prayers of al our gracious Kings leidge people in his three
Kingdoms of England Scotland and Ireland, for your redemption of them likewise
from slavery and bondage, to which I cry. Amen.

FINIS.
THE EPILOGUE.
And declaration of the penman.
Most Gracious Souveraigne.
TO show your gracious Majesty that I love my country so much that I could
devote my self to death for it as the Decij in Rome have done and that I
resolve to be such, Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula terrent; I
(in the presence of God and in the name of all the freeborne commoners of
England) do declare, that there is no legal Parliament in England nor lawful
Government in Scotland and Ireland, that there is not 495. Commoners by names
of Knights and Burgesses neither is there a house of Lords, nor is there a King
with out any of which by the known laws of England, petition of right by
which Kings formerly knew what was there is, and the subjects there is, nor by
there ordinances remonstrances and declarations made in the years 1642. 1643.
where in they declared they intended not, neither could they make law without
his them Majestyes consent; I do farther protest against those arbitrary,
exacting, and usurping few members remaining at Westminster, that what ever
they have done, or shall do, as they now are, is void, and null by law ab
initio, and of none of effect by there own doctrines, and judgments declared
in there ordinance made by them the 20. of August 1647. where in they made void
ab initio al votes, ordinances, and orders, passed by the then Lords and
Commons from the 26. of July 1647. to the 6. of August following, when there
speaker with some other renegadoes of them huried away to the army then at
Windsor, and this faith I resolve to live and die in as

Your Majestyes loyal subject. Wendy Oxford.


