ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS

SAPIENTIAE ET FELICITATIS.

blazon of Oxford University
Orders to be observed while his MAJESTY or the Two Houses of Parliament
continue in OXFORD, agreed upon by the Vice Chancellor and Delegates, to be
communicated to the Heads of Houses, and by them to their respective companies.
I. THAT they admonish all such as are under their charge, that they appear no
where abroad, without their Caps and Gowns suitable to their Degree and
Condition; and that their Apparel be such as the Statutes require.

II. That no Scholar, of what Condition soever, shall presume to go out to meet
the KING, either on Foot, or Horsback; or to be at, or upon the way, where the
KING is to come.

III. That no Scholar do disturb the Court, or come nigh the Places where the
Two Houses of Parliament, and their several Committees do meet.

IV. That the Seats in St. Mary's, where formerly the Doctors and Masters did
sit, be reserved for the Members of the Two Houses of Parliament: and that none
other whatsoever, do presume to intrude.

V. That the Vice Chancellor, and Proctors keep their Seats as formerly.

VI. That the several Doctors, together with other Heads of Houses, Canons of
Christ Church, and Noblemen (who are actually Members of the University) sit
in the Middle Gallary; and the Masters of Arts in the two Side Gallaries.

It is strictly required That the whole time, all persons observe the aforesaid
Orders, and abstain from going to Taverns, Coffee-houses, and other Public
houses, and comport themselves with that Sobriety and Modesty as may tend to
the Reputation and Honor of the University; upon pain of being entered into the
Black-book and otherwise proceeded against as the Crime shall require.

The Names of the Masters of Arts that have a Procuratorial Power given them,
during His MAJESTY'S abode in the University.
Mr. Isham ex Aede Christi. Mr. Spark ex Aede Christi. Mr. Elwood e C. C. C.
Mr. Massey e Coll. Mert. Mr. Harvey e Coll, Oriel. Mr. Aldworth e Coll. Magd.
Mr. Masters e Coll, Novo. Mr. Balche e Coll Wadh. Mr. Burrington e Coll. Exon.
Mr. Fry e Coll, Trin. Mr. Meers e Coll. Aen. Nasi. Mr. Adams jun. e Coll. Linc.
Mr. Orlebar e Coll. Om. Au.
These ords were printed 7. march (monday) 1680. and forthwith sent to the
Colleges and Halls, to be poshed up.


