ORDERS For the Reception of the most: Illustrious JAMES, Duke of Ormond, etc.
and Chancellor of the University of OXFORD.
Agreed upon by the Vice Chancellor and Delegates to be communicated to the
Heads of Houses, and by them their respective Companies.
I. THAT they admonish all such as are under their Charge that they appear no
where abroad, during the Chancellors abode in the University, without their
Caps and Gowns suitable to their Degree and Condition; and that their Apparel
be such as the Statutes require.

II. That no Scholar of what Condition soever shall presume to go out to meet
the Chancellor either on Foot or on Horseback; or to be at, or upon, the way
where the Chancellor is to come, but shall attend in that place and posture in
which he shall be required to be, upon notice from his Superiors.

III. That at the ringing of S. Mary's great Bell, all Persons, Graduates; or
others, forthwith repair to S. Mary's, (the Doctors in their Scarlet Gowns, and
all Graduates in their respective Formalities) and from thence stand in order
according to their seniority of Degrees or Conditions (as they shall be
directed by the Delegates, and those who have Procuratorial power) along the
high Street by Carfax toward Christ-Church West-Gate, (the Noblemen and
Doctors standing next to S. Mary's South-Porch) and as soon as the Chancellor
and his Retinue are past, every one immediately depart to his respective
College and Hall, except they shall receive other directions from the
Vice Chancellor or the Delegates.

IV. That upon the day when the Chancellor shall visit the Schools, all Persons
obey such orders as they shall receive from their respective Heads of Houses by
order of the Delegates.

V. That during the Convocation all Persons keep their Seats.

VI. That the same Masters that had Procuratorial power at the time of the Act;
have also the like power during the Chancellors stay in the University.

It is strictly required that during the time of this Solemnity all Persons
observe the aforesaid Orders, and comport themselves with that sobriety and
modesty as may tend to the Reputation and Honor of the University, upon pain of
being entered into the black Book, and otherwise proceeded against, as the
exigence of their fault shall require.


