THE Patriarchal Funeral: OR A SERMON Preached before The Right Honorable
GEORGE Lord BERKELEY Upon the Death of his FATHER.

By JOHN PEARSON.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for John Williams at the Sign of the Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Lord BERKELEY, Baron of Berkeley, Mowbray,
Seagrave, and Breouse.
My Lord,
I Have been lately honored by your Lordship with a double command, one to
preach, the other to publish, this Sermon: of the first of which though I might
have been innocently ambitious, yet of the second I may be justly ashamed:
partly, because the Sermon it self is much unworthy of public view,
especially upon an occasion of so great remark; partly, and more concerningly,
in regard that having been so many years happy in the knowledge of your
Lordship, and as long obliged as known unto your Honor, I have not hitherto
appeared with any thing worthy of your Lordship's Patronage. I shall therefore
humbly crave the leave of making to my self this interpretation, that your
Honor did intend this Command as a remembrance of my duty, that I may
hereafter meditate something to demonstrate to whom I owe the encouragement of
my studies. In the interim by this present Discourse I shall only give a
testimony, how properly I have endeavored the memory of your Father, by
obscuring his virtues, and your concernments, in my expressions, from all
persons who are strangers to your Family, while I speak to them which were
known unto you both, as to such as cannot but be most sensible, and bear a
perpetual remembrance, of them. Howsoever what is wanting in this Funeral
Sermon, shall be supplied in my perpetual devotion, praying for an everlasting
succession of (...) Benedictions upon your Honor, your Honorable and most
Virtuous Lady, and your most hopeful issue, as becomes

Your Honors most obliged and devoted Servant John Pearson.

The Patriarchal Funeral.
GENESIS L. 10. And he made a mourning for his Father seven days.
THere are two great names concealed in this Text, but expressed by the Prophet
David in a peculiar and eminent manner: Psalm. 77. 15.
Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy people, the Sons of Jacob and Joseph.
Great was the name of Abraham, but all his Sons were not accepted; only Isaac
was in the Covenant. Great was the name of Isaac, but his Son Esau was
rejected. Great then must the name of Jacob be, who had twelve Sons, and all
accepted. The whole people of God descended from him, and were called
Israelites, and the Sons of Jacob, as his by generation from his loins. One of
these twelve was Joseph, and the rest did equally descend from him, and might
be called his Sons by preservation, from his care and power. Howsoever, he is
exempted from the number of his Brethren; and, that he might be styled a
Father, two Sons of his are numbered with his Fathers Sons, and ranked with the
Patriarchs. Thus were all the people of God the Sons of Jacob and Joseph; and
Joseph, while the Son of Jacob, the Father of the Sons of Jacob. These are the
two concealed in the Text; Jacob the Father, and that Father dead; Joseph the
Son, and that a mourning Son: for he made a mourning for his Father seven days.

These words contain a brief relation of a Patriarchal Funeral; in which two
general parts are presented to our view; The Solemnization of the Obsequies;
and, The Continuation of the Solemnities. In the description of the
Solemnization there are four particulars observable, The Connection. The Person.
The Action. The Occasion. The Connection, in the conjunctive particle And: the
Person understood, in the following pronoun He: the Action represented, what
He, that is, Joseph did, he made a mourning: the Occasion expressed, for whom
he mourned, for his Father. The Connection of the Text is double, in reference
to the Person, and in relation to the Action. The Connection of the Person, And
he; the Connection of the Action with the precedent actions of that person, And
he made a mourning. I shall begin with the Connection of the Person, and in my
whole discourse exactly prosecute the method of the Text.

When aged Jacob yielded up the ghost, Genesis 49. 33. 50. 2, 3.
and was gathered unto his people, the Physicians embalmed Israel, and the
Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days. They were not as yet the
apparent enemies of God; they had their tears for Jacob, who afterward would
have drowned all his Sons; they preserved and prolonged the days of his life;
and when those were cut off, they continued the days of his weeping. But there
is a difference between a formal and a real sorrow, between a solemn and a
serious grief, between a popular and a filial sadness. Wherefore Joseph is not
contented with the Egyptian mourning; he has a nearer relation then those
strangers had, and therefore more of affection is expected from him; his filial
sympathy must go beyond their accustomed civility; the Egyptians mourned, and
He made a mourning for his Father. This is the Connection in respect of the
Person; that of the Action follows.

When Jacob was near the time of his dissolution, Joseph put his hand under his
thigh, and swear unto him that he would deal kindly and truly with him, that he
would bury him in the burying place of his Fathers. When he gathered up his
feet into the bed and died, Genesis 50. 1.
Joseph fell on his Fathers face, and wept upon him, and kissed him, and so
paid the first fruits of a Funeral with his eyes and with his lips. After this
he commanded the Physicians to follow with Spices and embalm him, desirous to
preserve that body to the utmost possibility from corruption, from which he had
received his generation. Then he entreated and obtained leave of Pharaoh to
perform his Oath which he swear unto Jacob: he went up to the Land of Canaan to
take possession with his Fathers body, and laid him in the field which Abraham
bought. Genesis 49. 31.
There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife, there they buried Isaac and
Rebekah his wife, there Jacob buried Leah, and there Joseph buried Jacob. And
having thus fulfilled all the duties belonging to a Son, there remaining but
this one, fitter to be performed then required, he made a mourning for his
Father. This is the Connection of the Action.

The Person or chief mourner then is Joseph; he which once was dead in the
thoughts of Jacob, and desires of his brethren, survives his Father to attend
his Funeral, and to preserve his Brethren alive. His coming into Egypt cost
aged Jacob many a tear; and he must pass into Canaan to demonstrate his
gratitude, and pay that debt unto his Father there. This eminent Person is
proposed for an example unto all ages of the world: what he here performed, was
no legal Ceremony; he was a Patriarch, and long before the law: he was a
singular and signal type of Christ, and has done nothing which may misbecome
the most retired and sublimed Christian.

And this will readily appear, if we join the Action to the Person. He made a
mourning. I called an Action, which may as well be termed a Passion: as a
mourning, so a Passion; as he made it, so an Action; a passionate action, or an
active passion. The internal grief of his mind and sorrow of his heart, as an
inward passion of his soul, was voluntarily raised within him by resolved and
continued thoughts of his Fathers death; and at the same time the expression of
that grief was willingly powered forth, as what he understood did well become
him. We are not only to bewail our sins, but all those miseries which proceed
from them: and therefore tears were not only lent us to declare Compunction,
but also to express Commiseration. We read our blessed Savior twice did weep,
once for the sins of Jerusalem, once for the death of Lazarus whom he loved.
Two eyes Nature bestowed upon us, though perfectly and distinctly we can see
but with one at once, and both are equally made the fountains of tears, as we
are sinners for Contrition, as we are Brethren for Compassion. When the first
Martyrs blood was shed for the Christian faith, Act. 8. 2.
devout men carried Steven to his burial, and made great lamentation over him;
such were the tears of the Infant Church. When Peter found Dorcas, a woman full
of good works and Almesdeeds, dead, all the Widows stood by him weeping. Act.
9. 39.
Thus the first which died in Christianity, were followed with solemn tears:
and it was a wise observation made by the Apostate Julian, That one of the the
means to convert so many Heathens to our Religion, was the care of the bodies,
and the solemnities always used at the Funerals of the dead. Thus far of the
Action, He made a mourning.

The occasion of this sadness is expressed in a word, but must be considered in
many more, as being the principal concernment both of the Text and Time. The
mover of his passion, the object of his grief, the cause of his tears was his
Father, And he made a mourning for his Father. This was so truly the occasion,
that it was the only cause, that there can be no reason imaginable assigned why
Joseph should mourn, but only because he had lost a Father. Though he was aged
to extremity, though he was holy unto eminency, though he was happy to
eternity, though no way disadvantagious by his death to any, yet because dead,
and that a Father dead, he made a mourning for him.

We usually say of ancient persons, that they have already one foot in the
grave, and the rest of their life is nothing else but the bringing of these
feet together. Why then should we weep for the death of aged persons, when it
can be but the second part of their Funeral? That sorrow seems to be but
useless which is spent upon necessities, and that grief irrational which would
create impossibilities. Psa. 90. 10.
The days of our years are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of
strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow. What
reason then can we produce, that the life of a man whom we esteem, should be
sorrow to himself, and his death be grief to us? Now Jacob gave this account of
his age to Pharaoh when he came down to Egypt. Genesis 47. 9. 28.
The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years; and
he lived in the land seventeen years; so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred
forty and seven years. This extremity of age had fastened him to his bed, the
perfect emblem and short forerunner of his grave. Genesis 48. 10.
The eyes of Israel were dim, so that he could not see; he was already in the
shades of darkness. Nay, the time drew nigh, says Moses, that Israel must die;
Genesis 47. 29.
there was a natural necessity of his death, an apparent impossibility of
longer life; and yet this consideration is no excuse to Joseph, but he made a
mourning for his aged Father.

Secondly, the death of the righteous is to be desired rather then lamented:
and it were a dishonor put upon Religion to think a pious man less happy dead,
then when he lived. Luke 23. 28
Weep not for me, was the language of the immaculate Lamb when he went to a
shameful and a painful death: and why should he, which yields up his soul with
comfort, leave his body to be covered with so much sorrow? Those which live in
impiety, and depart in their iniquity, they which have here provoked the wrath
of God, and go hence with that wrath abiding on them, as they could create
nothing to their relations but sorrow in their life, so must they necessarily
increase it at their death. But Jacob was a Patriarch, of eminent and constant
piety, particularly and remarkably beloved of God, highly blessed by him, and
powerfully blessing in his name; and yet when Jacob dies, Joseph weepeth: And
he made a mourning for his pious Father.

Thirdly, Death is nothing else but a change of a short and temporary for an
unalterable and eternal condition. From whence it follows, that those which
dye in their sins, from thence begin to feel those torments which shall never
cease: and therefore they leave behind them a sad occasion of grief and sorrow
to such as are apprehensive of the pains they feel. If the Rich man in the
Gospel were so careful of his surviving brethren, and so concerned in their
welfare; if they had as well understood his sad and irreversible condition,
what floods of tears would they have shed for him who called so earnestly for a
drop of water to cool his tongue! But as for such as pass from hence into a
place of rest and joy, who change the miseries of this sinful world for the
blessed presence of a good and gracious God; weeping at their departure may
seem improper and unkind officiousness, as 'twere a sorrow for their
happiness, and envy at their felicity. Now the soul of Jacob was certainly at
rest, and Joseph sufficiently assured of his happiness. He knew that his Father
was heir of the same promise with Abraham: for he looked for a City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God; Heb. 11. 10, 13, 16.
he died in faith, and embraced the promises; he confessed that he was a
stranger on the earth, and that he sought a better country, that is, an
heavenly; and therefore God had prepared for him a City, and he was in the
bosom of Abraham, the place of felicity. But the happiness of his soul is no
excuse to Joseph for the Funeral tears due at the interment of his body. And he
made a mourning for his happy Father.

Fourthly, many persons expiring give too sad occasions of sorrow to their
relations left behind: they which depend upon them, whose subsistence lives
and dies, and whose hopes are buried, with them, may go to their graves with
unfeigned tears, lamenting not so much the departure of their friend, as their
own loss; something they may weep for them, and more for themselves. But the
death of Jacob was not of any such condition; there could no disadvantage arise
from that to Joseph, no interest of his could suffer by it. He had already
blessed all his Sons, and Joseph principally; there could be no more of
heavenly favors expected from his prayers or prophesies. Had he died before he
laid his hands upon Ephraim and Menasseh, had Joseph and his Sons been absent
when he blessed the rest, he might have sadly mourned for the loss of his
Father, and of the Benediction. If Esau lift up his voice and wept, because he
was defeated of the blessing while Isaac lived, Joseph might well have made a
mourning, had he been prevented of the Benediction by an unexpected or a
distant death. But Jacob blessed them, and with his blessing gave order for his
burial, and with that blessing and that order died. And as his death was no way
prejudicial to the spiritual, so was it not at all disadvantageous to the
temporal condition of his Son. He suffered loss of no enjoyments by his Fathers
death; Jacob had lived long by the favor and the care of Joseph, his filial
gratitude alone preserved his life; but no such narrow thoughts abated the
freeness of Ioseph's sorrow. And he made a mourning for his Father.

If none of these considerations, which work so powerfully on other persons,
did move this Mourner to express such sorrow, what were the Motives then which
caused so deep a sense, what meditations wrought so powerfully on the heart of
Joseph? I answer, they were but two. Mortality, and Paternity; the one
supposed, the other expressed in the text: Jacob was the Father of Joseph, and
that Father dead, and therefore Joseph mourned for him.

Mortality is a proper object to invite our pity, and privation of life alone
sufficient to move compassion in the living. Weep for the dead, says the Son
of Sirach, for he has lost the light. Eccl. 22. 11.
If for no other reason, yet because a man is dead, and by death deprived of
those comforts which those that live enjoy, they which survive may providently
bewail their future privation in his present loss. Thus every Gravestone
bespeaks or expects a tear; as if all those eyes which had not yet lost their
light, were to pay the tribute of their waters to the dead Sea. This Fountain
Nature never made in vain, nor to be always sealed up; that heart is rock which
suffers it never to break forth; and be it so, yet if the rod of Moses strike,
an affliction sent from God shall force it. Let us therefore be ready with our
sorrowful expressions when we are invited by sad occasions; especially when a
Father, who may command them, calls for them, as that Wise man did, My Son, let
tears fall down over the dead. Eccl. 38. 16.
And if paternal authority demands them at the death of others, it is no filial
duty which denies them to attend upon a Fathers Funeral. Joseph a man of a
gracious and a tender heart, moved with common objects of compassion, had a
vulgar sorrow arising from the consideration of mortality; Joseph a Son full of
high affection and of filial duty and respect, was touched with a far more
lively sense by the accession of paternity: And he made a mourning for his
Father: he made a mourning for his Father, which begat him; for his Father,
which loved him; for his Father, which blessed him; for his Father, which had
mourned for him; for his Father, which came down to dye with him.

First, he made a mourning for his Father who begat him: had there been no
other but that naked relation, it had carried with it a sufficient obligation.
There is so great an union between the Parent and the Child, that it cannot
break without a deep sensation. He which has any grateful apprehension of his
own life received, cannot choose but sadly resent the loss of that life which
gave it. If the fear of the death of Croesus, by a natural miracle, could untie
the tongue of his Son who never spoke before; that man must be miraculously
unnatural, the floodgates of whose eyes are not opened at his Fathers
Funerals, though he never wept before. The gifts of grace do not obliterate,
but improve nature; and it is a false persuasion of Adoption, which teaches us
so far to become the sons of God, as to forget that we are the sons of men.
Joseph a person high in the esteem of Pharaoh, higher in the favor of God,
great in the power of Egypt, greater in the power of the Spirit, yet he forgets
not his filial relation, yet he cannot deny his natural obligation, but as a
pious Son he pays the last tribute of his duty to Jacob, And he made a
mourning for his Father who begat him.

Secondly, he made a mourning for his Father who loved him. Love, when in an
equal, commands love; and this is so just, that fire does not more naturally
create a flame. In this the similitude is so great, that there is no difference
in the nature of the love produced, and that which did produce it. But when it
first begins in a superior person, the proper effect which it creates in an
inferior, is not of a single nature, but such a love as is mingled with duty
and respect. The love of God to man challenges love from us, but that of such
a nature as cannot be demonstrated but by obedience; and that of a Father to
his Son is of the same condition, though not in the same proportion. The Father
loves first with care and tenderness, with a proper and a single love; the Son
returns it with another color mingled with duty, blended with respect. Now
Jacob had many children, and as an eminent example he loved them all: but among
the rest, there was one clearer and warmer flame; Genesis 37. 3.
for he loved Joseph more then all his children: the offspring of Rachel, the
Son of his old age, the Heir of his Virtues, the Corrector of his Brethren, the
Beloved of God, had a greater share in Jacobs affection then the rest of his
issue. He did not so much prefer his wives before his handmaids, he did not so
highly value Rachel before Leah, as he did esteem Joseph before the offspring
of them all. This was the paternal love of Jacob, and this was answered with as
high a filial respect in Joseph; which after death could not otherwise be
expressed then in tears; And therefore he made a mourning for his Father, who
loved him.

Thirdly, he made a mourning for his Father who had blessed him. Blessing is
the sovereign act of God, and the power of benediction like the power of God.
He delegateth this power unto his Priests, who stand between God and Man, and
bless the Sons of men in the Name of God. He derives the same upon our natural
Parents, that children honoring them may expect his blessing upon their
desires and prayers. And what greater favor could we ask of God, then that
those persons who have the most natural affection toward us, should also have
the greatest power to bless us? Now when the time drew nigh that Israel must
die, when his body drew nearer to the Earth, and his soul to Heaven, when his
desires were highest, and his words of the greatest efficacy, he called unto
his Sons, and blessed them, every one according to his blessing he blessed
them. Genesis 49. 1, 48.
But as he loved Joseph more then all his Brethren, so he blessed him above
them all: he made one Tribe of every Son, and two of him: his affection showed
it self Rhetorical in his Benediction, saying, The blessings of thy Father have
prevailed above the blessings of my Progenitors: unto the utmost bounds of the
everlasting hills they shall be on the head of Joseph, Genesis 49. 26.
and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his Brethren.
Giving this Benediction, Jacob dies; receiving this Blessing, Joseph survives,
who can render no other Retribution after his death, but care of his Burial,
and tears at his Funeral. And therefore he made a mourning for his Father, who
had blessed him.

Fourthly, he made a mourning for his Father, who had mourned for him. The
Parents cares and Fears are equal, and when any infelicity besides their
children, their griefs are great; and all these bear a proportion with their
love. Now the love of Jacob to Joseph was transcendent, and being so, it raised
as high an hatred in the hearts of his Brethren; by which he was, in their
intention, and in his Fathers opinion, dead. And now the Funeral is Ioseph's,
let us see how Jacob does appear. Genesis 37. 34.
He rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his Son
many days. Here is a real demonstration upon a supposed death, and a serious
mourning at a feigned Funeral. Had his dearest Son been dead, yet he might well
take comfort in his numerous offspring, but he did not; for all his Sons and
all his Daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted: and
he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my Son mourning; thus his
Father wept for him. Thus it pleased God to permit this happy deceit of envious
Brethren, Genesis 37. 35.
this pious mistake of an affectionate Father, not only for a great example of
Paternal love, but also to teach all Sons to measure their griefs at their
Fathers death, by a consideration of those sorrows which their Parents would
have expressed, had they dyed before them. Howsoever Joseph was but just in
this: for he made a mourning for his Father, who had mourned for him.

Lastly, he made a mourning for his Father, who came down to die with him. It
was the old expression of Parents comfort, that at their deaths they might have
their children to close their eyes; and it has been equally the desire of
children to be made happy by that occasion, in showing the last testimony of
their duty at their Parents death. Now Jacob, who upon the supposed death of
Joseph, Genesis 37. 35.
had said, I will go down into the grave unto my Son; upon the certain
intelligence of his life and safety, resolves to go down and die with him.
For when he saw the Wagons which Joseph sent, Genesis 45. 27, 28.
and his spirit revived, Israel said, It is enough: Joseph my Son is yet alive,
I will go and see him before I die: and when Joseph first presented himself
unto him in the land of Egypt, the first words which he spoke were these, Now
let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou art yet alive. Genesis 46. 30.
Now he which said at first, I will go and see him before I die, and when he
saw him, said, Now let me die, resolved nothing in that journey but to die with
Joseph. And he made a moursing for his Father, who came down to die with him.

For all these reasons Joseph mourned; for his Father, who begat him,
remembering his natural generation; for his Father, who loved him, not
forgetting his singular affection; for his Father, who had blessed him,
considering his double Benediction; for his Father, who had mourned for him,
meditating a pious retaliation; for his Father, who came down to die with him,
embracing the opportunity of a dutiful expression. And thus I close up the
first general part of the Text, or the Solemnization of the Obsequies.

The Second general Part of the same presents us with the Continuation of the
Solemnity. Which ministers a double Consideration, one as consisting of not
many days, the other as determining how many days. And he made a mourning for
his Father seven days.

Immediately after Jacobs death in Egypt, forty days were fulfilled for his
embalming, and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days. They
which have no hope of a life to come, may extend their griefs for the loss of
this, and equal the days of their mourning with the years of the life of man.
But so tedious a Funeral Solemnity is a tacit profession of Infidelity. When
Moses went up unto the Mountain of Nebo, Deuteronomy. 34. 2.
and died there, the children of Israel wept for him in the plains of Moab
thirty days. The plains of Moab were nearer to the Land of Promise then Egypt
was, and some light of the joys of the life to come was discovered under the
Law, and therefore more then half of the Egyptian Solemnity was cut off by the
Faith of the Israelites. But this Patriarchal Funeral was made in Canaan, the
Land of Promise, the Type of Heaven; it was appointed by Joseph a blessed
Patriarch, and a Type of Christ: it continued some days, to declare his natural
affection, but those not many, to express his religious expectation. Had it
been extended longer, it had demonstrated more of duty, but less of faith, he
had showed himself more a Son, but less a Patriarch. But now he is become a
great Example, in mourning some days, of filial duty; in mourning few days, of
Divinity. Which is our first Consideration.

The Second leads us to the determinate number of the days, which are expressly
Seven. And he made a mourning for his Father seven days. The Jews took special
notice of this act of Joseph, and in the land of Canaan observed the number of
these days, Eccl. 22. 12.
Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead, says the Son of Sirach; and
though it be not unto us a law, yet it is a proper subject of our Observation.

It was afterward one of the laws of Moses, He that touches the dead body of
any man, Numb. 19. 11.
shall be unclean seven days. And therefore well did Joseph teach the
Israelites to mourn the same number of days, that with their tears of natural
affection, they might mingle some thoughts of their natural pollution.

Again, the number of Seven is the number of rest, Exodus 20. 11.
In six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, Genesis 2. 2.
the Sea, and all that in them is: and he rested on the Seventh day from all
his works which he had made. Now Joseph knew that there remains a rest to the
people of God, he was fully assured that as the days of the years of his
Fathers pilgrimage were evil, so they ended in rest and happiness: that as sure
as his body was past all weariness and pain, so his soul was placed above all
possibility of grief or sorrow. A Dove brought Noah word into the Ark that the
waters were on the face of the Earth, and he stayed seven days, and then the
Dove sent forth returned, Genesis 8. 9, 11.
and lo, in her mouth was an Olive leaf plucked off, so Noah knew that the
waters were abated from off the earth. If we mourn for the death of any person
departed, and the waters appear upon the face of man, yet after the seventh
day, when the Olive leaf is plucked, when we have considered the peace, and
rest, and joys of the souls departed in the fear of God, it is time for the
waters to abate, for mourning to cease.

Thirdly, the number of Seven is the number of holiness: as God rested the
seventh day, so he blessed, Genesis 2. 3.
and hallowea it. Seven days Aaron and his Sons the Priests were consecrated;
seven days an Atonement was made, and the Altar was sanctified. Seven days has
Joseph set apart for his Fathers Funeral, to show that mourning for the dead is
something sacred, the tenth of the Egyptian mourning, an act of Piety, a part
of Religion. The Jews observed that the Circumcision was deferred till the
eighth day, that a Sabbath might pass upon the child, and so sanctify it
before it was circumcised; and Joseph appoints seven days for mourning, one
of which must necessarily be that day which God blessed and sanctified in the
beginning, to procure a blessing upon that duty, and to sanctify his sorrow.

Upon which seasonable Consideration I shall take leave to conclude my
meditations on the Text, and apply my self to the present Solemnity, which gave
the occasion to consider it: that I may make such use of the work of this holy
day, as may sanctify the sorrow of it.

And now, most Honorable Sir, the Joseph of this time, the chief Mourner of
this day, be pleased to endeavor the Sanctification of your mourning by these
reflexive Meditations.

First, learn from hence to meditate upon your own Mortality, and be now
assured, by this near and home example, that your self shall die. This may seem
but a cold monition, but a dull reflection; every Grave preaches that Doctrine,
and every Skeleton reads as good a Lecture: when we come into the House of
God, our feet will learn thus much, and the ground we tread upon will thus far
instruct us. It Is true, the examples of our mortality are numerous, but they
are not equally efficacious; the nearer our relations are to those which die,
the more we are concerned in their death, and there is none so near in his
concernment as that of the Father and the Son. There is a difference between
the language of the Scriptures, and such a Prophet as Nathan was; one tells us
that all men are sinners, the other says, 2 Samuel 12. 7.
Thou art the man. So common Funerals tell us all men are mortal, but that of a
Father speaks not only plainly, but particularly, Thou art so. From his
vivacity the Son receives life, and in his death must read his own departure.
It Is possible to imagine an immortal family, and then the deaths of others
concerned that not: but where the Father's dead, there can be no pretense or
thought of immortality. Beside, there is something more then propinquity of
nature in a Father: Religion teaches us that our days are otherwise bound up
in our Parents lives. Remember the first Commandment with Promise, Ephesians. 6. 2.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land:
consider that you have lost in his death all further opportunity of improving
the hopes of that promise; and that you stand now only, as to him, upon what
comfort you have in your former duty, and in your past obedience. Thus learn to
fix a more immediate and more concerning meditation of your own mortality, upon
the death of him, in whose life yours was involved both by a natural and
spiritual dependence.

Secondly, reflect upon that love and entire affection which you have lost; and
could no otherwise be lost, but by losing him, in whom it lived. Love is of
that excellent nature, that it is esteemed by the best of men, and accepted
from the meanest persons; what then is the affection of a Father! what is the
purity of that fire which God and Nature kindles in the breast of man! what
were the flames which ever burnt upon the Altar of your Fathers heart, who
never hated any man! See but the nature of Paternal love in David; who, when
Absalom, his Son, but a most rebellious Son, openly sought his life and Crown,
and dyed in that unnatural attempt, 2 Samuel 18. 33.
went up into his chamber and wept, and as he went, thus he said, O my Son
Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom; would God I had died for thee, O Absalom my
Son, my Son: Measure by this example the affection you have so lately lost, who
never gave any offense as Absalom did, and yet had in your Fathers eye all the
reasons of love which Absalom could have. Know then you make a mourning, as
Joseph did, for a Father that loved you: remember that the love of Jacob was
divided between twelve Sons, and therefore, though it was high, it could not be
whole and entire to Joseph, as for many years your Fathers has been unto you.

Thirdly, I speak not this out of design to renew or advance your grief, to
tell you what you have lost alone; but I propound this privation, that I may
contrive it for your imitation, endeavoring to stir up the same fire, and to
kindle the same affection in your self, who now are wholly to be considered in
the same relation. What you were to him, others are now to you; and what he was
to you, you are now wholly unto them. Before your natural affection was partly
taken up with duty, respect, honor and obedience due to a Father from a Son; it
is now taken off from those expressions, as to him, that it may descend the
more entire upon those which come from you, as you from him. Thus far you have
been the Joseph of the Text, be now the Jacob; that those two great names may
be concealed not only in the Text, but in your breast. Thus far you have been
the better part of Absalom, learn now to be the David: that we may truly say,
that tender affection, that Paternal love, dyed not with your Father, but
survives in you to your and his posterity.

Fourthly, I desire you to look not only upon that which you have lost, but
also upon that which he has left behind him. Vulgar and common persons, as
they carry nothing out of this world, so they leave nothing in it: they receive
no eminency in their birth, they acquire none in their life, they have none
when they die, they leave none at their death. But honorable persons, as they
die like common men, so that only dies with them which was common unto all
degrees of men; their singular respects, the privileges of their greatness,
their honors survive them, and descend unto their Heirs with their Inheritance.
Give me leave then yet to speak unto you as to the Heir of your Fathers honors;
consider what the nature and design of honors are; remember they were first
graciously conferred as a reward of the virtues of your Ancestors, and were as
wisely continued upon a presumption, and as an encouragement, of the same
virtues in their Successors. Your Honor knows how long the greatness of your
Family has been preserved: acknowledge first the vigilant providence and
infinite goodness of God in the preservation of it, while so many glorious
Titles have been lost, so many Noble Families cut off. Next, study to preserve
and advance it further by the exercise of those virtues upon which it was first
built, and has been since continued: endeavor to uphold not only your own, but
the very name of Honor in this Age, in which partly the want of such virtues as
are necessary to support it, partly the weakness of that power which first gave
life unto it, partly the unreasonableness of foolish men who endeavor to cast
a disesteem upon it, have too much eclipsed the glory of it.

Lastly, as I have advised you, with the Son of Sirach, Eccl. 38. 16, 17.
to let tears fall upon the dead, and to use lamentation as he is worthy; so I
shall conclude with his following advice, when that is done, then comfort thy
self for thy heaviness; that is, not only be comfored after sorrow, that
consolation may succeed your griefs, this is the common revolution of the
world: not only be comforted in lieu of your sorrow, that consolation may
recompense your griefs, that were but a vulgar compensation; but take comfort
in your sorrow, and rejoice in your self that you have been so happy as to be
truly sad. There is so much deceitfulness in the heart of man, so much
hypocrisy in Funeral mourning, that you may bless God for your own assurance
of the sincerity of your natural affection, and religious respect to your
Parents, and take delight in a just expectation, that it will be rewarded by
the future respect of your children. So having performed the duty of Joseph,
who made a mourning for his Father, you may expect the blessing of Joseph,
given by the mouth of Jacob for whom he mourned, Genesis 49. 22.
Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a Well, whose branches
run over the wall. That this Benediction may be your Honors portion shall be my
constant prayer, 25.
By the God of thy Father who shall help thee, and by the Almighty, who shall
bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lies
under, blessings of the breasts and of the womb. Amen. Amen.

The End.

