A SERMON Preached November V. MDCLXXIII. AT The Abbey-Church in Westminster.

BY JOHN Lord Bishop of CHESTER.

LONDON: Printed by Andrew Clark, for John Williams, junior, at the Crown in
Cross-keys Court in Little Britain. 1673.

PSALM cxi. 4. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered.
THis Psalm begins with an Hallelujah, and wholly consists of Praise and
Thanksgiving; in which the People of God express a just resentment and grateful
acknowledgment of the chiefest mercies received by their Fathers, referring
them all to the goodness of God, and jointly and publicly magnifying his Name,
as if it were previous to the great voice of much people in Heaven heard by S.
John. Rev. xiv. 1.
The words are so indicted by the Spirit, so penned by the Prophet, that they
may be a perpetual Rule and Direction in all ages to the Church, guided by the
same Providence, protected by the same Power, to have the like sense, and
render the same Praise to him whose hand is not shortened at all. Isa. l. 2.


This Duty is here taught us in such a manner as may render it most proper for
us to offer, most acceptable to him to whom it is to be offered. The
Expressions of the Psalmist sufficiently inform us, that it must be unfeigned
and real, sincere and integral, without any intervening doubts of his benign
and immediate Influence, without ^^ingling thoughts or imaginations of any
other assistance, ascribing to him the whole Deliverance, Psalm. xxix. 2.
rendering to him the whole glory due unto his Name, Isa. ii. 11.
that he alone may be exalted: there is nothing less than this intimated in the
first address, I will praise the Lord with my whole heart. ver. 1.
The same must also be public and united, universal. and illimited, with a
general consent and holy kind of conspiration; that the Praise to be rendered
may bear some show of proportion to the Mercy received, and, as the Blessing,
so the Return, may be, without exception, publicly performed in the assembly
of the upright, ver. 1.
and in the congregation.

The Duty thus taught and described is next urged and enforced by expressing a
reason, which has a natural tendency to excite our performance, or rather to
constrain us. For the works of the Lord are great, ver. 2. His work is
honorable and glorious; and his righteousness endures for ever, ver. 3.
Whereby he shows, that in the extraordinary works of God wrought for the
benefit of his people, the Attributes of the Divine Nature manifestly appear;
as his Wisdom in contriving them, his Power in effecting them, his Goodness in
vouchsafing them, his Justice in denying them to others, his Mercy in
conferring or confining them to us; and at the same time informs us, that our
Praise consists in the sole acknowledgment of these Attributes. For he whose
glorious Name is exalted above all blessing and praise, Neh. ix. 5.
cannot receive glory from us: our goodness extends not to him: Psalm. xvi. 2.
he is only glorified by the manifestation of himself, with our acknowledgment
and declaration of the glorious Excellencies which are in him, and the
Emanations proceeding from them.

This general Reason is followed by a more immediate, more concerning and
convincing Provocation to the same Duty; in that he which has done so great
things for our Fathers, and promised the like to us, has also revealed the
counsel of his will, and his design in the doing of them, both for our Benefit
and his own Honor: that there might be not only a sufficient Reason to move
and persuade us, but also an express signification of his will to determine and
oblige us unto a perpetual and never-failing Commemoration of his Goodness. And
the Revelation of this Design of God is clearly delivered in the words of my
Text, He has made his wonderful works to be remembered.

I shall not trouble you with any Division of my Text, but only raise this
Observation from it which is naturally contained in it: Where God has wrought
any signal work for any People or Nation, he justly expects and requires a
public and perpetual Acknowledgment of it. The truth of this indubitable
Observation, as it is useful for many purposes, so it is evident by innumerable
instances; three of which are glanced at in this short Psalm. First, He sent
redemption unto his people, ver. 9. that is, He sent Moses and Aaron unto the
Israelites, by whose hand he brought them out of the Land of Egypt: and
certainly he made that wonderful work to be remembered. For they obtained their
dimission by the intervention of a destroying Angel, while the Egyptians
perished and they were preserved: upon which the Feast of the Passover was
instituted, and with this remark, Exo. xii. 14.
This day shall be to you for a memorial: and ye shall keep it a feast to the
Lord throughout your generations: ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for
ever. Upon their coming forth from thence, the Law of the Sabbath was fixed to
a certain day in reference to the same deliverance with the like intimation.
Remember that thou wast a Servant in the land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. v. 15.
and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by
a stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God has commanded thee to keep the
Sabbath Day.

Secondly, He has given meat unto them that fear him, ver. 5. that is
probably, He fed them miraculously when they cried unto him in the wilderness;
he gave them Manna, even bread from Heaven, but with this Command: Fill an Omer
of it to be kept for your generations, that they may see the Bread wherewith I
have fed you in the wilderness. Exo. xvi. 32.
And this wonderful work was made to be remembered not only in it self, but in
its signification. John vi. 41.
For he which said, I am the bread which came down from heaven, when he was by
his Death to deliver us from the wrath of God, and to make a way open for us to
eternal Life, instituted the Blessed Sacrament to this end, that as often as we
eat that bread and drink that Cup, we should show the Lords death till he come.

Thirdly, He gave them the heritage of the heathen, ver. 6. that is, when the
sins of the Amorites were full, he drove out them and their neighboring
Nations, that he might place his peculiar people in the promised land of
Canaan. He magnified Josuah, as he had done Moses, in the sight of all Israel;
he cut off the waters of Jordan, that the Ark of the Covenant might pass before
them, and the people follow that, to take possession of the Land. And lest the
Memory of such a wonderful work should perish, he caused twelve stones taken
out of the midst of Jordan, Jos. iv. 3.
out of the place where the Priests feet stood firm, to be laid in Gilgal, for
a memorial to the children of Israel for ever. 7.


Upon these and the like Instances, founded in the express Will and Revelation
of God, delivered in the writings of Moses and the Prophets, preserved in the
public Monuments and sacred Archives of the Sanctuary, the Church of God in
after-ages followed the same Rule, and without any scruple put upon themselves
the same Obligation. For having a due apprehension of the great Equity and
Justice of the thing it self required, whenever the like Goodness of God was
manifested to them, though his Will was not expressly revealed, when his
Promises were fulfilled, though the Prophesies ceased, they thought it
necessary to oblige themselves and their Posterity to the Duty; as knowing that
Thankfulness is a necessary virtue by the eternal Law of Nature, and that the
Design of God, who changes not, could not but be the same for his Glory,
whenever he made the same Demonstration of his Mercy. Thus the Jews in their
Dispersion, being saved from a National Destruction, of themselves instituted
the Feast of Purim: Esth. ix. 27, 28.
they ordained and took upon them and upon their seed, so that it should not
fail, that they would keep these two days every year; And that these days
should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every
province, and every city; that these days of Purim should not fail from among
the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their seed.

It is easy to derive and justify a Doctrine from so many holy Examples, all
beyond exception, all the safest Patterns for our imitation: It is easy to
improve it, if we will attend not only to the Truth, but also to the Reasons
and the Use of it. And great Reasons there are, whether we consider the Benefit
received or the duty required. First, in reference to any signal benefit, any
extraordinary mercy received, it is necessary we should have a true sense and
firm persuasion of the work of God in it, that we may learn to depend upon his
Providence, which we find so vigilant over us, so beneficial to us; that we may
attribute nothing to our selves, or sacrifise to our own nets; that we may
discern his hand in his own work, and say with the Prophet, I will praise thy
name for ever, Psalm. lii. 9.
because thou have done it; that we may speak as unfeignedly, as emphatically,
To thee, O Lord, do we give thanks, Psalm. lxxv. 1.
to thee do we give thanks.

Secondly, this design of God teaches man to make a true estimate, and set a
value upon the benefit received as coming from his hand. How great soever any
temporal deliverance may be, which bears proportion with the evil or danger
escaped; it can never be so great in it self as in the consideration of the
deliverer. No enjoyment on earth can equal this assurance, that the preserver
of men cares for us, that the Lord takes pleasure in his people. We ought not
to value so much any preservation, as his favor who preserves us; because his
loving kindness is better than life. Psalm. lxiii. 3.


Again, in relation to the duty of a grateful remembrance and suitable return of
praise and thanksgiving, this design of God ought to be embraced with all
comfort and cheerfulness. For what greater honor can man receive, than that
God should desire to be honored by him? What greater advantage can we have,
than that he should therefore bless us, that he may receive praise from us, and
purchase his glory by the expense of his goodness? If God, who enjoyed himself
alone from eternity, has made all things for the praise of his glory; if he
has designed to bless us, that we may glorify him, and makes so advantageous
an interpretation of the return of our thanks; if he has thus made his
wonderful works to be remembered, nothing but a wretched ingratitude can deprive
us of them.

Lastly, the equity and excellency of the duty enforce the obligation. Here is
not any thing required, but what may be justly challenged, what cannot be with
any pretense denied. There is a moral obligation between men, to render to
every man his due, honor to whom honor: Romans xiii. 7.
and this divine acknowledgment is required upon no other terms, Psalm. xxix. 2.
Give unto the Lord the praise due unto his name. It is required in a due
proportion, cl. 2.
praise him according to his excellent greatness, according to the
manifestation of it. This is the exercise of the blessed Saints and Angels in
the nearest view of his perfections: the language of heaven is Alleluja; and
there is nothing more heavenly upon earth. For it is good to sing praises unto
our God; Psalm. cxlvii. 1. cvii. 8.
for it is pleasant, and praise is comely. O that men would therefore praise
the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men.

I Am willing to suppose we may be in some measure by this brief discourse
persuaded, that if this Nation has received any signal mercy as upon this day,
we are some way obliged to remember, to acknowledge, to give thanks for it. If
we be sensible of any extraordinary manifestation of the goodness of God
toward us, I hope we shall not be so singular as to desert all the examples of
the people of God in former ages.

And as to the certainty of the mercy, I think we may safely say with the
Prophet, O Godm, Psalm. lxxi. 8.
thou have taught us from our youth, and hitherto have we declared thy wondrous
works. We have been all brought up in this persuasion: hitherto we have thought
the mercy great, and the duty necessary. Certainly we may without vanity say,
Psalm. xliv. 1.
We have heard with our ears, and our fathers have told us of the great works
which God wrought for us in their days: Hitherto we have believed them, and
praised him. But if there be any which speak so much of our forefathers, that
we may give no credit to our fathers: if they teach us that our eyes and our
hands daily deceive us, and therefore we must take heed lest we believe what we
have heard with our ears: if in that which we take to be so grand a conspiracy,
there was nothing of substance, but only the species of a treason; though the
doctrine you have heard, be good to other purposes, yet as to this days assembly
it will signify little.

Being therefore the new Apologists for those Popish Conspirators have invented
those shifts and excuses for them, which they themselves, though great Masters
in that Roman art, could never pretend to, it will be necessary now to show how
this doctrine is applicable to this Nation, how the Text agrees with the day.
God has made his wonderful works to be remembered, says the Prophet: this is
the rule. The work of this day was his wonderful work. The work of this day is
never to be forgotten: this I take to be our cafe. We must acknowledge the
first, or we are most stupid and insensible; we must perform the second, or we
shall be most unworthy and ungrateful.

First, the work of this day was his wonderful work. The providence of God is
concerned in all events, but is most conspicuous in his greatest mercies; the
mercy manifesting his goodness, the greatness his power. Matthew. x. 29.
One Sparrow shall not fall to the ground without our Father, says our Blessed
Savior; and can we believe that thousands of men should in that manner be
preserved from destruction without his gracious and fatherly concurrence? How
low soever their opinion of Heretics be, as they are pleased to call them, can
we think so many persons designed to slaughter were not of more value than many
sparrows? Matthew. x. 31.
Touch not mine anointed, is the voice of God: shall the King and the Royal
Family, shall the Nobles and Judges of the land, shall the Church and People of
God, shall all whose lives are precious in his sight, be saved at once from
utter destruction by any other hand than his?

Certainly either the design, or the deliverance was from God; except we place
him, as Epicurus did, without the world, and wholly unconcerned in it. But that
was too black, too horrid, too impious, to be ascribed to any but to the grand
enemy of God and man, Ephesians. ii. 2.
the spirit that works in the children of disobedience. The deliverance
therefore was from him from whom he fell, and by whom, though he continue the
prince of the power of the air, he is still reserved in everlasting chains.
Jude 6.
As the machination of so much mischief to mankind bewrays the inveterate
enmity of him who incessantly seeks whom he may devour; so the prevention of
so much cruelty is a sufficient demonstration of God's Philanthropy.

Though many other Arguments might be used to demonstrate that this was the
work, the wonderful work of God, yet I shall make use only of one more, drawn
from the words of God, and those very remarkable. Isaiah xxix. 14, 15, and 16.
verses, Behold I will proceed to do a marvelous work amongst this people, even
a marvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of their prudent men shall be lost. Woe unto them that
seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord; and their works are in the dark,
and they say, Who sees it? who knows it? Surely their turning of things
upside down shall be esteemed as potters clay.

Now if this be God's proceeding to his marvelous works, as he himself assu^eth
us, it was never more evident than in the detection and defeat of this
conspiracy. For never any sought so deep to hide their counsel: never any work
was so in the dark. I speak not of the secret connivance of the mischief in a
cellar, but of their horrid secrecy and combination under the Seal of
Sacramental Confession; which they profess to be so sacred with them, that not
for the saving of a whole nation from the greatest mischief imaginable it may
be violated. For, as they say, all men are commanded by the Law of God to
confess all their sins to a Priest; and therefore the Priest by the same Law is
obliged in no case to reveal them. For certainly God never intended to impose
so hard a necessity on a sinner, as necessarily to lose one of the two, either
his temporal, or his eternal life; his temporal, if he confess, his eternal, if
he do not. Now if it were lawful for the Priest in any case to reveal the
confession, and not lawful for the sinner not to confess, he could not obtain
eternal, without manifest danger of his temporal, life. O the subtilty of the
doctrine! the nicety of the practice! O the great Roman Asylum! the happy
security in the pretense of penance to impenitent wretches! Here they may
freely open their tender Consciences, and by a safe consultation receive advice
in the worst of their designs for the advancement of the Gospel, and the
propagation of the Faith. For they have of late so fortified this Castle, that
it is become impregnable, though the Foundation of it be laid on a Tradition of
their own, wholly unknown, as they have acknowledged, to the vast number of the
Eastern Churches.

But if we grant the sacredness of Confession, and the duty of Secrecy in the
Confessor, which I shall not deny; yet reason (which can judge what designs are
fit to be kept secret, and what not) will teach all men, and some of their
Divines have formerly taught, that a private secret ought to be revealed for a
great and public good, for the prevention of a general evil, the Confessor
keeping the person confessing as close and safe as he may. And if this doctrine
had been observed, our danger could not have long continued, which consisted in
the mischief of the design, not in the number or power of the persons engaged,
and consequently had vanished as soon as it was disclosed. But they were
sufficiently fortified against this truth. For, that a private secret must
yield to a great and public good, holds only, they say, in those Countries
where the Prince is a Catholic, who believes the great Religion of private and
Sacramental Confession, and bears a great reverence unto it. And that too, when
that Catholic Prince is so pious and religious, that it may be rationally
presumed that he will by no means urge the Confessor with dangerous or
troublesome interrogations, or in the least desire the persons of the Traitors.
Thus upon an unjust supposal that our King was not a Catholic, and
consequently not a Christian, both he and his kingdom were wholly excluded from
the benefit of universal reason and the doctrine of their most sober Divines;
and so their most pernicious counsel lay still in the deep, wrapped up in the
conscience of the Priest, who had been taught that he knew it not as m^^ but as
God, and that it was not a natural or civil, but a supernatural secret.

Again, it was very unreasonable to pretend the sacred power of the Seal to
keep the secrecy of this horrid Conspiracy; because there was not any
Confession made of a sin committed and repented of (which only has a proper
tendency to Absolution) but only of a crime intended and of a present
resolution afterward to commit it; which is not to be esteemed under Penance
at all (except there can be penitence where there is no penitent or pretender
to be such) neither is it capable of Absolution or any benefit of Confession,
being it is not in it self Confession, but rather Consultation, and that the
worst imaginable, including a resolute intention to commit the greatest crime.
In this many of their Doctors agree; and a Bishop of Rome has given a full and
clear resolution in the point. But in the greatest danger we could receive no
benefit here, a new Distinction making up the breach. For we must understand
that though it were not a formal, yet it was a virtual Confession; though it
were but a Consultation, yet it had some reference to a Sacramental Confession,
either already made, or in probability to be made hereafter; by virtue of which
reference it was to be under the same secrecy, and to have the benefit of the
same Seal, being under it either directly or indirectly. Thus that grand
Conspiracy was consigned to take its best opportunity; as needing no
Repentance, but in case of a failure or nonperformance. And so this work was
still in the dark.

Moreover we might conceive our selves safe from such a machination of any
Christians by that Divine determination. We must not do evil that good may come
of it. For if their damnation were just, who slanderously reported of S. Paul,
Romans iii. 8.
that he said Let us do evil, that good may come; who could imagine that in any
case of conscience this should be admitted? And indeed a great scruple arose
even in the minds of the most confident Assassinates, whether the nocent and
the innocent might be destroyed and perish together. That be far from them to
do after this manner, Genesis xviii. 25.
to slay the righteous with the wicked; and that the righteous should be as the
wicked, that be far from them: (though all ought to have been accounted
innocent in respect of them who had no authority to make such a discrimination,
or to condemn and execute justice upon either:) Yet the sacred Oracle could
determine, that if the good to be expected were greater than the evil which was
to be executed, if the destruction of the innocent might be compensated by the
advantage which followed; then it was not only evidently lawful, but, so far as
the good exceeded the evil, meritorious. And now let the evil be never so
great, they were sure in the opinion of those whom they consulted, the
propagation of the Roman Faith, the advancement of the Catholic Cause, the
restitution of the Papal Jurisdiction was the greatest good imaginable, to
which the ruin of the nocent or the innocent could bear no proportion.

All this was sought in the deep to hide their counsel: all this was wrought in
the dark; and they said often among themselves, Who sees it? who knows it?
Wherefore if, notwithstanding all this contrivance of secrecy to hide their
counsel, the horrid Conspiracy was revealed, the snare discovered, and their
turning of things upside down esteemed as the potters clay, God did then
proceed to do a marvelous work for this people and nation, even a marvelous
work and a wonder. This is that which the Lord has done, and it were the
greatest wonder if it were not marvelous in our eyes. Which is the first part
of our Case.

Secondly, The wonderful work of this day is never to be forgotten. God has
saved our lives by a great deliverance, as Joseph said; and can we ever be
ungrateful to him who has given us such a deliverance as this, as Ezra speaks?
What can we ever expect to make us mindful, if upon such a deliverance as this
we prove forgetful? The Text teaches us that it is the design of him who
wrought it, that we should remember it; and shall we fulfill the design of our
enemies, whom he defeated? Let them deny it, who may be ashamed of the intended
cruelty; let not us forget it, who ought to rejoice in the mercy; lest we be
unmindful of him whose the mercy was, and for which he expects to be honored
by us. God made the memory of his wonderful works to be part of the Religion of
his ancient people; such were the Passover and the Sabbath: let us think it a
part of our Religion to remember this wonderful work. Let this day never fail
from among us, nor the memorial of it perish from our seed. May we never live
to see those times, in which the memory of this day shall be blotted out, or
rather cast out with indignation: may we never hear of such an Act of Oblivion.

Nor is it our Duty only to desire, but also to endeavor the perpetuity of
this Recognition: and consequently to use the just and proper means to
perpetuate it. It was our Religion, the settled Religion of the Church of
England, which was then aimed at; and nothing will preserve the due memory of
this day, but the preservation of that. Nothing but that procured the enmity;
nothing but that obtained the mercy. We know no other reason why men of the
same nation, but of a different persuasion in matters of Religion, should so
combine against us; we are conscious of no other motive on our part to incline
the infinite goodness of God to be so propitious to us; nor can any other
consideration without this set a sufficient value upon the mercy received. Let
us therefore earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints: Jude 3.
Let us keep that which was then preserved, if we expect the generations to
come should praise the Lord for this deliverance. The persons are now dead
whose lives were then preserved; if we suffer the same Religion to perish which
was then so signally owned, there will be little left for which the memory
should be continued. Thus let us endeavor to perpetuate the memorial of this
day, as the most just and innocent revenge.

But these things are in the hand of God; that God who saved our late Sovereign
alive upon this day, and suffered him to be cruelly murdered upon another.
When I consider the present condition of our Church and Nation, and fear that
our sins begin to be full; I cannot but think the enemies of our Religion, the
Papal Emissaries, have now much an easier way to destroy it. They shall not
need to seek so far into the deep, or to lay so vast a work in the dark: but
then I cannot choose but remember those words which I read so frequently in the
Scriptures, 2 Samuel xvi. 16, etc.
God save the King: God save the King God save him from the open rebellion of
the Schismatical party, the ruin of his Father. God save him from the secret
machinations of the Papal Faction, the danger of his Grandfather. God save the
King; and let all the people say, Amen.

FINIS.

