A DISSERTATION Concerning the Pre-existency of Souls: Wherein The state of the
Question is briefly unfolded, and diverse Arguments and Objections on both sides
Alleged and Answered;

AND A free judgment concerning the Sum of the Controversy allowed to every
one.

Being Originally written in the Latin Tongue, several years since, by the
Learned C.P. and now made English by D. F. D. P. upon the recommendation of F.
M. H. their Friend.

(...). LONDON, Printed for J. Wickins, at the White Heart, and Rob. Kettlewell,
at the Hand and Scepter, over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1684.

To his Friend THOMAS MARTYN OF PUTNEY, Esquire
SIR,
BOth your self and every Reader will readily conclude that I much wanted an
opportunity of gratitude, to snatch thus at so little a one to make you a
Present. However let the Zeal and Sincerity of being grateful, cover the
uncomeliness of disproportion in the Offer. The great Eastern Conqueror gave
like himself, but accepted from Inferiors like themselves. And a greater than
he, declared a poor Mite to exceed the weightier gifts of the Opulent. But,
Sir, you are not to be taught how to be generous, for you wear a mind too big,
than to refuse the smallest acknowledgment, and it would be an injury
(especially in me) to suspect you cannot stoop thus low. I wish I could as well
excuse the quality of the thing: It is, viz. a Paradox, and a Translate too,
and that perhaps done badly enough. Can any extenuation bring it nearer to a
Nothing? But I could wish that were all, or the worst of it. There is a Nest in
the World filled with living things (which call themselves Orthodox) that have
Stings and Anger; if these take offense, what will become of you? its no matter
how they use me. But I forget, Your dexterity is great in this mystery of
defense: And I am safe, if you please to take my part for under your Vmbrage, I
dare defy all the Wasps in the World, therefore, good Sir, protect

Your Friend, and Servant wholly, etc. D. F.

THE PRAEEXISTENCY OF SOULS Asserted, First, By an exposition of the Hypothesis
it self. Secondly, By a confirmation of the Hypothesis; which is derived partly
from Reason, and partly from allegations of Authority and Testimony. Thirdly,
by a refutation of contrary arguments.


Part I. Being Confirmatory.
CHAP. I. Propounding the Hypothesis it self.
THe Hypothesis of the Praeexistency of Souls is chiefly comprehended in the
following Positions.

1. All humane souls have, in the universal Creation, flowed out from God.

2. A humane Soul is of its own nature, a Spirit, but of an heterogeneous
essence, whose parts are a vital Center, and Rays or Beams of a secondary
substance; in the former is seated the superior faculty of Reason and Sense;
in the latter is placed the inferior plastic or propagating Faculty, which is
the Throne of a threefold vital aptitude, in a threefold vehicle.

3. The Soul from the very first moment of its Creation was united vitally with
matter, yet in a state or condition very glorious.

4. Souls becoming sated or glutted with the long enjoyment and use of
Ethereal Heavenly felicity and joys, which consist in the contemplation and
Love of the supreme Good, began somewhat more closely to consider their
material vehicles, and becoming delighted with the delicacies thereof, did at
first in a due proportion, and with a legitimate and allowed measure enjoy and
use with pleasure unutterable, the softer and more curiously sweet emotions of
them.

5. But after that, they falling into an immoderate Love and admiration of
them, viz. through a too loose desire and unbridled appetite, they wholly
plunged themselves into the lustful delights of them, in this regard leaping
over the bounds of true temperance, whence afterward their misery sprang forth
and ensued.

6. For by reason of this immoderate use of their material vehicles, 1. They
fell from their primaeval glory, into an inferior and less happy state or
condition. 2. Their Essence being at first immaculate and undefiled, but
through the Love and contrectation, or use of impure pleasures being miserably
infected, their Nature became affected, or seized with an inxpressible
intemperance. 3. Their vital aptitude unto their formerly most pure vehicles
became diminished. 4. Their most flourishing vivid Reason became limited,
bounded, and stupefied, and, 5. They themselves became manifestly unfit to
continue longer in an Ethereal heavenly life, whence they were forced out in
the very act, to relinquish their first habitation.

7. Descending therefore downwards, they began to make trial of a more vile
matter, out of which they would frame to themselves vehicles more agreeable to
their now polluted Essences; and at length arrived lower into the Atmosphere of
this Earthly Globe, where still degenerating more and more, and being now
delighted only with sensual pleasures, after some time spent, they utterly lost
all use of Reason; and presently after, of sense also; so that at length they
fell as it were asleep, and into a state of silence or rest.

8. Then their plastic or propagating Faculty only remained in its Vigor,
with which the Spirit of Nature eminently conspired, who, upon every occasion
of matter aptly prepared being given, admits and puts them into these earthly
bodies, they being first united with seminal matter, and after that becoming
inhabitants of a body duly Organized, as in their Prison and Grave.

9. Now this detrusion, or being thrust into these earthly vehicles, happens to
them upon a double account: First, that they might be duly punished for such
faults as they had committed in the state of Praeexistency, and then, that
notwithstanding they should not want an occasion of returning into that state
from whence they were fallen, if (viz.) in a due manner they applied their
endeavors thereunto.

CHAP. II. Containing Reasons which confirm these Positions.
1. WHatever Hypothesis concerning the Original of the Soul, is more
consentaneous to sound Reason than any other is, that Hypothesis of all others
comes nearest to the Truth: But this of the Praeexistency of Souls is such:
Therefore, etc. The second proposition of this Argument is thus proved: Because
there are chiefly but two contrary opinions of this point. One of them is
theirs who say that the Soul is propagated by natural generation from the
Parents: The other is theirs who affirm that the Soul is created upon every
occasion given for the generation. But in the former opinion we meet with a
plain contradiction: For seeing that the Soul is a Spirit, it is of an Essence
indivisible, that is, indiscerpible. The other opinion affords matters which
are unworthily ascribed to the Divine Majesty: (whilst it makes God, the
primary efficient cause of, and the Author, according to the most proper and
peculiar manner of speaking, of the manifest crimes of Whoredom, Adultery,
Incest, yea, of Buggery, viz. perfecting those impure Congresses, with the
Creation of new Souls.) Yea, it moreover injureth the very Soul it self, which
being created by God in all manner of purity, is thrust down into a Dungeon
(says this opinion) which is the impurest of all, by the depravity of which a
many of them are so corrupted, that at last they are necessarily adjudged to
that extremest of calamities, that they all remain infidels or unbelieving.
Seeing therefore these two opinions are thus absurd, what can be more probable
than the Praeexistency of Souls?

2. If from the beginning of the World the matter of every single man remained
undivided, which certainly must needs be subjected to many myriads of
alterations and modifications, before it could arrive to the state of a humane
body, it is much more probable, that every man's soul also did already exist,
or was in being even from that very Age, Term, or beginning: But the former
part of the Argument is true, no one Philosopher ever contradicting it:
Therefore also is the latter part thereof true. The connection of both parts of
that proposition is thus proved; because it is most eminently probable that to
the more Noble substance, there also belongs the more Noble duration. But the
Soul is nobler than the Body.

3. He who through his Wisdom always does that which is best, he without doubt
has in this case also done that which is best: But now it is better to be in
being sooner, than to be later, seeing always that it is good to be. But the
first is true concerning God, therefore also is the latter true of him.

4. Whoever is supreamly and absolutely, and by consequence always good, he
also is always communicative thereof to another; and then indeed by how much he
is so to more, by so much is it better: But the first is true of God: Therefore
also is the latter, and by consequence there were not from the beginning
created Souls wanting, to whom God might communicate himself.

5. If the Goodness of God ought not to be determined to be less than any
goodness of men, then it follows, that the divine goodness would not but now at
length create or produce Souls. But the first is true, and therefore also is
the latter. The connection of that argument is proved; because good men, as much
as in them lies, never let slip occasion of doing good, especially if nothing
hinders them: how much less then shall the most glorious God do so, of and to
whom we cannot so much as in thought imagine there can be any impediments.

6. He whose Government or Dominion could never be other than most full and
complete, to him never could be wanting Subjects, as many as possibly could
ever be in being: But the Universal Dominion of God is unchangeable, and never
was not most full and complete; Therefore also there never were wanting to him
as many Souls as could possibly ever be in being.

7. If God gave not such noble Creatures the same duration as he gave to
matter, it follows, that He either could not, or would not do it, but that is
repugnant to his Omnipotency, and this to his Justice. Therefore he did give it.

8. From what Opinion soever those difficulties which are met with in or about
humane affairs can most easily be avoided, that same is not only the truest,
but also the most useful opinion; but this concerning the Praeexistency of
Souls is such: Therefore, etc. The minor proposition is proved, because by this
opinion it is concluded that the souls of men did once exist in some other
State or Condition, in which they did in various manners and degrees sin
against their Creator: and thereupon it became necessary according to his most
just judgments, that they should endure various calamities, and several sad
chances or accidents one after another as a punishment inflicted on them for
the many exorbitances of their Apostasy. By this Key may not only be readily
unlocked that mystery, why many are so averse to all Religion and Virtue, yea,
also plainly stupid, and being, as it were, corrupted by an invincible kind of
sloth as to all things of such a Nature, even from their very Cradles, but to
all vices almost are incorrigibly prone. But also why even whole Nations of
people, for so many ages have lien as it were buried in the most savage
barbarity, yea and many of them are even yet to this very day detained therein?
Which strange Scene of things would necessarily much darken the ways of the
Divine providence, unless some glimmerings of Light should by and through this
Hypothesis break forth upon them.

9. That opinion which is not contradicted by any of our faculties, is without
doubt to be reputed to be true: But this of the Praeexistency of Souls is such:
Therefore, etc.

10. Whatsoever opinion does without any difficulty, alone explicate the Nature
of Original sin, that is to be preferred before all others: This is such a one:
Therefore, etc. The minor proposition is proved: Because by this Hypothesis,
every man is himself concluded to be the Author of his first Original sin; nor
is there any need that we should have recourse to the sin and punishment of
Adam, where we certainly meet with a Labyrinh of difficulties: For here in this
we hunt not after that secret and imperscrutable way or manner, how that sin of
his is devolved down upon us: Nor is the Divine justice brought into danger of
being accused, as if it should thrust down and shut up immaculate pure Spirits
into foul and unclean bodies, and that without any fault of theirs; in as much
as they were those who never had any commerce, or any thing to do with the sin
of Adam: together with all the other Incongruities, which belong to the common
opinion.

11. Whatsoever Opinion does without all difficulty, alone unfold those things
which occur about the various inclinations of humane minds, That is to be
esteemed before others: But this of the Praeexistency is such: Therefore, etc.
The minor is thus proved: The Internal Complexions of men are as various as are
their External Constitutions; and the Temperaments of their minds are as
diverse as those of their bodies, so that as there be peculiarities of Tempers
in Bodies, or Radical temperaments in the Corporeal parts of Bodies, so also
are there found Mental, or Soulish (if I may so speak) Propensions congenite or
connatural to the Souls themselves, with which they come as it were sealed and
impregnated into this World. For it may most easily be observed that some are
most highly addicted or prone to such or such Opinions, insomuch that at the
very first blush, as it were, they give up their assents unto them, yea, and
afterward stick close unto them, when as on the contrary, Others as equally
learned, and who have no less sharpness of judgment, do notwithstanding
hesitate in or concerning them, yea, though they were alike clearly proposed,
and confirmed with equal evidence; so that oftentimes, they can by no means be
brought to approve of them, but rather they most obstinately cry out against
them, insomuch as this their averseness seems to be implanted and riveted into
the very nature it self of these men. Whence now arises this Intellectual
Congruity with some Opinions, and an Antipathy and Incompatibility with others,
unless their Souls did praeexist, and came down into this state or condition
thus prepossessed with a certain kind of affection to these or the other
principles, and with an inbred hatred to the contrary. The same may be observed
also about those things unto which many incline, as being very prone to some
certain exercises, and peculiar operations, of which determinations singularly
tending to many specialties there can be rendered no sufficient reason; unless
it be this, that the Souls of these people had formerly appeared and acted on
another Theater, before they came down into this, where they were addicted to
some certain kind of actions which was very analogous or agreeable to this very
sort, which they are observed to affect here; in which if they had been more
than ordinarily delighted, and were exercised any long while, they then
acquired a habit, and its probable, that they retained in themselves always
some certain relics concerning them, and some glimmerings and fragments as it
were, and when the Reason, and the other faculties of these Souls came to
Maturity, who can deny, but that these might be excited afresh, again to choose
them, and to love them a new, and by a new recovery as it were, to call them
back again into use.

12. Whatsoever Opinion flows forth from the very Nature it self of Duration,
that is a true Opinion; This is such, etc. The minor is proved, because
whatever is capable of infinite duration from a respect of what is to come, the
same is also capable of infinite duration in respect of what is past, and that
in its own Nature, which in it self contains nothing which is repugnant to
this its former duration; but such is the Soul: Therefore etc.

CHAP. III. Containing Arguments drawn from Authority, and indeed chiefly that
of Scripture.
AUthority is either Sacred, or humane, and that is such either simply, as are
the Scriptures; or else according to a certain respect and consideration, as is
that of the Fathers. That of the Philosophers is humane. The Arguments derived
from the Authority of Scripture are either to prove the Praeexistency of all
Souls, or of the Soul of the Messiah only: The former shall be produced in this
Chapter.

1. In Deuteronomy. 29.14, 15. Neither with you only do I make this Covenant, and this
Oath; But with all who stand here with us this day, before the Lord our God,
and also with all that are not here with us this day. From whence the Jews do
thus argue:

Those with whom God has made a Covenant, they are not mere non-entities,
because a Covenant does require two real relatives: But God has made a
Covenant with Israelites, who were not yet born; Therefore they who were not
yet born, were not mere non-entities; and then by consequence, their souls
either lurked in the Souls of their Parents, which above is proved to be
absurd, or else they already did praexist.

2. Isaiah 57.16. For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always
wroth: For the Spirit should fail before me, and the Souls which I have made.
From whence the Jews fetch this Argument.

If God himself testifies that he made Souls for Posterity, with which he will
not contend, then those Souls, before that time came, in which the Spirit ought
to hide, or cover men, did already praeexist: But from the Text the first is
true, Therefore also is the latter true.

3. Jeremiah 1.5. Before I had formed thee in the Belly, I knew thee, (or
rather I implanted knowledge into thee) and before thou came forth out of the
Womb, I sanctified thee, and ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations.

Whence say the Jews: Whomsoever God so knew, as that he implanted knowledge
into him, and sanctified him, and ordained him for a Prophet, he must needs be
in being: But God did bestow all this upon one before he was formed in the
Womb; Therefore one did exist before he was formed in the Womb: and if it was
thus with one, what hinders that it may not be so with all, because duration is
one and the same to all created Spirits.

4. Ecclesiast. 4.2, 3. Wherefore I praised the dead: which are already dead,
more than the living, which are yet alive. Yea, better is he than both they,
which has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work that is done under the
Sun. Whence is this Argument: (compare this with Matthew. 26.24.) To whom is
given but the least Dram of happiness, to him it cannot be denied that he is
in being: But to him that is not yet born, such happiness is given: Therefore,
etc.

5. Job 38.21. Know thou, because thou wast then born, and the number of thy
days is great: Or else by way of questioning, thus, Did thou know or not that
then thou should be born, and the number of thy many days? From either sense
flows out a Praeexistency to the Soul of Job; in as much as he is concluded
to be present at the beginnings of things.

6. Wisd. 8.19, 20. For I was a witty child, and had a good Spirit; Yea, rather
being good, I came into a body undefiled. Now he who comes into a body, being
already good, certainly the making of his Soul began not with that of his body.

7. John 9.2, 3. And his Disciples asked him saying, Master, who did sin, this
man or his Parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered, neither has this
man sinned nor his Parents, but that, etc. whence is this argument:

Whatever opinion, when the most fair occasion was given, Christ did not
refute, nor reproved it as erroeous, in that opinion is contained no
unsoundness, nor danger, nor error: But this of the Praeexistency is such an
opinion, Therefore, etc.

8. Those who in Scripture are said to be lost, they were sometime not lost:
For every thing which is said to be lost, thereby presupposes, that it was
sometime in his power and possession, who after that, lost it: for that which
was never in possession, can never be said to be lost: But all men in Scripture
are said to be lost: Therefore all men were sometime not lost: And consequently
were in the power and possession of the supreme Lord: The minor is proved by
Psalm 119.176. Jeremiah 50.6. Ezekiel. 34.16. Luke 15.9, 24. chap. 19.10. Matthew
15.24. and 18.11.

9. Whoever are said to be erred and strayed like lost sheep, they are to be
presupposed to have been in the flock: But in Scripture men are said to err
and stray from the flock like lost sheep, 1 Pet. 2.25. Joh. 11.52. Therefore
they were in the flock once, and by consequence did praeexist.

10. Whoever are stransters and Foreigners in the Earth, They had their rise
from elsewhere, than in the Earth, and have their Country elsewhere. But in
Holy Writ, men are said to be strangers in the Earth: Therefore, etc. The minor
is proved from Psalm 39.12. 1 Peter 2.11. (...)

CHAP. IV. Containing Arguments drawn from Holy Scripture, to prove the
Praeexistency of the Soul of the Messiah.
IF Christ's Soul did praeexist, then did all Souls praeexist: But the first is
true, as presently shall be taught from Holy Scripture: Therefore, etc. the
major is proved, because Christ is in all things like unto us, sin excepted;
Now by and in the Reason of all Souls there is the same manner of duration. The
minor is proved,

1. Because Christ has long since often appeared to the Patriarchs; He often
conversed with Moses: He delivered the Children of Israel out of Egypt; He
accompanied them in the Wilderness; and led them into the Land of Canaan, etc.
witness (besides innumerable places in the Old Testament) that of Paul 1 Cor.
10.4. and that of John 1.11.

2. Because he himself testifies, that he had a glory with his Father before
the World was made, Joh. 17.5. But this was not the Glory of his divine nature,
because that was in its own nature immutable; Therefore it was the glory of his
Soul which already did praeexist.

3. Moreover He himself testifies thus: I came but from the Father, and am
come into the World. Again, I leave the World, and return unto the Father. As
in John 16.28.

4. John 3.13. No man ascends into Heaven, but he who descended from Heaven,
the Son of Man, etc.

5. John the Baptist testifies of him, That he came from above. John 3.31.

6. Again, Christ himself says, Joh. 6.32. My Father gives unto you the true
bread from Heaven: for he is the true bread of God, who descended from Heaven.

7. Verse. 38. I descended from Heaven.

8. The living Father has sent me. This is the bread which descended from
Heaven, Joh. 6.57.58. compare herewith, verse. 41. and 51.

9. 1. Cor. 15.47.

10. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who being in the
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of
no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of man, etc. They are the words of Paul, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7. All which,
together with the foregoing words, can by no means be understood of the Divine
Nature of Christ, which can neither be varied, nor moved from place to place,
by reason of his divine Excellency and Omnipresence, which is essential to him;
and by consequence they must necessarily be meant of the Soul of Christ, which
praeexisted long before its earthly body; from whence a most certain argument
may be framed, That the Souls of all other men did praeexist.

11. Compare herewith, Heb. 1.6. The Father brings in the first begotten into
the World, Which is to be understood according to his humanity.

12. 1 John 3.5.8. He who is manifested or appears, he does not then begin to
be in being.

CHAP. V. Containing Arguments taken from humane Authority, yet are such as in
their kind are Sacred.
1. LEt the Apostles of our Lord be here produced, even when they were not as
yet illuminated, who were addicted to this opinion, and yet were not corrected
by our Lord, as is manifest (1.) in that, that they asked him concerning him
who was born blind, Joh. 9.2. (2.) In that, that they said that some thought
that he was John the Baptist, others Elias, others Jeremias, or one of the
Prophets, as in Matthew. 16.14. Which assertion cannot stand unless upon the
foundation of Praeexistency, nor yet was it corrected by our Lord, as without
all doubt, had it contained in it any thing that was erroneous, it would have
been by him who was the most holy, and the most benign Master, or Teacher. (3.)
In that, that when our Lord said, That he came out from the Father, they
presently answered, Behold now speak thou plainly, and speak no proverb?
Joh. 16.29.

2. Let Clement of Alexandria come forth next, who often in his writings makes
mention of this opinion, nor ever once redargueth it as erroneous; For in his
Stromat. 1. He thus says: It is manifest that the Barbarians did especially
honor their Lawgivers and Lords, calling them Gods, for they thought, together
with Plato, that some good Souls having left their supercelestial abode, did
make a descent into this inferior Orb, and having assumed bodies, became
partakers of all those miseries which are obvious in Generation, and became
sollicitously careful of mankind, to whom they gave Laws, and taught
Philosophy. And then in his 3. Book, he says, when he disputes against the
Marcionites, and alleges many places out of Plato, which do partly directly,
and partly indirectly include this opinion, amongst which is that out of his
Phaedo, viz. That there is a Secret brought down to us by Tradition, that we
men are in this life, as it were in a Prison: So also is that other, where he
cites Heraclitus, also Pythagoras, and Socrates, together with Plato; That
Death is but what we see when up and awake; but what we see in sleep, is a
Dream. But most agreeable of all is what he quoteth out of Philolaus the
Pythagorean; The Ancient Divines and Poets do testify, that the Soul is
conjoined to this earthly body, by way of a punishment, and that she is, all
the while she remains therein, as it were buried. But against this he says
nothing. In the same Book although he mightily sets himself against Julius
Cassian, yet he uses these words: This Noble wit is of an opinion which
accords more with the mind of Plato, viz. that the Soul which is divine, and
from above, bei^^, effeminated with lust, does descend into Generation and
Corruption. Yea, in his Protrept. he expressly says: That Christ did again call
back into Heaven, those who were thrown down upon, and to the Earth.

3. Let Origin follow next, who more openly did propagate this opinion, so as
there is no need to give any Quotations out of him.

4. Moreover Synesius Bishop of Cyrenia, who in his 105. Epistle says
expressly: In good truth I shall never design to be of the opinion, that the
Soul in its existence comes after the Body. And in his 3^ Hymn: As a drop from
Heaven, I was poure^ forth on the earth. Restore me to my spring whence I
flowed in this banished wandering birth.

5. To these join Arnobius, who in his 1. Book against the Gentiles says thus:
Do we not all owe unto God this in the first place, That we are, That we are
called men, That being either sent from him, or fallen thorough blindness, we
are detained in the chains of a Body?

6. Prudentius appears next, who in his Hymn at the funeral Solemnities of the
deceased sings after this manner: See now how to the faithful is made plain
The bright path of the ample Paradise again;
And man may freely now approach that grove
Which the sly Serpent took from him above.
There, O thou best of Guides, I humbly pray,
Command that thy Servant-maid this Mind may
Be re-install'd in her kindly Sacred Throne,
Which she had left, as exiled wandering down.


7. St. Augustine also speaks favorably of this opinion, in his 1. Book of
Free Will: Whether the Soul lived another kind of life before her conjunction
to this body, is a great question, and a great secret. Also in the 3. Book,
when he came to speak of the Praeexistency of Souls, he says thus: If we think
of God, that he is any other than he is, our intention drives us not into
beatitude, but into vanity; but if we think of the Creature any thing otherwise
than he is, so long as we do not hold that opinion, for that, that is known,
and commanded, there is no danger. And in the discussion of that fourfold
question, Whether, (viz.) the Soul be propagated, or created? Whether or no it
was sent from God, from some secret receptacle, where it praeexisted; or that
it fell down hither by, or of its own proper motion? he says thus: Either that
same question is not, as yet, by the Catholic Writers of Divine Books, because
of its obscurity and perplexity, brought and illustrated, as it deserves; or
else if it be already performed, their Letters have not as yet arrived at my
hands.

8. St. Basil also, etc. And

9. Gregory Nazianzen, who that they were not adversaries to this opinion,
appears from hence, that out of Origen's Writings they collected a very
remarkable Treatise, on which they put the title of Origen's Philocalia, in
which are found places, not a few, which partly implicitly partly explicitly
affirm the Praeexistency of Souls.

10. John of Jerusalem. 11. Phil astrius. 12. Boethius may be added to the
rest.

CHAP. VI. Containing Arguments derived from the Authority of the Philosophers.
THe Testimony of the Ancients is indeed found to exceed all others, let us
turn our eyes which way soever we please.

1. In Egypt, the most Ancient Nurse of occult sciences, we have Trismegistus
assenting thereunto, as is apparent out of his Fragments.

2. As also the Gymnosophists, with whom the Brachmans of India, and the
Persian and Chaldean Wisemen had to do, as is manifest from the Magical or
Chaldean Oracles, upon which Pletho and Psellus wrote Commentaries.

3. To these add the abstruse Philosophy of the Jews which they call the
Cabbala, whose Author was Moses the chiefest of all the Philosophers who ever
were: Whence Manasseh Ben Israel concerning the Creation, Prob. 15. s. 5. out
of Gemara Hagigae cites the following words: In the Empyrean Heaven are
Mansions of life and peace, and of the Souls of the Just, and of Spirits, and
also of those Souls which are to come into the world: And out of Bereschith
Rabba alleges that testimony, that the Jewish Doctors do expound that place
of Psalm, 139.5. After and before thou formedst me, concerning the Creation of
Adam: that is, of men, which was done first on the first day, and then on the
sixth day.

4. Hither also does especially belong Philo^ the Jew, in whom nothing is more
familiarly treated on, than this opinion, that the Quotations are needless. We
may add, 5. Zoroaster. 6. Pythagoras. 7. Epicharmus. 8. Empedocles. 9. Cebes of
Thebes. 10. Euripides. 11. Plato. 12. Euclid. 13. Virgil. 14. M. T. Cicero. 15.
Plotin. 16. Jamblichus. 17. Proclus. 18. Porphyrius. 19. Psellus; and a many
others. And amongst the Moderns, 20. Marsilius Ficinus. 21. Also Johann.
Fernelius, who adjoyneth to himself, Hippocrates and Galen, viz. in Book 2. c.
4. of his concerning the hidden causes of things. 22. Cardan of the immortality
of Souls. p. 235.239. etc. 23. Pomponatius, who notwithstanding is little
favorable to the immortality of the Soul. And lest we should leave out any
body, we will here also recount, 24. even Aristotle himself, who in his tract
of the Soul, l. 1. c. 3. when he speaks of the necessary quality of a body of
being to be actuated by a Soul, he inveigheth against them who handle this
matter so negligently, as if it were possible, according to the Pythagorick
Fables that any Soul might enter into any body: for to every Animal blongeth a
proper species or kind, as also to be of a peculiar form; But they who teach
otherwise, do say the same, as if any one should affirm, that the Smith's art
goes into the pipe which is made; for every art must use its own instruments,
and every Soul its own Body. Where certainly Aristotle does not inveigh against
the Opinion of Transmigration (which includes in it self, that of
Praeexistency) but that the Soul of man can enter into the body of a Brute, and
on the contrary; This is that absurdity which Aristotle rejects, tacitly
approving of the other part of the opinion. Yea, in his tract of the generation
of Souls, l. 3. c. 11. he speaks out more clearly. Out of the Earth, and its
humidity are generated Plants and other living creatures, because in the earth
is a moisture, and in the moisture a Spirit, and in the whole Universe an
animal heat; so that all things are in a manner full of Souls. Also in l. 2. c.
3. where he especially handles the Question of the Praeexistency of sensitive,
and rational Souls; whether, viz. both of them may be said to praeeist, or the
Rational only, he thus concludes: It remains then, that the Rational Soul only
does enter from without, as that which alone is divine, and with whose
operation, that of the body has nothing in common. In which words he expressly
follows the Opinion of his Master Plato.

Part II. Being Confutatory.
CHAP. VII. Containing objections from the adverse part, and answers to them.
1. BUt here some argue to the contrary, thus: If the Soul should be united to
the body for a punishment, then that union would not be natural; nor would be a
good thing, and a perfection of nature; but rather something that is evil, as
is all punishment, which would be most absurd.

The Answer.
(1.) As for instance, it is enjoined also to man, for a punishment, that in
the sweat of his brows he should eat his bread; that a woman shall bring forth
in pain; that the earth shall bring forth Briars and thorns, and yet
notwithstanding, neither the sweat, nor the pain of Childbearing nor the
briars and thorns in respect of the earth, do cease to be natural; yea, this
very gross and inglorious body it self, instead of that glorious one in the
state of innocence, is given to a man for a punishment, and yet is a thing
natural.

(2.) It is therefore a Fallacy taken from what is said with limitation, to
what is said simply: For simply the Soul is not united to the body for a
punishment, but restrictively, and this union according to the 9. Thesis of
this Hypothesis is not granted to the Soul only for a punishment, but also for
an advantage, that, viz. an occasion for the Soul to return unto its former
state and condition should not be wanting unto it.

2. In every thing, that is, first which is natural, and then that which is
preternatural; but the separation of a Soul, and a separate subsistence is
preternatural; but union is according to nature: Therefore this must needs be
before that, and not on the Contrary.

Answer.
The argument is of that sort called by Logicians, an Ignoratio Elenchi; for by
this Hypothesis it is no where taught, that the Soul before its union with an
earthly body, is in a separate state simply considered, but rather had been in
an union with its more pure vehicles, viz. the Ethereal, and the Aereal, and
being at length separated from them, it descended into this Terrestrial body.

3. If God in the beginning had created separate Souls, then he created not all
things in a perfection agreeable and due to the nature of every one: The Reason
of the consequence is, because the Soul attains to its proper, and its
connatural perfection in the body, and not out of the body.

Answer.
This is the same Argument with the last, and is so named. Also we must
distinguish betwixt bodies, whereof three are such, as to which the Soul has a
natural aptitude: An Ethereal body, such as is promised to us in sacred Writ:
an Aereal one, and an Earthly one. If therefore it be said, That the Soul
obtains her proper perfection in an earthly body only, the assertion is
denied: but if the Ethereal body be not excluded, it is already said, that
according to this Hypothesis, the Soul long since attained to this perfection.

4. If Souls do exist before their bodies, they are either on the way, or in
their native Country, or in neither: but none of these can be affirmed:
Therefore they do not praeexist.

Answer.
Souls are at first in their own Country, where they sprang forth: but after
that in a neutral state or condition, when they be fallen down into a state of
sin: but when they are let into these bodies, they enter into the way of
returning. Therefore the minor proposition of the argument is false.

If Souls should praeexist, without all doubt they could not utterly forget
that State or Condition; which yet it is manifest that none of them remember any
thing of, therefore they did not praeexist.

Answer.
It will easily appear, that the forgetfulness of their former condition does
evince nothing against the the praeexistency of Souls, if we consider those
things which either plainly take away, or in a wonderful manner impair our
memory in that life: of all which we shall in this place find the concourse,
and in a greater degree, and from more powerful causes, than could ever happen
to any man living. Now those things which here in this world do plainly deprive
us of our memory are most chiefly these. 1. If opportunity be wanting of
remembering any thing: as it happens to them, who rising from sleep, dare
swear that they dreamed nothing all that night, yet afterward occasion being
given in the daytime, they recover into their memories oftentimes a long tract
of dreams. 2. If we are disused to apply our minds to some things; and thus
when with great labor we have written some things whilst we were Schoolboys,
when we are grown up to be men, for the most part we cannot own them for ours,
but that our names written in them can convince us. 3. When some very
remarkable change of constitution and temperament happens in our bodies, either
by some external accident, or by some more vehement disease, or by Old age. Now
all these principles of oblivion are more eminently found in the souls descent
into this earthly dungeon, than ever was possible to be done so long as she
inhabited in the same. For it is far beyond all doubt, that the difference
between that scene of things which the Soul sees out of the body, and that
which she sees in the body, is by far greater than that which is between those
things which a man sees sleeping, and those which he sees waking: Now the
perpetual affairs of this present life bring into the Soul a very remarkable
disuse as to the remembering of former things past. Moreover their descent, it is
probable, happened mostly, when they were in a state of silence, in which
perhaps many myriads of Souls lay for many ages; but if they might have
descended; not passing the state of silence, there occurs to their memory
examples of their former state or condition, as it was with Christ in Joh.
17.5. Finally the descent into this earthly body is a greater mutation, and
much more apt to blot out former impressions on the memory than any one
accident, or any other disease, which yet happening, do often destroy in many
persons all memory in this life.

But here again they object and say; if a bare mutation of vehicles can
introduce into the Soul an utter forgetfulness of all things formerly done, it
follows, that it may also be feared that the like may happen to her after her
departure out of this earthly body; which is absurd, because then memory
remains wholly firm, and Conscience will never cease to be and operate.

Answer.
These have a different consideration, because between the former state of
Souls and the present there interposes a state of silence and of inactivity, in
which all the superior faculties, viz. of Reason and sense to which memory
belongs, lie as it were benumbed or asleep: Now between the present state and
the future there interposeth no such thing, whence neither can follow an utter
abolishing of memory.

6. If God has created Souls with a threefold vital aptitude, to a threefold
vehicle, which is to be the last receptacle of fallen Souls, it follows that
God created them with a necessity of falling, because every vital aptitude and
consequently also that aptitude to an earthly vehicle flows from the essence of
the Soul, and by consequence is necessary.

Answer.
There is a distinction between a vital aptitude considered in it self, and
between its being deduced into act: (...) is it, and therefore there belonged to
her many vehicles, it follows that when she has laid down her earthly vehicle,
she must again assume another; and consequently there needs no Resurrection of
the flesh.

Answer.
We must distinguish betwixt the meaning of the word [Flesh] in the state or
condition wherein it is now Flesh, and in the further and larger acception
thereof, viz. when it is used for that, that was Flesh: now according to this
latter, and not according to the former acceptance is the Resurrection of the
flesh to be understood: for flesh as flesh shall not rise again, because as the
Apostle witnesses, 1 Cor. 15.51. We shall all be changed; But that which
sometime was flesh, shall rise again, and shall be changed into the nature of
that its vehicle, which is then competent to every Soul; because every mutation
of matter is not accidental to it, and it is all one to its substance, after
what manner or shape its particles are formed (for it is indifferent to Wax
whether it represent the shape of a man, or of an apple; whether it be melted,
or whether it be congealed;) there is nothing that will be lost from that
substance which was our flesh: whether it should be turned and attenuated into
the consistence of Air, or of Ether.

8. If the Soul did praeexist at first in an Aerial vehicle, it follows, that
after death also the like must be given unto it, lest it be forced to make a
leap: But such a vehicle would be altogether incommodious to departing pious
Souls, because the Air is the habitation of Devils, and full of Tempests.

Answer.
There are diverse degrees in the Air; nor is there any need that pious Souls
should be after death shut up within the Atmosphere of the earth, where these
inconveniences are; but there may be found much higher places in the Air,
where is greater quiet.

9. If the Hypothesis of Praeexistency is true, it follows, that a man may die
oftener than once: for if when a man departs out of this life, his vital
aptitude to an earthly body be not yet expired, it will be necessary, that he
should return unto such a like body, until a vital aptitude to an Aerial body
shall awaken in him, and upon this account he ought to die oftener than once,
which is absurd, as Heb. 9.27. Job 16.22. 2 Samuel 12.23.

Answer.
1. The saying of Heb. 9.29. that it may rightly be understood, we must
distinguish, 1. betwixt the term [Man] largely taken, for the Soul, in what
state or condition soever it be, and more strictly for the Soul united with the
body made out of the earth. 2. Betwixt universal and particular judgment. Paul
therefore is thus to be unfolded: that whatsoever Soul is united with its
earthly vehicle, it is appointed to it, Once to be dissolved from this vehicle,
and then it must stand before a particular judgment, where the Divine Justice
inquireth whether he has so lived as that he is to return to his former state,
or condition, or not; For the universal judgment follows not upon the deaths
of particular men.

2. As to what is said in Job 16.22. it is answered that that is particular,
and speaks only of the Death of Job, animadverted in himself, that the end of
his vital aptitude to a terrestrial vehicle did draw near; therefore as an Holy
man, there was no need for him to fear a return to this earthly tabernacle: Now
from a particular to an universal, the Consequence is never good.

3. The argument out of 2 Samuel 12.23. does in like manner labor under a
fallacy (called in Logic) an argument from what is said limitedly, to what is
said simply. For it was a particular case, that the Soul of David's young Son
was not so to return into an earthly vehicle, so as again to become the Son of
David, and in the very days of David should return unto him: yet from thence
we may not argue universally.

10. From this Hypothesis of Praeexistency it follows, That the Heavenly glory
of the life to come is unconstant, and may be lost. For if Souls can fall down
from their former glory, what hinders but that they also can fall from that
which is to come?

Answer.
The promises in the Holy Scriptures do hinder, in which an incorruptible Crown
is promised to the faithful for a special reward, 1 Cor. 9.25. and that which
never will fade away, 1 Pet. 5.4. Whence it is that Paul testifies, that we
shall rise again in incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.42.52. And this corruptible must
put on incorruption, and this mortal, immortality, verse. 53. that Death may be
swallowed up in victory, verse. 54.55. together with Sin, the sting thereof,
Hosea 13.14.

11. From this Hypothesis it follows, that diverse Souls may enter into one
body, because they are said to want the use of reason and sense, nor actually
to have any but a plastic faculty, which cannot discern, whether any other
Soul is entered in already, or not.

Answer.
We must distingish betwixt a formative entrance, and that which is not
formative: the first is when the vital center of the Soul obtains its place
in that point of matter, in which the spirit of the Universe has already
determined the primary seat of the soul: Although therefore a thousand Souls
should enter together into one material body, yet only one amongst them all
could obtain the formative ingress, viz. such a one as whose vital point should
possess or occupy the primary point of the matter, which seeing it is
indivisible, cannot be obtained by more than one: nor can it possibly be said,
that more or many can together possess one and the same point, or, be
homocentrick: for should it be so, that would come to pass either of purpose,
or by chance; the first cannot be, because the use of Reason and Sense is
absent; nor can the other be, because the matter of the vehicles which are not
to be laid aside without a reason or cause, does hinder; in which
notwithstanding that this homocentricity be allowed, penetration of dimensions
cannot be avoided.

12. From this Hypothesis it will follow, that the other Planets also are to be
inhabited by men: Because that some of them being nearer to that place of
happiness, from whence these Souls are fallen down, are greater than this
earthly Globe.

Answer.
The consequence is denied, because that there will be a want of seminal matter
duly prepared. For God placed Adam in this Globe of Earth, as the first
preparer of such matter; out of the bounds of which men from thenceforth will
not be.

CHAP. VIII. Containing the Arguments of the adverse part, which they take from
holy Scripture.
1. THe first place is out of Genesis 1. verse. 28. thus: Whoever by the power
of Gods command, Increase and multiply, do multiply themselves according to
their kind, they no less propagate themselves as in respect of Soul as well as
of body: because to the constitution of the species or kind of things animate,
there as much belongs a Soul as a body: But men by virtue of Gods command, do
multiply themselves according to their species or kind; Therefore, etc. and by
consequence, Souls do not praeexist.

Answer.
We allow the whole Argument, but deny the consequence to the conclusion: For
men can propagate themselves also as to Soul, though the Soul be not taken from
out of their substance; for a man whilst he generateth, prepares nothing but
matter, convenient to the introducing of a Soul; and so he is a cause without
which the effect cannot be produced, by reason of the introduction of Souls:
just as he who prepares matter or fuel for the fire, is the cause without
which the fire cannot be introduced, and thus also he multiplieth fires, which
notwithstanding come from without: thus also magnetical bodies or Loadstones
can by rubbing only multiply themselves, if, viz. they be rubbed upon Iron,
although the subtle matter which combineth therewith comes from without: 2.
These things being thus premised in a humane manner, we answer to the minor
proposition by denying it, for in Holy Writ, is no such addition, that man was
to multiply according to his species or kind; but it is nakedly put thus:
increase and multiply, which are indifferent phrases without all determination
of the principal efficient cause.

2. From Genesis 5. verse. 3. If Adam begat a Son according to his own image and
likeness, it follows then that his Son was also begotten by him as to his Soul:
But the first is true, therefore also is the latter so.

Answer.
We deny the antecedent: because likeness may be understood to be external, by
reason of the body, to the corruption of which the Soul was also subjected,
although it came into it from without.

3. From Genesis 46. verse. 26. whatsoever went forth from out of the loins of the
Parent, that did not praeexist; but the Souls of the sons, etc. Therefore, etc.

Answer.
In this Saying is a Synecdoche of one part for another; where the Soul is
taken for the body, as the Scripture also speaks elsewhere: as Psalm. 16.10.
He will not leave my soul in the Grave, etc. 2. In this also may be said to be
a metonymy of the form for the thing formed, of the Soul for the thing
animated. 3. If the acception were proper, this absurdity follows: that the
Soul is propagated from the Father only, the Mother contributing nothing

4. From Job 14.4. Who can give a clean thing out of that that is unclean?
whence it follows that from the impure Soul of the Father, must proceed or
come forth an impure Soul of the son.

Answer.
The particle [From] does not always signify the prinpal efficient cause, but
often times also the instrumental cause, or that cause without which the effect
cannot be produced, and so is it to be understood in this place.

5. From Psalm. 51. verse. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me.

Answer.
The Text speaks of the iniquity and sin not of the Infant, but of the
generating Parents; but if the sin were to be understood of the infant; this is
then the sense or meaning: Behold my Soul being already in in-iniquity from a
preceding fall, is received into the Womb of my Mother.

6. That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, John 3.6.

Answer.
The word or term [to be born] imports no essential dependence on him who
begets: for the Soul, even already, before its nativity, being carnal, that
is, having gained a vital aptitude unto Flesh, coming forth from carnal
Parents, is called Flesh, even as impure water derived through impure pipes,
when it breaks forth, is so much the more impure.

7. Romans 5.12. As by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin Death, so
Death is passed unto all men, because all have sinned; from this it follows
that before Adam there was no sin.

Answer.
Adam in the Allegorical History of Moses, is a figure of all mankind, and this
very Text does show that death is passed unto all men, not upon that account,
that Adam only has sinned, but in as much as every single man has sinned: The
Particle [One] signifies the same as [First] does, as in Mar. 16.2. Luke 24.1.
John 20.1. Acts 20.7, 8. Romans 9.11. it is said that the Children, who were not
yet born, had done neither good nor evil; whence it is concluded, that Souls
before this earthly life, had not committed sin.

Answer.
Not being as yet born, are either such as exist before the union of Soul and
Body, or such as exist in that union: the Text speaks of these latter, not of
the former, because first they are expressly named Children. 2. The determinate
time in which they had committed neither good nor evil is denoted, viz. when
the Lord said, The Elder shall serve the Younger: which he then said, when they
were already alive, and the Infants moved in the Womb: and so being not yet
born they may be said to have committed neither good nor evil actually,
although before the union somewhat of a fall had preceded: and therefore the
predicate is to be limited; they had done nothing of good or evil, viz. in the
state of the earthly union of Body and Soul.

9. From 2 Cor. 5.10. They argue thus: If in the place where an account is to
be rendered of all sins, an account is to be rendered of those only which are
proper to the body, as every one has done, it follows, that without the body
there is no sin; But the former is true, and therefore also the latter.

Answer.
The Antecedent is denied. 1. Because in the Text is found no such exclusive
particle [Only]: but from the greater part, viz. the actual sins, is the
denomination of the judgment made; therefore it may also be that that account
must be generally rendered of original sin. 2. Granting, that an account was not
to be given of this sin, yet it does not follow, that it was not committed:
because (1.) it would have been obliterated already by the general oblivion in
the Soul. (2.) It should have already suffered punishment for it, viz. its
being thrust down into this earthly Dungeon or Prison.

10. From Hebr. 7. v. 5.9, 10. Who paid Tithes in the loins of his Father, He,
even as to his Soul, is in his Father: But, etc. Therefore, etc.

Answer.
The Antecedent is denied: for this phrase, [to be in the loins of his Father,]
signifies nothing else than not to be as yet born, and yet to be in a
possibility to be born: therefore such as is the Nativity, such also is the
possibility or power of being to be born. Now the Nativity does not admit of
the concurrence of the Father, otherwise than as an instrumental cause to
prepare the matter for the introduction of the Soul: Therefore also the
possibility or power of being to be born ought thus to be understood.

11. From Ecclesiast. 12.7. The Spirit returns to God who gave it: whence they
thus argue. As the body is from the Earth, so the spirit is from God: and at
the time of generation, dust is given from the Earth, Therefore also at that
time the Spirit is given from God.

Answer.
We must distinguish between a giving which is originary, and that which is
participative: this is meant in this place, but not that: For as although the
body be taken out of the earth, yet its matter originally does not then at last
begin; so, although the spirit be given from God at the time of generation,
viz. by an universal concurrence, yet it follows not that it then at length
begins.

12. From Zach. 12.1. The Lord says, who forms the Spirit of man in the
midst of him: if therefore the spirit of man is formed within him, it did not
praeexist.

Answer.
By [Spirit] in this place is to be understood the animal Spirit, as often it
is elsewhere, Genesis 6.17. chapter 7.15. compare the 15. verse, importing the same
sense almost of Psalm. 33. even as also is the determination in the midst of
him, viz. it denotes it to be in his bowels: whence it is that it so follows
not in respect to the Soul.

FINIS.

