THE TRIAL OF THE TRUTH; Or rather, The Law is the Truth.

PSALM CXIX. CXLII.

Wherein are presented to the upright in heart, certain Theoretical Queries,
viz. belonging to Study or Contemplation for the true finding out, whether it
be necessary to Salvation, that we which profess obedience to the Gospel,
should walk in obedience to Gods Law, the ten Commandments, Exodus 20? Or
whether we may justly refuse to do that which is therein commanded, and do
that which is therein forbidden, without sinning against GOD?

Which Queries particularly and especially tend to make way for the finding
out, whether it be our duty to keep holy the seventh day Sabbath, commanded
Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11, 12? Or whether the duty of the Sabbath is not required
of us who are Gentiles by nature.

Propounded by a Lover of the Truth, I. O. Of Age 57 years.

Who desires that Truth may be preferred in all things above Error, and
Virtue above Vice: that Truth may be honored, and Error rejected.

Let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. Lament. 3.40. For
every one that asks receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that
knocks it shall be opened. Matthew. 7.8. At Amsterdam printed for the Author.
1656.

For ever, O Lord, is thy word settled in Heaven, Psalm. 119.89. All thy
Commandments are sure; they stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in
truth and righteousness, Psalm. 11.7.8, Nothing can be put to it, nor nothing
taken from it: and God does it that men should fear before him. Eccles. 4.14.
God spoke all these words, saying; Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy,
six days shall thou labor and do all thy work; but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do any work, Thou, nor thy
Son, nor thy Daughter, thy Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, etc. Exodus
20.8.9.10.11. Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man that lays
hold of it, and keeps the Sabbath from polluting of it; and keeps his hand
from doing any evil. Isaiah 56.2. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the
Commandment is holy, just, and good. Romans 7.12. And it is easier for Heaven
and Earth to pass, than one tittle of the Law to fail. Luke 16.17. For the
hearers of the Law are not just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be
justified. Romans 2.13. To the wel-meaning and impartial READER.
Honored Reader;
THE reasons of my intruding the ensuing Queries to public Consideration,
proceed out of an entire aim at the honor of God, and an universal good to
all men fearing God, putting them in mind to consider whether the
sanctification of the Lords seventh day Sabbath (the day called Saturday)
commanded in the Decalogue or Moral Law, is not a duty necessary to salvation?
And this I do, in regard I know the duty has been a long time, and yet is
neglected both by men wise and unwise, religious as otherwise, some on one
opinion, some on another (not knowing they do evil) as I shall relate;
passing by the names of the distinct Professions of men, among whom the
opinions do reside, till occasion be given.

1. Some there are, who say, that the Law of God, Exodus 20. is not given to the
Gentiles, and thereon they refuse to keep the seventh day Sabbath.

2. Others say, the Law of God is totally abolished by Jesus Christ, and
therefore they refuse to keep the seventh day Sabbath.

3. Others say, the whole Law is not abolished, but the fourth Commandment is
abrogated by Christ, in that it was only a Ceremonial Precept.

4. Others there are, who say, the Law of God, Exodus 20. is moral and
perpetual, and yet many of this sort say, though very absurdly, that the
seventh days rest was transferred from the seventh day of the week to the
first day of the week by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ on it; so that since
that time, the first day of the week is to be kept as the Sahbath in the place
of the Sabbath.

5. Others there are, who say, that the seventh day Sabbath was not transferred
from the seventh day to the first by Christ but was changed by the Authority of
the Church after the death of the Apostles, and on this account they refuse to
keep the seventh days Sabbath.

6. Some there are who refuse to keep the Sabbath out of an opinion, that a
daily ceasing from sin is the true keeping of the Sabbath.

7. Others say, the Law of God, Exodus 20. is moral, spiritual, and perpetual,
and every jot and tittle of it is established by Jesus Christ, and therefore
they are as absolutely bound to keep the seventh days Sabbath as they are to
keep any precept of that Law, of whose judgment I profess my self to be; and
why all men fearing God are not of the same judgment, I greatly marvel, seeing
they cannot but know, that God has commanded his chosen people to keep the
words of the Law or Covenant for ever, wherein the Sabbath is contained,
without adding or diminishing therefrom, and without turning either to the
right hand or left, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, Deuteronomy. 4.13. and 29.9.11.
and 31.12. and 4.2. and 5.32. In a word, I do believe that all men are to have
the Law of God, Exodus 20. in a high and honorable esteem, and to commit
themselves to be taught and governed by it; for the Law is spiritual and
eternal, and binds the whole man, spirit, soul, and body, the understanding,
will, and the affections thereof for ever, Romans 7.12.14. and 3.19. 1 Cor. 9.21.
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37. Luke 16.17. James 2.10.11.12.

1. Therefore it follows necessarily (according to my judgment, that we,
and all men are as absolutely, and as unchangeably bound to keep the seventh
days Sabbath commanded in the fourth Precept, as we are bound to keep any
precept of that Law; and other particular engagements bind me to be of this
belief.

2. Because the holy and blessed God made the Sabbath for man indefinitely,
before there was any distinction between Jew and Gentile, Genesis 2.2.3. Mark 2.27.

3. Because God himself rested on the seventh day Sabbath, Genesis 2.2.3. and
thereby gave us an example to rest on the seventh day also, Exodus 20.11. Ephesians.
5.1.

4. Because God commands his people Israel to keep the Sabbath for ever in
remembrance that he made heaven and earth in six days, and rested on the
seventh, Exodus 31.17. By which Precept we are also bound to keep the Sabbath
for ever, we professing our selves to be the Israel of God, Exodus 12.49. Numb.
15.16. Exodus 31.12. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Acts 15.8.9. Gal. 3.28.29.54.

5. Jesus Christ constantly kept the Sabbath, Mark 6.2. Luke 4.26.31. and he
requires us to follow him, John 12.16. Luke 14.27. 1 John 2.6.

6. The Apostles constantly kept the Sabbath, Acts 13.14.15.16.27.42.43.44. and
16.13.14. and 17.2. And we are to imitate them, 2 Cor. 11.1. Philip. 3.17. Heb.
6.12. Verily it appears to me a clear truth, that we Gentiles are to keep the
Sabbath as well as the Jews, because God has made rich and singular promises
of grace and glory to us on our keeping of it, Isaiah 56.6.7.8. These, and some
other considerations, through grace, have instructed my heart to believe, that
the Precept of the Sabbath is as truly spiritual and holy as any Precept in
that Law, retaining the same authority and binding nature, as ever it had; and
therefore ought as truly, and as conscionably to be kept as any precept of that
Law. But few men as yet are of this understanding, not because there is any
Scripture or sound reason that do lead men to believe otherwise (that I do
know of) but only out of some imaginary persuasion (as already mentioned) that
the duty of the Sabbath does nothing at all concern them; and thereon men take
liberty to violate the Law of God (which Law they ought with care and
conscience to keep, Prove. 3.1. chap. 7.1. Eccles. 12.13. Mat. 22.37. 1 John
5.3.) and do never repent of it: Yea men are so far from repenting of their
violating of the Sabbath. that they do allow and justify themselves, and all
men, professing Christ, in the breaking of it, by doing of the things which are
expressly forbidden in it, promising salvation to themselves, and preaching and
promising it to others: notwithstanding (I dare say) they cannot prove, that
God ever has made any promise of salvation to any who did allow or justify
themselves in the trausgression of that righteous Law. The consideration of
these things, and the discharge of my duty toward God and Man, has moved me
in humble boldness to publish these ensuing Queries, for the true finding out
whether it be not necessary to salvation that we should walk in obedience to
Gods holy Law, Exodus 20. to the end that if it be found necessary to salvation
for us to walk in obedience to Gods Law with Gospel performances, that those
then who have neglected it to this time, may repent thereof, and for time to
come conform themselves to do whatsoever God does command in it, lest they
speak peace to themselves when God has not said it, and thereby deceive their
poor souls: As also that in case it be not found necessary to salvation, we
then who profess obedience to the Gospel, should walk in obedience to Gods Law
(Exodus 20.) that we who do believe the keeping of it is necessary to
salvation, may be better informed; for indeed at the present we do not in the
least conceive, that there is any unnecessarie thing commanded in that Law, but
only true and just duties to be performed to God and Man in love; which if it
be so, and not otherwise, how we then may neglect to do that which is therein
commanded, and do that which is therein expressy forbidden, and sin not, I
would willingly know. And lastly, my desire is of thee, that thou will read
this following disconrse deliberately and considerately, and weigh what is
said, uprightly, and deal faithfully with God and thy own soul, as I have done
between God and my soul toward thee whose salvation he desires in all
sincerity, who remains for ever

Thine in the Lord, James Oockford.

THE TRIAL OF THE TRUTH; Or rather, The Law is the Truth. PSALM CXIX. CXLII.
Wherein are presented to the upright in heart, certain Theoretical Queries,
viz. belonging to Study or Contemplation for the true finding out, whether it
be necessary to Salvation, that we which profess obedience to the Gospel,
should walk in obedience to Gods Law, the ten Commandments, Exodus 20? Or
whether we may justly refuse to do that which is therein commanded, and do
that which is therein forbidden, without sinning against GOD?

Querie the first.

WHether there be not a Law in the Letter as well as in Nature given or
vouchsafed of God to the Gentiles as well as unto the Jews, to command or
require true and righteous duties of them to be performed to God and Man in
love? If nay;

Q. 2. How then shall the Gentiles know how to perform true and righteous
duties to God and Man in love? Mat. 22.37.39. And

Q. 3. If there be a Law in the Letter as well as in Nature given or vouchsafed
of God unto the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, wherein God commands true
and righteous duties to be performed to God and Man in love;

Q. 4. What Law is it, if it be not the Law of the ten Commandments, Exodus 20?
And

Q. 5. If it be the Law of the ten Commandments which God has given or
vouchsafed unto the Gentiles, as he has given or vouchsafed unto the Jews,
whereby he requires true and righteous duties to be performed to God and Man
in love? Then

Q. 6. Whether that Law be not broken by the Gentiles (after the knowledge of
it is come unto them) if the duties therein commanded be not performed to God
and Man in love? If nay,

Q. 7. How then can sin be said to be the transgression of the Law? 1 John
3.4. And

Q. 8. If the Law of Gods ten Commandments be broken (by the Gentiles, to whom
the knowledge of that Law is come) if the duties therein commanded be not
performed to God and Man in love? why then do the Gentiles, to whom the
knowledge of the Law is come, refuse to conform themselves to do as they are
commanded in the fourth precept of that Law: And

Q. 9. If the Law be not given to the Gentiles, how can they be under the curse
of the Law? Galar. 13.23. seeing where there is no law, there is no
transgression, Romans 4.15. And how could Christ have redeemed believing Gentiles
from the curse of the Law, Galat. 3.13. seeing sin is not imputed where there
is no law? Romans 5.13.

Q. 10. Tell me you Anti-Nomians, who make a show of godliness, and deny the
power of it, was not the Law made for the lawless and disobedient, for the
ungodly and for sinners, for ungodly and profane, for Murderers of Fathers,
and for Murderers of Mothers, for Man-slayers, for Whoremongers, for them
that defile themselves with mankind, for Men-stealers, for Liars, for perjured
persons, if yea, can you, or any else who are Gentiles by nature commit these
or the like evils, and not violate the Law of God? Exodus 20. answer me
directly.

Q. 11. Tell me you who will not keep the seventh day Sabbath, nor yield your
selves to be governed by that holy and righteous Law of God, Exodus 20. on a
mis-conceived opinion, that Jesus Christ has abolished the Law, Is not the Law
of God, Exodus 20. the Law of Love? Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37.38, 39. Has Jesus
Christ commanded love, and has he indeed abolished the Law of love? Tell me
could be abolish the Law of love and not abolished the Law and the Prophets
which hang on it? Mat. 22.40. Is there any thing commanded in the Law, Exodus
20. which is contrary to the law of Nature? Is there any thing commanded in
that Law, as that the doing of it is destructive to any Gospel-duty? And how
can the Law be abolished by Christ, seeing he came to establish it? Luke 16.17.
and not to destroy it, Mat. 5.17. And if the Law be abolished by Christ, why
do his Apostles require Christians to keep it? Romans 3.9. Ephesians. 6.1.2. James
1.22.25. and chap. 2. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. and chap. 4. 7. 11. Did they ever
command Christians to keep an abolished Law? If the Law be abolished by Christ,
how can it rightly be said, that the preaching of faith does establish it, Romans
3.31? If the Law (Exodus 20,) be abolished by Christ, how then can Christians
(or any else) transgress it, seeing sin is not imputed where there is no law?
Romans 5.13. Tell me directly, you who say the Law is abolished, whether you, or
any else may worship false Gods, do servile or common work on the seventh day
Sabbath (where necessity is not) disobey Parents, kill, lie, steal, etc. and
not transgress the written law of God? Exodus 20.

Q. 12. Whether a spiritual or regenerate man (I mean wisdoms son) though a
Gentile by nature, is not as truly bound to do or perform that which is
commanded in the spiritual Law, Exodus 20. as the natural or unregenerate man is
bound to do or perform the natural Law contained in himself? If nay; then,

Q. 13. Why is Wisdoms son required to keep the Law. Prove. 3.1. and 7.1.2.3. 1
Cor. 7.

Q. 14. If wisdoms son is as truly bound to perform that which is commanded
in the spiritual Law, as the natural man is bound to keep the Law remaining in
himself, then,

Q. 15. How can wisdoms son without sin neglect or refuse to keep holy the
seventh day Sabbath, commanded in the Law, seeing sin is the transgression of
the Law, wherein the Sabbath is commanded. James 2.10, 11. 1 John 3.4.

Q. 16. Whether there be any thing or things commanded in Gods Law, Exodus 20.
which is not meet or fit to be performed by Christians? If yea; then,

Q. 17. What thing or things are they? let them be manifested: and if there be
not any unmeet or unfit thing or things commanded in Gods Law, Exodus 20. then,

Q. 18. Why should not Christians as truly and as duly keep the Lords seventh
day Sabbath, commanded in the fourth Precept of the first Table of Gods Law,
Ezod. 20. as they are to keep the fourth Precept of the second Table of the
same Law?

Q. 19. Whether believing Gentiles are not as truly bound in love to abstain
from whatsoever God has forbidden in the Moral Law, as they are bound in love
to do whatsoever God has commanded in the same Law? If nay: then,

Q. 20. What is there forbidden in the Moral Law that believing Gentiles may
do, and not sin; seeing sin is the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4.
James 2.10.11. And

Q. 21. If Christian Gentiles are as truly bound in love to abstain from
whatsoever God has forbidden in the Moral Law, as they are bound in love to
do whatsoever God has commanded in the same Law,

Q. 22. Why then do we Christian Gentiles as conscionably abstain from doing of
servile or common work on the Lords seventh day Sabbath (the day abusively
called Saturday) as they do, or ought to honor their Father and Mother,
commanded in the fifth precept of the same Law?

Q. 23. Whether the seventh and last day of the week, the day called Saturday,
be not the day which God blessed and sanctified before or above any one of the
six days of the week, to be the day or time for the performance of his
public worship on it to the end of the world? If yea;

Q. 24. Why then do Gods chosen people separate the seventh and last day of
the week for the performance of Gods public worship on it, before or above
any one of the other six days of the week, and honor our Creator on it, and
sanctify it unto the Lord our God as he commands us in the Royal Law, seeing
God has made unto us singular promises of heavenly and spiritual blessings
upon our keeping of it? Isaiah 56.2.3.4.6.7. Luke 11.28. Honored Reader, if
thou intendest to answer to these Queries, be pleased to produce, if thou
can, that God at any time did make any promise of spiritualblessing either to
Jew or Gentile on the doing of any thing which God in the first place required
not of them? For if there be no such thing to be shown, even this thing it
self is of great validity to mamfest, that God commands his people the
Gentiles to keep holy tho seventh day Sabbath.
And

Q. 25. If the seventh and last day of the week be not the day which God
blessed and sanctified before or above any one of the fix days of the week, to
be the day or time of his public worship, what day is it, which God has
blessed and sanctified to that end? and how are these Scriptures to be
understood, Genesis 2.2.3. Exodus 16.26. and 20.8.9.10.11. and 31.17. Isaiah
56.2.3.4.5. and 66.23. Matthew. 24.20. And

Q. 26. Why did Jesus Christ in the time of his life, and his Apostles after
his death keep the seventh day Sabbath, and constantly worship God on it? Luke
4.16.31. Mark 6.2. Acts 13.14.15.16.37.42.43.44. and 16.13.14. And

Q. 27. Why did they command Christians to follow them, John 12.26. 1 John 2.6.
Matthew. 10.38. 2 Cor. 11.1. Phsl. 3.17. Hebr. 6.12? And

Q. 28. If the seventh day Sabbath ought not to be kept by Christians, why did
the first Christian Churches almost through the whole world for more than the
space of two hundred and fifty years after Ghrists death, constantly keep the
seventh day Sabbath for the worshipping God on it, and receiving the holy
Mysteries or Sacraments instituted by Christ (as Socrates does manifest they
did in his 5. book and 21. chapter; after the Greek in his 22.) did they do
evil therein?

Q. 29. Whether there be not in these our days a Sabbath day to be kept holy
unto the Lord our God? If yea; then

Q. 30. What day is it, if it be not the seventh day Sabbath? and who made it
Sa abbath?

Q. 31. And if the seventh and last day of the week, the day called Saturday,
be the Sabbath day, as the Word of God does manifest it is, Exodus 16.26. and
20.10. Deuteronomy. 5.14. and as all Declarations and Proclamations given forth by he
Parliaments of England do declare,, why then should not Christians forbear to
do common or worldly work on it, and ser it apart holy to the performance of
holy and public worship, according to the will of God? Exodus 20.8.9.10.11.
Levit. 23.3. And

Q. 32. Whether it be not presumptuous boldness in any man to say the seventh
and last day of the week, the day called Satturday is not the Sabbath day,
seeing so to say is to contradict the express Word of God in the fourth Precept
of the Moral Law? as also on the other hand, whether it be not superstition in
men to honor the first day of the week with the title of Sabbath or
Lord's Day, seeing it is not to be proved by Scripture, that either of those
titles of honor do properly belong to it?

Q. 33. Whether Jesus Christ did not as holily and as uprightly keep or
perform the duty of the Sabbath commanded in the fourth Precept of the Moral
Law, as he did keep or perform the 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or 10. Precept of
the same Law? If nay:

Q. 34. How then could Jesus Christ be wanting in obedience to the Law, and not
transgress the Law, seeing he was made under the Law? Galat. 4.4. and
circumcised, Luke 2.21.39. and thereby bound to keep the whole Law, Galat. 5.3.
And,

Q. 35. If Jesus Christ did as holily and uprightly keep or perform the duty
of the Sabbath, commanded in the fourth Precept of the Moral Law, as he did
keep or perform the 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Precept of that Law, and Jesus
Christ requires his Disciples to follow him. John 12.26. Luke 14.27. 1 John
2.26. then,

Q. 36. Why should not we who profess our selves to be Christ's disciples, as
holily and as uprightly imitate him in keeping holy the seventh day Sabbath,
commanded in the fourth Precept of the Moral Law, as we are to follow him in
keeping the other nine Precepts of that Law? And whether we may refuse to
follow him in the point of the Sabbath. without sinning against God,
notwithstanding he who says he abides in him, ought to walk as he walked? 1
John 2.6.

Q. 37. Whether the spiritual Children of Abraham that are Gentiles by nature,
are not as absolutely bound in love to keep the Sabbath according to the words
expressed in the fourth Precept of the Moral Law, as they are bound in love to
keep or perform the duties expressed in the 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10.
Precept of that Law? If nay,

Q. 38. Then why do the spiritual children of Abraham (that are Gentiles by
nature, as they esteem themselves, and would be esteemed) set up the fourth
Precept, wherein the duty of the Sabbath is commanded, with and among the other
nine Precepts of that Law in their Churches or meeting houses? and why do
Schoolmasters teach it to their Scholars to learn it by heart as they do the
1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Precept of that Law, if it be not intended that
both old and young should as truly and duly keep or perform the duty of the
Sabbath, as they are to keep or perform the other nine Precepts of that Law?
And,

Q. 39. If the spiritual children of Abraham (Gentiles by nature) are bound in
love to keep the Sabbath, according to the words expressed in Exodus 20. as they
are bound in love to keep the 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. Precept of the
same Law; then,

Q. 30. Why do believing Gentiles who profess themselves to be the spiritual
children of Abraham, refuse to keep holy the seventh day Sabbath, seeing
whosoever keeps the whole Law, and yet fails in one piont, is guilty of
all. Jam. 2.10.11?

Q. 31. Whether we may do or constantly practice any thing for which there is
not any Word of God that does either justify or allow us in the doing of it?
If yea;

Q. 32. Then what is the thing that we may do or constantly practice without
any word of God either to justify or allow us in the doing of it? And

Q. 33. If we may not do or constantly practice any thing for which we have
not any word of God that does either justify or allow us in the doing of it,
then,

Q. 34. Why do men constantly make it their practice to do common or worldly
work on the Lords seventh day Sabbath, the day called Saturday, seeing there is
not any word of God that does either justify or allow them so to do?

Q. 35. Whether the seventh day Sabbath were given of God to be a Sign, Type,
or Figure of our Regeneration or cessation from sinful works in the whole
course of our life? If yea, then

Q. 36. I would willingly know of these men, who account themselves so
regenerate by their believing Christ, whether they indeed and in truth do
cease from all sinful works in the whole course of their life, and do live so
holily and righteously as God requires of them? If yea;

Q. 37. Then let these men that so affirm, produce proof for the confirmation
of it, that we who do not apprehend that there are any such men, may know it
so to be: As also let such men prove, that such a walking does abolish the duty
of the seventh day Sabbath to them; and if it cannot be proved, that men are so
regenerated by their faith in Christ, that they rest or cease from all sinful
works in the whole course of their life, or that they do not live so holily as
God commands them: how can the sign, type, or figure, as namely, the seventh
day Sabbath be abolished or made void before the production of that which was
signified by the sign, type, or figure, viz. a resting or cessation from all
sinful works in the whole course of our life?

Q. 38. Whether the seventh day Sabbath was given of God to be a sign, type,
or figure of the eternal rest? If nay; How then are the words of the Author to
the Hebrews to be understood, chap. 4. v. 6.9.10.11? And if the seventh day
Sabbath was given to be a sign, type, or figure of the eternal rest; then

Q. 39. Whether God at any time did abolish or revoke any sign, type, or
figure, before the production of the sign, type, or figure? If yea, then

Q. 40. Let that sign, type, or figure, which was either repealed, or abolished
before the production of that which was shadowed by it, be made manifest; and
let it be proved that the seventh day Sabbath was such a sign, type, or figure.
And

Q. 41. If such a thing cannot be done, then why should not the seventh days
Sabbath be kept for a sign (according to the will of God, Exodus 31.17.) until
the production of the thing which the seventh day Sabbath prefigured, to wit,
eternal rest in glory?

Q. 42. Whether is it possible for any man to walk holy every day, who does
transgress the Law of God, Exodus 20. on the seventh day Sabbath (to wit, the
day called Saturday) by doing common or worldly work on it? If yea;

Q. 43. Then letit be proved that common or servile work may be done by
Christians on the seventh and last day of the week (where necessity is not) and
not transgress the Law of God, Exodus 20. And

Q. 44. If every man ought to walk holily every day, and no man can walk holily
every day who transgresses the Law of God on the seventh day, by doing common
or worldly work on it, tell me, were it not better then that every man did that
which God commadeth in his holy Law on the seventh day Sabbath, and leave
undone that which God forbids, whereby he provokes him to wrath, and incurs
his curse? Psalm 119.21. Jer. 11.3. except that there be larger Mercies for
erring men then we read of, Mat. 7.21. and 19.17.

Q. 45. Whether faith in Christ gives any man acceptance with God to his
justification and salvation, who neglects a holy walking before God? If yea;
then let it be proved. And

Q. 46. If faith in Christ does not give any man acceptance with God to his
justification and salvation, who neglects a holy walking before God, then I
would know, whether it be possible for any man to walk holily before God, who
knowingly and wel-pleasingly neglects to walk obediently to that which is
commanded of God in the fourth Precept of the Decalogue or Moral law? seeing
the transgression of that Law is sin in the smallest word, letter, or point,
as it is written by Moses in the Hebrew Text, witness these Scriptures, Exodus
34.27.28. Deuteronomy. 4.13. and 28.14. and 27.26. Matthew. 5.18. Luke 16.17. James
2.10.11. And,

Q. 47. If it be not sin to transgress the Law by neglecting or refusing to do
that which is therein commanded, how then are the last cited Scriptures to be
understood, and how is sin to be known?

Q. 48. Whether every man is not as truly bound to love the Lord his God with
all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his mind, as he is bound to
love his Neighbor as himself? If yea;

Q. 49. Then tell me, can a Christian man love his Neighbor as himself if he
refuse to perform any duty of love commanded in the second Table of the Moral
Law? If yea; prove it. And,

Q. 50. If a man cannot love his neighbor as himself, who refuses to perform
any duty of love commanded in the second Table of the Moral Law, then how can a
man love God as he ought, who refuses to perform the duty of love commanded
in the first Table of the Moral Law, seeing Jesus Christ does more strongly
bind and enjoine every Christian man in love to perform the duties of the
first Table of the Moral Law, to God, then he does bind or injoine any
Christian man to perform the duty of the second Table of the Moral Law unto
his neighbor? Mat. 32.21.37.38.39. And further I say, if the case stands
thus, tell me whether it is not a far greater, and worse sin in men knowingly
and wel-pleasingly to leave undone that which God expressly commands in the
fourth Precept of the first Table, Exodus 20. then it is knowingly and
wel-pleasingly to do that which is forbidden in the second Table of the same
Law? And

Q. 51. Whether God in the fourth precept of the Law, Exodus 20.8.9.10.11. does
not as truly and as absolutely require us to rest on the seventh day after his
example from doing any work thereon, as he does require us to work six days
after his example? If nay;

Q. 52. Whether Gods meaning in that which he commands in point of the
seventh days Sabbath be contrary unto his words? And

Q. 53. If Gods meaning in the point of the seventh days Sabbath be contrary
to his words, tell me then what his meaning is otherwise or contrary to that
which he commands in point of the seventh day Sabbath Exodus 20? And,

Q. 54. If Gods meaning in point of the Sabbath be contrary to his words, why
then should we not as truly and as duly keep holy the seventh day Sabbath
commanded in the fourth Precept of the Moral Law, and not do any work thereon
after Gods example, as we are for to work six days successively from the
first days work of the Worlds creation after his example? Surely it appears
to me, and to other devoute Christians, we are: And that from Genesis 2.2.3.
Exodus 20.10.11. compared with Ephesians. 5.1. And how can it be disproved by any
word of God I do not see, nor in the least conceive, because God has joined
the duty of our rest or cessation from worldly work to the seventh day; for
the words of the fourth Precept of the Decalogue run thus; Remember that thou
keep holy the Sabbath day; six days shals thou labor, and do all thou have
to do (now note) but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy mayd-servant, etc. Lo, here I find, that God has for ever
joined the duty of rest unto the seventh day (the day called Saturday) and
therefore as long as the day remains, the duty of rest on the seventh day
remains also; and not only on this reason, but also because Jesus Christ (in
Mat. 19.6.) says, Whatsoever God has joined together let no man put asunder;
which rule given by our Savior, binds not only in matter of Wedlock, but
in all matters whatsoever, where one duty is joined to another; for the rule
is general, and therefore it follows, that if we keep not an holy rest and
Sabbath on the seventh day, we do not only violate the Law of God, Exodus 20.
but also the Law of Christ, Mat. 19.6. and therefore surely a great
transgression, which ought to be looked to in time; for if a man sin against
man, the Judge shall judge him, but if a man sin against God; who shall
entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2.25. Verily I do not conceive, nor in the least
believe, that men can neglect to do that which God commands without sinning:
And therefore as the case stands, it behooves every man to prove and examine
his own ways and doings, by the word of God, that they may know whether the
first day of the week be to be kept or set apart by Gods command or by men's
will and appointment, contrary to the will of God. And to this end I demand,

Q. 55. Whether the Church (or old Fathers after the death of the Apostles)
did change or translate the seventh days rest unto the first day of the week
to be set apart for public worship? If yea; then, from whom had they authority
so to do? If from God, where do we read of it? If from man, who was it? and
who gave him authority so to do? And if of themselves, how could that be in
the way of righteousness, seeing Gods Church is ever forbidden to diminish
from his word, Deuteronomy. 4, 2. and 12.33. Eccles. 3.14. Prove. 30 6. Gal. 3.15. And

Q. 56. If the Church or the old Fathers did not change or translate the
seventh days Sabbath to the first day of the week, why do Institut. lib. 2.
chap. 8.533.
Calvin, Bu^^ing in his godly Sermon. page 140.
Bullinger; Declar. Bapt. page 96.
Frith, Answer to Dr. Moore, chap 25.
Tindall, In his Comment. on Exodus 20. page 369.
Dr. Willet, In Cathech page 989.
Vrsinus, Passat. on page 19. in an ancient Cop.
Bunni, In his Treatise on the Sabb. in Answer to Mr. Byfield.
Mr. Brerewood, say they changed it from the seventh day to the first; yea some
of these Authors do also give reason why they changed it; but for brevities
sake I will omit to lay down the words of the first Authors, yet I think good
to recite the words of Mr. Brerewood, and the Annotations of the College of
Rhemes on Apocal. 1.10. whose words are these; The Apostles and faithful
abrogated the Sabbath They are too large: the Apostles had no hand in it, the
Church did it long after their death, as is to be known by that which is
already said.
which was the seventh day, and made holy day for it the next day following,
being the Creation: And without all Scripture or commandment of Christ, that
we read of (yea which is more) not only otherwise than was by the Law
observed, but plainly otherwise then was prescribed by God himself in the
second Commandment (they err in their account, it is the fourth) yea and
otherwise then he ordained in the first Creation, when he sanctified precisely
the Sabbath Day, and not the day following. Such great power did Christ leave
with his Church, and for such causes gave he the Holy Ghost to be resident in
it, and to guide it unto all truths, even such as in the Scriptures are not
expressed: And if the Church had authority and inspiration from God to make
Sunday (being a working day before) an everlasting holy day, and the Saturday
that before was an holy day, now a common working day: Why may not the same
Church prescribe the other holy Feasts of Easter, VVhitsontide, Christmasse,
and the rest? For the same warrant she had for the one that she had for the
other, etc. Although the Church did change the duty of rest, and time of
worship from the seventh day, and placed it upon the first day of the week, yet
did not they at the first by any Law injoine the Church to keep it, but
Constantine the Roman Emperor was the first man (that we read of) who
commanded it to be kept; and this he did by his Edicts or Proclamations, which
he sent forth into all his Roman Empire, whereby he straightly commanded that
the Lords day should be forthwith observed, by devoting it to Prayer, and that
they should forbear to labor, or to do any work on the Lord's Day; as we read
in Eusebius in the life of Constantine, lib, 4. chap. 18. and 19. By which
means came the first day of the week to receive honor, and to be kept as a
Sabbath; but yet notwithstanding Christian men (fearing God) could not so
easily be brought to profane the Lords Sabbath (the day called Saturday) as to
make it a working day, which thing it seems the Heads or Governors of the
Churches would that they should, as it appears by the Council at Laodicea
(held about eight and thirty years after the Act of Constantine) in that they
made a Law that Christians should not Iudaize, and rest upon the Sabbath, but
should rather work on it; and that they should prefer the Lord's Day above the
Sabbath, and if any were found working on it, they should be excommunicated or
accursed. See Mr. Brabourn against the ten Ministers, in defense of the seventh
days Sabbath, page 482. out of Hospinian de origin. Fest cap 9. page 27.
Although the Church changed the time of rest from the seventh day of the week
unto the first, and that Christians generally unto this time have conformed
themselves to do their will, yet it does not prove that the Churches therein
are justifiable before God; neither will the continued enstome of the Church in
keeping of the first day of the week to this time in place of the Sabbath,
warrant our lawful keeping of it, unless God has commanded it. What answer
will men make when God shall call them to an account for their so doing, I
marvel. This I speak, because I do not believe that it can be proved, that
either Jesus Christ or his Apostles did give order to the Church that it should
change the seventh days rest to the first day of the week three hundred years
astea their decease Why the Church changed the Sabbath from the seventh day,
and placed it on the first day of the week; and the time when they did it, or
near about, is to be seen in the 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. pages of my Book
entitled, The Doctrine of the fourth Commandment deformed by Popery. etc.
and further to manifest that the Church changed the Sabbath, or abolished it,
and transferred the time of the celebration of it to the first day of the
week, hear what Mr. Brerewood says in his Treatise of the Sabbath, in answer
to Mr. Byfield, where he answers an objection touching the abolishing of the
Sabbath, and the celebration of it translated to the first day of the week.
Translated, says he, by whom? The Scripture we know to be sufficient; it
contains all the Commandments of God, whether of things to be done, or to be
avoided, or to be believed; let me hear either one precept, one word of God of
the Old Testament commanding it to be translated: I say, one word of any of the
Apostles, intimating that by Christ's commandment it was translated: It is
certain there is none. Therefore it is evident, that the solemnity of the
Lords day was not established Jure divino, not by any commandment of God, and
consequently to work on that day is certainly no breach of any divine
Commandment. How then (says he) has the first day of the week gained the
clebration and so lemnitie to become the Sabbath of Coristians? by the
coustitution of the Church, and only by that, yet of that most ancient Church
I confess, that next followed the ascension of our Redeemer; but all this is
but jus humanum the decree of Men, which must not equal it self with Gods
commandment, etc. And in page 43.44. he says, that the Church ordained solemn
Assemblies of Christians to be celebrated that day to the honor of God, and in
them the invocation of his holy name, etc. It is out of question all
Antiquities afford plentifully remembrance of it. And thus far Mr. Brerewood.

Now to speak a few words to those who say the Sabbath is abolished by Christ,
and the first day instituted in is stead. Can it be truly said that the
Decalogue is a Moral Law. when the fourth Precept is an abolished Ceremony, or
part of it? Is some part of that Law to be kept by Christians, and not all of
it? How is such a thing to be proved? Did God ever give a Ceremonial Precept
with the voice of his mouth, with thundering, lightning, and the voice of a
trumpet? Can it be proved that God did write a Ceremonial Precept in a table of
stone? Are not the ten Commandments the Law which Jesus Christ and his
Apostles established for Christians to keep to the end of the world? If nay;
what Law is it they established? And if it be the Law which they established,
could they establish every jot and tittle of it, as they did, Luke 16.17. Romans
3.31, and not establish the fourth Precept of the Law, which has more words in
it, then there is in some other seven Commandments of that Law? Do not you,
who profess your selves to be the Ministers of Christ, deceive your selves and
others, who teach your Hearers, that they are to keep the 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 8,
9, and 10 Commandments, and not the fourth? Was there ever such a thing taught
by Jesus Christ and his Apostles? Did not they as truly and as duly keep the
fourth Precept as they did the other nine? deny it if you can; And did not they
require all Christians to follow them therein as well as in other duties of
piety and charity? If nay; then prove to the contrary. Can you follow them,
and not keep the seventh days Sabbath? Can you break the Sabbath and not
transgress the Law? Oh take heed to your selves, deceive not your selves: I
fear all of you are blind leaders of the blind, which if you are, you know your
portion, Mat. 15.14. if you repent not; but I desire your conversion and
salvation with my whole heart: And therefore consider, I beseech you, who keep
the first day of the week for a Sabbath, or a day of public worship, out of
an opinion that Christ has so ordained it, did God ever say that Jesus Christ
should abolish the seventh days Sabbath, or that it should become a working
day? Can it be proved that the Law of the Sabbath which commanded an abstinence
from worldly work precisely on the seventh day to the death of Christ, that God
by the same Law, ever since the death of Christ has bound the Church of Christ
to abstain from doing any work on the first day of the week, the day called
Sunday, or Lord's Day, or Sabbath Day? Now if it cannot be shown that God has
thus done, nor yet be proved that God did ever bless and sanctify the first
day of the week to be kept or set apart to be the day or time of their
public worship, before, or above any one day of the week, nor yet proved that
God did ever command men to abstain from doing worldly or common work on it.
If none of this can be proved, then what warrant is there to be produced that
we keep or set apart the first day of the week for a Sabbath in the place of
the Sabbath? yea, or what warrant is there for men to work, turmoyle, bake,
roast, and boil on the Lords seventh days Sabbath, to the end they may have
the day following in honor and high esteem above any other day, when there is
no warrant nor example to be found in the book of God neither for the one nor
for the other. I know many do think that the Apostles and Disciples of Christ
did constantly keep or set apart the first day of the week for a day of Gods
worship, but whereby do they prove it. Surely there is no word of God in any
of the Evangelists or Apostles writings to do it: No nor to prove that ever two
of the Apostles or Disciples did assemble three first days together
successively to worship on them; whatsoever men think to the contrary: yea, so
poor a ground, or unsufficient warrant there is for men to set apart the first
day of the week to worship God on it in place of the seventh day Sabbath, that
were it not more for custom then for any warrant in the word of God, I suppose
some ordinary Christians would be ashamed to do it; and yet on the other hand
I know this, that there are many who have the first day of the week in so high
esteem, that they account the keeping of it a part of their divine worship; but
does God, or Jesus Christ, or any of his Apostles command that worship? or does
either of them command men to set apart the first day of the week to be a day
for worship: If yea: where do we read of it? and what law of Christ or word of
God do men transgress who do worldly or common work on it, and do refuse to
set it apart for a day of worship, I would willingly know? Can it be truly
thought, that if the first day of the week ought to have been kept by a divine
institution in place of the Sabbath, but Paul would have known it? and had he
known it, would he, think you, have kept the Sabbath with and among the
Gentiles, and not have kept the first day of the week, nor acquaint them that
the day of worship was changed from the seventh day to the first day by Christ,
having opportunity and fit occasion given him, when he preached unto them on
the Sabbath-daies, Acts 13.14.15.42.44. and 16.13? Can it be thought that
after Paul had preached to them on one Sabbath Day, and they desired him to
preach the same things to them the Sabbath following, Acts 13.42. he would have
fulfilled their request, and not rather have said unto them, the Sabbath day is
abolished, and the first day of the week is ordained and commanded by Christ
to be kept in its stead, and therefore come to morrow, and I will preach to you
the same things which I have preached to you now, the Sabbath being changed: Or
else would not he, think you, have said unto them; to morrow is our Sabbath
day, Lords day, or day of worship; we are to keep the first day of the week,
as Christ our Lawgiver has commanded, and not the seventh, had such a thing
been done by Christ, but nothing of this, or of any thing like it, was replied
to them by Paul (that we read of) but he fulfilled their desire, and preached
unto them the next Sabbath day, yea almost the whole City came together to hear
the word of God, ver. 42.44. In a word, we do not read that Paul, or any one of
the Apostles did keep or set apart any three first days of the week
successively with any one congregation while they were resident with them, for
performance of public worship; neither do we read that they did ordain or
command any congregation to keep the first day of the week for a day of worship
after their decease; yet I know men do oftimes produce 1 Cor. 16.1.2. to prove
such a thing to be done by Paul, but there is not one word in those Texts to
prove that the Apostles had any such meaning. It is well known that Paul did
constantly keep the Sabbath day, and did usually preach unto the Gentiles on it
as well as unto the Jews, Act. 13, 14.42.44. and 16.13. and 17.2. Even so it
was his care that it should be kept by all Christian congregations after his
decease, as it does appear in chap. 3. 17. and 4. 9. to the Philipians, and to
the Corinihians, 1 Cor. 11.1. as also by that of his charge to Timothy, 2 Timothy
2.2. and therefore little reason is there for any to say the Sabbath is
abolished, and a new Sabbath is placed in its stead, whereof there is not any
mention made in any part of the word of God. And lastly, I say, let no man
think that it does offend me, that men professing Christ do worship God on the
first day of the week, barely considering it the first day of the week, for
that I do not, but should rather like it well if God were worshipped every day,
in publish-assembly (if it might be with convenience) as it was in the
Apostles time, Acts 2.46. and 5.42. Luke 24.53. but the thing I dislike is,
that men do contrary to the Law of God in point of the Sabbath, Exodus 20. in
that they set apart the first day of the week in place of the seventh, and
therein do work, when God commands them to rest. Surely for men thus to do,
I deem it much displeasing to God, and therefore ought to be shunned by all
those who desire to worship God acceptably; but if there be some who out of a
conceived opinion do set apart the first day of the week in devotion to God,
and that withal they do holily and religiously keep the seventh days Sabbath
in obedience to the Law of God (as some Christians did in some space of time
after the death of the Apostles to the year 404. as the History of the Church
reports, Socrat. lib. 6. chap. 8. I like it well, and do believe it would be
wel-pleasing to God, it being done by those who worship God according to his
will (without any superstitious end) whose honor in all things and above all
things is to be preferred, and therefore let us seek to glorify God in our
souls and in our bodies, if we expect to have acceptance with him. To be whom
all honor, praise, and thanksgiving ascribed by all men, now, and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

