NO NECESSITY OF REFORMATION OF THE PUBLIC DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England.

By JOHN PEARSON D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1660.

No Necessity of Reforming THE DOCTRINE OF THE CHURCH Of ENGLAND.
WHereas there has lately come forth a Book, endeavoring to give Reasons
showing the Necessity of Reformation of the Public Doctrine, offered to the
Consideration of the Parliament by diverse Ministers of sundry Counties in
England; being I have hitherto constantly believed the Public Doctrine of our
Church to be true and Orthodoxe, and have often blessed God for continuing me
in the Faith professed amongst us since the Reformation, I did resolve to
examine impartially, at my first leisure, the Reasons pretending to show the
Necessity of Reforming that Doctrine.

Perusing that Part of the Book, which treats of this subject, with some
diligence, I found not any one Reason which could in the least persuade me,
that there is any such Necessity of Reformation of the public Doctrine of our
Church; and consequently did resolve, notwithstanding what is yet brought to
the contrary, to continue in the Faith which I have hitherto professed, and not
to repent of my Subscription to the Articles of the Church of England.

After this private satisfaction of mine own Conscience, entering into a further
consideration, that it is an undoubted disparagement of any Doctrine to be in a
Necessity of being reformed, and fearing lest some, if not of the Parliament,
to whose consideration the Reasons are offered, yet of the People, for whose
instruction they are published, might hereby conceive some sinister Opinion of
the Doctrine of our Church, I thought it not unfit to give a public account
of my private thoughts concerning this Particular.

But, lest any man may imagine that this writing of one Minister against others
might hinder that Union of all Parties, which, as at all times, so especially
at this, is to be wished and embraced, I shall begin with this unfeigned
Profession, that I do heartily and earnestly desire a full compliance,
concurrence and union, with such persons as those Ministers who offer the
Reasons profess themselves to be; that is to say, such as truly and
unfeignedly will make good those words, [ It is far from our thoughts to oppose
or disparage Orthodox Doctrine, a well-composed Liturgy, Rites for decency and
order, Ordination of Ministers, Apostolical Episcopacy, or due Rules of
Discipline. We are for all these with truth, and against rigid impositions
which may debar a Christian of any liberty allowed him by Christ.]

And lest this Publication might any way become, or be thought guilty of
hindering or retarding that so much expected and desired Union, I have resolved
to use my Pen with such brotherly temper and Christian moderation, as that
there come not from me any provocation or the least Reflection either upon
their Persons, their Parties or Persuasions; applying my self wholly and solely
to a due examination and orderly discussion of their Reasons, weighing and
trying whether they have in them any force to infer the pretended Conclusion,
and in case they prove not of that validity, discovering and declaring the
insufficiency and weakness of them.

Now the Proposition or Conclusion propounded and to be proved by them,
according to the Title of their Book, and Front of the first Part, is this.
There is a Necessity of the Reformation of the Public Doctrine of the Church
of England. This Proposition I confess to be the opinion of some men; for it
is the Tenet of the Church of Rome, and I am assured that there is not one
Papist who does not resolutely maintain it: but that it is, or ever was, since
the Reformation of the Church and Confirmation of the Articles, the Opinion of
the Ministers of sundry Counties in England, still professing themselves
Ministers of the Church of England, I never yet understood.

To this Proposition they have added an Appendage in these words, Reputed to be
(but indeed not) established by Law. Which Addition must be considered in the
laying down or fixing the Conclusion, to avoid all manner of misconception. In
order whereunto, in the first place, I shall lay down this Assertion, Whether
the Public Doctrine be established indeed by Law, or whether it be Reputed
only to be established, there is no Necessity of the Reformation of it. And
the reason of this Assertion in relation to the Appendage or Addition is clear;
because the adding of these words Established or Reputed can have no influence
at all upon the Reformation of the Doctrine. For if the Public Doctrine be
indeed established by Law, as it is reputed, the establishment by Law cannot
put it into a Necessity of Reformation; because no Doctrine (...) the worse by
a Legal establishment: if the Public (...) be only Reputed to be
established by Law, and be indeed not established, the Nonestablishment may put
it in need of a Confirmation, but can put upon it no Necessity of Reformation:
because the truth of the Doctrines of Religion depends not upon the Legal
establishment.

There is therefore a necessity of distinguishing these two conceptions of
Reformation, and Confirmation of the Public Doctrine. They are not more
industriously confounded in their Treatise, then they must be carefully
distinguished in our Answer. Wherefore I shall make my opposition distin^t, and
deliver it in two Conclusions, the one opposed to the pretended Necessity of
Reformation, the other to the objected want of Confirmation. Of the first I
shall treat resolvedly as a Divine, to whom it properly appertains to speak
of Theological Doctrines, and shall take the leave earnestly to contend for
the Faith of the Church; of the other I shall speak with all reverence and
submission to the Learned in the Laws, who understand the force of them better
then I can with any modesty pretend to do.

Our first Conclusion then is this. There is no Necessity of a Reformation of
the Public Doctrine of the Church of England. This I here present by way of
negation, opposing it to their affirmation, not designing here to prove it, but
only to vindicate the truth of it from their objections, and to show the
invalidity of their Reasons.

They begin to lay the Foundations of their Reasons thus. The Public Doctrine
of the Church of England, as it is commonly received and insisted upon, is said
to be contained in the 39. Articles, etc. Where it is to be observed, First,
that it is not said, All the Public Doctrine of the Church is contained in
the 39. Articles. Secondly, that whatsoever Public Doctrine of the Church is
not contained in the 39. Articles, is not so much as pretended to be in a
Necessity of Reformation. So that if there be any Public Doctrine not
contained in the Articles, as I conceive they will confess there is, that
Doctrine is not only clear from all their exceptions, but will serve also to
invalidate something of them when they are brought against the rest.

Their Reasons framed against the Public Doctrine contained in the Articles
are laid upon two Foundations, upon the Doubtfulness and the Defectiveness of
it; more Reasons of a Necessity of Reformation they pretend not to. For thus
they assume, But these Articles are both Doubtful and Defective. First they
endeavor to prove them Doubtful at large; and when they have done with the
Doubtfulnesse, they proceed immediately to the Defectivenesse, which having
handled much more briefly they conclude their Treatise of the Doctrine.

As to their Reason grounded on their first Foundation it must run thus,
Whatsoever is doubtful is Necessarily to be reformed. But the Doctrine
contained in the 39. Articles is doubtful. Therefore the Doctrine contained in
the 39. Articles is necessarily to be reformed. The Major Proposition is not by
them expressed; neither is there any thing offered for the Proof or credit of
it: And yet in some sense it may certainly be denied. But that is not so
material. The very Minor Proposition, upon which the Reason mainly depends,
has no formal Proof annexed to it. For in stead of proving the Doubtfulnesse
of the Doctrine contained in them, (which can be the only pretense in this
case of a Necessity of Reformation of Doctrine,) the Doubtfulnesse of the
Confirmation of the Articles is only insisted upon, in the two first
Paragraphs, the Declaration of his Late Majesty 10. Caroli is rehearsed in the
3. Paragraph The sad consequences of the Continuation and Confirmation of that
Declaration are urged by 7. several Reasons, An Objection foreseen prescribing
a Cure by taking away that Declaration is answered in two, Paragraphs, And more
then this is not produced to prove that the Doctrine contained in the 39.
Articles is doubtful.

To this I answer in General. Though the Articles had not been confirmed by
Parliament, though the Declaration 10. Caroli prefixed to the Articles were of
evil consequence, though the Taking away of that Declaration would not give
satisfaction if the Ministers be still tied to Subscription, yet it follows
not from any or from all of these that the Doctrine contained in the 39.
Articles is doubtful. For the Certainty of the Doctrine depends neither upon
the Confirmation of the Parliament, nor the Declaration of the King. The
Doctrine contained in the Articles was agreed upon, declared and set forth,
some years before the Act of Parliament of the 13. of Eliz. many years before
the Declaration of K. Charles of blessed memory. If the Doctrine were doubtful
after the Act and Declaration, it was doubtful before; if it were not
doubtful before it cannot be doubtful after, because it is the same Doctrine
both before and after, and neither the Act nor the Declaration is any part of
the Doctrine or Articles. Here is no pretense of any Doubtfulnesse in the
Articles in themselves antecedent to the Act and Declaration, and independent
of them. But unless they prove the Public Doctrine it self to be doubtful
in it self, they bring nothing at all to prove a Necessity of a Reformation of
it.

According to the foundation of the second Reason grounded upon the
Defectiveness of the Articles, their Argument must run thus. Whatsoever is
defective is in a Necessity of being reformed. The Doctrine contained in the
39. Articles is defective. Therefore the Doctrine contained in the 39. Articles
is in a Necessity of being reformed.

To which I answer, that they have not expressed the Major Proposition, much
less have they brought any Reason to show the truth of it; and that it is, in
the sense in which they understand it, untrue, is most certain. For it is not
Necessary to reform any one or more Doctrines, only for this reason, because
they are not all Doctrines. Nor is any thing in it self therefore false or
evil, because there is something else beside it true or good. Their Argument is
the same with this. That to which any thing may be added must be reformed. But
to the Public Doctrine of the Church something may be added. Therefore that
Doctrine which is professed must be reformed. They may as well infer a
Necessity of reforming the Gospel of S. Matthew, because there may be something
added to the Relations contained in it out of the Relations contained in the
other Gospels: and thus every Evangelical Harmony would be a Reformation of
each Evangelist. There is a large difference between Addition and Reformation.
A defect supposes the Necessity of one, not of the other. Were therefore that
proved by them which is expressed, it would no way infer the Conclusion,
because that is not proved which is implied for the illation of it, and without
which the Conclusion cannot follow. For if it be not Necessary that whatsoever
is Defective should be Reformed, then he which proves only that any Doctrine
is defective, by want of Addition of other Doctrines to it, does not prove that
the Doctrine to which the Addition should be made, must of Necessity be
Reformed.

If therefore I should answer no more then this to either of their Arguments,
what has been already said were sufficient to show, that there is no Reason
produced in that Book which does or can prove the Necessity of a Reformation of
the Doctrine of the Church of England. But to give yet fuller Satisfaction, and
to leave nothing unanswered which has the least appearance of Opposition: I
shall endeavor to occur to all Particulars which may seem to infer the
Doubtfulnesse of the Doctrine, or the Defect of the Articles: omitting nothing
which can be brought out of that Discourse to prove either.

In relation to the First, it is most certain that the two former Paragraphs
concern only the Legal Establishment, and therefore shall be considered and
refuted in my 2. General Conclusion. The 3. Paragraph only recites part of
the Declaration of 10 Caroli 1. Prefixed to the Articles, and that is there
recited only to show the Inconveniences supposed to flow from it. As yet
therefore there is nothing brought to manifest the Doubtfulnesse of the
Doctrine: and if there shall appear to be any thing it must be contained in the
7. sad Consequences, as they call them, which are mainly and directly intended
against the Declaration of that pious King and blessed Martyr, but obliquely
strike at the Articles themselves and the Doctrine contained in them.
Whatsoever therefore is contained in them to that purpose I shall examine, and
clearly show that is of no Validity to prove the doubtfulnesse of the Public
Doctrine.

The first sad consequence, as they call it, speaks only of barring the
Ministers from liberty to interpret the Articles, which is certainly far from
proving the doubtfulness of them: for the Interpretation may be prohibited as
needless, because of the Certainty, Evidence, and Pers^icuity of the Doctrine.
As for the Notorious truth mentioned by them, whether it be a truth, or whether
it be notorious, it is equally unconcerned in this proof, and may prove the
Doubtfulness of the Public Doctrine as much if it be false.

The second sad consequence, presents nothing but the same complaint of want
of Liberty to expound the Articles applied to a certain Particular Doctrine
contained in the 16. Article, which is, Not every deadly sin willingly
committed after Baptism is sin against the Holy Ghost. Now certainly this is
in it self a most sound, certain, infallible, plain, and perspicuous Doctrine,
and being so, the want of liberty to interpret one term of it, deadly sin,
cannot render it Doubtful. For interpret it which way you will, either say all
sins are deadly, or say all sins are not deadly, it will be equally true, that
Every deadly sin is not the sin against the Holy Ghost. In the like manner,
Whether we may fall from grace totally and finally, or whether we cannot fall
from grace totally and finally, which has been a great doubt; without any
question, After we have received the Holy Ghost we may depart from grace given;
of that there has never been any question. And so this Exception no way
inferres the Doubtfulness of the Doctrine, but rather gives a Testimony of the
great Wisdom and Moderation of the Church, which in Points doubtful and
controverted has propounded only that which with no sober man can be matter
of doubt or subject of Controversy.

The third sad consequence adds nothing to the former Objection, but only a
new Particular of the 20. Article in which their Liberty of Interpretation is
abridged: whereas the Article it self takes away no such liberty; neither does
it become the more doubtful by any such liberty being taken away by virtue of
His Majesty's Declaration. For whether the Church be taken for the Church
Catholic, or whether it be taken for the Church of England, it is most
certainly and undoubtedly true, That the Church has power to decree Rites or
Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith: which is the first
Doctrine contained in the 20. Article. And in the same manner, whether it does
happen that the Church should ordain ought contrary to Gods Word, or expound
one place of Scripture repugnant to another, or whether this do, or shall,
never happen: yet it is a Doctrine most undoubtedly certain, That it is not
lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods Word
written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant
to another. Which is the second Doctrinal Proposition propounded in the 20.
Article, and that, howsoever they would endeavor to interpret it, most
indubitable.

The fourth sad consequence presents the same objection of want of liberty to
expound the 34. Article; which is therefore insisted upon, because they
conceive they have found a strange expression in it, and they cannot understand
how a Tradition may be said to be ordained. This is the first Objection brought
by them against any Part of the Doctrine contained in any Article; neither is
the Objection properly against the Matter, but only against the manner of
Speech. And yet they were forced to mutilate the Article, before they could
raise this objection against it. For thus they print the words, Whosoever....
does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church, which be not
repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained by common Authority, ought to be
rebuked openly, and so they join the word ordained both to Ceremonies and
Traditions, whereas the Article speaks plainly and distinctly thus, and be
ordained and approved by common authority, that is to say respectively, the
Ceremonies ordained, and the Traditions approved. Thus if they please to take
the Article entire, they will be so far from showing the Doctrine doubtful,
that they will not be able to find in it so much as a strange expression.

The fifth sad consequence seems much more to the purpose then the former;
for here they endeavor to prove more then they undertook. The Design
propounded was to show the Doctrine doubtful; here they undertake to prove it
false. The Article accused is the 35. and the accusation is, that it teaches,
the Books of Homilies to contain a godly and wholesome doctrine and necessary
for these times; from whence they say, it will necessarily follow, that he
which subscribeth this Article must subscribe to false doctrines or assertions.
That therefore which the Article says is godly, wholesome and necessary, they
say is false. The false Doctrines charged upon the Homilies are two. The first
is pretended to be taken out of Hom. 2. Of the place and time of Prayer. That
Homily therefore is charged with false Doctrine. To which I answer, that the
second Part of the Homily, Of the place and time of Prayer, contains in it
these two Doctrines. 1. Christians ought to be zealous and desirous to come to
Church. 2. God is grieved with them who despise or little regard to come to
Church on the day set apart for Gods worship. In reference to each of these the
Article says very true, that this Homily contains a godly and wholesome
doctrine, and necessary for these times; and I can assure him whosoever
subscribeth it, shall subscribe in this to no false Doctrine or assertion. The
words which they affixe to this Homily, and in regard of which they charge it
with falsehood, are these; Pluralities of wives was by special Prerogative
suffered in the Fathers of the Old Testament, not for satisfying their carnal
and fleshly lusts, etc. But it were very strange if these words should be
produced in the Homily to prove the necessity of a place and time of Prayer;
certainly the Church would set no such example to extravagant preaching. Indeed
there are no such words in that Homily; and the mistake is so plain, that I
cannot see how diverse Ministers in sundry Counties could possibly concur in
it.

But though the words objected be not found in that Homily by them mentioned,
yet they may be in another, and so I confess they are, and that in the page by
them cited, which makes the mistake the more remarkable. But the Homily in
which they are found, is An information for them which take offense at certain
places of the Holy Scripture; and the only Doctrine which that Homily
undertaketh to defend is, that the people ought to read the Scriptures, which
in it self is plain and true, and so of no ambiguity. Now the Objection made
there to this Doctrine was, that the People by reading the Scriptures were led
into diverse mistakes; and the Homilist in answer to this Objection endeavors
to prevent misinterpretations of some scriptures, particularly such as taught
that the godly Fathers had many wives and concubines: the words then objected
are but an Exposition of the Custom of the Patriarchs in answer to an
objection raised against the Doctrine propounded and asserted; and therefore
though the Reason of the Exposition were not proper, the Doctrine is never the
less true, never the more doubtful; and so long as that is true, as certainly
this Doctrine, the People ought to read the Scriptures, is most true, the
Article binds to no false Doctrine in reference to this Homily, when it says
it contains a godly and wholesome doctrine, and necessary for these times.

The second Objection is taken out of the Homily of Almesdeeds, the second
part. The Design of which Part of the Homily is to show, How profitable it is
for a man to exercise himself in Almesdeeds; and particularly it proves, that
to be merciful and charitable is a means to keep a soul clean in the sight of
God. Which part of the Doctrine is grounded there on Luke 11.41. Give alms of
such things as you have, and behold all things are clean unto you: and being
thus stated and confirmed, for a further Illustration or enlargement, the
Homily proceeds to accumulate Authorities: in which accumulation if any prove
improper, it cannot make the Doctrine false or doubtful: and that is still
plainly true which the Article holds forth, even in reference to the Homily of
Almesdeeds, that it contains a godly and wholesome doctrine, and necessary
for these times.

The sixth sad consequence, presents the Queens Majesty as having the chief
power in the Realm of England, and raises a strong doubt whether the 37.
Article intend any power to any other person beside Queen Elizabeth. But
certainly the Kings Majesty has the same power in his Dominions, that the
Queens Majesty had in her Dominions; there is no difference in reference to the
Sex, or if there were, it is not probable that the weaker sex should have the
stronger power. The Article has express reference to the Queens Injunctions,
set forth in the year 1559. and those Injunctions take particular care, that no
other duty, allegiance, or bond should be required to the Queen, then was
acknowledged to be due to the most noble Kings of famous memory, King Henry the
Eight, her Majesty's Father, or King Edward the Sixth, her Majesty's Brother.
The words of the Article it self sufficiently declare that the Doctrine
contained in it concerns all the Kings as Kings. The Title in General is of
the Civil Magistrates, and the words run thus, Where we attribute to the Queens
Majesty the chief government, we give not to our Princes, etc. showing that
what they gave to her, they gave to all the Kings of England. Which will appear
more plainly out of the first Latin Copy printed in the time of Queen Eliz. in
the year 1563. read and approved by the Queen, the words whereof are these, Cum
Regiae Majestati summam gubernationem tribuimus, quibus titulis intelligimus
animos quorundam calumniatorum offendi, non damus Regibus nostris aut verbi Dei
aut Sacramentorum administrationem, etc. Being therefore the Article expressly
mentions and concerns the Kings of England, as they are the Kings of
England, the mention of the Queens Majesty in the Article can make the Doctrine
no more doubtful, then it does our allegiance in that Oath which was made 1.
Eliz. where the Heirs and Successors of the Queen are to appoint who shall
accept the oath, the words of which are, that the Queens Highness is the only
supreme Governor of this Realm. But I hope the Heirs and successors of Queen
Elizabeth did never appoint that Oath to be taken in the name of the Queens
Highness, but in their own. I therefore earnestly desire not only that diverse
Ministers of sundry Counties, but that all the Ministers of all the Counties in
England, would acknowledge and confess that it is the undoubted Doctrine of
our Church, that to the Kings of England their Heirs and Successors the chief
government of all Estates whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil in all
causes does appertain* as the 37. Article expresses it.

The last sad consequence does no way touch the present Articles, and
consequently does not prove them doubtful, but only suggesteth fears and
jealousies, that if the Kings Declaration should be continued, we should have
no settled or fixed Doctrine of the Church of England at all. It seems very
strange to me that King Charles of blessed memory should be suspected of
unsetling the Church, who dyed rather then he would make any alteration in it;
and left this as a Maxim to His Son, that His Fixation in matters of Religion
will not be more necessary for His Souls then His Kingdoms. Peace. It were
very strange if His Declaration should threaten any alteration in the Doctrine
of the Church, when those very words which they cite out of it as a cause of
their fears, give the greatest assurance imaginable of the continuance and
perpetuity of that which is already settled. For these are the express words so
much feared and impugned by them, The Bishops and Clergy, from time to time, in
Convocation, upon their humble desire shall have license under our broad Seal,
to deliberate of and to do all such things, as being made plain by them and
assented unto by Us, shall concern the settled continuance of the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England now established; from which we will not
endure any varying or departing in the least degree. What can be a greater
assurance of a settled and a fixed doctrine in the Church? what words can more
satisfactorily prevent all alterations of the Public profession of faith? the
whole power promised to the Bishops was only for the settled continuance of the
Doctrine and Discipline then established; the Doctrine then established is
acknowledged by the same Declaration to be that which is contained in the
Articles: the Bishops then were never to have any power from the King to make
any alteration in the Doctrine of the Articles: and if any should suspect the
Bishops had a design, or would ever attempt to alter the Doctrine in any
particular, we were sufficiently assured, they should never have power to
effect it, by the word of a King, who said of the doctrine established, From
which we will not endure any varying or departing in the least degree.

Thus have I dispatched the seven sad consequences, so far as they have in
them any the least show of proof of the Doubtfulnesse of the Public Doctrine.
For the rest of this part of the Discourse pretending to prove the Public
Doctrine Doubtful, it consists in an Answer to an Objection, which Answer of
it self makes clearly unnecessary and of none effect, all which has been said
by them against the Declaration of the King of blessed memory. The Objection
is, The Kings Declaration is no Law, and may be taken away. The Answer which
they give is, that this will signify nothing, if Ministers be still tied to
Subscription. If this be true, to what purpose were those sad Consequences
drawn from the Kings Declaration? For if the taking it away will signify
nothing of good, then the continuing of it can signify nothing of evil: for if
it did, the removing of that evil would be good.

The rest of that Answer is spent in arguing against the Judgment of two
Eminent Lawyers, which, because it has no relation to the Doubtfulnesse of the
Doctrine, I may very well omit, and conclude with them, Thus much of the
doubtfulnesse of the Articles, which they have much pretended, no way proved,
scarce endeavored.

As for the second Part of their charge, the Defectivenesse of the Public
Doctrine, they endeavor to prove it by three several Arguments. The First is
brought from the 6. Article, the only Article of all the 39. accused by them
of defect in it self. Their Objection is this, The Article is defective in the
not enumerating all the Books of the New Testament. And my Answer is plainly
this, Though the Article do not enumerate all, or any of the Books of the New
Testament, yet the Doctrine of this Article is not defective; and my Reason is,
because the Article describes them as well as if it did enumerate them, so that
any man may rest as much satisfied with the Description as with the
Enumeration. As for Example, the Council of Trent does enumerate all the Books
of the New Testament by name, Sess. 4. the Church of England not following that
Council expresses her self otherwise, saying, All the Books of the New
Testament, as they are commonly received, we do receive and account them
Canonical. Now all the Books named in the Council of Trent, are commonly
received, or they are not: if they be not commonly received, then I confess
the Article may be thought defective, but this, I suppose, our Brethren will
not say, or if they do, it is a known untruth: if they be all commonly
received, then has our Article left none out in her description, more then
they have in their enumeration* If they did or could name any one Book, which
they could prove to belong to the New Testament, and yet is not commonly
received, then they might charge the Article with defect, for it would want
that Book so named and yet not received. But if they can name no Book of the
New Testament which is not commonly received, then the Article contains every
Book of the New Testament which can be named; and if it contain all that can be
named, it must contain all that can be enumerated, and consequently it cannot
be defective in the not enumerating. Wherefore I entreat our Brethren the
Ministers of sundry Counties, that they will not prefer the Council of Trent
before the Articles of our Church, where nothing material can be objected to
either.

As for the doubts which have been in the Church of the Epistles of S. James,
and the second of S. Peter, they make nothing against this description: for
though they have been doubted of, yet they are now commonly received, and the
Article embraces all as they are commonly received, referring to the time in
which the Articles were penned, not to the age before Eusebius wrote the
History of the Church, and the Differences about the Scriptures. Now at this
time the Church of Rome had declared and enumerated all the Canonical Books of
the New Testament, the Church of England upon the Reformation did no way differ
from the Church of Rome in this Particular, but had in its Practice received
and used all the same Books, and therefore needed no other way to denote them
then by the Books of the New Testament commonly received. Where there was a
difference between our Church and theirs, there, to make good the Reformation,
it was necessary to enumerate the Books, because the difference could not be
otherwise known; and therefore we have in reference to the Old Testament a
Catalogue of the Canonical Books, and another of the Apocryphal: but where
there was difference neither with them nor among our selves, there such an
Expression as might acknowledge the consent, and no way prejudice the truth,
was thought most proper. In the Article made in the time of King Edward 6. in
the year 1552. printed by Richard Grafton 1553. there was neither description
nor enumeration of any Books of the Holy Scriptures: and therefore it is hard
measure that the Church, in the days of Queen Elizabeth 1562. adding an
enumeration of the Books of the Old Testament, and a Description of those of
the New, for the supplying of a supposed defect, should be accused as defective.

The second Argument to prove the Defectivenesse of the Public Doctrine is,
that There are no Articles for discovering and condemning sundry points of
Popery. To which my Answer is, That if they mean no more then that which will
discover a man to be a Papist, there is abundantly sufficient contained in the
Articles to discover any man. For we may assure our selves the Church of Rome
will admit no man to their Society, who shall be ready to subscribe our
Articles. This therefore, as to such a Discovery, can be no real Defect,
because we can need no more then what is enough.

But if the Articles did want some Doctrines for the Discovery of Popery (which
they do not,) yet those which our Brethren mention cannot be wanted for that
purpose. They signify a defect of such Tenets as are opposite to those of
Arminius, and think that they, if they were settled, would discover Popery.
Whereas it is most evident that the denial of the Doctrines contrary to those
of Arminius is no good or sound way to discover a Papist. If the Church of
England had found out no other way to discover a Romanist, then the denying of
Arminianisme, there would suddenly be Popish Priests enough to possess mine and
all your Benefices. I look upon the Dominican Friars to be as great enemies of
Armianisme as I or you are, and yet to be as much Papists as any are. I suppose
no man thinks a Praedeterminant or a Jansenian to be inclining to an Arminian,
and yet it is probable that the Major part of the Papists are of those Opinions.
I therefore conclude, as a most evident and infallible truth, that the Articles
are not defective in the way of discovering Popery or Papists, for that reason
only because they have not sufficiently expressed themselves against
Arminianisme.

The third Argument endeavoring to prove the Defectivenesse of the Public
Doctrine is an enumeration of several Common-places in Divinity, not
comprehended in the Articles. For so they argue, Those Articles contain nothing
of the Creation, of Providence, Fall of man, etc. and these they urge thus, All
which the Scripture teaches, and that as necessary; as appears by the
comprizing most of them in the Apostles Creed. To which I answer, That this
Argument contains in it two Objections, neither of which can be made good;
and yet if both were true, they could not prove that which they intend. The
first part of the Argument asserts, That the Articles contain nothing of the
Creation, Providence, and the rest of the Doctrines enumerated, at least 20. in
number. Which is a manifest untruth: For it cannot be said that the Articles
contain nothing of the Creation, when the first Article teaches us that God is
the Maker of all things Visible and Invisible: How can it be true that the
Creation is comprised in the Apostles Creed, as they say, and not in the
Articles, when the words of the Article speak as expressly of it as the Creed?
It cannot be said that the Articles contain nothing of the fall of man, when
the 10. Article begins thus, The condition of man after the Fall of Adam is
such, and then goes on to express the condition of man fallen. It cannot be
said, that the Articles contain nothing of Sin, or the Punishment of sin, when
the 9. Article gives a full Description of Original Sin, which is it self a
sin, and the fountain of all other sins; when the 15. Article shows Christ
alone to be without sin, and sin to be in every one beside him: when the 16.
Article treats of the nature of sin after Baptism. When the second Homily
(whose doctrine is approved by the Articles) treats at large of the misery of
all mankind, and of his condemnation to death everlasting by his own sin. It
cannot be said that the Articles contain nothing of Effectual calling, when the
17. Article treating of Praedestination to life, has these words, Wherefore
they which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God, be called according to
Gods purpose by his Spirit working in due season, they through grace obey the
calling, they be justified freely, they be made sons of God by adoption, etc.
Certainly this is an Effectual Calling, and that with something of Adoption.
It cannot be said, the Articles contain nothing of Faith, when the 4. Homily,
(the Doctrine whereof is confirmed by the Articles) treats solely thereof,
according to the Title, A short Declaration of the true, lively, and Christian
Faith. Much less can it be said, they contain nothing of Repentance, when the
19. Homily entitled of Repentance, is expressly named Article 35. and the
Doctrine acknowledged, which Homily treats largely of that subject in three
Parts. It cannot be suid the Articles contain nothing of the Law, when the 7.
Article speaks of the state of those which lived under the Law, of the
cessation of the Ceremonial and Judicial Law, and the continued obligation of
the Moral Law. From these and others which I might yet mention it appears,
that it is not justly charged upon the Articles that they contain nothing of
the Doctrines enumerated.

As for the other part pretending a Necessity of adding or inserting those
Doctrines or Heads of Divinity, because taught as they say, by the Scriptures
as Necessary, which they prove only thus, because, as they say, it appears by
the comprizing most of them in the Apostles Creed. To this I answer, First,
that it cannot possibly appear thereby. For granting that most of them were
comprised in the Apostles Creed: granting that whatsoever is comprised in the
Apostles Creed, is taught by the Scriptures as necessary: yet it no way
follows that the other Heads or Common-places not comprised in the Creed are
taught by the Scriptures as necessary. For no Doctrine in the Creed can
transfer the Necessity of it to another which is not in the Creed; or if it
can, it must be by a Necessary consequence from it or Dependence of it. But if
any one should argue thus, the Doctrine of Creation is comprised in the Creed,
from whence it is esteemed as necessary, therefore the Doctrine of Liberty of
Conscience, which is not contained in the Creed, must be equally esteemed as
necessary: the Doctrines of the Resurrection and the last Judgment are
necessary, as contained in the Creed, therefore the Doctrines of Marriage and
Church Discipline are necessary, which are not contained in it. I say, if any
one should argue thus, a man with modesty might deny the Consequence. If
therefore most of the Doctrines mentioned were comprised in the Apostles Creed,
yet it follows not that all the rest were Necessary.

Secondly I answer by a flat denial. The most of those Doctrines mentioned are
not comprised in the Apostles Creed. Which thus I make good. The Doctrines
mentioned, as not at all contained in the Articles are these. 1. Creation. 2.
Providence. 3. Fall of man. 4. Sin. 5. Punishment of sin. 6. God's Covenants.
7. Effectual calling. 8. Adoption. 9. Sanctification. 10. Faith. 11.
Repentance. 12. Perseverance. 13. Law of God. 14. Christian Liberty, and
Liberty of Conscience. 15. Sabbath or Lords day. 16. Marriage and Divorce. 17.
Communion of Saints. 18. Church Government and Discipline. 19. Resurrection.
20. The Last Judgment. Which are in number 20. at the least. But the most part
of these are not comprised in the Apostles Creed, except four or five be the
most part of 20.

I answer Thridly, that it seems to me a very strange Objection, to say that
most of these Doctrines are comprised in the Apostles Creed, and nothing of
them contained in the Articles; when the Apostles Creed it self is contained in
the Articles, and two Creeds more, which have been generally looked upon as the
Expositions of that Creed. For these are the words of the 8. Article, The three
Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly called the
Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and believed.

Being then several of those Doctrines are contained in the Articles, being
they are no otherwise proved to be necessary then because they are comprised in
the Creed, being far the major part of them are not to be found in the Creed,
being all which are in the Creed must be contained in the Articles which
contain the Creed it self, I therefore conclude the third Argument does no way
prove that the Articles are defective.

Again, being those are no more then these three Arguments brought to evince
the Defectivenesse, and all these are answered, being I have formerly showed
the invalidity of those which pretended to prove the Doubtfulnesse of our
Doctrine, being there is no other Topic used beside these two of the
Doubtfulnesse and Defectivenesse of the Articles, to prove the Necessity of a
Reformation, I therefore stick to my first Conclusion, There is no Necessity of
a Reformation of the Public Doctrine of the Church of England.

Having thus vindicated the Doctrine in it self, we shall now consider by what
Authority it is established; having showed that it wants not any Reformation,
we will enquire whether it stand in need of any Confirmation. Certain it is,
that the Public Doctrine of the Church of England is reputed to be
established by Law; but diverse Ministers of sundry Counties tell us, that
though it be reputed, yet indeed it is not so established.

To make way for as clear a Determination of this Question as I can, I shall
show all the ways by which the Articles of our Church have been confirmed, and
then consider upon the whole, whether it amount to a Legal Confirmation or no.

The first Articles of Religion framed since the Reformation were made in the
Reign of Edward the sixth, in the year 1552. the Authority which they had was
from the King, and from the Clergy. This appears by the English Edition, set
forth by John Day, with this Title, Articles agreed upon in the Convocation,
and published by the Kings Majesty, and more fully by the Latin Edition, set
forth by Renold Wolf, with this Title, Articuli de quibus in Synodo
Londinensi, Anno Dom. M. D. LII. ad tollendam opinionum dissensionem and
consensum verae Religionis firmandum inter Episcopos and alios eruditos viros
convenerat. Regia Authoritate in lucem editi. Which is also prefixed in John
Day's English Edition before the Catechism, published at the same time with
the Articles, and in the English Edition of Richard Grafton set forth by it
self; all which were printed in the same year, viz. 1553. Thus far they went
in the beginning of the Reformation, and this was the Authority which those
Articles had; and that might be sufficient, if no more were thought necessary.

The same Articles of Religion, (with some alterations) in the Reviviscency of
the Reformation, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, were again Ratified by the
Authority of the Queen, and of the Clergy, as appears by the English Edition,
set forth by Richard Jugge and John Cawood, whose title is this. ARTICLES
whereupon it was agreed by the Archbishops and Bishops of both the Provinces,
and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, in the year of our
Lord God, M. D. LXII. according to the Computation of the Church of England,
for the avoiding of the diversities of opinions, and for the establishing of
consent touching true Religion. Put forth by the Queens Authority. A Latin
Title to the same effect is praefixed to the same Articles of the Latin
Edition by Renold Wolf, with this addition concerning the Queens Authority at
the Conclusion. Quibus omnibus Articulis Serenissima Princeps Elizabeth, Dei
gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei Defensor, etc. per seipsam
diligenter prius lectis and examinatis Regium suum assensum praebuit. Thus did
they continue for above eight years, as they conceived sufficiently confirmed
and established.

The Articles thus established in the year 1562. were again Ratified and
confirmed in the year 1571. as appears by two English Editions both set forth
the same year by Richard Jugge and John Cawood, with the same Title before
mentioned, and with this Ratification added at the Conclusion. This book of
Articles before rehearsed is again approved, and allowed to be holden and
executed within the Realm, by the assent and consent of our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England, France and Ireland Queen, Defender
of the Faith, etc. Which Articles were diligently read and confirmed again by
the subscription of the hands of the Archbishops and Bishops of the
Vpper-house, and by the subscription of the whole Clergy in the Neather-house
in their Convocation, in the year of our Lord God, 1571. The same Title and
Ratification were printed with the Articles the same year in Latin by John
Day. Thus were the Articles again established by the Authority of the Queen and
the Subscription of the whole Clergy in Convocation.

But all these Confirmations, though greater were never had before in matters
of Articles of the Church, did notwithstanding not amount unto a full and
formal Law, till it was thought fit that not only the Archbishops and
Bishops, and the Clergy convened in the Convocation should subscribe them, but
that the same Subscription should be required of all the Ministers in all
places of the Kingdom, and then these Articles were confirmed by a complete
Law, that is, an Act of Parliament made in the same year 1571. by the consent
of the Queen, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of England, 13.
Eliz. cap. 20. From whence my Second Conclusion in reference to the
Confirmation of the Public Doctrine is this. The Articles of Religion of the
Church of England are established by the Law of England. Against this
Conclusion so plain and evident our Brethren the Ministers of sundry Counties
have made some Objections, but very short, contained in their two first
Paragraphs, the first of which is this. It appears not that they were all or
any of them confirmed by Parliament in the 13. of Eliz. forasmuch as they are
not therein expressly inserted, nor so much as their number, but only the
Title Page of them mentioned. Nor is it known when the Original is enrolled.
For the Assertion it self contained in the first words of this Paragraph, It
appears not that they were all or any of them confirmed by Parliament in the
13. of Eliz. I shall evince the contrary, first ad homines, proving out of
their own words that they were confirmed, which against them is sufficient. In
their Answer to the Objection that the Kings Declaration may be laid aside,
they urge that there is a necessity of repealing that branch of the Act so
far as it concerns subscription: But there can be no Necessity to repeal
that branch of the Act, if neither all nor any of the Articles be confirmed by
that Act, for the Subscription required by that Act, is expressed to be a
Subscription to the said Articles and no other. Again, they argue thus against
the Subscription: There is no more Necessity for Ministers to subscribe those
Articles which that Act confirms, then there is for others to subscribe to all
other Acts of Parliament which do concern them. In which words they plainly
confess that the Act confirms the Articles: and certainly whatsoever is
confirmed by an Act of Parliament, is established by Law. Again, these are
their plain and formal words. The Statute does require belief of every one of
these Articles, when it enjoynes not only Subscription, but an assent unto
them, punishing all with Deprivation that shall affirm and maintain any
Doctrine repugnant to them. Now if it be true that the Statute does require
belief of every one of these Articles, How can it be also true, that neither
all nor any of them is confirmed by that Statute? These two Assertions are so
different and contradictory, that they may well be pend in sundry Counties, as
well as by diverse Ministers.

Secondly, that the Articles were confirmed by the Act of the 13. of Eliz. will
thus appear. The Act begins thus, That the Churches of the Queens Majesty's
Dominions may be served with Pastors of sound Religion, be it enacted by the
Authority of this present Parliament, etc. Either therefore something is
established concerning Religion in that Act, or nothing. If you say, nothing,
then first you charge the Parliament with folly, to make an Act for
establishing nothing: Secondly, you make their determinations no way
correspondent to their intentions: for they make this Act to the intent that
the Churches might be served with Pastors of sound Religion, whereas the Act it
self, you say, establishes no Religion. If the Act did establish something in
Religion, then it either established the Articles, or something beside the
Articles. But it is most plain, that it established nothing in Religion beside
the Articles, therefore it must be at last confessed that it established the
Articles.

Thirdly, Those which are Learned in the Laws are certainly the best
Interpreters of the Law, and know best what things are established by Law, and
what not. Amongst them the Memory of Sir Edward Coke with me is most precious,
(in relation to himself while he lived, and to his Sons since his death) and
his Authority great with all. He therefore speaks in this manner, in the fourth
Part of his Institutes, cap. 74. Subscription required by the Clergy is
twofold; one by force both of an Act of Parliament confirming and establishing
the 39. Articles of Religion agreed upon at a Convocation of the Church of
England, and ratified by Queen Elizabeth under the Great seal of England. In
the Opinion therefore and Language of that learned Chief Justice, the Act of
Parliament does confirm and establish the 39. Articles: and those words I
oppose to theirs, it appears not that they were all or any of them confirmed by
act of Parliament.

Let us now consider the Reasons inducing them to deny this Legal
Confirmation; which seem in the forecited Paragraph to be two. First, forasmuch
as they are not therein expressly inserted, nor so much as their number, but
only the Title Page of them mentioned. To which I answer First, that this is
the same Argument which you used against the Articles for not enumerating the
Books of the New Testament; only here it is much weaker: for there it would
have satisfied you if the names of the Books of the New Testament had been
enumerated, though the whole New Testament had not been inserted in the
Article; but here nothing can satisfy but an express Insertion of all which is
to be allowed. Secondly I answer, that it is not material what is actually
inserted to conclude what is actually to be performed. The Title of the
Articles is inserted, and yet neither the sound Religion designed in the
Preamble, nor the Subscription urged in the body of the Act, has any reference
to the Title: for there is neither any Religion contained in the Title, nor any
Subscription required to it. But the Articles, which are not inserted, are
affirmed by the Act, to concern the Confession of the true Christian Faith, and
the assent and subscription are required unto them, not to the Title:
Deprivation is denounced to all which shall affirm any Doctrine directly
contrary or repugnant to any of the said Articles, not to the Title. We must
not therefore look unto what is inserted, but what is intended, in the Act. If
any Ministers had pleaded before the Lord Chief Justice Wray, or Coke, that
they were ready to subscribe to the Title of the Book of Articles expressed in
the Statute, but not to the Articles contained in the Book, because they were
not expressed in the Act, certainly they would have fared as ill as he who
subscribed them with a condition.

As for the Number of them it is no way material, because though now they are
known under the names and number of 39. yet then they were not so generally
called. The Articles of Edward the sixth were of another number, and those
which were agreed upon 1562. had no number affixed to them, neither in the
English nor Latin Edition. They were not therefore then so well known by their
number as by their Title, and the Act while it rehearses the Title confirms
the Book which was so entitled.

Their second Reason upon which they deny this Legal Confirmation is delivered
in these words. Neither is it known where the Original is enrolled. To which I
answer First, that if the Original Copy of the Articles had never been
enrolled, yet the Articles themselves had never been the less confirmed: and
my Reason is, because the Act takes no notice of the Articles as they were at
first written, but as they were at that time printed. For thus the Act speaks,
That the Churches of the Queens Majesty's Dominions may be served with Pastors
of sound Religion, be it enacted by the authority of this present Parliament
that every person under the degree of a Bishop.....shall declare his assent and
subscribe to all the Articles of Religion, which only concern the confession
of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, comprised in a
Book imprinted, entitled, ARTICLES whereupon it was agreed by the Archbishops
and Bishops of both Provinces and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at
London in the year of our Lord God 1562. according to the Computation of the
Church of England, for the avoiding of the diversities of opinions, and for the
establishing of consent touching true Religion, put forth by the Queens
Authority. These Articles were agreed upon in the year 1562. and then printed
with this very Title, before by us transcribed out of that Edition. In the year
1571. Those Articles were reprinted, and then this Act was published, whether
therefore the Original were enrolled or not enrolled, the Articles comprised
in the Book imprinted, and so entitled, were confirmed by the Statute.

I Answer secondly, that the Enrollment of the Original is not so obscure as
they pretend. We know that there was an Original enrolled, we can tell them
how many pages that Original consisted of, even determinately 19. we can
assure them this was deposited with Matthew Archbishop of Canterbury, we can
tell them the day when it was done, viz. the fifth day of February in the year
1562. All which appears by the Postscript printed with the Articles in Latin
in the year 1563. by Renald Wolf the Queens Printer. The words are these, Hos
Articulos Fidei Christianae, continentes in universum novendecim paginas in
autographo, quod asservatur apud Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem, Dominum
Matthaeum Cantuariensem Archepiscopum, totius Angliae Primatem and
Metropolitanum, Archepiscopi and Episcopi utriusque Provinciae regni Angliae,
in sacra provinciali Synodo legitime congregati, unanimi assensu recipient and
profitentur, and ut veros atque Orthodoxos, manuum suarum subscriptionibus
approbant, vicessimo nono die mensis Januarii, Anno Domini, secundum
computationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, millesimo quingentesimo sexagesimo secundo:
universusque Clerus Inferioris domus, eosdem etiam unanimiter and recepit and
professus est, ut ex manuum suarum subscriptionibus patet, quas obtulit and
deposuit apud eundem Reverendissimum, quinto die Februarii, Anno praedicto. The
Late Archbishop gives testimony to the same in his speech delivered in the
Star Chamber June 14. 1637. His words are these, p. 69. I sent to the
Public Records in my Office, and here under my Officers hand, who is a
Public Notary, is returned me the Twentieth Article with this Affirmative
Clause in it; And there is also the whole Body of the Articles to be seen. To
those therefore which know the Public Records, (unknown perhaps to the
Ministers of sundry Counties) it is known where the Original is preserved. And
this I conceive a sufficient Answer to their first Paragraph.

Their second Paragraph to the same purpose is this, Of the 39. there were 36.
of them set forth (yet not ratified by Parliament) the other were added by the
Convocation in An. 1562.

As for the Parenthesis of this Paragraph, signifying that the Articles made in
K. Edward 6. time were not ratified by Parliament, it no way opposes them who
think our Articles established by Law: because no man imagines that our
Articles were under the Consideration of any Parliament in the days of Edward 6.

The other words of that Paragraph are something doubtfully penned, and seem to
be capable of two senses. First, that in the time of Edward 6. there were but
36. Articles set forth. If this be the sense of their words, they are not true.
For the Articles agreed upon in the year 1552. and set forth in the year 1553.
that is to say, the Articles in K. Edwards Reign, if you look upon those which
were printed by Renald Wolf in Latin, or John Day in English, you will find
42. Heads or Contents without figures; if you look into the Edition of Richard
Grafton, you will find not only the Contents, but the numbers affixed to each
Article to amount to 42. It is not therefore true that in the time of Edward 6.
there were but 36. Articles set forth.

The second sense of the words of that Paragraph may be this. That of those 39.
Articles set forth in the days of Queen Eliz. there were 36. set forth in the
Reign of Edward 6. And in this sense their words are not true. For the 5.
Article, Of the Holy Ghost, the 12. Article, Of Good works, the 29. Of the
wicked which eat not the body of Christ in the use of the Lords Supper, and the
30. Of both kinds, these four are not to be found in the Articles set forth in
the Reign of Edward 6. And if 4. of the 39. be not to be found, there cannot
be 36. of the same 39. Wherefore I conclude, that I can find no sense in which
those words are true; that, Of those 39. Articles there were 36. of them set
forth in Edward 6. his reign.

Now being this is all which is objected by them against the Legal
establishment of the Articles, being an Act of Parliament has propounded the
same Articles, as a Confession of the true Christian Faith and sound Religion,
and acknowledges any Doctrine contrary to the said Articles to be untrue
Doctrine, and upon this acknowledgment and public Declaration of the truth of
the Faith and soundness of the Religion, has required all Ministers to
declare their unfeigned assent to the same, upon pain of being deprived ipso
facto, I conclude that the Articles of the Church of England are confirmed by
the Law of England.

And thus having answered all the Objections endeavoring to prove a Necessity
of Reformation, or Confirmation, of the Public Doctrine of our Church, I
earnestly entreat all these my Brethren in sundry Counties to advise with the
more sober counsels of those of our Brethren who have lately declared that They
take it for granted that there is no difference between us in matter of
Doctrine.

FINIS.

