Anglorum Magnanimus BEVILLIVS GRANVIL Cornubiensis, Eques Auratus.



VERSES BY The University of OXFORD.

On the Death of the Most Noble, and Right Valiant Sir Bevill Grenvill, alias
Granvill, Knight.

Who was Slain by the Rebels at the Battle on Lansdown-Hill, near Bathe, July
the 5. 1643.

Aut spoliis ego jam raptis laudabor opimis,
Aut Letho insigni. --
Virg. Aeneid. Printed at Oxford in the Year of our Lord, 1643. and now
Reprinted at London, 1684.

To the Right Honorable John Earl of BATHE, Viscount of Lansdown, Baron
Granvill of Granvill, Bideford, and Kilkhampton, Lord Lieutenant and
High-Steward of the Duchy of Cornwall, Lord-Warden of the Stanneries, Governor
of Plymouth, Groom of the Stole to his Majesty, First Gentleman of his
Majesty's Bedchamber* and One of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy-Councill.
THese Verses were an Epicedium of the Muses of Oxford, made to adorn the Hearse
of your Noble Father, who Died so Gloriously at Lansdown, in Defense of his
Prince and Country. It is Apparent what a Public loss his Death was, that one
of the first Universities of Europe should think fit to Lament it; A Respect,
it may be, never done before to any but to the Royal Family. But as there are
few Persons (my Lord) so Deserving to be Celebrated as your Father; so are
there few Families, which have had that Military Glory in them. Not to go back
so far as your great Ancestor Hamon Dentatus Earl of Corboil, descended from
the Warlike Rollo Duke of Normandy; Nor to Mention his two Renowned Sons,
Robert Fitzhamon, and Sr Richard de Granvill, who came over with William the
Conqueror, and Aided him at the Battle of Hastings, to Win the Crown of
England, and afterward in the Conquest of Wales; there are late Instances of
other of your Progenitors who have Illustrated your Race by their valiant
Actions. In the War with France, betwixt Henry the 8 th. and Francis the first,
Sir Roger Granvil lost his life at Sea: And his Son Sir Richard Granvil, when
he was very Young went a Volentier into Hungary to serve the Emperor Ferdinand
against the Turk, and after that was with Don John of Austria at the Battle of
Lepanto, the greatest Day that ever was at Sea since that of Actium. At his
Return home, applying himself to the Sea, he became an Expert Captain and
Admiral, and after Several Voyages into the West Indies, and elsewhere, and
Services done his Country, with much Honor and Success, he was at last Slain
at the Azores Islands, having with one of the Queen's Ships alone, being
unhappily Separated from the rest of the Fleet, whereof he was Vice Admiral,
Sustained a fight against the whole Naval power of Spain; never yiedling,
though his Guns were dismounted, his men almost all hurt or killed, himself
Mortally Wounded, and his Decks blown up, that there was no place left to fight
upon; so that his Enemies were Astonished at his valor, and Concerned to save
him, as if he had been of their own Nation: but his Wounds being too Mortal to
be cured, he Expired in a Few Hours, and was Buried in the Ocean, which had
been the Theater of his Glory.

I cannot forget another Sir Richard Granvill your Lordships Uncle, who having
done his Apprentice-ship in Arms in the Low-Countrys and German-Wars, served
his late Majesty in the Northern Expeditions, and then in the Wars of Ireland;
and at length coming to command one of the Kings Armies in the West, kept that
Country in his Majesty's Obedience, till the Rest of England was lost, and the
fortune of the Parliament prevailed every where: A severe Observer of Military
Discipline; and my Lord General the Old Duke of Albemarle was wont to say, one
of the best Captains we had in all the War of England and Ireland. As the Name
and fortune of your Ancestors are Descended to your Lordship, so is their
Virtue too, which appeared so early in you, that before you were Seaventeen
years Old, you entered into your Fathers Command; and after you had served the
King upon several Engagements in the Army, and particularly in Cornwall, at the
Defeat of the Earl of Essex, you brought those Valiant Companies, in the Head
of which your Father was slain at Lansdown, to fight for his Majesty at the
Second Battle of Newbery, where you were like to have undergone your Fathers
fate, as well as Imitated his Virtue, for being Engaged in the Thickest of the
Enemies, and having received several wounds, and one most Dangerous One in the
Head, with the blow of a Halberd, which beat you to the Ground, you lay for
some time without Sense or Motion, 'till a Body of the Kings Horse Charging the
Enemy a-fresh, beat them off the ground upon which you fought, where you were
found amongst the Dead, Covered with Dust and Blood; and being known, were
carried into that place of the Field, where the King and Prince of Wales (his
now Present Majesty) were, who sent you to Dennington Castle to be treated for
your Wounds. It could not My Lord but be matter of great Contentment to you, to
have his Majesty himself a witness of the Blood you had lost for him, and a
Spectator of that Loyalty and Courage, which are the Hereditary Qualities of
your Family.

No sooner were the Armies drawn off from the Field of Newbery, but you were
presently Besieged in* Dennington, where for some time you lay in Extreme
Danger of your life, not only by those Desperate Wounds you had got in the late
Battle, but in the hazard you were in, of Receiving new ones from the Enemy,
the Bullets flying continually through the Room where you lay under Cure, 'till
you were Releived by the Victorious Forces of his Majesty at the Third Battle
of Newbery: Nor have you only Served the King with your Sword in the Field, but
been another way a Chief Instrument of the Greatest good that ever came to
England, I mean the Restoration of his Majesty, and of the Laws and Liberty of
your Oppressed Country. This my Lord was brought to pass by your Prudent and
Successful Negotiation with my Lord General Monck, you having a particular
Commission from the King to treat with him; with whom when you had Conserted
all things for his Majesty's Return, and that without Imposing the least
Condition upon him, you Posted away to Bruxells to give him an Account of it:
In which Journey as well as in the Rest of your Conduct in this Affair, you
exposed your self to no Ordinary Danger, and most certainly served the King
your Master more Effectually, then if you had won more then One Battle for him.

My Lord General who seemed to be Inspired in the Carrying-on of this Great
Business, was so Circumspect, that he would not write to the King by your
Lordship, for fear you might be Searched upon the Way, and what you carried
Intercepted, and his Great Design Discovered before it was Ripe, and therefore
left all to your Care and Prudent Management; But at your Return, he wrote a
Letter to his Majesty, wherein he confirmed to him under his Hand what he had
Promised and Agreed in his Treaty with your Lordship, viz. That he would Employ
all the Power he had to set the King upon his Throne, and that without
Conditions. This Letter was delivered to his Majesty at Breda by your Noble
Brother Mr Bernard Granvill: If ever Letter were welcome to a Prince, this had
Reason to be so, since it contained no less then a humane Assurance that his
Majesty's Travels were at an End, and that the time was come that Allmighty God
would Restore him to his Crowns and Kingdoms, from which his Majesty was so
long and so Unjustly kept by most Bloody Usurpers.

Your Lordship is not only happy in the Conscience of your own Actions, and
Virtuous Examples of those who are gone before you, but in the most hopeful
Prospect you have of your Descendents. For my Lord Landsdown treading in the
Steps of his Brave Ancestors, has been already Courting Honor in the Wars of
Hungary, where he has distinctly signalized himself in all those great
Occasions, particularly at Kornenberch, where the Duke of Loraine Defeated
Twelve Thousand Spahyes in a raze Campaign at the Releiving of Vienna, which
was Besieged by an Army of Two Hundred Thousand Combattants; At the Battle of
Baracan, where the King of Poland, and his whole Army had been Certainly lost,
if the Duke of Loraine, with whom my Lord Lansdown then was, had not come in,
and turned the Day at the very instant that fortune was Declaring for the
Infidels; and lastly, at the taking of Gran, the Second City of the Kingdom:
and now he is retnrn'd Home with Laurells, and a lasting Monument of his
Achievements, being Dignified with the Quality of Count of the Empire, and
Honored to bear his Paternal Coat of Arms upon the Roman Eagle.

But it is an Epistle (My Lord) that I am writing, and not a History, and
therefore I will Conclude, humbly Entreating your Lordship to give your
Patronage to these Verses, which I Conceive I have some Right to Dispose of,
since by the fate of Survivorship they belong to me, who am the only man Living
of All those Names you find here; Except one* Right Reverend Lord, whose
Obliging consent is Obtained to this Edition. And therefore I cause them to be
Reprinted, and Consecrated to the Immortal Memory of your most Noble Father,
as the greatest Testimony I am able to give your Lordship of the Honor I have
for you, and your Family; Desiring further your Lordships Pardon for Presuming
to Reprint and Bind in One Volume together with the said Verses, a Letter from
his Late Majesty, the Royal Martyr, to Sr Bevill Granvill, your said Noble
Father; and another with his said Majesty's most Gracious Parent to the County
of Cornwall; with his Present Majesty's Warrant, given to your Lordship at
Brussells, for your Signal Services, (already Printed in the History of his
Majesty's Restoration,) and a particular account of his said Majesty's Grace
and Favor to the Loyal Towns and Buroughs within the Duchy of Cornwall, upon
your Lordships Favorable Mediation for your Countrymen: Together with the
relation of that Famous Seafight of your aforesaid Great Grandfather Sir
Richard Granvill, Written by the incomparable Sir Walter Raleigh.

I am, From the Inner Temple, Nov. 1. 1684. My Lord, Your Lordships most Humbly
Devoted. Servant, Henry Birkhead.

TO THE MEMORY of Sir BEVILL GRANVILL.
IT is not He. I Will not believe mine Eye.
He that could never Fear, can never Dye.
Dust, Sweat, and Blood, mixed in that Face, conspire
To say it is GRANVILL. Trust 'em not. The Fire,
That warmed his Breast, was Vestall, Star born Light,
Flame, that no Ocean, Day that feared no Night.
It is not He. But weeping Truth says, It Is:
That Corpse of Glory can be None's but His.
So hovers Valor over that Brow; so yet
(As, after Tempests, emptied Clouds still Threat)
Terror leaps from those Eyes, and Rebels Run;
The Soldier lives still, though the Man be gone.
The Man! Courage said More. But Honor, sitting
With Fame in Council, found it far more fitting
The World should know him Mortal; that he Fought
On equal terms; that to the Field He brought
Nothing Impenetrable, but his Mind;
Knew Danger and despised it: Since, we find,
Cowards, Secured, Act Valor. All else than
Speaking Him more, Death was to prove Him Man.
Then; when, as a Destroying Angel, sent
To Mow a Guilty Nation down, He lent
Blow's like to Whirl winds LANDS-DOWN saw Him Stand
Not with a Pike, but Thunderbolt in's hand.
GRANVILL against an Army. He being one;
Cannon, Horse, Foot Himself. So Fixed, and grown
Unto the Hill He Had Gained, and now made good,
That like another Hill, or Rock, He stood;
Fort to Himself and Us; Stronger then all
Cow'rds Love and Loose, Steep Mountain, Wood, and Wall,
Whence His Sword Chased them once; his Blood does still,
Sprinkling the Ground, and Hollowing the Hill;
Where, since Drops shed from such a Loyal Vein,
Rebellion never shall dare set Foot again.
Thomas Masters.

IS GRANVILL dead, or Valor? is it He
Has left this World, or is it Loyalty?
Alas! both Dye with Him, both leave us; how?
Shall none survive but Traitorous Cowards now?
Good Heavens forbid, by them the knot's untied:
Both by his Pattern Live, both in his Person Died.
Robert Grave.

COuld I report, Great GRANVILL, or repeat
Thy famous Actions in thine own stout Heat,
Could I write as Thou fought'st, the World might see
Perhaps some Picture of thy Deeds, and Thee,
And, thus inspired from thy bold flame, my Verse
At once would come forth rapture, and rehearse.
But as those ravished Prophets, who of old
Sick of their God, and much too frail to hold
Their strong Inspirer, first felt trance, then spoke,
And uttered Answers, which from Labors broke;
So meeting Things too high to be expressed.
I find my self* whilst I describe, oppressed.
Thou do at once possess, and hinder; still
Risest, and multipliest between my Quill.
Still bring'st new, various, Matter to my Dress,
Which still begins* and still shows Endlesness.
So Homer strove with his Achilles, who
Should bravelier write, or who should bravelier do.
So what at first He meant an Ode, and Song,
Swelled to a Work, and Story ten years long.
And what at first was destined to one Shade,
Spread in the Writing, and proved Iliade.
Had Thou, like Others, fought by Rule, and Line,
Who call it Valor Wisely to decline
Assaults, and Dangers, and maintain that there
Can be no Fortitude, where is no Fear;
Had thou believed that They, who do engage
Themselves beyond relief, fight not, but rage;
Or that, when men beyond a mean do stray,
Their Fury's only Valiant, not They;
We on thy Temples now had planted Bays,
And Thou had lived to hear and feel thy Praise.
But Thou did scorn such Rules, and call'dst such Laws,
Arts how to blemish, and desert a Cause.
Countedst those false, whom Others do count wise,
And their discreet Fear, ordered Cowardice.
Far above all cold precepts, which do preach
Escapes, retreats, and fallings back, and teach
Advantages of Time, and place, and thus
Learnedly make Men Pusillanimous;
Or at most, valiant to a Point, and all
Their Courage merely Philosophical,
Thou thought it still Ignobler to retire
With phlegm, and coldness, then to fall with fire.
Still call'dst retreating, loosing of the Day,
Still thoughtst that to be safe was to betray.
And where the Cause required it, not to dye,
That 'twas as great a baseness, as to fly.
Thus meeting Dangers in their sternest shape,
Thy Arts were still t'encounter, not to escape.
Still reckoned'st it a Soldiers Stain, and blot,
To be secure, not by his Sword, but Plot.
Methinks I see Thee shaking thy bold spear
Against a numerous Host, without their fear
Who did beset Thee, and the spacious plain
Before Thee strow'd with Slain fallen on thy slain.
Whilst all our other Troops, discharged from fight,
Wondered to see the War turned to a Sight,
Where one encountered many, and descried
A Siege on theirs, a Duel on our Side.
Great Soul! who did contract the Battle to
Thy Solatary self; and there did do
Things, which made all our other Forces be
Idle spectators of their Victory;
While'st safer by thy Side, then at their home,
Their business was to see, and overcome.
O what a Terror issued from thy Look,
Which fought as well as Thou, and Prisoners took
By the eye, as by the Hand; which but beheld
Made the first Skirmish, and at distance quelled;
Thy unarmed face showed dreadful as our Lances,
The foe felt new Artilleries from thy Glances;
Which still, like Native Engines, from Thee flew,
And at once routed, chased, and overthrew.
Thus, then, secured by thy Great self, at once
To us a Bulwark, to thy self a Sconce,
As in a Circle 'bout Thee drawn by the charms
Of thine own Courage, which did arm thy Arms,
How did thou dare the numerous Foe? still mock
Their furious Onsets with a shook for shook?
Still against their Iron Men, and men of Steel,
Like One enchanted all parts but the Heel,
(If We may credit what some do report)
Did hold fight from thy self, as from a Fort;
Impregnable, untoucht? still did it repair
The Faintings of those who about thee were?
Still did recrute our Losses? We did see
New Squadrons, as some fell, still raised from Thee;
Whose Valor ran supplys; and We from thence
Saw Thee new Troops, new Regiments dispense,
Still unexhausted. We can now unfold
The ambiguous rumor, and report, which told,
And spoke of our Increase in the West, that there,
Two Camps, two Armies for us did appear.
The Cornishmen made One, the Other Fame,
Which reckoned Thee Stout Granville, and thy Name,
Still as our other Camp; from whence We drew
Fresh Legions still, and thus from handfulls grew.
Here, some would chide thy Valor, whose bold Heat
Joined thine own to the Enemies defeat;
And say 'twas rashness in Thee to expose
Thy self a Pikeman against Horsemen Foes;
As if to fall had been thy Plot, and aim,
And Thou had some Ambition to be slain.
It Is true, indeed, our Conquest had been more,
Had Thou lived to behold it, with the Store
Of Worthies who escaped; Since, losing Thee,
We did not Win, but change a Victory.
Yet if to Dye with Honor be a Grace;
If to fall, and to consecrate the place
On which Thou fell'st, and make it shcred Ground
To all those who survived Thee, and stood round,
Be Nobler then to live; Those Books, which tell
Of ancient Herp's, who devoted fell,
And yielding up their stout, and Warlike Ghosts,
With their brave ruin did preserve their Hosts,
Will always, be thy Chronicle; whom Death
Snatched like a Decius hence; whose hallowed Breath
Flew from Thee like an Offering; who dyed'st twice,
Our Soldier once, and once our Sacrifice.
Jasper Main.

NOt to be wrought by Malice, Gain, or Pride,
To a Compliance with the Thriving Side;
Not to take Arms for love of Change, or Spite,
But only to maintain Afflicted Right;
Not to dye vainly in pursuit of Fame,
Perversely seeking after Voice and Name;
Is to Resolve, Fight, Dye, as Martyrs do:
And thus did He, Soldier, and Martyr too.
He might (like some Reserved Men of State,
Who look not to the Cause; but to its Fate)
Have stood aloof, engaged on Neither Side,
Prepared at last to strike in with the Tide.
But well-weigh'd Reason told him, that when Law
Either is Renounced, or Misapplied by th'awe
Of false-nam'd Commonwealths men; when the Right
Of King, and Subject, is suppres'd by Might;
When all Religion either is Refused
As mere Pretense, or merely, as That used;
When thus the Fury of Ambition Swells,
Who is not Active, Modestly Rebels.
Whence, in a just esteem, to Church and Crown
He offered All, and nothing thought His own.
This thrust Him into Action, Whole, and Free;
Knowing no Interest but Loyalty;
Not loving Arms as Arms, or Strife for Strife;
Nor Wastfull, nor yet Sparing of his Life;
A great Exactor of Himself, and then
By fair Commands, no less of Other men;
Courage, and Judgment had their equal part,
Council was added to a Generous Heart;
Affairs were justly timed; nor did he catch
At an Affected Fame of Quick Dispatch;
Things were Prepared; Debated, and then Done,
Nor rashly Brook, nor vainly Over-spun;
False Periods no where by Design were made,
As are by those, who make the War their Trade;
The Building still was suited to the Ground,
Whence every Action issued Full and Round.
We know who blind their Men with specious Lies,
With Revelations, and with Prophecies.
Who promise Two things to obtain a Third,
And are themselves by the like Motives stirred:
By no such Engines He His Soldiers draws;
He knew no Arts, but Courage and the Cause;
With these he brought them on, as well-train'd men,
And with these too he brought them off again.
I should, I know, track Him through all the Course
Of his great Actions, show their Worth and Force:
But, although all are Handsome, yet we cast
A more intentive Eye still on the last.
When now the incensed Rebel proudly came
Down, like a Torrent without Bank, or Damm,
When Undeserved Success urged on their force,
That Thunder must come down to stop their Course,
Or Granville must step in: Then Granville stood,
And with Himself opposed, and checked the Flood.
Conquest, or Death, was all His Thought. So fire
Either Orecomes, or does it self expire.
His Courage work't like Flames, cast heat about,
Here, there, on this, on that side; None gave out;
Not any Pike in that Renowned Stand,
But took new Force from His Inspired Hand;
Soldier encouraged Soldier, Man urged Man,
And He urged All: so much Example can.
Hurt upon Hurt, Wound upon Wound did call,
He was the But, the Mark, the Aim of All:
His Soul this while retired from Cell to Cell,
At last flew up from all, and then He fell:
But the Devoted Stand, enraged more
From that his Fate, plied hotter then before,
And Proud to fall with Him, sworn not to yield,
Each sought an Honored Grave, and gained the Field.
Thus, He being fallen, his Action fought a new:
And the Dead conquered, whiles the Living slew.
This was not Natures Courage* nor that thing
We Valor call, which Time and Reason bring;
But a Diviner Fury, Fierce, and High,
Valor transported into Ecstasy,
Which Angels, looking on Us from above,
Use to conveigh into the Souls they love.
You now that boast the Spirit, and its sway,
Show Us his Second, and we will give the Day.
We know your Politic Axiom -- Lurk, or Fly.
Ye cannot Conquer, 'cause ye dare not Dye.
And though you thank God, that you lost none there,
Because They Were such, who Lived not when they were;
Yet your great General (who does Rise and Fall,
As this Successes do; whom you dare call,
As fame unto you does Reports dispense,
Either a Traitor, or His Excellence)
How e'ere he reigns now by unheard of Laws,
Could wish His Fate together with his Cause.
And Thou (Blessed Soul) whose Clear Compacted Fame,
As Amber Bodies Keeps, preserves thy Name,
Whose Life affords what does content Both Eyes,
Glory for People, Substance for the Wise;
Go laden up with Spoils, possess That Seat
To which the Valiant, when they have done retreat:
And when Thou see an happy Period sent
To these Distructions, and the Storm quite spent;
Look down, and say; I have my share in All,
Much Good grew from my Life, Much from my Fall.
William Cartwright.

WHat We have Lost in Thee, We need not write,
Thine Enemies will do it; and in mere Spite
Commend Thy Valor, that the World may know,
In Granvill's Fall, the Greatness of Our Blow;
Let them alone to give Thee thy whole Due;
We only need Believe They can speak True.
Nor is it fit we should with Tears lament
That Blood thy Self thought honorably spent;
And scorned'st at their Alms to draw a Breath,
From whose Gift nothing's Noble but a Death;
Lets rather Weep for them, by whom 'twas Spilt,
Whose Best of Courage was but worst of Guilt;
Who had been Cowards had they Got the Day,
And showed Best Spirits when they Ran away;
Those pitied things yield matter for a Tear:
But Thy great Worth moves in a higher Sphere.
He only Mourns That right, that Fights like Thee,
And a fierce Charge is a good Elegy.
Brave Soul! me thinks I see how thou did stand
Directing Victory to the Right Hand,
How Thou did set Her in again, that Day,
Who, but for Thee, had almost lost her Way.
That little spark (dropped from Eternity)
Dilated by its self, and Loyalty.
How it Forgot its Bound, the narrow Span
Of Flesh and Blood that measures out a man;
And stoutly durst adventure to oppose
Thy Equal Self against whole Troops of Foes!
May Honor Dwell upon thy Tomb, and keep
Thy Glories waking, while thy Dust does sleep:
And may that fart'ned Turf, whence Pregnant Fame*
Yet Brooding Hovers to keep warm the same,
Grow fruitful from thy Blood, until it bring,
A Flower, from whence a second Mars may Spring.
William Barker.

THou Name of Valor! Heir of all that Worth,
Which Fates with constant Bounty have powered forth
On Granvills honored Race? In whom did dye
More then their Army, more then Victory
Could recompense, which to that gallant Stand
We owe, from ruin snatched by thy brave Hand.
Oh I could curse the villains odds! For when
We hazard Gold, They, but the dross of men.
Bate me the price of sin, the City-pay,
And what they steal, in order to obey
The Houses Vote, more then one Regiment
I Will name, wherein not ten are worth what is spent
Barely in feeding muskets; we have often lost
Powder; to kill such Rogues does not quit cost.
And yet it is nobly fought, since conscience
Alone begets those flames, not any sense
Of Triumph; for what honor is it to tell
That here a Sergeant-Major-Cobler fell,
There a Mechanick-Colonell dropped down,
Not fit to serve in any honest Town.
Our Conquest is unpleasant; we must grieve;
And wish the punished Rebels did still live,
Reserved for more ignoble fall; since here
Justice (though sacred name) was bought too dear.
Sad Victory! the Frontless faction now
Thank, yet not mock God for their overthrow.
Since gladly they would sacrifice a flood
Out of the Commons veins, for this one blood.
A thousand lives, and thousand Souls to boot
They Will give; it costs them naught, let th'fools look to it.
Guilty and wretched Commons! tell me, why
Only in order to your misery
You will be Perjured Rebels? whence does flow
This frantic pleasure, from your sin, or woe?
Did you improve your safety, did your ground,
Like your deceivers malice, being drowned
In blood, more fruitful grow, you then did sell
Your Souls for something; but to purchase Hell
With Poverty, and dangers, that you may
Be sooner dead, yet whilst you live, a prey,
Is so rare Phrensy, that you only can
Be thought to differ in the shape of man
From wildest beasts. But you are forced to fight,
You love your King, and wish He had His Right;
Yet awed take arms against him, money still
Contribute, Traitors are against your will.
Unworthy, vain excuse! why should you fear
Those few seducers? Terrible they were
By your abused Strength; if you withdraw
Your Aids they fall, to the long injured Law
Just Sacrifices; should they carry hence
Your wealth, they would leave behind your innocence;
Leave you returned to Duty, and to Peace;
Hating these certain Pledges of increase.
Dudley Diggs.

THe Villains now are ripe, let us pay our Vow,
See Granvills blood stands texted on their brow!
If their course Veyns an Ocean should disburse
'Twould not appease, because the more the worse;
Behold great Bartue, Stuart, Compton, now,
Sage Pierpont,, and fresh bleeding Cav'endish too!
Names that e're long shall strike this perjured Crowd,
And shoot down Vengeance from that Bow ith'Clowd,
Which shall consume these weeds that Truth may grow,
Granvill has pawned his blood it shall be so.
Great valliant Saint! Loving and loved again,
(For he that conquers Fear may conquer Men)
Thy choice was just and early, not adjourned
'Till the great scale at Keinton field was turned:
See, GRANVILL's up (the mighty Cornish cries)
Which (like a Beacon fired) made them All rise,
Thus roused, thou armed their inside day by day,
Dealt flame and Spirit to them as their pay,
Cleared and advanced their blood, cast them a new,
'Till in an instant they stout Giants grew;
Then led by Thee, they made vast Devon quake,
So as loose Stamford frighted left the stake,
Whose Fort, Ditch, Bulwark, did but raise thy heart,
Valor no more is borke then made by Art;
Nay when (thy Powder gone, compelled to cease)
That thou must bleed, or veeld to what should please
The two new families of Parliament;
Though Ammunition, Courage was not spent,
Then, then thy steel made them outrun their wheels,
Leave All, and take naught with them but their heels;
Thus Bodmin, Stratton felt thy influence,
Great BEVILL's Sword returned not empty thence.
But when the Rowt (as th'hill it self) came down
He grasped a spear and underpropt the Crown,
Placed like the flaming Cherubim, laid about,
Stood Guardian there to keep th'Apostates out,
Reared up like Sampson, took firm hold of the Beam,
Then pulled all down, Himself, the House and Them,
His bleeding corpse then on the Mount he hurled,
And fought it out with them in the other World,
Till they gave off, letting their Matches burn.
To light his conquering Ashes to his Urn.
Had thy Godolphin staid to help us here,
His Pen had now took measure of thy spear,
'T had made thee Emperor of the West and All,
We blind with tears, see nothing but thy fall,
Which now does bleed again, and doubly pierce,
To loose both Granvills sword, and Sidneys verse.
Cornwall (that glorious Dukedom) hence shall be
Adored, Eternal by Prince CHARLES and Thee,
Let their cheap Legions live (unfit to dye)
Who like their weapons strike they know not why,
Give our just Swords more satisfying dust,
Thread all the bold Committee at one thrust,
Scatter the Plot, till all the ill-built frame
Fall down as tribute to Great BEVILL's Name,
That Name (which shames Their malice and our wit)
Shall last as long as They conspired to sit.
John Birkinhead.

THey, that give Thanks for Overthrows, had never
Fairer Pretense to God, then they had here.
Marked you not'midst our latter Triumphs one
Intruding Sigh? Heard you not one sad Groan?
'Twas for the valliant Granvill: which one Cross
Allayed our Victory, and made it Loss.
Granvill, whose very Name the Rebels found
Dealing Revenge, and Death in every wound.
While in the fierce Assault, they did not know,
Whether they should wish Thee alive, or no*
How many trembling Ghosts did we enlarge
To cry Thee mercy in the Second Charge:
When the enraged Cornish, fierce upon
Revenge of Thee, cried Granvill, and killed on.
Treasure of Valor! in thy bold Designs
That Country glories more, then in her Mines.
Thus fell the mighty Scaeva, while the Foe
Trembled, and feared the very Overthrow.
Thus in the North our brave New Castle stood,
With more Success, with Honor no man could,
Henceforch the Pike we doubly honored call,
From that One Triumph Famed, from this one Fall.
Robert Masters.

HAllow my temples, let my thoughts be dressed
In such attire as fits a Poet-Priest.
That no rude accent may Profane thy name,
But all things be as spotless as thy Fame;
That Fame so great, that none but Granvills can
In the next age believe it of a Man.
Granvill! The Cornish Paean it shall be,
And only heard in Songs of Victory!
The Eternal Theme of Poets! which shall give
Strength to their Lines, and make their Verses live.
Thou that in those black times dard'st to be good,
When Treason was best Virtue, when none could
Be safe and honest; that almost alone
Dard'st love the King, when a whole Nation
Was growing one great Rebel; have firm stood,
And gave the first great stop to the growing flood;
Thou Destiny of our new molded State,
That first did make it is greatness shrink; whom Fate
Prepared to save a Kingdom; and did give
Thee Virtue great enough to make it live;
How will the Ghosts of those slain Rebels shake
To see thy Shade? How Brook and Hampden quake
To find themselves not safe, and that to dye
Has only changed the Scene of Victory?
How will their Guilt grow double, when they see
Thy Shine; twice frighted by themselves and Thee?
That glorious Shine, that shows the difference
Of Dying truly in the KINGS defense;
That though both fall together, and the blood
Of Traitors and a Patriots, make one flood;
They in the Shambles, He at the Altar dies,
They fall as Beasts, and He a Sacrifice.
Now may those Rebels one Thanksgiving make
And not Blaspheme, nor fair Truth Scandal take.
Thy death makes honest all their thick-skin'd Lies,
From which alone all their feigned Victories
Grow truths. How had We lost in that one stroke
A Kingdom, had not such brave Virtue broke
From thy Example, as did strike a flame
Into thy Followers, great as was thy Name.
Yet, let them boast their Conquest if they can,
Wee'have gained an Army, and have lost a Man.
And let them preach Thee slain, since from thy Death
A Thousand almost Granvilles gather breath.
So when the Sun's forced hence by Sable Night,
Myrtads of Stars spring from his falling light.
William Creed.

YEt boast not Senate, know He could not Die;
Until he had obtained the Victory:
Death waited for that minute, that her state
Might rise more glorious through his nobler Fate.
Methinks I now behold Him as He stood,
(Undaunted Spirit!) when that stately wood
Of Pikes marched up; when like a Captain Oak
He led that underwood, and took that stroke
Which should have felled the Grove: I see him stand
Dispensing Valor by his brave Command,
And braver Actions, the Soldiers swords
Being whetted by's Example, and his Words.
Would this were real; but our fancies move
Not guided by our knowledge, but our Love.
I could lament His Death, but that I know
All accents of our grief are far below
His vaster merit: rather let my Steel
Revenge his Death, and make their Conqueror feel
The anger of his Ghost; who slyly fled
From Granville but a Ghost from Granville dead.
Go weep for Cowards; he who bravely Dies
Ought to have Music at his Obsequies.
You happy souls who have the sacred trust
Of his dead ashes; see no Coward dust
Come near his Urne; it is fit his ashes lie
Where there is none but Valiant Company.
Near Lindsey's, Denby's, or Northampton's side,
(Who Conquered dying) raise his Pyramide:
Which may restore him to the World again,
A Conqueror of Time, as well as Men.
Peter Mew.

WIsdom directs, when Justice dictates right,
And Courage (if provoked) then bids men fight:
Wisdom to Granville said, thy Cornish friends
Are mates enough to work thy noble ends;
It Is fit (spoke Justice) to defend a Crown:
Then fight (said Courage) gain thee brave renown,
And Fame said to him, if thou dy'st, then I
Will keep thy Everlasting memory;
Fate only frowned; Granville obeys; commands
While Fate contrived his Death by Rebels hands;
Yet Friends, and Country do conserve his Name,
With Wisdom, Justice, Fortitude, and Fame.
Henry Love.

HEroic Martyr, whose Immortal death
Inliven'd here, giving our Realm new breath,
(For when the Sun setts bloody in the West,
The day still rises brighter in the East)
How Loyal were Thou, when the general ring
Was heard No Bishops, while they meant No King;
And only to wrong Charles was to be true,
As robbing of the Church paid Heaven it is due:
When too much Liberty did us enthrall,
And all Religions turned to none at all;
Whilst Rebel Members against their Head aimed darts,
Voting Him none, by Whom they all are parts;
And their Militia fought Him, for his aid,
To make Him Great, when Public Faith is paid!
Among these Self-contradictours You proved still
Faithful; and free to die, as they to Kill:
Like Decius, a Devoted Sacrifice,
Most sure to fall, yet by thy fall to rise:
Whose British acts did Pompey's words retrive,
We needs must Stand, we must not needs Survive.
When on the Mount Himself a Mount withstood
For th'Iron age too suitable a Brood,
(Who were Achilles like, as far as Steel
And Styx could do it, all proof, but in the Heel)
Courage was all his Shield, his Gorgon's head,
Striking with blows, and with amazement dead;
While from his wounds what valiant blood did post,
Most animated Him, when bravely lost;
Seeming some Martial Deity to his Foe,
'Cause they had fear enough to make Him so:
They that fled stronger, than He took the field,
Worse Cowards when they fight, than when they yield:
Like timorous Hare-Knights at each shot they start;
Or Rome's famed Ox, of metal void, and heart.
But this stout Champion triumph't in his fall,
And when He was most conquered, conquered all;
As lofty Castles, when they sink, dilate
The ruin round about, and scatter fate.
Nay his loss routed, whilst his Army thrived,
Heirs to fresh Spirit through his death derived;
Which by a Transmigration, as it ran
In one before, dwell't then in every man.
His Ancestors to our Norman King allied,
Who fought below Covictors by his side,
Him from above their glory saw, and shame;
They living won, his Careass overcame:
Which, that it self a plain reward might have,
Obtein'd a posthume Earldom in the grave.
Thus Codrus fell, yet all his Dignitys
Sunk with Himself: but whilst our Offering dies,
His Of spring here grow Peers, He in the Skys.
Henry Birkhead.

THE CLOSE.
THus slain thy Valiant Ancestor did lie,
When His One Bark a Navy did defy;
When now encompassed round, He Victor stood,
And bathed His Pinnace in his Conquering Blood;
'Till all His Purple Current dried, and spent,
He fell, and made the Waves his Monument.
Where shall th'next famous Granvills Ashes stand?
Thy Grandfiere fills the Seas, and Thou the Land.
Martin L Lewellin.

His Majesty's Letter to Sr Bevill Granvill, after the great Victory Obtained
over the Rebels, at the Battle of Strarton.
To Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Sir Bevill Granvill, at Our Army in
Cornwall.
CHARLES R.
RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you Well.
We have seen your Letter to Endymion Porter Our Servant: But your whole
Conduct of Our Affairs in the West, does speak your Zeal to Our Service and the
Public Good in so full a Measure, as We Rest abundantly satisfied with the
Testimony thereof. Your Labors and your Expenses We are graciously Sensible
of: And Our Royal Care has been to ease you in all that We could. What has
fallen short of Our Princely Purposes, and your Expectations, We know you will
attribute to the great malignity of the Rebellion We had, and have here to
wrestle withal: And We know well, how effectual a diversion of that
mischievous strength you have made from us at your own great hazzards. We
assure you We have all tender sense of the hardness you have endured, and the
State wherein you stand: We shall not fail to procure you what speedy relief
may be: In the mean space We send you Our most hearty Thanks for some
encouragement, and assurances in the Word of a Gracious Prince, that (God
enabling Us) We shall so reflect upon your faithful Services, as you and
yours shall have cause to acknowledge Our Bounty and Favor: And so We bid you
heartily farewell. Given at Our Court at Oxford the 24th of March, 1642-43.

His Majesty's Gracious Letter to the County of Cornwall, after the Death of
Sir Bevill Granvill, and those other Eminent persons Slain in his Majesty's
Service, Namely, Arundall, Mohun, Slaning, Trevanion, Godolphin, etc.
CHARLES R.

WE are so highly sensible of the extraordinary Merit of Our County of Cornwall,
of their Zeal for the Defense of Our Person, and the Just Rights of Our Crown,
(in a time, when We could contribute so little to Our Own Defense, or to their
Assistance; in a time, when not, only no Reward appeared, but great and
probable Dangers were threatened to Obedience and Loyalty;) of their great and
eminent Courage and Patience in their indefatigable Prosecution of their great
Work against so potent an Enemy, backed with so Strong, Rich, and Populous
Cities, and so plentifully furnished and supplied with Men, Arms, Money,
Ammunition, and Provision of all kinds; and of the wonderful success, with
which it has pleased Almighty God (though with the loss of some most eminent
Persons, who shall never be forgotten by Us) to reward their Loyalty and
Patience by many strange Victories over their and Our Enemies, in despite of
all humane probability, and all imaginable disadvantages; That as We cannot be
forgetful of so great Deserts, so We cannot* but desire to publish to all the
World, and perpetuate to all Time, the Memory of these their Merits, and of Our
Acceptance of the same. And to that end, We do hereby render Our Royal Thanks
to that Our County, in the most Public and most Lasting manner We can devise,
Commanding Copies hereof to be Printed and Published; and one of them to be
read in every Church and Chapel therein, and to be kept for ever as a Record
in the same, That as long as the History of these Times, and of this Nation
shall continue, the memory of how much that County has merited from Us and Our
Crown, may be derived with it to Posterity. Given at Our Camp at SUDELEY Castle
the Tenth of September. 1643.

The Gracious Patent of his Majesty King Charles the First to the County of
Cornwall.
CHARLES By the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting*
know Ye, that We out of Our Princely Contemplation of of the many and
extraordinary faithful Services to Us of late performed, by Our County of
Cornwall, And for their better Encouragement to proceed in their Duty and
Allegiance to Our Person, and Crown of England, and for diverse other Good
Causes and Considerations Us thereunto especially moving, Have out of Our
Special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, Given and Granted, and by
these Presents, for Us Our Heirs and Successors, do Give and Grant unto all and
every the Men and Inhabitants, Our Leige-Subjects of Our Kingdom of England,
within the said County of Cornwall, now being, or hereafter to be; That they
and every of them by themselves, or any of them, their or any of their Factors,
Agents, or Servants, shall and may have Liberty and Freedom from time to time,
and at all times for ever hereafter, to Trade, Traffic, and Commerce with
their Ships and other Vessels, and their Goods and Merchandise unto and from
the Havens, Towns, and all Ports and places within the Dominion of the King of
Denmark, and Great Duke of Muscovye. And all Ports and Places within the
Levant Seas. And unto all and from all and every of them whilst respectively
they, or any of them, are or shall be in Amity with Us, Our Heirs or
Successors, whether he Merchants of Our East Land Russia, and Turkey Company
of London, and the Merchants of the Company of Merchant-Adventurers of London,
or of any, or either of them, do, or may Trade, and into and from all other
Ports and places whatsoever beyond the Seas, for the time being in Amity, with
Us, Our Heirs and Successors; whether any of the Subjects for the time being of
Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for such time or times, do or may Trade,
Traffic, or Commerce; in as full, ample and beneficial manner, as We Can
grant the same; Saving allways to Us, Our Heirs and Successors from the said
Men and Inhabitants of Our said County of Cornwall, their Factors and Agents to
be duly paid unto Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, to Our and their Use, All such
Customs and other Duties and Payments upon, and for their Merchandises and
Goods to be Exported and Imported, as shall from time to time become due and
payable to Us, Our Heirs and Successors in that respect. Likewise saving all
Rights, Duties, or Payments any way belonging too or in respect of the Duchy
of Cornwall; Yielding and Paying thereof unto Us, Our Heirs and Successors the
Sum of Four Shillings of Lawful English Money, to be paid unto the hands of
the Sheriff of the County of Cornwall, at the Feast of All Saints Yearly: And
hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Willing and Commanding; that all the
Officers and every the Ministers of what Nature, Condition, or Degree soever,
and all other the Subjects of Us, Our Heirs and Successors whom these shall or
may any ways concern, to take Special notice to all intents and purposes as
they and every of them shall respectively answer the contrary at their perils.
And We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, further Promise and Grant,
unto the aforesaid Men and Inhabitants of our said County of Cornwall as well
present as to come; that if, and as often as any doubts or questions shall
happen to arise for, touching, or concerning, the Validity of these Our
Letters Patent; That then, and so often upon the Humble Petition of the
foresaid Men and Inhabitants of Our said County of Cornwall to Us, Our Heirs,
and Successors, exhibited, orupon Notice or Certificate to Us, Our Heirs, and
Successors, by the Learned of Council, of the aforesaid Men and Inhabitants of
Our said County of Cornwall, touching any Defeet requisite to be Amended; We,
Our Heirs, and Successors, will Graciously Grant Other Letters Patent unto the
said Men and Inhabitants of Our said County of Cornwall, with such and so many
Amendments, Explications, Amplifications, and Additions, as by the said Council
of the aforesaid Men and Inhabitants of Our said County of Cornwall shall be
advised, and thought fit; And which any way may tend to the Confirmation of
These Our Letters Patent, or to the Perfection of Our Intention before, in
these Presents, any way appearing. And We further Will, And by these Presents
for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, do Grant unto the a foresaid Men and
Inhabitants of Our said County of Cornwall, as well Present as to Come, that
these Our Letters Patents, or the Inrolement thereof shall be in all things
Firm, Valid, Good, and Sufficient, and Effectual, in the Law, against Us, Our
Heirs, and Successors, as well in all Courts as elsewhere, within Our Kingdom
of England, without any Confirmation, Licenese, or Toleration, from Us, Our
Heirs, or Successors, any way hereafter to be procured or obtained;
Notwithstanding the not finding of Office, or Offices, Inquisition or
Inquisitions, by which Our Title, in the Placit ought to be found, before the
making of these Our Letters Patent. And Notwithstanding that the aforesaid Men
and Inhabitants of Our County of Cornwall, in Constitution of Law be not
reputed a Corporation or Body-Politick, nor Capable in Law to hold the
Privilege of these Presents Granted; any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Proclam' or
Provision heretofore Had, Made, Enacted, Ordained, or Provided, or any other
Thing, C^e or Matter soever to the Contrary hereof, in any wise
Notwithstanding. In Witness whereof We have caused these our Letters to be
made Patents, Witness Our self at Oxford the Twenty Sixth day of January in the
Nineteenth Year of Our Reign.

Per bre' de Privato Sigillo.
A True Account of His Majesty's Particular Grace and Favor to the Loyal Towns
and Buroughs within the Duchy of Cornwall, by the Mediation of the Right
Honorable John Earl of Bathe, Lord Lieutenant and High Steward of the said
Duchy, and Lord-Warden of the Stanneries, etc.
Whitchall, December 12. 1684.
THe Right Honorable the Earl of Bathe being lately at His Government of
Plymouth, to Settle by His Majesty's Command the Affairs of that Garrison, and
the Militia of Cornwall under His Lieutenancy, the several Towns and Buroughs
within the Duchy of Cornwall, who had Uuanimously and with great Cheerfulness
resolved to Surrender their Charters and Franchises to His Majesty, made their
Applications to His Lordship as their Lieutenant, to Intercede with His
Majesty, that they might, by reason of the great distance, be excused from
their Personal Attendance with their Surrenders and Charters: To which His
Majesty being pleased to Condescend, the said Corporations delivered their
Surrenders to His Lordship for His Majesty's Use; humbly praying Him to lay
them at His Majesty's Feet: Which His Lordship at His return hither having done
accordingly, with a Petition on their behalf, His Majesty was pleased
Graciously to accept of them, and to Command His Lordship to assure the said
Corporations, That He very well remembered the Duty and Loyalty of that County
in the worst Times of Rebellion; and was well pleased with this fresh
Demonstration of it by them.

Which abovementioned Signification of His Majesty's Pleasure, was by His
Majesty's Command Ordered to be Printed in the Gazette, and which was done
accordingly.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of John Earl of Bathe, Your Majesty's Lieutenant of
Cornwall, and Lord Warden of Your Majesty's Stanneries, etc.
Shows,
THat the Mayors and Burgesses of the several Towns and Buroughs within Your
Majesty's Duchy of Cornwall, against whom Writs of Quo Warranto were lately
Issued, have Unanimously with great Cheerfulness, and some Emulation who should
be most forward, (excepting only one small inconsiderable Borough) expressed
an entire Submission and Deference to Your Royal Pleasure; and have Desired and
Entrusted Your Petitioner to lay the respective surrenders of their Franchises
and Privileges, and the Charters by which they claim the same, with their
customs and Prescriptions, at Your Majesty's Royal Feet; Humbly beseeching Your
Majesty to Grant and Confirm their Ancient Franchises and Privileges, with such
Additions, Alterations and Reservations as Your Majesty in Your Great and Royal
Wisdom shall think fit.

The small Revenues of the greatest part of the said Buroughs, and the signal
Loyalty and Sufferings of them all, and of all Cornwall in general, with the
great distance of their Habitations from Your Royal Palace, gives Your said
Petitioner Confidence most humbly to pray in their Behalfs, That Your Majesty
will be Graciously pleased to excuse their Personal Attendance with their said
Surrenders and Charters, and to receive them from the Hands of Your said
Petitioner; and that their several and respective new Charters may pass the
Great Seal, and other Offices without Fees, or other Charges. Which Royal
Bounty will greatly Encourage Them, and all Your Majesty's other Loyal Subjects
within Your said Duchy, in that Duty and Loyalty which they on this Occasion,
as their Ancestors with most of their Countrymen in the worst Times of
Rebellion, to the ruin of their Estates, and loss of their nearest and dearest
Relations, have according to their Duty most readily and faithfully expressed.

And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc. BATHE.

Unto which said Petition, His Majesty was Pleased to return this Gracious
Answer following, by the Right Honorable the Earl of Sunderland, His Majesty's
Principal Secretary of State.
WHereas the several Towns and Buroughs within the Counties of Cornwall and
Devon, mentioned in the List hereunto annexed, have voluntarily surrendered unto
His Majesty by the Hands of the Right Honorable the Earl of Bathe, their Lord
Lieutenant, all their Charters, with their Franchises and Privileges, which
they hold either by Ancient Custom, Prescription or otherwise, humbly
beseeching His Majesty to Regrant them new Charters, with such Alterations,
Additions and Reservations as His Majesty shall think fit; His Majesty having
taken the same into His Consideration, and also the humble Petition of the said
Earl of Bathe, representing the many Eminent and Signal Services, Loyalty and
great Sufferings of the said Towns and Country, in general, during the worst
Times of Rebellion, which His Majesty himself well remembers, and being
therefore Graciously pleased to accept of the said Surrenders from the Hands of
the said Earl, excusing their Personal Attendance, His Majesty is pleased to
Command Me to signify His Pleasure, That the several New Charters which shall
be Granted to the said Towns and Buroughs, pass the respective Offices and
Seals without Paying Fees; Whereof all Persons whom it may concern are to take
Notice.

Given at the Court at Whitehall, the 10th Day of December, 1684. Sunderland.

A List of tbe several Surrenders of the Towns and Buroughs within the Duchy
of Cornwall, Presented to His Majesty by the Right Honorable the Earl of Bathe.
CORNWALL.
LAnceston. Truro. Lostwithial. Bodman. Liscard. Penryn by the Mayor and
Magistrates. Penryn by the Portreave and Burgesses. Metchell alias Midsholl, by
Sir John Arundell, Lord of the Manor. Metchell alias Midsholl, by the Mayor,
Portreave and Burgesses. St. Ives by the Mayor, Portreave and Burgesses. St.
Mawes by Sir Joseph Tredinham, Lord of the Manor. St. Mawes by the Mayor and
Burgesses. Callington by Samuel Roll Esquire; Lord of the Manor. Callington by
the Mayor, Portreave and Burgesses. Foy by the Mayor, Portreave and Burgesses.
Grampond. Tregony. East Lo. West Lo. Camelford. Bossing alias Tintagell. St.
Germans by Mr. Elliot Lord of the Manor. St. Germans by the Portreave and
Burgesses. Helston Saltash Surrendered before, and New Charters according to His
Majesty's present Regulation.

DEVONSHIRE.
PLympton. Ashburton. Bideford. Bradnitch. Plymouth Tavestocke Surrendered
before, and New Charters according to his Majesty's present Regulation.

Bathe.

A REPORT of the Truth of the Fight about the Isles of Azores, the Last of
August 1591. Betwixt the Revenge, One of her Majesty's Ships Commanded by Sir
Richard Granvill, commonly called Grenvill, Vice Admiral, and an Armada of the
King of Spain; Penned by the Honorable Sir Water Ralegh, Knight.
BEcause the Rumors are diversely spread, as well in England, as in the Low
Countries, and elsewhere, of this late encounter between her Majesty's Ships and
the Armada of Spain; and that the Spaniards according to their usual manner,
fill the world with their vainglorious vanity, making great appearance of
victories, when on the contrary, themselves are most commonly and shamefully
beaten and dishonored; thereby hoping to possess the ignorant multitude by
anticipating and forerunning false reports: It is agreeable with all good
reason, for manifestation of the truth, to overcome falsehood and untruth; that
the beginning, continuance and Success of this late Honorable Encounter of Sr
Richard Granvil, and other her Majesty's Captains, with the Armada of Spain;
should be truly set down and published without partiality or false
imaginations. And it is no marvel, than the Spainard should seek by false and
Slanderous Pamphlets, advisoes and Letters, to cover their own loss, and to
derogate from others their due Honor, especially in this Fight, being
performed far off: Seeing they were not ashamed in the year 1588. when they
purposed the Invasion of this Land, to publish in Sundry Languages in Print,
great victories in words, which they pleaded to have obtained against this
Realm; and spread the same in a most false sort over all parts of France,
Italy, and elsewhere. When shortly after it was happily manifested in very deed
to all Nations, how their Navy which they termed invincible, consisting of 140
Sail of Ships, not only of their own Kingdom, but strengthened with the
greatest Argosies, Portugal Caracks, Florentines, and huge hulks of other
Countries, were by 30. of her Majesty's Ships of War, and a few of our own
Merchants, by the Wife, Valiant, and advantageous Conduct of the Lord Charles
Howard, High-Admirall of England, beaten and shuffled together; even from the
Lizard in Cornwall, first to Portland, where they shamefully le^t Don, Pedro de
Valdes, with his mighty Ship; from Portland to Cales where they lost Hugo de
Moncado, with the Gallias, of which he was Captain, and from Cales driven with
Squibs from their Anchors, were chased out of the sight of England, round about
Scotland and Ireland. Where for the Sympathy of their barbarous Religion,
hoping to find Succor and assistance, a great part of them were crushed against
the Rocks, and those other that landed, being very many in number, were
notwithstanding broken, slain, and taken, and so sent from Village to Village
coupled in halters, to be shipped into England: Where her Majesty of her
Princely and Invincible disposition, disdaining to put them to death, and
scorning either to retain or entertain them; they were all sent back again to
their Countries, to witness and recount the worthy Achievements of their
Invincible and Dreadful Navy: Of which the number of Soldiers, the fearful
burden of their Ships, the Commanders names of every Squadron, with all other
their Magazines of provisions, were put in Print, as an Army and Navy
unresistable, and disdaining prevention. With all which so great and terrible
an ostentation, they did not in all their Sailing round about England, so much
as Sink or take one Ship, Bark, Pinnesse or Cock-boat of ours; Or ever burnt so
much as one Sheepcote of this Land; Whereas on the contrary, Sir Francis Drake
with only 800. Soldiers not long before, landed in their Indies, and forced
Sant Iago, Santo Domingo, Cartagena, and the fort of Florida.

And after that, Sr John Norris marched from Peniche in Portugal, with a
handful of Soldiers, to the gate of Lisbone, being about 40 English miles.
Where the Earl of Essex himself, and other valiant Gentlemen braved the City of
Lisbone, encamped at the very gate; from whence, after many days abode, finding
neither promised party, nor provision to batter; they made retrait by Land, in
despite of all their Garrisons, both of Horse and Foot. In this sort I have a
little digressed from my first purpose; only by the necessary comparison of
theirs and our actions: The one covetous of honor without vaunt of
ostentation; the other so greedy to purchase the opinion of their own affairs,
and by false Rumors to resist the blust of their own dishonours, as they will
not only not blush to spread all manner of Untruths: But even for the least
advantage, be it but for the talring of one poor Adventurer of the English,
will celebrate the Victory with Bonfires in every Town, always spending more in
Faggors, then the purchase was worth they obtained. When as we never thought it
worth the consumption of two Billets, when we have taken Eight or Ten of their
Indian Ships at one time, and Twenty of the Brasill Fleet: Such is the
difference between true Valor, and Ostentation: and between Honorable Actions
and frivolous Vain glorious vaunts. But now to return to my purpose.

The Lord Thomas Howard with Six of her Majesty's Ships, Six Victualers of
London, the Bark Ralegh, and two or three other Pinnaces riding at Anchor near
unto Flores, one of the Westerly Islands of the Azores, the Last of August in
the afternoon, had intelligence by one Captain Middleton of the approach of the
Spanish Armada Which Middleton being in a very good Sailer, had kept them
Company three days before, of good purpose, both to discover their Forces the
more, as also to give advice to my Lord Thomas of their approach. He had no
sooner delivered the news but the Fleet was in sight many of our Ships Companys
were on Shore in the Island; some providing balast for their Ships; others
filling of Water, and refreshing themselves from the Land, with such things as
they could either for Money, or by Force recover. By reason whereof our Ships
being all pestered and romaging every thing out of order, very light for want
of balast, and that which was most to our disadvantage the one half part of the
men of every Ship sick, and utterly unserviceable: For in the Revenge there
were Ninety diseases: in the Bonaventure, not so many in health as could handle
her Main-Sail. For had not Twenty men been taken out of a Bark of Sr George
Careys, his being commanded to be sunk, and those appointed to her, she had
hardly ever recovered England. The rest, for the most part, were in little
better State. The Names of her Majesty's Ships were these as follows, the
Defiance, which was Admiral, the Revenge Vice Admiral, the Bonaventure
commanded by Captain Cross, the Lion by George Fenner, the Foresight by Mr
Thomas Vavasour, and the Crane by Duffild, the Foresight and the Crane being
but small Ships* only the other were of the middle size; the rest besides the
Bark Ralegh, commanded by Captain Thin, were Victuallers, and of small force or
none. The Spanish Fleet having shrouded their approach by reason of the Island;
were now so soon at hand, as our Ships had scarce time to weigh their Anchors,
but some of them were driven to let slip their Cables and set sail. Sr Richard
Granvill was the last that weighed, to recover the men that were upon the
Island, which otherwise had been lost. The Lord Thomas, with the rest very
hardly recovered the Wind, which Sr Richard Granvill not being able to do, was
persuaded by the Master, and others, to cut his Main Sail, and cast about, and
to trust to the Sailing of the Ship; for the Squadron of Sivil were on his
Weather-Bow. But Sr Richard utterly refused to trun from the Enemies, alleging
that he would rather choose to dye, then to dishonor himself, his Country, and
her Majesty's Ship, persuading his Company that he would pass through the two
Squadrons, in despite of them, and enforce those of Sivil to give him way.
Which he performed upon diverse of the foremost, who, as the Mariners term it,
sprang their Luff, and fell under the Lee of the Revenge. But the other course
had been the better, and might right well have been answered, in so great an
impossibility of Prevailing. Notwithstanding, out of the greatness of his mind,
he could not be persuaded. In the mean while as he attended those which were
nearest him, the great San Philip being in the Wind of him, and coming toward
him, becalmed his Sails in such sort, as the Ship could neither make way, nor
feel the Helm: so huge and high-carged was the Spanish Ship, being of a
Thousand and Five Hundred Tuns, who after laid the Revenge abord. When he was
thus bereft of his Sails, the Ships that were under his lee luffing up, also
laid him abord: of which the next was the Admiral of the Biscaines, a very
mighty and puissant Ship commanded by Brittandona, the said Philip carried
three tire of Ordinance on a side, and eleven Pieces in every tire. She shot
Eight forth-right out of her Chase, besides those of her Stern-Ports.

After the Revenge was entangled with this Philip. four other boorded her; two
on her Larboord, and two on her Starboord. The Fight thus beginning at three of
the Clock in the Afternoon, continued very terrible all that Evening. But the
great San Philip having received the Lower Tire of the Revenge, Discharged with
Cross-bar shot, Shirted her self with all diligence from her sides, utterly
misliking her first entertainment. Some say that the Ship Foundred but we
cannot report it for truth, unless we were assured. The Spanish Ships were
filled with Companys of Soldiers, in some Two Hundred, besides the Mariners,
in some Five, in others Eight Hundred. In ours there were none at all besides
the Mariners but the Servants of the Commanders, and some few Voluntary
Gentlemen only. After many enterchanged Vollies of Great Ordinance and Small
Shot, the Spaniards deliberated to enter the Revenge, and made diverse attempts,
hoping to force her by the Multitudes of their Armed Soldiers and Musketters,
but were still repulsed again and again, and at all times beaten back into
their own Ships, or into the Seas. In the beginning of the Fight, the George
Noble of London, having received some Shot through her by the Armadas, fell
under the Lee of the Revenge, and asked Sr Richard what he would Command him,
being but one of the Victualers and of small force: Sr Richard bid him save
himself, and leave him to his fortune. After the Fight had thus, without
intermission continued while the Day lasted, and some hours of the Night, many
of our Men were slain and hurt, and one of the great Gallions of the Armada,
and the Admiral of the Hulks both Sunk, and in many other of the Spanish Ships
great Slaughter was made. Some write that Sir Richard was very dangerously hurt
almost in the beginning of the Fight, and lay Speechless for a time e're he
Recovered; But two of the Revenges own company, brought home in a Ship of Lime
from the Islands, Examined by some of the Lords, and Others, affirmed that he
was never so Wounded as that he forsook the Upper Deck, 'till an hour before
Midnight; and then being shot into the Body with a Musket, as he was a
dressing, was again shot into the Head, and withal, his Surgeon wounded to
death. This agrees also with an Examination taken by Sr Francis Godolphin, of
four other Mariners of the same Ship being returned, which Examination, the
said Sr Francis sent unto Master William Killegrue, of her Majesty's Privy
Chamber.

But to return to the Fight, The Spanish Ships which attempted to board the
Revenge, as they were wounded and beaten off, so allways others came in their
places, she having never less then two mighty Gallions by by her sides, and
aboard her: So that e'ere the Morning, from Three of the Clock the day before,
there had Fifteen several Armadas assailed her, and all so ill approved their
entertainment, as they were by the break of day, far more willing to hearken to
a Composition, then hastily to make any more Assaults or Entries. But as the
day increased, so our men decreased: and as the light grew more and more, by so
much more grew our discomforts. For none appeared in fight but enemies, saving
one small Ship called the Pilgrim, commanded by Jacob Whiddon, who hovered all
night to see the Success: but in the morning bearing with the Revenge, was
hunted like a Hare amongst many ravenous Hounds, but escaped.

All the Powder of the Revenge to the last Barrel was now spent, all her Pikes
broken, Forty of her best men slain, and the most part of the rest hurt. In the
beginning of the Fight she had but one hundred free from Sickness, and
fourscore and ten Sick, laid in Hold upon the Ballast. A small Troup to man
such a Ship, and a weak Garrison to resist so mighty an Army. By those hundred
all was sustained, the volleis, boordings, and entrings of fifteen Ships of
War, besides those which beat her at large. On the contrary, the Spanish were
always supplied with Soldiers brought from every Squadron: all-manner of Arms
and Powder at will. Unto ours there remained no comfort at all, no hope, no
supply either of Ships, Men, or Weapons; the Masters all beaten over-bord, all
her tackle cut asunder, her upper work altogether rased, and in effect evened
she was with the water, but the very foundation or bottom of a Ship, nothing
being left over-head either for flight or defense. Sir Richard finding himself
in this distress, and unable any longer to make resistance, having endured in
this fifteen hours Fight, the Assault of fifteen several Armadas, all by turns
aboard him, and by estimation eight hundred Shot of great Artillery, besides
many Assaults and Entries: and that Himself and the Ship must needs be
possessed by the Enemy, who were now all cast in a ring round about him (the
Revenge not able to move one way or other, but as she was moved with the waves
and billow of the Sea) commanded the Master Gunner, whom he knew to be a most
resolute man, to split and sink the Ship, that thereby nothing might remain of
Glory or Victory to the Spaniards: Seeing in so many hours fight, and with so
great a Navy they were not able to take her, having had Fifteen hours time,
above ten Thousand Men, and Fifty and three Sail of Men of War to perform it
withal: The Spanish 53. Sail.
and persuaded the Company, or as many as he could induce, to yield themselves
unto God, and to the mercy of none else: but as they had, like Valiant Resolute
Men, repulsed so many Enemies, they should not now shorten the Honor of their
Nation, by prolonging their own Lives for a few Hours, or a few Days. The
Master Gunner readily condesended and diverse others; but the Captain and the
Master were of another opinion, and besought Sr Richard to have care of them;
alleging that the Spaniards would be as ready to entertain a Composition, as
they were willing to offer the same; and that there being diverse sufficient and
Valiant Men yet living, and whose Wounds were not Mortal, they might do their
Country and Prince acceptable Service hereafter. And whereas, Sir Richard had
alleged that the Spaniards should never Glory to have taken one Ship of her
Majesty, seeing they had so long and so notably defended themselves; they
answered, that the Ship had Six-foot Water in hold, Three shot under Water,
which were so weakly stopped, as with the first working of the Sea, she must
needs Sink, and was besides so Crushed and Bruised, as she could never be
removed out of the Place.

And as the matter was thus in dispute, and Sr Richard refusing to hearken to
any of those reasons; the Master of the Revenge (while the Captain wan unto him
the greater Party) was conveyed aboard the General Don Alfonso Bazan. Who
(finding none overhasty to enter the Revenge again, doubting least Sr Richard
would have Blown them up and himself, and perceiving by the Report of the
Master of the Revenge his dangerous disposition) yielded that all their Lives
should be saved, the Company sent for England, and the better sort to pay such
reasonable Ransom as their Estate would bear, and in the mean Season to be free
from Gally, or Imprisonment. To this he so much the rather condescended as
well, as I have said, for fear of further less and mischief to themselves, as
also for the desire he had to recover Sir Richard Granvill, whom for his
notable valor he seemed greatly to Honor and Admire.

When this answer was returned, and that safety of Life was promised, the
Common sort being now at the end of their Peril, the most drew back from Sir
Richard, and the Master Gunner; being no hard matter to dissuade men from Death
to Life. The Master Gunner finding himself and Sir Richard thus prevented and
Mastered by the greater number, would have slain himself with a Sword, had he
not been by force withheld and locked into his Cabin. Then the General sent
many Boats aboard the Revenge, and diverse of our men fearing Sir Richards
disposition, Stole away aboard the General and other Ships; Sir Richard thus
over-matched was sent unto by Alfonso Bazan to remove out of the Revenge, the
Ship being Mavelous unsavory, filled with Blood and Bodies of Dead, and
Wounded men like a Slaughter house. Sir Richard answered, that he might do with
his Body what he list, for he esteemed it not, and as he was carried out of the
Ship he Sounded, and Reviving again desired the Company to pray for him. The
General used Sir Richard with all Humanity, and left nothing unattempted that
tended to his Recovery, highly commending his Valor and worthiness, and
greatly bewailing the danger wherein he was, being unto them a Rare Spectacle,
and a Resolution seldom approved, to see one Ship turn toward so many Enemies,
to endure the charge and boording of so many huge Armadas, and to resist and
repel the assaults and entries of so many Soldiers. All which and more is
confirmed by a Spanish Captain of the same Armada, and a present actor in the
fight, who being severed from the Rest in a Storm, was by the Lion of London, a
small Ship, taken, and is now Prisoner in London.

The General Commander of the Armada, was Don Alphonso Bazan, Brother to the
Marquess of Santa Cruz. The Admiral of the Biscaine Squadron, was Britandona,
of the Squadron of Sivil the Marquess of Arumburch. The Hulks and Flyboats were
Commanded by Luis Coutinho. There were Slain and Drowned in this fight, well
near One Thousand of the Enemies, and Two special Commanders Don Luis de Sant
John, and Don George de Prunaria de Mallaga, as the Spanish Captain confesses,
besides diverse others of special account, whereof as yet report is not made.

The Admiral of the Hulks and the Ascension of Sivil were both Sunk by the side
of the Revenge; one other recovered the Rode of Saint Michael, and sunk also
there; a fourth ran her self with the Shore to save her men. Sir Richard died,
as it is said, the Second or Third day aboard the General, and was by them
greatly bewailed. What became of his body, whether it were buried in the Sea or
on the Land we know not: the comfort that remains to his Friends is, that he
has ended his Life honorably, in respect of the reputation won to his Nation
and Country, and of the same to his Posterity, and that being dead, he has not
outlived his own honor.

For the rest of her Majesty's Ships that entered not so far into the Fight as
the Revenge, the reasons and causes were these. There were of them but six in
all whereof two but small Ships; the Revenge engaged past recovery: The Island
of Flores was on the one side, 53 Sail of the Spanish, divided into Squadrons
on the other, all as full filled with Soldiers as they could contain: Almost
the one half of our men sick and not able to serve: The Ships grown foul,
unromaged, and scarcely able to bear any Sail for want of Balast, having been
six months at the Sea before. If all the rest had entered, all had been lost:
for the very hugeness of the Spanish Fleet, if no other Violence had been
offered, would have crushed them between them into Shivers. Of which the
dishonor and loss to the Queen had been far greater then the spoil or harm
that the Enemy could any way have received. Notwithstanding it is very true,
that the Lord Thomas would have entered between the Squadrons, but the rest
would not condescend, and the Master of his own Ship offered to leap into the
Sea, rather then to conduct that her Majesty's Ship, and the rest, to be a prey
to the Enemy, where there was no hope nor Possibility either of Defense or
Victory. Which also in my opinion had ill sorted or answered the discretion and
trust of a General, to commit himself and his charge to an assured
destruction, without hope, or any likelihood of prevailing: thereby to diminish
the Strength of her Majesty's Navy, and to enrich the pride and glory of the
Enemy. The Foresight of the Queens commanded by Mr Thomas Vavisor performed a
very great Fight, and staid two hours as near the Revenge as as the Weather
would permit him, not forsaking the Fight, 'till he was like to be encompassed
by the Squadrons, and with great difficulty cleared himself. The rest gave
diverse volleis of Shot, and entered as far as the place permitted, and their own
necessities, to keep the weathergage of the Enemy, until they were parted by
night. A few days after the Fight was ended, and the English Prisoners
dispersed into the Spanish and Indie Ships, there arose so great a Storm from
the West and North-West, that all the Fleet was dispersed, as well the Indian
Fleet which were then come unto them, as the rest of the Armada that attended
their arrival, of which 14 Sail, together with the Revenge and in her 200
Spaniards, were cast away upon the Isle of St Michael So it pleased them to
honor the burial of that renowned Ship the Revenge, not suffering her to
perish alone, for the great honor she achieved in her life time. On the rest
of the Islands there were cast away in this Storm 15 or 16 more of the Ships of
War: and of an hundred and odd Sail of the Indie Fleet, expected this year in
Spain: What in this Tempest, and what before in the Bay of Mexico, and about
the Bermudas, there were 70 and odd consumed and lost, with those taken by our
Ships of London, besides one very rich Indian Ship, which set her self on fire,
being boarded by the Pilgrim, and five other taken by Master Wats his Ship of
London, between the Havana and Cape S. Antonio. The fourth of this Month of
November we received Letters from the Tercera, affirming that there are 3000
bodies of men remaining in that Island, saved out of the perished Ships, and
that by the Spaniards own confession, there are 10000 cast away in this Storm,
besides those that are perished between the Islands and the Main. Thus it has
pleased God to fight for us, and to defend the Justice of our Cause, against
the ambitious and bloody pretenses of the Spaniard, who seeking to devour all
Nations, are Themselves devoured. A manifest testimony how injust and
displeasing, their attempts are in the sight of God, who has pleased to
witness by the success of their affairs his mislike of their bloody and
injurious designs purposed and practiced against all Christian Princes, over
whom they seek unlawful and ungodly Rule and Empery.

One day or two before this Wrack happened to the Spanish Fleet, when as some
of our Prisoners desired to be set on shore upon the Islands, hoping to be from
thence transported into England, which liberty was formerly by the General
promised: One Morice Fitz. John, Son of Old John of Desmond, a notable Traitor,
Cousin German to the late Earl of Desmond, was sent to the English from Ship to
Ship, to persuade them to serve the King of Spain, the arguments he used to
induce them were these. The increase of Pay which he promised to be trebled:
advancement to the better sort: and the exercise of the True Catholic
Religion, and safety of their Souls to all. For the first, even the beggarly
and unnatural behavior of those English and Irish Rebels, that served the
King in that present action, was sufficient to answer that first argument of
rich Pay. For so poor and beggarly they were, as for want of Apparel they
stripped their poor Countrymen Prisoners out of their ragged Garments worn to
nothing by six Months service, and spared not to despoil them even of their
bloody Shirts, from their wounded bodies, and the very Shoes from their feet;
A notable testimony of their rich entertainment and great Wages. The second
reason was hope of advancement if they served well, and would continue
faithful to the King. But what man can be so blockishly ignorant ever to
expect place or honor from a foreign King, having no other argument or
persuasion then his own disloyalty; to be unnatural to his own Country that
bred him; to his Parents that begat him; and rebellious to his true Prince, to
whose obedience he is bound by Oath, by Nature, and by Religion: No, they are
only assured to be employed in all desperate enterprises, to be held in scorn
and disdain ever among those whom they serve. And that ever Traitor was either
trusted or advanced I could never yet read, neither can I at this time
remember any example. And no man could have less becommed the place of an
Orator for such a purpose, then this Morice of Desmond. For the Earl his Cousin
being one of the greatest Subjects in that Kingdom of Ireland, having almost
whole Countries in his possession; so many goodly Manors, Castles, and
Lordships; the Count Palatine of Kerry five hundred Gentlemen of his own name
and family to follow him, besides others (all which he possessed in peace for
three or four hundred years) was in less then three years after his adhering to
the Spaniards and Rebellion, beaten from all his holds, not so many as ten
Gentlemen of his name left living, himself taken and beheaded by a Soldier of
his own Nation, and his Land given by a Parliament to her Majesty, and
possessed by the English: His other Cousin Sir John of Desmond taken by Master
John Zouch, and his body hanged over the Gates of his native City to be
devoured by Ravens: the third Brother Sr James hanged, drawn, and quartered in
the same place. If he had withal vaunted of his success of his own house, no
doubt the Argument would have moved much, and wrought great effect; which
because he for that present forgot, I thought it good to remember in his
behalf. For matter of Religion it would require a particular Volume, if I
should set down how irreligiously they cover their greedy and ambitious
pretenses, with that veil of Piety. But sure I am, that there is no Kingdom or
Commonwealth in all Europe* but if they be reformed, they then Invade it for
Religion sake, if it be, as they term Catholic, they pretend Title; as if the
Kings of Castile were the natural heirs of all the world: and so between both,
no Kingdom is unsought. Where they dare not with their own forces to invade,
they basely entertain the Traitors and Vagabonds of all Nations: seeking by
those and by their runnagate Jesuits to win parts, and have by that means
ruined many noble Houses and others in this Land, and have extinguished both
their Lives and Families. What good, honor, or fortune ever Man yet by them
achieved, is yet unheard of, or unwritten. And if our English Papists do but
look into Portugal, against which they have no pretense of Religion, how the
Nobility are put to death, imprisoned, their rich men made a Prey, and all
sorts of People Captived; they shall find that the Obedience even of the Turks
is easy and a Liberty, in respect of the Slavery and Tyranny of Spain. What
have they done in Sicill, in Naples, Millaine, and in the Low Countries; who
has there been spared for Religion at all? And it comes to my remembrance of
a certain Burger of Antwerpe, whose House being entered by a Company of Spanish
Soldiers, when they first Sacked the City, he besought them to spare him and
his Goods, being a Good Catholic, and one of their own Party and Faction; The
Spaniards answered, that they knew him to be of a good Conscience for himself;
but his Money, Plate, Jewels, and Goods, were all Heretical, and therefore good
prize. So they abused and tormented the Foolish Fleming, who hoped that an
Agnus Dei had been a sufficient target against all force of that Holy and
Charitable Nation. Neither have they at any time as they protest, invaded the
Kingdoms of the Indies and Peru, and elsewhere, but only led thereunto, rather
to reduce the People to Christianity, then for either Gold or Empery; whenas in
one only Island called Hispaniola, they have Wasted Thirty Hundred Thousand of
the Natural People* besides many Millions else in other places of the Indies:
A poor and harmless people Created of God, and might have been wonn to his
knowledge, as many of them were; and almost as many as ever were persuaded
there unto: The Story whereof is at large, Written by a Bishop of their own
Nation, called Bartholomew de las Casas, and Translated into English, and many
other Languages, entitled, The Spanish Cruelties. Who would therefore repose
trust in such a Nation of Ravenous Strangers, and especially in those
Spaniards, which more greedily thirst after English Blood, then after the lives
of any other people of Europe, for the many overthrows and Dishonours they have
received at our hands, whose Weakness we have discovered to the World, and
whose forces at home, abroad, in Europe, in India, by Sea and Land, we have
even with handfulls of men and Ships, Overthrown and Dishonored. Let not
therefore any Englishman, of what Religion soever, have other opinion of the
Spaniards, but that those whom he seeks to winn of our Nation, he esteems
base and Traitorous, unworthy persons, or unconstant fools; and that he uses
his pretense of Religion, for no other purpose but to bewitch us from the
Obedience of our Natural Prince; thereby hoping in time to bring us to Slavery
and Subjection, and then none shall be unto them so odious and disdained as the
Traitors themselves, who have sold their Country to a Stranger, and forsaken
their faith and Obedience contrary to Nature and Religion; and contrary to that
humane and general honor, not only of Christians, but of Heathen and
Irreligious Nations; who have always sustained what labor soever, and embraced
even Death it self, for their Country, Prince, or Common wealth. To conclude,
it has ever to this day pleased God to prosper and defend her Majesty, to
break the purposes of Malicious Enemies, of forsworn Traitors, and of unjust
Practices and Invasions. She has ever been Honored of the Worthiest Kings,
Served by faithful Subjects, and shall by the favor of God, Resist, Repel
and Confound all whatsoever attempts against her Sacred Person or Kingdom. In
the mean time, Let the Spaniard and Traitor vaunt of their Success, and we her
true and obedient Vassals, guided by the shining light of of her Virtues, shall
always love her, serve her, and obey her to the End of our Lives.

His Majesty's Royal Warrant to the Earl of Bathe, then Sr. John Granvill, at
Brussels, immediately before his Restoration.
CHARLES R.

IN consideration of the many Services done us by our Right Trusty and
Well-beloved Servant Sr. John Granvill (one of the Gentlemen of our
Bedchamber) and his Father, the most Valiant and Loyal Sir Bevill Granvill,
who most Honorably lost his Life at the Battle of Landsdown, in the Defense
and Service of the Crown, against the Rebels, after he had performed many
other great and signal Services.

But more especially in consideration of the late most extraordinary Services
(never to be forgotten by us or our Posterity) which the said Sr. John Granvill
has lately rendered us in his Person, in his secret, prudent and most faithful
Transactions and Negotiations, in concluding that most happy Treaty which he
had lately, by our special Command and Commission, with our Famous and Renowned
General Monk; and wherein he alone (and no other) was entrusted by Us,
concerning the said Treaty, about those most important Affairs for our
Restoration; which he has most faithfully performed with great prudence, care,
secresy and advantage for our Service, without any conditions imposed upon us
beyond our expectation, and the Commission we gave him; whereof we doubt not,
but by Gods blessing, we shall speedily see the effects of our said happy
Restoration. We are graciously pleased to promise, upon the Word of a King,
that as soon as we are arrived in England, and it shall please God to restore
us to our Crown of that Kingdom; We will confer upon our said right Trusty and
well-beloved Servant Sir John Granvill the place and office of Groom of our
Stole, and First Gentlemen of our Bedchamber (with all Fees, Pensions, and
Perquisites thereunto belonging) together with the Title and Dignity of an Earl
of our Kingdom of England: And the better to support the said Title of Honor,
and to reward as we ought those many great services, and to recompense the
losses and sufferings of him and his Family; We are further graciously pleased
to promise upon our said Royal Word, to pay all the Debts that he the said Sir
John Granvill, or his Father have contracted in the late Wars, in our service,
or in our Royal Fathers of Blessed Memory; and also to bestow and settle, in
good Land in England, an Estate of Inheritance to the value of at least 3000 l.
per annum, upon him the said Sir John Granvill, and his Heirs for ever; to
remain as a perpetual acknowledgement for his said services; and as a Testimony
of our Grace and Favor toward, him, and that Ancient and Loyal Family of the
Granvills, unto all Posterity. Given at our Court at Brussels, the 2d of April,
in the 12th year of our Reign 1660.

By his Majesty's Command Edw. Nicholas.

FINIS.

