OBSERVATIONS BOTH Historical and Moral UPON THE BURNING OF LONDON, September
1666.

With an Account of the LOSSES.

And a most remarkable Parallel between LONDON and MOSCO, both as to the PLAGUE
and FIRE.

Also an Essay touching the Easterly-Winde.

Written by way of Narrative, for satisfaction of the present and future Ages.

By Rege Sincera.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Ratcliffe, and are to be fold by Robert Pawlet at the
Bible in Chancery Lane. 1667.

To his much honored and respected Friend JOHN BULLER Esquire A Worthy Member of
the Honorable House of COMMONS.
SIR,
THis little Treatise having lain dormant in a corner of my Desk ever since his
Birth, (which was three weeks after the Fire) has got at last so much strength
as to walk abroad. The reason of his long repose was, that I expected when some
more pregnant Wit and better Pen would have undertaken this Task, which is
altogether out of my Profession and Employment: But finding that hitherto all
that has been written concerning it, as to the Narrative of its beginning,
progress and ending, has been thought defective, I have given it leave to show
it self abroad, with Observations thereon, under Your Honorable Name, as well
to avoid the malignancy of Censure, as to testify unto the World how much I am

Your humble and affectionate Servant, Rege Sincera.

Observations and Reflections, both Historical and Moral, upon the last
lamentable FIRE that happened in the famous CITY of LONDON, the Second Day of
September, Anno 1666.
BEfore we proceed any further in the examination of so lamentable and dismal a
Subject, we have thought fitting, for the curiosity of those that shall read
these Lines, and for the satisfaction of Posterity, in whose hands it may
chance to come, to set down the true and naked Narrative of the Fact as it did
happen, and as it has been printed by the consent of His Majesty, and of the
Public Authority, that the Reader being made certain of the truth of the
Accident, may the more willingly proceed to the Examination of those
Observations we have made upon it.

Whitehall, September 8.
ON the Second instant, at one of the Clock in the morning, there happened to
break out a sad and deplorable Fire in Pudding-lane near New-Fishstreet; which
falling out at that hour of the night, and in a quarter of the Town (so close
built with Wooden pitched Houses,) spread it self so far before day, and with
such distraction to the Inhabitants and Neighbors, that care was not taken for
the timely preventing the further diffusion of it, by pulling down Houses, as
it ought to have been; so that this lamentable Fire in a short time became too
bigg to be mastered by any Engines, or working near it. It fell out most
unhappily too, that a violent Easterly wind fomented it, and kept it burning
all that day, and the night following spread it self up to Grace Church Street,
and downwards from Canon-street to the Waterside, as far as the Three Cranes
in the Vintrey.

The People in all parts about it, distracted by the vastness of it, and their
particular care to carry away their Goods, many attempts were made to prevent
the spreading of it, by pulling down Houses, and making great Intervals, but
all in vain, the Fire seizing upon the Timber and Rubbish, and so continuing it
self even through those spaces, and raging in a bright flame all Monday and
Tuesday, notwithstanding His Majesty's own, and his Royal Highness
indefatigable and personal pains to apply all possible remedies to prevent it,
calling upon and helping the People with their Guards, and a great number of
Nobility and Gentry unweariedly assisting therein; for which they were requited
with a thousand blessings from the poor distressed People. By the favor of God
the wind slackned a little on Tuesday night, and the Flames meeting with
Brick-buildings at the Temple, by little and little it was observed to lose its
force on that side, so that on Wednesday morning we began to hope well, and his
Royal Highness never despairing, or slackning his personal care, wrought so
well that day, assisted in some parts by the Lords of the Council before and
behind it, that a stop was put to it at the Temple-Church, near Holborn-bridge,
Pye-corner, Aldersgate, Cripple-gate, near the lower end of Coleman-street, at
the end of Basinghall-street, by the Postern, at the upper end of
Bishopsgate-street, and Leadenhall-street, at the Standard in Cornhill, at the
Church in Fanchurch-street, near Clothworkers-hall in Mincing-lane, at the
middle of Mark-lane, and at the Tower-Dock.

On Thursday, by the blessing of God, it was wholly beat down and extinguished,
but so as that Evening it unhappily broke out again at the Temple, by the
falling of some sparks (as is supposed) upon a pile of Wooden buildings, but
His Royal Highness, who watched there that whole night in person, by the great
labors and diligence used, and especially by their applying powder to blow up
the Houses about it, before day most happily mastered it.

Diverse Strangers, Dutch and French, were during the Fire apprehended, upon
suspicion that they contributed most mischievously to it, who were all
imprisoned, and informations prepared to make a severe inquisition thereupon by
my Lord Chief Justice Keeling, assisted by some of the Lords of the
Privy Council, and some principal Members of the City; notwithstanding which
suspicions, the manner of the burning all along in a train, and so blown
forwards in all its way by strong winds, make us conclude the Whole was an
effect of an unhappy Chance, or to speak better, the heavy hand of God upon us
for our Sins, showing us the terror of his Judgments in thus raising the
Fire; and immediately after his miraculous, and never enough to be acknowledged
mercy, in putting a stop to it when we were in the last despair, and that all
attempts for the quenching it, however industriously pursued, seemed
insufficient. His Majesty then sat hourly in Council, and in his own person
making rounds about the City, in all parts of it where the danger and mischief
was greatest, till next morning, that he has sent his Grace the Duke of
Arbemarle, whom he called from Sea to assist him in this great occasion, to put
his happy and succesfull hand to the finishing of this memorable Deliliverance.

About the Tower the seasonable Orders given for plucking down Houses to secure
the Magazins of Powder was more especially successful, that part being up the
wind; notwithstanding which, it came almost to the very Gates of it, so as by
this early provision the several Stores of War lodged in the Tower were
entirely saved; and we have further this infinite cause, particularly to give
God thanks, that the Fire did not happen in any of those places where his
Majesty's Naval-stores are kept; so though it has pleased God to visit us with
his own hand, he has not by dis-furnishing us with the means of carrying on
the War, subjected us unto all our Enemies.

Through this sad accident it is easy to be imagined, how many Persons were
necessitated to remove themselves and Goods into the open Fields, where they
were forced to continue some time, which could not but work compassion in the
Beholders. But His Majesty's care was most signal in this occasion, who,
besides his personal pains, was frequent in consulting always for relieving
those distressed persons; which produced so good effect, as well by His
Majesty's Proclamations, and the Orders issued to the Neighbors Justices of
Peace, to encourage the sending in of Provision to the Markets, which are
publicly known, as by other directions, that when His Majesty fearing lest
other Orders might not yet have been sufficient, had commanded the Victualer of
his Navy to send Bread into Morefields for relief of the Poor, which for the
more speedy supply he sent in Baskets out of the Sea-stores, it was found that
the Markets had been already so well supplied, that the People being
unaccustomed to that kind of Bread, declined it, and so it was returned in
great part to His Majesty's Stores again, without any use made of it.

And we cannot but observe, to the confutation of all His Majesty's Enemies,
who endeavor to persuade the World abroad of great Parties and Disaffection at
home against his Majesty's Government, that a greater instance of the affection
of this City could never be given, than has been now given in this sad and
deplorable accident, when, if at any time, disorder might have been expected
from the losses, distraction, and almost desperation of some Persons in their
private Fortunes, thousands of people not having to cover them. And yet in all
this time, it has been so far from any appearance of Designs or Attempts
against His Majesty's Government, His Majesty and His Royal Brother out of
their care to stop and prevent the Fire, frequently exposing their Persons with
very small Attendants in all parts of the Town, sometimes even to be intermixed
with those who labored in the Business, yet nevertheless there has not been
observed so much as a murmuring word to fall from any; but on the contrary,
even those Persons whose Losses rendered their Condition most desperate, and to
be fit objects of their Prayers, beholding those frequent instances of His
Majesty's care of His People, forgot their own misery, and filled the Streets
with their Prayers for His Majesty, whose Trouble they seemed to compassionate
before their own.

Observations.
THe Philosophers, Rhetoricians and Lawyers do agree, that all the
circumstances of a fact, are happily contained in a Latin Verse framed for
that purpose, as well to illustrate the Method, which is the life of History,
as to help the Memory, which is to reap the benefit of it: the Verse runs
thus;

Quis, quid, ubi, quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando?
Who has done it, what has he done,
Where, by what means, wherefore, how, when?
Although these Disjunctives seem at first sight to carry no great sense,
nevertheless when they shall be thoroughly examined it will be found, that they
do contain all what can be said upon a subject, and that out of them as out of
so many living springs may be drawn all what is necessary for the clearing of a
propounded Question; and we will not be ashamed in this to follow the method of
the Schools and the authority of the learned, knowing that whatsoever fault
shall be found in it, will rather be imputed to our incapacity then to the
foundation we have built upon. Therefore to begin.

Quis? Who has done it? SECT. I.
FOR the clearing of the darkness wherein the humane understanding is naturally
wrapped up in distinguishing the several accidents and events that happen daily
in this sublunary World. The Philosophers have establishing two principal
causes, whereunto every one may have his recourse for his satisfaction and the
securing of himself, that nothing happens by chance, which is the opinion of
desperate and Atheistical persons. The first and universal cause is God
Almighty, who as he alone has created the World, so has he also reserved to
himself alone the government thereof, insomuch that the least accidents that
befall, depend merely from his providence, neither is there any thing hidden to
him with whom we have to do; it is he without whose leave and knowledge not a
hair falls from our heads, and who tells us by his Prophet that There is no
evil in the City but he has done it. This is that first Cause which ought to
captivate our understandings under its will, to make us admit all Events with
an equal mind, and submit our patience to his dispensations, saying with David,
I did hold my peace because thou did it, Psalm. 50. verse. 21. The other Causes
are called Second causes, because most commonly God makes use of them for the
accomplishing of his will, and these are divided into as many branches as there
are individual creatures in the World. By these a man lives, being begotten by
the seed of his parents; dies being suffocated, falls being drunk, is
drowned in making shipwreck, etc. Where it is to be observed that several
second Causes may concur together to the production of one and the same
effect; as in this sad and lamentable Accident we see the carelessness of a
Baker, the solitariness and darkness of the Night, the disposition of old and
ruinous Buildings, the narrowness of the Streets, the abundance of combustible
and Bituminous matter, the foregoing Summer extraordinary hot and dry, a
violent Eastern Wind, and the want of Engines and Water, concur as it were
unanimously to the production of this wonderful Conflagration, and to do in
four days what four Armies of Enemies (not opposed) could scarce have done in
eight. The Astrologers, whose science is as abstruse as uncertain, would fain
introduce another cause between the first and the second, to wit, the position
and influence of the Celestial bodies; but this accident will contribute much
to stop their mouths: for either they could not foresee it, or else having
foreseen it, they should have given us praecaution of it, as they do of many
other more frivolous things, and of less consequence then this; and which are
never true but by a supposition that (...) do not happen in our Country, they
may (...) Let us therefore conclude, that the two Causes above mentioned, that
is, first and second, are sufficient to move us to humble our selves in the
sight of God, who having the year before destroyed in the space of Six months
about an Hundred thousand people; and seeing our impenitent hearts and seared
consciences return again to our first vomiting, of Pride, Drunkenness,
Swearing, False dealings, Whoring, Treachery, and other vices; after he has
taken away the health of some, he takes away the wealth of others, and
threatens the rest with an impendent Famine by the last excessive Rains he did
send, and may send again in this Sowing-time; and it will avail nothing here to
say, as I have heard many, that other Countries, as France and Italy are guilty
of as many if not greater Crimes then we are, seeing that God chastises every
son he loves, and that he begins his Judgments by his own household, and
this Nation having received more prosperities and blessings from his hands then
any other, and accordingly more peculiarly bound to serve and obey him then all
the rest, whom he will find well enough when he sees his due appointed time:
For that servant that knew his lords will and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that knew not
and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be heaten with few stripes: For
unto whom much is given, of him shall be much required, and to whom men have
committed much, of him they will ask the more. Luke, chapter 12. v. 47, 48.

Quid? What has he done? SECT. II.
THE Answer is easy. An Incendie, a Conflagration, a Ruin and devastation by
Fire, such (as I believe) did never happen by any natural and ordinary means,
for that of Sodom and Gomorrah was supernatural and miraculous, the like being
never heard before nor after, that it should rain Fire and Brimstone suddenly,
and in such a quantity in fair weather; for the Scripture mentions that the
Sun was risen upon the Earth, besides, that instead of calcining the said Towns
into powder, as Fire and Brimstone will do all solid bodies, it not only
turned them, but also the ground on which they stood into a bottomless
bituminous Lake, which to this day remains before our eyes for a fearful
Example of the hainousness of Sin, and of the severity of God's Justice.
Concerning the conflagration of Troy, and that of Rome: The first may be
fabulous, or exagerated by the familiar Hyperboles of Poets to whose relation
chiefly we owe our belief in that point. As for that of Rome it is to be
believed, that those heaps of Stones and Marbles of which she was then builded,
gave a great check, if not a stop to the raging of the Fire, and stood in the
way of the Tyrants pleasure. Concerning others, as that of Turkish His story.
Constantinople, (...) Cromen.
Cracow, Paulus Jovius 12 Book.
Venice, Cusomion in vita Emp.
Vienna in Austria, Ad Junius.
Delf in Holland, Guicciard (...) 12 Book.
Malines and Antwerp, they came nothing near this which in three days and
three nights of about 460 acres of Ground upon which the City of London stood,
has swept away about 350, which is at the rate of four parts in five, having
destroyed about 12000 Houses, 87 Parochial Churches, besides 6 or 7 consecrated
Chapels, and the magnificent and stately Cathedral Church of St. Paul, the
public and most excellent buildings of the Exchange, Guildhall, Custom-house,
and all or very near the Halls belonging to every private Company, besides an
innumerable quantity of Goods of all sorts, this City being the best Magazin
not only of England, but also of all Europe; but amongst the rest it was a
Treasure unspeakable of four Commodities, which for their luggage and
cumbersomness, could not be rescued from the jaws of that unmercifull Element,
that is Wine, Tobacco, Spices and Books. As for Books, the Booksellers who
dwelled for the most part round about the Cathedral Church, had sheltered their
Books in a subterraneal Church under the Cathedral, called St. Faiths, which
was proped up with so strong an Arch and massy Pillars, that it seemed
impossible the Fire could do any harm to it; but the Fire having crept into it
through the Windows, it seized upon the Pews, and did so try and examine the
Arch and Pillars by sucking the moisture of the mortar that bound the Stones
together, that it was calcined into Sand: So that when the top of the Cathedral
fell upon it, it beat it flat, and set all things in an irremediable flame. I
have heard judicious men of that Trade affirm, that the only loss of Books in
that place, and Stationers' Hall, public Libraries, and private persons Houses,
could amount to no less than 150000 pound. I have seen Bells, and Iron Wares
melted, Glass and Earthen pots melted together, as it had been by a fire or
fusion; the most bigg and solid Stones (as those of the Cathedral) slit,
scaled, and in some parts calcined to powder by the violence of the frames.
Nevertheless, as Gods mercy is above all his works, and remembereth it always
amongst his judgments, I could not learn of above half a dozen People that did
perish by that woeful Conflagration; one of them was of my Acquaintance, and a
Watch-maker living in Shooelane behind the Globe-Tavern, his name was Paul
Lawell, born in Strasbourg, who being about 80 years of age, and dull of
hearing, was also deaf to the good admonitions of his Son and Friends, and
would neyer desert the House till it fell upon him, and sunk him with the
ruins, in the Cellar, where afterward his Bones, together with his Keys, were
found.

Although the loss of so famous a CITY, and of the Riches contained within its
Precinct be inestimable, nevertheless to satisfy the curiosity of the Reader,
and that of Posterity, as also to give some light unto those, who, with a more
mature deliberation, shall attempt the full History of it; we will set down the
chiefest Heads by which it is valued, leaving the liberty to the judicions
Reader to add to or substract from as he shall think fit; for we do not
pretend here to give an exact account of all the Losses, which we hope some
better, Wits, and that are more at leisure, will undertake hereafter, But
only to invite them by this to a more curious and earnest enquiry of the
Truth, and so transmit to Posterity a fearful Example of God's Judgment, that
they may in avoiding Sin, also avoid the like, to the glory and praise of his
most holy Name.

Let it therefore be said again, that by the computation of the best
Geometricians, the City of LONDON within the Walls was seated upon about 460
Acres of Ground, wherein were built about 15000 Houses, besides Churches,
Chapels, Schools, Halls, and public Buildings; out of this quantity of Houses
12000 are thought to be burnt, which is four parts of five, each House being
valued one with another at Twenty five pound a years Rent, which at Twelve
years Purchase makes Three hundred pound, the whole (...).

Fourscore and seven Parochial Churches, besides that of St. Paul's the
Cathedral, and six consecrated Cliappels, the Exchange, Guildhall,
Custom House, the Halls of Companies, and other Public Buildings, amounting
to half as much 1800000 l. The Goods that every Private man lost one with
another, valued at half the value of the Houses 1800000 l. About 20 Wharses of
Coals and Wood, valued at a 1000 l. a piece 20000 l. About 100000 Boats and
Barges, 1000 Cart-loads, with Porters to remove the Goods to and fro, as well
for the Houses that were a burning, as for those that stood in fear of it, at
20 shillings a Load 150000 l. Sum 7335000 l.

This being reduced to the Account of French-Money, taking one pound Sterling
for 13 Livers, amounts to 10569675000 Livers.

Now O London! it may well be said of thee, How does the city sit solitary that
was full of people, how is she become widow, she that was great among the
Nations, and Princess among the Provinces? Jerem. Lam. chap. 1.1. But courage O
thou that art now my Country, thou art fallen into the hands of God and not of
men; he that chastises thee is thy Father, and if he has a rod to punish
thee, he has also a staff to comfort thee, turn to him and he will turn to
thee, for he is a merciful, long-suffering, not willing that any should perish,
but that all should come to repentance, therefore be not overwhelmed with
sorrow, no thing has befallen thee, but has happened to others before thee;
and if it be true that the likeness and participation of afflictions does
mitigate the sense of them, that I may something allay thy present sorrow, I
will relate thee a story that has much parallel with thine, to show thou have
not been the only miserable: It is a true one, written and testified by an
Honorable Dutch Merchant who was an eye witness to it; and although it has
been once printed, yet because the Book is scarce, and the Language foreign, I
thought thou would not take it ill if I should impart it unto thee.

Moscow the chief City of all the Countries of the Emperor of Russia, is a
very great City, but not well compacted, it has in compass with the Suburbs,
well inhabited, and as full of people as the Town, about three German leagues
and a half, which makes about 14 English miles; the compass of the Town within
the walls is about three English miles; the streets and path ways are of great
trees set close together, and some boards by the houses side; and it is so
dirty in rainy weather, that it is impossible to go through the City otherwise
then on horseback; according to the custom of the Country where horses are of
small value, and of little expense, never being shod for any journey
whatsoever, unless it be during the Ice. The houses are but one story high, or
two at the most, all built with wood set up at the top one of another; there is
in the City, Suburbs and Castle about 5500 Churches, built for the most part
like Chapels, most of them, with great trees set one upon another; The great
Dukes Lodging is also built of wood, which he thinks wholsomer then stone;
the Castle is pretty well fortified with walls and broad ditches; it occupies
as much room as all the rest of the City. On one side of it dwells the Sins, on
the other the Optisins, who are as the Treasurers of the Great Duk, in whose
hands (as soon as you come) you must put in all your Merchandises; Being
departed from Nerva about the tenth of July 1570. we came on the beginning of
August to Moscow, where I found the Great Duke and his Officers busy in
seeking out about 30 persons, This Great Duke was John Basclides the famous
Tyrant.
who fell all under the sword of the Hangman, except one who was cast alive in
boiling water, and this because they had taken Bribes, most of them were great
Lords, and Familiars with the Great Duke, others were Merchants of Nouogard,
with their Wives Children and Families, accused of Treason in the behalf of the
King of Poland. Few days after, a horrid Plague invaded the town of Moscow, and
the places about it, with such violence, that in four months there died above
250000 people, and it was particularly observed that in eight days, that is,
from the tenth to the eighteenth of August, there died 2703 Priests, and this
Plague did continue so fiercely, that in the end of it, every one wondered when
he met any body of his acquaintance.

This extraordinary misery was so lowed the year after on the fifteenth of May,
by a strange ruin and conflagration; the occasion was, that the Emperor of
the Tartarians, being discontented that the Russians did not pay him some
annual Tribute, and hearing besides that the Great Duke by his tyranny and
massacres had so depopulated the Country, that he should find no great
resistance that way, did summon him to pay the said Tribute, but the Great Duke
returned nothing in answer but spightful and reproachful words; wherefore the
Tartarian came out of his Country about the end of February, followed with an
Army of 100000 horse, who within the space of two months and a half did ride
about 500 German leagues which makes 2000 Englist miles; when they were come
about two days journey from the frontiers of the Duke, he resolved to meet them
and to give them battle, but he lost it with a prodigious slaughter of his men;
The Duke knowing that the Tartarian would seek him out, ran away as fast and as
far as he could; he was only within nine leagues of Moscow, when the Tartarians
came and encompassed the Town, thinking he was within, they set a fire all the
Villages round about it, and seeing that the war would prove too tedious for
them, resolved to burn that great City, or at least the Suburbs of it; for this
purpose having placed their Troops round about it, they set fire on all sides,
so that it seemed a burning Globe; then did arise so fierce and violent a wind,
that it drove the Rafters and long Trees from the Suburbs into the City; the
conslagration was so sudden that no body had time to save himself but in that
place where he was then; the persons that were burnt in this fire were above
200000. which did happen, because the houses are all of wood, and the streets
paved with great Firr-trees set close together, which being Oily and Rosinous
made the incendie unexpressible, so that in four hours time, the City and
Suburbs were wholly consumed. I and a young man of Rochel that was my
Interpreter, were in the middle of the Fire, in a Magazine vaulted with stone,
and extraordinarily strong, whose wall was three foot and a half thick, and had
no Air but on two sides, one wherein was the coming in and going out, which was
a long Alley, in which there was three iron Gates, distant about six foot one
from another; on the other side there was a Window or Grate, fenced with three
iron shutters, distant half a foot one from another, we shut them inwardly as
well as possibly we could; nevertheless, there came in so much smoke, that it
was more then sufficient to choke us, had it not been for some Beer that was
there, with the which we refreshed our selves now and then. Many Lords and
Gentlemen were stifled in the Caves where they had retired, because their
houses being made of great trees, when they fell they crushed down all that was
underneath; others being consumed to ashes, stopped all the passages of going and
coming out, so that for want of Air they all perished. The poor Country people
that had saved themselves in the City, with their Cattle from Threescore miles
round about, seeing the conflagration, ran all into the Marketplace. which is
not paved of wood as the rest; nevertheless they were all roasted there, in such
sort that the tallest man seemed but a child, so much had the fire contracted
their Limbs, and this by reason of the great houses that were round about; a
thing more hideous and frightful then any can imagine. In many places of the
said Market, the bodies were piled one upon another to the height of half a
pike, which put me into a wonderful admiration, being not able to apprehend nor
understand, how it was possible they should be so heaped together.

This wonderful conflagration caused all the Fortifications of the Town wall to
fall; and all the Ordnance that were upon it to burst. The walls were made of
Brick, according to the ancient way of building, without either Fortifications
or Ditches; many that had saved themselves along them, were nevertheless
roasted, so fierce and vehement was the fire, among them many Italians and
Walloons of my acquaintance; while the fire lasted, we thought that a million
of Cannons had been thundering together, and our thoughts were upon nothing but
death, thinking that the fire would last some days, because of the great
circumference of the Castle and Suburbs; but all this was done in less then
four hours time, at the end of which, the noise growing less, we were curious
to know whether the Tartarians, of whom we stood in no less fear then of the
fire, were entered. They are a Warlike people, though they eat nothing but
Roots, and such other like substance, and drink only Water. The greatest Lords
among them feed upon Flesh baked between a Horse and the Saddle, wherein rides
the Horseman: nevertheless are they very strong, lusty, and inured to all
hardship, as also are their Horses, who are wonderful swift, and will travel
further in one day, eating nothing but Grass, then ours will do in three
feeding upon Oats; therefore the Tartarians come so easily from so far to
invade the Russians. They have also that craft, that they only come in the
Summer for the convenience of their horses; their Country is temperate, from
whence they come about the latter end of February, that they may be in Russia
about the beginning of June, and go back again into their own country at the
end of it, least they should be overtaken by the winter in Russia, which if i^
should fall out they would be all starved because of the great deserts
uninhabited, containing above Three hundred German leagues, and therefore void
of all relief, as well for themselves as for their horses, there being then no
grass upon the ground, which constrains them to make such a journey, which is
of above 1200 German leagues in four or five months time with all their Army,
which consists commonly of about 150000 or 200000 horses as good as can be,
but the horsemen are but slightly armed, having for all weapons a jack of Mail,
a Dart, and Bow and Arrows, they know nothing of what belongs to Guns,
having in all heir Country but Two Cities, wherein the Emperor keeps his
Court, without any Villages or Houses, but are contented to live under Tents,
which they remove to and fro as they see occasion.

But to come again to our Misery, after we had hearkened a while, we hard some
Russians running to and fro through the smoke, who were talking of walling the
Gates to prevent the coming in of the Tartarians, who were expecting when the
fire went out. I and my Interpreter being come out of the Magazine, found the
Ashes so hot that we durst scarce tread upon them, but necessity compelling us
we ran toward the chief Gate, where we found Twenty five or Thirty men escaped
from the fire, with whom in few hours we did wall that Gate and the rest, and
kept a strict watch all that night with some Guns that had been preserved from
the fire. In the morning, seeing that the place was not defensible with so few
people as we were, we sought the means to get into the Castle, whose entry was
then inaccessible; the Governor was very glad to hear of our intention, and
cried to us, we should be very welcome, but it was a most difficult thing to
come in, because the Bridges were all burnt, so that we were fain to get over
the wall, having instead of Ladders some high Firr-trees thrown from the Castle
to us, wherein instead of rounds to get up, they had made some notches with a
hatchet to keep us from sliding: we got up then with much ado; for besides the
evident inconveniency of those rough Ladders, we did carry about us the sum of
4000 Thalers, besides some Jewels, which was a great hindrance to us to climb
along those high trees, and that which did double our fear was, that we saw
before our eyes some of our company, that had nothing but their bodies to save,
yet tumble down from the middle of those high trees into the Ditch, full of
burnt bodies, so that we could not tread but upon dead corpses, whose helps
were so thick every where, that we could not avoid to tread upon them, as if it
had been a hill to climb up, and that which did augment our trouble was, that
in treading upon them, the Arms and Legs broke like Glass; the poor Limbs of
these Creatures being calcined by the vehement heat of the fire, and our feet
sinking into those miserable bodies, the blood and the filth did squirt in our
faces, which begot such a stench all the Town over that it impossible to
subsist in it.

The 25th of May in the evening, as we expected in great perplexity what the
Tartarians would attempt against us who were about Four hundred in the Castle:
the Tartarians whom we had saluted with our Guns, and killed some of them that
were come too near one of the Castle-gates, began to go back the same way that
they came in, with so much speed, that the next morning all that torrent was
drained up, for which having given God thanks and set our business in order, as
well as the present calamity would permit, we went away from that desolate
place.

Now O London! consider that thy Fate is not peculiar to thy self, and that
will allay the bitterness of thy sufferings; Remember also, that if thou
sanctifiest this affliction to thy use, the Lord promises by his Prophet, that
those shall reap in joy who did sow in tears, Psalm. 126.6.

Vbi? Where? SECT. III.
IN the richest City of Europe, and perhaps of the world; the greatest Magazine
that could be found for all sorts of Merchandises, incomparable for the
salubritie of the Air, and convenience of situation; Magnificent in public
buildings; Illustrious in good deeds, Renowned for Hospitality, Famous for
government, Venerable for antiquity; having subsisted about Two thousand years;
inhabited by Citizens whose courage was equal to their fortunes; in a word, a
City of which it might be said more truly then of Ormus.

Si terrarum orbis quaqua patet annulus esset;
Londinum illius gemma decusque foret.
This circumstance which we tread over so slightly, that we may not be
suspected of flattery, is not the least that aggravateth the enormity of this
accident, there is none of those characters we have given it, but is very true,
and might be the worthy employment of a better penn then mine, and the subject
of a full volume.

Quibus auxiliis? By whose help? SECT. IV.
HEre we must have recourse to what we have said before in the first
Paragrapht, when we spoke of the second causes, and say that God has made use
chiefly of eight things to accomplish this work. The negligence of the Master
or his Servants, in whose house the fire did first begin; the solitariness of
the night, the narrowness of the place, the weakness of the buildings, the
quantity of combustible and bituminous matters gathered thereabout, the
preceding Summer which was extraordinarily hot and dry, the East wind that blew
violently all that while, and the want of Engines and water to quench the fire;
we shall give every one his little Section, to satisfy the curiosity of these,
who inquire so much of the causes that have made this conflagration so violent,
dismal and irremediable.

I. Though there be some accidents which no humane prudence can prevent; as
when a man either in his own house, or going through the street, is crashed by
a sudden ruin; nevertheless the Philosophers are not to blame, when they say
that every one may be the author of his own fortune, for it is certain, that if
a man neglects or forsakes that providence given him by nature, he does
together forsake the instrument and the means which his good genius makes use
of to make him avoid the ill accidents that may befall him, for as our soul
does only act by the Organs of our body, so our Genius either good or bad
cannot act but by the means of our soul; now if our soul enjoys a sound and
temperate body, and does her functions with purity and facility; that Genius
which is always near hand, and as it were whispering at our ear, does move and
stir her to the preservation of whatsoever belongs or concerns her: if on
the contrary, this soul inhabiteth a body dyscratiated, melanchollick, full of
obstructions, or drowned in the excesses of eating and drinking, or passions,
its nature being igneous, and never ceasing from action; it necessarily
follows, that according to the disposition of the Organes, she turns to the
wrong way and neglects those things wherein she is merely concerned. Now in
things that might be prevented or remedied, it is an invalid excuse to say, I
would never have thought that such thing should happen. For who can attribute
it to a mere accident to put fire in an Oven, and to leave quantity of dry
wood, and some flitches of Bacon by it within the sphaere of its activity, and
so go to bed, in leaving his providence with his slippers.

I remember that some 36 years ago, in a Town of Brie, a Province of France,
called Sezane, upon a Sunday morning, a Woman that kept a Chandlers shop having
occasion to snuff a Candle, threw the snuff into a corner of her shop among
some old rags and papers, and so shutting the door went to Mass, but within the
space of half an hour, and before she could come back again, not only her
house, but those of her Neighbors were all in a flame, which being helped by
an East Wind which blew at that time, and which is the most dangerous of all
the Winds for Incendies, (as we shall show hereafter) did in the space of a day
and a night consume the whole Town, consisting of about four hundred houses.
Can this be called a mere accident, since there is no body so void of common
sense but might have either foreseen, or prevented so calamitous a consequence?

II. The second cause of this misfortune is the time wherein it did happen, to
wit, about one of the clock in the night, when every one is buried in his first
sleep; when some for weariness, others by deboistness, have given leave to
their cares to retire; when slothfulness and the heat of the bed have riveted a
man to his Pillow, and made him almost incapable of waking, much less of acting
and helping his Neighbors.

III. The narrowness of the place did also much contribute to this
Conflagration, for the Street where it did happen, as also most of those about
it, were the narrowest of the City, insomuch that in some a Cart could scarce
go along, and in others not at all. The danger I did once run of my life
thereabouts by the crowd of Carts, has caused me many times to make reflection
on the covetousness of the Citizens, and connivency of Magistrates, who have
suffered them from time to time to encroach upon the streets, and so to jet the
top of their houses, so as from one side of the street to touch the other,
which as it does facilitate a conflagration, so does it also hinder the remedy,
and besides takes away the liberty of the air, making it unwholesome, and
disfigureth the Beauty and Symmetry of the City. I hope that for the future his
Majesty, his Council, and that of the City, will take care that such disorder
happen no more, and will cause this City to be as commodious in its Buildings,
as it is happy in its Situation.

IV. Now follows the weakness of the buildings, which were almost all of
wood, which by age was grown as dry as a chip: This inconvenient will easily be
remedied, in building the houses with Stone or Brick, according to the Statutes
and Ordinances of Parliament provided and Enacted long ago in that behalf,
though for the most part ill observed.

V. The quantity of combustible and bituminous matter has given the greatest
encouragement to this devouring Fire; for as the place where the fire begun was
not far from the Thames, and from those Wharfes where most Merchandises are
landed, so Thames Street, and others thereabout, were almost nothing else but
Magazines of combustible and sulphurous Merchandises: Thereabout were a
prodigious quantity of Oil, Butter, Brandy, Pitch, Brimstone, Saltpeter,
Cables, etc. and by the Thames side were almost all Wharfes full of Coals and
Wood. Now as fire of it self is nothing but light which corporifieth it self in
the matter, and acts more or less according to the disposition of it, as we
see that a fire of Straw is less violent than that of Coals; it follows that
this fire having lighted upon these sulphurous and bituminous matters, did
feed upon them as in his proper Element, and not only devoured them with ease,
but imparts to the next combustible matters a disposition more fitting and apt
to receive him. The Nature of this sulphurous fire was evidently seen in the
melting of Bells, Iron, Pots, Glasses, and other metallique things, and in the
calcining of stones and bricks, which no other single fire of wood, coals, or
other vulgar matter could have done. I remember that some four or five years
ago the Lightning fell in Herefordshire without doing any harm in the Country,
but being extinguished of it self, the exhalation of it did mix it self with a
strong Westerly wind, that came as far as London, beating down houses, plucking
up trees by the roots; and to show its nitrous and sulphurous Nature, did as
it were neglect to touch wood, but did chiefly stick upon metal, and either
broke or bended it; the tokens of it are seen to this day upon the Steeples of
Bowchurch, St. Andrew, St. Giles Cripplegate, the May Pole, and other places.
These sulphurous matters were also the cause of another inconveniency, which
is, that the fire being corporified in them, did extend the sphaere of his
activity at a further distance then ordinary, and cast his burning beams
furthest off, mixing more exactly his Atoms in the Air, which he turns
almost into his own Nature, which was the cause that no body could come nearer
that fire then a hundred or two hundred paces.

VI. The foregoing Summer that was extraordinaryly hot and dry, had also
disposed the matter of the buildings to admit the fire more quickly and easily,
by sucking not only the intrinsecal moisture that was in them, but also that of
the Air which might have moistened them; for though there be no rain falling,
nevertheless there is a certain evapourish moisture in the Air, which if it be
not dried up, does moisten all porous things intrinsecally, and does condense
it self upon the solid ones, in the form of an Oleaginous moisture, as does
appear upon Marbles and Glasses.

VII. In comes now the East Wind to play his part in this Tragedy. That
unfortunate wind, of which it is commonly said, that it is neither good for man
nor beast, did blow with such a wonderful fierceness all the time of the
conflagration, that it did not only quicken the fire, as Bellows do the
Furnaces, but also getting into the streets, and among the houses, when it
found any let or hinderance that did recoil it back, it blew equally both to
the right and to the left, and caused the fire to burn on all sides, which has
persuaded many that this fire was miraculous: I my self remember, that going
into some streets at that time, and having the wind impetuously in my face, I
was in hope that at my return I should have it in my back, but it was all one,
for the reason aforesaid. It would be here too tedious to speak of the nature
of winds, and to show many reasons why this wind is so dry in England, as to
burn the flowers and leafs of the trees, more then the hottest Sun can do, one
which I think satisfactory will serve for all: It is therefore to be observed,
that winds do not only participate of the nature of the places where they are
begot, but also of that of the Countries thorough which they pass: Now all the
Southern, Western, and Northern winds, must pass thorough the great Ocean to
come into England, in which passage there mixes with them abundance of vapors
which cause their moisture, except the North Wind, wherein the moisture is
condensed by the cold; but the East Wind to come to us must pass over the
greatest Continent of the world, France, Germany, Hungary, Greece, Persia, etc.
even to China; so that in perusing such a tract of Land, it not only droppeth
down by the way his moist Effluviums, the earth as it were sucking them for its
irroration, but also carries along all the hot and dry exhalations that
perpetually arise out of the earth, which is the cause of his dry and burning
quality. I had formerly a little Garden, where I did bestow as much pains and
cares as I could, to bring up some young Fruit Trees that were in it, having the
advantage of a very good mould, but being seated Eastward and closed narrowly
by a Brickwall on either side; this wind that reigns constantly here in
England in the months of March, April and beginning of May, did in their
budding so burn the leaves and the flowers, that the hottest Sun could not do
the like, so that I was fain to give it over, having been two or three years
before I could understand that mystery, and the nature of that wind in this
country, for there is some other countries where this wind is salubrious and
fruitful enough.

VIII. It was also a great contributing to this misfortune, that the Thames
Water-house was out of order, so that the Conduits and Pipes were almost all
dry; as also that the Engines had no liberty to play, for the narrowness of the
place and crowd of the people, but some of them were tumbled down in the river,
and among the rest, that of Clearken-well, esteemed one of the best.

And thus courteous Reader, thou see an admirable concurrence of several
causes, for the putting of Gods will in execution; in other Cities that are not
subject to conflagrations; as Paris, which is all built of Freestone, the
innundations have several times played their pranks; other Towns, as in Italy
that think themselves exempted from fi^e and water, come to their periods by
fearful Earthquakes; others that escape Fire, Water and Earth, do perish by the
Meteors of the Air, and are calcined by the Lightening; so that God Almighty
never wants instruments to compass his will; and it seems that the four
Elements, of which this world is compounded, do conspire against the happiness
and quietness of man, when by their daily prevarications they go about to
confirm the disobedience of our first Parents.

Cur? Why? SECT. V.
HEre it is that we must wholly stoop and humble our selves under the mighty
hand of God, and answer with the Apostle, O the depth of the riches of the
wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out! For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his
Counselor? Romans 11.33. let it suffice thee O man to know, that whether he has
done it to punish thee for thy sins, or to try thy Faith and exercise thy
Patience; if thou can make benefit of this affliction, and sanctify it to thy
use; We know that all things work together for good, to them that love God.
(...)


