THE EXCLAMES OF RHODOPAEA.

To the lamentable Death of the most Noble Marquess of MONTROSE.

Together with a reflection to his most Honorable Exequies in the great Church
of EDINBVRGH.

Writtten formerly, and now published at his Honorable Interment.

Printed in the Year, 1661.

AS the bringing in of Cromwell, after his Victory over our selves, into the
Castle of Edinburgh; and showing him all our great things, looked like the
reception of the Ambassadors of Babell in. Jerusalem: so therein was prefigured
his shameless Victory over that place which followed. And to that purpose
then, (not without mine own pathetic,) and in this ejaculation, I expressed my
self. Wherefore, and because it contains what was seen in the causes thereof
now accomplished, and amongst the rest, the honor of this day; I have made
this which had not confidence to look the Sun before in the face, my mite;
Howsoever too familiar for this time, and even below what I think my present.

THE EXCLAMES OF RHODOPE.
DIapered Rhodope with flowrs and gods,
Is blasted now, blown, flow'n from their aboads.
The mountains Angeline, her Roses fall,
Fair Rhodopaea weeps: and most of all,
The guardian Genius of the Kingdoms, at
The horror thereof shrinks: God just and great
Leaves man unto himself: Man does what none
Dare speak of now: nor ever world saw done,
Which after age will, to the eternal fame,
Of him who is dead; and the wide worlds great shame,
Who killed him for the fault, for which no man
Did ever yet die, since the world began.
That heavenly piece of Empyraeum, out
Of the supremst of all the heavens cut:
Inspired with a soul, appearing through
His more material tralucence, with no
Less then what is above man, Great Montrose,
Who to be loyal before greatness chose.
And when our expeditious horses did,
Beyond a Subjects common mark proceed:
And on the borders of Soveragnity,
Took unto them too wide a liberty;
He in his circle, at his own poast stayed,
And what is come to pass out on us cried
When we, what was the good gift of God, thought
The Covenant within our Kingdom brought;
And did our walls threatening the clouds divide,
And gates capaceous to it opened wide,
Which has so many armed men let out,
Whom by our wisdom we did make so stout.
Who with a high born hand undid the King
And did on fire it self set, and will bring
Our State and Church into confusion and
Threatens with ruin to subdue our Land:
He, when the fatal ropes thereof we drew
Exclaimed no credit to the horse give you.
But as Divine she who the overthrow
Of her own Country did to it forshow,
And was not heeded till all was undone,
And all the Towers of Troy were overthrown:
When they would gladly have prevented what
They else might done to have preserved their State,
So this great Man in the own causes eyed
The Event of what we have found true and tried;
What reason and what opposition could
Do, to prevent what he to us foretold,
And warned us of our enemies falsehood, and
The ruin of the King and of the Land
By those with whom we were so far combined
In action, one, much probable in mind;
And to the cause did set a breast of Brass
To the prevention of what is come to pass.
And when we saw, that if we had done so,
We had far less then now we have to do.
And even were glad the cause to take in hand
Which he by word and deed had so maintained.
The abstract and the looking-glass wherein
Antiquities Nobility did shine
In maintenance of no Idaea as
Others have done and let the substance pass,
Did by his valor win the Kingdom, and
Before him did acquiet the whole Land,
And did the willing Subject in head bring
Of just obedience to their native King.
For all which he had said or done, or we
By black experience had so found to be,
Without respect to God or man, or King,
Or what our selves might on our selves thus bring,
By paving way to others to be trod,
In a respectlesnesse to Noble Blood,
To be hanged for their faults another day
When Justice happily again might sway.
We did condemn him without hearing, nor
Suffered his innocence, in his cause, more
Or less to speak, but haled him at length,
Where after triumph he dyed in full strength;
And with him many a guiltless and poor soul
Were partly killed, and partly put in roll
With that black letter, which ore they did breath
The wholesome air, sealed, which they died, their death,
And as when full, with all her Stars the Moon
At rising of the Sun does then go down:
So when the King much like a ^^it Bridegroom
Or strong man like to run his race, did from
His Tabernacle or Chalmber come, Montrose
And all his Stars did set, and among all those
Drummond and Dalgetie did come in ^eer
Like morning ones, and last did disappear.
This was the end of this great Man whose breath
His nostrils held; content nor with his death,
Nor with the manner: But to let men see
By his example what Nobility
Respect has to plead for, when this strange shaene
May turned about be to our play again.
We with the wicked gave him not a grave,
Nor it allowed his quartered Corpse to have;
And further did, then I my tongue will let
Therein imbrued be, with the telling it.
Which was not thy misfortune man, great soul'd
Which brought thee to what unheard rigor could
Commence on wickedness, nor in thee fault,
Which thee above thy self did so exalt:
But it was God who did it to his Glory
Which will be seen in end of thy deaths story,
When the avengers of thy blood shall come,
When there shall not a City be to run
For refuge to; or for all those who has
Been brought before to an untimely death,
By such a violence unheard before,
Sometimes in Battle without Quarter, or
By Law, against the Law, which for my part
I ever thought me bound to in my heart
And swore to have maintained; And many one,
Who in the quarrel have their lives laid down,
The least part of us all, from Stuart, who
Was first, to Drummond last, which well known two
Did close the bedroll ends, which did contain
So many of us all, as have been slain
And amongst the rest, Thou great Duke Hamiltoun,
Although thy blood did not our streets run down,
Thy death was e're thou died, applaused by
A volley of our great'st Artaillery;
In thy great Armies fatal overthrow,
Which we undid, and Victor made our foe,
Unto whose triumphs we his Trophies made,
And in his honor set out all we had,
Glory and strength; and to our strong Holds brought
The Enemy who shame and loss had wrought;
That arch of Traitors who it seconded
By doing after of a far worse deed,
In putting in the Lords Anointed hand
Whom we, though not sworn ought to have maintaind,
The world but one eye had, and he it quit
put out, and dimmed both us and him in it.
No King protestant was more upon earth
To whom he suffered not air to give breath,
And as we had been emulous, a little,
After the great breaking of that but britle
Vessel, which glorious his soul held, which shall
Shine, to give light, to their destruction all,
Who either to the Altar bound or cut
So innocent a sacrifices throat.
To the atonement whereof if Art
Might make imperchment where there is no part,
Old Huntley's blood was shed, who yet did never
Much evil, and was forced to deliver
His soul up, on the passion eve to be
A sprinkling our door posts upon, when the
Destroying Angel of God shall passover,
Judgment to execute on whosoever,
Has broke the oath of God, or out have stood
In th'evil matter of the Royal Blood:
Or the Arch-traitor come back to revew
What needlessly our follies our foe show
(Which never yet was fortunate) who may
Be master of the same and bear away
What he before had seen, when God may let
Us see, he has no, blessing given to it.
These Agnu's Deis are on the fatal thread,
Whereon the number of our stain are thread.
Which the whole world has taken, and a chain
Thereof made it about our necks to hang,
Whereon these Noble two Peers do make up
A carbuncle on either shoulders top.
And thou Montrose, who more then all the rest
Didstst for thy Master, shinest in the breast,
Whereat the Tablet hangs which of all there
The Phaenix Jewel is, nor other where,
Wherein is Printed the eternal face,
Flushing his Royal Innocence and Grace.
We killed Thee, the day when we our King
Did in our Israel receive to reign,
For fighting for thy Sovereign, when he fled
Over Jordan, where his Sacred Blood was shed.
And ere the Red blushed on the White and spread
The Rose were cropped, and the tree was sued.
And his kind friends only themselves content,
On th'oderiferous sweetness of his sent.
Which when cold North did on his Garden blow,
Did from the perfumes of his Spices flow,
Into the Air innobling so him by
The Incense of a lasting memory:
When we who now joy, may as sore lament
When time shall make a late time to repent:
Let us that mistake color as we will
No color will be to put on that ill,
And as the world has now seen one, will see
Another as sad a catastropee.
The Lord of all things had before decreed,
The time he lived, and the time he died,
Which being now come to a period, he
Gave him into our hands, this death to die,
That our cup thereby being better filled,
All of us might, who should be killed, killed.
And inexcusable made that God may
Be just when he condemns us, and they
The Crown gain of their labor: Against what has
Been sealed, it seems, with signet of Gods wrath.
Whereto example nor command had yet,
World nor reproof for not doing that great
Work, which has such confusion State brought on,
And Church, that from the Beggar to the Throne
An universal suffering has been, and
With guiltless crying blood is filled the Land:
Murdered is King, State, and Religion lost,
And what we thought to have maintained most,
And what we sureliest thought to stand and swore,
In such a manner never done before.
However, God did bring him to his end,
Who most the Kingly Interest did defend:
That debt of death since he was once to pay,
Though circumstances odious make the way,
He but Gods business joined to his own
As't in his way lay, who them both has done.
His soul the world but left, and now is gone
Unto the heavenly Mansions tendered one:
The wings of Angels, or conveyed did fly,
Loosed from the carnal fetters of her clay,
In twinkling of an eye, as all before
Him, so the Saints did pass into their glore,
And his Great Master, when upon the brink,
His Sacred Head bowed down to take a drink,
Of the fair River of Eternity,
He was devoured of immortality,
So, in a moment, what no charity
Can otherwise judge, has he pearcht so high.
It Is true, he is thought a murderer by the State,
And by the Church is Excommunicate,
And who are bound or loosed here below,
Are bound in heaven and loosed are also
Which either groundless makes our charity,
Or what in both I would be loath to say:
Yet if what Church or State have done agree,
With what example or command can be
In Word of God, then all is true is done,
And in the end the event will it crown.
We Reformation did intend, but mean
Took thereto, which, if God did it ordain,
It does transcend the model of what either,
Nature or he bestowed upon me ever:
Nor for Religion or security,
Did world hear like, or will it justify.
But thou who shuttest, and can open, and
The key of that closed Cabin have in hand;
Wherein, if subtilties be locked, which fret
The cloak will, which has palliate our State.
Once open thou, and that Gold button string
Cut, wherewith we the cloak about us hing,
And let it fall, and all the mysteries
Of State discover, and iniquities
If any be: Or if it be mistake
Or prejudice which us beyond us take,
Or led by any zeal to do more then
God for himself did ever us ordain.
O Edinburrow where those have been killed,
Who Is Carcasses have all thy ditches filled,
And where those never matched Counsel sat,
Which have in such a model cast our state:
The Sun which has those blind works seen, which none
Else have, but what unto themselves are known,
May see the shaene changed, which discover shall
The mystery wherein infolded all.
The pack of these breast businesses are
Which has destruction made, boodshed and War,
And either shall see loosed that Gordian knot,
Or bundle of our great'st mistakes see cut,
Or our eyes opened, that the wonders we
May of thy Law see, when all those shall be
Who should be killed; killed; and time about
Be punished for the fault we never thought.
O Thou who dwell in the extremes of light,
And ends inhabitest of infinite,
To which is no access, nor eye of man
Did ever penitrat, nor enter can
The secret thereof, wit: O Thou who have
All things of nothing made, and even them cast
In mould of excellence; and each in it
Kind dutiful made, and the world has set
In heart of man, who yet the work cannot
From the beginning wrought by thee find out:
Grant me humility; and to suspend
My judgment, till I see in things an end.
But mean while give me leave thus much to say,
I search have made, and only this found I,
That God has made men upright, but they have
Many inventions sought which them deprave.
To the most Honored Exequies of the Great and Blessed MONTROSE.
THat Heavenly piece of Empyraeum, out
Of the supream'st of all heavenly, cut;
Inspired with a soul, appearing throw
His more material tralucence, with no
Less then what is above man; Great Montrose,
Who to be Loyal before greatness chose;
When by man's wisdom, without Gods, the King,
Church, State had murdered, darkened, ruined been,
He through blood waded, with a breast of Brass
To the prevention of what is come to pass,
And when he had done all, he up at last,
In the flame, which had him still burned past:
Where he above is Angell'd, and below
To their shame's honored, who repent it now.
J. M. O.

