ENOCH's TRANSLATION, IN A SERMON PREACHED At the Funerals of the Right
Honorable THOMAS Earl of ELGIN, Baron of WHORLTON, etc. In the Parish Church
of Malden in Bedford-shire, December. 31. 1663.

By RICH. PEARSON D. D.

recumbent skeleton with crossbones

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher for Thomas Clark, at the South-Entrance of
the Royal Exchange. 1664.

Imprimatur.

JOH. HALL, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
Feb. 22. 1663.
To the Right Honorable, ROBERT Earl of Elgin, Baron of Whorlton, etc.
Right Honorable,
IN the Robe of Aaron's Ephod, by God's appointment, there was to be a Bell and
a Pomegranate, Ex. 28. 34.
A Bell and a Pomegranate, round about the hem of the Robe. Why the Bells were
not placed aloft, but in Extremis, in the Hem or Skirts of the Robe, Origin
gives this Moral account, Ut de extremis Hom. 9. in Exodus
nunquam sileas, semper sons, To put men in mind of their latter End; that
even from Aaron's Garment the doctrine of Mortality might be always sounding in
the ears of the People. Every Funeral Sermon is as a Passing-peal from these
Bells of Aaron. In this there is not only the Bell of Aaron, but the
Pomegranate, the fruit of a Holy and Pious Life, expressed in the rare Example of
your ever-Honoured Father.

It is true of the Lives of the Saints what one said of the Pomegranate, that
there is in the best aliquod granum putre, some one grane or other amiss. Yet I
am persuaded there were in him as few faulty granes, and as great Eminencies of
solid Virtue and Piety, as in any person whom this Age has produced. He has
derived to Your Honor a most compendious way of Excelling, in leaving You both
an high advantage of Doing Good, by an honorable Fortune, and a great Example
of Being Good, by beating out the way before You.

And by the blessing of God Your Lordship will exceed the Copy, having already
given to the world the signal evidences of Your great Love to Religion and
Loyalty, the surest Foundation of all Christian and Heroic Virtues. Which that
they may be increased and multiplied, with all other Blessings, upon Your
Lordship and Your Noble Family, shall be my constant and earnest prayer.

In the mean time Your Lordship will be pleased to accept of this short and
imperfect Draught, adventured into the public view in pure obedience to Your
Lordship's Desires, which have the force of undisputable Commands upon

Your Honor's most humble Servant and Chaplain, RICH. PEARSON.

HEB. 11. 5. By Faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and
was not found, because God had translated him: for before his translation he
had this testimony, that he pleased God.
THIS whole Chapter is as a golden Calendar, a sacred Roll, containing the
Lives of the ancient and holy Patriarchs, and the famous acts of those Hero's
which were the Worthies, not of David, but of Heaven; the men of Renown which
were before the times of Christ. And particularly this verse presents us with
an excellent Panegyric of the renowned Patriarch Enoch, the seventh from Adam,
the great Prophet of the First world, whose Prophetical eye was so illuminated,
that it could reach from one end of the world to the other; and living so near
to the beginning of the World, foretold the dissolution and consummation of it.
In this Text we have the Panegyric of this noble Patriarch: it consists of
many clauses; but if we marshal them into a Logical method, we may reduce them
to these three heads:

His Conversation in the world.
His Removal out of the world. And
The mutual Correspondence of both these.
His Conversation in the world, that is expressed in the first and last words of
the Text, He walked by Faith, and He pleased God.

His Removal out of the world, that is expressed in the middle clauses, He was
translated, that he should not see death, and he was not found, because God had
translated him.

The mutual Correspondence of these two, that lies in the Dependence and
Connection of the words. By Faith he was translated, in the beginning of the
verse. Piety is a comfortable preparative to a happy translation. And in the
latter end of the verse, God translated him, for he pleased God. A blessed
translation is an infallible consequent of a holy and heavenly life. These are
the several parts of the Text, of which I intend to speak.

I begin with the First, The holy Conversation Enoch whilst he was in the
world, described both by the Principle of a holy life, that is Faith, By faith
Enoch, in the beginning of the verse; and by the Consequence or Result of it,
in the latter end of the verse, He pleased God.

The first part of this Elogium is drawn from the Principle or foundation of a
godly life, that is Faith. It is the motto which S. Paul sets in the front of
all that was praiseworthy in the Saints, as the top of their commendation: By
faith Abel did thus and thus, By faith Abraham, By faith Moses, and By faith
Enoch. This is as the Title Page to all of them. Even the Saints before Christ
had the grace of Faith for their lamp, as well as those that followed after;
and by that Faith they lived and walked in their several stations: and it was a
Faith not different from ours in Kind; their Faith and ours were the same in
substance, and were both fixed upon the same Object: the difference was only
Gradual and circumstantial; they believed in that which was to be accomplished,
and we in that which is already accomplished. Their Faith looked forward, and
their voice was that of the Psalmist, Ps. 116. 10. Credidi, propter quod
loquar, I believed, therefore will I speak: Our Faith looks backward to Christ
already exhibited, and our voice is that of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 13. I believed,
therefore have I spoken. So in the substance of Salvation they shared with us,
and we with them: they Believers as well as we, they Christians as well as we;
Christiani ante Christum, as Tertullian speaks, Christians even before Christ
was come into the world: and as we believing receive Redemption by the Blood of
Christ actually shed; so they also believing received Redemption by the same
Blood of Christ which was virtually shed even from the beginning of the world.
So they and we make up one Church, one Spiritual Building, built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20.

Again, it is farther observable, that of all the Excellencies for which the
Saints are extolled in Scripture, above all they are magnified for their Faith.
In every of these examples that are mentioned in this Chapter, Faith as it is
the first, so it is the principal part of their commendation. There were other
Eminencies which were remarkable in them, Abel's Innocence, Abraham's
Obedience, Moses's Zeal, Noah's Righteousness, Enoch's Devotion: but the high
approbation which the Spirit of God gives them is for their Faith, as the first
and leading Grace, as the principal and fundamental Grace, which is the root
and spring of all the rest; as that Grace which made them live Religiously
here, By faith Enoch pleased God; and as that Grace which carried them to
Heaven afterward, By faith Enoch was translated. This order of Salvation God
has set; No coming to Heaven but by Christ, no coming to Christ but by Faith:
So No Faith no Christ, and no Christ no Salvation. Whereas some have vainly
thought to make Saints of the old Philosophers, as if by the right use of
Reason, or by the improvement of their natural Endowments they could attain
Salvation: this fond charity of theirs is much like that legendary devotion of
Pope Gregory, who is said by his prayers to have fetched the Soul of the
Emperor Trajan out of Hell, being moved with compassion for the justice which
he had once done to a poor widow. But the story tells us that by revelation he
received this answer, That however he was heard in that Petition, yet Caveret
in posterum, he should beware hereafter that he did not presume to pray for any
that was dead unbaptized. It is an equal presumption in these men to think by
their opinion to redeem from Hell the Souls of those Heathens who lived and
died without Faith, without Christ, and without God in the world. An opinion
not unlike to that of the Turks in their Alcoran, That every man shall be saved
in his own Religion, be it what it will, if he be but devout in it. Briefly, it
is an opinion which overturns the whole frame of revealed Truth, that any man
can be saved without Christ, or have any interest in Christ without Faith. This
is the reason why the Apostle in this Chapter makes such frequent mention of
Faith in the behalf of all the Saints, as the Grace which carried them to
Heaven, as the Grace which God esteems and approves above all, as the radical
and fundamental Grace which is the Root and Principle of a virtuous and holy
life. By faith Enoch; that is the first Elogium, in the beginning of the verse.

The second is drawn from the Consequence or Result of it, in the close of the
verse, He pleased God. This follows naturally upon the former, as the Effect
upon the Cause. For as the Apostle has laid down the Maxim, in the next verse,
Without Faith it is impossible to please God: so with Faith it is impossible
not to please him. Faith is the Grace that incorporates us into Christ: being
incorporate into Christ we are made partakers of all his Merits; his
Satisfaction becomes ours, his Obedience ours, his Righteousness ours: being
thus clothed in the robe of his Righteousness put on by Faith, we become
accepted of God, and God well pleased with us. Again, Faith is the Root from
whence infallibly springs the Fruit of a Holy and Godly life; and with such
Fruit God is well pleased.

But the Apostle here sets it down with advantage: It is not barely, He pleased
God, but He had this testimony, that he pleased God. And from whom had he this
testimony? even from God himself. We find it given unto him by the Spirit of
God, Genesis 5. 24. there it is said, Enoch walked with God, and here, Enoch
pleased God. To walk with God and to please God are phrases equivalent. Can two
walk together, says the Prophet, unless they be agreed? that is, unless they
be pleased; Amos 3. 3. Therefore the Apostle S. Paul joins these two words
together in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. Ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and to
please God.

Would you then know what it is to please God? S. Augustine leads us to the
beginning of this duty: Placere Deo incipit qui in se odit quod Deo displicet;
Then we begin to please God, when we hate and abhor in our selves whatsoever is
displeasing unto him. S. Basil carries us further; (...)* Then we please Bas.
l. de Virgin.
God, when by a holy and a virtuous life we endeavor to make our selves like
unto God. More particularly, To please God is, to love him, to fear him, to
serve him, to praise him, to do all those things which are pleasing and
acceptable unto him.

The reason is, God is the only infinite good, and cannot take pleasure in any
thing but himself, or something of himself. He is pleased with his Son, because
he is Himself; he is pleased with Piety, because it is a beam of Himself
wrought by his Spirit in the creature. So every action, the more it has of God,
the more pleasing it is unto him; and the more it has of Christ, the more it
has of God; and the more it has of Faith, the more it has of Christ; and of all
other Graces Faith is most pleasing to him, because it holds most of Christ:
the more of Christ, the more acceptance we find with God, because in him God
is perfectly well pleased.

The sum is this, The pleasing of God must be both our Final cause, we must
make it our End whilst we are in the world, to direct all our actions to the
Glory of God, to do that which may please him; and our Formal cause, we must
make it our Rule, it is the surest Rule we can walk by, to do those things
which are pleasing unto God.

Christ himself walked by this Rule, It is my meat and drink to do my Father's
will, Joh. 4. 34. David desired to walk by this Rule, Psalm. 143. 10. O teach me
to do the thing that pleases thee. Enoch went by this Rule, he walked by
Faith, and he pleased God. And this is the Rule which is set to every
Christian, that Golden and unerring Rule, which can never deceive us, 1 John 3.
22. to do those things which are pleasing in his sight.

So it excludes three false Rules, by which most men are wont to be overruled
in the managing of their conversation.

The first is (...), Self-pleasing; that is a false Rule: we must not be
self-pleasers, Romans 15. 1. not to lean to our own Understandings, not to be
swaied by our own Wills, not to be ruled by our own unruly Affections. I came
not, says Christ, to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me, Joh.
6. 38. That man is the best Servant of God who is least his own Master, who
knows no other velle and nolle, but only to do the will and pleasure of God.

The second is (...), the pleasing of men; that is also a false Rule: the
Apostle cries it down in Ephesians. 6. 6. Not as men-pleasers, but as the servants of
God. It is hard to be both a Servant of God and a Pleaser of men; therefore the
Apostle puts them as contradistinct and inconsistent designs, and if we will
cleave to the one, we must renounce the other; 1 Thessalonians. 2. 4. So speak, so do,
not as pleasing men, but God. The temporizing Hypocrite does all to be seen of
men, so speaks as hunting after the Favor and Applause and Approbation of men,
with those sawning Prophets mentioned in Isa. 30. 10. which speak smooth
things, and prophecy deceits. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and what is the
reason? the people love to have it so, Jer. 5. 31. He that would approve
himself a faithful Servant of God, must not look asquint upon the Applause of
men. S. Paul concludes for himself, and it may be a Rule for us, Gal. 1. 10. If
I should yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ.

The third is (...). If we must not please our selves, if we must not please
men, much less Satan, who is God's adversary. Whatsoever pleases him is
displeasing to God. Then we please him, when we listen to his suggestions, when
we commit sin, and delight to continue in it. As the good Angels rejoice at our
Conversion, so our Sin and Confusion is the pleasure and pastime of Satan. If
we make it our End and our Rule (as we ought to do) to please God, all these
ways are to be abandoned.

Here then was the high commendation of Enoch's Piety, he so lived, and so
behaved himself in the time of his pilgrimage, that by the testimony of God
himself, he pleased God. It was a high Character, especially from the mouth of
God, and that recorded by the finger of the Spirit of God in the Book of God,
in perpetuam rei memoriam. What an honor was it to Apelles to be enrolled
among the Nobles of the New Testament, with this singular Elogium or Title of
honor, Apelles approved in Christ? What an honor to Moses in the Old
Testament to be called To. 16. 10.
the Servant of God? to Abraham, to be styled the Friend of God? to David, to
be called A man after God's own heart? All these concur in this honorable
Elogium given to the Patriarch Enoch in this Scripture, He had this testimony,
that he pleased God. And thus much shall suffice for the first part of the
Text, His pious Conversation whilst he was in the world.

Being such an one, it was not fit that he should make too long a stay in this
world, which was not worthy of him. He was all this while a Candidate for
Heaven, and having received God's approbation, thither God removes him: and by
a special privilege he takes the Degree of a glorified Saint, as it were per
saltum, leaping over the threshold of Death.

This we have more particularly described unto was translated, that he should
not see death, and was not found, because God had translated him.

Concerning this Translation of Enoch many Questions have been started, but by
the help of this Scripture we may be able to resolve the most of them.

One is, Whether Enoch was so translated, that, as a person privileged from the
law of Mortality, he died not. The Scruple is grounded upon two several phrases
which are used by Moses in the story of Enoch, Genesis 5. 24.

First, in that it is said God took him. Now this phrase of taking away is used
in Scripture to set forth the blessed Departure of the Saints out of this world
by the ordinary way of Dissolution. Thus, Isa. 57. 1. Merciful men are taken
away, that is, they die; and Job 32. 22. my Maker would soon take me away, that
is, he would take away my Life, he would kill me.

Again, it is said in the same Scripture, that Enoch was not: and this also is
a phrase by which the Scripture sometimes points out the state of Death. So
Genesis 42. 36. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, that is, they are both dead; for
so Jacob at that time supposed them to be.

But this Question is clearly resolved by S. Paul in this Scripture, where he
tells us plainly, Enoch was translated, that he should not see death. That he
should not see death, that is, that he should not die. It is like that other
phrase, Luke 9. 27. There be some here that shall not taste of death. To see
death and to taste of death are phrases borrowed from two distinct Senses, but
have both the same signification: that is, says S. Augustine, Mortem non
experietur, he shall have no experience of death. Enoch was so far exempted
from the law of Death, that he did not so much as Taste it, ne primoribus
quidem labiis; so far privileged, that he did not so much as See it, ne
primoribus quidem oculis.

So his Taking away was not a Taking away of Dissolution, which implies
Mortality; but a Taking away of Translation, which prevents Death. Therefore we
may observe, that in Genesis 5. where the Lives of the Patriarchs are recorded, of
all the rest who are mentioned both before and after Enoch, it runs thus, Seth
lived so many years, and he died; Methuselah so many years, and he died: but of
Enoch otherwise, he lived so many years, and not said, He died; but, to show
that he was a privileged person, Moses gives him a singular and privilegiate
expression, God took him.

Again, whereas it is there further expressed, He was not, if we take the
phrase in its full rigor, it signifies an absolute Nullity, or Annihilation;
but here it is so far from intending an Annihilation, that it does not betoken
so much as an ordinary Extinction by Death. It is true, that as the Latins
were wont to express Death by the word Fuit, so the Hebrews by a Non fuit; but
in this place it does not signify so much, Therefore S. Paul in this Text
mollifies the phrase by a word of supply, Non fuit, He was not, that is, Non
fuit inventus, He was not Found; He was not any more in a visible communion
with men; He was secretly translated by God, as Moses secretly buried by God:
It was not known what was become of him, till God revealed it. We see other men
when they go out of the world: Even Elias himself was seen by Elisha when he
ascended. But none of the Patriarchs saw Enoch go; and being gone, he was not
to be found. The sons of the Prophets might search and seek for him, as they
did for Elias, but not meet with him. Again, as it was a Secret, so a Total
Translation, both in Soul and Body. Other Saints, though their Souls be carried
up on the wings of Angels, as Lazarus was, yet their Bodies are to be found,
they remain behind, and are laid asleep in their graves, as S. Peter speaks of
the Patriarch David, Act. 2. 29. He is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher
is with us unto this day. Enoch was not to be found either way: in him there
was no Separation of Soul and Body by death, but a total Translation of both.

That for the first Question.

Secondly, Some will grant that Enoch died not, he was not then Mortuus, but
make a question whether he was not Aliquando moriturus, afterward to die,
namely toward the end of the World, having preached Repentance to the
Gentiles; for so they read that place in Ecclesiastic. 44. 16. Translatus est
in paradisum, ut det gentibus poenitentiam: Our Translation better, He was
translated, being an example of repentance to all generations. The more
probable ground of this opinion is fetched from the common law of Mortality, by
which it is appointed for all men once to die: Psalm. 89. 48. What man is he
that lives, and shall not see death? But the Apostle in this place resolves
also this Question, that Enoch's privilege did not consist in a bare reprieve,
or a deferring of Death till some further time; then it had been enough for the
Apostle to have said, Et non vidit mortem, he did not see death: but it
consisted in a final preservation and exemption from it; therefore it is
expressed more fully, he was translated, ut non videret mortem, that he should
not, that is, that he should never see death.

And for that general law of Mortality, it is not a Rule so peremptory but that
it admits of some exception. S. Paul tells us of those Saints who shall be
found alive at Christ's coming to Judgment, 1 Cor. 15. 52. We shall not all
sleep, that is, we shall not all die, but we shall be changed, in a moment,
etc. That Change is not properly Death, but an equivalent or analogical Death.
So Enoch here, though he might admit of some such momentany Death, in the
change of a corruptible Body into an incorruptible, yet there was no
Separation, and therefore, properly speaking, he was free from Death.

Thirdly, there is yet a further Question concerning the Place of Enoch's
Translation, whither it was that God removed him. Some will have it to be into
a Terrestrial Paradise, the very same out of which Adam was ejected, a place
free from all those corporal molestations and inconveniences which attend upon
us in our earthly pilgrimage; but withal a place which does not afford the
vision of God, or the happiness of a Comprehendour. This Opinion is grounded
upon the forenamed place of the Son of Sirach, Ecclesiast. 44. 16. where Enoch
is said to be translated into Paradise. But this will appear to be a very weak
and a sandy foundation: For besides that the Author is Apocryphal, the Text is
falsified, the word Paradise being foisted into the vulgar Latin, which is not
in the Greek; and a corrupt Gloss inferred upon it, Into Paradise, therefore
into an Earthly Paradise.

But the Apostle in this Scripture resolves also this Question, where it is
said that God translated him; and recorded as a great privilege, Because he
pleased God, therefore God translated him. If only into an Earthly Paradise to
be there confined, it had not been a Gain, but a Loss; not a Prerogative, but a
Prejudice; not a Privilege, but a Punishment: that whereas the Souls of the
other Saints after the ending of a short Pilgrimage upon Earth are immediately
carried up to those Celestial mansions, where they do enjoy the vision of God,
the society of Saints and Angels, and are for ever blessed with the Lord; yet
Enoch, an eminent Saint, who had this singular testimony from God's own mouth,
that he pleased God, should be the only person condemned to an Earthly
Paradise for ages and generations, and so long kept out of Heaven, even almost
from the beginning to the end of the world.

The truth is, this Opinion of Enoch's Translation into an Earthly Paradise is
a wild conceit, without either ground of Reason or authority of Scripture: and
the ancient Fathers, speaking of Enoch and Elias, (whatsoever they say of the
degrees of Glory) determine of both, that they were taken up into the place of
Glory. He is there, says Epiphanius, (...), in a body Epiph. haer. 64.
spiritualized. He does (...), so S. Basil Seleuc. converse with Angels. He was
carried, Bas. Sell. Or. 11. Id. Orat. 40
says the same Father, (...), above all the bounds of visible nature: whither
can that be but into Heaven? Whence Isid. Pelus. Isid. Pelus. l. 2. ep. 37.
calls Elias (...), coelipetam Eliam, one that reached Heaven corporally. The
same may be said of Enoch. Of all the Saints these were the only Royal pare
who had the honor of this privilege. All the other Saints at the time of their
dissolution are taken up in their Souls, their Bodies are not translated
thither until the general Resurrection. S. Paul and S. John were taken up in
spirit, by vision or ex^^^sie; but Enoch in person. So it might have a twofold
reference.

1. It was a forerunner of the Ascension of Christ. Christ had forerunners of
all the other passages of his Incarnation. The Baptist was a forerunner of his
Birth; John born of the barren womb, Christ of the Virgin: a forerunner of his
Death; Isaac, the only son of his father, bound upon the Altar, as Christ
nailed upon the Cross: a forerunner of his Resurrection; Jonas after three
days brought forth out of the belly of the Whale, by the power of God, as
Christ by his own power raised out of the bowels of the earth: and a
forerunner also of his Ascension; Enoch translated into Heaven, as Christ
himself was afterward.

2ly, It was a forerunner of our rapture at the Last day; to assure us, that
the weight of our Bodies shall be no impediment of our Assumption into Heaven:
that as God gave us pledges of our Resurrection in both Testaments, in the Old,
by such as were raised by the Prophets; in the New, by such as Christ himself
raised; so he has not left us without remarkable pledges of our Ascension into
Heaven. In every state of the world there was one that was taken up; Enoch
before the Law, Elias under the Law, Christ after the Law: that in all Ages the
Saints might have some preambles of everlasting Life. For this reason
Epiphanius calls Enoch the First-begotten of the Resurrection; and S. Gregory,
Ascensionis praenuncium, the Forerunner of our Ascension. What was wrought
upon him in the first Age of the world, is daily wrought upon the Saints in all
Ages of the world; in respect of their Souls, at the time of their departure
they are translated and taken up into Heaven; and at the Last day it shall be
wrought upon the Bodies of all the Saints, when they shall be caught up into
the clouds, and meet the Lord in the air, and so shall ever be with the Lord. I
have done with the Second Part of the Text, His honorable Removal out of the
world.

The Third and last is, The mutual Correspondence between the two former Parts,
his Conversation By faith Enoch was translated, in the beginning of the verse:
and his happy Translation that was a necessary consequent of his holy and pious
Conversation, in the latter end of the verse, God translated him, because
before his translation he pleased God.

From hence will arise these two Propositions, whereof the one will serve to
guide and direct, the other to comfort and establish us in our way to Heaven.

The first is this, That a holy Conversation is a necessary preparative to a
happy Translation. There Is no passing into that Temple of Honor, but by this
of Virtue. We must enter through the Gates into the City, Rev. 22. 14. The City
is Heaven, and Grace is the Gate that leads into it. You have it expounded in
the former part of that verse, Blessed are they that do his commandments, that
they may have right to the Tree of life. Heaven is a holy place, no unclean
thing shall enter there, nor whatsoever defiles, nor whatsoever works
abomination: It is a Heavenly place, the earthly and covetous worldling shall
not enter there. To such a man the door of Heaven is as the eye of a Needle,
and such a man is to it as a Camel; if he would thread this Needle, he must take
away this Bunch from off his back, cast away the love of worldly Riches. Heaven
is the habitation of Righteousness, no unjust person shall enter there, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor extortioners, nor oppressors, nor grinders of the
face of the poor. It is God's holy Hill, and David tells us by what steps we
must ascend unto it, Psalm. 15. and Psalm. 24. by walking uprightly, and working
righteousness, and speaking the truth, by cleanness of hands and purity of
heart. Such an one shall receive blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from
the God of his Salvation. In a word; would you hope for a comfortable
translation at the hour of death? you must learn to live the life of Faith; By
faith Enoch was translated: learn so to order your lives as may be
well-pleasing and acceptable unto God; Enoch was translated, because he pleased
God. That Is the first Proposition, A holy Conversation is a necessary
preparative of a happy Translation.

And the second is like unto it, That a happy Translation is an infallible
consequent of a holy and godly Conversation. S. Augustine lays it down for an
undeniable truth, Non potest male mori qui been vixerit, No man can die ill
that lives well; be it a sudden, a violent, a painful, a bloody death, yet he
is happy in it, because He cannot die ill that lives well. Let us make sure of
this viaticum, Faith working by Love, and all will be well. He that has often
used to walk with God, as Enoch did, that has made it his care and conscience
to please God, has this Praeludium of a happy Dissolution, he begins in Grace,
and he must needs end in Glory.

In a word, Let us make this use of Enoch's Translation, often to look up to
that place whither he was taken. Had Earth been Enoch's home, had this World
been his abiding City, God would never have taken him from hence: but being a
pilgrim here, he takes him away. And however we have no hope of this privilege
whilst we are in our mortal Pilgrimage, to be immediately taken up in the Body,
as he was; yet we must aspire thither in our Affections and Desires. That is a
thing we may reach unto, and Nature it self will help us with some directions
to it, having given Man an erect Stature and a sublime Countenance, that he may
behold his Heavenly Original, and often meditate on the place from whence he
came, that is Heaven; that he may have a Heavenly Conversation, suitable to the
place whither he is designed to go, that is Heaven. But the Scripture gives us
better directions, to look up thither with the Eye of Faith; that will carry us
further then the eye of the Body, not only to the Starry Heaven, but to the
Beatifical, where our Hope is, where our Country is, where the Saints and
Angels are, where Christ himself is. If there be any love of Christ, we will be
often traveling thither, he is gone before; if any love of the Saints, they
are gone before; if any love of Happiness, we cannot hope to find it here, it
is in Heaven, or no where. Let us lift up our hearts thither, there let us fix
our eyes, thither let us bend our course, and so order our Conversation in this
world, that we may be fit for a better: that when the time of our Dissolution
is come, we may hope for a blessed Translation, having walked by Faith, and
labored to please God, as Enoch did; By Faith Enoch, etc.

I Have done with the Text, a noble Precedent of Piety drawn from the first and
Golden Age of the world. And now I perceive your attention revives, and your
expectation begins to rouse up, to hear something of the present occasion by
way of parallel. And I cannot blame you; such eminent Examples of Virtue and
Piety, as this Honorable Person has left behind him, are not the lot of every
day, especially in this last and Iron Age of the world. I shall therefore
endeavor in some measure to gratify such a just and reasonable expectation.
And I shall do it the more cheerfully, because I find my self discharged of
one main discouragement which usually attends upon these performances, the
suspicion of Flattery, that Pander of Vainglory, that stinking Fly which
poisons the perfume of many a Funeral Commendation. Here is no fear of that, I
am to speak of a Person so truly and highly Deserving, that my arrows will be
sure rather to fall short then beyond the mark. Being secured of that, I shall
set forward.

I will not take upon me to trace the Descent of of this Noble Person to its
first rise, it were a work that would require the Antiquities of two Kingdoms.
It may suffice, that it was both Ancient and Honorable; and let me add, it
was English too: and so I find it on the Monument of Edward Lord Bruce in the
Chapel of the Rolls,

Scotus ut ortu, Anglis sic oriundus avis. Our neighbour-Nation had the honor
to give that Family an hospitable entertainment for some hundreds of years; and
they had the justice also, after many revolutions, to restore it at length with
Honor and Splendor to its native and Original Soil.

His Ancestors, with their Name, came in with the Norman Conqueror, their Seat
was Skeleton in Yorkshire; and a Monument of theirs still remaining in
Gisborough Abbey bears witness to great Antiquity. Providence transplanted them
into Scotland, where they prospered, and took root, and spread their branches
into the Royal Family.

And the same Providence, together with the auspicious Reign of K. James,
brought them back into England. The L. Bruce of Kinlosse, Father to this
Honorable Earl, did not only attend upon his Majesty to this Crown, but was a
happy instrument, as Ambassador to Q. Elizabeth, (of whose favor he had a
great share) for the transacting of that great Affair, in order to the
Succession: and in the Succession, as an honor to his Justice and Integrity,
as well as Wisdom and Prudence, was entrusted, both as Master of the Rolls in
this, and Counselor of both Kingdoms. Here his own Modesty (which in those
days was accounted a Virtue) was the only Moderator which set bounds to the
Favor and Bounty of his Prince, in refusing those further offers that were
made by K. James, and returning diverse blanks that had been given unto him.

His Lordship now deceased had reason to acknowledge (as he did frequently and
gratefully) how happy God had made him in all his Relations. Happy in his
Father, so renowned in his generation. Happy in his Mother, whose Memory is
still precious in the fragrancy of her Piety, Charity and Hospitality. Happy in
his First Wife, the Daughter of Sir Robert Chichester, and Heir by her Mother
to the great and rich House of Harrington. By her he had his only Child, the
Earl now living. A Lady eminent in her time for singular Wit, Parts and
Modesty. Happy in his Second, Diana, Countess of Oxford, one of the Coheirs of
William Earl of Excester; a Lady of matchless Virtue and Honor, to whose dear
and pious Memory his Lordship erected this sumptuous Monument; having her self
left behind her, as with his Lordship the memory of a most entire Conjugal
Affection, so with his Son the unparalled kindness of a Mother-in-law; first
making him her Child, by a careful Education; and then her Heir, by a noble
Endowment with her whole Estate of Inheritance. Happy in his only incomparable
Sister, Christian, Countess Dowager of Devonshire, now surviving. And happy in
his only Son, and Heir of his Virtues, Fortunes and Honors.

But I must not forget my self, neither should I have mentioned this Nobility
of Extraction and Alliance, but that I find it attended with such a train of
Virtues, of which Honor is but the shadow, and without which it is not so much
as a shadow. Nobility without Virtue being as a golden Candlestick set upon a
Table without Light, or as a Beacon upon an hill, having no Fire in it: Whereas
Virtue accompanied with Honor is like a rich Diamond set in Gold, which makes
it appear more orient and illustrious. It is a good saying of Gregory
Nazianzen, True Nobility (...), it is to be measured, not by the Progeny, but
by the Person. Therefore passing by his Original and Traduction, let us look
upon him in his own proper and inherent Qualifications. And those we may refer
to three heads, Political, Oeconomical, Personal.

For Politicals, he was a Person enriched with great Endowments and Abilities
of Mind, much Prudence and Sagacity, as well as Integrity, a deep Judgment fit
for the managery of the highest Affairs, had not the depressions and
infirmities of a Consumptive Body indisposed him for the Public, especially in
such Times of Broils and Confusion as were altogether unsuitable to the Calmness
and Peaceableness of his temper. Yet even then he bore his part, and whilst
others were wallowing in blood, he was wrestling in Prayer and melting in
Tears, mourning for the Divisions of Reuben, and praying for the peace of
Jerusalem. And we must all confess that the Prayers of such Good men were
effectual to retrive those public Blessings of Religion, Peace and Liberty,
which the dint of the Sword could never do. For his own Concernment, his
greatest care was to preserve bonam Conscientiam in mala valetudine, a sound
Soul in a crazie Body, and a good Conscience in bad Times. He would often
comfort himself, and this comfort he carried with him to his grave, that He was
free from the blood of all men.

For his Oeconomicals, in the government of his Domestic affairs, his Family
was, as the Psalmist describes Jerusalem, like a City compact together. In the
midst of the distracted and confused Times, when the Coat of Christ was rent
into so many pieces, so many men, almost so many several Religions; in the
midst of those Confusions, his Family was like a little Church; and though at
that time very numerous, yet I could not observe that there were two amongst
them all of a different Persuasion, either in point of Religion or Loyalty.
This I ascribe (next to the Blessing of God, who makes men to be of one mind in
a house) to the Piety and Prudence of their Lord and Master, wisely considering
that he could never be ill served by those, who were both Religious Servants of
God, and Faithful Subjects to their Sovereign. Within those Walls you should
not hear any of those hellish Oaths, Blasphemies or Execrations, which in other
places are wont to infect the air, and grate the ears, and wound the hearts of
pious men. No Drunkenness or Debauchery to be found there. I observed it with
comfort, and can speak it with confidence, that for five years time, in which I
had the honor of a constant attendance in the service of that Noble Family, I
was not once encountered with the deformed spectacle of a Drunken distemper; but
on the contrary, such Order, Silence, Sobriety, Modesty and Civility, as if not
only the Eye, but the Soul of the Master had been in every corner of the
house. Such a Master worthy of such a Family, who was truly Pater-familias, not
so much the Lord, as Father of his Family; so tender of his Servants whilst
living, and so careful of them when dying, as to leave to every of them a good
blessing behind him.

Lastly, for his own Personal qualifications, he was most eminent and
exemplary. I shall not instance in any Negative Virtues, that he was not
obnoxious to any of those Vices which are incident to Greatness, not to Pride
and haughtiness, not to Violence and oppression, not to Luxury and
intemperance, not to Pleasure and wantonness: the black mouth of malice cannot
charge him with any shadow of these Enormities. But I will not insist upon
these. Privati and plebeii hominis est, ut vitio careat, as Nazianzen speaks,
It may be the commendation of a Plebeian, or Private man, to be free from Vice;
but for Persons that overtop others in place and Dignity, it is a shameful and
ignominious thing not to be as eminent above them in Virtue. And what Virtue
can we name, in which he did not both transcend the most, and equalize the best?

Begin we with his Humility, for that is the best foundation in the structure of
Piety. He that would build high, must lay his foundation low; and he that would
build for Heaven, must lay his foundation in Humility.

So did he, great in the eyes of others, little only in his own. And whereas
Solomon tells us, Before honor goes humility; here was Humility conspicuous in
Pro. 15. 33
the midst of Honor, which made it appear much more honorable. Like Saul in
the Old Testament, he was higher then the rest of the people by the head and
shoulders; yet like Paul in the New Testament, in his own esteem less then the
least. His grandeur discovered it self rather by the virtue and influence in
doing good, then by the pomp and splendor in seeming great.

Add to his Humility his exceeding virginal Modesty, mixed with such a sober
and serious Gravity in his countenance and deportment, that his very Presence
was sufficient to charm the extravagancie of wanton tongues, as well as his
Example. You should not hear at any time an unsavory word fall from his mouth.
He had such a perfect command of that little slippery member, that whereas
others, to whom their own Honor is tender as the apple of their eye, are yet
unreasonably prodigal of other men's Reputations; he was so far from lacerating
the fame of other men, that I could never observe him to speak ill of any man's
person, though never so ill deserving.

His Temperance was rare and admirable: he looked upon Excess as poison, not
only of the body, but of the better part, and such a bastard of Hospitality,
as most commonly is the death of the mother.

His Justice exact, so far from doing wrong to others, that if the case were
doubtful, he would commonly take the loss and disadvantage to himself.

But above all these, says the Apostle, put on Charity. So did he: his Charity
was great; both this and the other adjacent Parishes had a constant and a
liberal portion of it. But besides the ordinary and obvious ways, he had the
art to spy out the more choice and noble objects of Bounty, (of which the late
unhappy Times afforded plenty) and there he sowed plentifully, by many hundreds
in the year. And this he did in such a secret manner, that none could be
witnesses but God himself, and those to whom he gave it for God's cause. And
though he always gave it with his own hand, that he might be sure to give it
into right hands; yet he was unwilling that his left hand should know what his
right had done. And whereas Charity covers a multitude of sins, his Charity was
so modest as to cover it self.

These were the Fruits of a constant course of Piety and Devotion, which he did
most religiously observe both in public and private.

In the time of his Sickness, which was long, and accompanied often with sharp
pains, he wanted not a large stock of Patience and Christian Fortitude, to
comply with that gracious Providence which had put the Cup into his hand. But
having a clear prospect of the race which was set before him, by daily
Mortification, and Prayer, and other exercises of Piety, he carefully prepared
for his last and great Change, which befell him in the great Climacterical year
of his life, meekly resigning his Soul into the hands of his Gracious Redeemer.

It remains on our part, to commit his remaining Part, as a sacred Depositum,
to that Dormitory which himself prepared, beseeching God to give us Grace to
tread in the steps of such Pious Examples, that when our own Change shall come,
our Souls may be received into the same blessed Mansions, and at the general
Resurrection we together with them may have the same consummation of Bliss both
in Soul and Body; through Jesus Christ our Lord.

THE END.

