A MISCELLANY OF DIVERSE Problems.

Containing ingenuous Solutions of sundry Questions, partly Moral, partly of
other subjects.

Translated out of French by HENRY SOME, M. A. late Fellow of the Kings
College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Adams, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the Talbot, near St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, Anno Dom. 1662.

To the virtuous Ladies, Mris Elizabeth Chase, Mris Frances Heywood, and Mris
Laetitia Briggs, the three sisters of his dear friend Mr. H. Some.
Virtuous Ladies,
WHereas common and low spirits, might suspect this action, as a design to
renew a past sorrow, seeing me, after a year of mourning, recall the memory of
so sad a loss: I know, your more generous souls, will rather interpret my
intent, an endeavor to allay your too long grief, when I revive the memory of
a dear dead Brother: Since your reason, being so near of kind to his, cannot
but judge it a weakness, to prefer the passion of an useless sorrow, above the
merit of a pious gratitude.

And yet considering, that others will be so partial, as to blame, whatever
their fancies do not approve: I must forbear to heighten the cause of sadness,
by recounting the particulars of your loss; only I would fain beg your leaves,
to acquaint the world, that in this they and you are partners. But how shall I
effect that? since experience has now taught the vulgar, what was formerly
reserved to the knowledge of the more prudent; That the commendation of our
friend is frequently but the cloak of a self-conceited folly: And the world
having been of late so much abused by hypocrisy, is now become suspicious even
of virtue, if once recommended; especially by a person, whose obscurity leaves
him liable to their censure. However the love of goodness, the obligation of
friendship, and consciousness of truth, shall prevail with me to the hazard of
repute

I should indeed, both betray an high folly in my self, and injure the worth of
my Friend, should I, considering my own disability, undertake to discourse at
large of all his merits; and yet thus much I cannot but say, his ingenuous
discourse, his modest deportment, his humility and candor, gained a more then
ordinary respect from all that ever he conversed with, and this they shall
witness for me: They that had the happy opportunity of knowing him more
thoroughly, found his Learning so great, and communicated with that freeness;
his piety so true, and practiced with that innocence, that they could not but
love him with admiration, which also increased in those that had a more special
and constant intimacy with him; for such knew him so passionate a Lover of all
ingenuous Learning, that he ever counted that hour lost, which was not employed
in some kind or other of it. He hated naught so much as idleness, or doing
nothing, and that made his very recreations, as serious as others studies. And
this gave him the advantage of being skilled in modern languages: which
although he attained unto, by a sagacity proper to his disposition, and his own
industry, yet his courtesy would afterward entertain discourse with the
common Tutors and professed Teachers of them upon all emergent occasions. This
his true love to Learning, gave our Nation the opportunity of knowing the
Nature and Constitution of the new Famous French Academy, by his translation of
their History, written by Monsieur P. Pellison, which was a thing so acceptable
to the Author, that he was pleased to write him a particular acknowledgement,
and communicate to him also this present Treatise, which likewise at times of
divertisement he taught to speak English: In the perusal of which, I doubt not
but the more ingenuous will reap satisfaction, and find sufficient cause to
love the Translators memory, if they consider that it is not offered as a part
of his more solid labors, but as a valuable Essay of wit, and to be used as it
was made, only in a Diversion.

That which I offer to you, worthy Ladies, I give not as a Present, but repay
as a due, which without injustice I cannot detain; a greater reason, then that
which engages me to a publication, entituling you to the right of Patronage:
For the memory of a dear friendship cannot herein challenge any thing from me,
but what the interest of a nearer relation makes entirely yours, and together
with it, the Devoirs of

Your most humble servant, Samuel Thoms.
Cambridge, Jan. 10. 1661.
TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Conceive it would be rather presumption in me than humility, if before you
come to read what I here present you, I should not give an account of some
things that respect my design, and the manner of these Problems, which may
occasion you either to bear with their faults, or to condemn them with the more
reason and justice. In the first place, seeing me allege commonly many several
reasons of the Questions I handle, you may possibly desire to know, Whether I
propound part of them to exercise my wit, and to beautify my work, like an
Orator, that says not only all he believes to be true, or like truth, but
also all that he thinks advantageous to his cause. To this, Reader, let me tell
you, that in some places indeed, the obscurity of my matter has given me
license to make bold conjectures, and such as seemed to me more likely to add
Beauty than Light to my work: But that these places are very rare, and that
everywhere else I have labored to give only solid reasons, and have alleged
many of them, because having considered my matter many ways, and at several
distances, I thought they might be all true. Some indeed may here say, that it
is not very likely that one and the same effect should have such different
causes, for commonly when we think we have found one solid cause of an effect,
this makes us despise all others, and we are apt for this reason to esteem them
vain and frivilous. But, Reader, I am not of this judgment, nay on the
contrary do think, that when we discourse upon an effect, we should scarce ever
content our selves with one good and true cause of it alone, because every
considerable effect has many causes which contribute to its grandeur, as all
Rivers are formed by the uniting of several brooks, and many petty rivuletts.
This is very evident of its self in some kind of things; as for example, That
which casts a man into a disease, cannot be always one sole cause, but many
causes united; so when the Question is to discourse of the ruin of a State, it
is clear, that it will never be sufficient to think of finding one solid reason
only, because it always has many. But though I see my self confined within
the bounds of a Preface, which I am afraid to exceed too much: yet I will in
some sort show you, as much as the brevity which I study will suffer me, that
this is no less true in regard of our Passions, Actions and Humors, which are
the matters the greatest part of this book is composed of. First, for our
Actions, and the particular and ordinary motions of our mind, I may say that
all our Passions do there appear together always, and act their parts there,
though it be not always after the same fashion: just as in each Comedy that is
acted, they are the same Actors that appear upon the Stage, though they do not
there represent the same persons. And as they say that no Element ever appears
to us in its purity, that is entirely separated from others, and void of all
mixtures; I conceive also that after the very same manner, not one of our
ordinary Passions, which are as it were the Principles and Elements of our
manners, does ever appear in its purity, and without some mixture of the
others: so that by this means it scarce ever happens, that it is only one
spring which moves and actuates our spirits. It would be as long as it is easy
to prove this by abundance of examples; but I shall content my self to allege
some of them. If it be demanded, Why we desire glory? It is, without question,
(to give one solid reason of it) because we look upon it as a second Life, and
that we think our Being is amplified and extended according as our renown
spreads very far, and as we are known to many men; but for all this, if there
be not another cause given, we shall not very well satisfy this demand: For it
is very evident, that we desire it also, because the good opinion that others
have of our excellency, fortifies and upholds the opinion which we have of it
our selves. Besides, we do without doubt desire to gain Esteem, because it is a
way to make us be beloved, and that we desire to be beloved; nay farther we
wish it, both for its own sake (because there is a natural sweetness in being
beloved, and that none of the least) and for the conveniences that come by it.
Even so too, if a man enquires, Why we revenge our selves? he will presently
find that we do it for diverse several causes, which come from different
respects. For it is partly because pretending that the injury received has
cast us down, we labor to raise our selves up again, by making him repent that
did it. And partly, we do not desire only to make him repent, but we think also
that we discharge our selves in some sort of the hurt we received from him, in
making him suffer as much. As we see that children think to free themselves of
a kiss which one has given them by force, in re-kissing him from whom they
have received it, and say they will give it back to be rid of it themselves.
Partly also, (without having any regard to the thing in its self) we revenge
our selves for the opinion of others, and for fear one should come to think
that we had not power or credit enough to do it: Besides this, we do it out of
Fear for the future, and to the end that he which has offended us, may not
presume to do so any more; (For though this be not formally the desire of
Revenge, certain it is that it always contributes thereunto:) And lastly, we
revenge our selves, because that, as the shaking of Fear ceases not so soon as
the danger is over; so the hurt we received, has left in us a blind impression
of hatred which lasts still after that is past, and has only its self for the
reason of its self. If we should now examine the motion of the soul in Love, we
should find in it a stranger mixture of all sorts of Causes, Natural and Moral,
Corporal and Spiritual. In a word, we should as easily find that it is the same
with all the other ordinary and extraordinary humors of our minds; I mean,
that there is not any of them that has one only source, and that they have
always many roots, some whereof look backward, and some forward, some to the
right hand, others to the left; nay we should find they have almost always
quite contrary causes, since that most commonly they come to us partly from
strength and partly from weakness, partly from reason and partly from
blindness; and that they almost always show both some perfection and some
imperfection both at once.

Behold, Reader, the first thing I was to speak to you of, upon which I have,
it may be, insisted too long. Pass we now to that which remains with all
possible brevity. Some of my friends, whose least advice weighs much with me,
counseled me not to forget in several places of this Book, some reasons that
are commonly given upon the Questions I here handle, for fear least I seem to
be ignorant of them. But I told them that this might breed in you a great
dislike; and that besides, though those causes which are vulgarly given of
diverse Questions, are many times very good, yet are they more often
superficial, or at least not the principal; and this in my opinion proceeds
from hence, that the vulgar has the common sense much better than its
understanding; and that by this means it sees indeed well enough with a single
eye the things that touch the common sense, but is much less able to give the
reasons of them, or discovers ordinarily only the shallowest. This I told them
for mine own justification; and after they had heard me, they believed it was
sufficient that I allege these vulgar reasons, when it is altogether necessary
to do so, and that I should here acquaint you, that I have slighted many
others, or for fear of rendering my self tedious, I would not allege them all.

Moreover, I have formed the most part of these Problems in a very concise and
succinct manner, and by way of Question, in imitation of several ancient
Philosophers, and that I might comprehend the more things in fewer words. But
because a concise and succinct reason, which str^kes the mind suddenly, seems
at first to be more acute and gentle, than solid and profound; and because I
know that people judge often enough of things, as of men, by their countenance
and habit: I was not willing to tie my self always to this method, and have
many times vented my reasons after a more Dogmatical and positive manner, and
made my discourse a little more diffuse. Nevertheless, I hope that in judging
the whole work in gross, you will acknowledge to me that I could not have
allowed less room to these meditations which I here offer you, and that I had
not a design to make you lose in the reading of my book any considerable part
of your time, which you ought to employ better otherwise.

These are the three things, Reader, which I desired to speak to you of;
However I do not pretend, by telling you what I have endeavored to do, to
prejudice you in favor of me; I say only that I have endeavored, and not that
I have performed any thing: and on the contrary, to take from you all
preoccupation, and to leave your judgment the more free, let me tell you, in
putting a period to this discourse, that I my self am not satisfied, whether I
have conceived my reasons with sufficient strength, whether I have explained
them with grace and clearness enough; whether my style be hard or pleasant; and
that I demand your judgment: Nay I declare unto you, that I doubt not but
there are many faults in this my book; and that those that shall think so, will
be of my opinion. And if still others say, that there are more faults than
perfections in it, and that I have done nothing which deserves that you should
read and approve it: I shall not reply any thing more harsh and sharp, then
that this may very easily be, since that my spirit is so imperfect, and that I
am not certain they are in the wrong.

And if you demand, what it is that has given me the confidence to expose to
your view this work which I present, notwithstanding the diffidence I have of
my own abilities; I shall answer, that it is on the one side a certain Goodness
and Complacency which some persons Illustrious for their worth, and such as I
am sure you know and reverence, have had for it; and on the other side, the
extreme desire which I had to do somewhat that might be profitable to you; for
it is certainly, Reader, this desire, more than love of glory, or any hope that
I could have conceived to see any success proceed from my labors that might be
advantageous to me, that has sweetened whatsoever it could have of pains or
trouble in it; and I hope, that if you make any reckoning of these
Philosophical reflections, wherein I have mingled light matters with important,
I may perhaps one day offer you some others upon higher subjects, from whence
you may receive much more profit.

On the judicious Translator Master Henry Some late of Ks. College Fellow, my
dear and deceased Friend.
WHat Problems Aristotle never told,
Nor Plutarch, nor this Oedipus unfold,
Resolve who can: wherefore impartial Fate
Of useful men's short life contracts the date?
Whence your small Pox more unrelenting are
Toward the High, the Learned and the Fair?
Why fell such loyal expectations short
Of your so near, and so long wished for Port?
Why should a candid, studious, peaceful mind
Scarce through this angry Age safe passage find?
But stay, bold Muse; None may without offense
Fathom the Depths of State and Providence.
Rest we content what Nature has reveald
To read, and leave those other volumes sealed.
Our Joy, our Sorrow with Prob. 4, 5.
distinguished tears;
Our 47.
Laughter at this Authors Bar appears;
Who does to solid Reason reconcile
Every 28.
almost in voluntary smile.
The spring of Passions, and the quick Debate
Of Actions seeming indeliberate,
Are here disclosed: his Clue does guide your mind
Her self through her own Labyrinths to wind.
Now we discern, 51.
Why the parched ears grow white,
When your hot Constellations unite:
We more then feel what 7.
straightened East-winds blow:
39.
The Serick Insect we admire and know:
I know too 12.
Whence my friend who did but aim
At doing well, has hit the mark of Fame.
Yet unresolved of what one Page pretends,
6.
That men not best may make your surest friends,
His life retracts that; and against pretense
Of Demonstration brings full evidence.
Like dispositions strong affections move:
None worse then He, can challenge equal love.
Jan. 2. 1661. Christopher Ware Master of the Free School of Tunbridge.

To my Worthy Friend Mr. Samuel Thoms Publisher of this work of our Deceased
Friend the Translator Mr. Henry Some.
SOme do asperse Translations, say they be
Like reverst Arras rugged Imag'rie.
If so, wee'r well by this example taught
It Is the Translators, not Translations fault.
SOME could outdo his author, lend his story
A borrowed, greater then its native glory;
Not like those Scriblers, as ill taught as fed,
Who turn books not int' other tongues, but bread.
He knew as well to write, as to Translate;
To lend, as borrow learning; nor ingrate
To foreign wits, could, as well stockt as they,
His Paris bills in Cambridge coin repay.
Nay he was an Original of wit
So fair, so worthy, Heaven Translated it.
But can I name our loss, nor pay his Hearse
The tributary duty of a Verse?
A duty, though superfluous, since he
Was to himself sufficient Elegy.
Should we his Learning, Virtue, Candor scan,
Those joint Perfections speak him more then Man.
Dear Sir! when I recall those Attick nights
We once enjoyed with him, those lost delights;
When his discourse charmd our attentive ears,
And swelled us then with joy, as now with tears,
When we could call his learned diversions ours,
With which he used to wing the slow-paced hours;
Methinks stern grief does all my sense engross,
And the remembrance duplicates our loss.
But Sir it is you alone must now retrive
This loss, and in his writings make him live.
Then as (while he lies low in silent earth)
You Have given this Posthume offspring happy birth;
So still, Lucina like, propitious be,
And's other labors from abortion free.
Raise him a monument lasting as Fame,
And let as Trophies of his living Name,
His learned relics, while his ashes burn,
Rise like the Phaenix from their Parents Urne.
Then when his happy labors shall be grown
Old in esteem, enrich us with your own.
So shall your name with his enrolled stand,
And both in Honors train walk hand in hand.
R. S. Late Fellow of Kings College.

Upon the untimely death of his most Ingenious and Learned Friend Mr. Henry
Some, the Translator of this Book.
SVrely in Nature, there is some reason, Why
The best of Spirits do the soonest Die.
Brisk wits, it seems, are like the purest fire,
Which brightest burns, but soonest does expire.
The overleaven'd sort of men, we see
Aged and loathed like the Raven be:
Whilst the more sprightly part, like fragrant Rose
Loved and long-lived in death their eyelids close:
The Learned Planet courtier to the Sun,
As swift as Post his stated race does run:
Whilst his dull brother, with his leaden face,
Ends not his course, in twice ten times the space:
Ah me! it grieves me, that the ripest wit,
Should fatal prove, to him that owneth it:
This killed my Friend: from henceforth be it a shame
To be long-lived, for years your wit will blame.
J. Jones fellow of the Kings College in Cambridge.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Volume.
PROB. 1. WHat is the reason that the address and subtilty of wit which appears
in the execution of an evil action, makes us think it sometimes more ugly, and
sometimes less? page 1 PROB. 2. Whence comes the custom of making fireworks
and shooting off Guns, either when a Peace is made, or after a Victory, or at
the entrance of Princes into some City, or upon other the like occasions? 4
PROB. 3. Whence is it that the Choler of him that has no cause to be afraid of
us, and has our necks under his foot, is sometimes sooner appeased by
bravadoes and boldness, then by humility and entreaties? 9 PROB. 4. Whence
comes it that Fears are a comfort to sadness, and how they are formed? 13 PROB.
5. What is the reason there are Tears of Joy? 16 PROB. 6. Whence comes it that
many very wicked men are often times the best friends? 20 PROB. 7. What is the
reason that the Wind which comes in at a window, or a little hole, is more
dangerous than that which we feel abroad in the open field? 25 PROB. 8. Whence
comes it that Evil is more active then good? 28 PROB. 9. What is the reason
that Water-drinkers are greater lovers of fruit than others? 31 PROB. 10. What
is the reason that there is no such enmity as that which succeeds amity? 33
PROB. 11. Why has extreme affliction no Tears? 36 PROB. 12. What is the reason
that some things are gotten best by neglecting them? 41 PROB. 13. What is the
reason that those things which we are accustomed to, are not prejudicial to our
health? 44 PROB. 14. Whence comes it, that (as it is the saying of some body) a
great service is not so proper to gain our affections, as many petty services
done in a continued series, and on all occasions? 49 PROB. 15. What is the
reason that a great Joy makes us facile to pardon injuries? 53 PROB. 16. What
is the reason there is so much false news spread abroad, and that many delight
to make others believe strange things? 60 PROB. 17. What is the reason that
having been long on horseback, a man does better refresh himself by walking a
little on foot, then by sitting still? 63 PROB. 18. What is the reason that
when we come to rest our selves after much walking, we find our selves more
weary a while after? 64 PROB. 19. Why is it good not to let a wicked man, that
has power to do what mischief he please, perceive that we are jealous of him?
66 PROB. 20. Whence comes it that Beasts do know naturally how to swim, and
that Man has need to learn? 74 PROB. 21. What is the reason that the fruits
that grow at the tops of the boughs, are the best? 79 PROB. 22. Why do good men
think they ought to speak in proper terms of other Passions and Vices, but not
of things that regard Wantonness and Corporal love? 81 PROB. 23. Whence comes
it that they say whatsoever cures us and is good for us, dislikes us, and that
on the contrary, we love that which hurts us? 90 PROB. 24. What is the reason
that children in winter, though their face and hands seem to show that they are
more afflicted with cold then men grown, yet are not easily persuaded to warm
themselves? 95 PROB. 25. Whence comes it that when we are in affliction we are
better diverted by the representation of some Tragic History, or by the
recital of some great misfortune, then by more merry shows or facetious tales.
97 PROB. 26. Why do some noises make a man sleep? 100 PROB. 27. What is the
reason we aggravate our miseries, and love to persuade others that we are very
unfortunate? 105 PROB. 28. Why do many men laugh to see another man fall? 113
PROB. 29. What is the reason that they which embrace civil and worldly affairs
with too violent an ardor, are subject to lose all sense of Religion and the
knowledge of a Deity? 115 PROB. 30. What is the reason that the lowest Spirits
are commonly most persuaded of the truth of their opinions? 120 PROB. 31.
Whence is it that in the greatest subjects of affliction, we do many times take
up more readily a constant resolution, then in others that are much lighter?
122 PROB. 32. Wherefore are old men great talkers? 123 PROB. 33. Whence comes
it that in all kind of things those that do but meanly in them, are most
commonly more severe and rigid Judges of others, then those that excel
therein, and hold the first rank? 127 PROB. 34. Whence comes it that it is so
easy to blame and find fault, that the least able do it best, and that it is
much more hard to commend? 132 PROB. 35. What is the reason that when the
Winter has been very cold, they commonly say, the Summer that follows will be
very hot? 136 PROB. 36. What is the reason that Fear makes ones hair stand on
end? 138 PROB. 37. Whence comes it that many being in a Frenzy have spoken
Latin, or Greek, wit^^^t having ever learned either of these Languages? 141
PROB. 38. What is the reason that a too earnest entreaty makes us unwilling,
instead of inciting us, to grant that which is desired of us. 146 PROB. 39.
What are the causes of the mavelous things which we observe in the Silkworm?
151 PROB. 40. Why are good men oftentimes subject to a light promptitude of
Choler? 161 PROB. 41. Whence comes it that they say, the love of Grandfathers
to their Grandchildren is greater then that of their Fathers? 165 PROB. 42.
Why is it that a rare and eminent virtue which shines in a Prince, raises
greater motions of love in the lower sort of people then in other men? 168
PROB. 43. What is the reason that Shame makes a redness arise in the face? 177
PROB. 44. What is the reason that when we blush, it appears especially in the
forehead? 185 PROB. 45. What is the reason that Praises make a man blush? 187
PROB. 46. What is the reason a man laughs more at a pleasant jest, or a merry
tale, when he himself that tells it does not laugh? 190 PROB. 47. Why do we
laugh in seeing a thing very ill-favored, since that which delights the mind,
one would think, ought to have in it some perfection? 193 PROB. 48. What is the
reason that Man being inclined to flatter himself, does nevertheless aggravate
his own imperfection above the truth; as for example, in saying there is
nothing but folly, and injustice, and ingratitude in the world? 198 PROB. 49.
What is the reason that according to the common saying of the Poets and of
Aristotle himself in the second book of his Politics, Valiant and courageous
persons are most subject to love? 208 PROB. 50. Whence comes that aversion to
marriage of persons too near? 212 PROB. 51. Whence proceed the excessive Heats
of the month of August, and the other effects which are attributed to the
Dog Star? 221
The End.
PROB. 1. What Is the reason that the address and subtilty of wit, which appears
in the execution of an evil action, makes us think it sometimes more ugly, and
sometimes less?
THis Question having two parts, does not the reason of the first consist in
this, that he which is ingenious and imployes ^his wit to do ill, seems to be
more ^ngratefull toward God, in abusing the gifts which he has received of
him? Or else is it, that he which has cunningly carried on a very malicious
action, seems not to have been touched with any remorse of conscience that
troubled his judgment, for which reason he is accounted more wicked and more
unnatural? Or else, is it that an evil action full of wit and address, cannot
have been committed by a sudden and pardonable motion; and that this address
which appears in it, shows that a man has digested it at his leisure, that he
had a long time had it in his mind, and that he executed it with a full and
constant will? Or else, is it because he that sins so craftily, seems to have
been very violently desirous to sin, since it is certain that a violent desire
whets the wit, and renders it fruitful in inventions? Or else, is it because
the more ingenious a treason is, the more close and secret also it is; so that
there is requisite the more impudence and dissimulation to execute it? Or
lastly, is it because the rendering deceitful by a very refined treason, the
common assurances which we take of things, is an undermining the foundations of
public repose, and after a particular manner, the shaking of nature, which
has not given us any better means to guide our selves in civil society, and an
instructing of knaves new ways to hurt honest men, so that this is a being
doubly guilty; as a thief is doubly guilty, if not content to steal the fruits
of a garden, he enters into it by some place formerly inaccessible, and makes a
new way for those that shall have a mind to imitate him? But if this be so,
whence comes it then, that at other times the ingenuity that shines in the
execution of an ill action, makes us blame it less sharply, and sweetens the
hatred it ought to beget in us? Is it in this case not so odious, because the
luster of wit may in some sort repair the defect of it? Or else, because when
experience teaches us, that the beauty of the mind, and a black malice seldom
lodge together, and do not willingly associate; we do then frame some
excuseable motives to an evil action, when we see some gentleness shine in it,
and conceive that he that did it, was forced to it, either out of Gallantry, or
by the strength of some sudden Passion, rather than out of an extreme Malice
and ill nature?

PROB. 2. Whence comes the custom of making fireworks, and shooting off guns,
either when a peace is made, or after a victory, or at the entrance of Princes
into some City, or upon other the like occasions?
FIrst, as to public rejoycings; Is it because joy which is a violent
dilatation of our spirits, cannot be better expressed then by shows which
consist only in violent dilatations of powder by fire? Or else, if there be no
likelihood that men did so nicely regard such a relation, and that man's
imagination out of a secret impulse, took up a thing that resembles the motion
of joy to express it by? Is it rather because Light, which all these Artificial
fires redouble, is naturally the Emblem of Joy, and does naturally delight the
imagination more than any thing? And therefore we call sadness a dark cloudy
humor, and when we speak of it, we say that it overspreads the mind as 'twere
with a cloud. Or else, is it not because we finding that our own voice is too
weak to represent our joy, and that it is wholly unequal to the greatness of
our contentment, we borrow the mouth of Cannons, and the noyses of powder to
express it, and to carry the news of it speedily on every side, and make it as
it were even mount up to heaven? It is manifest that Joy of all the Passions is
that which desires most to be known and published, and a joyful man is equally
ravished that his friends and enemies know that he is so. Or else, as it is a
pleasure to see the picture of some great Dragon, which had frighted us, after
that we have no more cause to fear it; is it not also delightful for the same
reason to see the vain images of troubles, violences, and passed wars in the
fires of joy after that a peace is begun? Or else may we take it thus, that as
it is a sign a man has fast bound a savage beast, when he can play with it
without harm, and without dread, and make a pass-time of its rage and fury; so
it is a sign that one has fast chained up that cruel monster, War, when one
can freely sport with the most terrible instruments of its fury, when one can
make them vomit up, whatever they have most hurtful and affrighting, without
any man's receiving either fear or hurt thereby; and that one makes them serve
for a divertisement to Women and Children? Or else is not this secondary and
innocent use which we make of them as it were a testimony that we abolish the
first; and therefore also when we would speak of a profound peace, we use to
say that all the instruments of War shall become instruments of Husbandry, or
shall be employed to other uses?

Now seeing that fireworks and the reports of the Canon are used to represent a
public joy, is it not for the same reason that they are used at the entrance
of Princes into some City, as it were to testify to them that their arrival is
esteemed a public happiness? Or else was it not first instituted on this
manner, out of an extreme flattery, as if they meant to say, that they judged
the soul of the Prince that is thus received, so Martial, that they thought
they could not better please him, than by shows that represent War?

If any one, notwithstanding all this, shall wonder, that to receive a Prince,
we do to him in like manner as we would do if we desired to drive him away, and
that we express our kindness by the most proper marks of hatred and hostility:
is it not on the contrary, partly for that the imagination of men is carried to
it, because naturally a violent love borrows the characters of hate? Therefore
we see that beasts when they make much of their little ones, they strike them
little blows, and toss them up gently into the air; and that mothers caressing
their children with all tenderness, give them little pats and call them rogues:
and that the best friends delight to quarrel with one another seemingly and in
jest: and we might questionless prove the same by wanton love, chose we not
rather to pass by this proof, then to write any thing that should defile this
paper. And if yet you demand of me, why a violent love borrows the characters
of hatred; Is it not out of a too great desire of flying the appearances of
flattery, and false amity, that it runs into this contrary extreme, which is
more irrational; as if flying from an enemy, a man should cast himself down a
precipice? Or rather that in this there is nothing done otherwise than ought to
be, but that extreme love has some characters like to the violence of hatred,
because generally all extremes resemble one another?

PROB. 3. Whence is it that the Choler of him that has no cause to be afraid
of us, and has our necks under his feet, is sometimes sooner appeased by
bravado's, and boldness, than by humility and entreaties?
IS it not for the reason that Montagne gives of it; namely that generous
persons suffer themselves rather to be overcome by the generosity and greatness
of the courage of him whom fortune has laid low, than at his cries and groans,
because they are more ready to reverence the image of virtue, then simply to be
bent by compassion, which many times may be unreasonable? Or else, is it from
some other causes, as for instance this, that it is a thing that astonishes and
surprises him who can do what he please with us, to see that instead of
submitting to him, we brave him, and that every astonishment is as it were an
arrest and surprizal of the spirit, which consequently interrupts the motion of
Choler, and gives the soul that is surprised with it, time to be better
advised? To this might be added, perhaps, that in Choler the soul many times
moves not, but by the violence of the first swing that is given it; and that in
this case if one can stop it, it is infallibly extinct; as one deads the motion
of a body which is moved only by the violence of an impression it receives, if
one stop it but one sole moment. Or else, is it because the bravado's and
boldness of those whom an extreme misfortune has cast down, does not show so
much Constancy and Resolution, although at the first sight it seems to do so;
as on the quite contrary Despair, because he that hopes nothing, does likewise
fear nothing; so that instead of raising Choler it excites Pity? Or else may
we venture to say, that naturally every thing is extinguished by the same
causes which made it live, when they are too abundant; and that as Love is
extinguished by too free and too wanton caresses, and Fire by too great an
abundance of wood cast on it, it may fall out some times after the very same
manner, that the extremity and utmost excess of injuries appeases Choler
instead of provoking it? Or else, is it not because the reproaches, and
bravado's of those that see themselves to be in our power, are a testimony of
their freeness, and that we believe they have no worse thoughts than those that
they dare thus express with so much liberty, whereas, if they beg of us with
submission and humility, we suspect them of hypocrisy, and fear least this
dissimulation covers some black revenge, and an implacable and furious hatred
against us? Or else, is it that for a man to humble himself before us, is to
furnish us with a subject of only Vulgar clemency, which as it is less fair, so
it does with less violence attract us; and that, on the contrary, to brave us,
after having offended us, is to furnish us with matter for an heroic clemency,
which is more beauteous in its self, and followed with more of glory? Or
lastly, is it that he which does freely reproach us, and boldly declares our
injustice, cutting our soul to the very quick by this violence of his
discourse, does awaken it, makes it come to its self, forces it to be attentive
to the reasons he alleges, and makes it comprehend them better, after which,
though its interest oblige it to a greater revenge then before, it cannot still
continue its rage, because, as Aristotle says very well, a man is never angry
injustly, that is to say, against that which he does very clearly know to be
reasonable?

PROB. 4. Whence comes it that Tears are a comfort to sadness, and how are they
formed?
IS it not that Tears do not properly unload the heart, as it is commonly said,
but the brain, which being more dry after it is delivered of those humidities,
serves the soul better, and is the cause that he which is afflicted having his
reason more clear and strong, sees better the just grounds he has to comfort
himself? Certainly it is probable enough that the brain becomes more free, and
the spirit more serene after this storm of tears, as we see the air is never
more serene than after rain; and the example of children teaches us that the
moistness of the brain accompanies the weakness of reason. Or is it moreover
that by weeping we discharge part of the pituitous humor, or of the melancholy
humor, both which cast the spirits into pensiveness, and a dull heaviness or
stupidity? Truly this second reason seems not to be void of likelihood no more
than the first. But (will some one say) whence proceed Tears, and what is their
fountain? Certainly it is no easy question to answer; and perhaps, to resolve
it exactly, would require a longer search then can be allowed a Problem. But
yet methinks one might venture to say according to the appearances we see, that
our inward parts compressing themselves in sadness, as it is the property of
compression, there issues from them some moisture by this compression, as from
a sponge squeezed: Or else that the brain continuing cold in sadness by reason
of the spirits flying to the heart, it yields through its coldness some thin
substance which becoming heavy, seeks its way out; Or else, as sadness
generally weakens whatever is in us, that retentive faculty of him that is sad,
is not strong enough to keep back, as it did before, those humidities, which we
call Tears, but suffers them to run out when it relaxeth its self.

PROB. 5. What is the reason there are Tears of joy?
IS it that a too violent good wounds us many times as well as too strong a
light? Or else that every change of condition in which one has long continued,
how happy and advantageous soever it be, has always something of incommodious
in it? Or else, that there is some bitterness, and as it were an infusion of
wormwood in the greatest part of the sweets of this life? Or else, is there not
some natural reason in it? and may we not say that joy excessively dilating our
inward parts, does by this means drive out some humidity; because that which is
dilated cannot contain it self in the same bounds where it was before? Or else,
is it not that in an affliction, we are hindered from weeping, out of a fear for
the future, which makes us employ all our thoughts in consideration of means
that may deliver us from that which we fear; so that after we are become more
happy, we do yet many times nevertheless cry, to satisfy that desire which we
had to do so? Or else, is it not credible, that we never understood our misery
better, then when being delivered from it, we can compare the image of it,
which is still very fresh in our memory, with a quite contrary condition: so
that it is not to be wondered at, if many times this comparison which discovers
to us the greatness of it, makes us weep even in the midst of our joy, through
a kind of pity we have of our selves? Or else shall I take it thus, that in
the sudden motions of a great joy, the dilatation of the spirits of the heart
is so great, that it is weakened thereby, and that our soul finding its own
weakness, by this means is apt to be wounded by every reflection that has never
so little of trouble in it? Or lastly, do not these tears of joy proceed from
hence, that learning all on a sudden, that we are delivered from some great
evil, under which we have lain a long time, the news cannot presently gain an
entire belief in us: and that as a body that is frozen, does not lose its
coldness at that very instant it is brought to the fire; by the same reason our
soul cannot lose that impression of its passed sadness, at the very same
instant that the good it was deprived of becomes present to it? See then the
causes which it seems may be given of that mavelous state of man, wherein he
weeps although he have a serene spirit, by an accident which we see sometimes
happen in the air when it rains and shines both at once. There are are also
Tears which abundant laughter brings into our eyes; but they are not of the
same species with those I spoke of but now; and I conceive, they proceed only
from that great and violent agitation which laughter causes within us; for
there is no passion which shakes a man all over with greater violence; and it
may very well be, that a motion so violent forces out of the eyes some
humidity; as we see that the violent agitation of a vessel wherein there is
some liquor, makes some drops of it sparkle out; and as the wind that shakes
the trees after a rain, makes those drops which lay there, fall to the ground.

PROB. 6. Whence comes it that many very wicked men, are oftentimes the best
friends?
IT is found by experience, that very bad men are often most zealous friends to
them that they bear an affection to, nay sometimes more then the best of men.
To enquire then the causes of this effect, is it not that there is a kind of
amity which is not begotten by reason, but by a means more low, namely long
acquaintance and familiarity: so that souls of the lowest rank and that have
the least of reason, are not incapable of it: but on the contrary are in some
sort more capable than others, because not governing themselves by judgment,
they do only follow the impressions of other things; amongst which, that which
length of time and use makes, is none of the least? Or else, is it not because
good men are friends only ad aras, that is, as far as will stand with Religion,
and wicked men beyond? So that if they must only prostitute their consciences
to their friends, and tread underfoot all things sacred, and despoile
themselves of the fairest ornaments the soul can be adorned with, they do it
very willingly. Or else, is it not that as dogs are faithful to us, and succor
us against those that set upon us, partly indeed out of love, but partly also
because it is their disposition to be easily provoked: so wicked men help us
with great ardour against our enemies, and combat them with great animosity,
not only for the affection they bear us, but partly also, for that by reason of
their natural curstness and venom, of which they are full, they are more apt
to be inflamed with a violent choler? Or else, is it because it is very natural
for us to love with violence something without us; wicked men that love neither
God, nor Justice, nor common goodness, are constrained by the force of nature
to love infinitely some particular persons? Or else, is it that cultivating
only that part of their duty which consists only in friendship, and keeping
that only as a remainder of the beauty of the soul, which hinders them from
altogether resembling savage beasts, they have the more love for that, as a
mother has the more love for her son, if he be her only one? Or lastly, is it
not that the nature of things is such, that generally in every extreme there is
some light mixture of the contrary extreme: For instance, we see by experience
that in cold Countries there are sometimes in summer more violent heats then
those of the hot Countries; and on the contrary, the subtilty of the air of the
hot Countries is the reason that sometimes the cold there is more penetrating
than that of the cold Countries. The Germans that pass for the least subtle
people of Europe, have more of subtilty than any of the rest in all sort of
mechanic inventions. The most ingenious people are commonly the most awkward
and unapt in some slight things. Melancholy persons are subject to more violent
joys, then those that are sanguine; covetous people, according to the vulgar
opinion, are sometimes carried out to a greater excess of prodigality then
prodigals. Men extraordinary valiant do often tremble more then others at the
sight of a great danger. Women, whose visage is more properly then that of men
the seat of Beauty, are also more susceptible then men of an extreme and horrid
ugliness. Lastly, to return to the mixture of goodness and wickedness, one of
the cruellest Emperors of Rome could not, as the Historian says, be present
at the acting of a Tragedy, but those feigned miseries which he there heard,
raised a compassion in him which made him weep. We read as much of another
Tyrant of Greece of the same nature; and when a man is arrived at the highest
degree of wickedness, the last crime he commits, is to be his own murderer, and
voluntarily to throw himself into everlasting pains, by the violence of the
remorse of his conscience. In which there seems to be a certain air and shadow
of magnanimity and heroic goodness.

PROB. 7. What is the reason that the Wind which comes in at a window or a
little hole, is more dangerous than that which we feel abroad in the open field?
UPon this Problem some may possibly think, that as the water meeting with a
very narrow channel, becomes more rapid; so the wind that comes in at a door,
or a window, or a small chink, for the same reason redoubles its violence:
Which is very true, but nothing to the purpose, for the clearing the difficulty
of this Question: because it is certain that a very little wind gliding in at a
cranny, is more apt to hurt one, then another wind much more violent, when one
is in the open field. This cause then being thus rejected, is it not rather
because the wind which we suffer in the open field does presently close the
pores through its coldness, and so arms us against it self: whereas the wind
that comes into the house by some little hole, finds us hot all the time, and
consequently does, as long as it continues blowing, find our flesh soft, and
easily penetrable. Or else, is it because the wind that cools only one part of
us, such as that is which comes in at a little crack, makes the spirits, to
which this coldness is an enemy, fly to the other parts, which is hurtful to
this? Or else, in plain terms, as the welfare of a Commonwealth consists in a
certain proportion of the Citizens one to another; so the good state of the
body is a certain equal temper of all the parts: so that when any thing breaks
this equality and harmony, and cools one part, while the rest continue warm,
this is in it self a malady, and it were better they had been all equally
cooled? Or else, is it because the wind that one suffers in the open field, is
a very wide, and as it were broad motion of the air, which arriving at us, must
needs break it self against our body, as it were a wave, and pass on each side
without penetrating it: Whereas the wind of a little hole, being sharp, does
the better penetrate our pores, and does us the more mischief: as we see that
an arrow which does not hurt us if it be cast at us broadwise, wounds and
pierces us if it hits us with the point? Or lastly, does not that which
Plutarch says, contribute to the same effect, viz. that the wind of a little
hole, hurts us the more, because we take no heed of it, and that so we suffer
it a great while before we put our selves in a condition to avoid it?

PROB. 8. What is the reason that Evil is more active than Good?
IT is a very strange thing, and yet very true, that Evil is more active than
Good. Grief, which is an evil, is more active than pleasure, and surmounts it
so much in violence, that although a man be at the same time tickled with all
the pleasures that can flatter the senses, a small Grief will be able to spoil
all his happiness. As Grief is stronger than Pleasure; so Fear, which is a
production of Evil, is a passion much more violent than Hope, which is a
production of Good. Bad examples have more force to debase our minds, then good
have to raise them up. Poisons are stronger than Remedies; and whereas there is
not any remedy that can cure us of our maladies, unless it be applied to us,
there are poisons so violent that they kill us with the very smell of them, if
they do but come nigh our nostrils. Things that are the sweetest to the taste,
as Honey and Sugar, are not yet so sweet, as Wormwood is bitter: and if you
mingle an equal quantity of them together, the result will be bitter and not
sweet, the ill favor prevailing over the good. Lastly, to omit nothing upon
this subject, and to run through all kind of things by which this truth may be
cleared, although amongst colors White be naturally more excellent than Black,
as more approaching to the nature of Light: So it is, as Painters have
observed, that it is the most feeble of all; and that, if one mixeth it in an
equal quantity with black, it is always vanquished. But what then is the cause
of a thing that seems so contrary to reason? I answer, that there can be no
other given of it, but this, that Good here below, is not in its fountain, and
that we see only some weak rays and small sparks of it; for if it were at home
in its fountain, it would infallibly conquer Evil, and would be too strong for
it, since that Activity being a Good, it is impossible but that it should be a
property and dependence of Good rather then of Evil. But as of two Kings, he
that is the strongest may be vanquished by the other, in a place where he has
not the body of his forces, and his greatest power: So it may very well be that
Good may be more active than Ill, and yet that it may be vanquished by it in
this world where we are, and, as I may so say, in this lower region of things,
where it is not in its fountain, and in its greatest glory, and from hence may
be drawn a very strong consideration to demonstrate the existence of God, as I
could show more at large, and more clearly, if it were here my design.

PROB. 9. What is the reason that Water-drinkers are greater lovers of fruit
then others?
IS it not because water has a certain faint quality that offends the stomach,
and the juice of fruit corrects that quality, and is to them as a kind of wine
which they are not averse from? Or else, does not the same reason that makes
them love water, make them also love fruit, to wit, because they love all
things that are moist and cooling, and that fruit as well as water is in the
number of things that are most so? Or else, is it not because they which drink
water only, do with more difficulty digest, and for this reason they love
things that are easily digested, such as are most fruits, and prefer them
before viands that give more pain to the natural heat? And if any demand,
Whence it is that they say also, that on the contrary those which are great
lovers of wine, do not care at all for fruit: Is it not the contrary to those
reasons I now mentioned? Or else, do they not hate fruit, because by their
moisture, they dull and deaden the palate, and so render it less sensible of
the pleasure to which they are so much addicted? Or does not the same reason
for which they love salt and drying meats, make them also hate those that
quench the thirst, amongst which it seems fruit holds the first rank?

PROB. 10. What is the reason there is no such enmity as that which succeeds
amity?
IS it not because our mind does ardently affect all new things, and loves
change; and that when we come to hate him, whom we have a long time loved, it
is a very great novelty and an extreme change, which consequently has some
particular allurement to attract our minds and engage it more violently in its
design? Or else, do not great friendships leave behind them great enmities,
because they could not have been destroyed but by great quarrels, and great
subjects of hatred and discontent? Or else, is it because as a stranger, whom
we do not know, cannot be either hated or loved: by the same reason, he that is
very well known, may be hated more, and loved more than another; and that there
are none so well known to us, as those whom a long friendship has made us
familiarly acquainted with. And indeed as the great knowledge we have of them
makes us more lively imagine the motions of hatred they bear us, the words they
will say, the thoughts they will have, and their very gestures in their anger,
it is credible that this serves to inflame our wrath. Or else perhaps we may
say that those, that are great lovers of one another, do only seem to hate more
then other men; and perhaps they seem so, because that some relics of
friendship, which they cannot chase out of their mind, rendering the injuries
which they mutually do one another, more grievous, makes them complain thereof
with words fuller of passion, and talk of it uncessantly. Indeed it is
questionless much more grievous to be wronged by him that one loves, then by
him that one hates; because this kind of wrong raises as it were a Civil war in
our passions, exciting one part of our heart against the other, and hinders us
not only from obtaining what we desire, but also from desiring it completely
and without repugnance of a piece of our selves; and Lovers may be good
testimonies of this truth; for it is certain, as there are many waters that do
not offend the sound parts of our bodies, but yet when they touch a sore place,
cause there incredible pain: So this sweet wounding of their heart, makes them
most sensible of injuries, which, without that, would not vex, nor move them at
all. Or, lastly, those that loved very dearly, do combat one another with the
cruellest acts of enmity, to learn, as I may so say, to hate one another, and
to confirm themselves in that bitterness and violence, into which they are
fallen, because they find, that all sorts of habits are fortified by exercise,
and by the acts which they produce.

PROB. 11. Why has extreme affliction no tears?
Does it not proceed from hence, for that the soul in an extreme affliction,
has no lively apprehensions, such as those must be that raise tears, but falls
into a kind of stupidity and insensibleness? Or is it not because when we are
extremely afflicted, Nature, which finds that the greatness of our Affliction
would make us shed too many tears, and that so great an evacuation might
excessively weaken, instead of comforting us, keeps them back altogether, and
resists the motion of our disordered minds, which, were it not for that, would
abuse this sovereign remedy, and employ it to our own ruin? Or else, may we
not upon this subject say, that he that is mightily afflicted, cannot weep as
he would do, because generally every excessive passion hinders it self from
arriving at its end, and becomes an obstacle to its self; and that for this
reason those that are oppressed with too much Fear, desiring to fly, find that
it has nailed their feet to the ground; and that their hand shakes that are
too much in Choler, and that they cannot express but by inconsequent and
disjoynted words, the greatness of their passion, no more then those whom a too
great Love possesses, or those who are in a too great excess of Joy? Certainly
it seems that this is not void of likelihood. And if it be asked, Why every
excessive passion fails of arriving at its end? it may be answered, that this
happens to it, because it is a malady of the soul, and a defect; and that the
qualities proper to a malady are, impotence, weakness and ill success. Or else,
every inordinate passion is an obstacle to its self, and is impotent, because
it desires things vast and infinite, and beyond all possibility, which hinders
our soul from executing those that are real and possible. For we see evidently,
that he which is moved with a very great Choler, cannot express, at least in
common and ordinary words, his resentment, and the indignity which raised it,
because he seeks the most strong, and desires to use a more eager expression
then the language of man is capable of. It is plain also, that Lovers do many
times hack and hammer instead of speaking, for the same reason, namely because
they would invent terms that should be as it were all flame, and have more
force and energie then they can have; and that a like desire is the cause also
why Joy, which is so talkative, becomes mute in being increased too much, or
brings forth only sighs and inarticulate and confused sounds. And as for
excessive Fear, though this be a passion to which one cannot so easily apply
this reason; yet one may say possibly, that he which is too lively possessed by
the image of a terrible and present danger, hinders himself, that in this
perturbation and trouble wherein he is, he desires not simply to run, but to
use some means more prompt and efficacious then natural and ordinary ones by
which a man runs away; and that his imagination thus overslipping whatsoever is
real and possible, as that of others which we spoke of but now, does not, by
reason hereof, put in practice those faculties that move the parts of his body;
for it is evident that it is the operation of the Fancy that must put in
practice those faculties. But however it be, it is very likely that Anger, Joy,
and Love, fail of expressing themselves well, for this reason; and if it be so,
we may with likelihood say, that even so he which is very much afflicted,
cannot weep, because that his soul disdaining the common characters of sadness,
searches in that ardour wherein it is, so great ones that they are impossible.
Or else, we may say that it does not search for such, but as that ancient
Painter, that chose rather to cover with a veil the face of Agamemnon, then
venture to represent his grief: it also chooses rather to refrain tears, and
words, and not to paint forth the greatness of its affliction, then to be
forced to paint it by the same things which the smallest of afflictions make
use of. If any one be not satisfied with all these reasons, it may yet possibly
be added, that, as we said before, a moderate compressing of the inward parts,
may squeeze forth the humidity of tears; and a too violent compression of the
same parts may, on the contrary, keep them in, by closing up the passages by
which they use to come to the eyes.

PROB. 12. What is the reason some things are gotten best by neglecting them?
WE said in the foregoing Problem, that a Passion being wrought to a very high
pitch, is an obstacle to its self, and hinders us from arriving at what we aim
at. Now we will endeavor to give a reason of a difficulty like to that, but
yet greater, viz. Why there are many things which are best acquired by
neglecting them, and looking another way. Thus for example, the Philosophers
have observed to us, that Glory is of such a nature, that the best means to get
it, is to run away from it, and not to desire it, and that she favors those
most, that do least regard her. Pleasure, if we consider it well, is like to it
in this: for the soul being softened through the love of pleasure, and rest,
becomes so sensible of incommodities and griefs, so vulnerable by all sorts of
crosses, and so feeble, that the least thing wounds it mortally, and makes it
despair; and even the smallest misfortunes become great unto it: On the
contrary, the contempt of pleasure gives it presently a more strong
constitution, by which it sustains the shock of evils that would disturb her
rest and her pleasures, and by taking away her delicacy, makes her not to stand
in need of extreme pleasures to be delighted, but to be satisfied if she have
common ones. In Eloquence and Conversation, there are also many Graces which
are not gotten if one affects to have them, and must, as I may so say, escape
from us without our knowledge, to be natural and charming. But I need not
enlarge here into any large discourse, to prove this verity by many examples,
seeing we meet with it at every turn in the things of our life, and that even
the vulgar confess it and allege it very often, though they are ignorant of
the cause of it. But it consists in this, that all those things that are best
gotten by neglecting them, are vanities; for our soul weakens it self by the
desire of vanities; but on the contrary she fortifies her self, and gets more
light and solidity, when she with-draws her affection from them, and by these
new forces, which by this means she acquires, she obtains afterward not only
greater advantages, but also even those slight ones which she contemned; for
these slight and vain good things are commonly appendixes to solid ones, and
follow them as images and shadows follow bodies.

PROB. 13. What is the reason that those things to which we are accustomed, are
not prejudicial to our health?
THere is nothing more common then that saying, that things which we are
accustomed to, are not prejudicial to our health; and there is commonly a
reason given of it, with which men are satisfied, viz. that Custom is a second
Nature. But certainly I conceive, that he which will a little cast the eye of
his mind upon this answer, and consider it at his leisure, will see it vanish.
For Custom has indeed some power upon our inclinations, and on the things
which depend on the soul: but I do not see that it has the same power in
natural changes, and things that depend purely of the body. To understand it
clearly, Suppose that a man should a hundred times hold some Combustible body
very near the fire, you will see plainly that it will never accustom it self to
endure the power of it, without receiving harm; nay, on the contrary, it will
consume by little and little: Even so, if moisture be contrary to the welfare
of a body, it is very manifest that it will never accustom it self so well to
be moistened, but it will still receive damage from the wet. Since then this
answer is not satisfactory, should we not rather say, that there cannot be
rendered any universal reason of it, but that it happens oftentimes for several
particular reasons, which have nothing of common, that many things cease to
hurt after that one has been accustomed to them? As for example, Cold does not
hurt him that is used to endure it, because it shuts up the pores and thickens
the skin; and that he that has a thick skin, and his pores closed, must needs
be more difficultly hurt by external qualities. On the contrary, he that is
used to walk bare-headed in the field, receives no hurt from the heat of the
Sun, as may be seen in the Bohemians children, and in the Peasants of some part
of France, by reason that this very heat has sucked by little and little from
their brains, all those humidities which might have bred Rheumes or Catarrhs.
Violent labor also does not hurt those that are used to it, for that it dryes
the Nerves, and the Nerves cannot be dried, but they are hardened, nor hardened
without becoming stronger, and fitter either to bear a great weight, or to
thrust a thing with vehemence. Or else, is there in it some gross mistake? and
should we not rather say, that things which we are used to, do not cease to
hurt, because they have lost the power to do it, through use: but that when a
man has long used a thing, without falling into any remarkable inconvenience,
it is a sign it was not contrary to him at the first, although it seemed to be
so: and therefore Physicians do very wisely permit him to use it for the
future. Or else (if we must however find out some reason common to all the
effects which this Problem comprehends) does it not consist in this, that as
oftentimes Good is in the middle, and Evil in the extremes; so also on the
contrary that sometimes Evil is only in the mean, and Good in the extremes, so
that an hurtful thing having by length of time brought our temper into some
extreme, it may by this means deliver us from the evil which it brought upon
us. But that Evil is sometimes in the middle, and Good in the extremes, there
are that prove it by several reasons: For they say that the higher and the
lower regions of the air are more calm then the middle region, in which storms
and tempests are formed; that the extreme force or extreme weakness of the Suns
rays do equally render the air serene: but that when they have only a moderate
force, they raise vapors which they cannot scatter: That man should either not
reason at all, but follow plain common sense, as the Peasants do, or else
reason exactly and profoundly, and become truly learned; because reasoning by
halves, and being learned by halves, is the way to embroyl ones self in a
thousand doubts that others know not; that Angels and things inanimate are
equally incapable of misery; but that those natures that are in the middle
between these two extremes, are only subject unto it. Though these examples be
taken from things far remote from the matter in hand, yet they may bring us to
a belief that it is many times after the same manner in things which belong to
the health of our bodies.

PROB. 14. Whence comes it, that (as it is the saying of some body) a great
service is not so proper to gain our affection, as many petty services done in
a continued secies and on all occasions?
IS it not because a great service may be received in an instant, whereas this
train of petty services takes up in the gaining of our heart, a great deal of
time, which must needs help forward the business mightily with all sorts of
causes? Or else is it that when any ones beneficence descends upon us thus by
little and little, and as it were drop by drop, we do at the several times we
receive it, make more several reflections upon the obligation which he lays
upon us, so that thus his benefits do sink the better to our hearts, like
herein to a gentle and soft rain falling by little and little, which penetrates
better into the earth, whereas great and violent showers only sweep it and run
away without soaking in? Or else, is it that this continued train of petty
devoires and services, each of which apart is not of any consideration, leads
us to amity and good liking by so sweet and gentle a force, and brings us on so
insensibly, that we perceive it not, and so make no resistance? Or else, as we
love more those meats which having delighted the palate do not lie heavy upon
our stomachs; do we not in some sort love more for the same reason the services
that do us good, and yet leave no weight of necessary and forced obligation
upon our spirits; as questionless petty services often reiterated do, because
that on one side their number supplies their weakness, and makes them
countervaile a great benefit all at once; and that on the other side they are
of such a nature, that he which did them cannot handsomely reproach them to us?
Whence it comes that the acknowledgement we preserve of them in our minds,
seems to us to be the more voluntary. Or else that which we search for,
proceeds it not hence, that he which does us a great good turn, is believed by
us to do it out of vanity, to gain the reputation of generousness or bounty,
because a great service makes a noise, and is exposed to view; but that we
cannot suspect the same of him who is assiduous to render us a thousand petty
devoires, which appear not to the eyes of others, and are perceived only by our
selves? Or else shall we say, that one may do us a great service in our
absence, but that this train of petty services presuppo^^^ that he that would
make himself be beloved, is not absent from him by whom he desires to be
beloved: but that on the contrary, he converses ordinarily with him; and that
this familiarity is that which aids him principally to insinuate himself into
our heart? Or lastly, does not this also contribute to it, that when we have
received some notable benefit from another, as it is a thing commonly known, it
happens many times, that those whose interest it is to make us forget it, have
so much artifice to extenuate it, to give it ill interpretations, and to take
away its luster and weight, that they seduce us, and extinguish in us the
resentment which we should have had of it; whereas when any one has insinuated
himself into our favor, and has witnessed to us the ardour of his affections
in many occurrences, by petty services which have not been observed by others,
the resentment which we have thereof is not exposed the assaults of his
enemies, or rivals; and he is so much the more assured, the more it is secret
and the cause of it not known?

PROB. 15. What is the reason that a great joy makes us facile to pardon
injuries?
IT is certain that a great joy disposes us extremely to clemency, that it
softens our hearts, and expells that hardness and bitterness which injuries
have caused in them, and makes us easy to pardon them; and as it is a thing
certain, and such whereof the enquiry cannot be otherwise than curious,
pleasant, and profitable; I conceive I have reason to allow it a place among'st
these Problems, and endeavor to discover all the causes of it. In the first
place then, I believe I shall speak a very great truth, if I say, that our soul
being surprised on a sudden by a great happiness, finds it self secretly
obliged to some sovereign power, and has secret motions of gratitude toward
it; and that finding its self unable to do it any good whereby to testify its
thanks, it is so much the more constrained to do good to his works, that is to
say, that it becomes good, and disposed to do good, even to those that have
wronged it. But besides this reason, which without doubt contributes very much
to the effect we speak of, I conceive that Joy does besides of its own nature
beautify the soul, as well as it beautifies the countenance. And indeed,
seeing that Joy is more according to nature than Sadness, seeing it is a Good,
as Sadness is an Evil, it must needs for this reason inspire also into it and
waken the passions that are more conform to nature, and better than those which
are awakened by Sadness. Now there is nothing more according to nature then
Goodness. If it be objected that Affliction corrects us, and makes us better; I
answer, that it does not do it out of its own nature, but by accident, as a
medicine cures us by accident, although at other times it be a kind of poison,
and is always in some sort contrary to the temper of our bodies. For if we
consider affliction in its self, we shall find that as it is the property of
winter and ill weather to kill flowers and to despoile the trees of the
ornament of their foliage, even so it blasts the beauties of the soul, soures
and debases it. But above all we shall find, that in cooling and weakening the
courage it greatly impaires that generosity from whence issues the pardon of
injuries. Philosophers say that Light does naturally beget Heat, although it be
not a quality of the same species with it, by reason of a certain affinity or
correspondence of nature which is between them. I suppose it is for the same
reason that Joy may beget in the soul goodness and virtuous inclinations,
though its self be not a virtuous inclination, since that being a good passion,
it must have some analogy with all the good passions, as sadness must have also
with all the bad ones. But to come to the consideration of another cause of the
same effect, it seems also that as an injury made us not angry, but out of an
opinion we had that it had cast us down, when any great prosperity comes to
raise us up, it must for this reason appease and sweeten the grief which this
pretended dejectment has caused in us, since that it does in some sort do us
reason. Or else, perhaps the soul, in a great pr^^perity, looking on the
present which smiles upon it, and offers it nothing but matter of satisfaction,
and a most perfect rest, does equally take its eye off, both from what is to
come, and what is past, and therefore hates to remember passed injuries, since
that it cannot do it without looking off from the present which is so grateful
to it, and interrupting its delicious employment: but that which still puts it
more strongly upon the same resolution, is, that having all on a sudden
received a great blessing, it does passionately desire to enjoy it fully, and
not corrupt the sweetness thereof, and that there is nothing can so corrupt its
sweetness, as a motion of hatred and revenge. For as the act of Loving is in
its self naturally sweet, because it is very much according to nature: so the
motions of Hatred are naturally painful and mingled with grief, because they
cross nature; and because the soul does as I may so say, wrest and distort its
self, in receiving them into it, and does ill employ its faculties. Now that
all motion of revenge and hatred of another is naturally painful and mixed
with grief, is a thing that may easily be proved. For, besides that our own
sense makes us acknowledge it to be true, we need only to look upon the visage
of man in choler, to confess that nothing does more resemble the visage of a
man that is sad; and there appears something of painful and forced, somewhat
like to that one sees in the face of a Porter employed with all his strength to
lift up a great burden. It is even so also in all other motions of Hate. For
in a word, it is as unimaginable, that a man should machinate any black
designs, and frame within himself some malicious contrivance, without losing
the native quiet and serenitie of his spirit, as that the air should continue
serene when it is formed into storms and tempests, and that it should be
overspread with dark clouds, before it pours down either hail or thunderbolts
upon the earth. And as the spring of a Pistol is not at rest, and as it were in
its due place, so long as it is cockt, and ready to give fire and kill: So our
soul is without doubt restless, and out of its repose, so long as it continues
as it were bent to the execution of some malicious act, and is ready to do
mischief to another. And if we will descend from the consideration of men to
that of beasts, we shall there also find some testimonies of this truth, since
that they which when they are alone, seem to take pleasure in, considering the
beauty of the day, of the meadows, of the rivers and forests, and are most
lightsome and sportive, are also the most innocent; and that, on the contrary,
all the savage and blood-thirsty ones are sad and melancholy, which may be seen
both by their countenance, and in that they hate and fly the light. It is
wisdom therefore in us to drive from our minds all malicious thoughts when we
would fully enjoy any great happiness: Or else, the joy which a good fortune
causes in us, renders us sweet and easy to pardon injuries, because after
having gotten external goods, we do the more violently desire those that
respect the soul, namely wisdom, and virtue, as those only which we want, and
which remain to us to desire.

PROB. 16. What is the reason there is so much false news spread abroad, and
that many delight to make others believe strange things?
IS it not because a man thinks he does not do very ill, nor trasgresse much
the Law of Liberty, to add to that which he receives from others, some small
matter, or to take from it some petty and slight circumstance, which yet
changes the whole face of the thing; an absurdity like to that of an ill
play master, that thought he did not any great hurt, and was no dishonest man,
in taking away a small cipher from a paper wherein his debt was contained, and
in his defrauding his Creditor of a great sum under pretense that he took away
and blotted out only a small cyfer? Or else, do not false news arise
principally from hence, that we wholly give credit to our friends when they
tell us strange things; and that, on the contrary, our friends enlarge the
wonder to us, because they see we are delighted with it, and that they are
unwilling to deprive us of it by disabusing us, and take from us that
delightful error in which we are, no more then they would wake us if they knew
we were in a pleasant dream? Or else, is it because many men think they do well
to make use of a lie to uphold the Truth? Or else, are we not chiefly deceived
by false relations, because we think it reasonable to give credit to one that
is no bad man, but has on the contrary much of goodness; whereas we should
consider whether he be not guilty, of some weakness, because a man lies
through weakness as well as malice? Or lastly, may we not say that ill news is
spread principally for this reason, that many please themselves in making
others believe strange things? the truth is, experience evidently discovers
this malady with which they are affected; and if it be demanded why they are
thus delighted with it, methinks one may say, it is either because they would
have these great and strange things be so, and that being unable to give them a
real existence, they give them at least a shadow of it in printing them upon
the spirits of men: Or that half-believing them, and taking pleasure to believe
them, they labor to confirm themselves in their opinion, by drawing many
others to be of it, and acquiring to it good store of suffrages; or that being
unable to believe them in any sort, yet when they see that an another believes
them, they contemplate the joy which they imprint on his eyes, and on his
visage, and hear the exclamations which admiration forces from him, and the
gestures it puts him in, and receive hereby some reflection of his pleasure;
like in this to many sick people, who though they cannot eat themselves, yet
delight to see others eat with a good appetite?

PROB. 17. What is the reason that having been long on horseback, a man does
better refresh himself by walking a little on foot, than by sitting still?
IS it not that as a color is more contrary to a color then to a smell or a
sound, by the same reason one motion is more contrary to another motion then to
rest, and so easier effaces the impression of it, by that Law which says that
things which are under the same genus do more vigorously combat one another?
Or else, is it (...) body of the horse, on which we have been a long time, has
too much pressed many parts of ours, and by this means shut up certain
passages; and that when we walk, the spirits running to these parts to move
them, do raise them up, and by this means open whatsoever was there pressed, or
too much straightned, so that they soon recover their natural situation?

PROB. 18. What is the reason that when we come to rest our selves after much
walking we find our selves more weary a while after?
IS it because the heat which motion drew into our parts rendered them more
supple, and obedient to the will, in dilitating the nerves; and that after we
have rested a while we have lost this heat, but we have not lost our
weariness? Or else, is is because when we walk, our sweat runs down; but when
we come afterward to rest, it sticks upon our skin and benums it, by its
humidity, as also by its coldness, when the repose of the body has given it
means to grow cold? We see by experience, that those that come from swiming,
feel their arms and legs weak, as if they had been beaten, by reason of a cold
moisture that rests upon them. It is observed likewise, that when after a long
motion we come to rest our selves, we sweat presently much more; and this is
because the motion of the parts of our body does not then hinder that by which
the drops of sweat do descend by their narrow passages, the pores. For, as
every body knows, two several motions do very often hinder one the other.

PROB. 19. Why is it good not to let a wicked man that has power to do what
mischief he please, perceive that we are jealous of him?
IT is good, first, because he that would do wrong unjustly, has yet need of a
pretense, which how vain and frivolous soever it be, may at the least amuse his
spirit, and hinder him from considering and clearly discerning the ugliness
and injustice of his action. For, as he that is resolved to be let blood, and
has stretched forth his arm, yet turns his head another way out of a certain
horror which nature has of every thing that hurts any part of our body: So he
that is resolved to do an unjust and wicked action, does yet turn away his eyes
from the injustice which he sees in it, out of a natural horror, and
endeavors not to see it at all, or at least to see it less clearly. This is
very handsomely represented by Esope, in the fable of the Wolf and the Lamb
that drank at the side of the same river; for though the Wolf was resolved to
devour the Lamb, and saw that it was best for him to do it presently, for fear
least any one should come to her succor, yet he stayed a while to reason with
her, being not able to put himself on this action, without setting before his
eyes some color and show of justice. He begins therefore to complain, that she
troubled the water; but because she replied that this could not be, because she
drank a great way below him, which was so clear a reason that it shut out all
appearance of the contrary, he could not yet fall to the committing of this
evil, but seeks another pretense somewhat less void of color, in telling her
that she knew well enough, that her Father and Mother and all her Ancestors had
been his enemies. Not but that this second reason was very extravagant, seeing
it was the sole cruelty of the Wolf, which had bred in the Ancestors of the
Lamb this hatred, which made them only avoid, not wrong him: but nevertheless
this pretense for want of another, served to furnish him with some appearance
of Justice, without which nature cannot be moved or undertake any thing.
According to this then, though a wicked man may be resolved to do us a
mischief, and has power to do it, yet he wants a pretense, which he may use
toward himself, and whereby he may (if I may be bold to say so) find
obedience in his own faculties; We should be therefore so far from venturing to
furnish him with one, that we ought carefully to remedy all things from which
he may draw one. But we shall furnish him with a pretense and shadow of reason,
if we let him see that we distrust him, although it be not without just
occasion; and this shadow of reason will serve him to conquer that resistance
which he finds in his own nature. Secondly, it is good not to give wicked men
any testimony that we distrust them, because if they believe that we cannot so
much as imagine they are about to commit a great injustice, they will judge us
the honester, and farther from all treacherous and evil thoughts, and so will
be more ashamed to sin before us, and discover to us the baseness and
ugliness of their souls. Besides, if a wicked man thinks that we esteem him an
honest man, he cannot without regret go about to destroy by his actions this
belief which is advantageous and glorious to him; and will be so much the more
loath to do it, as he believes, that it is well established in our minds,
because that in doing it, he sees he wrongs himself: but on the contrary, if he
thinks we have already an ill opinion of him, he will not have so great a
desire to acquire our esteem, as he would to preserve himself in it, were he
possessed of it; because the desire of preserving that which a man has, is
more natural then that of getting. In the fourth place, if he believe that we
are in a profound and entire ignorance of the wrong he intends us, he sees by
the same means, that in doing it he will cause us more grief, then if we had
expected it, and provided our selves for it. Now the wickedest man has
naturally more of repugnance to bring a great grief upon any one then a little
one. Lastly, besides all these reasons, there is this still to be considered,
that if any one thinks that men account him an honest man, or that they do not
think him very bad, this serves to persuade him, that what is believed of him,
is true, and that indeed he has not very bad inclinations. Now there is no
better, nor handsomer way of reforming by degrees the mind of a wicked man,
then to persuade him that he has some seeds of virtue, and an inclination to
worthy things, because that loving himself, and every thing that is in him, he
will consequently love virtue, if he believes that it is one of his qualities,
and a part of his being; and he will also love virtuous men if he thinks he is
like them, as he would love a man that has nose or eyes like his own. In a
word, it is certain that every one acts according to the Idea that he has of
himself, and according to that which he believes himself to be: for, those
objects which we have most ordinarily before our minds, do by degrees
communicate their qualities to our souls, and our actions; Now there is no
object any man has more frequently before his mind then himself, so that if he
believes himself wicked, the image which he has of himself must needs
exasperate him and make him still worse and worse; On the contrary, if he
thinks himself inclined to goodness, this belief must needs sweeten him by
little and little and inspire into him better inclinations. This is all we have
to say upon this Problem, which methinks we have by this means sufficiently
illustrated: But yet we believe we should by the way add, that the Rule which
it gives, is not always true; for herein are many Distinctions to be used: and
especially we must have a care, whether he whose injustice we fear, be a man
entirely wicked, or whether he have some good principles, and be not yet fully
resolved to do injustly: For if he be absolutely wicked, we must not let him
see that we distrust him, for the aforesaid reasons; but if he has something
of generous, and be not wholly confirmed in his evil resolution, it is many
times good to let him perceive (but with humility and without bitterness, and
rather obliquely then in a direct and open manner) that we see well enough he
intends to wrong us, that our unhappiness is manifest unto us, and that we have
not any hope. For, besides that this raises more pity in him, it troubles him
to be accounted more unjust then he is, and having something of generous in
him, he labors to refute by his actions this ill opinion which we have of him,
and desires to show unto us that we were in an error when we had such a
conceit of him.

PROB. 20. Whence comes it that Beasts do naturally know how to swim, and that
Man has need to learn?
THey answer commonly, that Man does not naturally know how to swim, as Beasts
do, because that the first time he tryes to do it, he is seized with a Fear
which hinders him from making use of his legs and arms freely. But I do not
approve this answer; for beasts have at least as much fear as man, the first
time one casts them into the water; and I have seen some of them that would
tremble for fear a long time after, and remain astonished, and for all that
ceased no^ to swim very well. Besides, if it were only Fear that hindered man
from knowing how to swim, this would be nothing to them that are very bold, and
cast themselves without fear into great dangers; and a man in this case would
know at least how to swim in the water of a Bath, in the midst of a company of
his friends, since that then he would have nothing to fear: Or else he would
know how to swim in a very narrow brook, where the bottom may be seen all the
way, and can leave him no considerable fear. Since therefore this answer does
not suffice, and leaves the difficulty wholly untoucht: I conceive rather, that
a man does not naturally know how to swim, because the first time he tries, he
cannot choose but manage his legs and arms by Reason, and that this hinders
him from doing it right, because it is an action that must be done by the
imagination only, after a brutish and blind manner. We see clearly by
experience, that there are many things which we do worst, when we would do them
by Reason. Besides, I believe it is naught for a man, the first time he tries
to swim; to be prepossest with this belief, that he does not know how to swim;
whereas beasts are exempt from all this preoccupation: for, to believe
infallibly that one does not know how to do any thing, is a disposition to do
it ill, and to come scurvily off. But, besides these two reasons, in my opinion
it is very remarkable, that when beasts swim, they are in their natural
posture, because they have not an erect stature; and do move according as they
have an inclination to move naturally, namely, with all their feet at once; and
that on the contrary, man lying at his length upon the water to swim, is not in
the posture in which he should naturally be, and so has the greater pains to
move himself in this manner, as even upon the earth it would be painful to him
to march upon all four. Or else I may say upon this subject, that the
difficulty is not so much to know why creatures that are much more light than
man, are more proper to swim; but why he does not know how to swim as well as
Oxen, horses, and such other creatures that are heavier than he: To which I
answer, that it is because Oxen, and Horses, and such other beasts, have an
inward capacity and cavity of their bodies much greater, which is the cause
that though their bodies sink deeper under water by reason of their weight,
there yet remains part thereof above; and that it happens to them as it does to
vessels that are high built, to wit, that they continue above the water,
whilst others that are not so much laden, but are much less, do sink. Or else
too, one may rationnlly say, that beasts do naturally swim, because they have
for the most part a longer neck than man, so that although all the rest of the
body be heavy enough to sink under water, yet in holdlng up their necks they
take their breath at ease; whereas man's body being ready naturally to sink
under water as well as theirs, he has not a neck long enough, to keep his head
notwithstanding out of the water, and by this means keep himself from being
choked. So then Beasts have in this received from nature diverse advantages
above Man, in which she has not done him any wrong, but on the contrary has
manifested the same wisdom which she shows in all other things, that she is
guided by a most admirable and penetrating judgment, which fore-sees things
that depend upon a long train of consequences. For, this wisdom foresaw that
Man only among all other creatures should know how to make Boats and Bridges,
or to pass the rivers on Horse back.

PROB. 21. What is the reason that the fruits which grow at the tops of the
boughs are the best?
IS it because that which is most earthy and gross in the nourishment, cannot
reach to the tops of the boughs, so that they receive only that which is more
subtle, and does easier find passage through the narrow streights of the wood?
Or else, is it because that the tops of the branches are the newest and
youngest parts of the tree, and that for this reason they have the more virtue?
Or else, is it for that the fruit which grows at the tops of the boughs, are
more exposed to the rays of the Sun, which ripens them better? Or else,
because they are more exposed to the beating of the rain, which serves to
soften their hardness, and to make them also sweeter; as we see that fruit is
sometimes softened between our hands, and made sweeter according as we handle
it? Or else is it, that when there is abundance of nourishment in a tree, it
passes to the extremities, after it has provided for the necessities of all
the other places; but that being arrived at the extremities, and not able to
pass further, it amuses it self, and so feeds those fruits that grow there the
better, which consequently must have more of juice and of savor. Methinks one
may express the course of this nourishment by the example of a brook, which
runs as long as it finds any way, but meeting at last some obstacle which is
laid before it, and hinders it from passing further, it swells and gathers its
waters into an heap. Or else, lastly, is it that the nourishment, according as
it ascends from the root to the branches, is still more and more concocted by
the Natural heat of the tree; so that for this cause it must needs be that
which comes to the ends of the branches, must be most concocted, and most
purified?

PROB. 22. Why do good men think they ought to speak in proper terms of other
Passions and Vices, but not of things that regard wantonness and corporal Love?
SOme ancient Philosophers discoursing upon the same Question which we have
here propounded, have though that this modesty which hinders us from speaking
plainly of things that belong to lasciviousness, and the lower and more
terrestrial part of Love, was but an abuse and vain ceremony. Their reasons
were, that since we speak in plain terms of all other vices, whereof some are
far worse, and that we dare pronounce the names of Treason, Sacrilege,
Impiety, Assassination, Cruelty, there is no color of Reason why we should not
with the same boldness speak of vicious Love, much less that we should not dare
to speak of all the effects of lawful Love, which has nothing in it irregular.
Whereunto they added, that whatever one might do without sin, one might also
speak without sin. Montaigne seems to have been of the same opinion; for in the
first Chapter of the third Book of his Essaies, he says, that the rule which
forbids us to express some things in plain terms, is a false rule, and that he
scorns to reckon it amongst his true duties. He says afterward, that it is
the Daughter indeed of true wisdom, as other things which respect Ceremony, but
a bastard one; and that he which should undeceive the world of it, would not
perhaps do so much mischief, because man acquitting himself of these false
offices, thinks himself discharged of so much of the obligation which he has
to natural offices. At last he adds, that it is only a sparing of Vice, not to
dare speak of it, but by a Periphrasis. For my part, I think that the general
opinion of men which is contrary hereto, must needs be better grounded, and
that they have reason to look upon it as a piece of brutishness in those that
speak plainly of whatsoever belongs to corporeal Love. And I do justly call
this opinion general, whatever Montaigne was pleased to say, since there is no
true History found by which it may be proved that there was ever any people
wholly void of this modesty; and although there have been some, doubtless it
was only a savage people, and scarcely participant of common sense, as certain
Nations that have been lately discovered. And a thing does not cease to be of
common sense, though it be contradicted out of simplicity by some particular
people. And though we could not tell how to answer to the subtilties here
alleged against the general opinion, yet in my judgment it were not wisdom to
disbelieve it, and follow them. But for all that, I conceive the truth being on
our side, will furnish us with arguments to prove, that the objections which
are urged against it, are weak and ill-grounded. For in the first place,
Montaigne himself, in that Chapter where he is so much against the common
opinion in this bus^ness, does nevertheless confess, that there is no action
which ought so much to humble a man, as this which is here in question; that
they are the feet of the Peacock which abate his pride; that our weakness and
vanity appear there in their best apparel; that when he considers the
circumstances of it, he believes that saying of the Ancients, That man was made
by the gods to serve them for a May Game; that all other actions admit a wise
and discreet proceeding, except this only; that all other Passions trouble
reason and assail it, but that this does wholly annihilate it. I think that in
all this he says nothing but truth, but we may from hence draw arguments
against himself; and indeed this truth being supposed, we have ground to say,
that then it is impudent and vicious to speak openly of a thing, where the
inconstancy of our judgment and the weakness of our nature seems to be at its
best, after a particular manner, because it is a sign that he which does it,
does not much trouble himself with the perfection and dignity of his soul; and
that he does without regret discover the defects and vanities of it. If it be
further objected, that yet we speak openly of Perfidiousness, Sacrilege,
Ingratitude and Cruelty; To this I answer, that good men indeed do openly and
without scruple, speak of these things, and that no man is offended at it,
because it is presupposed, they are things to which they are not subject. It is
not so in the follies and sordid things which Love makes men commit, when for
hope of a corporal pleasure, it makes a man submit himself with too much
weakness to that sex, which nature has made inferior to him: For they are
follies to which the best have been subject; they are weaknesses from which
good men are not totally exempt; and even those which abominate all Cruelties,
Treasons, Thefts and Ingratitudes, and hate them with a perfect hatred, do yet
find themselves weak on this side; and that is the reason they cannot speak of
the more base and brutish part of this passion without blushing: and truly they
would be impudent, if herein the memory of their infirmity did not produce this
effect in them, and if they should speak openly and boldly of their vice,
instead of avoiding the representation of it to themselves by formal and direct
expressions. To confess that this is so, it is to be considered, that we should
think a rogue impudent and brutish without measure, if being surprised in the
fact, and being questioned of the manner in which he committed his theft, he
should speak of it at large, and with all the circumstances, without blushing
and casting down his eyes for shame; and that on the contrary we should think
he had some remainders of probity left in him, when he dares not speak of it
but with difficulty and by halves, making us guess his meaning, rather than
expressing it. Even so a man that we know has committed a notable Treason,
would be thought very impudent, if he should in company make long discourses of
Traitors and Treason, and if on the contrary such kind of discourse should not
put him into a kind of confusion. In a word, it becomes him that knows himself
guilty, to be ashamed of every thing that represents to him his fault. And as
for that which was said, that it is only a sparing the vice of wantonness, not
to speak as openly of it as of others, it is as ill-grounded as the rest. For
as for a lie, parricide, murder, impiety, avarice, cowardice and vanity,
because they are things which have an ugliness, which is essential to them, and
therefore inseparable, it is very true, that the more lively one can describe
them, the more hatred and horror he raises of them; nay it may be maintained,
that a lively conception of them is enough to make one fly them, without the
assistance of any other discourse; just as men run away from blows, or from an
house on fire, without any need of persuasions. But it is quite otherwise in
Corporal Love; for it has no essential deformity, and is bad only by accident,
namely, for want of necessary circumstances; and when it carries us in pursuit
of its object with excess, or by base and unworthy means. And therefore to
moderate it, it is not at all necessary to set it forth to the life, but on the
contrary, by how much the more lively and in proper terms it is described, so
much the more does the imagination of those that hear so indiscreet a lesson,
grow warm with that base heat which it is accustomed to kindle there. And hence
I draw one strong reason more, in favor of that truth I maintain. For since
that to speak in proper terms of this low and ignoble part of Love, is rather
helping than weakening it, he that discourses of it in this manner, must needs
have a design to render it more violent, either in himself or others; both
which are equally beastly. Or else it must needs be, that at the same time, he
that talks thus, and that he is with his friends, whose converse ought to
elevate his soul to nobler and more spiritual pleasures, he feels himself moved
with that lascivious and terrestrial ardour; otherwise he would never love to
represent to himself the effects thereof so distinctly, because they are of
such a nature, that if the imagination be not delighted with them, it is
wounded by them, it being not possible there should be a medium between these
two extremes.

PROB. 23. Whence comes it that they say, whatsoever cures us, and is good for
us, dislikes us; and that on the contrary, we love that which hurts us?
IS it that in this they do not say true, but that as the Time whilst we are
in sadness seems to us longer, for the same reason the accidents which are
offensive to us, seem to us the more frequent? Truly I think that from this
Source descend many other Vulgar Errors; as for example these; That a man is
hurt sooner in the same part where he is already ill: That the wittiest
children do commonly die before they can give their parents that contentment
which they hope for from them: That disasters follow one another, and scarce
ever come single: For as we desire that these accidents should never happen, so
for fear least they happen, we think that they happen always. Or else, does
not the error wherein men are in this business, proceed from hence, that when
we love that which profits us, no man takes any notice of it, because it is a
thing conformable to Reason and Nature, and upon which our spirit slides away
smoothly, as our hand slides upon a polished body, where it finds no rub or
obstacle; and that on the contrary, when we love that which hurts us, as it is
a thing that astonishes us, and makes us stick some time to search the causes
of it, so we see it the better, and imprint it the deeper into our memories? Or
else happens it not thus, in effect, through the imperfection of finite things,
which produces also many other effects, that seem to be against nature? As for
example, we see that Difficulty whets the appetite, whereas it should rather
dull it; and that Evil is more active then Good, although it ought to be quite
contrary, and many other the like things; so that this may persuade us, that it
is through this very imperfection that wholesome things offend, and hurtful
things delight us? Or else, is it because the remedy ought to be contrary to
the disease, and that contraries redouble their force against one another by an
Antiperistasis? Physic for this reason does at first heighten the disease, and
consequently also the pain. And as Physic does at first reinforce and
heighten the disease, may it not also be that hurtful things for the same
reason do delight us more often at the first, and increase our vigor, and that
therefore they please us? If we suppose for example, that a man be sick for
want of heat, it may be if he uses cold things that are naught for him, they
will at the first refresh him and give him some strength, by making of his heat
increase, and redouble it self by an Antiperistasis. Or else, is not nature at
first delighted with things that redouble its evil, because that by increasing
it, they may in some sort stupifie and dull its sense? And is it not, on the
contrary, hurt by those things that cure it? because that in restoring it to
its strength by little and little, they do as it were awaken it out of that
lethargy in which the disease held it, and so make the sense of it the more
quick? Or else, is it that Nature when she has need to be cured, is depraved
and ill disposed: so that it is no wonder if in this condition she be offended
with that which is good, and pleased with that which is bad for her? Or else,
is it not that as a man cannot take a spot out of his clothes without making
the place a little more thredbare, nor refine metals without diminishing them,
nor cause any great good in a Commonwealth without wrong to some: so also we
cannot cure our bodies of any great infirmity, but we must do it some damage;
and that as the remedy in curing us, does us some hurt, this is the reason why
it is irksom to the sense? If you ask me in particular, What is the reason that
almost all Medicines are bitter, and odious to take? (wherein methinks a great
part of the difficulty of this Problem consists) I answer, that this happens
from its quality, because if the Medicine were not offensive to the palate,
neither would it offend the stomach, seeing that it is from one and the same
quality, that things which have been displeasing to the taste when they were in
the mouth, do excite also a sense of horror in the stomach and offend it. Now,
if the Medicine do not raise a sense of horror in our stomachs, Nature would
not use its utmost strength to rid it self of it, and would not reject together
with it, the ill humors that made it sick: for I think it is very probable,
that it is by this means that most Medicines purge us.

PROB. 24. What is the reason that Children in Winter, though their face and
hands seem to show that they are more afflicted with cold than men grown, yet
are not easily persuaded to warm themselves?
IS it not because to warm themselves they must stand still a good while in the
same place, and that Children love to be constantly in motion, out of a kind of
Impatience, which is natural to our spirit at that age? Or else is it, that
when they are cold and come nigh to the fire, its heat at first instead of
comforting, does more afflict them; which happens, because it re-inforceth at
first the cold of their bodies by an Antiperistasis; and that as they want
experience and reason, and follow the first sentiment of nature, they reject
this wholesome remedy for want of knowledge to judge, that by and by they shall
find comfort by it? Or else is it, that though their bodies be more easily
altered by the cold, then those of full grown men, as it is plain to the eye;
yet this alteration is not so painful and grievous to them; the reason of it
is, because the cold hurts chiefly by too much hardening and making stiff all
the parts of our body, and that theirs are so tender and so soft, that by
reason thereof, they cannot but very hardly be brought into the contrary
extreme?

PROB. 25. Whence comes it that when we are in affliction, we are better
diverted by the representation of some Tragic History, or by the recital of
some great misfortune, then by more merry shows, or facetious tales?
IS it that the soul, being lively afflicted, shuns light and vain joys,
because that without truly comforting it, and without taking away the grounds
of its affliction, they do only dilate the spirits by a superficial emotion of
pleasure, with which they tickle the imagination, and that this dilatation of
the spirits cannot be but offensive to the soul, if it still keeps its sadness
at the bottom of the heart, since that it is for its good, and to the end that
it may have the more strength, it keeps them together in affliction? Indeed it
seems to be for this reason chiefly, that the soul being thus afflicted, does
thus fly from gay and delightsome objects, and loves sad ones; just as a weak
eye hates cheerful and light colors; and on the contrary, loves such as are
dark and have but little light. Or else, when we are profoundly afflicted, and
are present at shows full of mirth, are we not displeased to see others laugh
there with a most pure and perfect joy, because this does more sadly put us in
mind of our own misfortune: whereas in hearing read, or seeing acted a Tragic
history we find our selves less unhappy by considering the miseries befallen
others? Or else, does not the recital of other folks misfortune comfort us,
chiefly for this reason, that for a time they take off our thoughts and
affections to our selves, and fix them upon a foreign object? Or else, is it
that as they say nothing does better drive out one love then another love? for
the same reason nothing does better expel one sad thought then another.
Without doubt this reason is upon good ground, and to speak more generally,
when ever one desires to take away from a man wholly and for ever, any strong
passion, one should endeavor to put him first into some other passion that is
nigh it. For when we have wrought any change in a mind that had given it self
up through length of time to some certain inclinations, we may after that bring
him to what we please; as we see that when a man has moved a stone a little
out of its place, which long lying had fastened to the earth, afterward he
draws it whither he pleases; Or else the sadness which Tragedies and other
such like spectacles beget, is it not more apt to diminish afflictions, then
are other things more sportful, for this universal reason, That an evil is
always more easily cured by another evil, then by a good, which happens thus,
because to go from evil to good is a longer way, and must receive a greater
change then to pass from one evil to another.

PROB. 26. Why do some noises make a man sleep?
IS it that noises which one hears near at hand being only a motion of the air,
or at least such as cannot be formed unless the air be moved, do excite some
motion in the organs of the brain, by striking the air enclosed in the ears;
and that this motion being very proper to hinder the operation of the spirit,
makes a man sleep? Or else, does not the noise of wind or rain, or of a spring
make us sleep, by delighting us? And therefore we see also that many fall
asleep more easily when they make some part of their body be rubbed, through
the pleasure that comes of it; and that children also sleep sooner and with the
more facility, when we rock them, because they love to be rocked? Indeed, that
pleasure may help to produce sleep, methinks may further be proved, in that
they which are in a great and profound pleasure, whether of body or of mind, do
shut their eyes, stretch their arms carelessly, and continue in the same
posture, as if they were really asleep, and that we say pleasure puts a man as
it were into a sound. But why has Pleasure this property to be more apt to
cause sleep then the other passions of the soul? Is it not that the passions
being necessarily either pleasures, or griefs, or desires, or hopes, or fears,
the soul that hopes, or fears, or desires, or suffers, is in solicitude, and
seaches every thing, and therefore it sets its reason on work, and so hinders
it self of being seized by sleep, whereas when it is in pleasure, it searches
after nothing, being content with the present, and therefore its reason ceases
to act, and by ceasing to act causes sleep to ensue; just as Night comes when
the Sun cease to shine. Besides, noises that tickle the ear, do make us
sleep, not only because they give us pleasure, but also because this pleasure
is altogether sensual. For a spiritual pleasure makes us employ our reason, and
so keeps up within us this internal light of the mind, which does no less
hinder us from sleeping then an external light which strikes upon our eyes; and
on the contrary, a pleasure merely corporal, is an obstacle to meditation. But
why of sensual pleasures does that of hearing produce sleep? Is it not because
it is that only which we can admit in an entire repose of the whole body, and
without doing any thing on our part? For, for example, the pleasures that come
from delightful savours, cannot be tasted without moving the tongue and jaws;
and we cannot also well enjoy a good odor if we do not make some effort to
draw it in and smell it, nor can we well admit the pleasures of the eye without
turning the eyes this way and that, and without straining to hold them open, by
drawing back toward the forehead the skin that covers them: but to Hear you
cannot say we should need to do any such thing; Or else may we not explain this
Problem thus, that a pleasant noise which strikes the Ear, produces first a
suspension and cessation of all other thoughts, by that sweetness which charms
us, and afterward takes from us even the sense of it self: because an object
that has been long present to the faculty, strikes it no more, and is not
perceived; which appears in that Custom is so proper to render both good and
bad things insensible to us, and that he which has long had his mind fixed upon
a work, that he composes, becomes unable to judge rightly of it, until he has
for a while given his mind some other object? But why must the noises which
make one sleep, be in some sort uniform? and why, for instance, does the noise
of a spring, because it is all of one kind, make us sleep better then of a
musical instrument, which yet is more sweet? Is it that in noises which are not
uniform, the same object is not always present to the faculty, that they have
in them grave or sharp sounds, high or low, slower or swifter ones; whereas in
noises that are uniform, it is precisely the same object which is always
present to the faculty, and that by this means it may, after it has effaced
all other objects of our thoughts, efface it self also, and make it self
imperceivable, by the continuance of its action, as we said, and so beget
sleep? Or else is it that the pleasure which is given us by the noise of a
brook or a fountain, is a pleasure purely sensual and of the ear only; but that
the pleasure, which the harmony of a musical instrument creates, is not a
pleasure of the ear only, but also of the imagination and of the memory, since
that a man must compare in it one concord with another, and consider the
proportion of the sounds to one another, to dislike or approve it; and that
seeing it exercises the fancy and the memory, it is not to be wondered, if it
be not so proper to make a man sleep?

PROB. 27. What is the reason we aggravate our miseries, and love to persuade
others that we are very unfortunate?
IF we search why we aggravate our misfortunes, we cannot deceive our selves in
saying it is to persuade others that we are very unfortunate. But it is a
greater difficulty to know for what reason we desire they should believe so,
because oftentimes they are persons that we do not hope to receive any succor
from, and that our very misery rendering us less able to be useful to others,
may hinder many base and mercenary minds from doing us any good. To enquire
then the cause of this humor of the afflicted; is it not, in the first place,
that they are never assured that any man may not for the future be in a
capacity to help him; and therefore they tell their misfortunes to all they
see, and aggravate them to them, to the end that if hereafter they should
discover any means to succor them, the pity which they have raised in them,
may presently produce its effect? Or else do they desire to have all that come
near them know their evil, and believe it to be very great, thereby to incite
them to give them some consolation? Or do they not hope, that he to whom they
have aggravated their misery, if he be not able to help them, may at the least
pray for them, and that these prayers may prevail with the divine goodness? Or
else, do they not desire that those very persons from whom they cannot hope for
any succor, should bemoane them, for that they think that some body else that
shall have the means to deliver them from their miseries, will do it so much
the more willingly, if he sees that many persons do compassionate him, and are
affected therewith, because the more general the good is which we are entreated
to do, and the more persons it regards, the more ready are we to do it? Or else
is it that to be beloved being in it self a good, we do therefore exaggerate
our miseries, thereby to raise pity, and by pity love, because we know
naturally that pity is so near to love, that there is nothing more easy then
to slip from one to the other? Or else, do we not desire that a man should
believe that we suffer very much, because we desire he should talk much and
long of us, both while we live and after our death, and that we foresee that
men will talk so much the more of us, as they think that our miseries have been
great? Or is it not out of a vain affectation of glory which is annexed to
constancy, and to be in some sort admired by others, that we paint forth as
very excessive, incomparable, and in a word, much greater then they are, the
evils which men see we suffer with so much patience, our Vanity being so
essential and united to our souls, that Grief it self cannot expel it, and
that that accompanies it even in the midst of torments, upon the Rack, and at
the Stake, as the Stoics said of their Wisemans Happiness? Or else, do we
aggravate our miseries, because through humane weakness, we do in our miseries
many times think that the Providence which governs the Universe, does us some
kind of wrong, and that to prove it, we dare not allege our perfections, and
our innocence; but we allege only the evils which it sends us, which we say
are greater then all that ever man suffered? Or else, because we believe that
all things have their course in the world, and succeed one another; do we not
for this reason delight to persuade our selves, that we have been for the time
past very unhappy, to the end that we may build upon this foundation hopes of
being happy for the future, and of seeing our felicity return in its course, as
the Day returns after Night, Summer after Winter, and Fair weather after a long
Storm? Or as Caesar very wisely painted forth to his Soldiers the enemies
forces much greater then they were, to the end that afterward seeing them
less, they should less fear them, and be provided of resolution and courage
more then enough; does not our soul by a like artifice fain to its self its
misfortunes greater then they are, to the end that afterward returning to
consider the truth of the business, it may receive some comfort in undeceiving
its self; and that when the violence of its evil shall return to oppress it,
it may have laid in a large provision of courage, and find its self provided of
more constancy then is requisite for the undergoing of it? Or else do we not
aggravate our miseries, to provoke our selves to weep more abundantly, because
we find that tears are a refreshment to us; and therefore also in Tragedies,
afflicted persons do commonly exhort one another to shed abundance of Tears? Or
else, to conclude, do we thus aggravate our evils, because we think that great
and excellent things, having only great destinies, either in good or evil, it
is some token of elevation and excellence to have been exercised by great
evils? If any man object to me, that herein we should make but a simple
consequence; I do freely confess it; but I believe he will also grant me, that
the mind of man has very many weaknesses and follies, and especially that he
is so passionate for his own excellence, that he lets not slip by in vain the
least shadow of the least mark that he can give to himself of it. And
therefore we see many men blame themselves for having a bad memory, that from
thence they may draw some advantage for their judgment, because though they
see this consequence cannot but be very weak, since that there are everywhere
thousands of blockheads that have neither memory nor judgment, yet they think
that this is some slight sign of it, because of an opinion that is received by
many to this purpose, the truth whereof we do not here examine: and that which
is yet more, you please men, if you only tell them that they have an head made
like some very able man, whom every body reverences and esteems; nay they
please themselves to believe they resemble him in their hair, or gate; or,
briefly, in having any air of his, nay to believe that they have had a destiny
like to his, and like success in certain encounters. For, as in judgments of
Lawsuits, there are some things which being not able to pass for entire
proofs, do pass for semiproofs, or yet for less; so our soul in the midst of
reasons, by which it labors to prove its own excellence, receives very vain
ones, not as entire proofs, but as things which being collected and amassed in
a sufficient large number, do give it means to flatter it self with some fancy
which is advantageous to it, and to attribute to it self very likely some
perfection.

PROB. 28. Why do many laugh to see another man fall?
THere are some who propounding this Question, answer in one word, that it is
out of malice. And if a man object to them, that many of those that laugh at
such a mischance, do not cease to have very honest minds, and a great deal of
true goodness: They might answer, that a soul really good, may yet have,
together with its goodness, some light mixture of malice; as we see there is
scarcely a man so wise that has not some light weakness of spirit: As when we
say a man is sanguine, we do not mean that he has not a drop of Phlegm,
Choler, or Melancholy humor in his body, but only that sanguine is predominant
in him; so when we say a man is wise, good, or ingenuous, we are not bound to
conceive him exempt and wholly purged from folly and vice; For in truth it
signifits no more then that Wisdom, Virtue and Ingenuity are his predominant
qualities: Nevertheless, it is clear that in those that laugh when they see one
fall, it is not properly malice; which I infer, not only because they do not
laugh if he take any considerable hurt, but also and chiefly because they are
as ready to laugh at themselves, if by chance they burn or cut their own
fingers; or if the wind blow their hats off, or if they are surprised, or
caught with a shower before they can get any shelter, or if any other petty
disorder befalls them, the reason is, because these petty disorders have
always in them something of grotesque, extraordinary and sudden; and because
by these three qualities they do in some sort tickle the imagination.

PROB. 29. What is the reason that those who embrace Civil and Worldly affairs
with too violent an ardour, are subject to lose all sense of Religion, and the
knowledge of a Deity?
THough we had not learnt from the authority of the Holy Scriptures, that the
care of the things of the world, and the deceit of riches, do blind the
understandings of men in respect of the mysteries of Faith, experience would
sufficiently prove it; since that it happens even at this day very frequent,
that those which settle their affections too much on the affairs of the world,
and have in their minds no other designs but of worldly advancements, do so
lose the sense of the verities of Religion that there remains to them only an
outward profession of it, with which, as with a superficial kind of beauty,
they cover the irregularity of their opinions. To say from hence, that they
wish there were no true Riligion, that they might give themselves the more
liberty to complete their designs all manner of ways, and that they labor all
they can to persuade themselves of it, and at last do persuade themselves, it
is to say very much, but perhaps not altogether enough, because many times it
happens that the more we desire to chase out of our minds a belief, the less
able are we to do it: It must therefore be added further, that as those who
addict themselves to the contemplation of things sublime and abstract, do
become unfit for low things, such as are the affairs of the world: So by the
same reason, those that exercise their minds too much about low things, and
such as fall under the eye, must become unfit for the discerning of sublime
things, for that our soul is so miserable that it can hardly gain on one side
but it loses on the other, and its perfections do very often shock one against
another, and are incompetible. But besides these two reasons, there is a third
more nice and not so easily to be perceived. The better to comprehend it, we
must first consider, that when our eyes have been too long fixed upon the Sun,
there do remain upon them some certain impressions, which make us think we see
its image in all the objects we look on: So when our mind is strongly fastened
upon the consideration of any one object, it thinks that it sees it everywhere
else, and is also ready to believe that every one looks upon that which he does
with a great deal of earnestness, as he that has long turned round, believes
that all things turn with him. Thus, for example, a man of an Amorous
complexion, all whose desires look only at Love, is apt to think that all
things in the world are undertaken for Love; that it is this which for the most
part plays his own game under the masque of Ambition, or some other passion;
and that even wars, and all the greatest troubles of State, are only the
effects of some secret Love. But an Ambitious man, out of the love he bears to
Glory, takes it quite otherwise, and believes rather that all is done out of
Ambition; that Covetousness it self looks at that indirectly; that Learning, as
well as War, aims at nothing else; and that in Love it self, the Ambition to
conquer the mind of a Mistress, or to surmount a Rival, are our principal
motives. A Soldier wiil be ready to think that Learning has no other rational
end but the Military Art; but on the contrary a Scholar will judge that War
has no other end but to provide that wise men may quietly and peaceably apply
themselves to contemplation. An Orator will tell you that Philosophy was
invented only to move the passions of the Judges handsomely and with a dress.
But on the contrary, a Philosopher will rather judge that Eloquence has no
other end but the application of Philosophy. It follows then, according to the
preceding Doctrine, that when a man that has already a propension to impiety,
has the affairs of the world too much in his head, and the means by which they
are brought about; and he thinks, night and day, of nothing but politic tricks
and gins by which he may entrap others; This imagination by little and little
becomes plausible to him: That Religion it self is an artifice that tends to
the bringing about of these very affairs of the world; and that it is a
State-device of the Politicians, because he thinks that every one looks upon
that which himself does with abundance of affection, and thinks he sees
everywhere else the same objects which his own mind is filled with, and to
which he is too much addicted.

PROB. 30. What is the reason that the lowest spirits are commonly most
persuaded of the truth of their opinions?
IS it not because that as the earth and gross bodies have this advantage over
the noblest and most subtle ones, that they are more firm in their places, and
cannot so easily be removed; so gross and dull souls have certain advantages
over others, amongst which this must be reckoned to be firm in their opinions?
Or should we not rather say that this is rather a disadvantage to them, and
that it is harder to take away their errors, then to take from wise men their
sound belief; for the same reason that makes it harder to cure a man of a
disease than to make him sick? Or else, is it not that as a man that stands on
tiptoes, cannot be so firm in this posture as he is in that lies along and
keeps himself with all his weight on the ground: So wise men cannot be so firm
in their opinions, to which they came only by forcing and straining themselves;
as fools are in theirs, into which they suffered themselves to fall as it were
with all their weight, being far from striving to raise themselves up again? Or
else, is it that base opinions are upheld by the suffrage of the multitude, and
that it is not to be wondered at, if that makes us courageously embrace an
opinion, since it makes us without fear to run upon death, and assures us
against the greatest dangers? Or else lastly, is it that fools for want of
judgment, do not for the most part understand the reason of the able; and that
on the contrary, able men do by their vivacity conceive the reasons which fools
object against them, better then they do themselves, and that this difference
is alike proper to make those more resolute, and to weaken something the
assurance of these?

PROB. 31. Whence is it that in the greatest subjects of affliction, we do many
times take up more readily a constant resolution, then in others that are much
lighter?
IT is principally for two causes. First, that when we are much afraid of any
misfortune, and look upon it as the greatest that can happen to us, this fear
makes us very often to think of it; so that when it befalls us, we are already
preparey for it, and that for this reason man^ times we are more easily
resolut^ therein, contrary to the expectation of all men. The second is that a
great misfortune disabuses us of the too great estem which we set on the things
of the world, and of the happiness which may be gotten in it, and proves to us
on the contrary by our own experience, that all things are very fickle and
inconstant. Thus then it makes us contemn it, and by that great blow which it
gives us, does as it were cut the roots by which we were tied unto it: In a
word, by afflicting us on the one side, it comforts us on the other, and
furnishes us with weapons against it self.

PROB. 32. Wherefore are old men great talkers?
OLd men have thoughts that vex and perplex them, when they come once to be
entertained with much leisure; either because they have discovered vanity in
all things, or because old age in which they are, sets before their eyes as
soon as they entertain themselves in this manner, many grand incommodities,
into which they are ready to fall, and lastly, the most inevitable of all
evils, which is Death. They seek therefore to divert their minds from these
vexatious thoughts by all means, and hither tend their household cares, to
which, for this reason, they apply themselves very earnestly; but when they
have nothing to do, they can only Hear, or Talk, or Read, to hinder that
melancholy which their mind would give to it self in too great a lesure. But
Hearing is not sufficient to divert their minds from thoughts that wound them,
because governing themselves wholly by their own judgment, they give no great
attention to the thoughts of others, or contemn them, as making account that
they themselves have others taken up upon better grounds. As for Reading, it is
an employment, which besides that it is hurtful for them, dulls their
faculties, which Age has rendered less quick, because it has nothing that does
enough affect the senses and the mind. It is then only when they Talk that
their minds do in good earnest lose the image of those things that afflict and
trouble them, and diverts the sight from every thing that inspires it with
melancholy. It is not therefore to be wondered at, if they are much delighted
therewith. Or else, as Fruit falls more easily from the tree when it is ripe:
so our Conceits come more fluently from us, how careful soever we be to keep
them in, when they are full ripe, and that we have cleared and well digested
them. Now old men's are such, because they are wise, and have made many
reflections, which have disabused them of many errors. Or else, lastly, they
are Talkers, for several particular reasons, as for instance, if they are
present at any solemnity or great show, they have then less curiosity then
others, because they have often seen the like; therefore, instead of being
attentive to see; they suffer themselves often to make large discourses, which
being then very offensive to those that are near them, has so much the more
easily gotten them the name of great Talkers. Just so also, if they are at a
Feast, they have less appetite then others, and are sooner satisfied. And
therefore, were it only out of civility, they are obliged to Talk, which
incommodating those that by this means see themselves bound to make long
replies, makes them so much the more blame this vice. Moreover, after the
repast, they are also carried away with a desire to Talk much, to keep
themselves from sleeping, because they know well it is a thing they are subject
to. These are then, it seems, the principal causes of the effect we speak of,
though there may be also many others.

PROB. 33. Whence comes it, that in all kind of things, those that do but
meanly in them, are more severe and rigid Judges of others, then those that
excel therein, and hold the first rank?
DO not people very much deceive themselves, when they think that to dislike
all things, is a token of delicacy of judgment; whereas on the contrary, they
should say, that a squeamishness both in body and mind, is a sign of sickness;
and as an healthful man likes well brown bread, and less delicate viands; so a
spirit of a strong and vigorous health, ought to be pleased with all things,
wherein it sees shine never so little of perfection, although it will perceive
the difference that is betwixt them and others; which being thus supposed, our
Problem remains without difficulty; Or else shall we say, that the inclination
easily to condemn others, proceeds from rudeness, and a want of natural
sweetness, which is not to be found in minds that have an entire and perfect
beauty, because it is a great ugliness; as on the contrary, it is a great part
of the beauty of the mind to have sweet and gentle thoughts, to be ready to
excuse the faults of others, and not to contemn any one? Or else as we see
often, that petty Lords are less accostable than the great ones, and maintain a
gravity fuller of pride, because their authority being not so well founded as
that of these later, they think they must thus uphold it, by surly and arrogant
looks, and by a brutish impudence: Is it not just so in the meaner wits, and do
they not use this severity to condemn others, for to separate themselves
thereby from the common, and labor to maintain the authority they usurp, and
which they perceive has not footing and basis enough to uphold it self? Or
else as subordinate Judges, are very often more severe and rigorous in their
judgments then the Sovereigns, because it is not in their power to remit any
thing of the severity of the Law: the meaner wits, are they not more hard many
times to excuse a thing that is against the ordinary rules, because it is for
great minds only to grant a dispensation from those rules upon certain
occasions; and because those that have meaner abilities, ought not to be bold
therein, nor are they, for fear, lest whiles they desire to excuse others, they
be blamed themselves? Or else is it, that meaner spirits are not willing to
confess in others a moderate worth, because it is troublesome to have many
companions; but that when a man does excel in some kind of thing, he is glad
that many others do but meanly in it, because it is glorious and delightful to
have a great many inferiors? Or is it not, lastly, because great spirits love
the truth more, and have more of ingenuity and of good breeding to acknowledge
the perfection that is in another, and to publish it with all sincerity: but
the meaner sort are not always capable of so pure and clean a candor, and do
many times dissemble their judgments upon some design? It is certain indeed,
that many petty passions which they cannot rid themselves of, are capable to
alter their good nature, and hinder them from confessing with sufficient
magnanimity another worth. For sometimes they will not confess it out of an
appetite of revenge, which some slight words has raised in them; sometime they
refuse to do it out of some motion of emulation and envy; sometimes it is not
properly out of envy that they are loath to own a merit far above their own, but
because so high a perfection does more plainly discover to them their own
littleness, and by this means makes them sad. Or else it may be, if they have
once begun to blame a thing, they will not unsay it out of obstinacy, and lest
they acknowledge they were deceived. Or else, they will not confess that
another has any worth, out of fear lest somebody should thence infer by a
long consequence, that they themselves have none: Or if they have no interest
to obscure another glory, there will be some friend of theirs, or else some
one that is of the same City, or of the same Country, or of the same Party
that they are, whom this interest will concern, and they will not prefer
before him one that is indifferent, or a stranger, or of a contrary Party. In a
word, there are besides many other causes more slight and more nice, which
change the candor of their words, and make them deny, either in whole or in
part, the perfection of another: but great minds are free from these
weaknesses, and undefiled with this filth, because they are less interessed,
and therefore worth finds more equity at their hands, and is more easily owned.

PROB. 34. Whence comes it that it is so easy to blame and find fault, that
the least able do it best, and that it is much more hard to commend?
IS it not because there is much more ill than good in humane things, and that
those which are the most perfect, are yet very imperfect, if a man examine them
strictly, and with a desire to find fault? But this being supposed, that the
most perfect things in this world have very great defects: Whence comes it that
the meanest wits do take notice of them much more easily then they do the
perfections? Is it not because being ill-sighted, they see only that which
exceeds, and is very great in the subjects they examine, and that as we said,
the evil does always exceed? Or else, does not the imperfection of the objects
more lively affect the mind, than their perfection; for the same reason that
that which hurts our bodies, is much more lively felt, then that which delights
them? Or else is it, that to acknowledge worth, and to commend it, one must
first know wherein the perfection and truth of things consists; but that to
know and to prove that another man is not arrived at it, one needs only know
wherein they do not consist. Indeed this reason seems to be most true, and to
be able sufficiently to clear the difficulty of this Problem. For it is so
easy to say wherein things do not consist, that after this manner we know the
nature of God himself, since that being ignorant what he is, we do nevertheless
know him by negation, and we know that he is not any thing material, any thing
visible, any thing mortal, and that he is incapeable of change, and of the
least defect; so that without being able to describe his greatness, we can
easily blame and reprove those that speak too lowly of him. After the same
manner, it is very easy to tell where the Center of a circle is not, and the
least child can point out with his finger many places which are not the middle
of it: but to know where it is, there is need of skill, time, and instruments.
But if we must still search out another reason for the same effect, consists it
not in this, that as one that swims is carried by the very same water which he
strikes, which he thrusts from him, and which he troubles: so he that reproves
and combats any one, and does all he can to decry him, is born up by his
inventions, because that he affirms nothing of himself, and does only maintain
that, what he whom he censures says, being supposed, such and such things do
follow: So that by this means he discourses oftentimes successfully of many
things which he understands not, nor sees the grounds of. Truly it seems to be
so; For, for instance, though I know not what a Half Moon, a Counterscarpe, or
a Bastion is, it is clear notwithstanding, that when he that discourses of them
before me, shall come to contradict himself, either directly or indirectly, I
may in using these terms which I understand not, reproach to him his
contradictions, fight against him with those arms which he has put into my
hands, and appear more able and more understanding by this censure of him, then
indeed I am. On the contrary, to commend any one with success, one must not
suppose for ttue, any thing that he says, but must prove and maintain it by
reasons fetched elsewhere.

PROB. 35. What is the reason that when the Winter has been very cold, they
commonly say the Summer that follows will be very hot?
THere are sometimes some slight things, the clearing whereof fails not to
bring some light to our common sense, and in this number one may reckon this,
which at first sight has some difficulty, by reason that one would think the
quite contrary, that if the Winter has very much cooled the Earth and Air,
they should be the more difficultly heated by the following Summer. Is it
therefore quite otherwise, that the heat of the Summer finding the earth and
air very cold, does redouble its violence by the opposition of its contrary? Or
else do they say so, because they see that one contrary does naturally succeed
another in the same degree; as for example the water does naturally ascend as
much as it has descended; the excess of heat in a fever arises to the same
violence with the excess of cold; great friendships leave behind them great
enmities; and great displeasures, when they end, produce extreme contentments;
after an extraordinary cloudy and wet season, we enjoy an extraordinary
serenity and purity of air, and much fairer then that which went before it; and
one that is recovered from a great sickness, has commonly better health then
he had before, and recovers a soundness that is more firm and of a greater
value, then that which he had lost. Or else is it that when the Winter has
been extraordinary cold, it has also been necessarily dry, by the same reason
the earth being very dry is disposed to receive a great heat? Or else that when
it has been long cold, it is a sign, that the matter of the cold and Northern
wind, or of the other causes that do cool the air, is spent for a long time,
and therefore it is likely it will be very hot?

PROB. 36. What is the reason that Fear makes ones hair stand on end?
FOr the clearing of this Problem, I think it is needful to consider in the
first place that Admiration and Fear have some affinity, and do often accompany
one another. Which being so, it seems that as Admiration makes a Chilness run
through ones whole body by reason that it brings into the soul a certain shadow
of Fear. So Fear makes the hair stand on end, out of some mixture of
Admiration. Indeed this seems so much the more probable, because the frights
which make the hair stand on end, must spring from a danger whose image
presently strikes the soul, and yet it knows no cause of it, and that those
frights which come upon us when we think we see dead men, or Ghosts, or Devils,
do chiefly produce this effect, because they are not only fearful things, but
also very admirable, as being supernatural. Virgil has excellently well
comprised this; for when he would express the Fear which the ghost of his wife
Creusa struck into Aeneas, the prodigy of Polydorus's tomb, the arrival of
Mercury, that came to bring him a message from Jupiter; or the Fear that Turnus
was in, seeing an infernal monster flap his buckler with its wings: upon all
these occasions he puts down this circumstance, that their hair stood up right,
because that all these things were as Admirable as terrible: But in other kinds
of fear, he is contented to mention only coldness and trembling. And if any
demand of me why Admiration makes the hair to stand up right? I answer, that
the soul, having its faculties intent on the consideration of that which
appears admirable, does also contract the organs of the brain, and with them
the skin that covers the head. Now a man may easily imagine that we cannot
contract this skin, but by pulling it up, nor pull it up but the hairs will
stare a little. It is true that the motion of fear does also contribute
thereto, because it makes one cold, and that a part of our body cannot be cold
without being a little more contracted then before.

PROB. 37. Whence comes it that many being in a frenzy, have spoke Latin or
Greek, without having ever learned either of these languages?
MAny of those that have examined this Question, endeavoring to rid themselves
of the great difficulty which it presents at first to the mind, have in my
judgment made use of such answers, as are more against all appearance of
reason, then the Question it self, and given us remedies worse then the
disease: For they would give such strange force to our imagination, that no man
of a sound judgment is able to give credit to their vain discourses. Wherefore
omiting all that they have said of it, we will search only amongst known
causes, according to our custom, the reason of so mavelous an effect. First
then it is remarkable, that those words, which many being in a frenzy have
pronounced in a tongue which they knew not, have been ordinarily Latin or
Greek, or sometimes Hebrew, according to the report of those that have treated
of them. In the second place I suppose that the words which they have thus
spoken, did not make any discourse that was coherent or that was pertinent to
that which was asked them, since that the transports of their frenzy hindered
them from discoursing rationally. These two things being thus supposed, one may
add, that although those that have spoken Latin, Greek, or Hebrew in a frenzy,
never studied it, and yet they easily may have heard those words before which
they spoke, seeing that these three languages are commonly taught throughout
Europe, and that private houses and those places which are set apart for
speaking in public, do very often retain them. Now it is possible that these
words, at the same time when they heard them, made some impression in the
organs of their memories, which through its weakness did not appear to them,
until they fell into madness; because that the heat of the frenzy by its
immoderate subtilizing of the spirits of the brain, renders the sense of the
imagination so quick and so delicate, that there cannot be in its organs any
impressions so weak which it discovers not and is lively enough affected with
it. And that the images of certain things can lodge in our memories, and we
have no knowledge of them at all, because they are only painted very weakly,
and as it were with dead colors, may sufficiently be proved by Reminiscence,
which brings to our minds many things which we thought we had utterly
forgotten. Besides many otherlike impressions, are also made oftentimes in the
other organs of our faculties, and we never perceive it; and it is not to be
doubted, for example, but that when the weather is about to change, our bodies,
although we perceive nothing on it, do receive within them some change, as well
as those of birds that thereby do presage fair or foul weather. In the third
place, one may confess that certain images may be imprinted in our organs
without being perceived, after the example of a man that is very short-sighted,
who does questionless, for all that, receive the images of objects very far
distant, because that he would see them if on a sudden, the power which he
has of seeing should become more subtle and quick. And if any man wonders not
that these freneticks we speak of, are able to retain, and conserve a long time
in their memories the images which they do not know are there, but that the
words which they heard only by the by, should be able to leave there any light
and weak picture of themselves. He must remember that besides that the organs
of the memory are without doubt very delicate, and very susceptible of all
impressions, the activity of natural things is mavelous, and has many times
much greater extent then we believe. For, for example, could we easily persuade
our selves, that a beast that runs can in running imprint its sent in all the
places where it goes, if the dogs of chase did not prove it; and when we have
handled a ring of glass, or silver, or gold, would we believe at the first,
that so small touching of it should take away any thing from it: and yet
Philosophers hold that it must needs be so, since that at length we diminish it
sensibly by handling it? I add further that it is not necessary, that the
persons we now speak, of should have heard those words they pronounce in their
frenzy, only once; they may have heard them two or three several times, and a
man must the less wonder that we have the images of things without knowing it,
when he considers that our very desires are hidden from us, when they are as
yet very feeble, and newly born.

PROB. 38. What is the reason that a too earnest entreaty makes us unwilling
instead of inciting us to grant that which is desired of us?
IS it not because man being a rational creature and one tha^ ought to act
freely, loves to lea^ himself the dance in all his actions and to have the
beginning of the^ in himself; and that when one desires to constrain him with
too much ardour and violence to any things he thinks he is rather drawn by the
ardour and pressing importunity, then put upon it of himself, which
consequently displeases him, and makes his will more cold instead of heating
it? Or else, is it because he which begs of us earnestly, makes us foresee
plainly enough, that we cannot deny him his desire without putting him into a
great choler, and making him our enemy, that is to say, that he provides for us
his enmity, as it were a punishment in case we fail of compliance toward him,
in which our mind sees yet a greater image of constraint, and that which
displeases it more? for it hates nothing so much, as to seem to do a thing out
of fear. Or else, is it because we judge, that he which desires a thing with
immoderate and excessive passion, is apt to tell a lie to gain it, sooner then
another man that desires it with less violence; and that he does purposely
conceal from us some circumstance, which would make his request unreasonable,
and unjust? Or else, is it because that which is very violently desired, seems
to us of more consequence; and that in things of consequence, we are wont to
demur and consider a good while before we resolve any thing, because we are
afraid of committing some great error? Or else is it because he which prays
us with too much earnestness, says many things which make us believe that he
has his eye fastened only upon his own interest, and that he regards only the
good or evil that may happen to him upon our denial or consent, and not on the
good or evil that may befall us, which we dislike with some reason, as being
unjust: for, according to equity and reason, he that would have us be disposed
to do good to him, ought also on his part to wish us well, and that in desiring
of us an act of good will toward him, he have not a will indifferent toward
us? Or else lastly, is it not because too earnest prayers and supplications are
commonly accompanied with too low and base a submission, and a too servile
flattery, which commonly do quite contrary to that a man thinks they should? It
is manifest indeed that a too low and sordid submission is apt to be contemned,
and every one knows it well enough; but that which deceives men, is, that
oftentimes they do not consider long enough before the consequences of this
contempt, and see not that it not only extinguishes Affection in us, but also
inclines us even to Hatred, just as Pity inclines us to Love. Besides, the
submission that any one renders to us, is not more apt to please us, and by
this means to get some benefit of us, then to make us think it comes from a
base and dejected mind, since that all the advantage we can find in it,
proceeds only from the mind that it comes from: and as for the excessive
praises which are given us by him that desires to obtain some favor from us by
his too base flattery, if we think that they do not come from the heart, we
consider them only as so many cheats; and if we believe that he does really
esteem us, with that excess as he makes show of, first, we do not much thank
him for it, because the esteem which a man has of any one, is a thing forced,
and depends not on him that gives it; and in the second place, we do not now
take so much care to preserve and augment this esteem in him by our benefits,
as thinking it both great enough and well enough established, whereas when any
one respects us, but with more moderation, we labor what we can to increase
this esteem by our beneficence, and take care to cherish and cultivate (as I
may so say) a belief, which we see is both profitable and glorious to us.

PROB. 39. What are the causes of the marvelous things which we observe in the
Silkworm?
TO say the truth, there is nothing so admirable as that which no body admires.
Those which we call occult qualities in the Elements, or in other things, may
have the most common causes, like Juglers tricks, which seem to be grand
mysteries, before one has discovered them: but Man, whose ordinary operations
and common motions we do not at all admire, offers us nevertheless in these
operations and motions far more worthy subjects of astonishment; his Passions
are more admirable then the ebbing and flowing of the sea; the power of his
understanding over his Will, more marvelous then the influence of the Stars;
the operations of his Senses are of much more difficult explication, then all
those of the Loadstone; and he is a great marvail that admires little ones. Not
to go too far in this discourse, the consideration of the marvels which are
discovered in the Silkworms, may furnish us with some proofs of it: they seem
at first sight to surpass or equal the things that are most strange; and those
that have described them, have not been able sufficiently to admire that this
creature should be killed by the sole noise of thunder, that it should have an
instinct to spin unprofitably, and even with the loss of its life, seeing that
it stifles it self in its own work, that it can draw out of its body that Silk
of which it composes it; that a long time after it is dead, it revives; that it
transforms it self into a Butterfly, and after it is thus transformed, it can
live still many days without meat, that is to say, to the end of its life. But
how strange soever all these things seem, I conceive that if we would consider
them somewhat exactly, we should persuade our selves, that there is no
necessity of leaving the bounds of common and ordinary causes to unvail and
clear the secrets of them; and to do it, I will lay down only two things;
First, that Silkworms are excessive cold; and Secondly, that they are full,
and as I may so say, overglutted with an excessive moisture: their moisture is
apparent of its self to our sight, since that it makes them wholly transparent;
and it is credible, that it is this that renders them so fruitful. Their
extreme coldness may also be felt by our hands, and does besides discover it
self by certain reasons to our minds, seeing that in the midst of Summer, if
the weather come to be a little coldish, they dye with cold, which does not
befall any other creature; and seeing those which take the pains to keep them,
are careful to keep them very warm, and in a place that is not exposed to the
Northwind. These two things being thus supposed, it is no wonder in the first
place that the noise of thunder kills them; this manifestly proceeds from the
fear which so terrible a noise causes in them; for they must needs be very
fearful, since that they are so cold and are void of blood; and when fear adds
its coldness to that which is natural to them, so violent an excess may easily
deprive them of life. Now as the Silkworm is very cold, and when it begins to
grow old, its natural frigidity by this means increasing, it is not to be
wondered at that it seeks to envelop and cover it self, to the end that it may
be warm: for all other creatures being pressed with cold, do the like, and
search out holes wherein they lie in the straw, and enwrap themselves even in
the clothes and hangings of our houses, to be the less troubled with it. Hereto
serves the Silk which it vomits, and we must not wonder that it can vomit this
rich matter; for it is nothing but the remainders of its nourishment which its
too weak heat cannot digest, and as it were a superfluous humor which their
abundance of it has caused. Besides, when it puts it forth, it is not dry, but
viscous, and has a clammy moistness: but presently after the air hardens and
dries it, as if it were glue. Being thus covered for warmth, it is not stifled
as folks believe; nature does not give creatures any instincts that are so
destructive to them. It dies not unless by a natural death for want of
strength, but rather it makes its Bed when we think it builds its Sepulcher,
and sleeps when we believe it dies. And indeed, if we open this pretended
grave, after that we believe it is dead, we shall clearly perceive that it is
only in a profound sleep; its natural frigidity, which even before it thus
locked it self up, caused it to sleep longer then ordinarily other creatures
do, making it sleep much longer, since it locked it self up enveloped as it is
in silk, which it wisely drew out of its own body to cast round about it; it
grows a little warm by reason that its heat is on all sides hindered from
exhaling, and driven back, just as a man becomes warm by means of the clothes
he covers himself with. But whence comes it, you will say, that it transforms
it self into a Butterfly? I answer, that there is no color to say it is
transformed; that the Wings it acquires were due to it from its birth; that
nature intended it should fly with them: but that they could not grow out,
until that being covered with silk, which it vomited, it had gotten together a
little more heat, to strengthen its vegetative faculty, and enable it to put
them forth, as it does to that of Trees, to put forth their fruits, leaves and
flowers, the production whereof was formerly hindered by the coldness of the
Winter. Nor does this happen only to Silkworms; for Caterpillars spin the like
upon trees, locking themselves up in their own work, and being there, they get
wings as well as these. But that which further proves to us, that the heat of
the Silkworm, uniting it self, after the manner aforesaid, may serve to put
forth its wings, is, that flying Serpents are to be seen only in very hot
Countries, by reason it seems, that the extreme heat of the air, supplying the
defect of the coldness of their temper, gives their formative faculty power to
produce them. But if we must say that they are transformed, and that they
change their nature in acquiring wings, because that immediately after their
birth they have none, we must for the same reason say, that many other
creatures are transformed when they acquire Teeth, Nails or Horns, which they
had not when they were born, and that the very birds are transformed when they
get wings, since that when they were hatched they had none. The Silkworm
therefore is not transformed, but only becomes able to fly somewhat slowlier;
and to conclude my story, it is reasonable we should believe, that after it
has slept much, the same cause that awakens other creatures, awakens this
also: Then does wise nature make it vomit forth a thin sharp moisture, which
helps it to gnaw that silk, which it was on all sides environed with, and by
this means out it comes and continues for many days, and even to the end of
its life, without eating any thing, wherein consists the last marvel that we
are to speak of. But I conceive we may easily guess the cause of it, if we
remember, that it has a very great moisture joined with a very small heat: for
we shall see that this small heat must find for a long time sufficient aliment
in this great moisture, without having need to receive any other; and hereupon
might be alleged the strange story of a German maid, that having a very weak
heat, and a body full of a viscous and clammy humor, continued some whole
years without eating or drinking. Now as this temper of the Silkworm discovers
to us the cause why it can live so long without meat: So this entire
abstinence, in which it passes a great part of its life, may be a new
confirmation to us, that it has the same temper which we attributed to it at
first. For though for a certain season it eats abundantly enough, of which
there may be easily some other particular reason; yet considering its whole
life in gross, it must pass for one of the soberest creatures. These are then,
in my opinion, the causes of whatsoever appears marvelous in the Silkworm. If
any one has a mind to think that there are more strange and more occult ones,
it is not my intent, that this discourse should hinder him; But yet I believe
that as we oftentimes do not see many things because they are too far distant
from the eyes of our mind, so at other times we do not see them because they
are too near, and that we search at the other end of the world for that which
lies before our noses, and that the great eagerness that our understanding uses
to arrive at their causes, makes it go much beyond them.

PROB. 40. Why are good men oftentimes subject to a light promptitude of
Choler?
DO they not only seem to be so, because they are more free and open, and so
know not how to dissemble the smallest anger, and least discontentments that
arise in them; but let them presently appear in their eyes and words: whereas
those that are less free, do conceal them what they can possibly? Or else, is
it that those that have honest and good minds, are angry for many things that
regard not their particular interests? as for example, for the glory of God,
and for any thing that respects Honesty and Piety, so that as these are general
things which come every moment into our discourse, ordinary conversation offers
them more often occasion to speak with heat and emotion, and in some sort to be
provoked: whereas a brutish man, to whom all things are indifferent except his
own proper interest, can hear without any disturbance, all kind of discourse
which he is not the subject of, be they never so strange; which makes him often
appear more sweet and gentle, because his interests being some particular
things, and little known to others, they scarce ever come to be the matter of a
common discourse? Or else, may we not give light to this Problem, by that which
Aristotle says, that Choler is inclined to obey Reason, but that it obeyes it
too soon, and stays not until the first appearance of Reason has given place
to another more clear and solid? And may it not be said, that if so, it must
needs be, that good minds must naturally have some seeds of a light promptitude
to Choler, because the inclination readily to obey Reason, is without doubt a
good disposition of mind, and a token of excellence, though by accident-there
may arise from it vicious actions and other inconveniences? Or else, may we
not add further, that one shall have less reason to wonder, that Good men have
many times such a disposition, if it be considered, that there are some kinds
of Anger so handsome, that one may maintain they mark out more of Goodness,
Tenderness, and Love of good, than even motions of Pity or Good Will; because
in the motions of Affection and Pity, the soul does merely desire to do good;
but those of a generous and laudable Anger, are the motions of a soul that does
so much love good and hate evil, that it troubles it self at it even to fury,
and becomes foolish for a time? It may indeed be further alleged in favor of
this Paradox, that the tenderness of nature of any creature appears not so
much; for example, when it takes care to give food to its little ones, as when
full of anger and as it were in a fury, it lays on load with its wings, or
horns, or other arms that Nature has given it, on those that would come too
near them. Or else, in conclusion we may say, that there are certain emotions
of choler, in which a man has no intentions to do any hurt to those of whom he
complains with sharp words; but rather to incite them to produce their
justifications, to be able to find them innocent, or less culpable, and to
continue by this means to love them: so that as they do not proceed out of
malice, but tenderness, there is no cause to wonder that good men are subject
thereunto, and that they show a good nature, like in this to Lightnings, that
appear in Summer evenings, and are oftentimes signs of fair weather, whereas
they should seem rather to presage foul.

PROB. 41. Whence comes it that they say, The Love of Grandfathers to their
Grandchildren, is greater then that of their Fathers?
IS it not because a man attains through longer cares to have a Grandchild,
then to have a Son; and that always that which we acquire through more care,
is more dear to us? Or else, is not a Grandchild dearer, because it has been
a long time desired? Or else, do we not look upon it as a more rare favor, and
such as heaven eommunicates only to few persons, which makes us love it the
more, because generally all rare things have a particular allurement for our
minds? Or else, is not a Grandchild more beloved of his Grandfather then of
his Father, because that his Grandfather, as being more old, and nigher his
death, does for this reason desire the more to live again in another? Or else,
is it because the love we bear to those that proceed from us, arising from a
desire to extend our being successively to many generations, he that by this
natural course is more removed, shows to us this design more advanced, and so
does more touch our inclinations? Or else, is it because the Father loves his
Son only for his own sake, but the Grandfather loves him for his own sake and
for his Sons sake too, and sees in him the image of himself, and of him whom he
has begotten, and that these two diverse considerations do produce in him two
diverse tendernesses very powerful? Indeed this reason is very likely: for to go
about to object, that the Father has likewise two diverse causes of loving his
Son, because he may love him for the Grandfathers sake, this makes nothing to
the purpose; since that, as every one knows, the affection which blood
inspires, has much less force in ascending than in descending. But if still
another reason must be given of this Problem, one may also say, that perhaps
the affection of Grandfathers does only seem to be greater then that of
Fathers, because the Son being in a more particular manner the very blood and
substance of the Father; the Father for this reason thinks that to love him
very much, is to love himself very much, and that therefore he conceals and
keeps in these motions of it, for fear lest they betray too much weakness and
selflove: Whereas a Grandfather being not so much touched with this
consideration, does the more give himself over to the violences of his Love,
and dares more freely manifest it, as judging the excess thereof-less shameful.

PROB. 42. Why is it that a rare and eminent Virtue which shines in a Prince,
raises greater motions of Love in the lower sort of people, then in other men?
IT is a thing worthy to be observed, that the virtue of a Prince when it is
eminent and rare, seems to raise more Love in the lowest sort of people, then
in any others. For we see it is commonly the vulgar people that appear most
afflicted for the death of a good and virtuous Prince, even to weep in the
streets, shops, and about the fields, with an extreme tenderness, as it were
for a domestique loss, and it is also the meaner sort of people that in his
lifetime gives him with more zeal a thousand benedictions, and labors for his
glory with a more passionate will, and such as shows that they have more of
resentment against those that would do him any wrong. History may furnish us
with a thousand strange and admirable examples of this affection of the vulgar
people toward a good Prince; but, that I may not enlarge this discourse too
much, we will content our selves to name only some of them. We see in Sueton,
that after the death of Germanicus, a Prince of an eminent virtue, the
Commonalty of Rome grew almost mad, that neither the Edicts of Tiberius, nor
the Religion of certain Festivals, could stop the immoderate course of its
grief, and that many of those which were possessed of this grief, went so far
as to demolish the Altars of the gods through despair, to cast the tutelar gods
of their houses into the streets, and to expose those children that were born
to them on that day, as refusing all Happiness and all occasions of Joy. The
good qualities of Julius Caesar produced also the like effects after his death;
for though he had taken from the Romans that liberty which they prized so high;
nevertheless after that Antonie had awakened by his Oration the memory of his
Goodness, Clemency, Valor, and of the number of his Victories, the common
people that heard him, were so touched with it, that after they had done
honors to him as a god, they ran with lighted firebrarnds in their hands to
set fire to the Capitol, and had almost burnt down the City, to be revenged on
those that had newly freed it, and reduced the Commonwealth to its ancient
form. This very Caesar in his lifetime was so beloved of his Soldiers, that
having failed of their duty, they desired him to decimate them, thereby to
expiate their crime, and to give himself satisfaction. The like happened also
afterward to his successor Augustus, according to the report of Appian. And
Alexander the Great, leading his Macedonian Soldiers, young and old, cross the
deserts, for none other design but to come to the bounds of the habitable
world, was nevertheless so tenderly beloved of them, for his Virtue, that
seeing them mutiny to return into Macedonia, and even the punishment of some of
them could not stop their commotion, he only sent them word, they might go
whether they pleased, and that he would love them no longer, nor account them
his, which touched them with so sharp a Repentance, that flocking before his
door, they fell a crying with abundance of tears, that he should kill them if
they had offended him, as Quintus Curtius tells the story. But to begin our
search for the Reason, why the Virtue of a Prince excites in the minds of the
common people (that are most commonly interessed and mercenary) such
disinteressed and such heroic motions, which seem to be greater then those
that are raised in the rest of men that are better bred: is it not, in the
first place, that the common people are not in all regards inferior in Virtue
to the rest of men; and that if they be something less generous and more
mercenary, as we have confessed, they are on the other side full of Pity, and
have in very many things more of Shame and Justice? And may we not add, that as
the love which beasts bear to their young ones, surpasses that which men bear
to their children, it may very well be after the same manner that amongst men a
good motion may sometimes be more strong where there is less of Reason and
Knowledge, because then a man obeyes more blindly the good incitements of
Nature? Or else is it that many times men of a middle rank look upon the
Fortune of their Superiors, if not with envy properly so called, yet at lest
with some evil of heart; and that those of the lowest sort are more free from
all these motions, because the distance between them and those that govern them
is greater, and therefore they are disposed the more to consider their Virtue
with Love and Admiration? Or else, is it that the motions of an heroic and
extraordinary Generosity, when they shine upon the eyes of all in the person of
a Prince, may excite more of admiration in the minds of the lowest sort of
people, because they perceive themselves less capable of ever arising so high?
Or else is it that when a Prince manifests his affection in general to all his
subjects, the lowest people think themselves most obliged to his goodness,
because they think themselves least worthy of it? Or else, is it not that the
greatest part of the goodness of a Prince consists herein, to be favorable to
the Poor, which, as being weakest, are most apt to be wronged by the stronger;
not to enrich those that are already too rich, with the substance of the common
people, and to do Justice equally to all his subjects, without having regard to
the difference of quality, and that it is no wonder if all this does more
please the common sort of people, then persons of quality? Or else is it also
that the vulgar sort as being less enlightened, and less pollished by Learning,
are more dazzled by greatness of Birth, and have more veneration from the pomp
and glory that attends the fortune of Princes: so that when the luster of
Virtue comes to shine on their eyes, together with this glittering Greatness,
it seems so venerable to them, that it has power over their minds to do any
thing? This last truly seems to contribute not a little to their Admiration;
but, to conclude, we may see here by the way, that Machiavel had no reason to
say that the Virtue of a Prince can raise Love and Gratitude in a few persons
only, and that all the rest of men are ungrateful, and incapeable of being
moved by it; and therefore in his opinion, he should endeavor rather to make
himself feared by the rigor of his punishments: This appears, say I, to be
false by our Problem, for we have seen that the love of a Princes Virtue shines
chiefly in the common people, which makes the greatest part of men, and is able
to beget in them most exquisite and admirable motions of affections, because of
this mixture with Greatness, which has a certain Luster and Beauty, that does
extremely take with the people. And if I may be permitted to add something upon
this consideration, I shall say further, that it is only the baseness of his
own mind, that made him imagine that Gratitude, shame of an unworthiness
generally confessed, or love of a rare merit, should have so little power upon
our spirits; for it has been often seen, that a troop of mutiners from amongst
the very dregs of the people, after they have contemned the fear of punishment,
have become calm and appeased on a sudden, merely by the presence of a man of
known virtue, out of reverence which it imprinted in them. There are many
crimes which men cease not to commit every day, although they that commit them
are every day hanged for it; but on the contrary, there are ingratitudes and
unworthinesses which are committed but very rarely, although the Laws have not
ordained any punishment for those that are guilty of them, because the greatest
part of men have conceptions lively enough of the blackness and sordidness of
them. The fear of Death and Pain, which, according to Machiavel, do never
forsake men, is overcome every day in the wars by the hope of a little pay, and
the contempt of them is grown common. But of so many thousand men that hazard
themselves thus, without doubt there would be but a very few, that for a much
greater sum would betray a friend, by whom they had been sensibly obliged. But
we leave this discourse, before it has carried us very much beyond our
subject, and pass on to another Problem.

PROB. 43. What is the reason that Shame makes a redness to arise in the face?
AS there are not any motions more pleasant and more worthy to be known, then
those of Shame, so there are none that seem to produce their effects in us
after so obscure a manner, and so difficult to explain. The reason is, that
whatever our mind does most genuinely and after a more natural manner, is
always that which it is least aware of. Now the impressions that Shame causes
in our blood, and upon our faces, is so natural, that Stage Players which laugh
and cry, though they are neither sad nor merry, which can make themselves look
pale as if they were afraid, and can artificially draw upon their faces the
redness of Anger, and easily counterfeit Pity, Astonishment, or Disdain,
cannot for all this by any cunning draw upon their faces the redness of Shame,
and the characters which it ought to be accompanied with. Besides, he that
cries has an intention to cry, and he that weeps has an intention to weep:
but most commonly he that blushes has no intention to blush; and this is the
reason that very modest persons blush even at their very blushing, and by
endeavoring to hide their Shame, increase and double it. Lastly, that which
makes the difficulty of this Problem appear greater, is, that it is certain the
redness of Shame proceeds always from some grief and pain which the soul is
in. Now it is the property of Grief to repress the blood and spirits, and
gather them together about the heart, instead of spreading of them in the face,
as shame does. Nevertheless, we will endeavor here to discover the mystery of
so handsome a passion: And first we will tell you what some have thought, that
the soul sends forth the blood into the face in shame, because it desires to
cover it as with a veil; whereto they endeavor to add some weight from
experience, which shows us, that those which are surprised with Shame, do
naturally hold their hand before their face. Now as I do not absolutely reject
this consideration of theirs, yet I do not think it ought to satisfy us so,
but that we should search for others: For besides that it is perhaps a pretty
fancy rather than a reason, certain it is, that many times they that are
surprised with Shame, do not desire to hide their faces from him that censures
them, but on the contrary do earnestly wish that he read therein his repentance
and sorrow, and for all this cease not to blush. To search then another cause
of this effect, we must in the first place consider, that in all the Passions,
the Soul imprints the images of its least motions upon the body, and there
figures out what it resents, and what it suffers by certain dispositions which
it gives it, as it were by so many Emblems and Metaphorical pictures, whether
it does it out of design, or be constrained to it by necessity. Thus, for
example, angry people hold up their heads high, and commonly set both their
hands on their sides, because holding the head high and taking up more room
then before, is a Metaphorical expression of the vain elevation of a
presumptuous mind, and of the greatness which it falsely attributes to it self:
So a man that affirms any thing with much zeal and opinionativenesse, commonly
bends his fists, because this action has some Analogy and correspondence with
the estate in which the soul is. But it were unprofitable and endless to think
to prove a thing so clear and certain, by enumerating all our passions;
wherefore supposing it rather true, we say (and I think with much color of
Reason) that in all griefs and sadnesses, when the soul flies some external
evil, and considers it as external, it makes the spirits of the outward parts
fly toward the inward, because such a motion as shows that it desires from all
sides to enter into its self, thereby to escape that evil which comes unto it
from without, is most proper to represent to the life the desire which it then
has, and the condition it is in: but on the contrary in the grief of Shame,
because it is touched with the horror and hatred of an evil, that is within it
self, and is fastened to its own substance, since it is nothing else but its
own imperfection, it cannot better express this horror and hatred, then by
violently thrusting forth the blood and spirits from within to the outward
parts, as if it would banish them from us, since that indeed it is an estate
that has some Analogy with this corporal motion, and that it would if it
could, banish it self, and go out of its self, by that means to fly from the
vice which it finds it is defiled with. Moreover Shame dilates the spirits and
the blood, and sheds them upon the face more subtly then any other passion,
because it proceeds from a most spiritual conception, to wit, from the
conception of a dishonest thing, and that the more spiritual impressions have
also more quick and sudden effects. To this effusion of the blood and spirits,
contributes also perhaps after another sort, the contempt which in shame the
soul has of its self; for seeing that then when it is most careful to preserve
and defend us (as for example in Fear and in Affliction) it does
extraordinarily contract and keep them within, to strengthen it self the more;
it may be, on the contrary, when it hates, and thinks it self as it were
unworthy of its own care, it does by a natural motion remit much of that
straining, which holds the spirits thus united and collected, and gives them
more liberty to spread themselves, and to carry the blood along with them. But
if this contribute nothing at all to it, the first reason that we give, is
methinks sufficient to clear this Problem; for though for the most part we do
not blush, if we do not think our selves really in fault: yet sometimes a
calumny makes us blush; and some may wonder that it should be so, since then
the soul, one would think, can not be troubled with any remorse nor with any
sense of its own imperfection. To this I answer, that i^ truth we cannot have a
true remor of faults, which we have not committed; but as he which has for
some time held his eyes fixed upon a deep precipice, into which it is impossible
he should fall, yet cannot choose but tremble out of a vain shadow of fear that
this image gives him: So he that has great horror for some fault which he is
falsely accused of, according as he has his mind bent upon the consideration of
the lewdness which is attributed to him, cannot choose, notwithstanding the
clear testimony of his own Conscience and of Reason, but be surprised many
times with a vain shadow of remorse, which makes a blush mount into his face,
ere his soul has had time to think better on it.

PROB. 44. What is the reason that when we blush, it appears especially in the
forehead?
IS it not because the forehead is the whitest part of the face, and most free
from natural redness, and consequently most apt to make that more lively
appear, which shame imprints in it? Or else the blood which shame brings into
the face, does it not appear chiefly in the forehead, because the skin thereof
is extremely thin and delicate, as one may easily perceive by so many little
wrinkles, which Horror, Discontent, Admiration or Anger do make in it, and
because it is free from hair, which in the other parts of the face may in some
sort hinder us for perceiving so well the impressions which come into it from
within? Or else, if the conceit of those that say, that in shame the soul sends
the blood into the face to cover it therewith, as with a veil, must take place;
may we not say, that it sends it especially into the forehead, because it is
the part most exposed to the view of of him that censures us: seeing that when
we speak to men, we are wont to look them in the forehead: Or else do not the
spirits in spreading themselves, make the blood especially come under the skin
of the forehead, for that it is the highest part of the face, and that it is
their nature to ascend as much as they can, as soon as the soul lets go her
hold by which she keeps them in the body?

PROB. 45. What is the reason that praises make a man blush?
IS it not because he that is much commended, feels many times that the excess
of praises which are given to him, do puff him up whether he will or no with a
little pride, and tickle him with a pleasure that dissolves and as it were
shakes all his gravity and firmness: So that he blushes not at the praises, but
at the weakness he finds in himself and discovers to others? Truly that which
shows that it may be thus, is, that we see those which are most subject to
blush when they hear themselves praised, are commonly such persons as have
indeed a sincere goodness, but have not a soul really great; for a great soul
is not puffed up nor elevated at the praises it receives, any more than the Sea
is increased or heightened by the water of Rivers that run into it. But it may
be too all their redness proceeds not from Shame, but comes partly from an
extreme pleasure they take to hear themselves praised; for pleasure also
diffuses the spirits and gives some color to the face. Or else that on the one
side, an honest and good soul has not always the courage, generously to
reject the false praises that are given it, because it loves glory; but that,
on the other side, because of its goodness, it blusheth at the fault it commits
in not resisting them, and in taking to it self by this complacence an honor
which is not its due. Or else, is it not out of extreme Humility that a man
blushes, in hearing himself praised for that he does not at all believe that he
is master of those perfections which are attributed to him, and that the
praises given him, show him what he ought to be, and therefore do only quicken
the sense which he has of his imperfections? Or else, is it because he that
highly commends us, makes every one look on us the more, and does in a manner
draw us out of obscurity by this glory which he procures us, and that then we
blush not at our glory, but rather because we apprehend that our faults will
appear the more in this great light which it sets us in, and that it does as
well illustrate our blemishes as our perfections, and renders them the more
remarkable? Here possibly some may say to me, if the blushing of shame proceeds
only from the sense which we have of our imperfection, as you have established
it in another Problem, to what purpose is it that our faults are objected to us
by others to make us blush, and what is the reason that it contributes thereto?
I answer, that it is because the judgment of others does always confirm ours,
and therefore if we think that another blames and condemns a fault which we
have committed, this belief of his does more strengthen the opinion which we
had of it before, and does more lively manifest the ugliness of it.

PROB. 46. What is the reason that a man laughs more at a pleasant jest, or a
merry tale, when he himself that tells it, does not laugh?
IS it not because then he does not seem to have the design which he has, I
mean, that he seems as if he would tell something serious and of importance,
whereas he only tells some trifle, and that our mind takes pleasure in this
deceit? But why does it take more delight in this deceit, then it would have
done in seeing the naked truth? Is it not because in discovering it thus
through a lie, that is transparent and easily penetrable, it still somewhat
exercises its noblest faculty, the judgment, and gives to it self some proof
of its sufficiency and light? Or else is it because a ridiculous thing spoken
in a cold and serious tone, surprizeth us the more, because we did not expect
to see it in this form, and under this appearance, and so it is proper to cause
laughter, which must arise from a being surprised, whereas he that laughs
whilst he tells a merry story, does as it were threaten us and give us warning
before hand, so that he does not surprise us at all? But why must laughter
arise from a surprise? Is it, as some say, because it proceeds from Admiration,
which is raised chiefly by a novelty? Or else, is it because that which makes
us laugh, is always so vain, that if our minds could consider it a little at
leisure, it would not find in it any subject of contentment? Or else, do we not
laugh, when he that tells us any merry thing laughs much at it, because he
seems to us as if he commended himself; and that otherwise that which he says,
seems to be less pleasant, and less apt to cause laughter, when we see he helps
it forward by beginning to laugh first? Or else lastly, is it because he which
tells a merry passage without laughing, appears to have some politeness, and
with all gravity of manners: So that as he appears a more honest man, so
likewise whatever he says, has more of grace in his mouth, and delights us
the more, whereas if he laughs too much, he appears only a Bouffon, and by this
means whatever he says, though never so good, loses more then half its grace
and beauty?

PROB. 47. Why do we laugh in seeing a thing very ill-favored, since that
which delights the mind, one would think ought to have in it some perfection?
TO escape this difficulty which is not so slight, but that many ancient
Philosophers, and Orators have labored to little purpose for the clearing of
it: may we not say in the first place, that a man does not laugh at ugly
things, when they are wholly and altogether such, since that on the contrary we
do then call them horrible, and fly from them as things odious; but that most
commonly a man laughs at some trifling and slight grace mixed with their
deformity? as for example, it is clear that the habit of a Bouffon though it be
deformed, has many times I know not what grace that may tickle the
imagination; But what is the reason this remnant of grace, and this vain and
slight ray of goodness that may be found in some ill-favored things, makes one
laugh more then a thing reasonably well made would do? May it not possibly be
because in a thing ill made, the defects that it has, may by their opposition
render in some sort more pleasant, and more grateful to the fancy, that little
grace which shines in it? Or else rather, is it not because generally every
grace or prettiness that makes one laugh, either in handsome or unhandsome
things, should be always vain and slight, and not solid, as we said in the
foregoing Problem? But why should it be so? Is it not because solid graces
chiefly affecting the Judgment, and approving themselves to us by our
discretion and understanding, do produce a pleasure though greater, yet more
sober, and such as has something of grace in it; but a vain and slight grace,
affecting especially the imagination, and being chiefly liked by our weakness,
fills us also with a joy that manifests somewhat of weakness and childishness,
and takes from us all gravity, and makes us not able to hold our countenance,
which is that we call laughter, and therefore they say it is a sign of folly in
those that are much subject to it? Or else do not things that are very
ill-favored delight those that look upon them because they are rare as well as
things perfect and excellent? Or else is it not that as our soul loves to have
its Ideas perfect and entirely expressive of their objects, for this reason it
is pleased more in considering things very ill done, then moderately well,
because these first do perfect and accomplish the Idea which it has of
ugliness, and fills up its knowledge to the full every way; whereas those that
are moderately well done can give it only imperfect notions? Or else do not
objects that are very ill done, by giving us an Idea of extreme imperfection,
furnish us with an easy way to draw from thence the image of extreme
perfection, and to render it more lively in us; so that they very much
instructing our mind, it delights it self to consider them, not for any reason
that persuades it that it should do so, but by a natural and blind motion that
makes it search in it to perfect its knowledge, and to instruct its self? Or
else, do we not love to see things very ill done, to show our abilities in
condemning them? But what is the reason we cannot as well show them in praising
those that are moderately well done? Is it not because every body knows at
first sight that which is extreme, and finds more difficulty in that which is
moderate? Or because, as we said in another Problem, it is easier to blame then
to commend? Or else, do we not delight to express the rules of good, whereof we
have all some Theory, rather on the subject of an ill made thing, then of one
that is well made, because a thing well made contains them in its self, and so
seems to suggest them to us, and to leave nothing to our invention, whereas
when we express them by blaming a deformed thing, we seem to invent them our
selves? It is probable indeed that fools do it for this reason, because they
think they cannot manifest their wit better then by detracting and finding
fault. Or else, to conclude, is it not in many merely an odd fantastical and
childish humor to like a thing that is deformed, and to consider it with
satisfaction, and therefore we see that all fools laugh more heartily at
monstrous and extravagant things, and that good and discreet men smiling only
at these, do laugh more heartily at things excellent and handsome, as at a bold
and neat reply, at a pretty compendious way by which some one has brought
about his desires, or at some gentleness that shines in his actions, at a
graceful motion of the body, at the fit proportions and correspondence of all
the parts of an History, or Fable, at a passion naturally expressed, or some such
like thing?

PROB. 48. What is the reason that Man being inclined to flatter himself, does
nevertheless aggravate his own imperfection above the truth; as for example, in
saying there is nothing but folly, and injustice, and ingratitude in the world?
FIrst, it may be said on this subject, that in truth man attains most commonly
to a mediocrity of wisdom, seeing there are scarce any that have not the use
of common sense; and that to speak civilly, he also attains ordinarily to a
moderate and common Virtue, seeing there are few that become unnatural: but
that for all this; when we come to compare this wisdom, and this ordinary
virtue of men with a state of Perfection much greater, which reason gives us
the Idea of, we find our selves forced to name them Vice and Folly, just as we
call foul linen black, in comparing it with that which has been new washed,
or with snow, though it be white in it self and in comparison with Ink; for
every mean state is an evil in regard of an excellency which is much above it
as truly as it is a good, in regard of that which is beneath it. Now our soul
is so much the more apt to look upon the good that is in it with disdain,
because it finds it is born for a state of perfection much more eminent; and
thus though an Artisan be to be commended if he perfectly understand any
mechanic art; yet wheen we judge of a Prince, we make no account of such an
ability, if he has no other, because we conceive he is born for much greater
things. Secondly, our soul does often attribute to it self more imperfection
then it has, because the good already gotten slips out of our memory, and does
not ordinarily present it self to our minds, as that which is wanting does; the
reason of it is, because the soul always withdraws its sight from the things
about which it has no more to do, as on the contrary, it fixes it upon those
that give it some occasion of desire and endeavor. In the third place, a man
does not think there is any need of aggravating the good that is in man, and
believes rather it would be a thing very hurtful: but on the contrary, he
thinks it is very profitable to aggravate his Vice and Folly, which is also
very true, but yet to some certain degrees only; for to give to man too low
conceptions of himself, and such as are like him, is an abating of his Courage
and quenching of his Emulation. But however hereby, sometimes the imperfection
of man seems to us to be greater then it is; for to consider, first, that which
regards his understanding, oftentimes when we speak of many fools, we say with
a serious tone, as if we desired to be believed, and to have it pass for an
Axiom, that they have no more judgment then beasts; nay in aggravating their
folly, we think sometimes that beasts have more: though if we consider it
aright and according to the truth of the business, a man that is the most void
of wit, gives, at but opening his eyes, and by his first gestures, and by his
first looks, tokens of a greater judgment then all beasts put together: There
are also Philosophers that have contributed to the making of the generality of
men be so severely condemned; for whether it were, that herein, they always
had for their end some profit that might be reaped by it, or that at sometimes
they might be put upon it for some other reasons, they have one after another
aggravated his folly in such a manner as if they had a mind to take from him
even common sense. In this there is too much severity and bitterness; for we
should not consider only the faults of people, but also the good that is in
them, and then we shall find that in many things they have the first notions
most quick and most pure, though they know not how to discourse of them
exactly, and after a subtle manner: we should not also impute as so many
faults of their understanding, all the weaknesses of their imagination, and
take them in the worst sense that can be; for all things appear bad to him that
considers them not with candor and equity; and he that is resolved never to see
any thing but bad, makes short work, by casting himself into an excess of
rigor, and turning away his eyes from that which is laudable in them; but by
this means he depraves himself, and not that which he considers after this
manner; the same also happens from the aggravating of men's vice. But to
discover yet another cause that makes us thus defame our nature many times
beyond the truth, it may further be said, that every one thinks to gain
something to his own advantage in vilifying mankind, and the generality of men;
for if he has any perfection, he is more willing to persuade himself, that it
comes to him from what he has particular and proper, then to believe that it
proceeds from what he has in common with others; the reason whereof is,
because what he has in particular, is more his own; and on the contrary if he
has any imperfection, he also finds some comfort in the displeasure it does
him, by attributing it to the general nature of man, rather then to the fault
of his own individual nature: But especially wicked men are put upon a like
design by the like motive; for, that they may find out some excuse, they
endeavor to include all others in the same fault, which they themselves are
guilty of: they scrape together therefore what ever is most ugly in our life,
and make it much worse in expressing it, and in giving ill interpretations of
it; and when we hear them thus aggravate much beyond the truth that which is
ill in us, we contradict them not, as well because as I told you, that we think
it is profitable it should be so, as also because it seems to be Humility to
consent to an accusation in which we are comprised; and on the contrary that it
is arrogance and presumption to oppose it. From hence then arise many sayings
and expressions, which import that reason can do nothing or very little on the
mind of man, that there is nothing but injustice and ingratitude to be seen in
the world, and such other like things, which are contrary to other sayings that
we have at other times, which are as much beyond the truth: for it is not more
impossible that heaven should fall, then it is impossible that Justice and
Reason should cease to have very much power upon the minds of men, and that
they should not suffer themselves to be bent and affected with this same
Reason, as their particular interest. Pirates, robbers upon the highway,
poysoners, and the most detestable of men, do not make any exception against
this rule; and though Choler be the most wild and savage of all our passions,
and though it stir whatsoever is most base and evil in us; yet that which first
kindles it is an indignity, which is nothing else but injustice: and therefore
Poets that are the Painters of the ordinary motions of the soul, when they
bring upon the stage one that talking to himself alone labors to animate
himself with a violent rage, they make him insist longer upon reasons drawn
from justice or injustice, then upon others drawn from profit; and not without
cause; for if a man do only conclude in himself, that it is profitable for him
to be angry, there would be nothing more cold then such an inticement, and he
would not for this obtain of himself to be angry in good earnest; but if he be
persuaded that it is just he should be so, this consideration would without
fail put fire into his soul as soon as ever he thinks of it, and will there
kindle the flames of choler: Hence it comes that a thief, what want so ever he
have of money, will not be angry that a man has been so careful as not to let
him cut his purse; for he cannot see in this any indignity, and he does
absolutely want the considerations of justice, which ought to begin the forming
of choler in him. And as for the common sayings by which we express the want of
gratitude, which we ordinarily see in men, they also do often surpass the
truth; for if we consider it well, there is nothing more pressing than a motion
of gratitude, and experience shows sufficient examples of it amongst all sorts
of men. But to leave this discourse, I will add, that because there are few
spirits so miserable, as to endeavor to make themselves more wicked then they
are: Man, for that reason, knows not how inaccessible the extremity of vice is,
and how impossible it would be for him to dispoile himself of what ever there
is good and laudable in his nature, and to go quite contrary to the rules of
Reason; and that this makes him sometimes have too ill an opinion of himself,
and to pass beyond the bounds of truth in blaming himself.

PROB. 49. What is the reason that according to the common saying of the Poets
and of Aristotle himself in the second book of his Politics, Valiant and
courageous persons are most subject to love?
IS it not because courage and an inclination to Love have one and the same
Original in the Temperament, namely heat of blood, which may be perceived in
that the age wherein man is most courageous through the heat of his blood, is
that wherein he is most inclined to Love? Or else, is it not because Love is a
passion which has some beauty and nobleness, and that men truly courageous, as
they have a more noble soul, so have they also a greater propension to all the
Passions that have any ray of nobleness and beauty, and proceed partly from a
good principle? Indeed we see, that for this reason they are subject to
ambition, because ambition has some mixture of generosity, and of the Love of
that which is honest; and to Opinionativeness, because it has a shadow of
constancy; but that on the contrary they are farther then other men from
Avarice, Cruelty, and desire of Revenge, because these motions of the soul have
not the least footsteps of any nobleness and beauty. Now to show that Love is a
passion which has some nobleness and something of praiseworthy, we may bring
this reason, that (whatsoever some say that would decide this business by fine
expressions, and have their jests pass for Oracles) a true Lover does in some
sort love beauty for it self, and not only for the hope of a base and brutish
pleasure; for he not only humbles himself before the beloved object, as we
humble our selves before a great man by constraint, and with repugnance, and to
obtain some good of him, but he also takes pleasure in this very act of
submission, and the more he humbles himself with innocence and freeness, and
without any design, the more this pleasure increases in him, which is an
infallible token that he makes this the end of part of his desire: Justly
therefore do the Poets call the excess of Love handsome fooleries; for though
they be fooleries in that they choose their objects ill, they have some Beauty
in that they denote in the soul where they are formed, some violent inclination
to love perfection. Or else may we say, that even the inclination to love
perfection is the sole motive and only fountain of true courage, so that if
Love have in it any ray or spark thereof, it is no wonder that those who have
an extreme high courage, are the more subject to it? Or else is it that it is
an hard matter to resist at once two contrary assaults, because this seems to
require two contrary dispositions of mind; and that for this reason they that
have a soul strong to resist griefs and objects of terror, are many times
extraordinary weak against pleasures and objects that conquer by flattering our
senses, amongst which those that cause Love are the most alluring? Certainly,
it seems credible, when we consider the great weakness with which men, the most
famous for their courage, have yielded to pleasures of this kind. Nevertheless,
herein their courage was imperfect; for our soul ought not to be firm like Ice
very hard frozen, which resisting the blows of hatchets, and bearing heavy
burdens, yet makes less resistance to a small heat, and to a ray of the Sun,
then the most weak things; but rather like to a Diamant which equally resists
all assaults: and as a sword cuts alike on both sides, so a perfect and
complete courage should be whetted on both sides, and have as it were two edges
and two points to resist equally Pleasures and Pains; Or else, these two
different parts of courage, which we now speak of, have not at all any thing of
contrary, and do spring rather from the same fountain: but as though the Visual
faculty has one and the same spring, yet when we would collect it into one of
the eyes, and there make it become more strong, we do naturally shut the other:
so our soul in uniting all its force toward some one side, remits in it other
regards, and in avoiding with great care some kind of weakness, it falls more
readily into others.

PROB. 50. Whence comes that aversion to marriage of persons too near?
AS there is no question but the condemning of Marriage between persons too
near, is less clear by reason, then the condemning of vices, which are formally
the motions of malice: so he that would infer from thence, that there is
nothing of nature in this, and that it is wholly a Civil constitution, and no
more, will be deceived; since that the general inclination and opinion of men
testifies the contrary; for a general opinion can never fail of being true, at
least in part; and the example of beasts cannot upon this subject be
considerable to a man of judgment; for it were absurd to think that beasts
should respect an affinity which they know not; and he that should say that
laughter, shame, desire of glory, desire of knowledge and the like, are not
natural to Man, because they are not natural to beasts, would evidently make a
ridiculous consequence. And if men cannot give particular reasons why they
disapprove this sort of marriages, and specify what they find inconvenient
therein according to reason, we ought to think that for all that they see it in
gross and at a distance, as many times we see afar off an house, though we be
not able to distinguish the doors, windows, and other parts of it. And by how
much the less clear the reasons of it are, so much the more reason have we to
exercise our selves in the discovery of them in this Problem. First then I
shall say, that not only nature gives us a strong inclination to love those
persons which are very near us, and are members of the same family with us,
(for of this no man that has his senses can doubt) but that it also makes us
consider them in some manner as we do our selves: This appears in that if a man
commends one that is very near us, we blush at it as if he commended us, and do
out of humility desire him to forbear, as if these praises were meant to us.
This being so, as every one is naturally far from the folly into which
Narcissus fell, and is not capable of being touched with the love of his own
beauty: by the same reason he naturally flies from regarding with Passions like
to those of Lovers, the persons for whom he has an affection of the same
nature and kind with that which he has for himself; and this is a token of the
ardour and truth of the Amity which he bears them; as on the contrary, if this
Amity should cease to have the qualities and properties of that which he bears
to himself, it were a certain sign that it had received diminution, and is not
such as nature requires it should be. In the second place, the reverence which
Proximity gives to persons that are of the same family, being an obligation so
straight and so natural, that the ancient Romans have named it Piety, and that
every honest soul considers it as a sacred thing; it proceeds from hence that a
man desires to see the degrees of it very distinct, and separate, in several
persons, to the end that it may the more exactly discharge the duties that
belong unto it, and discern more clearly after what manner he ought to be
affected toward each of them in particular; for he perceives that this
knowledge would become much more obscure by marriages that should unite in one
and the same person two of these degrees first, and afterward three or four or
more of them; and that in this case there would be requisite much subtilty of
wit to discern the obligation that should arise from the mixture of these
different or contrary obligations. If besides these general reasons we shall
need to allege others, touching the different degrees of Proximity, first, to
show that reason prohibits marriage with those men or women that are of our
nearest kindred to whom we owe respect, I shall allege those well-known
verses, whose truth every one will confess, Non been convenient nec in una sede
morantur
Majestas and Amor.
That is, A real Love and Majesty,
Can hardly in one bosom lie.
Whereupon I add, that if Reason forbids us to use too familiar caresses
toward those persons I spoke of, it does likewise forbid us to desire to unite
our selves to them in such a manner of union as above all others produces
Familiarity, and does necessarily deface and abolish Respect and Inequality: I
mean that Union wherein marriage consists. It remains then only to speak of
that marriage which may be imagined between Brother and Sister, in regard of
which the preceding reason can have no place, seeing they owe one another no
Respect, but merely Amity. It is well known what a great Personage discoursing
on this subject, has said, to wit, that the affection which would arise from
such a marriage, as being produced from the concourse of two such potent
considerations, would be somewhat too ardent. But, for my part, I do not think
he should have taken it thus, nay I conceive, that in some sort it ought to
have been taken quite contrary. But before I explain my self more clearly, I
will say that in every species of the Passions, there are of them that are
contrary to one another, and that expel one another, and are incompatible,
instead of increasing and mutually assisting each other. Thus, for example,
there are contrary Joys; for there is a certain Brutish Joy, which is so
incompatible with another Spiritual Joy, that when this last possesses the
soul, the other must necessarily give place; and hence it comes to pass that
many that feel within themselves most perfect pleasures, and such as are very
spiritual, have in their countenance an air of sadness, very far from having
their eyes cheerful, and those other marks that accompany lower and baser
pleasures. Thus a sadness that raises in a man a discourse which he intends to
make upon Humane vanities and misery, being very far from increasing that which
the loss of a suit at Law, or the like, has begotten in him, diminishes it,
and instead of overcharging his spirit, comforts it: Thus Grief for a disgrace
far from augmenting the weakness into which our soul is cast through a corporal
grief, serves many times to take from her the sense of it. In a word, it were
easy to show, that there are also thus Angers, Fears, Loves, Enemies, as I may
so say, one to another, and incompatible. This being thus premised, I say, that
the Passion which we properly call Love, as arising from a bodily pleasure, and
being altogether sportful and wanton, and an enemy to all serious thoughts and
considerations, according to the saying of Poets and of Lovers themselves,
cannot but be of a nature more contrary to Fraternal Love, which is altogether
Spiritual, Holy, and Serious, and flows only from Reason. That for this cause
so far are they from increasing one another, it is certain that That must
necessarily loosen all the bonds of This, and that as we perceive that it
loosens them, and that we have a very great inclination to keep them still fast
and united, and such as nature would have them to be, we feel also for this
cause a repugnance, by reason of that which thus loosens them. And herein we do
for all the world, as it a man should go about to make us laugh heartily, by
making some serious and profound contemplation of Philosophy to increase the
pleasure of it; for we should soon perceive that quite contrary these two sorts
of Joy cannot agree together, much less augment one another; and that it were
an extravigance to think they should. This is all I have to say upon this
subject.

PROB. 51. Whence proceed the excessive heats of the Month of August, and the
other effects which are attributed to the Dog Star?
I Have much reason to fear that I shall be accounted rash, if I dare to
question the power which is generally granted to the Dog Star: but on the other
side also, I conceive that if herein I am rash, I ought to be pardoned, in
consideration that I undertake by this means to maintain familiar and known
causes against occult ones; For as in Law, the cause of Liberty against
Servitude is always favorable, I conceive likewise that in disputes of
Philosophy, the reasons which are drawn from known and familiar things, ought
to be favored against all those that consist in Sympathy, or in secret
influence, or in specific qualities, and yet no doubt we ought to have
recourse to these last: but it is only as people that are like to be drowned,
catch at thorns, and embrace them in that pressing need: that is to say, when
we find no other means to deliver our selves from a difficulty: for so long as
there is any other means of escaping it, if it be but any thing tolerable, this
must needs be very bad. But to come to the present business, Those which have
considered that the heat of the Month of August is greater then that of the
Months of June and July, although in them the Sun be nearer to us, and strikes
us with less oblique rays, and makes longer days, have thence inferred, that
this excess of heat proceeds from the influence of a Star which is called the
Dog, to which they have also given other ill qualities: for this (if we will
believe what they say of it) is the cause that in August the heat of the Sun is
more malignant, even when it is no greater then in the other Months of Summer;
that many creatures, and especially Dogs, do then run mad; and that it is then
more dangerous to go into the water; and that sicknesses are more frequent and
greater; and that men feel some particular weaknesses in all the parts of the
body. But all things well considered, it will be found, that there is nothing
in all this that should oblige us to attribute secret and particular virtues to
the Dog Star, and to leave the large field of known and ordinary causes; For
first I do not see why we should wonder, that the Sun is hotter in August then
in July, though it be true that in August he regards us somewhat more
obliquely, and that the days are shotter; the reason of it is, because the
Earth having been exceedingly dried by the former heats, is more apt to be
violently scorched, as we see that any dry thing set before a lesser fire,
receives a more violent heat, then a thing that is moist from a fire that is
much greater. That this reason is pertinent, there is an experience that
methinks proves it plainly enough; it is, that though at noon the Sun be nearer
to us, and cast more direct rays on us then he does any time after: yet those
that travel in Summer, do perceive a more violent heat two or three hours
afternoon, then at noon it self; the reason whereof is, that at noon the
moisture of the morning is not so well dried up, either on the grass, or the
air, or the earth, as it is a while after. This example is so put to the
subject I apply it to, the Question in hand, that there cannot be found any
difference in it, and it may serve well enough to prove what I say; for as
somebody has well observed, the images of the Four Seasons of the year, are to
be seen in one only Day, in which the Morning by its moisture represents the
Spring: Noon and sometime after is like the Summer Solstice, and the two
Months that follow it; the Evening to the Autum: and the arrival of Night to
the arrival of Winter. Now as this reason renders the heat of August greater,
it is manifest that withal it renders it necessarily more malign. But yet if
it be objected that it is often more malignant then that of other Months,
without being more violent: I answer, that this does not yet force us to fly to
a secret cause; for if it were necessary to attribute this particular malignity
to the influence of some Star, it would follow also, that we must give
influences to some other Star, for to render a reason of the particular
malignity of the Sun in March, which as having a very feeble hear, one would
think, should not be able to be hurtful, and to engender so easily rhumes and
catarrhs. But, to say the truth, these two several malignities are the effects
only of the course of the year, and of two contrary extremes; for the Sun in
March has something of malign and dangerous, by reason of the great humidity
it meets with in the earth, nay and in our brain, on which it acts so weakly,
that instead of dissolving, it only dilates it. And on the contrary, the Sun in
August is extraordinary hurtful through an excess of dryness which it finds in
the earth, after it has endured the heats of a great part of Summer, and in
our bodies, which the same heats have dried. It is this dryness which at this
time disposes beasts to madness, though indeed Dogs run mad not only in August,
but also very often in the Months of June and July, or September, which need
not for this borrow any thing of the Dog Star. From this excessive dryness
proceeds likewise the weakness which we feel then in our bodies, and the
disposition which this season puts us in, to diverse maladies; for every extreme
is always nigh an evil, and easily falls into one, or rather is one it self:
To conclude, if those that swim in this Month, do find that the waters are
more unwholsom then they were before, a man may say, it is because their more
pure and subtle parts have been exhaled by the precedent heats, and that what
remains is gross and impure. And I do not see that there is any thing in this,
we should need to attribute to the Dog Star, more then in the other things we
mentioned.

THE END.

