LONDONS LAMENTATIONS: OR, Some affectionate breathings forth on London's late
Ruins BY FIRE, Begun September. 2. 1666. about Two of the Clock in the Morning.

WITH Twenty Lessons to be learned by this severe Rod of the Fire.

Composed in Verse by R. P. a well-wisher to that famous and ancient City of
London.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock, to be sold by him at his Shop over against
the Church in Broad-street. 1666.

Some Breathings forth on London's late ruins by Fire.
COme call for such as skilful are to weep:
Tears cannot exceed, nor sighs be here too deep;
Nor though our heads of waters fountains were,
What might exhaust and draw them dry is here:
For of our City sin an heap has made, Isa. 25.2.

Our famous City yea in ruins laid,
And that by Fire which alate befell,
But such as Stories scarce can parallel.
Methinks it was some semblance of that Fire,
Which Sodom God consumed with in his ire.
Methinks I am as one even quite dismayed;
Methinks yet that should not be true that is said.
The former Fire was not quenched quite, Pestilence.

Before another Fire breaks forth with might:
The former that did much consume our men;
Another dreadful Fire comes then,
And that consumes our houses and our goods,
And nothing leaves but rubbish where they stood:
And thus out of one Fire go do we, Ezekiel. 15.7.

And with another Fire devoured we be.
Oh what distress* Oh what perplexity!
What fears and frights surpised all suddenly!
How did all faces gather paleness, and
All knees wax feeble, each hangs down his hands.
Hearts fail for fear, all full of consternation,
As if it was the general conflagration.
Men are amazed: the Engin^s to those flames
Are but a s^o^^ nor waters can them tame;
But still they rage and roar yea run along
With a furious fiercenese as they first begun.
What Adamantine (...) could but relent
To hear what dismal cries and shrieks up went;
Such as even pierct the Heavens, yea, and might make
The very Earths Foundations for to shake.
Some cry, My children, Oh are they secure?
And are none left in the house still are you sure?
Others, my Father, some, my Mother cry;
Another says, he cannot his wife espy.
One cries, come help, O let us get out this chest;
Another cries, first get out this, as best;
Another cries, Oh help to save my Plate;
Another calls, a Cart at any rate;
A third, he comes and says, it is too late,
You cannot for rubbish pass unto the Gate:
Oh cries another, I am quite undone;
To help to save my goods, I can get none.
Thus all are in an hurry, and some take
From others straits advantage, gain to make.
The Judgment is so sore, so far extends,
That none are able it to comprehend:
Something thereof at present we do see,
And every day will more appear to be.
Our Body Politick's wounded at heart,
And all the Members, each do feel the smart.
The Mother of our Israel is undone,
And all her Daughters languish every one.
The very Fountain of our Trade's drawn dry,
And all her Rivulets exhaust do lie.
Oh what a change a few days here have made!
How soon when these things flourish do they fade!
How solitary does that City sit, ( Lam. 1.1.)

Which so much people had alate in it!
But as a Widow she is now become,
Her Glory stained, and all her beauty gone,
It is departed, and she is so overthrown,
That where her streets were scarce it can be known:
Her ways do mourn, her Gates are sunk, and she
Has made her dwellers elsewhere seek to be.
How many lately rich are now made poor?
How many empty which alate had store?
How many harbourless which houses had?
How many that were joyous now are sad?
How many that to others succor gave,
Have need themselves now succor for to have?
How many late at ease are now perplexed,
Waiting what dismal things may follow next,
Fearing least these their sorrows but begin,
And are still soarer things but ushering in.
Oh London, glorious things were spoken of thee,
But oh what sad things now reported be!
But what do words to such a devastation,
That does so far exceed even all relation?
Such as go up and do behold it, see
Far more than e're they heard it for to be.
Come now Jehovahs works behold, and see
What desolations he has made to be! ( Ps. 46.8.)

Such as amaze, and even astonish; and
These made in the Mother City of our Land,
Yea, that was chief among the Nations that
Among the Provinces as Princess sat.
But see how on a sudden wondrously
She is come down, and now in dust does lie:
The Lord has brought down them that dwelt on high,
The lofty City low has made to lie; ( Isa. 26.5, 6.)

Yea he has laid it low, even to the ground,
And now with very dust its equal found,
So that the foot may now it tread upon,
The foot of the poor, the steps of the needy one.
Now as the Lord his work has done, even so
Our work likewise let us now also do.
Often warned we were before, but we took none;
O that by this now warned might be each one,
And let these losses not be lost in vain,
Nor let them be but turned into gain;
Out of the Eater let there come forth meet.
And out o'th strong some sweetness let us get.
God would us teach by that which he has done.
And several lessons learn would have each one;
Some of those lessons here behold and see,
And lets be sure them well take out do we.

That such a Fire amongst us kindled has,
And how exceedingly we him incenc't,
That by no means no sooner could be quenched.
The Fire indeed it was exceeding sore,
But what it spoke, Gods great displeasure, more.

And under it abas'd and humble be.

Who makes such dismal desolation!
And in thy works how terrible art thou,
S^y unto God, as we have seen thee now!
Oh of thine anger who the power does know!
According to thy fear thy wrath is so. Psa. 66 3, 5. Psalm. 90.11. Psalm. 76.7.

O thou! even thou art to be feared, and
Who when thou art angry in thy sight can stand?

For heavier things by far our sins did cry.
Less than our sins deserved punished are we;
Our houses, not our selves, consumed be.
The City's burnt, the Suburbs are not so,
The Daughters yet do stand, though Mother low.

For what a day may bring forth who can say? Prove. 27.1.


Which them did carry on, and them begin.

All things are that we here possess below.

One therefore that is to come let us seek elsewhere, Heb. 13.14. Chap. 11.10.

A City which foundations has, and's said
To be by God himself both built and made.

Where neither loss nor desolations are.
Let God himself, Christ, Grace, our treasures be,
And then our treasures safe in Heaven have we.
As a forerunner, by this Fire we
May of that conflagration minded be,
When the earth and all things that therein be
Shall suddenly be burnt up utterly. 3 ^ct 3 10.

What manner then of persons ought we be
In all holy converse and piety;
That when the Heavens and Earth dissolved shall be
New heavens and new earth expect may we;
And let our care, looking for such things, be
Of him in peace without spot found to be.
That London is not spared, let all then see
Impartial in his Judgments God to be.
And London not escaping, that in sin
None that go on escape shall punishing.
Our City, houses, and estates lie low,
And now our hearts let them be low also;
Yea, let our sins and lusts be brought down low,
That have our City brought for to be so.
Men's works even with the dust we levelled see:
The devils works destroyed let also be;
Let them also come down, no longer stand,
Which threaten further ruin to our land.
This Fire though so fierce, yet quenched we see;
O dread the Fire that never quenched shall be!
But is eternal, where all cast shall be
That still go on to do iniquity. Mat. 13.40.

These desolations so behold do we,
As yet we pity those on whom they be,
And so as with their tears a part we bear,
And see that we for them lift up a prayer;
Yea, so their desolations let us see,
That succor and relief afford them we.
With what thou have do good without delay,
For all thou have may soon be swept away.
God for our house and portion let us assure,
And then our house and portion shall endure.
Let all our springs in the Fountain be, and we
When brooks and cisterns fail refresht shall be.
The main use.
Let by this Fire be purged iniquity,
And sin to take away, the fruit let be.
Let not the Lord so sorely smite in vain;
But now forthwith to him let us turn again,
From whom we have revolted, and amend,
Or certain ruin us will next attend.
Let not our sins a snare still to us be,
Except we mean all to consumed be.
These things are sad, but if in sin we shall
Persist, yet heavier things will on us fall;
And this will be to sin with a high hand,
And on such God will set a heavy brand,
As once on Ahaz, this is he or she
That still did add to their iniquity.
To those in the Suburbs and others yet escaped
You that are near the City, and yet spared,
And with what others ruined were are scared,
Make others case your own, to them be kind,
Or judgment without mercy you will find;
Do not affliction to the afflicted add,
Poor hearts so heavy do not make more sad;
Than which I know no more provoking thing,
Nor likelyer heavier things on us to bring.
Do not your selves less sinners think to be
Than those whom now so desolate you see.
Be warned, with speed repent, or be you sure,
Your sins will heavier things to you procure;
And though you have escapt the Fire past,
Into a far worse Fire they will you cast.
Conclusion.
Lord sanctified let this sad stroke be,
And by it every one let us bettered be;
That we repenting, thou may not go on,
To make an utter devastation.
Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
Licensed according to Order.


