Heart-sick, Wounded England and Ireland Healed and Saved, Now, not too Good
News to be True, BY The Appearance of an Old Man, a STATE-PHYSITIAN,
Discovering all (or at least, very many) of its Epidemical Diseases, by
Prescribing and Applying, Not Hurtful, Poisonous, Dear, Foreign, French,
Fraudulent DRUGS, But Wholesome, Sound, Cheap, Faithful, Domestic, ENGLISH
SIMPLES.
Containing Certain PROPOSALS, Viz. 1. The Propagation of the GOSPEL. 2. The
Ruin and Suppression of Sin, Superstition, and Popery. 3. The Advancement of
Piety, Virtue, and Integrity. 4. The Resurrection and Revival of all, or most
Lawful TRADES, especially those Two great Ones, HVSBANDRY and WEAVING.


Wherein a Way is Showed; 1. How all the Poor of England may be set on Work,
the Parishes Eased, and the Poor more Comfortably Provided for than Ever. 2.
How Dearness of Provision, Scarcity, especially a FAMINE in England, may be
prevented for Ever. 3. How Ill Husbandry, Idleness, and Poverty, may be
prevented for Ever. 4. How all the Lands in England may be far better Improved
for Ever. 5. How the KING'S REVENUE may be Increased many Thousands per Annum,
and yet every Individual Housekeeper in England made Richer Five Shillings per
pound, in the Use of one Commodity every Year, for ever. 6. The Native
Commodities of England Advanced, and yet the Price of all manner Necessary
Provision for the Life of Man far Cheaper, Viz. Beef at a Penny, Mutton and
Pork at one Penny halfpenny per Pound, in the Dearest Places of England, even
London, for Ever. 7. The preventing of Breaking any more Persons in England,
either out of Knavery or Necessity, for Ever. 8. The preventing any more
Rebellions in Ireland by the Irish, against the Government of England, for
Ever. 9. The Undermining of our English Trade, and unlawful Exporting our
Native Commodities by Foreigners out of England, for Ever. 10. The making
England a Rich, Fruitful, Plentiful, and Powerful Country, preventing any more
Foreign Invasion, and Enabling the King of England to give Laws (especially by
Sea) to the Universe. 11. The Numbers of Poor wonderfully Lessened, and the
Swarms of Vermin that now live by Thieving and Cheating, Banished for Ever.
12. The Conversations of Men Inspected, and yet their Hearts in Love United.
Lastly, The Groans and Sighs of Poor, Necessitous, and Half-starved Wives and
Children, put to an End in England for Ever; with many other Great Blessings
coming on the Nation, too Numerous here to be Incerted: Plainly Demonstrated by
those three Grand Teachers of Men and Christians, and Experience.


1. By One who is by Birth, a Gentleman. 2. By Country, Oxfordshire. 3. By
Trade, a Sword-Cutler of London. 4. By Habitation, a Parishioner of St. Leonard
Shorditch, in Long-Alley, next the Ball in Cross-Dagger Court:
Called, JEREMIAH PEISLEY.

Is there no Balm in Giliad? Is there no Physician there? Why then is not the
Daughter of England Healed? I would have Healed them, and they would not be
Healed. There was a Poor Man Saved a Great City, but no Man remembered that Poor
Man. Can we find such a One as this is, in whom the Spirit of God is? Forasmuch
as God has showed three all this, therefore, etc.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1689.


