THE Storehouse of Physical Practice: Being a General TREATISE OF THE Causes
and Signs OF ALL DISEASES AFFLICTING Human Bodies. TOGETHER With the Shortest,
Plainest and Safest way of Curing them, by Method, Medicine and Diet. To which
is added, for the Benefit of Young Practisers, several choice Forms of
Medicines used by the London Physicians. By JOHN PECHEY, of the College of
Physicians in London.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCXCV.

HONOR VIRTUTIS PRAEMIUM


THE PREFACE.
I Believe nothing has so much obstructed the Improvement of the Art of
Physic, as the late unaccountable Humor of Romancing on the Nature and the
Causes of Diseases: For in many of our modern Authors, the greatest part of the
Paper is wasted about flourishing a Whimsoe, to make it pass for a probable
Supposition (and hence the noble Art is termed conjectural) so that in some of
them scarce a Page can be spared for the Cure, that which is the main of the
Business being huddled up or touched on by the by. Whereas Reason and Argument
are not the true Tests of Physic, nor indeed of any thing else, when
Experience, the great Baffler of Speculation, can determine the Matter. And,
which is strange, this unkind usage of the Art is privileged by a sort of Men,
who are set apart for the well ordering of Physic; and these Broachers of
Whimsies, dignified with the Titles of Philosophers and Virtuoso's.

From what has been said, the following plain Practice must expect but cold
Entertainment with the speculative Physician; but such as mind and study
Practice, will, I question not, patronize the Undertaking; when, upon the
perusal, they find in this One Treatise, the Sum and Substance of several
voluminous Authors; it being a Collection of such Methods and Medicines, as I
thought best and most useful: But it is chiefly designed for young Practisers,
and may serve as their Vade Mecum, where they may readily turn to any Disease,
and at once view the Diagnosticks and Cure.

And here it may not be improper to add briefly, for the Benefit of young
Physicians, some Directions relating to Study and Practice. And, first, spend
not too much time upon Anatomy, Chemistry and Herbs; for though the knowledge of
these is not only ornamental but useful too, yet if you consume the greatest
part of your time in these Preliminaries, you will be as foppish as those young
Sparks that give themselves up to Dancing and Fiddling, and neglect Arms and
History, the true Accomplishments of a Gentleman: But above all, be not
inveigled with an Hypothesis, the bane of Art.

In the next place, associate with such practical Physicians as make their own
Medicines, and assist in the making of Medicines, and see their Practice; for
by this means (such being usually called in at the beginning of the Disease)
you may observe a whole process of Cure; whereas those that only prescribe, are
seldom sent for till the Disease is incurable.

Moreover, add Reading to Practice, and every day let some time be allotted for
Study; and so you will be confirmed, and in a great measure freed from those
anxious and vexatious Thoughts, that continually afflict Physicians when they
are not encouraged and strengthened by the assistance of good Authors. Is it
not, therefore, most advisable to abate something of the gayity of Youth, and
to apply, in time, to serious Matters, that thereby you may procure a lasting
Peace with your Selves, and a comfortable Repose for Age? For though many
pleasant Surprises daily occur in Youth, that make the World, for a time, a
very agreeable Habitation, yet the continual Reflections on the Follies of it,
in our fading Years, render the Mind sour and uneasy.

To conclude, I shall add one short Note, which I desire all young Physicians
to observe well, viz. That you have a regard to the predominant Symptom; for in
many Cases you must for a time desist from the method of curing the Original
Disease, and immediately bend all your force against the urgent Symptom;
otherwise the Patient will be destroyed before the Disease can be cured.

From the Angel and Crown in Bazing-lane, London. January the 22d, 1694/5.
THE INDEX.
A.
ABscess of the Stomach, 215 After-pains, 421 Agues, 499 Albugo, 46 Anasarca,
265 Apoplexy, 14 Appetite, lost, 188 Asthma, 127
B.
BArrenness, 396 Belching, 193 Bladders in the Eye, 59 Bladder inflamed, 288
Bleeding at Nose, 100
C.
CAncer of the Womb, 384 Cancer of the Cornea, 61 Catalepsis, 18 Carus, 14
Catarrh, 28 Celiac passion, 240 Childrens Convulsions, 9 Childrens Diseases,
429 Dead Child, 415 Childbed Purgations suppressed, 419 Cholera morbus, 205
Cholic, 222 Cholic, bilious, 229 Cholic hysteric, 233 Clorosis, 314 Coma, 14
Consumption, 152 Convulsion, 25 Coryza, 98 Costiveness, 238 Courses, stopped, 316
Courses, immoderate, 355
D.
DEafness, 72 Diabetes, 302 Dilatation of the Pupil, 43 Diarrhaea, 242 Diseases
of the glassy Humor, 37 Diseases of the christalline Humor, 38 Diseases of
the watery Humor, 39 Acute Diseases in Childbed, 425 Dropsy, 257 Dropsy of
the Womb, 388 Dysury, 311
E.
EArs, Noise in them, 78 Ears, Pain in them, 79 Ears, Things coming out of
them, 88 Empy^ma, 149 Encan^his, 67 Epiphora, 68
F.
FAinting, 179 Falling Sickness, 6 Falling of the Wea, 64 Fever, pestilential,
464 Fever, continual, 482 Fever, scarlet, 493 Fevers of Children, 494 Fevers,
intermitting, 502 Fistula Lachrimalis, 64 Flux, bloody, 245 Flux of the
Hemorrhoids immoderate, 254 Forms of Medicines, 527
G.
GIddiness, 4 Gout, 451 Green Sickness, 314 Gums, ulcerated, 119 Gums,
bleeding, 120 Gutta serena, 32
H.
Headache, 30 Heart, trembling of it, 183 Hicops, 197 Hypochondriack Diseases,
358 Hysteric Diseases, ibib
I.
JAundice, 255 Jaws, ulcerated, 121 Inflammation of the Tongue, 103 Inflammation
of the Stomach, 215 Inflation of the Womb, 388 Iliac passion, 236 Incontinence
of Urine, 303 Itch, 522
L.
Labor, hard, 410 Lethargy, 14 Looseness, 242 Lyentery, 240
M.
MAdness, 3 Matter collected under the Cornea, 58 Measles, 478 Miscarriage, 401
Mouth, ulcerated, 121
N.
NArrowness of the Pupil, 46 Nauseousness, 193 Nephritic pain, 284 Nightmare,
12 Nostrills, Ill scent in them. 97 Nurse, choice of one, 429
O.
OPthalmia, 49 Over-purging, 504 Ozaena, 90
P.
PAlpitation of the Heart, 183 Palsy, 19 Palsy of the Tongue, 109
Peripneumonia, 136 Bastard Peripneumonia, 146 Frenzy, 1 Piles, 254 Piles,
painful, ibid Pimples in the Face, 522 Plague, 464 Pleurisy, 130 Polypus, 92
Small Pox, 467 French Pox, 505
Q.
QUinsie, 126
R.
RAnula under the Tongue, 105 Reins inflamed, 288 Rheumatism, 461 Rickets, 440
Rhyas, 67 Rupture of the Cornea, 63
S.
SArcoma, 92 Schirrhus of the Womb, 381 Scurvy, 268 Secundine retained, 416
Smelling, lost, 95 Sneezing, 99 Spitting of Blood, 100 Spots in the Eyes, 46
Spots in the Face, 522 Stomach-pain, 207 Stone in the Kidneys, 284 Stone in the
Bladder, 286 Stranguary, 307 Suffusion, 39 Swooning, 179
T.
TAsting, diminished, 107 Teeth, black, 117 Tenesmus, 249 Timpany, 262
Trembling, 28 Tumors of the Tongue, 103
U.
ULcers of the Tunicks of the Eye, 60 Ulcers of the Nostrils, 90 Ulcers of the
Stomach, 215 Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder, 295 Unguis Oculorum, 71 Vomiting,
193 Urine, suppressed, 307 Urine, hot, 311 Urine, bloody, 292 Uvula, relaxed,
124
W.
WEakness, 187 Whites, 357 Womb, inflamed, 371 Womb, ulcerated, 375 Womb,
mortified, 387 Womb, falling, 395 Worms, 252
THE STOREHOUSE OF Physical Practice.
Diseases of the HEAD.
CHAP. I. Of a Frenzy.
A Frenzy, in Latin, Phrenitis, is twofold, True and Spurious. A true
Frenzy is an inflammation of the Brain and Membranes of it, with a perpetual
Delirium, and a continual Acute Fever. A Bastard Frenzy proceeds from an hot
intemperies communicated to the Brain from the whole Body; as in Burning
Fevers, or from the inflammation of some particular part, as of the Liver,
Lungs, and especially the Diaphragm.

The Causes of a true Frenzy proceed from Choleric Blood extravasated.

The Signs of an approaching Frenzy, are Watchings, disturbed Sleep,
immoderate Speech, Urine first Thick, then Thin and Clear; Heat and Pain in the
Head, and the like.

A Frenzy is known by perpetual Raving, restless Watching, and by drawing the
Breath deep, and seldom, and the Sick does not call for Drink; though there are
great and apparent causes of Thirst; the Pulse is small, frequent, and quick;
the Fever is continual, and the Tongue black, yellow or rough.

A Frenzy is generally deadly, because the Noble Parts are generally
affected: But there is most hopes of Recovery when they Laugh, and when all the
symptoms are moderate, and when the Strength is good; and if after the Disease
is at height, some evacuation happens, as by Sweat, Bleeding at the Nose, or a
Looseness: The following Signs show it to be deadly, trembling of the Hands and
Tongue, gnashing of the Teeth, Convulsion, and a shaking at the beginning of
it, catching of the Clothes, black Blood droping from the Nose, white Stools,
and a pale Urine.

CVRE. The Blood flowing to the Head must be evacuated, repelled, intercepted,
and a revulsion of it must be made. That which is already flown in must be
evacuated and discussed; the intemperies of the part must be corrected, and the
strength of it, and of the whole Body must be preserved. All these things may
be performed by the following remedies: But first of all, and at any time of
the day, Bleeding must be used.

If it be occasioned by a suppression of the Lochia, or of the Courses* or of
the Hemorrhoids, the Vein called Saphena must be opened in the Foot; afterward
you must open a Vein in the Arm, to evacuate the Blood that is put off upon the
Head, Bleeding is to be repeated twice, thrice, or more, according to the
height of the Disease, and the Age, and Strength of the Patient.

Note in opening of the Vein, the Orifice must be small; for otherwise the
restlesness of the Sick will force the Blood out, and so make it join the
sooner; you may apply a Plaster to it made of Aloes, the White of an Egg, and
Hares Down.

After Bleeding you must endeavor to procure Sleep, by applying cooling things
to the Forehead and Temples, and Anodine Medicines must be given inwardly.

Take of Lettice and Purslain Water each one Ounce, of Diacodium half an Ounce,
or six Drams, of Syrup of Lemons half an Ounce, make a Draught to be taken at
Bedtime.

The Sick may take often of the following Julep.

Take of the Waters of Lettice, Purslain, Roses, red Poppies each three Ounces,
Syrup of Violets and Pomgranats each one Ounce and an half, of Sal prunella
three Drams, make a Julep. The Dose is three or four spoonfuls at a time, four
or five times a day.

When Bleeding cannot be used, Cupping-glasses must be applied, with deep
Scarification, first to the lower Parts, viz. the Thighs, etc. then to the
upper Parts, viz. to the Shoulders, etc. And afterward you may apply them
without Scarification to the Legs and other parts: Blisters may be also
conveniently applied to the Shoulders and Arms, and a cooling Glyster must be
daily injected. For instance.

Take of the common decoction for Glysters one Pint; dissolve in it one Ounce
of Lenitive Electuary, and four Ounces of Brown Sugar; make a Glyster.

Note, That the quantity of the Glyster must be varied, according to the Age
and Bigness of the Patient.

Bleeding in the Nose, by pricking often with a Lancet, the Nostrils where the
Hairs grow, does much good; and also Leeches applied behind the Ears, to the
Nostrils and Forehead.

CHAP. II. Of Madness.
MAdness, in Latin, Mania. This Disease does not kill of it self, yet it is
very difficult to Cure, especially if it be hereditary.

CVRE. Bleeding, Vomiting, and strong Purges are to be frequently used; with
which, and severe Discipline, it is frequently Cured: But if the Disease be
mild, kind words and good usage, and gentle Physic does oftentimes the
business: But in most Bleeding must be used to a great quantity in the
beginning of the Disease, sometimes in the Arm, and sometimes in the Jugular
Vein, in the Forehead, Foot, or drawn from the Hemorrhoidal Veins by Leeches*
Vomits do also a great deal of good: But such as are Chemical are best, because
they work most powerfully, and the Sick may be easily cheated with them.

Take of Sulphur of Antimony eight or ten grains, of cream of Tartar half a
Scruple; mix them and give it in a spoonful of Broth, or with Bread: Repeat
this Vomit once in four days.

Strong Purges are also frequently used: As,

Take of extract of black Hellebore, and Calamelanos each one Scruple, mix
them, and make a Bolus to be taken in the Morning.

Betwixt the Evacuations, such things may be used as attemperate the Blood, if
the Sick will take them, as Steel-waters, Whey, and the like.

For preservation, such People as are subject to Madness, should Purge and
Bleed Spring and Fall.

CHAP. III. Of Giddiness.
GIddiness, in Latin, Vertigo. There are two sorts of it; in one the Sight is
taken away; in the other it is not. The Cause of Giddiness is a circumvolution
of the Spirits. An idiopathick Giddiness is known by Pains, and dullness in the
Head, a dullness of the Sight, noise in the Ears, Deafness, and the like. The
peccant Matter is discovered by the following Signs; dullness of the outward and
inward Senses, Sloth, much Sleep, much Spitting, want of Appetite, and of
Thirst; a white and crude Urine show that Phlegm abounds; watching, anger,
activity of Body, thirst, a quick Pulse, thin and yellow Urine, signify that
Choler is peccant; fear, sadness, disturbed thoughts, long watching, dreadful
Dreams, sour belchings, and the like, signify Melancholy abounds: The bigness
and stiffness of the Veins, a florid Countenance, and heat of the Face, beating
of the Temples, dullness of the Head, weariness, or a red and thick Urine, and
sometimes a thin, when there is a translation to the Head, signify that Blood
abounds.

A sympathetick Giddiness is known by the absence of the Symptoms that proceed
from the Head, and when there is no apparent Disease in the Brain.

Want of Appetite, nauciousness, sour Belching, Pain, or Wind in the Stomach,
signify that it proceeds from the Stomach; that a Giddiness proceeds from the
Liver, Spleen, or Womb, is known by the following Signs: When it proceeds from
the Spleen there are frequent and large evacuations of Wind, inflation of the
Belly, sour Belchings, and the like; when from the Womb, there is stopage of
the Courses, or Hysteric Fits.

A Giddiness that is recent, and seldom invades, and that which is occasioned
by external Causes is light, and easily Cured; that which is inveterate and
frequent, most commonly ends in the Falling Sickness, or Apoplexy.

CVRE. The Cure is much the same with the Falling Sickness: which see in the
Chapter of the Falling Sickness: But when it is small it does not need so large
a course of Physic as is requisite for the Cure of the Falling Sickness. But
those things will be sufficient which I shall here set down.

First therefore, if Blood abounds, inject a pretty sharp Glyster, and
afterward Bleed; then Purge with the following Pills.

Take of the fetid Pills two Scruples, of Resin of Jalap five grains, with a
sufficient quantity of Galbanum dissolved in Briony Water; make seven Pills to
be taken in the Morning; repeat them Thrice.

But if the Patient cannot take Pills, the following Purging Potion may be
given instead of them.

Take of Gerions decoction six Ounces, boil in it of the Fibers of black
Hellebore, and of Agarick each one Dram and an half; strain it, and add an
Ounce of the Syrup of Roses Solutive, and two Drams of Compound Briony Water.
Make a Potion.

Afterward let the Patient use the following Sneesing Powder.

Take of the Leaves of Marjoram, Sage, Rosemary dried, each half a Dram, of the
Roots of Pellitory of Spain and white Hellebore each one Scruple, of Musk three
Grains; make a Powder.

Cupping-glasses with and without Scarification, frictions of the extreme
parts, Bleeding from the Hemorrhoidal Veins may be used to cause revulsion.
Blisters are also of use for derivation. Afterward use such things as are
proper to strengthen the Head, which you will find in the Chapter of an
Epilepsie. The Conserves of the Flowers of Marrygolds is counted by some a
Specific for Giddiness.

CHAP. IV. Of the Falling Sickness.
THE Falling Sickness, in Latin, Epilepsia, is an universal and violent
Convulsion; the Fit most commonly comes of a sudden, and precipitates in the
twinkling of an Eye to the Earth, and deprives a Man of Sense and
Understanding; for they seem rather forcibly thrown down, than to fall; and
that part which first comes to the Ground, is most commonly bruised or wounded.
They gnash with their Teeth, foam at the Mouth, and often beat their Heads
against the Ground; their Arms and Legs either become rigid, or tossed here or
there. Some beat their Breasts violently, and some cast their Bodies
impetuously hither and thither: But in most the Belly swells much. After some
time, sometimes sooner, sometimes longer, the symptoms suddenly cease, as if
the Tragedy were just ended, and then the Sick come to themselves again, and
are sensible; but there remains after the Fit is gone off a pain in the Head,
and a dullness in their Senses, and often a Giddiness.

The Fits are sometimes wont to come at set times of the day, month, or year;
but most commonly according to the greater turns of the year, or according to
the Conjunctions, or opposite Aspects of the Moon, or Sun, they return more
certainly, and afflict more violently; and sometimes the Fits are uncertain,
and come as occasion is offered, and according to the variety of evident
Causes. Sometimes they are gentle, sometimes violent; sometimes, though rarely,
some Signs forewarn the Epileptick person of a Fit before he falls, as a
dullness of the Head; sparkling of Fire before the Eyes, Noise in the Ears, and
the like.

Sometimes a Convulsion in some outward part, as in the Arm, or in the Leg, or
in the Back, or in the Hypochondres, precedes, which rising from thence like a
cold Air toward the Head, occasions the Fit.

CVRE. You must begin with Purging; but if the Sick bear Vomiting well, a Vomit
must be first given, and must be repeated for several months, four days before
the Full Moon. Wine of Squills mixed with fresh Oil of Sweet Almonds; or half a
Scruple or a Scruple of Salt of Vitriol may be given to Infants: But for grown
People, and such as are of a strong Constitution, the following forms of
Medicines may be prescribed.

Take of Crocus Metallorum, or of Mercurius Vitae four or six grains, Mercurius
dulcis fifteen Grains, or a Scruple, grind them together upon a Stone, mix them
with the Pap of a roasted Apple, or Conserve of Borrage; make a Bolus.

Or give half an Ounce, one Ounce, or one Ounce and an half of the infusion of
Crocus Metallorum, or of Mercurius Vitae, made in Spanish Wine, according to
the Strength of the Sick: Or,

Take of Emetick Tartar four or six grains.

They that are of a weak Constitution may take a Scruple or half a Dram of Salt
of Vitriol, and half an hour after let them drink several Pints of
Posset Drink; and then with a Feather, or with the Finger, let them provoke
themselves to Vomit often. The next day after the Vomit, unless any thing
forbid, draw Blood from the Arm, or by the Sucking of Leeches from the
Hemorrhoidal Veins; and the next day after Bleeding, give a Purging Medicine,
which afterward must be constantly repeated four days before the New Moon.

Take of Rosin of Jalap half a Scruple, of Mercurius dulcis one Scruple, of
Castor three Grains, of Conserve of the Flowers of Peony one Dram, make a Bolus
to be taken in the Morning: Or,

Take of the Fibers of black Hellebore infused in Vinegar, dried and powdered
half a Dram, of Ginger half a Scruple, of Salt of Wormwood twelve Grains, of
Oil of Ambar two drops; make a Powder, give it in the Pulp of a roasted Apple
in the Morning.

Of the days the Sick does not Purge, especially at the Seasons of the Moon,
give Morning and Evening specific Remedies.

Take of the Roots of male Peony dried and poudered, one, two, or three Drams;
give it twice a day in the following tincture, at eight in the Morning, and at
four in the Afternoon.

Take of the Leaves of Misleto of the Oak two Drams, of the Roots of Peony cut,
half an Ounce, of Castor one Dram; put them into a Glass, and pour upon them,
of Bettony Water, or of simple Peony Water, and of White Wine each a Pint, of
Salt of Misleto of the Oak, or of Common Salt two Drams: Digest them in a close
Vessel in the heat of Sand for two days. Give three Ounces with a Dose of the
Powder above prescribed.

At the same time make a Necklace with Peony Roots sliced, and hang it about
the Neck, and the Roots fried or boiled till they are soft, may be eat daily
with the Meat.

Take of Man's Skull prepared one Ounce, of misleto of the Oak, factitious
Cinnabar, and of Elk's Hoof, each half an Ounce. Dose, half a Scruple, or one
Scruple.

Some find benefit by Shaving the Head, and by applying to the forepart of it a
Plaster.

Take of the Roots and Seeds of Peony, of Castor, of Misleto of the Oak, and of
Man's Skull finely powdered, each one Dram, of the Plaster of Bettony two
Ounces, of Carrana, Tacamahaca, each two Drams, of Balsam Copaiba a sufficient
quantity: make a Plaster spread on Leather, and apply it to the Sutures of the
Head.

Anoint the Temples and Nostrils often with Oil of Ambar, either by it self, or
mixed with Oil of Copaiba, Sneesing Powders, and Apophlegmatisms must be used
every Morning.

Take of white Hellebore one ounce, of Castor and Euphorbium each half a dram,
of sweet Marjoram, and the Leaves of Rue each two drams, make a Powder, which
you may dissolve with Mustard in a decoction of Sage, or hyssop, and with it
wash and gargle the Mouth.

Glysters may be used daily upon occasion. It Is said that six or eight Ounces
of the decoction of Gujacum taken twice a day, and the second decoction of it
used for ordinary drink, as is used in the French Pox, will Cure this Disease.

CHAP. V. Of Childrens Convulsions.
CHildrens Convulsions, in Latin, Epilepsia puerorum, are so frequent, that it
is almost the only Species of Convulsions.

They are chiefly subject to them in the first Month, and at the time they
breed Teeth; but they also happen at other times, and proceed from other causes
in such are disposed to them: Sometimes they do not come presently after the
Birth, but lie hid until the breeding of Teeth, or not till a great while
after, and take their rise from other evident Causes either Internal or
External; as from an Unhealthy or Big-bellied Nurse, from Milk coagulated or
corrupted in the Stomach, from a Feverish Disposition, from Ulcers or Scabs of
the Head, or of other Parts suddenly disappearing; from changes of the Air, or
from the Conjunction or opposite Aspects of the Sun and Moon.

We must endeavor to prevent these Convulsions in Children and Infants, or to
Cure them when they are come; for if the former Children of the same Parents
have been subject to Convulsive Fits, this Disease ought to be prevented, by
the early use of Remedies, in such as are born after: To this end it is
customary to give to newborn Babes, as soon as they begin to breath, some
Medicine proper for Convulsions: Some, upon this occasion, give some drops of
pure Honey; others a Spoonful of Canary-wine sweetened with Sugar, or Oil of
Almonds fresh drawn; others give a drop of Oil of Ambar, or half a Spoonful of
Epileptick water. Besides these things used at first, which certainly do good,
some other Remedies ought to be administered; for instance, give a Spoonful
twice a day of the following Liquor:

Take of the Waters of Black Cherries and Rue, each one Ounce and a half; of
Langius's Antiepilectick Water, one Ounce; of Syrup of Coral, six Drams; of
prepared Pearl, fifteen Grains; mingle them in a Viol.

The third or fourth day after the Birth, make an Issue in the Neck, and if the
Countenance be florid, evacuate by bleeding, an Ounce and an half or two Ounces
of Blood from the Jugular Veins, but take care that too much Blood do not flow
out in sleep; rub gently the Temples with the following Linement.

Take of Oil of Nutmegs by expression two Drams, of Balsam of Copaiba three
Drams, of Ambar one Scruple, mix them.

Hang round the Neck the Roots and Seeds of Male-peony, and a little Elks hoof
sewed up in a Rag: Moreover Medicines proper for Convulsions must be given
daily to the Nurse.

Let her take Morning and Evening a Draught of Whey, wherein the Roots of
Male-peony, or the Seeds of Sweet Fennel have been boiled.

Take of the Conserves of the flowers of Bettony, Male-peony, and Rosemary
flowers, each two Ounces; of the Powders of the Roots and Flowers of
Male-peony, each two Drams; of red Coral prepared, and white Ambar, each one
Dram; of the Roots of Angelica and Zodoary prepared, each half a Dram; with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Peony, make an Electuary. Let her take the
quantity of a Nutmeg Morning and Evening, and be very orderly in her Diet.

But if any Infant be actually seized with Convulsions, because the Issue does
not run well, you must apply a Blister to the Neck or behind the Ears; and if
the Infant be not of a cold Constitution, Blood must be drawn from the Jugular
Veins by Leeches, and Linements must be used to the Temples, Nostrils and Neck,
and to the Soles of the Feet; and Glisters which empty the Belly plentifully
must be injected: Moreover, often in a day, namely every sixth or eighth hour,
Specific Remedies must be given.

Take of Oil of Copaiba, and of Castor, each two Drams; of Ambar half a Dram;
make a Linement.

Apply to the Soles of the Feet the Plaster, with Euphorbium spread on Leather.

Take of prepared Pearls, of the Powder de Gutteta, each one Dram, mingle them
for twelve Papers, whereof let him take one Morning and Evening in a Spoonful
of the following Julap, drinking after it one or two Spoonfuls.

Take of the Waters of Black Cherries, and of Lilly of the Valleys, each two
Ounces; of Fennel-water, and Compound Peony water, each two Drams; of Syrup of
red Poppies, six Drams.

Take of the Powder of the Seeds of Rue, of Castor, of Assafaetida, each a
sufficient quantity, mingle them and tie it up in a Rag, sprinkle it with
Vinegar, and put it often to the Nostrils.

Vntzerus commends much the Gall of a Sucking Kitlin, all the Juice being taken
out of the Bladder, and mixed with a little water of Lime-flowers, and given to
the Child: An excellent Physician lately told me, that he had known several
Children cured with this Remedy. When by reason of breeding Teeth difficultly,
Convulsions happen, this Symptom is Secondary and less Dangerous, and therefore
does not require the first and chief work of Healing; for sometimes we are more
Solicitous to ease the Pain, and take off the Feverish Disposition. And
therefore a thin and cooling Diet is ordered for the Eruption of the Teeth,
either by rubbing or cutting the Gums, and things that are anodine are applied
to the swelled and pained Parts; and here Glisters and Bleeding are often used;
and we ought to procure Sleep, and to qualify the Fury of the Blood; in the
mean while Temperate Medicines for Convulsions, and such as do the least stir
the Humors, are to be used, and Blisters, because they evacuate the Serum too
apt to be poured upon the Head, do often give relief.

When Children are seized with Convulsions, not presently after the Birth, or
upon breeding Teeth, but from other Occasions and Accidents; the cause, for the
most part of such, is either in the Head or in the Bowels; when the former is
suspected, as is wont to be known by the signs which show watery Humors heaped
up in the Brain, the Medicines above mentioned must be used: Moreover, for
those who bear Purging well, a Vomit or gentle Purge must be prescribed, Wine
and Oxymel of Squills, also Mercurius dulcis, Rubarb, and Rosin of Jalap are of
good use, when the cause of the Convulsions seems to be lodged in the Bowels,
or when Worms or sharp Humors in the Belly are the cause: For Worms, a Purge
of Rubarb, or of Mercurius dulcis, with the Rosin of Jalap must be given, and
the following Medicines are also of use.

Take of the Roots of Virginian Snake-weed powdered one Dram, of Coral calcined
till it is white half a Dram; make a Powder. The Dose is half a Scruple or a
Scruple twice a day for three days following, drinking upon it the Decoction of
the Roots of Grass.

Take of Hiera pitra, and of Venice-Treacle, each one Dram; make a Plaster for
the Belly.

If the Convulsions are thought to proceed from sharp Humors disturbing the
Bowels or Stomach, Purging upward and downward by turns is to be observed; to
this end a gentle Vomit of Wine of Squills, or Salt of Vitriol, is to be given.

Take of Syrup of Peony three Ounces, Salt of Vitriol two Scruples, of Compound
Lavender-water one Dram, mingle them, give a Spoonful three or four times in an
hour, till the Child has once Vomited or went to Stool once.

But if Evacuation downward seem most proper, give the Infusion of Rubarb, or
the Powder of it, or Syrup of Succory with Rubarb, or Syrup of Roses with
Agarick: And moreover Glisters are to be used frequently in this case, and
External Medicines are to be applied to the Belly.

Take of the leaves of Camomil cut small, two handfuls, put them into two Bags
made of fine Cloth or of Silk, which being dipped in hot Milk and pressed out,
are to be applied successively to the Belly.

CHAP. VI. Of the Nightmare or Incubus.
IT is commonly supposed by the ordinary sort of People* that this Disease is
occasioned by the Devil, or an Evil Spirit's lying upon their Stomachs, which
perhaps may be so sometimes; but it also comes from mere Natural Causes, as is
supposed, though what those are, or where the Morbisick Matter is placed, is
not known, when it is thought to come from Natural Causes, the Cure is to be
undertaken in the following manner, Bleeding and gentle Purging is first to be
used, and afterward things proper for the Head, as Powders of Ambar, Coral,
Pearls, the Roots of Male-peony, Dittany of Crete, Contra yerva, and other
things prescribed in the Chapter of the Apoplexy, and the like: But an orderly
Diet is first to be prescribed; windy Meats, and such as are hard of Digestion
are to be avoided, and Sleep must not be indulged after Eating or Study, and
large and late Suppers, and lying on the Back must be forbid.

Infants and Children are often troubled with this Disease, the sign whereof,
is their starting in their Sleep, and crying out violently; and after they have
had these Fits often they fall into Convulsions, wherefore a right Method of
Cure ought to be administered as soon as they seem to be disordered in their
Sleep: Inquiry must be made concerning the Milk they Suck, whether it be good
or not, and whether it agrees with their Stomachs; after they have Sucked
plentifully, they must not be suffered to sleep, the Nurse must use an orderly
Diet, and let her take also Morning and Evening a Dose of a Powder or Electuary
that is proper for the Head, drinking upon it a Draught of Posset Drink,
wherein the Leaves of Sage or Bettany, or the Roots or Seeds of Peony have been
boiled. Let the Infant take twice a day a Spoonful of Black-Cherry-water; let
an Issue be made in the Neck, and let it lie sometimes on one side, sometimes
on the other, and seldom or never upon the Back: And Coral, or the Seeds of
Male-peony being hanged about the Neck, or upon the Pit of the Stomach, may do
some good. When they start violently often in their Sleep, apply a Blister to
the Neck or behind the Ears. Moreover, Morning and Evening daily give half a
Scruple of the Powder de Gutteta in a Spoonful of Lime-flower-water.

CHAP. VI. Of Sleepy Diseases, Coma, Lethargy, Carus and Apoplexy.
THere are four sorts of Preternatural Sleep, Coma, Lethargy, Carus and
Apoplexy, which because for the most part they proceed from the same Causes,
and require the same Methods of Cure; therefore they shall be treated of
together in this Chapter.

The first and principal cause of these Diseases, is a Phlegmatic or Watery
Humor, contained in the Brain contrary to Nature.

Secondly, Sleepy Diseases are wont to be generated by Blood abounding in the
Brain, and from extravasated Blood stopping or oppressing the Ventricles of the
Brain, sleepy Disease, and especially an Apoplexy is sometimes occasioned.

Thirdly, It is certain that a Comatose Disease proceeds from a Tumor that
oppresses the Brain by its weight.

Fourthly, Immoderate Vapors carried to the Head, may be the cause of a
Sympathetick Coma.

Fifthly, From the immoderate use of Narcotick Medicines inwardly taken, so
deep a Sleep is occasioned, that many, by the imprudent use of Opium, have
slept their last.

That Sleepy Diseases are occasioned by Phlegmatic Humors stagnating in the
Brain, is known by a Phlegmatic Habit of Body, by old Age or Childhood, by a
cold or moist Season or Country, by the Suppression of the Excretion of Phlegm,
by the Mouth and Nostrils; and for that the Sick, before the coming of this
Disease, was afflicted with a Dullness of the Head, Dimness of Sight, and
Unaptness for Motion; and because in the Disease Phlegm flows from the Mouth and
Nostrils, or falling upon the Throat, is frequently swallowed down by the Sick.

That Blood produces a sleepy Disease is known by a Plethorick Disposition, by
Redness of the Face, and by a Pain in the Head foregoing this Disease: That the
Sympathetick Disease arises from Vapors elevated to the Brain, is known by the
absence of those Signs, which signify an Idiopathetick Disease, also by the
signs of the peculiar disorder of the Parts, from whence Vapors are transmitted
to the Brain.

A very thin Diet is to be ordered at the beginning of these Diseases, and when
the Fit is off, the Sick, to prevent a Relapse, must forbear all strong
Liquors, and be fed with Barley and Oat-meal Broths, or with Chicken Broth; and
sometimes, especially when he Purges, with Chickens, Lamb, and the like.

When a Physician is first called to a Patient, that is seized with a sleepy
Disease, he must endeavor by all means to rowse him, by offering Violence to
all his Senses; and therefore he must expose his Eyes to the Sunbeams, or to a
clear Light; his Ears must be filled with violent Noises and Clamours, and the
Sick must be sure to be called aloud by his own name; sharp things are to be
blown up his Nostrils; the Sense of Touching is to be revived by Frictions,
Vellications, plucking of the Hair, Ligatures, Squeesing of the Fingers
together, and the like; he must be presently Blooded if he has Strength; but
his Strength is not to be judged of by the present Circumstances, but by such
as he was in before the Disease invaded him. You must first Bleed in the Arm,
and then in the Jugular Vein, presently after give the following Vomit.

Take of the Blessed Wine one Ounce and an half, of Carduus water one Ounce, of
Spirit of Juniper Berries two drops; make a Vomit.

Inject two or three sharp Glisters in a day.

Take of the Carminative Decoction, with Bay Berries and Juniper Berries ten
Ounces, of the Electuary of Bay Berries one Ounce, of Vinum Benedictum three
Ounces, and of brown Sugar three Ounces, of Chemical Oil of Juniper ten drops;
mingle them, make a Glister.

If the Glister be not rendered in due time, provoke the Belly by a Suppository.

Take of Hiera picra half an Ounce, of Sal Gemma one Dram, of Honey a sufficient
quantity; make Suppositories.

The Spirit of Sal Armoniack must be held to the Nostrils, and things of all
kinds that cause Revulsion must be used, not only Frictions and Ligatures, but
also Cupping-glasses set on the Back, Shoulders, Arms and Thighs: But in an
Apoplexy you must not apply Cupping-glasses to the Back, or to the
Hypochonders, least the Muscles of the Breast and Belly should be contracted,
and so Respiration more hindered: Cupping-glasses applied to the Head are
counted very proper; apply a Blistering Plaster with Euphorbium to the Neck:
Some, according to the Custom of the Ancients, hold a red-hot Drying Pan to the
Head, at such a distance as it may burn the Hair but not the Skin.

Take of the Waters of Rue, Balm and Black-Cherries, each three Ounces; of
Compound Peony water, and of Compound Syrup of Peony, each one Ounce and a
half; of Tincture of Castor one Dram, of Spirit of Sal Armoniack half a Dram;
mingle them, make a Julep, give four or five Spoonfuls often.

In the general Cure of these Diseases you must take notice, that in those
which proceed from Blood, Medicines that heat the least are to be used; but
Bleeding is to be used more freely, and afterward the Vein in the Forehead is
to be opened, and things that purge Choler are to be mixed with those that
purge Phlegm: If the Brain be very much cooled, the Sick, after universal
Evacuations, may use Tablets made in the following manner.

Take of Amber-grease half a Scruple, distilled Oil of the Seeds of Anise,
Cinnamon and Nutmegs, of each three drops; Oil of Cloves one drop; of Sugar
dissolved in Orange-flower water, four Ounces; make Tablets, let him take a
dram or two drams every Morning.

The following Powder is also commended and is much in use.

Take of white Ambar half an Ounce; of the Powder called Diarhodon Abbatis two
drams; of the Roots of Peony one dram and an half; make a Powder, whereof give
a dram in two Spoonfuls of Simple Peony water before the New Moon.

It is also proper to hold Nutmeg often in the Mouth, and to chew it; and
Perfumes are to be held often to the Nostrils, especially Apoplectick Balsam;
Spices are to be used with Meats, and the following Digestive Powder after
Meals.

Take of the Seeds of Coriander, sweet Fennel, Caraways, each fifteen Grains,
of white Ambar one Dram, of the yellow peel of Citrons, and flowers of Rosemary
each one Dram and an half, of Nutmegs half a Dram, of white Sugar three Ounces;
powder them grossly, and give half a spoonful after Meals.

If from too great a quantity of Blood a sleepy Disease is feared, the Patient
must be sufficiently Blooded, and the utmost endeavors must be used to make
the Hemorrhoids flow, than which nothing can be more advantageous.

Purging is to be ordered to prevent a Relapse.

Take of the Pill of Ambar, and of the lesser Cochie, each two Scruples, of the
best Castor six Grains, of Oil of Ambar a sufficient quantity; mix them and
make 12 Pills. Take six for a Dose, and the other six three days after.

Or,

Take of the Pill of Ambar one Scruple, of Rosin of Jalap six Grains, of Tartar
vitriolated eight Grains, spirit of Lavender eight drops, of Elixir
Proprietatis a sufficient quantity; make 4 or 5 Pills to be taken in the
Morning.

After Purging prescribe the following Medicines.

Take of the Conserves of the Flowers of Male peony, and of Rosemary each one
Ounce, of the Bark of Citron Candied six Drams, of the Species Diambra, and
Dianthos, each one Dram, of Castor powdered two Scruples, of Compound Spirit of
Lavender half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrups of Gilliflowers,
and Compound Peony; Make an Electuary, give the quantity of a Nutmeg Morning
and Evening daily; and let the Sick take four spoonfuls of the following Julep
after it.

Take of the Waters of Black Cherries, Rue, Pennyroyal each three Ounces, of
Compound Peony Water, and Langius's Epileptick Water, each one Ounce, of the
Syrup of the Flowers of Male Peony one Ounce, mingle them. Or,

Take of the Powder e gutteta three Drams, of Castor half a Dram, of Syrup of
the Flowers of Peony a sufficient quantity; make forty Pills, whereof let him
take four every Night at Bedtime, drinking upon them two spoonfuls of the
following Julep.

Take of the Waters of the Flowers of Peony, Black Cherries, Rue, Pennyroal,
each two Ounces, of Compound Peony Water, and of Compound Briony Water, and
Tincture of Castor, each one Ounce, of Syrup of Male Peony an Ounce and an
half, mingle them.

Take of Ambar one Ounce, sprinkle the fourth part of it every Night at
Bedtime upon the Head.

CHAP. VIII. Catalepsis, or Catoche.
THis Disease is very rare and very wonderful. Galen mentions an Observation of
one of his Scholars, who upon hard Study was seized with a Catalepsis. He lay,
says he, like a piece of Wood, extended, rigid, and inflexible; his Eyes were
always kept open, but he could not speak.

When he recovered, he told us he could hear us speak, though not plainly; he
remembered what was done, and saw all that were with him; but he said he could
not speak nor move a Limb: And Fernelius mentions two Observations of this
kind: He says, that a person studying very hard was seized with this Disease,
and that he was so stiff, that sitting with his Pen in his Hand, and looking
earnestly upon his Book, he was supposed to be hard at Study; till being
called, and pulled, he was perceived to have no Sense nor Motion. Another lay
as it were Dead, who neither saw nor heard, nor felt when he was pricked. He
breathed well; and whatever was put in his Mouth he readily swallowed: Being
taken out of his Bed he stood alone; and being pushed he went forward; and in
what manner soever his Hand, or Arm, or Leg was Bent, it stood fixed; so that
he looked like a Statue.

The like Observations are to be found in many other Authors; from whence you
may gather, that there is most commonly an abolition of the internal and
external Senses, and a stiffness of the Limbs: But sometimes the Senses are not
wholly abolished; for sometimes they can hear, and their Limbs may be moved by
the Bystanders,

The Cure is twofold, one in the Fit, the other out of the Fit: In the Fit,
those things are proper which are prescribed for Sleepy Diseases. Out of the
Fit, such things as are used for Cure of Melancholy are proper; for from thence
it most commonly proceeds: But if it come from a Cold intemperies, such things
are proper as serve to mend such a Constitution; if it proceed from abundance
of Blood, Bleeding is to be used.

CHAP. IX. Of a Palsy.
A Palsy, in Latin, Paralysis, is a privation of Sense and Motion, by reason
the influx of the Animal Spirits is hindered. There are various differences of
it; for either it seizes all the parts of the Head, then it is called
Paraplegia; or only half the Body, then it is called Hemeplegia; or it seises
only one part, then it is called a particular Palsy. It is also called
perfect, and imperfect: It is said to be perfect when Sense and Motion are
wholly abolished; imperfect when the Functions are weakened: And then it is also
called Numbness, which is a forerunner of a Palsy. There is also another
Species of an imperfect Palsy, when Motion is hurt, and the Sense remains
perfect; and so on the contrary.

The causes of a Palsy in general, are all those things which hinder the
influx of the Animal Spirits into the Nerves and Muscles; the most frequent of
all is a Phlegmatic Humor; which by obstructing, compressing, thickning or
cooling the Nerves, hinders the said influx of the Animal Spirits.

The Pituitous humor flows from the Brain into the Nerves and spinal Marrow;
so a small Apoplexy degenerates into a Palsy; because the humor occasioning
it is cast from the Brain upon the Marrow, or beginning of the Nerves; and so
it either insinuates it self into the substance of them, and shuts the
insensible passages through which the Spirits pass; or passing by the
Vertebra's of the Back, and spinal Marrow, and following the Course of the
Nerves compresses them, and so hinders the passages of the Animal Spirits; and
the same Humor may thicken the substance of the Nerves by its Coldness; so
that it cannot make way for the Animal Spirits.

There are other Causes of a Palsy, but they are not so common; as taking
Cold, a Blow or Fall, the frequent handling of Quicksilver, tumors near the
Spine or Nerves; cutting of the Nerves, dislocation of the Vertebra, or other
Joints. The kind of the Disease is easily known; for want of Motion and Sense
may be soon perceived; but the knowledge of the part affected is more
difficult: But it may be known by those that are skilled in Anatomy, who know
the Originations and Insertions of the Nerves. For if the right part of the
Face becomes Paralytick, or the left, the other parts being sound, they know
the Brain is only affected according to that part from whence the Nerves are
carried to those parts: But if the parts under the Head are also afflicted with
the Face, the Brain and the Spine of the Back are also affected; and if the
parts below the Head are seized, and the Face well, the fault is only in the
Spine; and in the beginning of it, if all the Parts are affected: But if only
half the Body is Paralytick, only half the Spine is affected. When the Legs are
Paralytick, the seat of the Disease is about the end of the Spinal Marrow, near
the Vertebra's of the Os Sacrum; and so in the rest, the place is to be sought
for from whence the Nerves arise. And sometimes enquiry after the external
Cause much helps to find out the Part affected; of which there are two
Instances in Galen, one of a certain Man, who in a Cold and Rainy Season wore a
long while a wet Neckcloath about his Neck, his Hands became Paralytick. The
other is of one who lost the Sense of three of his Fingers; and when Galen
understood that he fell out of a Cart upon his Back, he conjectured that some
Part was hurt by the Fall under the seventh Vertebra, where the Nerve begins;
and therefore he applied the Medicine which was used before to the Fingers, to
no purpose, to that part.

The knowledge of the Causes is to be fetched from the Procatarctick Causes,
the foregoing Diseases, and the Constitution of the Sick; and so the external
cooling and moistening Causes going before, Old Age, a Phlegmatic Constitution,
Winter, cold and moist Diet: An Apoplexy going before, signify that the
Disease proceeds from a cold intemperies, and a Phlegmatic humor.

Fevers foregoing, and sometimes a present Fever, Choleric, or Melancholy
Constitution, Summertime, or Autumn, the use of Spices, of Salt or hot Meats,
violent and long Passions of the Mind, the excretion of Choleric and
Melancholy humors, or of Acid, or Acrid Serum, hot defluxions upon various
parts, and Pains arising from thence: And lastly, when Pain and Convulsions
accompany the diminution of Sense and Motion; and when such as are so afflicted
are injured by hot and drying Medicines, and relieved by cooling and moistening
Remedies, the Palsy proceeds from Choleric or Melancholy humors. Tumors, and
luxations; and Wounds causing a Palsy are easily known.

The Prognostic Signs.
A Palsy coming from a pituitous humor stuffing the substance of the Nerves,
is difficult to Cure. A Palsy following an Apoplexy is seldom Cured, and most
commonly turns to an Apoplexy again. A trembling coming upon a Palsy is good:
If the paralytick Part be hot there is hope of Recovery; but if it be always
cold it is hardly Cured. A wasting of the Part, and great Paleness renders it
incurable. If the Eye of the Paralytick side be lessened, there is little hopes
of a Cure. A Palsy of the Legs or Feet is easier Cured, than of the upper
Parts. A Palsy in old People is incurable. A Palsy cannot be Cured in the
Winter. A violent Fever coming upon a Palsy is good, so is a Looseness coming
upon a small, and new Palsy.

The Cure of a Palsy is to be varied according to the variety of the Causes;
but because it chiefly comes from Phlegm, and a cold intemperies, we must
chiefly endeavor to remove this Cause, and you must begin with an universal
evacuation of the whole Body: As to Bleeding that can scarce do any good, for
the Blood is not in the fault, but Phlegm; and for the most part this Disease
seises Old People, such as are Phlegmatic, and naturally Cold: But if an
abundance of crude Blood should seem to produce the Phlegmatic Humor, and to
nourish it, a Vein may be opened in the Arm of the well-side: But Blood must be
drawn sparingly, lest the languid Heat should be extinguished.

Therefore Bleeding being omitted, or used as is said, sparingly, the Cure must
be begun by removing the antecedent Cause, which is a cold intemperies of the
Brain. To which end the following Remedies must be used.

Take of the Roots of Cyperus, Florentine Orris, Angelica, Zedoary, Elecompane,
each one Ounce, of the Leaves of Bettony, Marjoram, Balm, Peniroyal, Calaminth,
each one handful; of the Tops of Thym, and Sage, each half an handful, of the
Seeds of Anise, Sesely, and Fennel, each three Drams; of Liquorish rasped, of
Raisins of the Sun cleansed, each one Ounce; of the Leaves of Senna cleansed,
and sprinkled with Aqua Vitae two Ounces; of the Seeds of Carthamus bruised,
and of fresh Polypody of the Oak, each one Ounce; of Agarick newly
trochiscated; of Turbith, and Hermodactil's, each three Drams; of Ginger and
Cloves, each one Dram; of the Flowers of Staechas, of Rosemary, Sage and
Lavender, each one pugil; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to a
Pint; dissolve in it four Ounces of White Sugar, clarify it, and aromatize it
with two Drams of Cinnamon, and make an Apozem for four Doses, to be taken in a
Morning.

In the first and last Dose dissolve three Drams of Diaphaenicon. Or,

Take of the Mass of Pill Cochiae Minor two Scruples, moisten them with Bettony
Water; make five or six Pills, guild them, and let him take them early in the
Morning.

The Pills of Agarick, and of Cochiae major are used for the same purpose.

Take of Gujacum, and of Sarsaparilla, each two Ounces; infuse them twenty four
hours in two Quarts of Fountain Water over hot Ashes, then boil them over a
gentle fire to the consumption of half, strain it, give half a Pint hot in the
Morning, and cover the Sick well that they may Sweat. The use of this may be
continued for fifteen or twenty days, or longer.

In the use of Sudorifick Decoctions, this is always to be observed, viz. let
some Purging Medicine be given once a Week, omitting for that day the
Sudorifick Potion. Sneezing, Apoplegmatisms, Blisters, Head Powders, and Baths
are also used. After the use of the Diet Drink, give the following Pills once a
Week.

Take of the faetid Pill, Coch. Minor, each half a Dram: Troches of Alhandal
four Grains; mingle them, and make Pills to be taken in the Morning.

But because the Humor wants preparation before every Purge, therefore two or
three days before every Dose of the Pills, give three or four Ounces of the
following Water, in the Morning two hours before Eating.

Take of Gujacum four Ounces, of the Bark of the same one Ounce, of
Sarsaparilla one Ounce and an half, of China one Ounce, of Sassafras six Drams,
of Wood of Aloes, and of Galingal each one Dram and an half, of the Roots of
Angelica, Peony, and Fennel, each three Drams and an half, of the Seeds of
Peony two Drams, infuse them twenty four hours in six Pints of Fountain Water,
and two Quarts of White Wine. Afterward add the Leaves of Bettony, ground
Pine, Sage, each one handful; of the Flowers of the Lime-tree, Primrose,
Staechas, and Rosemary, each two Pugils; of Lavender Flowers one Pugil, of Old
Venice Treacle half an Ounce, of the Seeds and Bark of Citron each two Drams
and an half, of Polypody half an Ounce, of Cinnamon six Drams; distill them in a
Bath, to two Pints and an half of the Liquor, add four Ounces of Penids.

If the Purges abovementioned are not successful, it will be convenient to give
Chemical Vomits, as Vinum Benedictum, and the like, if the Sick is able to bear
them.

After general Evacuation, we must use Topics, both to the Paralytick part to
recall the Heat and Spirits, and to the Spinal Marrow; where for the most part
resides the Cause of the Disease; therefore let the part affected be rubbed
daily gently with hot Clothes, and let Cupping Glasses be applied to the Heads
of the Muscles of the part affected, let them have a narrow Mouth, and much
Flame: But they must not be kept on long, lest what is attracted should be
dissipated. Afterward apply a Plaster of Pitch and Rosin of the Pine; that
what is attracted may be kept in. All the Paralytick part may be Stung gently
with Nettles. Afterward the part affected may be anointed with proper Oils,
Ointments, and Balsams. The following Ointment is very good in this case:

Take of the Juice of Squills four Ounces, of the Juice of Wild Cucumber, and
of the Juice of Rue each one Ounce, of Euphorbium, Castor, Sagapenum,
Ammoniacum, Bdellium, dissolved all in Vinegar, each one Dram and an half; of
Myrrh, Frankincense, Pellitory of Spain, Niter, each one Dram; of Oils of
Elder, Turpentine, and of Euphorbium, each half an Ounce, of Wax a sufficient
quantity to make an Ointment. After the anointing the part, wrap it about with
hot Clothes.

If the Disease goes not off by these means, Plasters are to be applied to the
Spine of the Back; the following is of excellent use for this purpose.

Take of Ship-pitch, Galbanum, Sagapenum, and Gum Ammoniack, each one Ounce, of
the Roots of Pellitory of Spain, and of Mustard Seed each half an Ounce, of
Euphorbium two Drams, of Yellow Wax three Drams, of Oil of Turpentine a
sufficient quantity; make a Plaster.

It is also very good to Sweat the Part affected by the Vapors from a
Decoction of Cephalic Herbs and Roots made in White Wine; but the Decoction
must not touch the Part. A Decoction of the Roots of Burdock is also much
commended in this Case: These sorts of Baths are to be used twice or thrice a
Week; and after Bathing you must put the Sick to Bed, and give him a Dram of
Venice Treacle. The green Leaves of Tobacco infused in Malago Wine, and the
Parts bathed with it after Sweating, is reckoned the best outward Remedy for a
Palsy.

But lastly, the Bath Waters are best; if the Sick drink of them some days,
Bath and Wash the Head with them, and afterward rub the Parts with the
Infusion of Tobacco Leaves.

The Paralytick Parts must be always kept warm: If it can be, with the Skins of
Foxes, Hares, or Lambs.

CHAP. X. Of a Convulsion.
A Convulsion, in Latin, Spasmus, is an involuntary and perpetual Retraction of
the Nerves and Muscles toward their Original.

It is twofold, one properly so called, to which the Definition above mentioned
agrees; the other is rather a Convulsive Motion; and they are thus
distinguished: In a true Convulsion, the retraction of the Muscle is continual,
and the Member immovable: In a Convulsive Motion, the Member is variously
agitated, as in the Falling Sickness.

They also differ in their Causes; for a true Convulsion proceeds from fullness
or emptiness, a Convulsive Motion from Irritation.

A true Convulsion is divided into universal and particular; an universal takes
its rise either from the Brain, and then the Muscles of the Face are also
seized with Convulsions; or it arises from the beginning of the Spinal Marrow,
then the Muscles of the Head, or those that move the Spine forward or backward
are seized with Convulsions: Upon which account there are three sorts of
Convulsions; the first is called Emprosthotonos, wherein the Body with the Head
and Neck are violently contracted forward, so that the Chin touches the Breast,
and the Body represents the Keel of a Ship, and sometimes is bent like a Bow,
and the Head touches the Knees: In this sort, two Muscles that bend the Head
forward are chiefly affected.

The second is called Opisthotonos; and in it the Body is bent backward: The
twelve Muscles that extend the Head, or some of them, being Convulsed.

The third is called Tetanos, wherein the Muscles before and behind are equally
contracted, and the Parts kept as it were in Aequilibrio. This is the strongest
of all; it arising from a Contraction of all the Muscles.

A particular Convulsion is caused by the Contraction of some one part, the
Nerve that serves for its Motion being ill affected, which has sometimes a
peculiar Name from the effect or symptom; as a Convulsion of the Muscles moving
the Eyes is called Strabismus, that of the Jaws and Muscles of the Temples
(...). A Convulsion of the Mouth, from a Contraction of the broad Muscle
arising only from one part, is called the Dog Convulsion: But if there be a
Contraction in both sides, it is called Risus Sardonicus; but sometimes the
Mouth is distorted by the Palsy, by Relaxation of the other Muscle. A
Convulsion of the Yard is called Satyriasis, or Priapismus. Other Convulsions
have no proper Names.

The immediate Causes of a true Convulsion, according to Hippocrates and Galen,
are repletion and inanition, the mediate Causes which occasion a repletion, and
inanition are various; a Phlegmatic humor flowing into the Nerves is supposed
to distend them, as to their Breadth, and so they must be necessarily
contracted as to their length. Another cause of Convulsion from repletion, is
an inflammation of the Nervous Parts.

The Causes of Convulsions by Emptiness, are all immoderate Evacuations by
Bleeding, Vomiting, Sweat, and a Consumption of innate Moisture, which is
occasioned by Burning and Coliquative Fevers, by immoderate Labor, by
Watchings and Cares, and immoderate Venery.

A Convulsive Motion proceeds from Matter that Vellicates and Pricks the
Nervous Parts, which most commonly is malignant; for such a humor commonly
happens in malignant Fevers: It is also occasioned by Worms, Poison, and by
Hysteric Fits.

A Convulsion which seises many Parts, especially near the Head, is dangerous;
and that which seises the Muscles of the Breast, is also dangerous; for the
Sick may be suffocated by it.

A Convulsion arising from great Fluxes of Blood, or over-purging is dangerous,
if not deadly; so is a Convulsion arising from a Frenzy, and upon a Fever.
Hypocrates says, that those who are seized with a Tetanos, die within four
days; but that if they live longer, they recover.

CVRE. The Cure of this Disease is to be varied according to the variety of the
Causes. That which happens from Emptiness is incurable. After Bleeding, or it
being omitted, if it be not convenient, strong Purges must be used: but respect
must be had to the strength of the Patient: After Bleeding, apply
Cupping-glasses, with Scarification, if Blood has not been drawn before,
otherwise without Scarification: They must be first applied to the remoter
parts, afterward to the parts near the affected part: But if the Legs are
Convulsed, they must be applied to the Buttocks and Loins; if the Arms, to the
Neck and Shoulders: Blysters are also applied with good success to the parts
opposite to the part affected. In the mean time, after the first Purge, the
Matter is to be prepared, with Medicines proper for the Head. Note, that Castor
ought to be added to Purges in this case. Sharp Glysters are frequently to be
injected, such as were mentioned in the Chapter of an Apoplexy. The part
affected must be anointed with the following, or some other proper Linement.

Take of the Ointment of Marshmallows six Ounces, Oil of Turpentine and
Camomile each one Ounce, Oil of Lavender three Drams, of Oil of Foxes half an
Ounce, Liquid Storax two Ounces, wherewith anoint the affected part, and the
Spine of the Back frequently, with a hot Hand.

After anointing the parts, wrap them in a warm Sheep-Skin, just taken from the
Sheep. Sheeps Lungs, Pigeons or Hens cut in the middle, and applied hot, are
also good. It is also good to put the affected part into the Belly of an Ox, or
Sheep newly killed, and keep it there as long as it is warm: but the use of
Sulphurous Baths is most successful.

When a violent Pain accompanies the Convulsion, use the following Linement.

Take of the Oils of Violets, Lillies, Camomile, each one Ounce and an half, of
Oil of sweet Almonds, Mastich, and Roses, each one Ounce; mingle them, and
anoint the part affected.

Sneesing Powders and Apophlegmatisms are also proper in this Case.

CHAP. XI. Of Trembling.
TRembling, in Latin, Tremor, is a depraved Motion of the Members, whereby they
are involuntarily moved. The chief Cause of it is weakness of the Nerves,
occasioned by Old Age, by long Sickness, by immoderate Venery, by Fear, and
other passions of the Mind; or by such things as are wholly offensive to the
Nerves, as the Fume of Quicksilver. Hard Drinking will also occasion it, and a
partial Obstruction of the Nerves by gross humors.

CVRE. It is Cured by the same Medicines that are used in the Palsy.

CHAP. XII. Of a Catarrh.
A Catarrh, in Latin, Catarrhus, according to the Ancients, is a preternatural
fluxion of Humors from the Head upon the Lower Parts: But the ingenious Dr.
Lower is of the Opinion, that it is put off by the Blood upon the Glands that
are seated in the Throat and Jaws; and he says there are no passages to convey
it from the Head.

CVRE. Whatever precipitates the Serum through the Reins, or carries it off by
Stool, or by Sweat, is good in this case, or whatever else lessens the Serum.

Wherefore, nothing is better for Curing a Catarrh, if a Fever does not
accompany it, then abstaining a long while from Drink; for several have been
Cured, by not drinking in three or four days time; for by this means the source
of the Disease is dried up; just as R^vulets become dry for want of Rain.

But if you have reason to imagine from the Pulse, the Urine, or restlesness of
the Body, that there is some Fever: Having first purged the Body, you must
presently Bleed, and the Sick must be kept to a thin Diet; and other things are
to be done which the Cure of the Fever requires: but respect must be had to
the Flux of the Serum.

But if by reason of abundance of Serum, the Catarrh continue obstinate, in
this case nothing is better, then after Purging to use Diuretics; if the
Catarrh yet continue, you must make Issues in the Neck, Arms, or Legs, or apply
Blisters there.

But because these things require time to do the business, if need require; or
if there be danger of Suffocation, you must Bleed again, and presently Sweat
the Patient once, or twice a day, if his Strength will bear it; which by
casting forth the serous Humor through the Pores of the Body, will perform the
Cure.

Take of the decoction of Senna Gerionis four Ounces, of Syrup of Buckthorn six
Drams, of Spirit of Sulphur five Drops, of Aqua Mirabilis one Dram, mingle
them, and make a Potion to be taken in the Morning.

At Bedtime after Purging, give the following Pills.

Take of Pill Storax eight Grains, of the Juice of Liquorish half a Scruple;
make three Pills: Repeat the Purging Potion every third day for thrice.

Of the days the Sick does not Purge, let him take of the following Electuary.

Take of the Conserve of Red Roses vitriolated, of the Electuary of Sassafras
one Ounce, of Frankincense powdered one Dram, of Diacodium a sufficient
quantity, make an Electuary; let him take the quantity of a Nutmeg Morning and
Evening, drinking upon it three Ounces of the following Decoction.

Take of the pectoral Decoction one Pint, add to it in boiling, of Balsam of
Tolu three Drams, of the Leaves of Ground Ivy half an handful. To the strained
Liquor, add two Ounces of Diacodium, and one Ounce of Spirit of Carraways;
mingle them.

Diuretics, and Diaphoreticks must be also used. Lastly, He that would wholly
prevent this Disease, must be well Clothed* and must remove into a hot and dry
Country.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Headache.
Headache, in Latin, Cephalalgia. This word is used for all Pains of the Head
in general; but properly it only signifies a new Pain of the Head. Cephalaea is
an inveterate Pain of the Head: Hemierania the Pain of one side of the Head. It
is also divided into external and internal; Idiopathick and Sympathick; and of
these, some are pricking, others heavy, and some beating; an inward pain of the
Head is seated upon the Meninges, which lies deep, and reaches to the Roots of
the Eyes; but the outward pain is seated upon the Pericranium, and is
exasperated when the Head is pressed, or the Roots of the Hair turned back.

An Idiopathick Pain is continual. This does not proceed from the disorder of
other parts: but a Sympatick Pain does. What that part is which communicates
the pain to the Head may be easily known by the proper Signs of the affected
part. The pain of the Head proceeds from a cold Cause, and from a hot Cause.
For the Cure of the former, the Phlegmatic Matter is to be evacuated by the
following Pills.

Take of the Pills of Ambar one Scruple and an half, of Cochiae Minor two
Scruples and an half, of Tartar vitriolated ten Grains, of Peruvium Balsam a
sufficient quantity; mingle them, make twelve Pills, give six of them once a
Week in the Morning.

The Bath is very effectual in this case, the party being bathed, and his Head
washed with it. Sneezing Powder is also very proper. Sudorifick Decoctions are
also very beneficial in iinveterate pains.

Take of Sarsa parilla, and Gujacum, each two Ounces, infuse them twenty four
hours in two Quarts of Fountain Water, upon hot Ashes, and boil them over a
gentle Fire till half is consumed; add to it Coriander Seeds and Liquorish, or
of Sugar and Cinnamon as much as is sufficient to give an agreeable taste.
Strain it, and keep it in a Glass; let him take half a Pint hot in a Morning,
for fifteen, twenty, or thirty days; and let him have more Clothes on than
ordinary.

But this is to be noted in the use of Sudorifick decoctions, that some Purging
Medicine must be given once a Week from the very beginning of the Cure:
Specific Remedies should be used, and such an one is the following Epithem.

Take of the Powder of Zedoary one Draw, of the Waters of Bettony, Vervain, and
Elder, each one Ounce; mingle them, apply it hot to the pained part, with
Scarlet Cloth.

Among the Specificks for the pain of the Head, from whatever Cause it arises,
Vervain is the chief, whereof the distilled Water is applied to the Head, and
taken inwardly to four Ounces, with four Drops of Spirit of Salt; and Forestus
says, that he knew two sick People that were Cured, by only hanging green
Vervain about their Necks, when other Medicines were used to no purpose.

If the pain of the Head proceed from a hot Cause, give first a Glyster, and
then Bleed: But a greater quantity of Blood is to be taken away when the Pain
proceeds from Blood, than when Choler abounds. Afterward some Medicines that
Purge Choler must be given; not only when Choler is the chief Cause, but also
when Blood is Luxuriant; for the thinner part soon turns to Choler. If by one
Evacuation, the peccant matter is not sufficiently purged, the Purging Medicine
must be repeated at due distances of time, in the whole course of the Disease
if the Belly be not fluid, Glysters that are emollient, cooling, and gently
Purging, are to be injected every day.

For pains of the Head, which come upon continual Fevers: Sheeps Lungs taken
out hot and applied to the Head, do powerfully assuage the Pain: Or,

Take of the Seeds of white Poppies two Drams, of Saffron half a Scruple, of
Camphor one Scruple, with a sufficient quantity of Populeon Ointment, spread
them upon Leather, and apply them to the Forehead.

And after general Evacuations, derivation may be successfully used, by
Bleeding in the Forehead with a Lancet, or with Leeches, and by applying
Blisters to the Neck. In the mean while, the Humors must be attemperated by
Juleps and Emulsions.

Lastly, If the Pain be very violent, we must use Narcoticks outwardly and
inwardly.

In every Pain of the Head, from whatever Cause it arises, and will not yield
to other Remedies; the Head must be shaved, and a large Blister applied all
over it.

Diseases of the EYES.
CHAP. XIV. Of a Gutta Serena.
WHen the Sight is lost, and there is no apparent fault in the Eye, it is
occasioned by the hindrance of the influx of the Animal Spirits into the Eyes.

An Obstruction is the most ordinary cause of a Gutta Serena, which is
generated by a Phlegmatic Humor falling from the Brain into the Optic Nerves:
But it is also certain, that this Disease is occasioned by the compression of
the Optic Nerves; by Phlegm coleated about them, or with Blood, or some other
Matter heaped up in that place, whereby Tumors are made in those places; and
Experience shows, that an inflammation of the Brain, or Frenzy in malignant
Fevers occasion Blindness. Lastly, Wounds in the Head, whereby the Optic
Nerves are cut, hinder the influx of the Animal Spirits to the Eyes.

This Disease is known by the Eyes seeming to continue in their Natural State,
only the Pupil appears blacker and larger. But there is great difficulty in
distinguishing the Causes of it; for though when it proceeds from Blood, or
Pus, an Inflammation, Abscess, or Wound go before, yet no sure Sign can be given
to distinguish a compression by a Phlegmatic Humor from an Obstruction. Yet we
may in some sort guess, because in an Obstruction only of the Optic Nerve, the
Eyes are only affected: But if there be a compression by Phlegmatic Humors,
gathered together about the Roots of the Eyes, and the mamillary processes,
that Matter will either seize other parts of the Brain, and then the rest of
the Senses, or all of them will be injured. But if it be seated only about the
Optic Nerves, a Phlegmatic Matter will be evacuated by the Nostrils more
plentifully than is usual, and there will seem a weight to lie upon the
forepart of the Head, especially about the Eyelids.

As to the Prognostics, if the Sight be quite taken away by an Obstruction of
the Optic Nerves, the Disease is most commonly incurable; for we see that
Obstructions of other Nerves whereby a Palsy is generated, is seldom or never
Cured, especially in those that are Old. But if the Obstruction be partial, and
the Sight be only diminished, there is more hope of Recovery, though a long
course of Remedies, and a great deal of time is requisite for the Cure.

But if this Disease proceed from Humors collected in the forepart of the
Head, it is easier Cured. Fabritius Hildanus mentions an Observation of one
that lost his Sight by taking a violent Vomit, and recovered it again by taking
another: For the first by its Violence stirred the Humors too much, and forced
them upon the Optic Nerves; but the other evacuated the Humors, and so Cured.
There are other Observations of this kind; but it is reasonable to suppose,
that in these cases where the Cure is so easily performed, the Humor is not
stopped in the substance of the Nerves, but collected in the Brain about the
Nerves.

For the Cure of this Disease; the Matter impacted into the Nerves, or adhering
to them, which causes the Obstruction or Compression, is to be evacuated, which
cannot be, unless the whole Body be first evacuated: As Galen says, the Eye
cannot be Cured before the whole Head, nor that before the whole Body.

That the Remedies may be described orderly, a Diet convenient for th^^ Disease
is first to be appoin^ed, which ought to be attenuating, and moderately drying.
And first an Air inclining to hot and dry ought to be chosen; but thick,
cloudy, cold and rainy Air must be carefully avoided. Meats of easy Digestion,
and of good Juice, must be eaten; and such as breed a thick Juice must not be
used, as Pork, Geese, Pease, Cheese, and the like; also those things that fill
the Head with Vapors, as things made of Milk, and hot Spices, as Pepper,
Ginger, and the like. The Bread must be made with Fennel-water, or the Seed of
it must be mingled with it: But great Care must be taken, that Darnel is not
mixed with the Wheat wherewith the Bread is made, which has been always
accounted very injurious to the Eye. In Sauces and Broths, let the Sick use
those things which have an attenuating Faculty, as Hyssop, Fennel, Marjoram,
Bettony, Sage, Eyebright, and especially Nutmegs, which strengthen the Brain,
and clear the Sight. Turnips should be often eaten, and also Sparrows, and
Pigeons; Cold Herbs must be avoided, especially Lettice, which is injurious to
the Eyes. The Sick must be moderate in his Diet, and the Supper sparing; and
once or twice a Week, let him go to Bed without Supper: At Meals, instead of
Salt, let him use the following Powder.

Take of common Salt two Ounces, of Eyebright dried two Drams, of Nutmeg one
Dram, of Cinnamon two Scruples; make a Powder.

After every Meal let him take one Spoonful of the following Powder:

Take of the Seeds of Coriander prepared half an Ounce, of the Seeds of Anise
and Fennel each two Drams, of Cinnamon and Nutmegs each one Dram; of Eyebright
dried three Drams, of Sugar of Roses, twice the weight of all.

Wine is not good in this Disease; because it fills the Head with Vapors, and
promotes fluxion; but a Decoction of Sarsaparilla sweetened with Liquorish, and
aromatized with Coriander Seeds, is a proper Drink: But all cannot abstain from
Wine, or strong Beer, and therefore dried Eyebright infused in small Wine or
Beer, may be used sometimes.

Sleep must be shorter than usual; and lying on the Back must be avoided as
much as may be; and the Sick must not Sleep after Dinner: He must be moderate
in his Exercise, and his Body must be always kept Loose.

These things being thus ordered, the Cure must be begun with universal
Evacuation; and he must be first purged with the following Medicine.

Take of Senna cleansed half a Dram, of the Seeds of Fennel one Dram, of the
Leaves of Bettony, Eyebright, and Vervain, each half an handful; of Liquorish
three Drams; boil them in Fountain Water to three Ounces, strain it, and
dissolve in it three Drams of Diaphaenicon, and an Ounce of the Syrup of Roses;
make a Potion to be taken in the Morning

After the first Purge, the Physician ought to consider with himself, whether
Bleeding is to be used: In Old People, or such as are of a Phlegmatic
Constitution, certainly it is not: But in those that are young; and of a hot
Constitution, especially if there be Signs of Blood abounding, without
controversy, if it be used in time it may do much good; and where there are
such indications for Bleeding* After Blood has been drawn from the Arm, the
particular Veins of the Head may be opened, and those which are near the Eyes,
viz. the Forehead Vein, the Vein of the Temples, and in the Corner of the Eyes,
near the Nose: But it is more proper to apply Leeches to the Temples; and if
they are set behind the Ears too, they may do much good. Some Practitioners
relate, that some blind People have been Cured by Wounds in the Forehead,
whereby the turgid Veins and Arteries have been emptied.

But if a suppression of the Courses has preceded this Disease, Blood is to be
drawn from the lower Veins, or Leeches must be applied to the Hemorrhoids;
afterward the Body must be purged more exactly with the following Apozem.

Take of the Roots of Fennel, Sarsaparilla, Florentine, Orris Elecampane, each
one Ounce, of the Leaves of Bettony, Marjoram, Balm, Eyebright, Fennel,
Vervain, the greater Celandine, each one handful, of Liquorish rasped, and
Raisins of the Sun cleansed, each one Ounce, of the Seeds of Anise and Fennel
each three Drams, of Senna cleansed two Ounces, of Gummy Turbith, and Agarick
newly trochiscated, each two Drams, of Ginger and Cloves each one Scruple, of
the Flowers of St^chas, Rosemary, and Lavender, each one pugil; boil them in
Fountain Water to a Pint; strain it, and dissolve in it four Ounces of White
Sugar, make an Apozem for four Doses, to be taken in the Morning; Clarify it,
and Aromatize it with two Drams of Cinnamon.

When all the Apozem is taken, give the following Pills.

Take of the Pill Coch. minor two Scruples; make six Pills to be taken early in
the Morning.

Universal Evacuation being thus performed, Revulsion of the antecedent cause
is to be made, and the conjunct cause is to be discussed, and carried off by
derivation; to this end frictions of the extreme Parts, especially the lower
Parts, are to be used: Cupping-glasses are to be applied to the Back and
Shoulders without Scarification, especially to the hinder part of the Head with
Scarification, whereby the Humors are so powerfully drawn from the fore^parts
and beginning of the Nerves, that some upon the application of it, have
immediately recovered their Sight.

At the same time, a Blister must be applied to the Neck* An Issue made in the
Neck with a Skean of Silk is very beneficial in this case.

A Potential Cautery applied to the Coronal Suture, has been successful
sometimes, when nothing else would do good.

After universal Purging, a sudorifick Diet is to be ordered, of Sarsa, and the
like; and after the use of the sudorifick Decoction, the use of a sulphurous
Bath is very proper, to Bath in, and to wash the Head with. Apophlegmatisms are
also of use.

During the whole Course, the Sick is to be purged often*

And care is to be taken to strengthen the Head and Eyes; to which end, a Dram
of Old Venice Treacle must be given at Bedtime, twice or thrice a Week,
dissolved in Fennel, or Eyebright Water; Nutmeg also chewed i^ a Morning
Fasting is much commended; so are Candie^ Myrobalans eaten in a Morning.

In a desperate case, after all Remedies have been used to no purpose, a large
Blister applied to the shaved Head has sometimes done much good, and repeated
twice o^ thrice, when the Excoriation begins to be dry.

CHAP. XV. Of Diseases of the glassy Humor.
THE glassy Humor is placed under the Cristaline, and is therefore made by
Nature clear, that the Species may be conveyed pure and clear to the Optic
Nerves; if therefore the perspicuity of it be sullied by the mixture of any
Humor, and it become dark, the Sight is more or less diminished,
proportionably to the degree of darkness of it.

Moreover, this Humor may be injured by being misplaced, namely, if part of it
by a Blow or Contusion is thrust before the Cristalin Humor; for then the
Sight is darkened, for the glassy humor is thicker than the watery, and so the
Species of Objects cannot be brought pure and sincere to the Cristaline Humor.

The former of these Diseases can be known by no Signs; but be imagined only by
reason: For this Humor cannot be seen, nor the disposition of it known;
therefore Practitioners, when they perceive no fault in the Eye, confound this
with the Gutta Serena, and that without any damage to the Patient; for
extraneous Humors poured upon the glassy Humor must be discussed by the same
Remedies wherewith a Gutta Serena is wont to be Cured. But the vitiated
situation of the glassy Humor may be known, by appearing like the White of an
Egg under the Pupil; but it cannot be distinguished from a suffusion, unless
the antecedent and procatarctick causes are well considered; for a suffusion
proceeds from a simple influx of the Humors: But this from the glassy Humor
misplaced by a Blow or Wound.

This Disease is incurable by Art: But sometimes it happens to be Cured by
Nature; and therefore the whole business is to be left to her.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Diseases of the Cristaline Humor.
THE Christaline Humor is the chief Instrument of Sight, and therefore more
than the other Humors of the Eye, ought to retain its Purity and Perspicuity,
that it may render the Sight perfect; and if it recede from that Purity, the
Sight is much obstructed.

The chief Disease of the Cristaline Humor is the change of it to a gray
Color, and this Disease happens in old Age, from a drying and thickning Cause:
It is known by a deep and great whiteness that appears about the Pupil, and all
things are seen through a Smoke and Cloud; but it is difficultly distinguished
from a Suffusion, which represents such a Whiteness in the Pupil; upon which
account, many Authors confound it with a Suffusion: But those that look
carefully, may distinguish these two Diseases; for in a Suffusion, the
whiteness is in the Pupil, but in this it appears deep.

This Disease is incurable, especially in old People, in whom the dryness of
the Parts cannot be mended.

Besides, the Cristaline Humor may be vitiated in Situation, namely, when its
broad part which is like a Lentil, is not exactly opposed to the hole of the
Pupil, but is moved upward to downward, and then things appear double: But this
fault of Sight is also occasioned by Vapors, or by thin Phlegm, that sullies
the Christaline Humor. This often happens to People that are drunk. The second
ill Situation of the Christaline Humor is, when it inclines forward or
backward; if forward toward the Pupil, then things that are near are not
plainly seen; but things that are at distance are; this happens most commonly
to old People: If it be placed backward toward the Optic Nerve, things that
are near are plainly seen; but things at distance not at all: This is called
Purblindness, which is to be remedied only by Spectacles.

The third ill Situation of the Cristaline Humor, is when it proceeds too much
to the right or left, and this is called Squinting. But this is not only
occasioned by the vicious Situation of the Cristaline Humor, but also from the
ill Disposition of the Muscles that move the Eyes, which is either natural, or
occasioned by a Convulsion or Palsy; which is to be cured by Paralytick
Remedies.

Lastly, From a greater or lesser Inversion of the Cristaline Humor, other
Vices of Sight may proceed; as when things that are straight appear crooked; or
upside down; which happened to a Physician, as Sennertus relates, who looking
earnestly upwards, removed the Cristaline Humor.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Diseases of the Watery Humor, and especially of a
Suffusion.
THE watery Humor is altered from its natural Constitution, when it is peccant
in Quantity or Quality; when it is increased or diminished beyond measure, it
causes a Dilatation, or Contraction of the Pupil, which are to be treated of in
their Place: But when it is vicious in quality it becomes thick; it is caused
by some other Humor flowing into it; this is called a Suffusion, which is to
be treated of here. This Disease, when it begins, and when the Sight is a
little darkened, is called, A Suffusion: But when something is collected in the
Pupil, like Water, it is called Water. Lastly, when the Matter is wholly
concreted in the Pupil, and wholly obscures the Sight, it is called a Cataract.

There is also a Suffusion, which is Spurious, which proceeds from Vapors,
translated from the Stomach, and other Parts. A Phlegmatic Humor is the chief
and most ordinary Cause of a Suffusion, yet some other Humors may be mixed
with it, at least in a small Proportion; if Choler be mixed with it, it appears
yellow; when Melancholy, black.

These Humors are wont to flow to the Eyes, wh^ they are weak, either
naturally or occasionally: To the natural Weakness belongs a prominence of the
Eyes; for those that have such Eyes, are subject to Suffusions; for prominent
Eyes are wont to be large, and so fitter to receive Humors and Vapors. Some
external Causes also occasion weakness, as a Blow, Contusion, Bathing, a
Southerly and Rainy Season, long continuing in the Sun, Smoke, hard Reading,
especially by a Candle, which occasions a Fluxion of Humors upon the Eyes. The
differences of Suffusions arise from the thickness, quantity, or place where
the Humor resides, that occasions them.

By reason of the greater, or lesser thickness, the Obstruction of the Sight is
more or less; for if the Humor be thin, and serous, the Sight is but little
obstructed; if very thick, blindness is occasioned.

By reason of the quantity and place, the Humor possesses either all the
Pupil, and then the Sight is equally obstructed, which way soever it is
directed to the Objects; or it covers one part of the Pupil more than another,
and the Objects are not seen whole, by looking directly, nor many at one time:
But if the Humor be very small, and is seated in the middle of the Pupil, the
Objects appear as if there were holes in them: But if the Matter be torn into
various Corpuscles, seated in various Parts of the Pupil, the appearance of
Gnats is always before the Eyes. Also Hair, Cobwebs, Circles about a Candle,
and many other things.

The Diagnostick of this Disease is first to be directed to a legitimate
Suffusion, to distinguish it from a spurious, afterward the various Sorts of a
legitimate Suffusion are to be enquired into.

A true Suffusion seizes only one of the Eyes most commonly; or if both, not at
the same time, nor alike, which happens in a Bastard Suffusion.

Secondly, in a legitimate Suffusion, something dark appears in the Pupil,
which is not in a Spurious; but this Sign is not constant; for if the Suffusion
be generated from a thin and serous Humor, there is no change in the Eye, that
Humor being scarce thicker than the watery Humor; upon which account,
Physicians mistake it for a Gutta Serena. But this Suffusion is easily
distinguished from a Gutta Serena; for in a Gutta Serena, the Sight is wholly
taken away, or much diminished, no fault appearing in the Eye: But in a
Suffusion, which does not appear to the Sight, the Sick can see tolerably well;
because the serous Humor, from whence it is produced, is thin and clear; so
that the species of the Objects can pass through it like Glass; and then in a
Suffulsion, the Sight is not for the most part obstructed in althe Parts of the
Pupil; but the Objects are sometimes seen best, when they are placed directly
opposite to the Eye, and sometimes when they are placed toward the Corner;
because most commonly, there is a greater thickness, or thinness, in one part
of the Pupil, than in another.

Thirdly, In a true Suffusion, the Symptoms are continual; but in a Bastard
Suffusion, they are increased or lessened by intervals, as the Vapors rise
more or less to the Head; and so when the Stomach is empty, they are much less,
than when it is full, for then a greater quantity of Vapors arise from the
Head, and then the Gnats, Cobwebs, and the like, appear only by intervals.
Besides, in a true Suffusion, the Sight seems to pass always through a Cloud,
or thick Glass, which is the proper and Pathognomonick Symptom of it: But in a
Bastard Suffusion, the Sight is sometimes very good.

CVRE. The Cure is easier performed in Summer than in Winter. If a Suffusion
come upon an acute Fever, after a Peripneumonia, Frenzy, or violent Pains of
the Head, it is very hard to cure. A confirmed Suffusion can be cured only by
Couching. In a confirmed Suffusion, if having shut the other Eye, the Pupil is
dilated, there is hope of a Cure by Couching, otherwise there is none; for then
the Optic Nerve is obstructed; and so the Spirits cannot come to the Pupil. A
black Suffusion can never be cured; and but very rarely, a green or yellow. A
Suffusion which represents the Objects by holes, is not to be Couched. Couching
succeeds best when the Eye is full, and at its natural bigness, for if it be
withered and small, it will not succeed. This Operation must not be attempted
in old Age, or in Childhood, nor when, the Eye being pressed with the Finger,
the Suffusion appears broader, and then returns to its wonted bigness and
shape; for then it is not ripe: But if, being pressed with the Finger, it does
not alter its shape, it may be Couched. When it is ripe, it is like a thin
Skin, and may be wrapped round the Needle, and thrust to the lower Part of the
Eye.

The Cure of a Suffusion is not to be directed only to the conjunct Cause; but
also to the antecedent, and therefore the whole Body, especially the Brain,
must be first well Purged, afterward, the Humor obstructing the Pupil must be
difcussed, or removed some other way.

Which Indications being the same in a manner, as were proposed for the Cure of
a Gutta Serena, may be sought for there.

Therefore all that Cure being premised, which was instituted for a Gutta
Serena, we must proceed to those Remedies which respect peculiarly the taking
off the Matter, that is seated near the Pupil; and though Topical Remedies may
seem not to do much good, yet a due use of them is not to be rejected; for
experience teaches, that incipient Suffusions have been cured by Topical
Remedies, when they have been used after general Evacuations.

First therefore, you must begin with gentle Resolvents, which must not dry too
much, lest the Matter of the Suffusions should be hardened, and so rendered unfit
for Resolution; and Emollients are therefore to be mixed with the Resolvents,
to prevent the hardening of the Matter, and to render the resolving of it more
easy; to which end, the following Fomentation may be used at the beginning.

Take of the Leaves of Rue, Fennel, Eyebright, and the greater Celandine, each
one handful, of the Seeds of Foenugreek one ounce, of the Flowers of Camomil
and Melilot, each one pugil; boil them in three parts of Fountain Water, and
one of Wine added at the end. Strain it, and foment the Eyes with it, with a
soft Sponge Morning and Evening, and the Head being covered, the Steam of the
Decoction may be received into the Eyes.

At the very beginning of the Disease, when the Fluxion is beginning, and when
Medicines are used for Revulsion, it will be proper to foment the Eyes with Red
Wine, to hinder the Fluxion.

In the Progress of the Disease, a Fomentation of White Wine, wherein Crocus
Metallorum has been infused, is very beneficial; and the Breath of a Child,
having first chewed Fennel-seeds, received into the Eyes; and a Child, or a
Whelp, licking the Eyes in the Morning, is also good; and Bread hot out of the
Oven, mixed with Fennel-seeds, held to the Eyes, till they are moist with the
Vapor of it. The foresaid Remedies must be used in the Morning chiefly. At
Night apply the following Cataplasm.

Take of the Flower of Foenugreek-seed one ounce, of Aloes half an ounce, of
Saffron one dram, make a fine Powder, mix it with White Wine, wherein Crocus
Metallorum, has been infused, make a Cataplasm to be applied hot at Bed time.

Many commend Pigeons Blood dropped hot into the Eye; but because the heat of
it soon goes off, it were better to apply a young Pidgeon, before it has
Feathers, cut in the middle, to the Eye. The Suffusion being cured, either by
Resolving Medicines, or by Chirurgical Operation, care must be taken to
preserve the Eyes; for the Eyes being much weakened by the Disease, are ready to
receive Fluxions; therefore Purging is to be used frequently, and Issues are to
be made to turn the Humors, and such strengthening things are to be used as
were proposed in a Gutta Serena, and the Eyes must be washed in the Morning,
with Wine held in the Mouth till it is warm, and mixed with Sage chewed in the
Mouth.

Moreover, Spectacles that represent the Objects, neither greater nor lesser
than they are, preserve the Sight much.

Lastly, all those things are to be avoided which injure the Sight, and such as
help it are to be used.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Dilatation of the Pupil.
THE Wea Tunica is subject to many Diseases, especially Rupture, Distortion,
Dilatation and Constriction.

A Rupture may be occasioned by an external Cause, as by a Bruise or the like,
or by an internal, namely, by a great quantity of Humors extending, or
breaking it: But this can never be cured by Art; the distorting of it happens
from the first Conformation, when it sticks on every side to the horny Tunick;
and this also can never be cured.

The Dilatation of the Pupil, which is the hole of the Wea Tunica, through
which the Species of the Objects enter the Eye, injures the Sight, for that the
Light enters in too great quantity; upon which account, such as are troubled
with a Dilatation of the Pupil, see better where there is a little Light, than
where there is a great deal; and this shows the natural and the ordinary
changes of the Pupil, which happen according to the more or less Light of the
place we are in, for in a very light place the Pupil is contracted; and this is
the Reason, that when we come out of a very light Place into another that is
more obscure, we can at first scarce see any thing, till the Pupil is gradually
dilated to receive more light, and then things that could not be seen at first,
plainly appear: and on the contrary, they that come put of a dark place into a
very light place, can scarce bear the Light.

The preternatural Dilatation of the Pupil is either from the Birth, or arises
from preternatural adventitious Causes, which are either internal, or external:
The next and immediate of the Internals, is Extension of the Tunica Wea, which
is either from dryness, or repletion; dryness stretches the Wea, and renders
the hole of the Pupil larger, as holes in Leather are larger when they are dry.
This dry Intemperies is occasioned by long Watchings, by Fevers and other
drying Causes. The Repletion of the Tunica Wea, it being extended on every
side, renders the Pupil larger, and this is produced either by Wind or Vapors,
or by Humors flowing upon the Eye, or by the watery Humor increased above
measure; and lastly from a Swelling of the Tunica Vva. To these Causes may be
added a Convulsion of the Tunick, which chiefly appears in Fits of the Falling
Sickness, and in Chldrens Convulsions.

The external Causes are a Fall, a violent Shaking, holding of the breath in
Women in Travail, and in Trumpeters.

The Diagnostick of this Disease is not difficult, for the Dilatation of the
Pupil may be perceived by the Eyes, especially if before the Disease, the
Physician know the natural largeness of it, and also if with the largeness of
the Pupil, the Sight is obstructed; besides, the natural largeness of the Pupil
is known by shutting one Eye, for then the Pupil of the other is more dilated,
which does not happen in a Dilatation, that is, a Disease, because the Tunica
Wea is so much distended by the preternatural Cause, that it can be distended
no further.

As to the Prognostic; A Dilatation of the Pupil from the Birth, is incurable;
and that which arises after, is difficult to Cure, especially if Dryness be the
Cause.

CVRE. The Cure is to be varied, according to the variety of the Causes; and if
it come from Dryness, the whole Body must be refreshed with moistning
Medicines, and Nourishment, such as is used in Hectic Fevers, the Body is also
to be moistened with a Bath of hot Water and new Milk, if it be also frequently
dropped into the Eyes, especially Women's Milk.

If it proceed from an Humor that fills the Eye, the-whole Body is to be
Evacuated, and presently the Hu,+mour wherewith the Eye is stopped must be
discussed which may be sufficiently performed by the Remedies prescribed in the
Cure of a Suffusion: But after them Astringents may be used, to contract the
Pupil of the Eye; to which end the following Collyrium may be used.

Take of Red Roses dried two scruples, of Saffron, Spikenard, and the Bark of
Frankin^ense, each half a scruple, of Tutty prepared, Spodium, Acacia, each one
scruple; reduce them to a Powder, and tie it up in a fine Rag, and infuse it in
three ounces of Rose Water: Drop the Water in the Eyes often, and press the Rag
every time you use the Water.

If it proceed from Wind, after general Evacuations, those Medicines are to be
used, which expel Wind, and the Eyes may be fomented with a Decoction of
Fennel, Rue, Dill, Red Roses and Myrtles, made in Rose Water, and a fourth part
of White Wine. Lastly, if it be occasioned by a Bruise, it must be cured like
an Ophthalma, if there be an Inflammation; but if there be no Inflammation,
apply at the beginning a Cataplasm made of Bean Flower, the Leaves of Plantane,
Red Roses, and Rose Water: But afterward, Pigeons Blood must be often dropped
into the Eye; which is an excellent Remedy for all Wounds and Bruises of the
Eyes.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Narrowness of the Pupil.
THE Narrowness of the Pupil is also injurious to the Sight: It is either
narrow from the Birth, and then it is no great Injury; for though they cannot
see so well as others in a Place where there is not much light, yet they see
better in a very light Place; or the Narrowness of the Pupil is occasioned by
preternatural Causes, as from too great moisture, or dryness, from a Defect in
the Watery Humor, or for want of Spirits.

The Cure of this Disease is the same with the former, though they produce
different Effects.

CHAP. XX. Of an Albugo, Spot, and other Colors of the Cornea changed.
THE natural Constitution of the Cornea is altered, when it loses its
Perspicuity, or changed into another Color. It loses its clearness, when it
grows thick by dryness, which often happens in old People, and is never to be
cured: Or it is thickened by gross Humors stuffed into it; which frequently
happens in an Ophthalmia; when, by reason of too great an use of Resolvent
Remedies, the thinner Parts of the Humors are discussed, the thick remaining
behind: Or when by cooling Medicines used too often, the Humors are thickened;
and then the Horny Tunick is not only thicker in that Part where the Humor is
impacted; but it also turns white, and is called Leucoma, or Albugo; but such a
Disease is also occasioned by the Cicatrix of a Wound, whereby the Cornea is
rendered thicker, and loses its clearness*

There are several sorts of it, as it is more or less thick; one only possesses
the Superficies of the Cornea, another is seated deep, and penetrates the whole
Cornea; one is greater, and possesses the whole Pupil, or the greatest Part of
it; another is small, and covers only a small Part of the Pupil, and then it is
called a Spot.

The Cornea is also infected with a different Color, when Blood is poured off
upon it, and then it is called Suggillatio, and then all the Objects appear
red; or when Choler insinuates it self into it, which often happens in the
Jaundice, and then the Objects appear yellow.

Those Diseases do not want peculiar Diagnosticks; because they are apparent.

As to the Prognostics: An Albugo which proceeds from Phlegm, or from a gross
Humor remaining after an Ophthalmia, is easily cured, if it be not inveterate:
But that which is occasioned by a Cicatrix, is very difficultly cured; because
Parts of exquisite Sense, can scarce bear such sharp Remedies, as are necessary
to take off the Cicatrix.

The Cure of an Albugo, occasioned by Phlegmatic Humors, concreted in the
Cornea, must be performed by emollient, discutient, and attenuating Medicines:
But universal Remedies mush be premised, which carry off the antecedent Cause,
and prevent a new influx of Humors, such are set down in the Cure of a
Suffusion, and Gutta Serena; afterward a Fomentation is to be applied with
soft Spunges, to mollify the concreted Matter, made of the Decoction of
Foenugreek, Melilot, Celandine and Fennel, or the Vapor of this Decoction, may
be received into the Eyes: Presently after discussing Remedies are to be used,
such as are prescibed for the Cure of a Suffusion; and attenuating Eye
Medicines, and such as resolve the Humor impacted in the Eye, especially such
as are made of Honey distilled, are to be used; for the Water of distilled
Honey, is very good to take out Spots from the Eyes; if the use of it be long
continued. Sugar Candy dissolved in Eyebright, Celandine, or Fennel-water, is
also good, and let the Eye be often licked, with a Boy's or Girl's Tongue, they
having first chewed Fennel in their Mouths. Amatus Lusitanus says, that he
cured a Girl of twelve Years of Age, that had thick Clouds in her Eyes with the
following Collyrium, having first used the Decoction Sarsa for three Weeks.

Take two Pound of Honey in the Comb, of the Tops of Fennel, of the Flowers of
Elder, and Eyebright, each two Pugils, of Sugar Candy two ounces; distill them
in a Bath, and drop the Water into the Eyes.

The Juice of Fennel fresh drawn with one drop of Peruvian Balsam in it,
discusses powerfully an Albugo; the Oil of burnt Rags mixed with the Spittle of
a Boy, being applied with a Feather, is also good. This Oil is drawn by firing
a Rag, and extinguishing it between two Platters; when it is cold, the drops of
Oil will stick to the Platter.

But an Albugo, or a Spot, occasioned by a Cicatrix, is cured by those Remedies
which mollify, attenuate, and dissolve; but because those things that take off
the Cicatrix are Acrimonious, the greater care ought to be taken, that
universal Evacuations and Revulsions are first used* lest Humors should flow
to the Part; afterward it will be convenient to use such Fomentations which
are mentioned above; and then discutient and abstersive Remedies are to be
applied. First, those that are gentle, especially the Compound Water of Honey
above described: But afterward stronger, as the Galls of Fish, of the Pike,
and the like: Also of other Animals, as of the Partridge, Cock, Goose, Bull,
and the like; also the Juices of the greater Celandine, the lesser Centaury,
Brooklime, and the like, which are to be mixed with Honey, both because the
Honey is discutient, and abstersive, also because Liquors dropped into the Eye,
run presently to the Corners, and will not stay upon the Pupil, upon which they
ought to work; but when they are mixed with Honey, they easily stick to it; but
by reason of their sharpness, the foresaid Juices or Galls may be thickened with
the Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth, Psyllium, or Quinces extracted in Pennyroyal
or Eyebright Water, the form of a Collyrium with Juices may be such as follows.

Take of the Juice of Fennel, Celandine and Brook-lime, each three Drams, of
the Juice of the lesser Centaury half an ounce, of white Honey one ounce;
mingle them like a Liniment; if with the Albugo there is a redness of the Eyes,
the Collyrium made of White Wine, Salt and Wheat, described in the Chapter of
an Ophthalmia, is good, or the following may be used.

Take of Aloes and Agarick, each one scruple, powder them, and tie them up in a
Rag, and infuse them in Eyebright or Fennel-water, and rub the Eyes with it,
Morning and Evening. The Aloes cleanses, strengthens, and stops Fluxions, and
the Agarick is very abstersive.

Suggilatio, or the red Color of the Eyes, occasioned by Blood poured upon
them; if it be fresh, may be easily cured, by dropping Pigeons Blood into the
Eyes, or for want of it Woman's Milk with a little Frankincense and Saffron, or
the Yolk of an Egg with Wine may be used. But if the Disease be obstinate, the
Eye must be fomented with a Decoction of Foenugreek, Marsh mallows* Fennel,
Rue, and Celandine; or the Steam of the Decoction may be received into the
Eyes. Lastly, all those things that we prescribed for a Suffusion, are proper
for the Cure of this Disease: But when the Disease is inveterate, and when that
which was red begins to turn black, the Tops of Hyssop wrapped in a Rag, and
dipped in boiling Water, and applied to the Eye, are particularly recommended
by Galen; and Experience shows, that this Remedy is so very effectual; that the
Blood is apparently drawn out, and sticks to the Rag.

Lastly, the yellow Color, which appears in the Eyes of those that have the
Jaundice, goes off of its own accord when the Disease is cured: But if you
desire to hasten the Dissipation of it, the Steam of Vinegar received in the
Eyes, will do it.

CHAP. XXI. Of an Ophthalmia.
THE Tunica adnata is so nearly joined to the Cornea, that many Diseases
possess both Tunicks, so an Inflammation of the Eyes, though it properly belong
to the Tunica adnata, yet is very often extended to the Cornea, and produces
various Diseases in it, viz. Ulcers, Hypopyon, Albugo, and others, and Pustles
and other Tumors and Wounds and Ulcers are common to both Tunicks: So that all
the Diseases of these Tunicks cannot be treated of a part; and therefore we are
forced to enter upon the Diseases of the Tunica adnata, before we treat
further, of the Diseases of the Cornea.

Therefore, beginning from an Ophthalmia, which according to the Signification
of the Word, is nothing but an Inflammation of the Eye, and is called in
English, Blearedness of the Eyes.

The conjunct Cause of an Ophthalmia, is Choleric, Phlegmatic, or Melancholy
Blood, flowing into the Eyes, or accumulated there. There are many Causes of
Fluxion, both External and Internal. The Causes of Congestion, are all those
things which occasion an Intemp^ries, or Weakness in the Eyes.

The Diagnostick of an Ophthalmia is easy; for the Blood poured upon the
Tunica adnata, may be perceived by the Eyes; if it be occasioned by Blood, the
whole Face* as well as the Tunica adnata, will look red, and the Veins will
appear large: If it proceed from Choleric Blood, the Acrimony of the Tears
will corrode the Angles of the Eyes and the Cheeks, and there will be a violent
pricking Pain: If it proceed from Phlegm, the^ will be a dull Pain, and little
Heat; the Tears will not be sharp, but the Eye will be much blear'd, and full
of viscous Matter: If it proceed from Melancholy* the Tumor will be small, and
the redness will incline to a brown Color, the Tears few, and the clammy
Matte^ little, but thick.

If the Fluxion arise from the inward Parts of the Head, there will be a
Headache, that reaches to the Roots of the Eyes: But if the Fluxion pass by the
outward Vessels into the Eyes, the Pain of the Head is more external; the Veins
of the Forehead are distended, and a Pulsation is perceived in the Temples.

In order to the Cure of an Ophthalmia, a cooling and moistening Diet must be
appointed, and such Meats as easily digest; and rather boiled than roasted;
Spoon* Meats rather than solid; the Patient must avoid Acrid, Salt, and
Peppered Meats, and such as fill the Head with Vapors; Milk, Sugar, and all
sweet things, must be avoided. Wine is not good in the beginning; but instead
of it, a Ptisan of Liquorice and Barley, or some other cooling Liquor must be
used.

Sleep is very beneficial, because the Motion of the Eye then ceases, whereby
the Pain and Fluxion are excited, the Sick should lie with his Head high on the
well side: All Motion of the Body must be forbid; and Talking, and the Belly
must be kept open: The Patient must keep himself free from Passions, especially
from Anger.

The Air must be temperate, and pure, and free from Smoke, Dust and Winds, and
the Room must be darkened, and the Eye must be covered with Black, Green or
Sky-colored Cloth; the well Eye must be also covered; because, when that moves
to view an object, the other is also moved.

The Course of Diet being thus appointed, the external Causes, from whence it
most commonly arises, must be removed. A Collyrium must be presently prepared,
made of Rose and Plantane-water, the white of an Egg, and of Woman's Milk, and
let it be dropped into the Eyes often in a Day; and a Rag dipped in it must be
applied over at the same time Sleep must be indulged as much as may be; for it
much furthers the Concocting, or discussing of the Morbifick Matter. If the
Disease be not taken off with these things, Remedies for a true Ophthalmia are
to be used in the following manner.

A Clyster must be first injected, and Blood must be drawn from the Part
opposite to the Part affected, and Bleeding must be repeated, till a sufficient
Evacuation and Revulsion are made; for this Disease has been often cured by
Bleeding alone; but respect must be had to the Age, the Sex, and Constitution
of the Sick; and in those that have had some accustomed Evacuation suppressed,
as of the Courses or Hemorrhoids, the inferior Veins must be opened, or Leeches
must be applied to the Hemorrhoids. But after a sufficient Evacuation of Blood
has made, by Vene-section, Revulsion must be also undertaken, by applying
Cupping-glasses, with, and without Scarification, to the Back and Shoulders,
Frictions and Ligatures are also used to the Inferior Parts; and to the
foresaid Revulsions, Derivation is to be joined, which is made by opening the
Veins of the Forehead and Temples, and in the Angle of the Eye; some apply
Leeches to the Temples, or behind the Ears; all which kinds of Derivation are
very useful after sufficient Evacuations.

Galen commends the opening of the Arteries of the Temples, when the Ophthalmia
proceeds from very hot and boiling Blood: And though this kind of Remedy is
seldom used in our Age; yet it is very beneficial, and without danger; for in
those lesser Arteries, by Ligature only, the Blood may be stopped.

Blisters are also of good use applied to the Neck, and behind the Ears; and
after Bleeding has been sufficiently used, Purging must be ordered, that the
hot Humors may be evacuated; but you must Purge with gentle Medicines, and
such as cool the Blood; as,

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce, of Sena two drams, of Rhubarb one dram, and
an half; infuse them in Fountain Water: To three Ounces of the strained Liquor,
add of Manna, and of Syrup of Roses solutive, each an ounce. Make a Potion to
be taken in the Morning; or the following Bolus may be used.

Take of Cassia newly extracted six drams, double Catholicon three drams,
Powder of Rhubarb one dram, with a sufficient quantity of Sugar; make a Bolus.

In a Phlegmatic Ophthalmia, Pills are frequently prescribed, as Pills of
Agarick, and the like; which although they be very proper when the Disease is
at its height, yet in the beginning, it is better to let them alone, lest the
Humors being put in a Commotion by the sharpness of the Medicine, may cause a
greater fluxion upon the Part. Neither is one Purge sufficient, but they must
be frequently repeated, if the Disease prove tedious; convenient preparations
being premised, as Apozems and Juleps proper for the peccant Humor: In the
first place, the heat of the Humors is to be temperated from the beginning of
the Disease, by refrigerating and thickning Juleps, or with an Emulsion of the
four greater cold Seeds, Lettice and white Poppy Seed, made with some cooling
Decoction; to which may be added Rose Water.

Universal Evacuations and Revulsions being premised, Topics are to take
place, and such as are repelling from the beginning ought to be used.
Nevertheless, the more rational Practitioners do advise, not to apply repelling
Collyriums at the beginning of the Disease: Because for the most part, they six
the Humor that slows upon the Part, and so augment the pain and inflammation.
Galen does censure an Oculist, because he proposed repelling Medicines to be
used at the beginning of an inflammation. Nevertheless, astringent Medicines may
be applied to the Forehead and the Temples at the very beginning of the
Disease; because by them the Veins by which the Humors fall upon the Eyes are
compressed, and the Humor repelled. They may be made after this manner:

Take of Bole-armenick, Dragons blood, Frankincense, Mastich, each one Dram;
red Roses, Balaustins, and the Flower of Lentles, each two Scruples, mix them
with the White of an Egg, and Vinegar of Roses. Make a Cataplasm to be applied
to the Forehead and Temples.

A Cataplasm made of the Juice of Nettles, and Wheaten Flower is esteemed very
effectual for stopping the Flux of Humors upon the Eye, being applied to the
Forehead and Temples; sometimes the Juice of Nettles by a specific quality
does stop all manner of Fluxes of Blood, being either applied outwardly to the
place, or taken inwardly.

In the mean time, if the pain be very violent, which causes a Fluxion more and
more upon the Eyes, anodine Medicines must be applied to the Eyes; of which the
new Milk of an healthful Woman is the best, which is to be milk'd from the
Breast into the Eye, instead of it new Cheese made of Sheeps Milk may be used:
But it must be often changed, lest it turn to Butter, and so augment the
inflammation.

The White of an Egg beat into Water, is greatly commended by Galen, because it
eases Pain, and stops the Fluxion gently.

An Apple roasted under Cinders does also greatly mitigate the pain of the Eyes.

The Mucilages of the Seeds of Fleabean, Quinces, and Fenugreek Seeds extracted
with Rose Water, do greatly ease Pain; they must be changed once in two days,
lest they become sharp. Of these, several Compositions may be made upon
occasion: For example.

Take of the Pap of a sweet Apple roasted under the Cinders one Ounce, of the
Mucilages of the Seeds of Psyllium and of Quinces extracted in Rose Water, each
six Drams, of the Liquor of the White of a new Egg, and Woman's Milk, each one
Ounce: Make a Cataplasm to be applied to the Eyes.

Pieces of Kids, Calves or Sheeps Flesh new killed, frequently applied to the
Eyes, powerfully ease Pains.

A more simple Cataplasm may be made of Crumbs of Bread moistened in Woman's Milk
and Rose Water.

But if the Pain be vehement, and intolerable, Narcoticks must be used, but
sparingly, and with Caution; because they condense the Spirits that serve for
Sight, and thicken the Coats of the Eye, and the Humors, and so dull the
Sight. Amongst the Ocular Narcoticks, Trochisci Albi Rhasis with Opium, are the
best, which may be prescribed after this manner.

Take of Rose Water two Ounces, the White of an Egg strongly beaten one Ounce,
Trochisci Albi Rhasis with Opium one Dram; make a Collyrium to be dropped into
the Eyes.

After the Pain is abated, repelling Medicines are to be used, which ought to
be moderate, and anodine Medicines are to be always mixed with them; to this
end the following Collyrium uses to be prescribed.

Take of Plantane-water, Rose Water, each an Ounce and an half, Liquor of the
White of an Egg an Ounce, Trochisci Albi Rhasis, without Opium, one Dram; make
a Collyrium to be often dropped into the Eyes.

If the Pain be more sharp, Woman's Milk, and the above mentioned Mucilages may
be added to the Collyrium.

The following Remedy powerfully abates the Inflammation, and stops the Fluxion.

Take the white of one Egg, beat it with a pretty big piece of Alum in a Tin
Platter; stir it until it has got the consistence of an Ointment: spread it
upon a Rag, and apply it warm to the Eyes; romove it in the space of two Hours;
lest by staying too long, it fix the Humors in the Eye, by the astringent
force which is in the Alum.

Sal Saturni dissolved in Rose Water or Oxycrate, or mixed with Pomatum, does
powerfully extinguish the Inflammation of the Eyes.

In the augmentation of the Disease, digesting Medicines are to be mixed with
repelling Medicines; therefore to the abovementioned Collyriums may be added,
Waters of Eyebright, Fennel, Celandine, and the Mucilages of the Seeds of
Flax, Marshmallows, Foenugreek. Galen chiefly commends the Decoction of
Foenugreek Seeds; because it Digests, Concocts, and moderately repels.

When the Disease is at a height, Sarcocol is also added to Collyriums, which
digests a little more powerfully: But because it hurts the Eyes by its
Acrimony, it is fit to infuse it some days in Milk, often changed before it be
used, and a small quantity of it ought to be prepared at once; for after it is
long kept it turns sharp, and is hurtful to the Eyes, it may be used after this
manner.

Take of Flowers of Melilot, Camomil, red Roses, each one pugil, of the Seeds
of Foemigreek well cleansed one dram; boil them in Plantane-water: in four
ounces of the strained Liquor, dissolve a dram of Sarcocol prepared, of Tutty
prepared, and Trochisci albi Rhasis without Opium, each half a dram, make a
Collyrium.

There are some Waters commended by Authors, as very effectual. Quercetan in
his Dispensatory, commends the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, in Eyebright and
Plantane-waters.

Crollius, and the rest of the Chemists, greatly commend Salt of Saturn
dissolved in Rose Water, to which may be added some Grains of Sal Ammoniacum:
It may be prescribed after this manner.

Take of Sacharum Saturni three grains, of Salt Ammoniacum three grains,
Rose Water three ounces; mix them, and drop of it into the Eyes Morning and
Night.

A Water made of white Vitriol, it being dissolved in Red Rose Water or
Plantane-water is commonly used; as, Take of White Vitriol one scruple,
dissolve it in four ounces of Plantane or Rose Water; strain it, and drop it
into the Eyes: If it be too sharp, it must be qualified by mixing more Water
with it.

Many Ointments are also commended for the Cure of an Ophthalmia.

Take of prepared Tutty an ounce and an half, of Camphor one dram, of
Verdigrease grains twelve; powder the Camphor and the Tutty together in a
Mortar, and the Verdigrease by it self, all of them must be very finely
powdered; then take of fresh Butter one Ounce, of Rose Water one dram, boil
them together gently, and having taken them from the Fire, mix by degrees,
first the Tutty with the Camphor, afterward the Verdigrease; strain them
through Silk, and make an Ointment; Anoint the inward part of the Eyelids,
especially about corners, with this Ointment.

This is of excellent use for Inflammations of the Eyes, and for itching of the
Eyelids.

When the Disease is come to its State, resolving Remedies ought to exceed
Repellents, and the same Remed^es which were used at the beginning are also
good, when it is at its height, if you increase the quantity of the Resolvents,
and lessen the quantity of the repelling Ingredients.

A Fomentation made in the following manner, is convenient to be used to
discuss the Morbisick Matter when the Disease is at height.

Take of the Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, Roses, each one Pugil, of the Seeds
of Fenugreek two Ounces, make a Decoction, wherewith foment the Eyes with
linen rags four times double.

This Fomentation may be also used at the beginning or declination of the
Disease; it must be applied hot in the Winter and warm in the Summer.

The Oil of Rags, or the Liquor which is drawn from Rags, burnt and
extinguished betwixt two Platters, is excellent to discuss an Ophthalmia, a
drop of it mixed with a Child's Spittle, being put into the Eye with a Feather.

And Collyria that are more resolvent may be used at the declination.

Take of Frankincense and Aloes each half a dram, of Sarcocol moistened with
Woman's Milk one dram and an half, of Saffron half a Scruple, of the Mucilage of
Fenugreek Seeds half an Ounce, of Fennel and Eyebright Water each an Ounce,
make a Collyrium.

Fennel Water mixed with Astringent Wine, is good to be used in the manner of a
Fomentation, to discuss the Relics of the Disease, and to strengthen the Eye.

A Decoction of Hyssop is excellent to take off the Redness which remains at
last.

But an inveterate Ophthalmia, which has continued many Years, requires a
somewhat different and longer Method of Cure. If it proceed from a hot
Intempories, then such Remedies as correct it are to be used; after Bleeding,
and convenient Purging Baths, Whey, and Vitriolick Mineral Waters, and Leeches
applied to the Hemorrhoids, do much good.

But if the matter of an Ophthalmia arise only from an Intemperies of the
Brain, from whence Phlegmatic Humors flow to the Eyes with somewhat of Blood;
then care must be taken to purge the Brain twice, thrice or four times in a
Month, and a Seaton must be made in the Neck, and Masticatories are of use.

But if the Brain want to be more dried, Sudorifick Decoctions of China,
Sarsaparilla, and the like, must be used, and the Resolvent Fomentation and
Ointment mentioned above are to be applied, and the following Water is very
effectual.

Take of the best Aloes, and of Tutty prepared, each six drams, of white Sugar
one Ounce, of Rose Water, and of White Wind that is not acid, each six Ounces,
infuse them in the Sun for forty days, in a Glass well stopped, drop in a few
drops of this Water, not strained, into the Eye.

Sometimes in an inveterate Ophthalmia much Filth like Matter is collected in
the Eyes, and in this case Cotton finely carded and well dried, and applied
over the Eyes for many nights together, will draw it out.

To conclude, Zacutus Lusitanus cured a desperate Ophthalmia, that had
continued, notwithstanding all other Remedies for a Year, with Fluxing.

CHAP. XXII. Of Matter collected under the Cornea.
INflan^ations of the Eyes, when they are Violent, and a great Tumor is raised,
cannot sometimes be dissolved but turn to Matter, which is greatly to be
feared; for then Ulcers succeed, and sometimes a Collection of Matter under the
Cornea, which is called Hypopyon: This also often happens by Contusions of the
Eyes.

This Disease is known, not only by the white color that resembles Matter, but
also by the Inflammation that went before; and when the Eye is moved, the
Matter seems to move under the Cornea; the Eye looks red, and there is a
throbbing Pain in it, or at least it went before.

In order to the Cure, Universal Remedies being premised, if any relics of the
Inflammation remain, they must be taken off by Remedies prescribed in the
foregoing Chapter, and afterward use a Fomentation made of the Flowers of
Camomil, Melilot, the Seeds of Psyllium, and Fenugreek, afterward you may use
the following Collyrium.

Take of the Waters of Vervain, Rue, Celandine, Roses, Fennel, each half an
Ounce; of the best Aloes, Tutty prepared, each half a dram; of Sugar Candy one
dram; powder them and mingle them, and add to them a little Woman's Milk; make a
Collyrium.

Drop a few drops into the Eye twice or thrice a day.

The following Medicine is also very effectual.

Take of Saffron, Aloes, Myrrh, each one dram, of Wine three drams, of Honey six
drams, dissolve the Saffron in Wine, then mingle the Aloes and Myrrh, and
lastly the Honey, anoint the Eyes with it.

And those Remedies are also proper, which were prescribed for Spots of the
Eyes, and for a Suffusion; but if the Matter cannot be discussed by resolving
Medicines, other Remedies must be used. Galen mentions an Oculist of his time,
that cured many of this Disease with placing the Patient upright in a Chair,
and holding his Head on both Sides, and suddenly shaking it, the Matter sunk
down: But if this will not do, Galen proposes to Cure it by Puncture, as in a
Suffusion: But for this Operation, the most skilful Surgeon must be procured.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Bladders called Phlyctaenae.
IN the Tunicks, called Cornea and Adnata, as in other Parts of the Body, are
wont to be generated small Bladders full of Water, like the Bladders which
arise from Scaulds; they are of the bigness of Millet Seeds, and are occasioned
by acid and watery Humors, they are easily known, for they appear to Sight:
Those that arise in the Adnata, are of a red Color; but those in the Cornea,
are blackish, when they are placed upon the Superficies of it; but they are
white, if they lie deep. Those that are seated in the Adnata, are not so
dangerous as those in the Cornea, the superficial is less dangerous than they
that are deep.

The Cure of then must be performed, by resolving the conjunct Matter, and by
turning the antecedent Cause the other way, and great care must be taken to
hinder Suppuration; wherefore universal Evacuations, Revulsions and
Derivations, which were proposed in the Cure of an Ophthalmia, are also of use
here. Afterward Topics are to be applied, which gently repel in the
beginning; but in the Progress of the Disease, such things as dry and and
resolve are to be used, which you may see in the Chapter of an Ophthalmia.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Ulcers of the Tunicks called Cornea and Adnata.
ULCERS in those Tunicks use to follow an Ophthalmia, when it comes to
Suppuration; they also follow the breaking of the Bladders in the Cornea: They
are also occasioned by sharp and corroding Humors, that fall upon the Eyes.
Great variety of them are proposed by Authors, according to the various
Circumstances.

They are easily known, because they appear to Sight: If the Ulcer be in the
Cornea, it appears white in the black of the Eye; if it be in the Adnata, a red
Spot appears in the white of the Eye. These Ulcers are very hard to Cure, and
dangerous; but much more in the Cornea, than in the Adnata. That which is near
the Pupil is most dangerous; because when it is cured, a Cicatrix is left
behind, which spoils the Clearness of the Sight.

The Cure of this Disease, as of other Ulcers, is to be performed by cleansing
and drying Medicines, but they must be very gentle, by reason of the softness
and exquisite Sense of the Part; but those things are to be used first which
stop the Fluxion: Such are to be found in the Chapter of an Ophthalmia. If
there be also an Inflammation and Pain, Medicines respecting both must be added
to the former.

Moderate cleansing and drying Medicines are, Sugar, Honey, Saffron, Myrrh,
Frankincense, Aloes, Sarcocol, Tutty, and Ceruss, whereof the following Forms
may be composed.

Take of the Decoction of Barley and Foenugreek four ounces, of the best Honey
half an ounce, or of Syrup of dried Roses one ounce; make a Collyrium,
wherewith wash the Eye often; or,

Take of Vervain and Plantane Waters each two ounces, of Sugar Candy half an
ounce, mingle them for a Collyrium; or,

Take of Honey Water distilled in a Bath, and of Rose Water each equal Parts; or,

Take an Egg boiled hard, and cleared from the Shell, divide it into two parts,
take out the Yolk, and fill the hole with Sugar Candy powdered, bind it up, and
set it in a Cellar, and a Liquor will drop from it, which is very fit to
cleanse Ulcers; if you would have it operate more powerfully, you must mix
powdered Myrrh with the Sugar Candy.

In the Progress of the Disease, if it is necessary to cleanse and dry more
powerfully, add to the forementioned Collyria, white Troches of Rhasis,
Frankincense, Aloes, Myrrh, Sarcocol, and such like in a small Dose: You may
also add Milk, the White of an Egg, Mucilages, and other Anodyns; but Tutty is
better than the rest, because it dries without causing Pain. The following
Collyrium is very drying and cleansing.

Take of Sarcocol moistened in Rose Water, of Ceruss, Aloes washed, Myrrh, Tutty
prepared, each half a dram, of Sugar Candy one dram, with the Mucilage of Gum
Tragacanth extracted in Rose Water; make a Collyrium, wherewith anoint the
Eyelids.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Cancer of the Cornea.
AS Cancers are wont to happen in all Parts of the Body, so also they sometimes
grow in the Eyes.

A Cancer of the Eye, is either occult or ulcerated: An occult is called a
Cancerous Tumor; when it is ulcerated, it is called a cancerous Ulcer; in both
there is an unequal hardness, and a leaden and livid Color, great and pricking
Pain, especially about the Temples, the Veins appear swollen like a Varix, in the
Tumor, and in the Neighboring Parts, sharp Blood frequently flows our, when
the Cancer is ulcerated; and the Pain is very much exasperated by Medicines,
that are never so little heating.

This Disease is incurable, both in the Eye and in other Parts of the Body when
it is rooted, unless it be irradicated by a Chirurgical Operation.

Two sorts of Cures are proposed by Authors, viz. a true one, and a palliative.

The true one can be performed only by Surgery, the palliative Cure, which
mitigates the Symptoms, is performed by Evacuations and convenient Topics. But
first of all, a cooling and moistning Course of Diet must be ordered,
afterward Blood must be drawn from the Part opposite to the Eye affected, and
Leeches must be applied behind the Ears of the same side, and to the
Hemorrhoidal Veins, if they are any whit swelled: Cupping-glasses must be also
applied to the Shoulders, and other sorts of Revulsions must be used.

Purging, and the prepara^ion of the Humors by Potions, Apozems, medicated
Brothes, and the like must be frequently prescribed: But above all, Black
Hellebore rightly prepared, or the extract of it; for an incipient Cancer has
been cured by using of it twice or thrice.

These Remedies hinder the influx of the Humors into the Eyes, and much lessen
the Pain and other Symptoms: But Topical Remedies, such as are described in the
Chapter of an Ophthalmia to ease pain, do also much good, especially Collyria
made of Mucilages, of the white Troches of Rhasis, of Tutty prepared, and with
the Water of Roses, Nightshade and Plantane.

The following Water is excellent for washing the Eye.

Take of the Roots of the greater Figwort, and of Herb-Robert, each two
handfuls, of Ribwort, Nightshade, Borrage, Bugloss, Purslain, Eyebright,
Betony, each one handful, of green Frogs, and of the white of Eggs, each number
seven, of the Seeds of Foenugreek and Quinces each one ounce; the Roots and
Seeds must be beat, and the Leaves cut; then pour upon them of Rose Water and
Eyebright water, each one pint: mingle them, and distill them in a leaden
Still.

The Flesh of Pullets eases the Pain much, and some say this Disease has been
cured by this Remedy only.

A Lady that had an ulcerous Cancer upon all the right side of her Face a long
while, and had used various Medicines that were prescribed by Italian, French,
German, and Spanish Physicians, was cured by a Barber by this common Remedy. He
cut Chickens into thin and broad Pieces, and applied them often in a day to the
Part affected.

Lastly, The true Cure of a confirmed Cancer can only be performed by the
Extraction of the Eye, which Fabricious Hildanus says may be safely and
successfully done; and he describes at large the manner of Extirpation, and all
the Circumstances of it in his Observations.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Rupture of the Cornea.
THERE is such a Solution of the Continuum in the horny Tunick sometimes, that
the watery Humor comes out of the Tunica Wea; this is called a Rupture of the
Cornea. The cause of this is either a Rupture, or a Wound, and it is most
commonly incurable; but if the Wound be small, and if but part of the watery
Humor flows out, the Cure may be undertaken: For Galen says that the watery
Humor is sometimes regenerated.

The Cure of this Disease must be entered upon, by conglutinating Remedies:
Universal Evacuations, namely, Bleeding and Purging, if they are necessary,
being first used; drop into the Eye the White of an Egg mingled with the white
Troches of Rhasis, and foment the Part, with the Decoction of Red Roses, of the
Leaves of Knot-grass, Brambles, Shepherds Purse and Plantane, made in
astringent Wine, if there be not an Inflammation; if there be, it must be made
in Simple Water. Or,

Take of Quinces paired, the Seeds and Cores being taken out, half a pound, of
red Roses three pugils, of Acacia two drams, of Saffron one scruple; boil them
in astringent Wine, and make a Pul^ise to be applied to the Part; and to
strengthen the whole, the following Collyrium must be used.

Take of Aloes washed, of prepared Tutty, and of Sarcocol moistened with Woman's
Milk, each half a scruple, Saffron grains eight, with Mucilage of Gum
Tragacanth; make a Collyrium.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Falling out of the Uvea.
THE Falling out of the Wea often succeeds the Rupture of the Cornea; the Cure
of it is very difficult: But if it be very small, it may be oured by moderate
Astringents, such as are proposed in the foregoing Chapter.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of a Fistula Lachrimalis.
HItherto the Diseases of the Eyes, which happen in the Tunicks or Humors of
them, have been treated of. It remains now, that we speak of the Diseases of
the Eyelids, and of the Corners of the Eyes. And first, the Tumor appearing
betwixt the greater Angle of the Eye, and the Root of the Nose offers it self,
it is called Oegylops, and Anchylops. Anchylops, before it is broken: But
Oegylops, after it is broken. This Tumor, or rather Tubercle, is sometimes with
an Inflammation, and sometimes without; when it is accompanied with an
Inflammation, it is red about and painful, and is occasioned by thin and
choleric Blood, brought by the Veins of the Temples, Forehead, and Face to the
Part, and for the most part degenerates into a sinuous Ulcer, and then it is
called Fistula Lachrimalis; which if it continues a Year, occasions a Caries of
the Bone, which may be known by the Cavity it makes, by the stinking Matter,
and the roughness that is perceived by the Probe.

This Tubercle also comes without an Inflammation, and then it is generated by
a gross and viscid Humor, that resembles Honey; then it is to be reckoned with
those Tumors which are called Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meliceris, which are wont
to be without Pain.

The Cure of an Oegylops is very difficult, because Medicines can be hardly
applied, by reason of the nearness of the Eye, and because by reason of the
softness of the Parts, it easily degenerates into a Sinous Ulcer: But is yet
more difficult to Cure, if the Abscess pass through the Nostrils, and Matter
flow through them; because the Bones that are under, are most commonly fouled
thereby.

But sometimes an Oegylops is of the Nature of a Cancer, which may be known by
the pricking pain, the swelling of the Veins, and the hardness and livid Color
of the Skin; and then it is better not to meddle with it, for Medicines make it
worse, and increase the Pain.

A new Fistula Lachrimalis, which has an outward and plain Orifice, is cured
by Medicines; but that which is deep and inveterate, and joined with a Caries
of the Bone can scarce be cured without a Cautery.

The various Seasons of this Disease require different Applications and
Remedies, and first at the beginning of an Oegylops, Revulsion of the Fluxion
to the Part must be made by Bleeding and Purging, and at the same time
repelling Medicines must be applied to the Forehead, whereby sometimes the
Progress of the Disease is stopped, and the suppuration hindered. To which end
the following Cerate may be applied.

Take of Pomgranate Peel, of Acacia, Balaustins, Cyperus Nuts, Roch Alum, and
Bole Armoniack each one Dram, of white Wax four ounces, of Turpentine three
drams; make a Cerate.

Having used this or the like, resolving Medicines are to be applied to the
Part for some time, as is the following Decoction.

Take of pure Honey, and of Aloes each two ounces, of Myrrh one ounce, of
Saffron one dram and an half, of Water a quart; boil them with a gentle Fire,
to the Consumption of half: dip a piece of soft Sponge, press it a little, and
apply it hot, afterward bind it on, and change it often.

If the Tumor cannot be dissolved by the foresaid Remedies, but tends to
Suppuration, it must be helped by a Plaster of simple Diachylon, or if the
Pain and Inflammation be violent, a Cataplasm of Crumbs of Bread may be
conveniently applied. If the Abscess does not break of its own accord, it must
be presently opened; for otherwise the Matter will corrode the neighboring
Parts, and occasion an incurable Fistula.

The Abscess being opened, the Ulcer must be cleansed, and cured after the
manner of other Ulcers: But if it prove obstinate, and turn to a Fistula, the
following Method of Cure must be used.

And first, universal Evacuations, as Bleeding and Purging are to be repeated:
The Fluxion from the Head is to be averted by Cupping-glasses, Blisters, and
Causticks applied to proper Places; after which a Decoction of China or Sarsa
may be used for a considerable time: In the mean time, the Brain is to be dried
by Suffumigations, Cephalic Powders, and other Medicines proposed in the
Chapter of a Catarrh.

In place of an Issue, a Seton may be put in the Neck, by which alone a Fistula
Lachrimalis was cured, according to the Relation of Fabritius Hildanus.

In using of Topics, the Orifice of the Ulcer is to be opened, and dilated
slowly and by degrees, by a Tent made of the Pith of Elder, prepared Sponge, or
the Root of Gentian. The Ulcer being sufficiently opened, the following
Medicines may be used.

Take of common Honey two ounces, Verdigrease one dram, Water of Rue four
ounces, the Verdigrease being powdered, boil them altogether, to the
Consumption of the third part. The strained Liquor warm may be put into the Eye
by a Syringe solftly.

This Remedy is to be continued for three Weeks, putting upon the Ulcer a
convenient Plaster, and defending the Eye by washing it with Rose Water.

The Ulcer being sufficiently cleansed, the following Collyrium may be used to
Incarnate and Cicatrize.

Take of Frankincense, Sarcocol, Aloes, Dragons Blood, Balaustins, Alum,
Antimony each one dram, Verdigrease five grains: powder them all finely, and
with a sufficient quantity of Rue-water make a liquid Collyrium, to be dropped
into the Eye thrice a day; and also the Tent may be dipped in it, and after it
is put in the Ulcer, a Plaster of Diapalma may be put over it.

If there be a Caries in the Bone, it can only be cured by an actual Cautery;
the manner of applying it is exactly described by Paraeus, Fallopius and
Aquapendens.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Rhyas and Encanthis.
TO a Fistula Lachrimalis ordinarily succeeds another Distemper, which is
called Rhyas, which is the Consumption of the Caruncle of the greater Angle of
the Eye, whereby it becomes larger. It is also produced by other Causes, as by
sharp Humors falling upon and corroding the Part, or by cleansing Medicines
which are used to Cure the Fistula Lachrimalis,

To a Rhyas is opposed an Encanthis, which is the immoderate growing and
standing out of the abovenamed Caruncle; which is occasioned by the too great
abundance of Blood falling upon the Part, or from an Ulcer of that Part, not
timely dried up.

A Rhyas is cured by Consolidating and Sarcotick Medicines, such are the
following:

Take of Red Roses one pugil, Cyperus Nuts, Myrtles, each two drams, Aloes a
dram and an half, rough Wine one pint, boil them to the Consumption of the
fourth part. Wash the affected Part with this Wine often: Or,

Take of Aloes, Frankincense each one dram, Dragons Blood half a dram, of Red
Roses, and berries of Sumach each one scruple, Rosewater a pound; boil them to
the Consumption of a fourth part, make it in the form of a Collyrium.

An Encanthis is cured by taking away the superfluous Flesh that grows in the
Corner of the Eye, which is performed by Medicines which eat away proud Flesh,
beginning with the more moderate, and proceeding to those that are more
powerful.

Therefore burnt Alum is to be first applied, and if that be not effectual,
Vnguentum Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, or Vitriol burnt is to be used. But if
these be not sufficient, the Caruncle is to be cut off, or consumed with an
actual Cautery.

In taking off the Canruncle care must be taken, that it be not altogether
taken away, lest the contrary Distemper, viz. a Rhyas, be produced.

CHAP. XXX. Of an Epiphora.
BY the Name of an Epiphora in general, a flux of Humors into any part
whatsoever is understood. Nevertheless, it is most commonly taken for the flux
of a thin Humor from the Eyes, which is also called involuntary Tears, which
use to flow from the Corners of the Eyes continually.

To the Production of these Tears; which preternaturally flow from the Eyes,
the ill disposition both of the part sending and the part receiving do concur.
The part which sends is the Brain, which being affected with a cold or hot
Intemperies, generates watery Humors, and sends them to the inferior Parts,
which are fit to receive them.

The recipient Part is the gland by the greater Corner of the Eye, and the
Caruncle placed above the same Corner: The thinness or thickness of which
Parts, or any other weakness, is the Cause why they so easily receive the
Humouts that flow into them.

This Humor is carried from the Brain into the Corners of the Eyes, sometimes
by the internal Veins, and sometimes by the external.

The Humor causing an Epiphora is sometimes cold, and then it produces no
other Inconvenience to the Sick, but the troublesomness of the Fluxion. But
sometimes it is accompanied with Saltness and Sharpness; and then it produces
Pain, Redness, and also the Exulceration of the Eyelids.

As to the Prognostic; A new Epiphora, occasioned by external Causes, is
easily cured, especially in those that are Young. When it is of long
continuance, and in an old Person, it is very hard to be cured. That which
proceeds from other Distempers, as from an Oegylops, Fistula Lachrimalis, and
the like, altogether depends upon the Cure of those Diseases.

The Cure of this Disease consists in taking away of the Fluxion, and in
strengthening the recipient Part.

The Fluxion is to be removed by Evacuation, Revulsion and Derivation of the
Peccant Humor, and the strengthening of the Part from which it is transmitted.

The Peccant or Serous Humor abounding in the Brain, is evacuated by Bleeding
and Purging.

Bleeding in a cold Intemperies of the Brain, is not proper, unless there
appears manifest Signs of a Plethora. But in a hot Intemperies, when the
Humors are sharp, Bleeding is very proper, and may be repeated twice or
thrice, if it be needful.

Such Purging Medicines must be used as agree with the Nature of the Patient.

Revulsion of the Humor must be made by Cupping-Glasses applied to the
Shoulders often, by Blisters frequently applied to the Neck, or by Issues in
the hinder Part of the Head, or in the Arms. Forestus says, when the Disease is
obstinate, a Blister applied to the forepart of the Head does much good.

For Derivation, Leeches applied behind the Ears are proper, and Masticatories
used in a Morning.

And least the Humors once evacuated should be generated again, the Brain must
be strengthened and dried; and if it be of a cold Intemperies, such things must
be used, as are proper to correct it; if of a hot, such coolling Medicines must
be used, as peculiarly respect the Head.

And whilst the foresaid Remedies are in use, Topical Remedies must be applied
to the Part receiving, and first, if the Humor flows by the external Veins,
astringents must be applied to the Forehead and Temples; and if the Fluxion
proceed from an hot an acrid Humor, the following Cataplasm must be applied.

Take of Bole Armenic, Dragons Blood, Balaustines, and of Myrtles each one dram
and an half, of Acacia and Hypocistis each one dram of Frankincense and Mastich
each two scruples, of red Roses one pugil; powder them, and mix them with the
white of an Egg, and a little Vinegar, make a Cataplasm, wrap it in a Rag, and
apply it to the foresaid Parts, and when it is dry renew it.

If it be occasioned by a cold Humor, the following Cerate must be applied.

Take of Frankincense and Mastick each one dram, and an half, of Gum Anime
Tacamahacca and Boodstone each one dram, of Gum Juniper two scruples, of
Turpentine and Wax a sufficient quantity, make a Cerate.

But to the part affected, astringent and drying Collyria must be applied, made
in the following manner.

Take of Tutty prepared one dram, of Sarcocol moistened half a dram, of
Frankincense and Mastich each half a scruple, of Spikenard grains six; make
Troches, mix them with the White of an Egg, and Juice of Quinces, and apply
them to the Corner of the Eye. Or,

Take of Aloes, Cypress Nuts, Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, each two drams, of
prepared Tutty, Sarcocol moistened, each one dram and an half, of Dragons Blood,
Barberries, Summach, Red Roses each one scruple, powder them finely, and mix
them with Fennel-water, and make a Collyrium.

When the Fluxion is hot, the following is best:

Take of white Troches of Rhasis without Opium, of Sarcocol moistened, of Acacia
and Olibanum each one dram, of the Stones of Myrobalans burned, of white and
red Coral each half a dram, of Pearls half a scruple, of the Juice of
Pomgranates boiled half away, a sufficient quantity. Make a Collyrium.

If redness of the Eyes accompanies an Epiphora, the following is proper.

Take of grains of Sumach bruised one scruple, of Plantane-water one ounce,
infuse them for some time; then press then out hard, and add of Rose Water, and
Eye-bright-water, and of the White of an Egg well beaten, each half an ounce,
of Sugar Candy finely powdered one scruple. Make a Collyrium.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Disease of the Eye, called Unguis Oculorum.
IT is a hard and nervous Membrane that arises from the greater Angle of the
Eye; it first covers the White of the Eye, and then the Black, and the whole
Pupil, and so it hinders Sight. Sometimes it is thin, and white, and sometimes
fleshy, and consists of many bloody Veins.

This Disease arises from an Ulcer of the Flesh in the Angle of the Eye, upon
which account an inequality arises in the part, which in time grows to this
covering.

It is difficultly cured; for the sharp Medicines that are necessary for taking
it off, must be used leasurely and by degrees, by reason of the exquisite Sense
of the Eye. When it is of a moderate bigness, it may be cured by Medicines; but
when it has extended it self to the Black of the Eye and is become inverate,
it can be cured only by manual Operation.

When it is thick and hard, and of a blackish Color, it is of a Cancerous
Nature, and can never be cured.

The Cure must be directed to the antecedent, and conjunct Cause.

With respect to the antecedent Cause, such course of Diet must be ordered, as
has been proposed for other Diseases of the Eyes arising from Fluxion,
Evacuations and Revulsions are also to be used; and after sufficient
Evacuation, such Topics are to be applied, as may consume it, beginning with
those that are gentle, such as are prescribed for taking off Spots; but if they
are not sufficient, stronger must be used. Forestus commends the following
Collyrium very much.

Take of the Juice of Fennel four ounces, of the Juice of Celandine three
ounces, of the Juice of Rue two ounces, of the Juice of Mallows two ounces and
an half, of Aloes one dram, of Vitriol two scruple, of Verdigrease one scruple,
of Ginger and Cinnamon half a scruple, of the Gall of an Eele, of Ox Gall, or
Hogs Gall two drams, of Sugar Candy two scruples; boil the Juices, add the rest
and clarify them, so make a Collyrium.

But before, and after the use of these things, the Eye must be fomented with
an emollient Decoction.

But if it cannot be cured by Topical Remedies, you must proceed to Chirurgical
Operation; the manner whereof is described by Celsus, and others.

Of Diseases of the EARS.
CHAP. XXXII. Of Deafness and Difficulty of Hearing.
WE treat of Deafness and Difficulty of Hearing in the same Chapter, because
they proceed from the same Causes, and differ only in degree.

They are either occasioned by Diseases of the Head, or by a fault in the Ears.

A Cold Intemperies of the Brain, repletion or weakness, or any other Disorder,
especially in that Part from whence the Nerves of Hearing arise, may occasion
Deafness of Difficulty of Hearing. The fault of the Ear may be in the inward or
outward part of it. In the outward Cavity, a perfect or imperfect Stoppage, by
reason of a Tumor, Abscess, Blood, Matter, Phlegm, or other things from within,
or without, may occasion a difficulty of Hearing: But it is to be noted, that
though the outward Cavity be quite stopped, yet perfect Deafness will not
follow; for sounds can pass through the Mouth to the Ears: for there is an open
Passage from the Palate to the inward Cavity of the Ears, which serves for the
cleansing the Ears, aad those that are Deaf, are wont to open their Mouths,
that they may hear the better: And if Traveling by Night, you put one end of
your Stick, or the point of your Sword betwixt your Teeth, and the other end on
the Ground, you will easier hear a noise from a far, and Footsteps of those
that follow you.

In the inward part of the Ear, Humors collected in the inward Cavity flowing
principally from the Head, most commonly Phlegmatic, but sometimes Choleric,
occasion Deafness, or Difficulty of Hearing: But these Humors are sometimes
transmitted to the Ears from the whole Body, as in continual Fevers, especially
when they are malignant; but it also proceeds from an ill Conformation of the
Organs of Hearing, as when the Tympanum is relaxed by a violent noise, or from
moisture. And for this reason very many deaf People hear worst in a Southerly
Constitution, because the Membrane is relaxed by the moisture of the Air: But
sometimes the Tympanum is stretched and dried too much, as after acute
Diseases, Watching or Fasting, and sometimes it is broke by violent Motions, or
corroded by Matter: But sometimes Matter and Blood flow from the Ear in great
Concussions, without any injury to the Hearing, when they break out betwixt the
Bone, and the Membrane; or if other Parts of the Ear are disordered from the
Birth, or by reason of some external Cause, as from a Fall, a Blow, or the
like. Lastly, a cold Intemperies occasioned by cold Air, or cold Water falling
into Ear, or the immoderate use of Narcoticks, or of other Medicines, may
occasion this Disease.

To distinguish particularly all those Causes by their Signs is very difficult,
yet they may be guest at in the following manner.

If Deafness happen by reason of a Disease in the Head^ some other Senses are
also hurt, or some peculiar Disease appears in the Brain, as pain or dullness of
the Head, Apoplexy, Lethargy or the like.

The Stoppage of the outward Cavities of the Ears may be perceived by the Eyes,
if by the Sun you look into the Cavities; for then you may see, whether it be a
Tumor or gross Matter, or any other Heterogeneous Substance; and then you may
know, by the relation of the Patient, whether any thing is fallen into the Ear.

But if the inward Cavity be filled with some Humor, we may reasonably suppose
it is Phlegm, if a Phlegmatic Fluxion troubled the Sick before, or if he has
been frequently subject to such Fluxions.

But if a Choleric Humor occasions this Disease, a Cholerlck Fever afflicts
the Sick, or went before, and it is also accompanied with violent Pain, if it
proceed from Blood, the Pain is heavy, and Blood abounds in the whole Body.

The looseness and moisture of the Tympanum is known by moist Causes going
before, and by a moist Intemperies seizing some other Part; for it can scarce
be imagined that moisture should only seize this part. Too much dryness or
tensity of Tympanum may be known by the dryness of the whole Body, and drying
Causes going before.

We may also guess at the Rupture or Errosion of the Drum, if the violent
corroding and tearing Causes abovementioned went before.

As to the Prognostics of this Disease. Deafness from the Birth, or which has
continued a long while, and is absolute, is incurable. And that which is not
absolute, but of a long standing, is seldom or never cured.

That Deafness which proceeds from Choler or Blood, in acute and continual
Fevers, commonly goes off when the Fever ceases.

Difficulty of Hearing, if it be not soon cured, degenerates into a perfect
Deafness; if the Drum be broke, and if a Cicatrix be left upon it, the Deafness
is incurable.

That Deafness which increases and decreases by intervals, is curable.

As to the Cure: That Deafness which proceeds from a Disease of the Head,
requires no other Cure than what is requisite for the Cure of the said Disease;
that which arises from a Tumor that is hard and inveterate is incurable: But
if it be hot and inflamed, the Cure of it is proposed in the Chapter of Pains
of the Ears: But if it proceed from Matter collected in the Ear, see the
Chapter of the things that come preternaturally from the Ear. If it proceed
from dryness, it must be cured by a moistning Diet, by long Sleep, and by
washing the Head with warm Water, and dropping moistning things into the Ear,
as Oil of sweet Almonds and the like: If it proceed from any thing dropped into
the Ear, that must be forthwith washed out, shook out, or extracted; and if
some little Animal has crept into the Ear, it must either be allured out, or
killed. The Ears are washed by pouring in such things as moisten, smoothen and
dilate them as Milk, Oil of sweet Almonds, or some mollifying or loosning
Decoction. Things are shook out of the Ears by Sneezing. It is also good in
this case to bend the Ear downwards, and to hop upon the Leg of the same side;
for by this means, Boys shake Water out of their Ears when they have been
swimming. But if those things do not succeed, you must endeavor to extract it
by carefully putting an Ear Pitcher beyond it, or with a pair of Forceps fitted
for the purpose.

But if this does not succeed, you must endeavor to break them, and afterward
wash them out; and to this purpose, a Probe with Cotton on the end of it, and
dipped in Turpentine, or the like, is put into the Ear, to clear the Passage;
and if any of the clammy Matter remains behind, it may be cleared by an
Ear-Picker. Some cut a Quill, and put one end into the Ear, and endeavor to
suck out what is in it.

Animals are allured out of the Ear, by putting such things to it, as are
pleasing to them; as a Sponge dipped in Milk and Sugar, or the Pulp of a sweet
Apple, or Lard wherewith little Worms are much pleased, and soon come out of
the Ear, if it be turned to the Sun. If a Leec^ happen to get into the Ears, it
may be enticed out, by putting Blood to the Ear; Gnats may be drawn out, by
putting Dogs Hairs into the Ears; but if you cannot get them out, alive, it is
best to kill them, because then they will not disturb the Ear so much, and may
be easier drawn out; they may be killed by dropping Spittle or Urine into the
Ear. But bitter things kill them soonest, as the Juice of Wormwood, a Decoction
of Aloes, or any Gauls, sharp things do also the same, as Vinegar, the Juice of
Onions, and the like.

But because a cold Intemperies is the most frequent cause of Deafness, the
Cure must be chiefly directed to the amendment of it; wherefore an attenuating,
drying, and moderately heating course of Diet being ordered, as is prescribed
for the Gutta Serena; and Southerly Winds being avoided as much as possible,
and the Ears defended from them; Vaporous Aliments must be avoided, especially
Garlic and Onions, which are very injurious to the Hearing, and also those
that generate gross and phlegmatic Humors; these things, I say being first
observed, general Evacuation must be entered upon by Head Purges. Bleeding must
be also used if there be an indication for it; and if the Disease be obstinate,
a Sudorifick Diet, afterward particular Remedies that cause a Revulsion of the
Humors, as Blisters, Issues, Sneesing Powders, Masticatories, Apophlegmatisms,
but especially Masticatories.

But Sulphurous and Bitumenous Baths are peculiarly proper for the Cure of
this Disease, the Body being bathed, and the Head washed with them; afterward
topical Remedies are to be applied, to discuss the Matter in the Ear.

Take of the Leaves of wild Marjoram, Wormwood; Pennyroyal, wild Thym, Sage,
Mint, the lesser Centaury, Mallows, Marshmallows each one handful, of the
Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, Stechas, and Rosemary each one pugil, of Cinnamon
and Cloves, each half an ounce; boil them in equal parts of Fountain Water and
White Wine added toward the end. Strain it, and foment the Ear with it hot
with a Sponge Morning and Evening; and the Vapor of the Decoction may be
received into the Ear through a Tunel.

It certainly does much good by passing into the innermost Parts of the Ear.
Instead of the Fomentation, Bread made up with Carraway-seeds, cut and applied
hot from the Oven, may be used; or common Bread just taken out of the Oven, the
under Crust being cut off dipped in Spirit of Wine, and applied as hot to the
Ear as can be born, is also of good use: But the Bread will be more effectual,
if with the common Flower, the Seeds of Carraways, Juniperberries, Bayberries,
and Nutmegs are mixed with it.

If you will have a stronger Decoction, you may add of the Pulp of Coloquintida,
or of the Roots of white Hellebore each one dram: After fomentation, some
Liquor must be instilled into the Ear, and afterward you may stop it with
Cotton perfumed with Musk.

Take of Oil of bitter Almonds, and of Rue each one ounce, mingle them, and
pour it hot into the Ear. Or,

Take of Oil of Castor, and white Lillies, each one ounce, of Oil of Dill half
an ounce, of white Hellebore half a dram, of Aqua Vitae one ounce: boil them in
a Bath, till all the Aqua Vitae is evaporated. Strain it for the use
abovementioned.

Chemical Oils are are very effectual, as of Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage, Fennel.
Spike, Cloves; but because they are very strong, they must not be used alone;
but they are to be mixed in a small quantity with the foregoing Oils, half a
dram of them, may be sufficient to be mixed with two ounces of the foresaid
Oils.

The Water that drops out of an Ash-stick when it is burning, is much commended
for Deafness, when it proceeds from a hot Cause.

The Fat of an Eel is much in use; it is gathered from the Water wherein a Fat
Eel is boiled, being Scum'd off with a Bay-leas, and dropped hot into the Ear.

In applying topical Remedies, this must be always observed, viz. that they are
applied warm or hot, and what has been used before must be taken out of the
Ear, before other things are dropped in; and when any thing has been dropped
in, the Ear must be stopped with Cotton perfumed with Musk, which of it self is
very good for Deafness.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Noise in the Ears.
THE Sense of Hearing is obstructed by a Noise in the Ears; for as the Eye
ought to be void of Color, that it may rightly perceive all the Colors of
Objects: For if it be preternaturally affected with any Color, as in the
Jaundice, the Sight must be necessarily depraved, so the Ear should have no
sound in it, that it be able to receive all Sounds that come from abroad, for
if any Sound is preternaturally in the Ear, it hinders Hearing.

This Noise in the Ear proceeds from a preternatural Commotion of the inbred
Air; for though this inbred Air moves naturally, yet no noise is heard from its
Motion, unless we stop the Ear with the hand, or with some such thing.

The Causes of this extraordinary Motion are Vapors, Wind, or Spirits,
transmitted to the Ear from other Parts, or bred in it; if it be brought from
other Parts, it proceeds either from the whole Body, or some peculiar Part. It
flows from the whole Body in Fevers, and this Sound in the Ear comes from a
windy Spirit conveyed through the Arteries from the whole Body to the Ears: But
it most frequently happens at the beginning of Fits, and just before a Crisis
by a Bleeding at the Nose. Wind is also elevated to the Ears, from some
peculiar Part, viz. from the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Mesentery, Womb, and from
some other Parts; upon which account, inviolent Vomiting, Hypochondriack
Melancholy, and Mother-Fits, there is frequently a Noise in the Ears. It is
also occasioned by windy Spirits flowing from the Head, that arise from Cold
and Phlegmatic Humors. Wind is also generated in the Ear by Phlegmatic Matter
contained there. Upon which account, difficulty of Hearing is commonly
accompanied with a Noise in the Ear, for the Obstruction is occasioned by
Humors, Other Causes occasioning this Noise in the Ears, are Ulcers, a hot
Intemperies, Weakness, exquisite Sense, a violent shaking in the Head, and
violent Sounds.

The Cure of this Disease is to be varied, according to the variety of the
Causes; and first the Cure of the Noise proceeding from a consent of other
Parts, depends on the Cure of the Diseases of those Parts: But that which
arises immediately from the Ear requires a peculiar Cure; and if it be
generated by a cold Intemperies, and from gross Wind, it requires the same Cure
which is described in the Chapter above. If it proceed from an Ulcer in the
Ears, it requires the same Cure, which is proposed for Curing the Ulcer in the
following Chapter. If it proceed from Weakness, after long Sickness, it will
decrease gradually as the Strength increases. But you must drop into the Ear
Oil of Camomil, of Dill, or Oil of sweet Almonds. And lastly, if it takes its
rise from a hot Intemperies, or an exquisite Sense, a cooling and moistning
Diet must be ordered, and cooling things must be dropped into the Ear, and
first a Decoction of Barley, Violets, Lettice, Water Lilies, to which may be
added, to make it more penetrating a little Balm or Camomil; and if these do no
good, the Juice of Lettice, Purslane, and Henbane may be used. Galen proposes
the Juice of Poppies, and Opium it self; but these are to be used sparingly,
least by weakening the Native Heat of the Part, they should too much dull the
Hearing.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Pain of the Ears.
PAIN of the Ears is a very violent Disease. The chief Causes of it are
Intemperies immaterial and humoral, Wounds, Ulcers, and external Things falling
or thrust into the Cavity of the Ear.

A cold Intemperies often occasions a Pain in the Ears; it is occasioned by
cold Winds, cold Water, and other cold thlngs; for cold things are injurious to
those Membranous and nervous Parts.

But a cold Matter occasioning Pains in the Ears, is either Phlegmatic, or
Serous flowing from the Brain, or Wind transmitted from the Brain, or lower
Parts.

Hot Matter occasioning those Pains is either Choleric, or Sanguinious,
whereby an Inflammation is raised.

If an immaterial Intemperies be the Cause, there is no weight peceived in the
Ear, nor no Tumor. A cold Intemperies is known by cold Causes going before, as
traveling in the Winter time, the increase of Pain by external Cold, and its
being eased by the Application of hot things. A hot Intemperies may be known,
by the external things that heat, as a hot Air, the heat of the Sun, pain
arising from the use of hot things.

If the pain arise from a Phlegmatic Humor, there is a weight perceived in the
Ear and in the Head, and a Phlegmatic Fluxion has sometimes fallen upon some
other Parts. Besides, cold Causes went before, as cold and a Northerly Wind,
cold Aliments, Winter time, old Age and the like.

If the Pain arise from Wind, it will be violent, but not continual, and a
noise of the Ear will be joined with it.

That it comes from a Serous Humor, may be known by other Diseases produced by
it, and afflicting the Sick at the same time, as sharp and thin Fluxions on the
Teeth, the Eyes, the Ears, the Breast, and other Parts, and by an Evacuation of
serous Humor by Vomit, Stool, Urine and Sweat.

If it arises from a Choleric Humor, it will be pricking and sharp, with a
sense of heat; it will be eased by cooling Medicines, and the Constitution is
hot and choleric, the Sick young, the Course of Diet hot, it is Summer, and
some other heating Causes went before.

An Inflammation is known by the Violence of the Pain, Pulsation, by great heat
and redness, that extend themselves sometimes to the Cheeks and Temples; a
violent continual Fever accompanies it, sometimes a Delirium, Convulsion,
Fainting, and Coldness of the extreme Parts.

A Wound may be known by Blood pouring from the Ear, an Ulcer by Matter flowing
out: But because a Flux of Matter sometimes flows from the Brain through the
Ears, there is need of distinction; for if it proceed from the Brain, the Pain
of the Head, and other Signs of an Imposthume went before, the Matter is
evacuated in great quantity, and is lessened by degrees, till at length it
quite ceases. But it may proceed indeed in a great quantity from an Abscess of
the Ear; but then the Signs of an Inflammation went before, afterward an Ulcer
follows, which afterward may be known by the following Signs, whether it takes
its rise from an Abscess, or from a Flux of some sharp Humor, A small quantity
of Matter flows continually, pain and heat, and pricking in the Ear, especially
when the Ear-Picker is put in. Moreover, we may guess at the differences of the
Ulcer; for if the Ulcer actually exists, it may be known by the thin Sanies,
that is of a Citron Color: And by the length of the Disease, you may know if
it be deep by the quantity of Matter; if it be sordid, by the thickness and
quantity of it; if it be virulent, by the thin Sanies; if putrid, by the
stinking Matter; if corrosive, by Blood flowing out after the Sanies; if it be
Fistulous, by the duration of the Ulcer, the virulent Sanies, and by the hard
and callous Flesh. Things fallen into the Ear, or thrust into it, may be known
by the relation of the Sick, and may be perceived in the Cavity of it.

The Prognostic of the Pain of the Ear is various, according to the variety of
the Causes; that which proceeds only from an Intemperies, is easily cured. That
which proceeds from cold, phlegmatic, serous, or windy Matter, is not
dangerous, but is most commonly long in curing: But that which proceeds from
hot Humors, and especially if they cause an Inflammation, is very dangerous
for the Brain, by reason of its nearness, suffers by consent, and a Delirium
and a Convulsion often follow; and young Men are in most danger of this
Disease; for they being of a hot Constitution, and their Blood being hot, the
Inflammation is so great, that it destroys the Native Heat of the Brain, and
kills the Sick within a Week; but old Men's Humors are colder, and the
Inflammation less, and so they are less in danger.

Ulcers in the Ears are difficultly cured, because the Brain puts off its
Excrements upon them, but those that follow an Abscess are easier cured, and
also those that yield good Matter: But when the Sanies is virulent, fetid, or
otherwise ill qualified, the Cure will be very difficult, and especially if the
Ulcer be Fistulous, or the Bone foul.

The Cure must be varied according to the variety of the Causes, if it proceed
from a cold Intemperies alone, bo^^ Medicines applied to the Ear may be
sufficient for the Cure, such as were proposed for the Cure of Deafness A hot
Intemperies, if at any time it happen without Matter, may be cured by cooling
Topics.

If it proceed from a cold Intemperies joined with Matter viz. Phlegm, or Wind,
or serous Matter, the same Cure is to be administered, which was proposed for
the Cure of Deafness*

If it arise from a hot Intemperies with a Fluxion o^ Choleric Humors; first
the Humout flowing to the Part must be drawn away by Bleeding, whereby also the
hot Intemperies of the whole Body, may be moderated* afterward the peccant
Humor must be evacuated by proper Purgers; and afterward cooling Juleps and
Broth^* Goats Milk, Mineral Waters, Baths of warm Water, and the like, must be
used; and lastly, all those things are to be used, which are proposed for the
Cure of a Headache, proceeding from a hot Intemperies: But the Pain must be
assuaged by cooling and anodyn Topics.

For the Cure of an Inflammation of the Ear, an emollient, cooling, and
loosning Clister must be injected, and so much Blood must be taken away, as may
answer to the fullness of it, and to make a sufficient Revulsion of the Humor
flowing to the affected Ear, the Cephalic Vein opposite to it must be opened,
and a great quantity of Blood must be taken away at several times; and if the
Disease seem to arise from a Suppression of the Courses, or of the Hemorrhoids,
the inferior Veins must be opened, a good quantity of Blood being first taken
from the Arm. And if those Causes are absent, the opening of the inferior Veins
will make an excellent Revulsion to the most distant Parts, to which end
Leeches applied to the Anus are also proper.

Revulsions may be also commodiously made by Frictions, and Ligatures of the
Arms and Legs, and by Cupping-glasses applied to the Shoulders and Back.

And sometimes Cupping-glasses applied behind the Ears for to make Derivation,
do much good.

Zacutus Lusitanus also commends Leeches applied behind the Ears, four of a
side, which he says, gave much relief to a certain young Man, who was afflicted
with a violent Inflammation of the Ear: The opening of the Artery of the
Temples has also sometimes admirable Success. Purging is also very proper in
this Disease, with Cholagoges; afterward the whole Mass of the Humors is to
be attemperated with cooling Juleps made of a Decoction of Lettice, Purslain,
Plantane, Sorrel, and the like, also of the Syrups of Lemons, Pomegranates, and
of red Poppies.

In the mean time, whilst the foresaid Remedies are used, Topics are to be
continually applied, which must be always anodyn, by reason of the Violence of
the Pain, the Mitigation whereof is principally to be taken care of; but at the
beginning and increase, gentle Repellents are to be mixed with the anodyns; at
the State and Declination, Resolvents are to be mixed with them.

Take of Woman's Milk, fresh drawn, two ounces; of the white of an Egg beat to a
Liquor half an ounce; mix them, and drop it warm into the Ear.

Or the Milk alone milk'd into the Ear.

Take of the leaves of Plantane, and Nightshade, each one handful; of the
flowers of Camomil and Melilot, each one Pugil; make a Decoction; let the
Vapor be received into the Ear by a Tunnel.

Take of Oils of Violets, Water Lillies and Roses, each one Ounce, mingle them,
drop it warm into the Ear.

Millepedes infused in the foresaid Oils, and pressed out, make an excellent
Anodyn; for they have an excellent Faculty to ease Pain, and for that reason
they are used for Pains of the Teeth, the Piles, and other Pains.

If the Heat is very violent, cooling Juices are to be mixed with the foresaid
Oils in the following manner.

Take of Oil of Water Lillies, and Oil of Roses, each one ounce, of the Juice
of Nightshade and Plantane, each half an ounce, mingle them, and drop it into
the Ear.

Oxyrrhodinum is used by many Practitioners, made of Oil of Roses two parts,
and one part of Vinegar; but it may be suspected as may be also all other
things which repel powerfully, for there is danger, least the Humor should
flow back upon the Brain; and it is a general Precept always to be observed,
not to apply strong Repellents in Inflammations that are near noble parts; but
gentle Repellents may be mixed with Loosening and Anodyn things; for so the
Fluxion may be moderately suppressed, and not driven far back.

But in violent Pains we are forced to use Narcoticks, but they must be used
rarely, and with great caution, for they are offensive to the Head. I know a
Person, says Galen, who lost his Speech and Sense by the use of Opium, nor
could he be restored by any Medicines: But if there be absolute Necessity, they
may be prescribed in the following manner.

Take of the Oil of the Seeds of Poppies one ounce and an half, of Camphor and
Opium each two grains, mingle them, and drop them into the Ear. Or,

Take of Oil of Sweet-Almonds two ounces, of the Juice of Mallows half an
ounce, of Myrrh half a dram, of Saffron half a scruple, of Opium three or four
grains, mingle them, use it as above.

In the Application of Topics the Precept of Galen must be carefully observed,
viz. That the inflamed Ear be not touched, but Medicines must be dropped into the
Ear by a Probe wrapped round with the softest Wool dipped in the Medicines, and the
Sick must be asked whether it be warm, and whether he can bear it any hotter,
and you must drop it in as hot as he can bear it; the Probe must be dipped in the
Medicine and applied gently to the passage of the Ear, that it may flow into
it; you must continue doing of it till the passage is full, and then apply over
it to the mouth of the passage and over all the Ear, Wool dipped in the Medicine.

At the state of the Disease, Oils gently resolving are to be mixed with
Anodyns in the following manner.

Take of the Oils of Camomil, Sweet-Almonds, and Violets, each one ounce, Oil
of Lillies half an ounce, mix them.

But Fomentations and Fumes resolve more powerfully, which may be prepared of
the following Decoction.

Take of roots of Marshmallows one ounce; of the leaves of Mallows, Nightshade
and St. John's Wort, each an handful, of the Seeds of Flax half an ounce, of the
Seeds of Mallows, Marshmallows, white Poppies, each two drams; of the flowers
of Camomil, Dill and Roses, each one Pugil, make a Decoction in Water or Milk
for a Fomentation or Fume.

The Water drawn from Ash-sticks, being dropped into the Ear eases the pain
wonderfully; it is drawn by burning green sticks in the Fire, it drops from the
ends of them.

If the Tumor cannot be resolved, but tends to Suppuration, which may be known
by the increase of the pain a great Pulsation, and a violent Fever, Nature
must be furthered in her Motion, and the following Cataplasm must be applied.

Take of Crumbs of white Bread one pound, boil them in Milk to the consistence
of a Poultis; then add the yolks of Eggs number two, of Oil of Roses two
ounces, of Saffron one scruple, make a Cataplasm. Or,

Take one Onyon, fresh Butter two Ounces, Oil of Camomil and Roses, each one
ounce, of Saffron one scruple; make a Cataplasm, which must be applied
moderately hot to the part.

When the Abscess is broken, and the Matter comes out through the Membrane of
the Ear, either rarefied or corroded; then the Sick should lie on the Ear
affected, that the Matter may flow out easily, and such things should be dropped
into the Ear, as may wash and cleanse it.

Take of the Decoction of Barley four ounces, of Honey of Roses one ounce,
mingle them, drop it warm into the Ear.

If the Ulcer be generated by Acrimony of Matter, it requires a peculiar Cure,
which may also be used for an Ulcer arising from Fluxion of Humors.

And first, according to the Opinion of Galen, Topical Medicines must not be
applied to any Member, before the whole Body is purged; wherefore Evacuation by
Bleeding and Purging being administered, agreeable to the Nature and
Constitution of the Patient, and repeated through the whole course of the Cure
as often as there is occasion, drying and astringent Topics may be used,
beginning with the Mild, and proceeding to Stronger by degrees. For instance,

Take of the best Honey, and of old White Wind, each three ounces, boil them
till all the Scum rises, drop it into the Ear; afterward stop the Ear with
Cotton dipped in the same Liquor; when you would have the Medicine stronger, mix
the Juice of Horehound, Smallage, Wormwood, the lesser Centaury, or of
Sow-bread with Honey; boil them gently, and drop them into the Ear. Or,

Take of the Juice of Beets one ounce, of Horehonnd half (...) ounce, of the
best Honey six drams; boil them a little; afterward add two drams of Syrup of
Wormwood, mingle them.

You may make a stronger Medicine in the following manner*

Take of the Juice of Sow-bread one ounce, of Myrrh on^ ounce, of Saffron half
a scruple, of Frankincense one scruple, of Verdigrease half a scruple, of old
Wine one ounce an^ an half, boil them till the Wine is consumed, drop the
Liquor into the Ear twice or thrice a day.

Note, Before any Liquor is dropped in, the Ear must be well cleansed with warm
Hydromel, a Probe wrap^ round with a Cotton, being dipped in the Liquor, and used
for that purpose.

The Ulcer being well cleansed it must be cicatrized by Epulotick Medicines
used in the following manner.

Take of round Birthwort, of the bark of Pomegranates, and of Galls, each half
an ounce, boil them in equal parts of Wine and Smith's-water to half a pint;
strain it, and add to it of the Juice of Plantane and Knot-grass, each one
ounce, of Honey of Roses two drams; mingle them, and drop it into the Ear; or
drop into the Ear burnt Alum mixed with the Wine, for it is very drying.

If the Ulcer be very obstinate, and has continued a long while, it is
certainly promoted by Fluxion, which therefore you must endeavor to remove, by
Purging and a Diet-drink of Gujacum or Sarsaparilla, by Errhins, Masticatories,
Issues, and by other Remedies that divert the Fluxion.

If Pain arise by reason of the Sharpness of the Remedies, Oil of Sweet or
Bitter Almonds, with Myrrh, Aloes and Saffron, must be dropped into the Ear: If
the Pain be violent, a little Opium must be mixed with them, or the Oil of the
Yolks of Eggs beat in a leaden Mortar may be used.

If the Ulcer be very Sordid, Aegyptiacum must be mixed with the foresaid
Juices.

If the Pain of the Ear be occasioned by something thrust into the Ear, you
must endeavor to draw it out, by wrapping Wool upon a Probe dipped in
Turpentine, or made glutinous by Rosin, or some other Gum: But if this will not
do, warm Oil must be often dropped into the Ear, to relax it, and to Lubricate
the Matter contained in it, and so it may the easier be drawn out, and
Sneesing-powder must be given, and these things must be used continually till
the Sick is freed; for if any thing remain long in the Ear, an Inflammation
will arise, and afterward it will be much more difficult to extract any thing
from the Ear; and there will be besides great danger.

Lastly, If the foresaid Remedies are not sufficient, Chirurgical Instruments
must be used. See the manner of Extraction in Fabritius Hildanus, Cen. I.
Observe. 4, 5, 6.

Gnats sometimes insinuate themselves into the Ears, and moving in the Cavity
of it, they cause much Trouble, but they may be extracted by a Probe wrapped
round with Cotton, and dipped in Turpentine.

Sometimes water runs into the Ear in swimming, or when the Head is washed, and
is often very troublesome and causes Pain, but is most commonly easily shook
our, by hopping upon the Leg of the same side, and by holding the Ear
downwards: But if this will not do, you must endeavor to suck it out with a
Pipe wrapped round with Wool to stop the hole of the Ear, that the external Air
should not enter in. It is also dried by a small soft piece of Sponge often put
in.

CHAP. XXXV. Of things that come out Preternaturally from the Cavities of the
Ears.
MAny Things come out preternaturally from the Ears, which must be particularly
mentioned, and peculiar Remedies must be prescribed for them. First therefore,
an Abscess being broken arising from an Inflammation, or from an Ulcer,
proceeding from the Acrimony of Humors, Matter or Sanies, is wont to flow; the
Cure of which depends on the Cure of the forementioned Diseases, which are
proposed in the foregoing Chapter.

Blood also sometimes flows from the Ears, as in Wounds and Concussions of the
Head, whereby the Veins of the Ears may be broken or torn: But if this Flux be
moderate, it must be left to it self, for if it should be retained within it
might cause an Inflammation; but if it be immoderate, or continue a long while,
it must be restrained by bleeding in the Arm, and by applying Cupping-glasses
with Scarification to the Shoulders; afterward cooling and astringent things
must be dropped into the Ears, as the Juice of Plantane, Knot-grass, or the
Decoction of Bramble-tops, red Roses, Mastich, Acacia, Hyposistis, Balaustins,
Sumach, and the like, in Wine and Vinegar, or Smiths Water.

A watery Humor sometimes flows from the Brain to the Ears, this most commonly
happens to Children, and ought not to be stopped, for being suddenly stopped, it
occasions the Falling Sickness, or some other great Disease of the Head.

For Nature puts off Excrements, and the too great Moisture that abounds in
Childrens Heads, not only by the ordinary ways appointed for this use, viz. The
Nostrils and Palate, but also through the Eyes, the Ears, and the Superficies
of the Head, where Ulcers and Scabs often happen: But when such an Evacuation
is Symptomatick, and when the Humor flowing to the Ears causes Ulcers in them,
and hinders the Hearing, you must endeavor to cure it by a convenient Method.
And First, the Superfluous Humors in the Brain must be evacuated by gentle
Purges often repeated, and also by Derivation, by Blisters in the Neck, and an
Issue there; afterward the Ears must be cleansed and dried by the following
Medicine.

Take of the Juice of Agrimony, and Wormwood, each four Ounces, of Whitewine,
and Honey of Roses, each one Ounce, boil them a little, and drop them into the
Ear the Filth being cleansed away, afterward the Ears must be stopped with
Cotton dipped in the same Liquor.

But if a watery Humor flows from the Ears of grown People and continues so a
long while; the whole Body and the Brain must be evacuated, afterward, the
superfluous Moisture must be dried up by Sudorifick Diet-drinks, and the Course
of it must be endeavored to be turned by Blisters, Issues, and Cupping-glasses.

Lastly, Worms are sometimes generated in the Ears, from putrid Ulcers, which
being cured they cease to come out. But Because the healing of the Ulcer
requires Time you may endeavor to kill the Worms in the mean while by
convenient Remedies. For Instance,

Take of the Oil of bitter Almonds, of the Juice of Smallage, and the lesser
Centaury, each two Ounces, of Vinegar two Drams; boil them a little, then add
of Mirrh, and Aloes, each one Scruple; mingle them, and drop it into the Ear.
If you would have it stronger add ten Grains of Coloquintida.

Of Diseases of the NOSE.
CHAP. XXXVI. Of Ulcers of the Nostrils, and of an Ozaena.
AN Ulcer of the Nostrils is either fresh and simple, or old and putrid, which
is called an Ozaena.

The fresh and simple proceeds either from extetnal Causes; as a Wound or
Contusion, or from internal, viz. From Acrimony of Humors flowing thither,
espeally from Salt Phlegm.

But an Ozaena comes from a simple Ulcer neglected, or by reason of greater
Acrimony of Humors.

A simple Ulcer has little or no Pain; and Blood flows frequently from it,
especially when it is touched or rubd, or it is covered with a dry and black
Scab, which is sometimes blown out; but an Ozaena is accompanied with a greater
Pain, the Scab is more filthy, and the Snot stinks, and it often eats the Back
Bones, and perforates the Pallat, especially if it be of a cancerous Nature, or
from the French Pox, or an Elephantiasis.

As to the Cure, such a Course of Diet must be ordered as may attemperate the
Acrimony of the Humors, and hinder its Generation; afterward the whole Body
must be evacuated by Bleeding and proper Purges; and Cuping-glasses must be
applied with Scarification. And if the Fluxion of sharp Humors to the Nostrils
be very obstinate, Derivation must be made by Blisters in the Neck, and Issues
there, and things that strengthen the Head must be used.

After universal Remedies, Topics must be applied, and first you must see
whither the Ulcers are crusty, if they are, the Scabs must be taken off before
you go any farther; and first you must foment them with warm Water, or anoint
them with fresh Butter, with fresh Goose or Hens Grease, or with the Oil of
sweet Almonds, or the like.

When you have mollified them, they must not be forcibly pulled off, but you
must suffer them to fall themselves, or gently remove them with your Finger,
anointed with Oil of Almonds.

When the Scabs are cleared, you must use drying and astringent Medicines; in a
simple Ulcer it may be sufficient to wash it with Barly-water sweetened with
Honey of Roses, and to anoint it, with Ointment of Tutty, or with the white
Ointment of Rhasis, or with the Oil of the Yolks of Eggs rubbed in a leaden
Mortar.

But for an Ozaena you must prepare the following Medicines.

Take of whole Barley one Pugil, of the Leaves of Agrimony, Plantane, Wormwood,
and the lesser Centaury, one Handful; of red Roses half a Pugil; boil them in
Smiths Water, in the Liquor strained dissolve four Ounces of Honey of Roses,
make an Errhine, which must be often snuffed up.

After it has been cleansed, the following Decoction must be used.

Take of Balaustins, and Pomegranate-peel, each two Ounces, of the Leaves of
Plantane, Horse-tail, Mouse-ear, Rupture-wort, each one Handful, of the Roots
of Bistort one Ounce, of Crude-alum, one Ounce and an half; make a Decoction.

The Water of Alum is also very good, and also those Medicines which are to be
proposed to dry a Polypus in the following Chapter. Egyptiacum also dissolved
in Barly-water is good.

Afterward use the following Ointment.

Take of Omphacine Oil half an Ounce, of Pomegranate-Bark and Balaustines, each
three Drams; of Mirrh, Alum, and Labdanum, each two Drams; of Chalcitis,
Aloes, and the Bark of Frankincense, each one Dram; of the Oil of Roses, and
Mirtles, each two Ounces, of red Wax, a sufficient Quantity to make an
Ointment; apply it to the Ulcer, or dissolve it in Wine, or Plantane-water,
snuff it up often, the Mouth being filled with Water.

When the Ulcer is well cleansed, you must dry it with the Powder of red Roses
snuft up. Rondeletius says, that nothing is so effectual to dry the Ulcers as
Fumes of Orpiment and Cinnabar: As for Instance,

Take of Pure Labdanum, of Hypocistis, Mastich, and Mirrh, each three Drams;
red Storax, and Storax calamit, of the Bark of Frankincense, Sandarach, and
Orpiment, each two Drams; mix them all with Turpentine, and make Troches,
wherewith let the Sick be fumed, Morning and Evening in his Chamber.

It is also of great Use to burn Candles made of red Wax in the Patient's
Chamber, which ought to be small, and the Windows and Doors must be kept close
shut. And this Way, says Rondeletius, I have cured Ulcers which the Italian and
French Physicians left off as incurable.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of a Sarcoma and Polypus.
UPon Ulcers of the Nose comes sometimes fleshy Excrescences which constitute
another Kind of Disease, viz. A preternatural Tumor, whereof there are two
Sorts, one a Sarcoma, and the other a Polypus.

A Sarcoma is a fleshy Excrescence in the Nose, which has no certain Shape, and
is much like proud Flesh in other Ulcers* But a Polypus is a fleshy Excrescence
arising with small Roots, and afterward spreads broad and hangs down in the
Nose, and resembles the Fish Polypus, from whence it takes its Name. It is a
soft Caruncle, sometimes white sometimes red, and sometimes livid; and if it
grow much, it sometimes hangs out of the Nostrils: But if it be rooted high in
the Nose, it sometimes hangs down to the Pallat, and obstructs the common
Passage of the Mouth, and it may be plainly seen behind the Uva: It swells much
in a southerly Constitution, and at full Moon, and is much diminished at the
new Moon: It may be distinguished from a Sarcoma, because a Sarcoma, is wont to
grow at the Bottom of the Nostrils, but a Polypus near the Root of the Nose.

The Cause of both Tumors is a thick viscid and phlegmatic Humor flowing from
the Brain mixed with some Blood, and sometimes a melancholy Humor is mixed
with it, and then there is Danger lest it degenerate into a Cancer. A Sarcoma
is also generated often from a superfluous Nutriment of the Nostrils.

A Sarcoma is most commonly easily cured, but a Polypus very difficultly: But
that which is soft, and white or red, or redish, is cured most easily; but when
it is hard and livid it is very hardly cured; and there is Danger least it
should turn to a Cancer. That which is seated below or in the Middle of the
Nostrils, is easier cured than that which grows at the Root of the Nose,
because Medicines can scarce reach thither.

Both of them are to be cured the same Way, viz. The superfluous Flesh must be
taken off: But first the antecedent Cause must be removed, which is a
Phlegmatic Humor falling from the Head. To this End an attenuating Course of
Diet must be ordered, and universal Evacuations, Revulsion and Derivation.
Afterward the superfluous Flesh must be taken off, either by a caustic or by
an Instrument, and the Ulcer remaining must be cicatrized: But at the
Beginning, when the Disease is fresh, it is sometimes cured by astringent and
very drying Medicines, and such gentle Means are always to be used before you
proceed to greater.

Take of unripe Grapes three Pounds, of the Bark of Pomegranate, of Balaustins,
and Sumach, each two Pounds; infuse them in Vinegar, and distill them; then add
of Alum a Pound, of Vitriol three Ounces; distill them all again, and touch the
inward parts of the Nostrils frequently with the Water.

If this is not sufficient more powerful things must be used, and you must add
Sandarach, and Orpiment to the foregoing Water; or the Polypus must be
frequently touched with Spirit of Vitriol tempered with Plantane Water: But red
Precipitat often washed is reckoned the best Medicine. It may be mixed with
Honey of Roses, and applied with a Tent dipped in it. Plasters are also used in
this Case.

Take of Verdigrease, Orpiment, Vitriol, Crude-alum, each one Ounce and an
half, of Antimony six Drams; infuse them in Vinegar, and then powder them very
fine; when they are dry, infuse them and powder them eight Times more; then
lastly infuse them in Plantane Water, and dry them; afterward take of Oil of
Roses four Ounces, of Thithargo two ounces, mix them and boil them; and toward
the End, two Ounces of the foresaid Powder, boil it to a sticking Plaster, and
make Tents of it to be put up the Nostrils.

Note, That before the Use of Causticks, the Nostrils must be defended by
Galen's cooling Ointment, or with Populeum, or with the White of an Egg mixed
with the Oil of Roses, or the like. Secondly, you must take Notice, that
caustic Medicines must be conveyed through a Silver Pipe, which must incompass
the Polypus so that the Medicine may work and not touch the Nostrils. Thirdly,
you must take Notice, that such Medicines must be used when the Moon is
waneing, for then the Tumor is much diminished, and so the Medicine may the
easier reach the Root of it. Lastly, if it cannot be cured by Medicines, you
must proceed to Chirurgical Operation, which is described by Cornelius Celsus
and by late Authors.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Loss of Smelling, and other Faults of it.
SMelling, as all the other Actions of the Body is hurt three Ways, it is
either diminished, abolished, or depraved.

The Cause of Smelling diminished and abolished are the same, they only differ
in Degree; they are Intemperies, Obstruction and Compression.

A cold and moist intemperies, joined with Phlegmatic Matter, lessens Smelling,
or quite abolishes it; upon which Account in a Catarrh and Coryza, the Sense of
Smelling is frequently lessened, or wholly destroyed.

Obstruction is occasioned by a Phlegmatic Humor, which stops the Passages of
the Nostrils, and the Pores of the Mamillary Processes, so that Smells cannot
come to them; it may also be occasioned by a Sarcoma, Polypus, or any thing
else that stops the Passages of the Nostrils.

A Compression also sometimes may happen from a Phlegmatic Humor collected in
the fore part of the Brain, compressing the Mamillary Processes, as happens in
Diminution of the Sight by compressing of the Optic Nerves. It also may happen
from a natural Defect in the Confirmation of the Nostrils, as when the Nostrils
are so narrow and low that there is not a free Passage.

The Cause of depraved smelling, is a bad Savor continually striking upon the
Nostrils, which either proceeds from an Ulcer of the Nostrils, or from putrid
Phlegm gathered together about the Nostrils or the Os Ethmoides: For that Phlegm
that putrifies in the Sense of Smelling, or near it, betwixt the Coats of the
Brain, does not affect the Sense it self, nor those that labor under it; but
any one that sits near them will easily find it out, for nothing can be smelt
but what is carried to the Sense from some other Place. A nasty and stinking
Vapor may be carried to the Processus, Mamillares from other Parts, as from
the Stomach, Gums, and the Brain it self, that spoil the Sense of Smelling, so
that all Savours are thought to be such; even as the Tongue being disordered by
bitter Choler, tastes all things bitter.

Any of these Causes are easily known, a cold Intemperies and Abundance of
Phlegm are known by a cold and moist Intemperies of the Brain, and a slimy Phlegm
dropping from the Head.

An Obstruction, if it be occasioned by Phlegm, is known by the same Signs. If
it proceeds from a Sarcoma, or a Polypus, the Diagnostick is to be taken from
their proper Chapters.

The Place wherein the Matter causing the Obstruction resides, is known from
this, If it sticks in the Passages of the Nostrils, there is a Defect of the
Speech, because the Nostrils do greatly contribute to the forming of Words.

But if the Matter stick in the fore part of the Brain, or the Mamillary
Passages, the Speech will be perfect.

You may know by the peculiar Diseases of each Part, from whence the ill Scent
arises that offends the Organ of Smelling.

As to the Prognostic Smelling, if it be lately lost, or if it arises from a
simple Coriza, may be easily cured.

The cure must be varied according to the Variety of the Causes, if it arise
from a cold Intemperies, those things are proper which are used for a cold
Catarrh: But to open an Obstruction occasioned by Phlegm thrust into the
Passages of the Nostrils, or into the Mamillary Processes, such Remedies are to
be used as purge those Parts, viz. Errhins, Sneazing-Powders, and
Apoplegmatisms.

Lastly, If the Nostrils are obstructed by a Sarcoma, or Polypus, it must be
cured by the removing of them.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of an ill Scent in the Nostrils.
AN ill Scent in the Nostrils and a stinking Breath, are very different, for
that comes wholly from the Nostrils, but this from various Parts, viz. From the
Stomach, Lungs, Gums, or from Ulcers in the Jaws, which are either apparent to
Sense, or may be known by their proper Signs,

But an ill Scent in the Nose, is occasioned by putrid Vapors, arising either
from the Nostrils, as in an Ozena, a Sarcoma, or Polypus, or from Air
transmitted to the Nostrils from putrid Humors contained in the Brain, and in
the fore Part of it, or about the Mamillary Processes, or Os Cribrasum: But
Phlegmatic Humors putrify in the said Parts when they are retained in them
beyond Measure, especially if there be also a hot and moist Intemperies of the
Brain, they are retained by reason of an Obstruction of those Parts, or too
great an Oppression of them, as in those that are flat-nosed.

The Disease of the Nose occasioning such a Stink, may be known by its proper
Signs. But if there be no such Disease in the Nostrils, we may conjecture that
it arises from a putrid Humor contained in the Brain, or Mamillary Processes,
or in the Os cribrosum.

The Prognostic of an ill Scent in the Nostrils, which is occasioned by an
Ulcer, Polypus or Sarcoma, depends on the Prognostic of them; But that ill
Scent which proceeds from Corrupt Humors contained in the fore part of the
Head, if it be lately come may be easily cured, if it be inveterate, it is
incureable, especially if it come from an ill Confirmation of the Nostrils, as
in such as are flat-Nosed.

The Cure is performed by taking away the Causes, and by moderating the
Symptoms.

The Cure of an Ulcer, Sarcoma and Polypus, are mentioned above, but a putrid
Humor contained in the Brain. Mamillary Processes, or in the Os Ethmoides,
must be carried off by Purging and Cleansing.

And first, universal Evacuations are to be ordered which free the whole Body
and the Brain from Phlegmatic Excrements; and if there be abundance of Humors,
a Sudorifick Diet-drink must be also ordered; afterward cleansing Errhins must
be prescribed to remove the conjunct Matter.

And first, Whitewine, wherein Centaury has been infused, must be put into the
Hand, and snuft up Morning and Evening, or the Juice of Beet drawn with
Marjora^ Water may be used, but the following is more Powerful,

Take of the Roots of Florentine-orris half a Dram, o^ white Hellebore, and
long Pepper, each half a Scruple of the Seeds of Anise, and of dried Marjoram
powdered each one Scruple; of the Oils of Nard, Wall-flower, and Violets, each
as much as is sufficient: Make a soft Ointment wherewith anoint the Top of the
little Finger and anoint the Nostrils within, or a Tent besmeared with the
Ointment, may be applied.

Lastly, To palliate the ill Stink, sweet smelling things may be often drawn up
the Nostrils, as an Infusion of Nutmegs in fragrant Wine, Angelica Water, and
the like.

CHAP. XL. Of a Coryza.
COryza is a sort of Catarrh, wherein the Fluxion falls on the Nostrils, it is
easily known by the abundance of Moisture that is evacuated by the Nostrils,
it is commonly called a Cold, or Stoppage in the Head.

It requires the same Method of Cure as is used for a Catarrh, but in this Case
you must not use Errhins, least they should draw Humors to the Part affected.
Masticatories and Apoplegmatisms may be prescribed after general Evacuation,
and some-things are reckned peculiarly proper for this Disease, as the Vapor
of a Decoction of Marjoram received into the Nostrils, or of Vinegar wherein
red Roses have been infused, the Venegar being poured upon red hot Iron, if it
be occasioned by a very cold Fluxion, the Fumes of Frankincense cast upon live
Coals corrects the cold Intemperies of the Brain, and dries up the Superfluous
Moisture.

CHAP. XLI. Of Sneezing.
THo Sneezing often happens in Health, and is generally so small a thing that
it scarce deserves the Name of a Symptom, yet sometimes it is so very
troublesome that it requires Medicines and the Physicians help, and the ancient
Custom of saying God bless you upon sneezing, shows that some time or other it
has proved dangerous; some say 'twas an Epidemical Disease in the Time of
Gregory the Great, and that the Sick died sneezing.

As to the Prognostic it is of it self without Danger, but it is very injurious
at the Beginning of a Catarrh or Coryza; and in Fevers when it is frequent it
sometimes occasions bleeding at the Nose, but most commonly it does good by
expelling Superfluities from the Brain.

When Sneezing is injurious, as in a Plurisie, Peripneumonia, and the like, or
when it becomes a Disease, the Cure must be undertaken by Revulsions and
Evacuations; and if by Reason of a hot Intemperies of the Brain, or of any
other Part, sharp Vapors are transmitted to the Nostrils, Bleeding must be
used and proper Purges; and to qualify the Acrimony, and to assuage the
Irritation of the Nostrils, it will be proper to snuff up warm Milk into the
Nose, or to anoint the Nostrils wlth Oil of Violets, or of sweet Almonds, or
with fresh Butter.

CHAP. XLII. Of Bleeding at the Nose, or Spitting of Blood.
BLeeding at the Nose comes at any Time of the Year, and seises chiefly those
that are of a weakly Constitution, and have hot Blood, and oftener when they are
in Years, than when they are Young; at first there are some Signs of a Fever,
which goes off by bleeding at the Nose, but a Pain and a Heat in the fore part
of the Head remains; the Blood flows for some Hours, then stops a while, and
afterward breaks out again, and so it does by turns, till at length it is
quite stopped, either by the use of Remedies, or of its own accord, by reason
the Quantity is diminished; but the Sick is in danger of a Relapse yearly,
either upon drinking of Spirituous Liquors, or from being overheated upon any
other account.

In order to the Cure, I endeavor to qualify the Head and Ebullition of the
Blood, upon which account the preternatural Extravasation arises. Wherefore I
bleed often in the Arm, and take away a large Quantity of Blood; I order a
cooling and thickning Course of Diet, as three parts of Fountain Water, and one
of Milk boiled together, and drank cold, roasted Apples, Barly-broths, and the
like; forbidding the use o^ Flesh: I also prescribe thickning and cooling
Juleps, and Emulsions and the like.

Take of the clarified Juices of Plantane and Nettles, each six Ounces, of the
Aqua Lactis Alexiteria four Ounces, of Cinnamon Water hordeated three Ounces,
of white-Sugar a sufficient Quantity, mingle them, make a Julep; let him take
four Ounces in the Morning, and at four in the Afternoon, and so daily for
three Days following.

Take of the Waters of Plantane, and of Cinnamon hordeated, each four Ounces,
of distilled Vinegar half an Ounce, of true Bole, and of Dragon's Blood, each
half a Dram, of London Laudanum three grains, of Syrup of Myrtles one ounce and
an half; mix them, make a Julep; let him take five or six Spoonfuls every Night
at Bedtime.

Take of the Syrup of Juice of Nettles four ounces; give half an ounce in his
Liquor every time he drinks, and he may drink of Tincture of Roses every time
he drinks.

Take of the Seeds of Henbane, and of white Poppies, each half a dram; of Sugar
of Roses three drams, of Syrup of Comfry a sufficient quantity; make an
Electuary, give the quantity of a small Nutmeg twice a day, and let him drink a
draught of Tincture of Roses presently after it. Or,

Take of the four greater cold Seeds, each one dram and an half; of Sweet
Almonds two pair, of the Seeds of white Poppies two drams, Plantane-water eight
ounces, of Red-Poppy-water four ounces, of Cinnamon Water hordeated one ounce
and an half; make an Emulsion, to which add three drams of pearled Sugar, and
half an ounce of the Juice of Citron; mingle them, give four ounces thrice a
day.

I order that the Sick should keep from Bed daily for some time, and that a
gentle cooling Glister be injected every day, and a Paregorick Draught to be
taken at Bedtime: But because sharp Humors often accompany such Hemorragies,
besides Cooling and Revulsion, I order gentle Purging, even when the Disease is
at height; and when it has done Working, I give an Anodyn that is stronger than
usual; and when the Symptom is quite abated, I give another Purge.

As to External Applications, Rags four times doubled, and dipped in cold Water,
wherein Sal Prunella has been dissolved, and gently pressed out, may be applied
often in a day to the Neck; and after general Evacuations the following Liquor
may be applied.

Take of Hungarian Vitriol, and of Alum, each one ounce; of the Phlegm of
Vitriol half a pint, boil them till all are dissolved; filter the Liquor when
it is cold, and separate it from the Cristals that sometimes arise; to the
remaining Liquor add a twelfth part of Oil of Vitriol; dip a Tent in this
Liquor, and put it up the Nostril from whence the Blood flows, and leave it
there two days.

Rags dipped in this Liquor and applied, stop Blood in any external part.

A Spitting of Blood, which I shall now treat of, seises Weakly People of a hot
Constitution, whose Lungs are weak; it happens chiefly to young People in the
Spring or Summertime.

It must be cured much the same way as the Bleeding at the Nose, only Purging
must not be used often, for if it be the Sick will quickly fall into a
Consumption.

Take of Lucatellus's Balsam one dram, of true Bole one scruple; mingle them,
and give it Morning and Evening, with a draught of the Traumatick Decoction.

Take of Plantane-water two ounces, of Cinnamon Water hordeated one ounce, of
distilled Vinegar half an ounce, of red Coral prepared half a dram, of Dragons
Blood half a scruple, of London Laudanum two grains, of Syrup of Myrtles one
ounce; mingle them, give a Spoonful every hour till the Blood stops. Or,

Take of Tincture of Roses one pint, of Comfry one ounce and an half; mingle
them, give a draught every fourth hour. Or,

Take of Conserve of red Roses, and of Comfry, each three drams; of Cutle-bone
finely powdered two drams, of Crabs Eyes one scruple; boil them in half a pint
of Milk to four ounces; let him eat and drink all. Or,

Take of the Lohoch of Purslain one ounce and an half; give three drams every
fourth hour.

And lastly, Bleeding frequently used, a Glister every day injected, and
Diacodium taken every Night at going to Bed, and also a Diet, and Medicines
that thickens and cools, will perfect the Cure.

Of Diseases of the TONGUE.
CHAP. XLIII. Of an Inflammation of the Tongue, and other Tumors of it.
AS all parts of the Body, especially such as are fleshy, are wont to be
inflamed, so also is the Tongue sometimes, by reason of Blood flowing into it;
and as it is Pure, Choleric, Phlegmatic or Melancholy, it occasions either a
Flegmon, or an Erysipelas, an Oedema, or a Scirrhus, and sometimes it ends in
Suppuration; whereof Forestus mentions an Observation, of a Brewer who had a
great Inflammation of the Tongue, which Suppurated.

But most commonly the Swelling of the Tongue is soft and loose, and purely
Oedematous, of which Galen proposes an Example, of a Man whose Tongue was so
tumified, that it could not be contained in his Mouth.

And sometimes also the Tongue grows excessively big, when there is no Oedema,
no Scirrhus, nor any other kind of Tumor, and without any kind of Pain, and is
only an increase proceeding from too great Nourishment of the part.

The Diagnostick of these Tumors is not difficult, for they may be seen; but
the differences of them may be so distinguished, if there be an Inflammation,
Pain and Heat, and Redness attend it, and the Face is also affected therewith;
but if the Swelling proceed from Phlegm, the Tongue is white, and much Phlegm
flows out, which tastes sweet and insipid: But if it be only an increase of the
Tongue, there are no signs of other Tumors or ill Humors.

As to the Prognostic; Tumors of the Tongue, for the most part, do not
endanger Life, unless they grow so great, that Suffocation should be feared
from thence, or take their rise from some Malignant Humor, which may generate
a Cancer, which is known by Hardness, pricking Pain, and a livid Color.

The Cure of an Inflammation of the Tongue, must be begun with such things as
cause a Revulsion, and with repelling Medicines: And then first a loosening
Glister must be injected, and a large quantity of Blood must be taken away;
presently after Cupping-glasses with Scarrification must be applied to the
Shoulders; afterward cooling and repelling Gargarisms must be used. Galen
commends the Juice of Lettice wherewith the Tongue must be washed; or a
Gargarism may be prepared, of a Decoction of Plantane, Nightshade, of Syrup of
dried Roses.

After Bleeding Purging may be prescribed, with a Medicine made of Cholagogs
and Flegmagogs.

The Fluxion being stopped by Evacuation, Revulsion and Derivation, the
Derivation of the Humor stuffed into the Tongue must be endeavored; to which
end the Veins under the Tongue must be opened: But if it cannot be done, by
reason of the bigness of the Tongue, a Cupping-glass, with Scarification, must
be applied under the Chin.

If the Tumor tends to Suppuration, it must be promoted by applying a Fig cut
in the middle, which must be frequently changed, or by a Gargarism made of a
Decoction of Barley, Mallows, Violets, Figs, Raisins of the Sun, of the Seeds of
Quinces and Fenugreek, adding to them Syrup of Violets and of Jujubs.

Suppuration being made, if the Abscess does not break of it self, let it be
opened with a Knife, and the Ulcer must be presently cleansed with a Decoction
of Barley, Agrimony and Plantane, with Honey of Roses.

But a soft and loose Tumor arising from Phlegm, is cured first by Revulsion
made by Bleeding, if the Sick abound with Blood; afterward some strong Purge
must be given, as is the Pill Coch minor: But if the Sick cannot take Pills, a
strong Purging Potion must be used.

After these Evacuations, cooling and repelling Medicines must be applied at
the beginning: The Tongue may be washed with the Juices of Lemons,
Pomegranates, Sorrel, of Plantane, or with Simple Oxymel, to which may be added
in the increase of the Disease, a little Ginger, Sal Gemma, or Sal Armoniack.
Zacutus Lusitanus in a very dangerous case, when Suffocation was feared, by
reason of the bigness of the Tongue, applied four Leeches to it, and soon after
a great quantity of Blood was evacuated, and the Tongue assuaged. The same
Zacutus Scarrified the Tongue deep in a Boy of Ten Years of Age, when the
Tongue was soft, and by that means a great quantity of Salt Water flowed out,
and the Patient was presently cured.

Lastly, When the Tongue is much increased, Claudinus proposes the Cutting off
the Superfluous Flesh, necessary Preparations being first used.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Ranula under the Tongue.
THough in the foregoing Chapter we treated of the Tumors of the Tongue, yet
one remains, which we thought best to treat of in a Chapter by it self, because
it is of a different Nature from the others, and requires a different way of
Cure.

A Ranula is a Tumor under the Tongue, in that part wherein it is joined to
its bridle; and so great is this Tumor most commonly, that it rises higher
than the lower Teeth; a cleft is in the middle of it, whereby it is divided
into right and left, and by this means it resembles the hinder part of a Frog,
from whence it takes its name: It is of the Nature of a Meliceris, and the
Matter which flows from it is like Honey, and contained in a Bag, and in this
Bag a Stone is sometimes found.

It is most commonly without danger, but it is dangerous when it looks black
and brown, and is hard, for then it is of a Cancerous Nature, and ought not to
be meddled with.

As to the Cure of this Disease, First the antecedent Cause must be taken away;
and if it be Inveterate, then you must use Cauteries and Sudorifick Decoctions,
Afterward you must endeavor to dissolve it by Topical Remedies.

Take of Pomegranate-peel, of dried Hyssop, and of common Salt, each two drams;
make a Powder to be held under the Tongue, and to be repeated often.

Forestus says, That a Girl of Twelve Years of Age was cured by this Remedy
within two days: But in grown People it is best to use Sal Armoniack, which
dissolves and penetrates more powerfully.

But if the Tumor cannot be cured by Medicines that discuss, it must be
opened, which most commonly must be done; for it is seldom dissolved; but a
large Apertio^ must be made, that all the Matter may come out together;
afterward the Ulcer must be washed, first with gentle things, as with a
Decoction of Mallows, afterward with cleansing things, as with Whitewine*
mixed with Honey of Roses: Lastly, With Oxymel: When the Ulcer appears clear,
and free from the Bag, it must be cicatrized, by washing the Mouth often with
Alum dissolved in Claret.

If the Ulcer be Inveterate, and cannot be cured by the foresaid Remedies,
touch it twice a day with the Oil of Sulphur, tempered with Rose Water, viz.
Mix one drop of the Oil with five or six drops of the Water; for so the
Intemperies will be corrected, and the part dried; which may be also
strengthened by washing the Mouth often with a Dissolution of Alum in Claret:
But if it will not be cured by these means, the actual Cautery must be used.
You may see the manner of using of it in Paraeus, Book VII. Chap. 5.

CHAP. XLV. Of Tasting diminished, abolished or depraved.
TAsting, as the other Senses, and all the Actions of the Body, is injured
three ways, it is diminished, abolished and depraved. It is diminished when it
scarce perceives Tastes that are not strong, and but little such as are. It is
abolished when it cannot taste any thing. And lastly, It is depraved, when it
supposes the Object tastes differently from what it really does.

The Causes of Diminution, and Abolition of Tasting are the same, they only
differ in degree; for if they are small, they only diminish the Taste; if they
are great they abolish it.

The Causes are either a Defect of the Animal Spirits in the part, or an
Intemperies of the Nerve, that comes from the third Pair to the Tongue, or the
Tongue it self is some way preternaturally indisposed.

The Spirits are in fault, either by reason of the Paucity of them, as in
People that are Dying; or upon account of Obstructions of the Nerves of the
third Pair through which they are conveyed; or by reason of a Tumor in that
part of the Brain from whence the Nerves rise.

The Tongue is either covered with a moist and Phlegmatic Humor, or it is
affected with Tumors, Pustles or Ulcers; and by these its proper Action, or
the Sense of Tasting, may be either diminished or abolished.

The Taste is depraved when the Tongue is affected with some vicious Humor, as
in Fevers, when it is infected with Choler, all things seem bitter; and when
it is infected with Salt Phlegm, or a Melancholy Humor, all things taste Acid
or Salt; for the External Objects coming upon the Tongue move the vicious Juice
of it; and so all things that are tasted seem of the same Taste with the Humor
in the Tongue: But sometimes the Tongue perceives the Taste of the Juices
contained in it, although no External Object come near it. This is daily seen
in Fevers, when the Tongue is infected with Choler, for if it be very bitter,
there is continually a bitter Taste in the Mouth.

The Diversity of the foresaid Causes may be known by the Variety of the Tastes,
and by the Disposition of the Tongue; A sweet Taste, and a Redness of the Tongue
signifies Blood, bitter Taste and a Yellow Color signifies Choler; whiteness
with Sweetness Phlegm; a brown Color and Sharpness Melancholy; an abominable
Taste shows ill Humors contained in the Stomach: Pustles, Tumors, and Ulcers
may be easily seen. But lastly, if there be no Alteration seen in the Tongue,
and yet the taste is either diminished or abolished, we must suppose that the
Cause lies hid in the Brain or Nerves.

The Cure is various according to the Variety of the Causes, and therefore if
the Disease be in the Brain or Nerves, such Medicines must be ordered as are
used for the Cure of a Palsy: But when the Taste is depraved by vicious
Humors, that Symptom most commonly proceeds from other Diseases, especially
from Fevers, which being cured the Symptom ceases,

If the Taste be injured by Tumors, the Cure of it depends on the Cure of them.

Lastly, If the Fault arise from Pustles or Ulcers of the Tongue, the Cure of
those must be undertaken by bleeding, and purging, and with the Application of
cooling drying and astringent Topics, in the Form of a Gargarism. But if the
Ulcers are sordid, they must be cleansed with Honey of Roses, sharpened
moderately with Oil of Vitriol, or of Sulphur. But when you would dry more
powerfully, the affected Part must be touched once and again with the Oils
unmixed. And so may be cured Aphthae and all Ulcers of the Mouth and Tongue
presently.

CHAP. XLVI. Of a Palsy of the Tongue, and of the Motion of it Hurt.
THe chief Action of the Tongue is Speech, and that is abolished, diminished
and depraved by various Causes, which have Reference to Simular, Organick, or
common Diseases. As to Simular, a moist Intemperies joined with Matter renders
the Tongue too soft and loose, so that it cannot move readily; also too much
Dryness hinders Speech, which happens in Fevers; but Organick Diseases are
magnitude increased, as was said before of Tumors, which hinders the free
Motion of the Tongue; the Figure of it faulty, as when the Tongue is naturally
too short, or when the Top of it is cut off, or when the Bridle is too strait,
and an Obstruction of the Nerves of the seventh Pair, which are brought to the
Muscles that move the Tongue.

Lastly, Common Diseases are a Solution of the Continuum, and Wounds of the
Part.

Too great a Moisture of the Tongue causes Stammering, and such so affected
cannot pronounce the Letter R, and it is either native as in Children, who by
reason of too great Moisture are troubled with it, and are freed from it in
Progress of Time, whereby the Superfluous Moisture is consumed; But in some it
remains all their Life long, and they always Stammer.

But in some Stammering is accedental, and comes from a Catarrh, and from a
great Fluxion of a Phlegmatic Humor falling upon the Jaws or Tongue, and is
cured by Evacuation, Revulsion, and Derivation, and by strengthening and drying
the Head.

The Cure of a Palsy of the Tongue, is performed by taking off the antecedent
Cause, viz. The Humor abounding in the Brain, and by discussing the Conjunct
Cause, viz. the Humor thrust into the Nerves moving the Tongue. And first,
Purging must be ordered, and Bleeding must be used if Blood abound, and such a
Quantity must be taken away as is agreeable to the Age and Strength of the
Patient; afterward Cephalic things must be used, and if the Diseases be
obstinate, a Sudorifick Diet-drink.

After universal Evacuations, Derivation of the Morbifick Matter must be made
by Cupping-glasses, and Blisters applied to the Neck, and by an Issue in the
hinder part of the Head.

Avicen applies a Cupping-glass to the Chin, which is also approved of by late
Authors. Bleeding under the Tongue is also used successfully after general
Evacuations; and to discuss the Humor the following Gargarism is frequently
used.

Take of the Roots of Florentine-orris half an ounce, of the Leaves of wild
Marjoram, Sage, Staechas, Rosemary, each half an handful, of Cubebs three
drams, of Liquorish, one ounce; boil them in equal Parts of Water, and
Whitewine added toward the end; to one Pint strain it, and dissolve in it two
ounces of Oxymel of Squils; mlke a Gargarism. But if it be not strong enough to
do the business, two or three drams of the Roots of Pellitory of Spain, or the
like quantity of Mustard Seed may be added to it. Castor also may be added if
it be not too unpleasing.

The Juice of Sage is much commended the Tongue being rubbed with it, you may
also add Mustard Seed to it. The following Pills may be also held frequently
upon the Tongue.

Take of the Juice of Bettony, and Liquorish, each one dram and an half, of
Castor, and Assa-faetida, each half a dram, of Nutmeg, and Spicknard, each one
scruple, make them up into small Pills with Honey,

Fumes and Powders sprinkled into the Hair, and the like, must be used to
strengthen the Brain, and to discuss the Relicts of the Phlegmatic Humor.

And lastly, To hinder the Growth of new Matter, which the Intemperies of the
Brain is wont to cause, after general and particular Evacuations things that
strengthen the Head must be used.

Of Diseases of the Gums, Teeth, Jaws, Uvula, and Larynx.
CHAP. XLVII. Of Pains of the Teeth.
THe Pain of the Teeth is occasioned by the Influx of Humors, which are either
Cold, Phlegmatic, Hot, Serous, Salt, or Acrid; Worms also bred in rotten Teeth
occasions Pain, and some think that the Pain proceeds sometimes from Wind.

The External and Procatarctick Causes occasioning Pain in the Teeth, are all
those things which promote Fluxion of Humors; the chief whereof are cold Air,
or Southerly Winds, standing long in the Heat of the Sun, or abroad in the
Night, surfeiting, and all Errors in Diet. To these add Rottenness of the
Teeth, which weakens them and renders them more apt to receive Fluxions.

The Diversity of the Causes may be known by various Signs, when the Pain
arises from hot Humors it is very violent, the Constitution hot, the Age
flourishing, it is Summer, there is great Heat in the Part, and often an
Inflammation of the Gums, cooling Medicines give Ease; hot increase the Pain;
But if the Pain arise from cold Humors, Signs contrary to these appear.

If Worms are the Cause the Pain is by Intervals, and the Motion of the Worm is
sometimes perceived in the Part.

Pain is likewise produced by a Flatuous Spirit, which appears by the vehemence
and tearing Pain which is felt in the Part, and which goes off in a little
time, and is easily cured, by applying discutient Remedies to the place.

The Prognostic is various according to the Variety of the Causes. A Pain
which is occasioned by a hot, thin, or sharp, acrid and salt Humor, is the
more vehement indeed, but sooner goes off, by reason of the sudden Changes of
the Humors; that which proceeds from a cold and Phlegmatic Humor, is more
gentle but of longer Duration.

A Tumor arising in the Gums or Jaws, eases the Pain of the Teeth, by reason
that the Fluxion is carried to the exterior Parts; so that it falls no more
upon the Cavity of the Teeth.

As to the Cure, the Cause of the Pain must be taken away, and the Pain it self
mitigated. And although Anodyns have no great Effect, unless the Fluxion be
taken off, yet it is often so violent, that it must not only be mitigated with
Anodyns, properly so called, but also with Narcoticks before the Cause be
removed. Therefore the Humor which flows to the Teeth must be drawn back,
evacuated and repelled; that which is already flown in, must be discussed and
carried off by Derivation.

First therefore, If the Pain arise from hot Humors, Bleeding must be used in
the Arm of the same Side, whereby a Revulsion of the Humor may be made; but if
the Pain proceeds from cold Humors, Bleeding is not so proper, but by reason
of the Fluxion it may be used because it principally makes Revulsion; but a
small quantity of Blood must be taken away, unless the Signs of a Plethora
appear; for in that case large Bleeding may be allowed, which is the best means
to ease the Pain in the Teeth, and all other Pains.

The next Day some purging Medicine must be given, that is proper for the
peccant Humor; afterward if the Pain continues, Cupping-glasses with
Scarification must be applied to the Shoulders, or a large Cupping-glass
without Scarification; a Blister may be applied to the Neck or behind the Ears,
for it draws powerfully the Humors backward.

And to stop the Flux Astringents are properly applied to the Temples; such are
the Plasters of Gum-elemi, of Mastich alone, or ad Herniam.

The fresh Roots of Comfrey, bruised and applied to the Temples are excellent
for stopping of Fluxion, also the Powder, of Alum and Galls made into a
Plaster with Pitch are very effectual.

Riverius, chief Physician to Henry the Great, kept the following Plaster as a
great Secret.

Take of Pine-nuts, and red Roses, of the Seeds of Cresses torrified, of
Mastich, and sealed Earth, each one dram and an half, infuse them in Rose
Vinegar twenty four Hours, afterward dry them, and add of Opium dissolved in
Aqua Vitae three ounces, of Ship Pitch and Colophony, each one Ounce, of Yellow
Wax melted in the Oils of Henbane, and white Poppies, by Expression a
sufficient quantity, make a Plaster, which must be applied to the Arteries and
pained Part.

Medicines also are put into the Ears for Pain in the Teeth, because the
Arteries which nourish the Teeth do pass by the Ears; upon that account, Oil of
bitter Almonds is put into the Ear next to the Tooth affected, also a
Suffumigation of Vinegar, in which Penyroyal, or wild Marjoram has been
boiled, is often used.

Vinegar is also dropped into the Ear, by which the Fluxion is powerfully
stopped, and it is most effectual in a hot Fluxion.

But in a hot Fluxion, Juice of Garlic mixed with Venice Treacle, and dropped
warm into the Ear, mitigates the Pain powerfully: Also the Root of Garlic, the
Bark being taken off, and made in the form of a Suppository, and put into the
Ear, produces the same Effect.

Astringents are also applied in the beginning of the Fluxion, and they ought
to be cold if the Matter be hot; but if it be cold, hot Medicines mixed with
those that are repelling are to be used; in whatever Cause, if the Pain be
violent, Anodyns are to be mixed with Discutients. To which Purpose the
following Medicine may be prescribed.

Take of the Roots of Cinquefoil, Bistort, Tormentill, each one dram, of the
Leaves of Vervain, Plantain, and Mullein, each one handful, Cypress-nuts,
Galls, and Cups of Acrons, each two drams, of red Sanders, a dram and an half,
of red Roses, and Balaustines, each one pugil, boil them in astringent Wine and
Vinegar, fomeri^ the pained Part with this Decoction frequently.

This Decoction may be used in the beginning of a hot Fluxion, in a cold one
you may add the Roots of Cyperus, the Bark of Box-wood, Ivy-leaves and the like.

A more Simple Medicine may be prepared of Plantain, and Rose Water, with a
little Vinegar, after the manner of an Oxycrat.

Or the Teeth must be washed with a Decoction of Galls in Vinegar. Or,

Take of Cinquefoil-roots half an ounce, of Willow-leaves half an handful, boil
them in astringent Wine, and wash the Mouth with the Decoction.

This Decoction stops the Fluxion, and eases Pain.

After that these Remedies have been used which mitigate the Pain, and discuss
the Cause of it, of which there are a great Number proposed by Authors, and
also by the common People. We shall in the next Place propose those that are
more effectual; of the which such Choice is to be made, that these which not
only resolve, and discuss, but also stop the Flux, being mixed with
astringents, in the beginning and increase of the Disease, those which only
discuss in the Height and Declination.

Take of the Juice of House-leek, and Nightshade, each two ounces, of Cow or
Sheeps-milk, eight ounces, Oil of Roses, Omphacin, one ounce and an half, of
Opium and Saffron, each three grains, mix them and apply a Rag dipped in the
Liquor warm often to the Jaws where the pained Tooth is. Or,

Take of the Pap of sweet Apples boiled two ounces, of Bra^ infused in Vinegar,
three ounces, Oil of Roses, Omphacin one Dram, Saffron half a scruple, of Opium
two grains, mix them and make a Cataplasm to be applied to the part affected.
Or,

Take of wheaten and Bean-flower, each three ounces, of Oil of Roses complete,
and of sweet Almonds, each half an ounce, of the Juice of the greater
House-leek an ounce and an half, of Milk a sufficient quantity, make a
Cataplasm, to be often applied warm to the Part affected. Or,

Take the Whites of two Eggs, beat them with Rose Water, with Rags whereon two
drams of Pepper powdered has been sprinkled, apply them over the whole Cheek
affected.

Nevertheless it is carefully to be noted, that Astringents be not applied to
the Jaws if they be tumified, least the Humor be repelled back, and should
suffocate the Patient.

Cotton dipped in Oil of Cloves, and put into the Hollow Tooth is frequently used
to ease the Pain, Oil of Box also does the same.

But if the Pain be so violent that it cannot be quelled with the foresaid
Remedies, we must use Narcoticks, which may be applied to the pained Tooth, but
they most certainly give Ease being taken inwardly; you may give three or four
grains of the London Laudanum, it gives ease and stops the Fluxion.

Take of Opium, Mirrh, and Labdanum, each one Dram, powder them, and boil them
in Whitewine to the Consistance of a Liniment, mix Cotton with it, and stop the
Hollow Tooth.

If Worms are in the Teeth, they must be killed by bitter things.

Take of Aloes one Dram, of Champhor ten Grains, of Aqua Vitae half a dram,
mingle them, and apply them to the Teeth with Cotton,

It is to be noted, that there is seldom a Pain in the Teeth, unless they are
Hollow, and until they are eaten through to the Nerve; wherefore that the Pain
may be taken off, the Nerve must be burnt, either with an actual Cautery, or
with Aqua fortis, or Oil of vitriol put into the Cavity.

But if notwithstanding all these means the Pain continues, the Tooth must be
drawn, but care must be taken that the Tooth be not drawn when the Fluxion
rushes violently upon it, or when the Headache accompanies it; or the Gums are
swelled, and when the Pain is violent; and the Tooth-drawer must be admonished,
that he does not pluck it out violently at once, least a concussion of the
Brain should follow, or the breaking of the Jawbone, upon which violent
Bleeding, a Fever, and sometimes Death comes. As soon as the Tooth is drawn,
the Part from whence it is taken must be pressed on every side, that it may be
restored to its natural State, afterward let the Sick wash his Mouth with warm
Oxycrat, and let him be careful least he catch cold, whereby a new Fluxion may
fall upon other Teeth.

But if Blood flow so much as that it can scarce be stopped, which sometimes
happens, though the Jaw be not broken, by reason of a Vein or Artery torn. This
Flux of Blood is most commonly stopped by applying Lint rolled up hard, and
pressing it hard down an hour or two with the Fingers. But if this does not
succeed; burnt Vitriol must be applied, and a Rag dipped in Vinegar over it,
which also must be pressed down with the Finger, till it be crusted. The last
Remedy is an actual Cautery, which presently stops the Blood.

But if any timorous Person cannot bare the drawing of a Tooth, but desires to
have it extracted by Remedies.

Those things are to be tried, which are proposed every where by Authors for
the same purpose, as a Paste made of Frankincense powdered, a little Starch,
and the Milk of Spurge, the Root of Crow-foot, the Bark of the Root of Mulberry
Tree, the Ashes of Earthworms, Pellitory of Spain steeped in Vinegar, the Root
of wild Cucumber infused in Vinegar, and the like. But Bears-foot is the most
effectual, the Tooth being rubbed with the Leaf of it bruised, but great care
must be taken, that the other Teeth be not touched with it; for if so, they
would be in danger to drop out. A certain Country Fellow being grievously
afflicted with the Toothach, desired another to rub his Teeth with Bears-foot,
who unwarily rubbed almost all his Teeth with it, and in a few hours almost all
of them dropped out. Wherefore if any one intends to use so violent a Medicine, I
would advise him to cover the rest of his Teeth with Wax to secure them.

Though the Tumor arising in the Jaws most commonly takes off the Pain of the
Teeth, the Matter being translated to the outward parts; yet to procure Ease
the sooner some Remedies must be used: The following Liniment does good.

Take of Fresh-Butter and Hens-grease each one ounce, of the Powder of
Florentine Orris one dram, of Saffron half a Scruple, of Oil of Camomil, and
Oil of Sweet-Almonds, each half an Ounce; make a Liniment to be applied to the
Jaws.

A Cataplasm made of Figs bread and Vinegar operate sooner.

Nettles bruised and applied to the Jaws soon ease the Pain.

This Cure is for the present Pain, but if it be wont to return frequently, the
generation of Humors flowing to the part must be hindered, and the Teeth must
be strengthened, that they may not so easily receive the Humors flowing to them.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Black and Rotten Teeth.
THE Teeth are often Black, Yellow or Livid, by reason of vicious Humors
sticking to their Superficies, which by lying long on them corrode, and make
them rotten; ill Vapors do the same, which arise from unwholesome Meats eaten,
or from an Intemperies of the Stomach; Quicksilver used to the whole Body, or
to the Face to Beautify it, blackens the Teeth: Upon which account Women that
use Paint are wont to have black or foul Teeth.

In order to the Cure, the antecedent Cause must be first removed, and if ill
Humors abounding in the Stomach occasion this Disease, they must be evacuated,
and the Intemperies producing it must be corrected, and a good Course of Diet
must be ordered, and such Meats must be avoided as are apt to corrupt the
Teeth, especially those that are Sweet.

There are a great many Medicines proposed to whiten the Teeth by Authors,
which every one may make trial of; we use only one, which presently frees the
Teeth from all Filthiness, and renders them white; and also preserves them from
a Caries, that is, the Spirit of Vitriol or of Sulphur, in which a small Stick
wrapped round with a Rag may be dipped, and the Teeth rubbed with it, and presently
after the Teeth must be dried with a clean Linen Cloth.

When the Teeth are very foul, the pure Oil may be used, or mixed with Honey of
Roses, or it may be corrected with Simple Water, least the use of it corrode
the Gums. Montanus relates that he learned this from a Woman at Rome, whom he
had seen when he was very young, and she about the Age of Twenty; he found her
afterward when she was Fifty in the same Condition, who had preserved her
Beauty and Strength by the use of the Oil of Vitriol; and that her Teeth which
were very ill in her Youth were become firm and clean in her old Age by the use
of it; for she was wont daily to rub her Teeth and Gums gently with a drop or
two of it.

The Ashes of Tobacco are also excellent to cleanse and whiten the Teeth.

But to preserve them and to keep them clean, they must be daily cleansed from
Filth, and Meat that sticks in them, by a Tooth-picker, made of the Lignum
Leutiscinum. Afterward you must wash the Mouth with Wine, and the Teeth must
be rubbed with the following Powder.

Take of the Roots of Bistort, Alum, and White Coral, each one ounce; make a
fine Powder wherewith rub the Teeth.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Errosion and Vlceration of the Gums.
THE Gums are eaten and ulcerated by Acrid and Corroding Humors flowing to
them from the Brain, Stomach, Spleen, and other Parts. Splenetick People are
more especially troubled with Ulcers of the Gums, and such as are Scorbutic;
and sometimes also the Gums are corroded by Worms, or by the Humors that
occasion them; so that when they continue long to be so, they signify Worms to
be in the Body. Fabritius Hildanus mentions an Observation of a Boy, that was
much troubled a long while with corroded Gums, and after he had tried many
Medicines both inward and outward, at length he died, and his Body being
opened, there were found great numbers of Worms, which had eaten through his
Guts, and lay in the Cavity of the Belly.

The Cure must be first directed to the Antecedent Cause, and the Peccant
Humors must be evacuated by Bleeding and Purging. The Acrid and Hot must be
attemperated by Apozems, Juleps, and medicated Broths, and the like. And the
Fluxions of the same Humors is to be turned, by applying Cupping-glasses to
proper places. And lastly, The Diseases of the Part principally affected must
be cured.

And afterward we must use Topics, which are to be varied according to the
greatness of the Disease, for in a simple Errosion those things are only to be
applied which are Astringent and dry: And first the following Lotion must be
used.

Take of unripe Galls, of the Cups of Acorns, and of Balaustins, each one dram;
of red Roses one Pugil; of Crude-allum three drams; boil them in two parts of
Smiths water, and one of rough Wine: The Teeth must be often washed with this
Water, and if the Errosion is not cured with it, the following Opiat must be
used.

Take of Dragons Blood three drams, of Wood of Aloes, red Roses, Spodium,
Hartshorn burnt till it is white, and Cypress Nuts, each one dram; of Myrrh,
and the Ashes of Tobacco, each one dram; of Alum two drams; make of all a
Powder, mix it with Honey, and add to it a few drops of Spirit of Vitriol or
Sulphur, make an Opiat, which you must spread upon a rag, and apply to the Gums
at Bedtime.

Spirit of Sulphur either by it self or mixed with Honey of Roses, cleanses and
whitens the Teeth, and cures the Corruption of the Gums.

If the Ulcer is deep or sordid, you must use the following Balsam.

Take of choice Myrrh, and of Sugar Candy, each equal parts; powder them, and
fill the white of an Egg with them first boiled hard and cut in the middle,
afterward bind it up with Thread, and hang it in a Cellar, put a Glass under
for the Liquor to drop into, wherewith anoint the part affected often in a day.

But if the foresaid Remedies will not do the business, and if the Tooth near
the Ulcer be rotten, it must be drawn out, and the Ulcer will be soon cured,
otherwise it will be incurable.

CHAP. L. Of Blood flowing from the Gums.
BLOOD sometimes flows in a great quantity from the Gums, either Critically or
Symptomatically: But though a Critical Hemorrhage seldom happens by the Gums,
yet that it does so sometimes, Experience and the Observations from Authors
show.

It flows Symptomatically from the Gums, by reason of its Acrimony, and of the
vicious Constitution of the Spleen, and also the Scurvy: It also sometimes
flows plentifully after the drawing of a Tooth; the little Artery being torn,
which was inserted into the Root of the Tooth; upon which account sometimes so
much Blood flows as kills the Patient.

The Cure of a Symptomatick Flux is performed by Bleeding, and Purging, and
other Remedies that correct the Disorders of the Bowels; afterward Topics
must be used that are of an Astringent Nature, in the form of a Gargarism,
Lotion, Powder, Liniment, or Opiate.

If a great quantity of Blood flows upon drawing a Tooth, Revulsion first must
be made by Bleeding, and Cupping-glasses and Astringent Medicines must be
applied to the part; as a Cataplasm made of Bole-armenick, Dragons Blood,
sealed Earth, and other Astringents mixed with the white of an Egg.

If these things do not do, the Patient must apply his Finger to the part from
whence the Blood flows, and must be kept there so long, till the Blood
coagulated upon the Orifice of the Artery stops the Flux.

If the Blood cannot be stopped by these gentle means, stronger must be used.
Chalcitis burnt and applied, stops Blood wonderfully, Gum-arabick powdered, and
the Cavity filled with it, is also of use: So is also the Powder called
Thuraloes, applied with the white of an Egg and Hares Down.

CHAP. LI. Of Ulcers of the Mouth and Jaws.
SMALL and Superficial Ulcers of the Mouth are called Aphthae, and when they
are large they go under the common name of Ulcers, as those are that happen to
Pocky People.

These Ulcers are wont to be generated by Acrid Humors, or Vapors translated
from various parts of the Body to the Jaws. So in Malignant Fevers, such
Ulcers frequently happen, and to those which are of a hot Constitution, and are
subject to an Intemperies of the Parts, and to others that abound with
corrupted Humors, upon which Account Children are frequently troubled with
Aphthae.

These Ulcers are various, not only for that some are small, some greater, and
because some trouble Children, and some grown People, but also because an
Inflammation accompanies some of them, and others it does not. These various
Degrees happen according to the variety of Humors from whence they are
generated, for either they proceed from Blood, Choler, Phlegm, or Melancholy, or
rather from black Choler, which is of a burning and malignant Quality.

But these Differences may be known by their proper Signs, for red Ulcers
proceed from Blood, yellow from Choler, white from Phlegm, livid from black
Choler, a stinking Ulcer signifies Putrefaction.

As to the Prognostic, Aphthae properly so called are easily cured, but deep
Ulcers, or such as are putrid are difficultly cured, and they are most
dangerous in Children, both because they spread more by reason of the Softness
of their Flesh, and also, because they cannot bear strong Medicines; upon which
account Children sometimes die of them, if they are accompanied with
Putrefaction and Malignity.

And with respect to the Cause from whence they proceed, they are more or less
Dangerous; if they proceed from Phlegm there is little Danger, if from Blood, or
Choler, there is more, if from black Choler most of all.

Black and crusty Ulcers are deadly, especially in Children.

Ulcers of the Jaws accompanied with a Fever are dangerous.

As to the Cure, a cooling and drying Diet must be ordered to hinder the
Generation of the Antecedent Cause; wherefore if in Children, the Disease
arises from a Fault in the Milk, either the Nurse must be changed, or her Milk
must be corrected by proper Meats and Drinks, and by Bleeding and purging if
there be Occasion.

But you must be sure to prescribe a cooling and astringent Diet to the Nurse,
as Quinces, Pears, Medlars, Lettice, and Purslain. The same must be prescribed
for grown People, and they must avoid acrid, salt, and peppered Meats.

Moreover with respect to the antecedent Cause, universal Evacuations must be
prescribed, according to the Age of the Sick, and first, Bleeding makes a
powerful Revulsion of Humors flowing to the Part, and attemperates their
Acrimony, and cools the whole Body. Afterward Cupping-glasses with
Scarification must be applied, Leeches behind the Ears, and under the Chin, and
a Blister must be applied to the Neck. The next Day after Bleeding Purging must
be ordered suitable to the peccant Humor, and the Age,

At the same time, viz. From the very beginning of the Cure, Topics must be
applied; but such as are gentle must be first used, as Gargarisms, or Lotions
made with the Waters of Plantain, or Honey-suckle, and sweetened with Syrup of
dried Roses, or of Mulberries, or of a Decoction, of Plantain Leaves,
Bramble-tops, knot-grass, Balaustins, red Sanders, and the like, with the
foresaid Syrups. And if there be an Inflammation, it is proper to add the Juice
of Nightshade, House-leek or of Purslain, and Sal Prunella, in such Quantity
as may not sharpen it too much, or instead of them a small Quantity of Crude
Alum may be mixed with it. If there be no Inflammation, Spirit of Vitriol, or
Sulphur is the only Remedy which may be used by it self to grown People; The
Ulcer being touched with a Stick wrapped round the top, with a Rag dipped in it,
and so simple Aphthae will be cured immediately.

But for Children the Spirit must be mixed with Honey of Roses to mitigate the
Sharpness, and must be used with a Stick, as above directed.

If the Ulcers are very painful, and accompanied with Inflammation; the Mouth
must be often gargled with Milk, or with an Emulsion of the cold Seeds, or with
a Mucilage of the Seeds of Fleabean, and of Quinces extracted with Plantain and
Rose Water.

Lastly, If the pain be so very obstinate that it cannot be appeased by the
Revulsions and Topics proposed; but by Reason of the Violence of it, sharp
Humors are continually attracted, and long Watchings occasioned, and a Wasting
of the whole Body, whereby the Life is much endangered, the last Remedy are
Narcoticks, which ease the Pain, and hinders the Influx of the Humors, they
are to be dosed according to the Age and Strength of the Patient.

I cured a Boy, says Riverius, of four Years of Age, when he was just dying, by
giving him a grain of Laudanum. His Jaws and Tongue were full of deep Ulcers,
and the Inflammation so great, that he could not bear Topic Remedies, and the
Flux of Humors so much, that they flowed perpetually out of his Mouth like a
Stream, and the Child cried Night and Day.

If the Ulcer be putrid, and sordid, it must be first washed with a Decoction
made of Barley and Honey of Roses, and in Children, with Milk wherein Steel has
been quenched, mixed with conserve of Roses; afterward you must use things
that are stronger, Honey of Roses is the chief, made acid with the Spirit of
Vitriol.

If these are not sufficient, burnt Alum may be added to the things
abovementioned, or Unguentum Aegyptiacum, in a greater or lesser quantity,
according to the Degree of the Diseases.

Lastly, If the Ulcer of the Jaws proceed from the French Pox, it cannot be
cured until that is taken off.

CHAP. LII. Of the Relaxation of the Uvula.
THe Relaxation of the Uvula, happens by reason of a Phlegmatic Humor, falling
from the Head upon it, wherewith some Blood is often mixed, and then an
Inflammation accompanies the Relaxation, which also frequently happens to the
Almonds, concerning the Cure of which Inflammations we shall say nothing;
because the Cure of them is performed by the same Remedies which were proposed
for the Cure of an Inflammation of the Tongue, and for Ulcers of the Mouth with
Inflammation.

The Phlegmatic Humor falling upon the Uvula, moistens, softens, and so
relaxes it, that it touches the upper part of the Oesophagus, and creates
Nauseousness, and those that are so affected, always endeavor in vain to
swallow something that lies at the top of the Oesophagus, and by this Sign
without Inspection, the Relaxation of the Uvula may be known.

The Cure of it must be first directed to the anticedent cause, wherefore the
Humors flowing from the Head, must be evacuated, and diverted by those
Remedies which are proposed for the Cure of a Catarrh.

The Topics which are used in the Beginning must be astringent and repellent,
such as were proposed for Ulcers in the Jaws and Gums; afterward the things
that are drying and astringent must be mixed with them; and though the
Gargarisms proposed in the said Places, are profitable in these Cases; yet when
there is no Inflammation, the use of Powders is more effectual. For by them the
relaxed Uvula is more powerfully dried and contracted. And therefore the Bark
of Pomegranates finely powdered should be first used, and in progress a little
Pepper may be used with it. Or,

Take of red Roses, Balaustines, Pomegranate-peel, each half a dram, of the
Roots of Bistort, Tormentil, and unripe Galls, and of Florentine-orris, each
one dram, of burnt Alum two Scruples, make a Powder.

Common Chyrurgeons apply long Pepper powdered to it, but it is not safe, for
there is Danger least the Humors should be drawn violently to the Part
affected, and so should occasion some great Mischief.

The manner of using these Powders is as follows: The Tongue must be depressed
with a Speculum-oris, and then with a Spatula, or with a small Spoon for the
Purpose; the Powder must be conveyed to the Uvula, often in a Day, till the
Humor imbibed be wholly consumed.

But if the Uvula relaxed cannot be reduced by the foresaid Remedies to it is
former State, but still continues troublesome by being so long, the top of it
must be cut off; but care must be taken that too much of it be not cut off, for
if so the Speech and Respiration would be injured.

CHAP. LIII. Of a Quinsie.
IT comes at any Time of the Year, especially between Spring and Summer, and
chiefly seizes young Men, and such as are of a Sanguine Constitution, and red
hair'd People, (which I have often observed) more than any other, they shiver
and shake presently, a Fever follows, and a little after a Pain and
Inflammation of the Jaws, and if the Patient be not presently relieved, he can
neither swallow nor draw his Breath through his Nostrils; so that he is under
the apprehension of strangling, by reason the Jaws are stopped by the
Inflammation and Tumor of the Uvula, Almonds, and Larynx, and is indeed in a
manner suffocated. There is great Danger in this Disease, for it sometimes
destroys a Man in a few Hours.

In order to the Cure, I presently take away Blood plentifully from the Arm,
and presently afterward from the Veins under the Tongue, and then I order that
the inflamed Parts should be touched with Honey of Roses, made very sharp with
Spirit of Sulphur, and that the following Gargarism should be used not after
the common Way, but that it should be kept in the Mouth without any Agitation
till it wax hot, and then that it should be spit out, and that it should be
repeated now and then.

Take of Plantane-water, and red Rose Water, and of the Water of the Spawn of
Frogs, each four ounces; the Whites of three Eggs turned to a Water by beating,
of White Sugar Candy three Drams, make a Gargarism.

I likewise order, that the Patient take daily of the Emulsion prescribed in
the Cure of a Pleurisy or the like. The next Morning I bleed again, unless the
Fever, and difficulty of Swallowing somewhat abate, and defer Purging till the
next Day: But if both these are lessened, I presently give a lenitive Purge. If
the Fever and other Symptoms are like to be troublesome, after purging they
are to be quelled by Bleeding repeated as before, by applying a large and
strong Blister to the Neck, a cooling and emollient Glister is to be injected
every Morning, except when the Patient purges, through the whole course of the
Disease. The use of Flesh of all kinds, and their Broths are to be forbid, and
the Patient is to be dieted with Oatmeal and Barley Broths, and roasted Apples,
and the like, let him use a Ptisan of Barley or small Beer. Let him keep up
some Hours every Day, for the warmth of the Bed heightens the Fever, and other
Symptoms. But it is to be noted, that such a Quinsie which is only a Symptom of
a Fever I call stationary, is to be cured by that Method which is requisite
for the Fever, and so is either to be taken off by Sweat and Transpiration, or
by any other Method of Cure which is necessary for the primary Fever whereon
it depends, which is worth Observation.

CHAP. LIVE. Of an Asthma.
THough an Asthma is taken for a Difficulty of Breathing in general, yet it
principally Signifies that which proceeds from a stoppage of the Lungs, and an
Obstruction of the Bronchia, which of its own Nature is without a Fever,
though sometimes a Fever accompanies it.

An Asthma is divided into three Species, one is called Dyspnoea, another
Asthma, the third Orthopnoea.

A Dyspnoea is a difficulty of Breathing, arising from an Obstruction of the
Lungs; this is less than an Asthma, or Orthopnoea, and arises from a smaller
Quantity of Matter that obstructs more the Substance of the Lungs, than the
Bronchia; upon which account there is no Wheezing, which is occasioned by a
Commotion of the Humor contained in the Bronchia.

An Asthma is a great and frequent Respiration, wherein the Diaphagma, the
intercostal Muscles, and the Muscles of the Abdomen are violently moved, and a
Wheezing accompanies it.

But an Orthopnoea, is the greatest Difficulty of Breathing, wherein the Sick
can only breath, as the Word signifies, sitting upright.

The Cure of an Asthma is twofold, one in the Fit, and the other out of it; in
the Fit a Glister being first given, Bleeding must be used; if Blood seem to
abound in any Degree, and the Sick must be placed upright in a free Air, and
Smoke, or the Breath of the Standers by must not offend him; and his Clothes,
or any thing else that covers his Breast must be loosned.

After Bleeding, or it being omitted, if it be not thought proper, a
Phlegmagogue Purge must be given.

As to Vomits, though some dislike them, yet are they very proper in this
Disease, as is evident by Experience, and frequently the Fit is taken off by
this Remedy alone. Sharp Glisters are often to be injected to make a Revulsion,
nevertheless their Quantity ought to be small Frictions in the inferior Parts
are also to be used, and many Cupping-glasses are to be applied to them, and to
the Neck; afterward the gross Humors must be moistened and attenuated, and the
Wind arising from them must be discussed, to which Purpose the following
Medicines must be given.

Take of Gum Ammoniack and Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar of Squills, each one
dram and an half of Castor, and of the Flowers of Sulphur, each half a dram, of
Millepedes prepared one dram, of Salt of Ambar one scruple, of Elixir
Proprietatis half a dram, with a sufficient quantity of Oxymel, make small
Pills; Let him take four Morning and Evening, drinking upon them three
Spoonfuls of the following Julep.

Take of the Waters of Rue, Black-Cherries, Lime-flowers, each two ounces, of
compound Peony, and compound Briony-waters, and of Spirit of Castor, each one
ounce, of Syrup of Staethas, and Gilly-flowers, each one ounce and an half,
mingle them and make a Julep.

Take of the Nerve Plaster half an ounce, of Oil of Amber four Drops, of
Balsam of Sulphur half a dram, mingle them, spread a Plaster upon Leather, and
apply it to the Breast.

Take of the Cephalic, Plaster with Euphorbium a sufficient Quantity, make
Plasters for the Soles of the Feet.

In the mean while, things that expectorate the gross Matter must be used.

Take of the Pectoral Decoction a quart, add to it of Spirit of Salt-armoniack
half a dram, of Oxymel of Squils half an ounce, of Tincture of Castor one dram,
of Ground Ivy Water three ounces, mingle them, let him take six Spoonfuls every
two Hours. Or,

Take of the Seeds of Annise finely powdered, and of Powder of Liquorish, each
three drams; of the Flowers of Sulphur one dram and an half; mingle them, add
two ounces and an half of the best Honey, dissolved in three ounces of
Cinnamon Water hordeated; make an Electuary; add to it of Balsam of Sulphur
fifteen drops; of Oil of Annise-seeds ten drops; let him take one dram every
third or fourth hour, drinking upon it five Spoonfuls of the following
Decoction.

Take of the Roots of Elecampane one dram and an half, of the Leaves of
Ground Ivy half an handful; boil them in three pints of the Pectoral Decoction
strained; add three ounces of Canary-wine, Syrup of Maidenhair two ounces and
an half; mix them.

The Breast must be anointed with Ointments and Liniments that soften and
discuss.

Take of the Ointment of the Flowers of Oranges, and Pomatum, each three drams;
of Oil of Nutmegs by expression two drams; of Oil of the Berries of Juniper and
Annise, each half a dram; mingle them, make a Liniment, wherewith anoint the
whole Breast Morning and Evening.

Take of the Ointment of Marshmallows one ounce and an half, of Oil of
Annise-seeds thirty drops; make an Ointment.

If the Fit Continue, apply a Blister to the Neck; when the Fit is off, the
Fluxion of the Humor must be hindered, and that which has already flowed upon
the Lungs must be incided, cleansed away, and expectorated, and to restrain the
Force of the Fluxion, a clear and pure Air must be chosen, and Southerly and
rainy Air must be avoided, and the Air in the Night; Sleeping and Watching must
be moderate, and the Humor must be purged off by the following Medicines.

Take of the bitter Decoction, made with a triple quantity of Senna, three
ounces and an half, Manna half a ounce, mingle them, make a Purging Potion. Or,

Take of the Pilulae Ruffi one Dram, of the Species Hiera half a dram, of Salt
of Wormwood half a scruple, of Aloes Rosat, and of Rhubarb powdered, each one
scruple, of Elixir Proprietatis a sufficient quantity; make Ten Pills of a
dram, let him take four at bedtime.

Of the Days he does not Purge, let him take of the following Medicine.

Take of the Seeds of Annise finely powdered two drams, with a sufficient
quantity of Lucarellus's Balsam, make Pills, of each drams Six, let him take
three in the Morning, and as many at four in the Afternoon, drinking upon them
four ounces of the bitter Decoction.

It is to be noted, that Purging must be often used in this Disease, and the
Form of them must be varied, least Nature should be too much accustomed to one
and the same Remedy.

CHAP. LV. Of a Pleurisy.
THis Disease that is as frequent as any other, comes at any time, but
especially about the Spring and Summer; for at that Time the Blood being heated
by the nearness of the Sun, rushes violently into effervescences and inordinate
Motions.

It chiefly seises those that are of a sanguine Temperament, and often country
People, and those that are accustomed to much Labor. It most commonly begins
with a Shaking and Shivering, and then Heat, Drouth, and Restlessness, and
other Symptoms of a Fever follow, after a few Hours, though (sometimes it is
much longer before this Symptom comes) the Patient is taken with a violent
pricking Pain in one of his Sides about the Ribs, which sometimes reaches
toward the Shoulder-blades, sometimes toward the Backbone, and sometimes
toward the Breast, he coughs frequently, which occasions great Pain, so that
sometimes he holds his Breath to prevent coughing; the Matter which is spit up
at the beginning is little and thin, and often sprinkled with Particles of
Blood, but in the Process of the Disease it is more and more concocted and mixed
with Blood; the Fever in the mean while keeps the same Pace, and is helped on
by those Symptoms that proceed from it, and the said Fever with all its ill
Train ( viz. The Cough, the Spitting of Blood, the Pain, and the like) is
gradually lessened, according to the Degree of the free Expectoration of the
Morbisick Matter.

But the Matter occasioning this Disease, does not always in the Process of it
attain the Concoction that is due to Expectoration; for it often happens, that
the Matter spit up is yet little and thin, as at the beginning of the Disease;
and consequently the Fever and other Symptoms do not at all remit till they
have destroyed the Sick. In the mean while he is sometimes bound in his Body,
and sometimes too loose, the Stools being frequent and very liquid; it
sometimes happens when the Disease is very high, and Bleeding has not been
used, the Patient is not able to Cough, but laboring under a great difficulty
of breathing, is in a manner suffocated by the Violence of the Inflammation;
which is sometimes so very great that he cannot open his Breast large enough for
Respiration, without exquisite Pain. And sometimes after a violent
Inflammation, and when Bleeding has been ommitted which ought to have been used
at the Beginning of the Disease, an Imposthume is presently occasioned, and the
Cavity of the Breast is filled with Matter; in which case tho the Original
Fever either wholly ceases, or is at least lessened, yet the Patient is not
out of Danger, for an Empyema or an Hectic Fever following, the Poor Wretch
dies Consumptive.

But now though a Pleurisy commonly takes its rise from the proper and
specific Inflammation of the Blood, which is wont to produce it when it is an
Original Disease. Yet it comes sometimes accidentally upon other Fevers, of
what kind soever they be, from a Precipitation of the Febrile Matter upon the
Pleura, or intercostal Muscles, and it happens for the most Part at the very
beginning of the Fever; the Febrile Matter being as yet crude, and not subdued
by a fit Ebullition, and so not prepared for a due Separation; but this
Inconvenience most commonly arises from an unseasonable and preposterous use of
hot Medicines. For Nature being disturbed by this means, is forced to expel the
Humor, as yet crude by any Way; and so sometimes the Feverish Matter is
impetuously cast upon the Meninges of the Brain, and then a Frenzy is
occasioned; and sometimes upon the Membrane covering the Ribs, and from thence
a Pleurisy arises; especially when the Age and Temperament of the Patient, and
the Season of the Year, betwixt Spring and Summer contribute to it. For
certainly at that Season Fevers are prone to turn to Pleurisies.

Though this Disease has an ill Name, and is of it self more dangerous than any
other, yet if it be well managed it is easily cured, and indeed as certainly as
other Diseases.

As to the Cure, as soon as I am called, I order that ten ounces of Blood be
taken away from the Arm of the Side affected; and afterward, I prescribe the
following Potion to be taken presently after Bleeding.

Take of Erratick Poppy-water four Ounces, of Sal Prunella one dram, of Syrup
of Violets one ounce, mingle them, make a Draught.

At the same time I prescribe the following Emulsion.

Take of sweet Almonds number seven, of the Seeds of Melons, and Pompions, each
half an ounce, of the Seeds of white Poppies two drams, beat them together in a
marble Mortar, pouring gently upon them a Pint and an half of Barley-water, of
Rose Water two drams, of Sugar Candy half an ounce, mingle them, make an
Emulsion, give four ounces every fourth Hour.

I also order Pectorals to be taken frequently: For instance,

Take, of the Pectoral Decoction a quart, of Syrup of Violets and Maidenhair,
each one ounce and an half; mingle them, make an Apozem; let him take half a
pint thrice a day.

Take of the Oil of Sweet-Almonds two Ounces, of Syrup of Violets, and
Maidenhair, each one ounce; of Sugar Candy half a dram; mingle them, make a
Linctus, of which let the Patient lick often in a day.

Oil of Almonds by it self, or Oil of Flax-seeds, is often used with good
Success.

As to Diet, I forbid the use of all Flesh, and all Broths of it, though never
so thin: I advise that the Patient be fed with Oaten and Barly-Broths and
Panada, and let him drink of a Ptysan made of Barly-water, with the Roots of
Sorrel and Liquorish, and the like, and sometimes Small-beer.

Moreover, I prescribe the following Ointment.

Take of the Oil of Sweet-Almonds two ounces, of the Ointment of Marshmallows
and Pomatum each one ounce; mingle them, make a Liniment, with which anoint the
affected side Morning and Evening, applying upon it a Cabbage-leaf.

I also order he should persist in the use of the said Remedies through the
whole Course of the Disease.

Of the same day I am first called; if the Pain be very violent, I take away
again the same quantity of Blood, or else the day following, and so the third
day; and after this manner four times one day after another (unless the Patient
be well before) when the Pain and other Symptoms rage violently; but if the
Disease, being more moderate and less dangerous, permits me to proceed more
gently; or if the Patient, being weak, cannot well bear Bleeding so often, I do
not repeat it again after it has been twice used, till a day or two be past
betwixt each Bleeding.

I have seldom observed, that a confirmed Pleurisy has been cured in grown
People with less than the loss of forty Ounces of Blood, or thereabout; though
in Children, once or twice Bleeding is most commonly sufficient; nor does the
Diarhea, which sometimes comes upon this Disease, hinder the foresaid repeated
Bleeding; for indeed it may be soon stopped by this very Method, without any
Astringent Medicine: But I either wholly omit Glisters, or take care that they
be injected at as great a distance as may be betwixt the Bleedings; and they
should be only made of Milk and Sugar.

All the time of the Disease, I take care that the Patient be not overheated,
and therefore I give leave that he be taken every day out of his Bed, and that
he keep up some hours according to his Strength; which is of so great moment in
this kind of Disease, that if the Patient be kept continually in Bed, neither
this so large Evacuation of Blood, nor other Remedies, how cooling soever, will
sometimes do any good for the taking off the said Symptoms.

Presently after the last Bleeding, unless perchance it happens before that all
the Symptoms abate, and that the Patient (who has been kept hitherto for some
days from all Spirituous Liquors and Strong Nourishment) soon recovers his
Strength, it will be convenient to give a gentle Purge.

But now if any one should say, That proceeding in this way, we scarce touch
upon Expectoration, so far are we from discoursing largely of the ways by which
it is to be promoted, through the various Seasons of the Disease, he is to know
that these things were not unwarily past over: But after good consideration
designedly neglected; for I always thought that they were in very great danger,
who committed the Cure of this Disease to Expectoration; for it often happens
that part of the Morbifick Matter being concocted, and perhaps spit up, the
rest remains crude; the best maturating and expectorating Medicines having been
used in vain; for sometimes the Expectoration goes on very well, and sometimes
is wholly suppressed. The Patient in the mean while being in Jeopardy on every
hand, and for any power I have over Expectoration, which indeed is none at all,
may be adjudged for Life or Death; whereas on the contrary by Bleeding, the
Morbifick Matter is in my power, and the Orifice of the Vein may supply the use
of the Aspera arteria; for I confidently assert, that this Disease, which if it
be treated by the Method we have spoken against, is deservedly reckoned among
the most dangerous, may be as certainly and as safely cured, by the Method I
have now prescribed, as any other Disease whatever; nor could I ever find the
least Injury befall any one by so large an Evacuation of Blood, though
unskilful People think otherwise; but for as much as the Cure of this Disease
almost wholly consists in Bleeding repeated, which being performed in places
far distant from populous Towns by unskilful Surgeons and Farriers, Poor People
are often in danger of losing their Arms, and their Lives are hazarded by the
Pricking of a Tendon. I thought sit to add here the Cure of such Punctures when
they happen: They whose Tendons are pricked do not presently perceive a Pain,
but twelve Hours after Bleeding they complain of it, not so much in the Orifice
lately made, as in the Parts tending to the Armpits, where at length the Pain
fixes, and is chiefly perceived when the Arm is extended: But the part hurt has
no great Swelling, that scarce exceeding the bigness of a Hazel-nut; an Ichor
continually distills from the Orifice, which is the chief sign of a Puncture of
a Tendon, I have known it cured in the following manner.

Take of the Roots of white Lillies four ounces; boil them till they are soft
in a quart of Cows Milk; then take of Oat-meal, and of the Meal of Flax-seeds,
each three ounces, boil the Meal to the consistence of a Pultis, in a
sufficient quantity of the Milk strained from the aforesaid Roots, and mingle
the Roots mash'd; make a Cataplasm, apply it hot Morning and Evening to the
part affected.

CHAP. LVI. Of a Peripneumonia.
A Peripneumonia is an Inflammation of the Lungs, with an acute Fever, a
Cough, and a difficulty of Breathing: They that have this Disease perceive a
great Inflammation in the Breast, with a Swelling of the Lungs, and sometimes a
pricking Pain; they labor for Breath, and Breath is short; the Fever is
accompanied with great Thirst, Watchings, and a troublesome Cough, and the
Spi^tle Bloody, or streaked with Blood.

The formal reason, and the conjunct cause of a Peripneumonia, consist in the
Febrile Effervescence of the Blood, together with the Stopage of it in the
narrow passages of the Lungs, which occasions an Inflammation there.

It is observed that a Peripneumonia frequently follows, or comes upon a
Pleurisy, or succeeds a Quinsie.

As to the Prognostics of this Disease, common Experience does attest, that
it is a very dangerous Disease; for many either dye of it, or very difficultly
recover Health; and this is manifest from its Aetiology; for a Wound with a
great Extravasation or Stagnation of Blood made in the Lungs, is very
difficultly cured, and the affected place is never restored to its Pristine
State.

The Prognostic Signs which are of chiefest note, are taken from appearance of
the Symptoms, and from the nature of things evacuated, and from the degrees of
Strength.

A Peripneumonia coming upon a Pleurisy or Quinsie, most commonly is worse
than when it comes of it self, or succeeds either of them. But if upon this
Disease, after what manner soever begun, an acute Fever presently follows,
with great Thirst, Watchings, and an Orthopnoea; it is ill, and yet much worse,
if a Delirium, or Frenzy, or Convulsive Motions, or an Hemiplegia come upon
it.

Moreover, The Patient is as much endangered if he be very Short-breathed, if
he be troubled with Vomiting, or frequent Swooning away, a weak Pulse, or cold
Sweats: For while these Symptoms are urgent, the Obstruction of the Blood in
the Lungs is not at all removed, nothing is digested or spit up; but the
Circulation of the Blood being more and more obstructed, and its Accension by
Respiration hindered, the Animal Spirits are much disordered; so that at length
the Strength is quite spent, and the Vital Flame extinguished.

As to the Prognostics from things evacuated, we observe a Peripneumonia to be
dangerous when nothing is spit up; Next to this, when the Spittle is thin and
crude, mixed with Blood; it is far better when the Spittle is yellow and thick,
streaked with a little Blood. The Urine being yellow from the beginning, and of
a good Consistence, with a cloud in the midst, shows that almost all the
Impurities are lodged in the place affected; when from that state it is changed
into a thick and turbid Urine, it shows that the Morbifick Matter is resorbed
from that part into the Blood: But if such kind of Urine be suddenly changed
into a thin one, then a Delirium, or Death it self, is at hand. Much Sweat, and
plenty of Urine, a Diarrhaea, Bleeding at Nose; the Flux of the Courses, or of
the Hemorrhoids, are good Signs in this Disease; yea, any of these Evacuations
happening seasonably, do frequently discharge the Disease.

The condition of Strength is ever of great Moment in making a due Prognostic
in this Disease; for oftentimes when there be dreadful Symptoms, as a violent
Fever, a difficulty of Breathing, with a Cough, Watchings, and other ill
Signs, if the Pulse be as yet strong, and the Animal Spirits vigorous, there is
more hope of the Patient, than when these things are more sedate, if the Pulse
be weak, and the Spirits torpid and oppressed.

The first Indication of Cure in a Peripneumonia, is, That the Blood impacted
in the Vessels of the Lungs, and causing Obstruction and Inflammation, may be
discussed from thence, and restored to its wonted Circulation; but if it cannot
be done, the second Indication will be, that the Matter be duly digested, or
suppurated, and presently spit up.

While the former Indication prevails, the Intentions of Healing may be these
following: First, That the more plentiful Flux of Blood to the part affected be
prevented: Secondly, We must endeavor that the Blood stagnating or
extravasated in the Lungs, be resorbed again by the Veins into the rest of the
Mass, and restored to Circulation: And that it may be the better done, the
Blood ought thirdly to be freed from its Clamminess whereby its Fluidity is
hindered. Fourthly, We must take care of the most urgent Symptoms, viz. The
Fever, Cough, Watchings, and difficulty of Breathing: But if notwithstanding
all these things, the other Indication shall come into use; it will be
requisite to prescribe maturating and expectorating Medicines vulgarly so
called, together with these Remedies just mentioned.

That we may answer the first and second Intention together, Bleeding is for
the most part requisite in every Peripneumonia, yea, sometimes it ought to be
frequently repeated; for the Vessels being emptied of Blood, do not only
withdraw the Nourishment of the Disease, but do often resorbe the Matter
impacted in the part affected: Wherefore if Strength remain, and the Pulse be
strong enough, large Bleeding is convenient at the very beginning; but
otherwise let it be used in a small quantity; which however may be repeated as
occasion offers it self. It is to be noted, that Blood drawn in a
Peripneumonia, and also in a Pleurisy, after it is cold, contains in its
Superficies a small viscous and discolored Film. Moreover, we may observe one
while the Blood entirely bad, another while only part of it is subject to this
change; for when the Blood is received in three or four Dishes, sometimes in
all, but oftener in the second and third Dish, it is apparently bad, and in the
first and last good enough. Wherefore it is commonly ordered, that the Blood is
always to run so long, till that which is so depraved begins to come forth; and
if there be sufficient Strength, the flowing out is to be continued till it
runs good again: Indeed as frequent Experience does approve of this Practice,
so does Reason it self; for in this Disease, seeing the whole Mass of Blood
does not presently acquire that Clamminess, the depraved Portions are chiefly
accumulated about the place of the Obstruction, and adhere on every side in the
lesser Vessels; wherefore the Blood first flowing out by Phlebotomy is often
good: Afterward, the Vessels being emptied, receive the other Morbifick
Stagnating before, and restore it to Circulation; and when Portions of it
placed near, troop together to the Orifice of the Vein, they flow out together;
and after that the corrupted Blood has flowed out, the residue more pure does
succeed. Wherefore in this case, let Incision be ever made with a large
Orifice, and let the Blood be drawn out with a large and continued Stream; for
otherwise, if in the midst of Bleeding, the bad Blood issuing out, the Orifice
(as the Manner of some is, that the Spirits should not faint) be closed with
the Finger; when it is opened again, the pure Blood will flow next, but the bad
sliding by, if there be any remaining, will not presently return to that
Orifice. Besides Phlebotomy, many other Remedies, namely, whatever does repress
that Urgency of Blood, and empty the Passages thereof, are to be used,
wherefore a very thin Diet is prescribed, for the most part merely of Barley
and Oats; and though Catharticks are altogether prohibited, because they
disquiet the Blood, and hurry it impetuously upon the Part affected, yet
Glisters which gently loosen the Belly, and draw the Impurities of the Blood
toward the Belly, ought to be daily used. Moreover Juleps, and temperating
Apozems which restrain the Fever of the Blood, and evacuate the Superfluous
Sorosities of it, and gently open the Passages of the Breast, are used with
good Success.

The third Intention of Healing which respects the taking off the Clamminess or
Obstructing Viscosity of the Blood, is wholly to be performed by Remedies,
which unloose the Frame thereof too much bound, and dissolve the Combinations
of the Salts, as testaceous Powders, the Tooth of a Boar, the Jaws of a Pike,
and other things endued with an Alkali Salt, also Sal-prunella. I have
frequently known the Spirit of Sal-Armoniack, and Hartshorn to have yielded
notable Relief in this Disease, and the Infusion of Horse-dung, by reason of
its volatile Salt is of great use, though it be a common Remedy.

As to the Symptoms and their Cure, very many Remedies appropriated to these,
fall in together with the former, for against the Fever the same Juleps and
Apozems, which appease the Heat of the Blood, and withal recreate the Animal
Spirits are to be used; to which, in respect of the Cough and Difficulty of
breathing, temperate pectoral Remedies are added. The greatest Difficulty is
what ought to be exhibited against want of Sleep, when it is very urgent; for
Opiats because they further the Difficulty of breathing in this Disease, are
scarce safely taken; yea sometimes they are very pernicious; wherefore
Laudanum, and the strong Preparations of Opium, are to be shunned in a
Peripneumonia, more than a Dog or a Snake.

Nevertheless, Anodyns and gentle Hypnoticks, as Water and Syrup of Red Poppies
are not only allowed, but are accounted Specific Remedies in this Disease, and
in a Pleurisy; and sometimes it will be expedient to use Diacodiats, if the
Strength be sufficient, and the Pulse strong enough; for the Pain of the
Breast, if at any time it be troublesome, it is necessary to apply Liniments,
Fomentations, and Cataplasms.

The second curative Indication which intends the Digestion of the Matter
impacted in the Lungs, (if it cannot be dispersed or resorbed,) and to throw it
up by Spittle requires ordinary, maturating, and expectorating Medicines that
are temperate, such as assuage Thirst, and appease the Feverish Heat. The more
select Remedies, that are chiefly accommodated to this Disease shall be now
mentioned.

The Medicines conducing to the first and second Intention are prescribed
according to the following Forms.

Take of the Waters of Mary's Thistle ten ounces, of red Poppies three ounces,
of the Syrup of red Poppies one ounce, of Pearls prepared one dram, make a
Julep.

The Dose is six Spoonfuls every fourth Hour.

Take of Black Cherry Water, of the Water of Carduus Benedictus, and of Baulm,
each four ounces, of the Powder of Boars Tooth one dram, of Syrup of Violets
ten drams, make a Julep to be taken after the same manner.

Take of Grass-roots three ounces, Shavings of Ivory, and Hartshorn, each
three drams; Raisons stoned one ounce and an half, Liquorish two drams; boil
them in Spring Water, from three Pints to two; to the strained Liquor add,
Syrup of Violets one ounce, Sal-prunella one dram; make an Apozem. Take three
or four ounces thrice a Day,

For the same Intention, viz. that the Vessels being emptied may substract the
Nourishment of the Disease, or resorbe the morbifick Matter, Purging is
prescribed by many.

The Ancients in this Disease as in many other, used after Phlebotomy,
Preparatives and Purgatives in a constant Course; and of late the Chemists with
greater Boldness give Vomits, and prefer them before all other Remedies in
Peripneumonia; yea neglecting or forbidding Bleeding, they chiefly depend on
Stibiate Vomits, but I think there cannot be a more pernicious Course; for
though sometimes they do no hurt in rustic and robust Bodies, yet they are
without Success; but in tender Constitutions they are in a manner as
destructive as Poison.

But as to Purging, though it may not be convenient at the very Beginning, for
indeed it is then most commonly injurious, yet the Fluxion of the Morbifick
Matter being stopped, and the Effervescence of the Blood being appeased, we may
safely evacuate the Body with a lenitive Purge.

Take of the Decoction of Senna gerionis four ounces, of Syrup of Roses
solutive one ounce, mingle them, make a Potion. Or,

Take of the best Senna three drams, of all the Cassia, and Tamarinds, each
half an ounce; of Coriander Seeds two drams, let them be boiled in a sufficient
Quantity of Fountain Water to six ounces; when it is strained add one ounce of
Syrup of Violets; let it be clarified with the white of an Egg, and give it.

Purgatives are not always to be given, nor ever unadvisedly in this Disease,
but Glisters are used frequently, and most commonly daily; they must be gentle
and emollient, such as easily move the Belly, without any great Agitation of
the Humors or Blood; for this purpose, Milk or Whey is often convenient, with
brown Sugar, or Syrup of Violets. Or,

Take of the Leaves of either Sort of Mallows, of Melilot and Mercury, each one
handful; of Linseed, and sweet Fennel-seeds, each half an ounce; of sweet
Prunes Number six; boil them in a sufficient Quantity of Spring water to a
Pint, to which add Syrup of Violets one ounce, Sugar ten drams, Sal Prunella
one dram, make a Glister.

Medicines for the third Intention, viz. for dissolving the Clamminess of the
Blood, are wont to be administered in the Form of a Powder, of a Spirit, or a
Potion, according to the Manner following.

1. Powders. Take of Crab's-eyes two drams, of Sal prunella one dram and an
half, of pearled Sugar one dram, make a Powder for six Doses, one to be taken
every Sixth Hour, with a proper Julep or Apozem. Or,

Take of the Tusk of a Boar, of the Jaw of a Pike, or of Crab's-eyes, each one
Dram and an half; of the Flowers of Sal Armoniack, of the Powder of red Poppy
Flowers, each half a dram; mix them for four Doses,

2. Spirits and Chemical Liquors. Take of Spirit of Sal-armoniack distilled with
Olibanum three drams, the dose is from fifteen drops to twenty, thrice a day.
Or,

Take of the Spirit of Urine, or Soot, after the same manner.

Take of the sweet Spirit of Nitre three drams, the dose it from six drops to
ten.

3. Potions. Take of Carduus-water one Pint, fresh Horse-dung three ounces,
dissolve it warm, and filter it; the dose is three or four ounces twice or
thrice a day; add half an ounce of Syrup of Violets, or of red Poppies. Or,

Take of the Leaves of Dandelion two handfuls bruised, and infused in half a
Pint of the Water of Mary's Thistle, Treacle-water half an ounce, press them
out, add Powder of Crab's-eyes one dram; take four or six Spoonfuls thrice a
day.


The fourth Intention of Healing in respect of the Symptoms greatly urging,
does suggest diverse Sorts of Operations. First, in respect of the Fever, the
Juleps and Apozems above prescribed are convenient. Moreover the Use of
Sal-prunella ought to be frequent. Secondly, for the Cough and difficulty of
Breathing, Lambatives and Decoctions, or Pectoral Juleps are administered with
Success.

Take of the Syrups of Jujubes, and Maidenhair, each one ounce and an half; of
Syrup of Violets one ounce, Flowers of Nitre one Scruple, make a Linctus to be
licked now and then.

Take of Syrup of Marshmallows one ounce, of Diacodium, and of Syrup of
red-poppies, each half an ounce; Powder of Crab's-eyes two Scruples, make a
Linctus to be taken the same Way.

Take of the Syrups of Hyssop, and Liquorish, each one ounce and an half; of
the Powder of red-poppy Flowers one Scruple, of Crab's-eyes one dram, of the
Lohoch of the Pine six drams, make a Lohoch, take the Quantity of a Nutmeg four
times, or oftener in a Day.

Take of the Roots of Grass, Chervil, Marshmallows, each one ounce; Figs
Number four, Jujubs, and Sebastines, of each Number six; Raisins one ounce,
Liquorish three drams, Barley half an ounce, boil them in three Pints of
Spring Water to a Quart, strain them, the Dose is three or four ounces.

Take of Raisins stoned one ounce and an half, Filberds number four, of
Liquorish sliced three drams, of Hyssop Water one Pint and an half, infuse them
warm in a close Vessel six Hours, strain them, and add one ounce and an half of
Syrup of Marshmallows, make a Julep; the dose is three or four Spoonfuls often
in a day, swallowing it by degrees.

Thirdly, Against Watching.

Take of Red-poppy water three ounces, of Syrup of the same six drams, of
Epidemick-water two drams, make a Draught to be taken at Bedtime.

If the Pulse be strong, and the Strength remains.

Take of Cowslip Water three ounces, of Diacodium half an, ounce, make a
Draught to be taken at Bedtime.

Fourthly, If the Pain be much about the Place affected.

Take of Ointment of Marshmallows two ounces, of Oil of sweet Almonds one
ounce and an half, mingle them, make a Liniment to be applied with thin Paper.

Fifthly, For the last Intention of healing, (which assisting the Secundary
Indication prescribes Medicines maturating, and expectorating) the following
Forms are convenient.

Take of Linseed Oil fresh drawn three ounces, Syrup of Violets two ounces, of
Hissop water half a Pint, mingle them in a Glass, take two or three ounces
twice or thrice a day, shaking the Glass first.

Take of Olibanum powdered one dram, put it into an Apple made hollow, roast
the Apple in the Embers, let him eat it at Bedtime, repeating it three or four
times.

Take of Oil of Almonds fresh drawn, of Syrup of Maidenhair, each one ounce and
an half; Sugar Candy, two drams, stir them in a glass Mortar till they are
perfectly mixed, make a Linctus to be taken often in a day with a Liquorish
Stick, also let a Spoonful be taken thrice a day in a Draught of Posset drink.

It would be easy to produce many Observations of Peripneumonick Patients, but
seeing the Type of the Disease, and the Reasons of the Symptoms, are in all
almost the same, it will be sufficient to mention only one or two; and while I
was writing these Things, I was sent for to a Patient very Sick of a
Peripneumonia, he was about fifty Years old, lean and choleric, he fell into a
Fever by taking Cold, he was troubled with a Cough, a pain in the Breast, and
a Difficulty of Breathing, when he had continued thus four days without any
Remedy or Physical Administration, I found him in a great Fever, with Thirst,
and a great Inflammation in the Breast, breathing very difficultly and
painfully, and rattling, insomuch that he seemed in the Agony of Death; but
because his Pulse was strong enough, though quick and disturbed, I presently
ordered him to be blooded, and that eight or ten ounces of Blood should be
taken away, and seeing he was little relieved after three Hours Intermission, a
Glister being first administered I ordered twelve ounces more of Blood to be
taken away; moreover I prescribed Spirit of Hearts horn, twelve drops of it to
be given every sixth Hour with a proper Julep, and between I ordered a Dose of
the following powder to be administered,

Take Powder of Crab's-eyes, and Sal-prunella, each one dram and an half; of
Pearl one dram, Sugar Candy two scruples; make a Powder to be divided into
eight Doses.

Moreover, he took as often as he pleased a Draught of a pectoral Apozem; by
the use of these within three hours all the Symptoms began to abate, and the
Night after he sweated and slept a little; the day after I repeated Phlebotomy,
and then continuing the same Remedies, he recovered in four or five Days; the
Blood we took from him was always in the Superficies viscous and discolored.

A certain Gentleman of a Sanguine Complexion, and of a strong Habit of Body,
after immoderate drinking of Wine, fell into a Fever with a grievous
Peripneumonia, so that Heat and Thirst mightily afflicting him, sitting always
upright in his Bed or Chair, and breathing short and very frequent, he could
scarce draw in Air enough to sustain the vital Flame; because he could not
undergo large Bleeding, I took it away by degrees, twice or thrice day after
day; Glisters were often injected. Moreover, Apozems, and Juleps, also Spirit
of Sal-armoniack, and Testacious Powders were given by turns; within four or
five days the Fever some what abated, also he began to breath better, and
sometimes to sleep a little; yet he did always complain of a great Heaviness of
his Breast, and of an intolerable Oppression of the Lungs; wherefore when
Bleeding was no longer safe, I applied very large Blisters to the Arms and
Thighs; the Blisters on his Arms soon dried up, but those on his Legs did not
only remain open, but after five or six days did run very much, and afterward
almost for a Month daily discharged great Plenty of a sharp Ichor; in the mean
time his Lungs sensibly amended, and at length were freed of their Burden.
Lastly, The little Sores raised by the Blisters were difficultly cured, and not
without frequent Applications of Medicines.

CHAP. LVII. Of a Bastard Peripneumonia.
A Fever accompanied with many Peripneumonick Symptoms, invades yearly about
the beginning of Winter, but oftener at the End of it; it chiefly seizes those
that are of a gross Habit of Body, and middle aged, or (which oftener happens)
those that are older, and too much addicted to Spirituous Liquors, especially
to Brandy; for when the Blood in such Men has been burdened with Phlegmatic
Humors, heapt up in the Winter, and stirred into a new Motion by the
approaching Spring, a Cough is presently occasioned by this Means, by which the
said Phlegmatic Humous rush upon the Lungs; at which time, if the Patient
chance to live irregularly, and continues to drink freely such spirituous
Liquors, the Matter growing almost thick, which occasioned the Cough, stops the
Passages of the Lungs, and the Fever consumes the Mass of Blood: At the
beginning of the Fever, the Patient is sometimes hot and sometimes cold, is
giddy, and complains of a launcing Pain of his Head; when the Cough is violent,
he vomits up all liquid things when he coughs, and sometimes when he does not;
the Urin is turpid and very red; the Blood taken away is like that of
Pleuriticks; he is often short breathed: If he cough, his Head aches just as if
it were cleft in Pieces (for so the Patient terms it) there is a Pain of the
whole Breast, or at least a Pressure of the Lungs, which is perceived by the
Standers by when the Patient coughs; the Lungs not sufficiently dilating
themselves, the vital Passages are as it seems shut up by the Swelling, and the
Circulation on that Account is so intercepted, and the Blood so stopped, that
there are no Signs of a Fever, though this may also happen by reason of the
Plenty of the Phlegmatic Matter, by which the Blood is so burdened, that it
cannot rise to a perfect Ebullition, especially in gross Bodies.

In curing this Fever I count I am oblidged to take away that Blood by
Phlebotomy, which occasions the Suffocation and Inflammation of the Lungs, and
to ventilate and open the Lungs with Pectoral Remedies, and to mitigate the
Heat of the whole Body with a cooling Diet: but whereas on the one hand the
Heap of Phlegmatic Matter contained in the Veins daily supplying Matter for the
Inflammation of the Lungs, may seem to indicate Bleeding often repeated; yet on
the other hand I found by the best Observation I could make, that Bleeding
often repeated, has succeeded very ill in Feavorish People of a gross Habit of
Body, especially if they have passed the Flower of their Age, and therefore I
forbore the Repetition of it; and instead of it, used frequent Purging, which
is well enough substituted for it, in those that abhor large and often repeated
Bleeding.

Therefore I proceeded after this manner: I ordered that the Patient should be
blooded in the Arm lying in Bed, and that he should not rise till two or three
Hours after; for all Blood letting somewhat weakening and disordering the whole
Body, may by this means the easier be born; for the Patient lying a Bed can
better bear the taking away of ten ounces, than of six or Seven when he is up;
the next day I give the following Potion in the Morning.

Take of Cassia extracted one ounce, of Liquorish two drams, of fat Figs number
four, of the Leaves of Senna two drams and an half, of Agarick trochiscated one
dram, boil them in a sufficient Quantity of Water, in four ounces of the
strained Liquor dissolve one ounce of Manna, of Syrup of Roses solutive half an
ounce, mingle them, make a Potion.

The next day I used to bleed a second time; and the next day save one, I order
the Purging Potion above prescribed, to be repeated, and to be given every
other day till the Patient is quite well; when the Patient does not purge, I
advise him to use a pectoral Decoction, and Oil of sweet Almonds, and the like.

I forbid the use of Flesh, and the Broth of it, but especially of all
spirituous Liquors; in the stead of which I allow him for his ordinary drink a
Ptisan of Barley and Liquorish, and small Beer, if he desire it.

And indeed, the Bastard Peripneumonia occasioned by a great deal of Phlegmatic
Filth heapt up in the Blood, is to be cured by Bleeding repeated, and by
Purging.

Though this Bastard Peripneumonia is something like a dry Asthma, both as to
Difficulty of Breathing, and some other Symptoms; yet it is sufficiently
distinguished from it; for in this there are manifest Signs of a Fever, and
Inflammation, which never appear in that, though in this kind they are much
less and obscurer than those which accompany a true Peripneumonia.

But you must carefully observe, that it is by no means safe to forbid the
drinking of Spirit of Wine, and such Liquors all of a sudden, when the Patient
has been a while addicted to them, but they must be left off Gradually; for
there is Danger of a Dropsy from an hasty and abrupt Change, which ought to be
observed in all Diseases that come on this Occasion; and seeing there has been
Mention made of Spirit of Wine, I will say by the by, that indeed it ought to
be wished that they were either wholly prohibited, or at least used for
refreshing the Spirits, and not for extinguishing them; or that the internal
use of them was wholly abdicated, and that they should be only used by
Surgeons, in Fomentations to digest Ulcers, or to be applied to Burns, in which
Case they are better than any other Medicine yet found out, for they defend the
under Skin from Putrefaction, and so soon perform the Cure (not waiting for
Digestion, which requires a considerable Time) if a Rag dipped in Spirit of Wine
be presently applied to the Part hurt, with Scalding Water, Gunpowder, or the
like, and moistened with the foresaid Spirit now and then, till the Pain from
the Fire be quite gone, and afterward only twice a day.

CHAP. LVIII. Of an Empyema.
AN Empyema is a Collection of Matter within the Cavity of the Breast, whereby
the Organs of Respiration are oppressed. This Collection of Matter is
occasioned either by a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, or Angina, suppurated and
broken.

The Signs of an Empyema, either show it is coming, or that it is already
perfectly formed. Of the former kind are these Diseases going before, from
whence this usually arises, as a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, and Angina; and
sometimes also a Bruise or Wound in the Breast, and sometimes also other
Diseases not well carried off; from whence there will be a greater Suspicion of
an Empyema, if after a Week or two passed without plentiful Spitting, Shaking
and a Fever, and Faintness of the Spirits supervene; and then after fourteen
or twenty Days, the Signs of a confirmed Empyema will appear, viz. Difficulty
of Breathing, a Weight upon the Breast, Fluctuation of the Matter, an
uneasiness from Motion, Thirst, and almost always a small Fever, Redness of
the Cheeks, Restlesness, and Watching.

As to the Cure of an Empyema, you must first consider whether the Signs of its
being already made be certain or dubious; in the former Case there is not much
use of Medicines; but the Body being well prepared, we must presently open the
Side; wherefore if from a Pleurisy, or a Peripneumonia not well cured, or if
by reason of Blood extravasated by a Blow, a Fall, or Wound, a Fluctuation of
Pus, of Purulent or Bloody Matter be perceived, and the Spittle lessened, or
none at all, it is to no purpose to wast Time in using expectorating and
maturating Medicines; but having loosned the Belly, and attemperated the Blood
and Humors, by Juleps, Apozems, and Anodyns, an Aperrion must be undertaken,
either by the Knife, or in tender and timorous People by applying a Caustic
betwixt the sixth or seventh Vertebra; and when the Eschar is made, we must
divide it gently with a Knife, and pass the Knife gently into the Cavity of the
Breast; then having put in a Silver Pipe, the Matter must be evacuated by
degrees; but it must be let out as hastily as the Strength of the Patient will
permit; for that which remains within, will stink horridly in a few days; to
prevent which a cleaning and Traumatick Liquor must be injected, with a Syringe
twice or thrice a day. It is not necessary to describe particularly the Manner
of the Operation, it being well known, and often practiced by skilful
Chirurgions, and daily practiced. After it is cut open and dressed as it ought
to be, there is little more to be done by the Physician. An exact Course of
Diet, a frequent Loosning of the Belly (so often as there is Occasion) by
Glisters, and also these Remedies, which are Vulgarly called Traumatick, which
do hinder the Dissolution of the Blood, and keeps the Seresities of it from
falling upon the Breast to hurt it, ought to be prescribed. But if the Signs of
this Disease are uncertain, or altogether doubtful, the Breast ought not to be
opened too soon or rashly. I have known some have their Breasts opened to no
purpose, when they have spit stinking Pus, and they have also labored under a
Dyspnaea, and a Difficulty of Breathing; therefore when an Empyema is not
evident by Pathognomick Signs, Medicines (such as are prescribed for the Cure
of a Peripneumonia) which help Expectoration, and evacuate gently by Sweat and
Urine, ought to be used for some time: If these do not any Good, and the
Empyema still remains, or Augments, then the Breast must be opened.

As to the Forms of the Medicines requisite for the Cure of an Empyema before
Section, the same Remedies which were prescribed for a Peripneumonia, are to be
used: but after the opening of the Breast the following are chiefly to be used.

To prevent Fainting which may happen either in the Operation or after it, the
following Julep must be in Readiness, and four or five Spoonfuls of it must be
taken upon occasion.

Take of the Waters of Balm, and Black Cherries, each six ounces; of
Aqua-mirabilis one ounce, of Pearl powdered one dram, of Syrup of Gilly-flowers
one ounce, mingle them, make a Julep.

The following Decoction must be taken twice or thrice in a day.

Take of the Leaves of Hart's-tongue, Speedwell, Hemp, Agrimony, Coltsfoot,
Mouse-ear, Sanicle, each one handful; of the Roots of Madder, and Chervil, each
one ounce; of Barley half an ounce, of red Cicers half an ounce, Raisons of the
Sun one ounce and an half; boil them in two Quarts of Fountain Water till half
is consumed, sweeten it with Clarified Honey, or with the Syrup of Mouse-ear as
it is taken.

If there be no Fever the following Pills may be used.

Take of the Powders of Crab's-eyes two drams, of Flowers of Sulphur one dram,
of Sal-Prunella half a dram, of the Species Diarrhodon-abbatis one Scruple, of
venice Turpentine washed a sufficient quantity; make a Mass, make small Pills,
take a Scruple or half a dram of them Morning and Evening; or the Turpentine
being omitted, half a dram or two Scruples may be taken in the Form of a Powder
twice a Day.

CHAP. LIX. Of a Consumption.
A Phthysis in general, is a Consumption of the Muscular Parts of the Body: It
is twofold, either Original or Sympromatick. There are two Species of the
original Phthysis, viz. Atrophia, and a Consumption of the Lungs.

An Atrophia is twofold, viz. Either Nervous, or arising from Inanition.

A Symptomatick Phthysis is occasioned by other Diseases going before.

An Atrophy, or Nervous Phthysis, is a Consumption of the whole Body, without
any considerable Fever, Cough, or difficulty of Breathing, but loss of
Appetite and Indigestion accompany it; upon which account Faintness, and a
daily wasting of the Body follow. This sort of Consumption sometimes happens in
England, but very often to the Inhabitants of Virginia, when they return hither.

In the beginning of this Disease, the Body appears Oedematous, the Face Pale
and Squalid, and the Stomach nauseates every thing but Liquors; and the
Strength is so languid, that the Sick, before the Fleshy parts are evidently
consumed, is rendered so very Weak, that he cannot keep from Bed, the color of
the Urine is most commonly of a deep Red, and very little in quantity, though
sometimetimes (but rarely, as it is wont to happen in Diseases of the Nerves)
it is pale, and voided in a great quantity; but no considerable Fever can be
discerned, either by the Pulse, Drouth, or Heat, how high-colored soever the
Urine is; so that the Pathognomonick Signs of this Consumption beginning, are
Faintness and want of Appetite, without any notable Fever, Cough, or short
Breath; though in progress of the Disease, when the habit of the Body is
wasted, some difficulty of Breathing (as is usual in all that are Faint) may be
perceived.

This Disease is very difficultly cured, if the Physician be not made use of at
first; it ends in an Hydropical and Oedematous Tumor of the Body, especially
of the lower parts, and then the Disease is past all hope.

The main of the business must be performed by Stomachick Medicines, and such
as strengthen the Nerves, such are Chalybeats, Antiscorbuticks, and Cephalicks,
and bitter things of every kind: For Instance, Let the Sick take, if his Body
be bound, four Ounces of the bitter Decoction with Senna, and every fourth
night two Ounces of Tinctura Sacra, or of the Tinctura of Hiera Picra, made in
the Waters of Rue, Black Cherries, Compound Peony.

In his ordinary Drink, hang a Bag of Cephalicks, and Antiscorbuticks; an hour
before Dinner let him take half a Dram of Elixir Proprietatis in a Draught of
Whitewine, wherein Wormwood has been infused: Apply to the Region of the
Stomach the Magisterial Stomachick Plaster, with a few drops of the Chemical
Oil of Cinnamon and Wormwood; or foment the Stomach daily with Aromatic Bags,
made of the Leaves of Mint and Wormwood, Cinnamon, Mace, Zedoary, Galingal,
Cyperus, and Sweet Smelling Flag, and boiled in Claret: If it be Summertime,
let him drink Chalybeat Waters; if Winter, Syrup of Steel or the Wine of it,
made by quenching Filings of Steel in good Whitewine three or four times; then
by infusing in it Zedoary, Galingal, Nutmegs, sharp Cinnamon, Mace, Cubebs, and
Cloves grossly beaten: But amongst Chalybeats, Mynsichts extract is thought the
best, which must be given in the form of a Bole, or of Pills, for the space of
twenty or thirty days. For Instance,

Take of the Extract of Mynsicht half a scruple, Balsam of Gilead seven drops,
of Haly's Powder six grains, of the Compound Powder of Wake-Robin four grains,
of the Powder of Liquorish a sufficient quantity; make Pills of an ordinary
size, repeat them every day once.

Opobalsamum by it self, as also Spirit of Hartshorn, and Spirit of
Sal-armoniack, are very effectual in this case, because they are agreeable to
the Nerves. For Instance, Let the Sick take eight or ten drops of Opobalsam, or
of Spirit of Hartshorn, in a sufficient quantity of Sugar Candy. Let him
endeavor to make himself Cheerful by Exercise and Company; for this Disease
most commonly proceeds from Care and Sorrow; and let him live in a good and
open Air: And because the Stomach is chiefly affected in this Disease, he must
eat a delicate sort of Meat, and not be too long accustomed to any one.

The Consumption that proceeds from Innanition is next to be discoursed of; and
first, Of that which proceeds from an Hemorrhage, whither by the Nostrils, or
from the Lungs by Coughing, or from the Jaws by Hawking, or from the Stomach by
Vomit, or from the Reins by Urine, or from the Hemorrhoidal or Uterin Vessels
in the customary monthly Purgation, or from hard Labor; or lastly, from Wounds
when there has been a great and long Flux of Blood. In this case the Hemorrhage
must be first stopped by thickning Remedies, and by binding hard the extreme
parts; and if there be occasion, and the Sick have Strength, Bleeding must be
used frequently, but sparingly; you must apply, if the part will admit of it,
Galen's Stiptick Plaster, the Royal Stiptick Water, Oxycrat cold, Ink, Ashes
of Hair a little burnt in a Retort, and with Vinegar made up in the form of a
Cataplasm, true Bole, Dragons blood, and the like; and they must be often
renewed.

Let the Sick take inwardly three or four times a day twenty or thirty drops,
or more, of the Royal Stiptick-water, in a Draught of the Milk-water, and five
or six Spoonfuls of the clarified Juices of Plantane and Nettles; or let him
take frequently in a Spoon the following Linctus.

Take of Syrup of Purslain three ounces, of true Bole, Dragons blood, of the
Troches of Spodium, and of sealed Earth, each two scruples; of Japan Earth one
dram, of Gum-Tragacanth a sufficient quantity dissolved in Plantane-water;
mingle them, make a Linctus.

Or let him take thrice a day the quantity of a Nutmeg of the following
Electuary.

Take of the Conserve of red Roses one ounce, of the Troches of Ambar three
drams, of true Bole, and of Dragons blood, each half a dram; with Syrup of
Myrtles make an Electuary.

Let him take also every night at Bedtime five or six Spoonfuls of the
following Julep, shaking the Viol when he uses it.

Take of Plantane-water six ounces, of Cinnamon Water hordeated three ounces,
of distilled Vinegar half an ounce, of true Bole, and of Dragons blood, each
half a dram; of London Laudanum three grains, of Syrup of Myrtles one ounce and
an half; make a Julep.

The Flux of Blood being stopped, we must endeavor by all means to raise the
weak Blood with new and good Chyle, and to extinguish the Febrile Flame, if it
be begun, least a Consumption should follow; wherefore the Sick must be
frequently nourished with good Broths, and variety of Meats that are full of
Nourishment, and of easy Digestion, and pleasant to the Stomach; but he must
be sure to abstain from Wine, and from things salted and spiced; and because
this sort of Sick, and all other that are inclining to a Consumption, are
subject to Anger, Sorrow, Oppressions of the Hypochonders, Hysteric Passions,
and want of Appetite; upon which account they can neither eat plentifully, nor
digest well: They must endeavor to recreate themselves, and to take the
Benefit of a wholesome and free Air, which most commonly does more good than
Medicines.

But if the Sick be Hectic, the Peruvian bark given freely is of admirable
Virtue; and if there be occasion the Sick must use a Milk Diet, or Chalybeat
Waters; but you must by no means Loosen the Body.

A Consumption also often arises from a simple Gonorrhaea, and the Whites; also
from Imposthumes and large Ulcers, and also from giving Suck, from a Looseness
and Dysentery, from a Diabetes, from Salivation, a Dropsy, violent Sweating,
and the like.

But a Consumption of the Lungs is the chief: The Cause in general of it, is an
ill Disposition of the whole Mass of Blood, and of the Nervous Spirit,
contracted by degrees by the various Procatarctick Causes, whereby the Acrid
and Malignant Serum of the Blood separated by the soft and glandulous
Paranchyma of the Lungs, stuffs and inflames them, and at last causes Ulcers,
which is indeed the containing Cause of this Disease.

The Procatarctick Causes are first, a Suppression of the usual and necessary
Evacuations, as of the Courses, the Lochia, of old Ulcers, of Issues, of Sweat
by the Soles of the Feet, and other parts of the Body, and the like, without
correcting and removing the Causes on which they depend; whereby the Blood is
vitiated. Secondly, Great Passions of the Mind, especially Fear, Sorrow, Anger,
deep Thinking, unseasonable and too hard Study, and the like. Thirdly, Eating
and Drinking too much, and unseasonably, especially Drinking too much of Wine
and Spirituous Liquors. Fourthly, Neglect of due Exercise. Fifthly, Long
Watching. Sixthly, Marshy and gross Air, and Smoke of Coals. Seventhly, An
Hereditary Disposition. Eighthly, An ill Conformation of the Breast. Ninthly,
Contagion. Tenthly, Stones generated Preternaturally in the Lungs. Eleventhly,
Particular Diseases which corrupt the Blood and Spirits.

By these and suchlike Procatarctick Causes, the Body being predisposed for a
Consumption, the Disease takes its rise immediately from taking Cold.

For the Cure of an original Consumption of the Lungs, Blood must be drawn from
the Arm, especially if the Sick be Plethorick, or accustomed a long while to
Blood-letting, and let six, seven, eight or ten Ounces be taken away. Secondly,
It is requisite after Bleeding, especially if the Disease took its rise from a
Surfeit, or is accompanied with Nauseousness, or a Disposition to Vomiting, to
give a gentle Vomit of Honey, or of Oxymel of Squills, and sometimes of the
Vinum Benedictum in a moderate quantity: The Vomit, especially if the Sick bear
it well, and if it be necessary, may be repeated three or four times at the
distance of three or four days betwixt each Vomit: It is best to give the Vomit
toward the Evening, the Sick being blooded the day before; and at Bedtime
after every Vomit you must give an Anodyn.

Take of Honey of Squills half an ounce, give it in a Draught of Posset Drink,
and repeat twice or thrice in an hour, if the Sick does not Vomit enough.

This is proper for Children and young People.

Take of Oxymel of Squills, and of Oil of Sweet-Almonds, each one ounce; mingle
them, let the Sick, take it in a large Draught of Posset Drink, and let it be
repeated twice or thrice in an hour if there be occasion. Or,

Take of Vinum Benedictum seven drams, Syrup of Violets two drams; mix them and
make a Potion for Vomiting. And, if it be needful, you may give of Oxymel of
Squills and Oil of Sweet-Almonds, each half an ounce, in a Draught of
Posset Drink twice or thrice, in the Operation.

Salt of Vitriol is not at all convenient in this case, because it irritates
and pricks continually the Glandulous parts about the Jaws, and so promotes the
Flux of the Serum, and increases the Cough. After the Vomit has done working,
give the following Opiat or the like.

Take of the Pectoral Decoction clarified four ounces, of Tincture of Saffron
two drams, of Helmont's liquid Laudanum fifteen drops, of Syrup of Violets two
drams; mingle them, make a Draught; or you may give ten grains of the Pill of
Hounds-tongue, or of Storax.

Thirdly, It is convenient to Purge gently by Stool the Humors by Stomachick
Purges, and the like, which the least agitate the Blood. For Instance,

Take of choice Manna, and of Oil of Sweet-Almonds, each one ounce and an half,
or two ounces; dissolve them in a Pint of hot Ptisan; let the Sick drink half
in Bed, and the rest half an hour after when he is up. Or,

Take of the best Senna two drams, of Cassia with the Canes broke, and of
Tamarinds, each half an ounce; of the Seeds of Coriander prepared half a dram;
boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain or Barnet water to eight ounces;
dissolve in it an ounce of Manna, and half a dram of Sal-prunella: Let the Sick
take half in the Morning, and the rest half an hour afterward.

And every Night after Purging give an Opiate to assuage the Blood, and to
quiet the Lungs, least a new Flux of Humors should fall upon the Lungs by the
Agitation of the Blood occasioned by the Purge.

For the same reason it is proper to mix some Opiate with Stomachick Purges to
be taken at Bed Time. For Instance.

Take of Aloes-rosat one scruple, or twenty five grains, of the Pills of
Hounds-tongue half a Scruple; mingle them make four Pills to be gilded, which
are to be repeated every other Night after the Patient has been blooded.

These Pills are vulgarly called Pilulae Catarrhales by the Apothecaries; for
they do not only evacuate the Humors by Stool, but also hinder a new Flux of
them to the Lungs. Or,

Take of the Stomachick Pills, with Gums, Aleophagin of Mastich, or of Ambar,
half a dram, or two scruples; of London Laudanum one grain; mingle them, make
four Pills, gild them, and let them be taken every third Night for thrice.

And if the Catarrh be very violent, and if a Difficulty of Breathing, or a
straitness on the Breast does not arise from the Use of Opiates, an Opiat must
be given every Night; for at the beginning of this Disease nothing considerable
can be done without them.

Fourthly, In this State of the Disease, Diaphorecticks do much Good; but you
must take notice, that they must be never used before Bleeding, Vomiting and
Purging, if they are necessary, and they must be always mixed with Opiates, and
such must be chosen as are least hot.

Take of venice-treacle half a dram or two scruples, of Conserve of old red
Roses half a dram; mingle them, make a Bolus. Or,

Take of Diascordium, and conserve of Wood Sorrel, each one dram, make a Bolus.
Or,

Take of Matthew's Pill fifteen grains; make two Pills, gild them, and let them
be taken at bedtime. Or,

Take of the Pill of Hounds-tongue twelve grains, of Diaphoretick Antimony one
scruple, of Tincture of Saffron a sufficient quantity; mingle them, make four
Pills.

These Diaphoreticks must be taken at Bedtime, and great Care must be taken
that the Sick does not take Cold after the use of them: Blisters must also be
applied to the Arms, and betwixt the Shoulders, and Pectoral Medicines must be
used when the Sick does not Purge.

Take of Oil of sweet Almonds, of Syrup of Maidenhair, of Jujubs, Violets, or
of Marshmallows, each one ounce and an half; of White Sugar Candy one dram and
an half; mingle them exactly, whereof let the Sick take a Spoonful every fourth
Hour, drinking upon it four ounces of the following Apozem hot.

Take of the Pectoral Decoction clarified one Pint and an half, of Tincture of
Saffron extracted with treacle-water, of Syrup of Maidenhair, Scabious, or of
Jujubs, each one ounce; mingle them, make an Apozem.

If you desire to have a more thickning Linctus.

Take of fresh Oil of sweet Almonds, of Syrups of Comfrey, of red-poppies, of
dried Roses, each one ounce and an half; of Diacodium half an ounce, of Sugar
of Roses one dram and an half; mingle them, make a Linctus.

If you would have a more lubricating Linctus.

Take of fresh Oil of Flax extracted without Fire, of Syrup of Liquorish, and
of Honey of Violets, one ounce and an half; of white Sugar Candy one dram and
an half, mingle them exactly, make a Linctus.

If there be a Fever, omit the Hissop and Tincture of Saffron; if there be a
Looseness, use the following.

Take of the Lohoch of the Lungs of a Fox, of Coltsfoot, and Purslain, each
one ounce; of Syrup of Jujubs, and Maidenhair, each one ounce and an half; of
Flowers of Sulphur two drams, of Tincture of Saffron half an ounce, of the
Species Diatragacanth frigid, of Diamargit frigid, of the Powder of Haly, each
one dram; of Penediat Sugar half an ounce; mingle them, make a Linctus.

Take of Tacamahaca, of Balsam of Peru, each one Drain; of the Ingredients for
the Pectoral Decoction a sufficient quantity, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Fountain Water to a Pint and an half; with the strained Liquor, and
with a dram of each of the four Cold-seeds, with the Seeds of white Poppies,
and of Henbane, each two drams; and with eight Almonds blanched, make an
Emulsion to be sweetened with Pendiat-Sugar.

But if by reason of the Clamminess of the Phlegm the Difficulty of Breathing is
more than usual, the following Linctus must be prescribed.

Take of the Lohoch of Raisons, and of Squills, each one ounce and an half; of
Syrup of Hedge-mustard, of Hyssop, and of Hore-hound, each one ounce and an
half; of the Species Diaireos, Diacalaminth, and the Flowers of Sulphur, each
one Dram and an half; Tincture of Saffron half an ounce, of white Sugar Candy
six Drams; mingle them, make a Linctus.

And if this Symptom be very violent, a dram of pure Gum-ammoniack, and a dram
and an half of Flowers of Benzoin may be added.

And for these Intentions, Balsamic Medicines, with things that agglutinate
are proper. For Instance,

Take of the Pulp of the conserve of red Roses, and Wood Sorrel, each one ounce
and an half; of Olibanum three drams, of Opobalsam two scruples; mingle them,
make an Electuary, whereof let the Sick take the quantity of a Nutmeg thrice a
day, drinking upon it four ounces of the following Apozem.

Take of the Leaves of Millfoil, Mouse-car, Burnet, Dandelion, spotted
Lungwort, Scabious, each one handful; of the Flowers of St. John's-wort,
Violets, the greater Daisy, red Poppies, each half an handful; of Jujubs, and
Dates, each six Pair; of Saffron tied up in a Rag half a dram, of the Seeds of
Annise, and Juniper Berries, each three drams; infuse them, and boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Fountain Water to three Pints, in the hot Liquor
strained dissolve four ounces of Conserve of red Roses, which being added to
the Apozem render it Balsamic and Pleasantly tasted; strain it again, and add
of the Syrups of Coral, and of Oak of Jerusalem, and of Maidenhair, each one
ounce, make an Apozem.

Or instead of the foregoing Electuary the following may be substituted,

Take of the Pulp of the conserve of red Roses two ounces, of the conserve of
Hips one ounce, of the Powder of Haly one dram, of Lucatellus's Balsam half an
ounce, of Balsamic Syrup a sufficient quantity; mingle them, make an Electuary
to be taken as before.

Let the Sick take often in a day one or two Spoonfuls of the Balsamic Syrup,
which is very agreeable to the Stomach, and with every Dose of the Syrup, a
scruple of the Balsam of Tolu made into small Pills, may be taken; and every
Night at Bedtime the Sick may take twenty five or thirty drops of Helmont's
liquid Laudanum in a spoonful of Balsamic Syrup: When there are no other
Medicines to be taken, and there is nothing contrindicates it, it is also very
effectual to prescribe a dram of Flowers of Sulphur to be taken in a rear Egg,
or Honey of Rosemary-flowers.

If a Tickling Cough, by reason of the Acrimony and Thinness of the Humuor,
issuing from the Windpipe and Bronchia, be very troublesome to the Patient, the
following Tablets must be used.

Take of the Pulp of the Roots of Marshmallows one ounce, Pearl-sugar,
Gum-arabick, Tragacanth, white Starch, dissolved in Poppy-water, each two
drams; of Penediat Sugar dissolved in Rose Water a sufficient quantity; make
Tablets, each weighing a dram.

But if the Cough continues long, and is violent, and will not yield to the
foregoing Remedies, we must use Balsamicks. For Instance, Let the Sick take
thrice a day three of the following Pills, in a spoonful or two of some proper
Linctus.

Take of the Powder of Millepedes prepared three drams, of Gum-ammoniack well
purified one dram and an half, of the Flowers of Benzoin two scruples or one
dram, of Extract of Saffron, and Peruvian Balsam, each half a scruple; of
Balsam of Sulphur anisated, or made with Turpentine, a sufficient Quantity;
mingle them, make Pills of a moderte bigness, gild them, or cover them with
Powder of Liquorish.

These Pills have often done good in Consumptire Coughs.

The Sick must choose an Air that is moderately hot and dry, and somewhat thin;
the diet must be of easy Concoction, as Mutton, and Veal, and the like; and
the Sick must eat Flesh only at Dinner; at Supper he must only eat Water Gruel,
Panada-broths, potched Eggs, and the like; and he must be sure to be moderate
in his Diet; he must drink sparingly of small Beer, and the like; Wines must be
avoided, and other spirituous Liquors; it is also convenient that his Beer be
medicated with Pectoral things and the like, which are proper for the Disease;
for by this means a great quantity of Medicines will be mixed with the Blood
without nauseating the Stomach, or injuring the Appetite, which a Physician
ought to take great Care of. For Instance,

Take of the best Sarsa-parilla cut eight ounces, of the Roots of China sliced
four ounces, of Polypody of the Oak, Maidenhair, Ground Ivy, spotted
Lung-wort, Coltsfoot, Scabious, Oak of Jerusalem, each two handfuls; of the
Flowers of Scabious, water lillies, and of Rosemary, of the grater Daisy, and
of St. John's Wort, each one handful; of Juniper Berries four ounces, of Raisins
of the Sun stoned six ounces, of Liquorish rasped one ounce, of the Seeds of
Annise two drams; mingle uhem, make a Bag for four Gallons of middling Beer,
which let the Sick use for his ordinary Drink.

The Sick must exercise himself daily moderately, especially before Dinner; he
must take great Care that he does not catch Cold: The Sick must be diverted as
much as may be from Anger, Sorrow, deep thinking, and all other great Passions
of the Mind; from Study, and unseasonable Watching, always sleeping, if he can,
the first part of the Night.

But in the second State of this Disease, which may be known by the Increase of
the hectic Fever, which now is often like a putrid Intermitting Fever, and
by the manifest wasting of the Flesh, by the dry Cough, a Weight upon the
Breast, and difficulty of Breathing; all Evacuacuations by Stool, Vomit, or
Sweat, are injurious; for they promote the Fever, and Increase the
Consumption: Nor is Bleeding to be used at this time, unless it be to prevent a
Peripneumonia; but the Alteratives and Pectorals before prescribed must be used
frequently, as often as the Stomach will bear them; but especially the use of
the Balsamicks before prescribed must be long continued, if there be no
considerable Fever; and by this means many Consumptive People have been
recovered.

Issues are also of use, and the Shaving of the Head.

And if the Hectic heat be but small, the Sick ought to drink Calybeat Waters
in the Summertime; for by this means many have been relieved Year after Year;
their Stomach, Flesh and Strength recovered, and the Hectic Heat and Cough
left them, and their Breath has been freer: But these Waters are not to be used
when the Lungs are evidently putrified, or when the Flesh is very much wasted
by Colloquative Sweats, a Looseness, or a Dropsy, for then they are deadly. And
when they are proper, the Sick must use them the greatest part of the Summer,
but not so great a quantity at a time as is usual in other Cases, two Quarts,
five Pints, or three Quarts, may be sufficient at a time; and the Sick must
take Care that he does not catch Cold, and of Errors in Diet: Purging is not to
be used during the drinking of the Waters in this Case, but if the Body be
subject to be bound, the Purging Mnieral-waters must be taken three or four
times, at the distance of three or four Days before and after the use of the
Calybeat-waters. If the Waters do not pass well by Urine, or if they cause a
Diarrhea, you must not continue the use of them long, unless these
Inconveniences may be remedied by Art, to take off or to prevent the Diarrhea.

I use to prescribe the quantity of a Walnut of the following Electuary, to be
taken at Bedtime every Night.

Take of the Pulp of the conserve of old red Roses, of the Electuary of
Quinces, each half an ounce; of the Troebes of Ambar three drams, of true Bole,
of Dragons-blood, each half a dram; of London Laudanum three grains, of Syrup
of Mirtles a sufficient Quantity; mingle them, make an Electuary.

To force the Urine, I order that a scruple of the whitest Salt of Ambar, well
cleansed from the Oil, should be dissolved in the first Draught of Water.

It is also good, during the Course of the Water, to medicate the ordinary
Drink with a Bag of Pectoral Ingredients.

But secondly, If the Hectic Fever be considerable, it is safer to
attemperate the Blood by a Milk-Diet; but as to a Milk Diet what follows must
be observed.

First, In the use of this Diet, nothing but Milk, or things made of Milk,
Bread only excepted, must be allowed of; but good Quantities of it must be
taken frequently, least by reason of the Thinness of it, the Parts should be
deprived of their due Nourishment. Secondly, This sort of Diet must be
continued for the Space of a Month or two. Thirdly, Spring time is most
seasonable for a Milk Course, for then the Herbs and Flowers, wherewith the
Beasts are fed, flourish most.

Fourthly, But if by reason of the Ferment of the Stomach being too acid,
common Milk, as it sometimes happens, curdles, and so cannot be concocted; upon
which account, Vomiting, Grips, and a Looseness follow; it is better to abstain
from the use of it, and to endeavor to attemperate the Blood with Asses-milk:
Concerning the use of which observe the following Directions. First, Give this
Milk in the Morning, and let the Sick sleep a little in Bed afterward; let it
be given again at five in the Afternoon. Secondly, Nothing of a contrary
Nature, whether Diet or Medicine must be taken till the Milk is concocted.
Thirdly, You must give a Pint, or half a Pint at a time, or thereabout; for a
great Quantity of this, or of common Milk, can neither be received nor
concocted by the Stomach, but is usually cast out presently, either by Vomit or
Stool, to the great Prejudice of the Sick; wherefore it is prudently ordered by
Physicians, that as the Stomach is by degrees accustomed to this sort of Diet,
so the quantity of it should be daily increased from half a Pint to a Pint.
Fourthly, If the Sick, by reason of the acid Ferment of the Stomach, is subject
upon taking Asses-milk, to a Loosness^ (which frequently happens) the Milk,
must be sweetened with Sugar of Roses, and must be milked upon a Branch or two
of Mint; and if there be occasion, and nothing forbids, the Sick may take every
Night at Bedtime a grain of London Landanum, or a Dose of the beforementioned
Astringent Electuary. Fifthly, The Milk must be drank whilst it is warm, for if
it should grow cold, and be afterward warmed upon the Fire, it would be
rendered less pleasing to the Taste and Stomach, and the Remedy would not be so
effectual, by reason of the Spirits being wasted. Sixthly, During the use of
Asses-milk, which also ought to be ordered in every Milk-diet, the Sick must
abstain from all other Medicines, except Opiats and Astringents, if they are
necessary to prevent a Looseness, or to quiet the Cough at Nights. Seventhly,
But if the Looseness, occasioned by the Milk, cannot be taken off by the
Laudanum, and the Astringents, or if after it is taken off, Vomiting or at
least a continual Sickness, or Weight upon the Stomach succeed, which are the
certain Signs of the Milk curdling in the Stomach: Or lastly, If there be Signs
of a Schir^hus and Obstruction of the Liver, which are frequent in Scorbutical
and Hypocondriack People, that have had a Consumption a long while, rhey must
carefully avoid all sorts of Milk; for the use of Milk, by increasing the
Obstruction of the Liver, is wont to bring upon the Consumption a Dropsy and
Jaundice, whereby the original Disease is rendered deplorable.

Wherefore, Fourthly, in these cases it is better to alter the Blood, and to
blunt its Acrimony by the free use of Fish, and of testaceous Medicines; and
also by Restorative Broths made of the extreme parts of Animals, and drinking
freely of the Compound Waters of Milk, Capons, and Snails, and the like; though
what we said before of the use of Milk is also true, with respect to these
Phlegmatic Waters, viz. That when the Liver is obstructed, the Jaundice or
Dropsy is wont to follow the free use of these. Wherefore in such a case it is
better to endeavor to Sweeten the Blood in the following manner. Let him eat
freely of River and Sea-crabs, of Lobsters; and generally speaking of all
testaceous Fish, which sort of Diet eaten plentifully, much attemperates the
Acidity of the Blood, and the sharp Ferment of the Stomach* Of these testaceous
Fish are also made very pleasant Broths, which must be taken plentifully.

Take of River Crabs number an hundred, beat them whilst they are alive, and
boil them in two quarts of Fountain Water; add toward the end of boiling two
or three blades of Mace, one Nutmeg rasped, and of Malago-wine half a pint;
strain it for use. Jellies and restorative Broths may be also used to the same
purpose. For instance,

Take of the Shavings of Hartshorn and Ivory, each four ounces; two blades of
Mace, one bark of an Orange candied; boil them in two quarts of Fountain Water
to a quart, or a pint and an half; strain it; let the Sick take three or four
Spoonfuls, either by themselves or in some hot Broth.

These kind of Jellies may be made more pleasant to the Palate, by adding at
the time of use a little of the Syrup of Baulm, Gilliflowers, Raspberries,
Oranges or Lemmons; though it must be confessed Acid Syrups do not so well
agree with Jellies.

The manner of making a Restorative Broth is as follows.

Take a Capon drawn and cut in pieces, of Sheeps and Calves feet, each two
pair; the shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, each half an ounce; two leaves of
Mace, one Nutmeg cut, yellow Sanders, three drams or half an ounce; boil them
all gently in one gallon of Fountain Water, till half is consumed; add toward
the end of boiling a pint of Malago-Sack, and of the Flowers of the greater
Daisie, Coltsfoot, Maidenhair, Spotted Lungwort, each one handful; of fat
Dates eight pair, of Jujubs twelve pair, of Sebestens ten pair, of Raisins of
the Sun stoned three ounces; strain it, let the Sick take a large Draught of it
twice or thrice a day.

Prepared Coral, Millepedes, Pearls, Crab's-eyes prepared, the Simple Powder of
Crabs-claws, and other testaceous Medicines taken plentifully, and often in a
day, are good to blunt the Acrimony of the Blood.

Take of the Aqua lactis Alexiteria, of Carduus, or of black Cherry-water, one
pint; of Cinnamon Water hordeated half a pint, of prepared Pearl half an ounce,
of white Cristaline Sugar two ounces; mingle them, make a Julep, whereof let
the Sick take four ounces (shaking the Viol always when it is used) three or
four times in a day, adding, if the Stomach require it, one or two ounces of
Epidemick water. Or,

Take of the Powder of Millepedes, of Crab's-eyes prepared, of the Simple Powder
of Crabs-claws, each one dram; of the Powder of white Ambar half a dram; mingle
them, divide it into nine Papers, whereof let him take one thrice a day in a
Spoonful of the Pearl Julep.

Fifthly, If the Sick seem free from an Obstruction of the Liver, and has
neither the Dropsy nor the Jaundice, but the Milk-Diet before described does
not agree, by reason of a Looseness, or the Acid Ferment of the Stomach; besides
the altering Medicines above described, the free use of the compound distilled
Waters of Milk, Snails, a Pig, and the like, may be ordered with success, to
attemperate farther the Acrimony of the Humors.

The Milk-water.
Take of the leaves of Maidenhair, Coltsfoot, spotted Lungwort, Speedwell,
each three handfuls; of Hyssop, Goatsrue, Mint and Wormwood, each two handfuls;
of the Flowers of St. John's Wort and Scabious, each two handfuls; of English
Saffron one dram, three Nutmegs sliced, Dates and fat Figs, each half a pound;
of Raisins of the Sun stoned one pound; cut them, and infuse them in three
gallons of fresh Cows Milk, and three quarts of Malago-Sack, distill them in a
cold Still, and draw off half the Liquor, and mix the Distillations, and keep
them for use.

If the Consumption be Scorbutical, you may add in Distillation the tops of
Pine, Watercresses, and Brook-lime, and Ground Ivy, with other gentle
Antiscorbuticks: And instead of Malago Sack, you may use Brunswick Mum. If you
would have this Water also Restorative, you must add a Capon or a Pig in the
second Distillation. For instance,

Take a Capon or a Pig, (the Intrails being taken out) cut in pieces, of the
Milk-water above described one gallon, distill off three parts of the Liquor.

Snail-water.
Take of Garden-Snails cleansed with Salt three hundred, of common Milk, or
rather of the Milk-water above prescribed three gallons; distill them in a cold
Still with a gentle Fire till the Liquor becomes Acid: And the following
Magisterial water of Worms is not to be despised, for it will keep good a long
while.

Take of fresh Milk two gallons, of Mint and Roman Wormwood, each two
handfuls; distill off one gallon: Then take of Garden-Snails, first washed in
common water, then in Small-beer, half a peck; of Earthworms prepared one
Pint, of Angelica one handful and an half, of Agrimony, Bettony and Rue, each
one handful; put the Herbs into a Still, and the Snails and Worms upon them;
and at top shavings of Hartshorn half a pound, Cloves one ounce, Saffron three
drams; infuse them in two quarts of Syder, and one of Malago-Sack; then distill
all in a cold Still.

These Liquors are to be drank freely for the ordinary drink, mixed with an
equal part of Milk, if the Stomach will bear it, and if the Sick can quench his
Thirst with it. If a Julep be more pleasing, give it in the following manner.

Take of the Waters of Pig or Capon before described one pint, of white
Cristaline Sugar a sufficient quantity, boil them to a Syrup.

Take of Milk, or Snail-water one pint and an half, of the Syrup just described
four ounces; mingle them, make a Julep, whereof let the Sick drink freely. Or,

Take of the Water of Milk, or of Magisterial Snail-water a quart, of pearled
Sugar ten drams or an ounce and an half; mingle them, make a Julep, whereof let
him take freely and frequently.

But if there is not so much a Hectic Fever as a difficulty of Breathing, as
it often happens to such as are afflicted with a Scorbutic Consumption, a
Pectoral Hydromel is better for the ordinary Drink, than distilled Waters
abounding with Phlegm.

Take of the roots of China sliced six ounces, of the roots of Coltsfoot
gathered at a Fit-time three ounces, of the roots of Burdock and Avens, each
three ounces; of the roots of Elecampane two ounces, of the leaves of Lungwort,
all the Scabious, both the Speedwells, Meadow-sweet, and Monywort, each two
handfuls; of all the Capillaries, each one handful; of the flowering tops of
Bugles and Bettony, of the flowers of red Speedwell, and of Cowslips, each four
Pugils; of all the Ground Ivy three handfuls, of Jujubs, Dates, Sebestens, and
Raisins of the Sun cleansed, each one ounce and an half; of Spanish Liquorish
one ounce and an half, cut them all, and boil them in sixteen quarts of
Fountain Water with a gentle Fire till half is consumed; strain it and clarify
it, and add to it four pound of the best Honey; boil it again, and take off the
Scum; strain it again, add half an ounce of Cinnamon, six drams of
Coriander-seed, of the Seeds of Annise and Sweet Fennel, each three drams; put
the Liquor into a large Tub, and let it ferment, which it will the sooner do,
if the Tub be placed in the Sun, for then it will be sufficiently fermented in
forty days, otherwise it will require a much longer time: The Vessel must be
always kept open and full. Of this let the Sick drink a good Draught twice or
thrice a day for many Months.

When the Consumption comes to its third State, the Sick very rarely is cured
or lives long, unless the Ulcers are very small and benign; wherefore, though a
prudent and honest Physician, being called to Consumptive People at this time,
may endeavor to mitigate as much as may be the Symptoms, and may prescribe
Medicines proper for the Consumption and the present Indications; yet he ought
by no means to promise a Cure, but rather acquaint the Patient of his Danger;
and so he will secure his own Reputation, and that of the Medical Art.

The Curative Indications at this time of the Disease are these four: First,
Pectoral Medicines must be prescribed, and the Cure of the Ulcers must be
promoted (if they are small, benign and curable) as much as can be, in this
weak and wasting Condition of the Sick.

Secondly, The Peripneumonick or Inflammatory Fever, as often as it happens,
must be taken off, with all its dreadful Symptoms.

Thirdly, The Putrid Fever arising from the Purulent Matter of the Lungs must
be mitigated.

Fourthly and lastly, The Tormenting Symptoms arising from the Putrid Fever by
reason of the Colliquation, must be removed as far as may be, that at least the
Sick may dye easily.

As to the first in this State of the Consumption, Altering, Expectorating and
Balsamic, or Healing Medicines that are not too hot, (by reason of the great
height of the Fever) but always Cordials are to be given, and those are to be
chosen that are most palatable, and may be taken in the smallest quantity. For
instance,

Take of the Pulp of the old Conserve of red Roses, of Wood Sorrel, and of
Lucatellus's Balsam, each one ounce; mingle them, make an Electuary, whereof
let him take the quantity of a Nutmeg wrapped in a Wafer Morning and Evening; or
let him take twice a day of the Balsamic Pills above described, number three.

Take of the Aqua Lactis Alexiteria eight ounces, of the Magisterial Water of
Snails, of Cinnamon Water hordeated, each three ounces; Aqua mirabilis one
ounce; of prepared Pearl two drams, of clear Ghalk one dram, of white
Cristaline Sugar one ounce or ten drams; mingle them, make a Julep, whereof let
the Sick take four or five Spoonfuls after every Dose of the Electuary, and of
the Pills, and as often as he will.

Take of the Balsamic Syrup, which is very agreeable to the Stomach, three
ounces; of Tincture of Saffron made in Treacle-water two drams; mingle them,
let him take of it often in a Spoon, and in a Spoonful or two of this mixture,
let him take twice a day six or eight drops of Opobalsam.

But if the Cough and Watchings are very obstinate, let him take sometimes
twelve drops of Helmont's Liquid Laudanum. Nevertheless in this languid state,
Opium ought to be given cautiously in small Doses, and in due distances of
time; neither ought it to be given at all without urgent necessity require it,
least a sudden Death follow, and the Disgrace of the Medical Art. Or,

Take of the Syrup of Maidenhair four ounces, of Aqua mirabilis half an ounce
or six drams; mingle them; let the Patient take a Spoonful of it frequently, or
with a Liquorish-stick, especially when the Cough is troublesome.

Jellies and Restorative Broths are to be prescribed in this case: And indeed
in this deplorable Condition, Medicines are rather to be taken from the Kitchen
than the Apothecary's Shop.

As to the Peripneumonick Fever, it arises always from the great Inflammation
of the Tubercles of the Lungs; and therefore it uses to return frequently, viz.
As often as a new Tubercle either of its own accord, or from cold taken, or
from any Error committed in Diet, happens to be inflamed; and during the
Inflammation this Fever continues, and often kills the Patient suddenly; it
being accompanied with uncertain Shivering, and violent Heat succeeding
alternately, with Watching, Restlesness, a Delirium, difficulty of Breathing,
difficulty of Expectoration, violent and wandering Pains of the Side, Breast and
Shoulders; but when the Inflammation first begins to Imposthumate, which, if
the Sick lives, happens usually about the seventh day of the Disease, the
continual Inflammatory Fever is succeeded by a Putrid Intermitting Fever,
either Quotidian or Tertian, which certainly indicates Matter in the Tubercles,
and can never be perfectly eradicated unless they be cured.

This Inflammatory Fever, as all others of the same kind, requires a thin
Diet, that the Belly should be kept open, and Cordial and Attemperating Juleps
are to be used freely; also Pectoral Apozems, and Lubricating and Inciding
Linctuses, to facilitate the Expectoration of the Phlegm, too much thickened by
the Feverish Heat, and to take off the painful Compression of the Lungs, and
to ease the Cough. Diaphoretick Opiats are also to be used sparingly, at due
Intervals, to promote the Expulsion of the Febrile Matter through the Pores of
the Skin: Also Blisters and Epithems are to be used for the relief of the
Brain, and Genus Nervosum, which would otherwise suffer much by Fevers of this
kind. Liniments also and Anodyn Fomentations must be prescribed, to remove the
Painful and Convulsive Contraction of the Muscles, and Membranes of the Breast;
but above all, Bleed seasonably and largely, and it must be repeated, if there
be occasion, according to the Strength of the Sick, and the present
Effervescence of the Blood; and perhaps Consumptive People require Bleeding
more than those that are strong.

Wherefore the Physician, though he count the Consumption deadly, ought to
endeavor the Cure of the Peripneumonia in the following manner: Let him order
a Diet of Water Gruel, Ptisan, roasted Apples, and the like, and middling Beer
with a Toast in it: But at the first Declination of the Fever, Chicken-broth,
potched-Eggs, and the like.

And the Belly, if there be occasion, must be presently loosned, with a Glister
made of Milk and Sugar, with Camomil-flowers, which also must be repeated upon
occasion; then eight or ten Ounces of Blood must be taken away from the Arm of
the pained Side; and Bleeding must be repeated every day, or every other day,
according to the Effervescence of the Blood, and the Violence of the Pain in
the Side, and of the difficulty of Breathing, if the Strength will permit that
an Imposthumation may be hindered if possible.

In the mean while, through the whole Course of the Disease, one Spoonful of
the following Linctus dissolved in four Ounces of the Pectoral Apozem, must be
taken every third or fourth hour hot.

Take of the fresh Oil of Sweet-Almonds, of Syrup of Maidenhair, each one
ounce and an half; of white Sugar Candy one dram and an half; mingle them
exactly and make a Linctus.

And if the Phlegm be very tough, and if the Difficulty of Breathing and the
Pain increase by reason of it, instead of Oil of Almonds, Oil of Linseed fresh
drawn without Fire may be substituted, and Syrup of Hedge-mustard, or of the
five opening Roots instead of Syrup of Maidenhair, if a Flux of the Belly does
not contra-indicate: Besides two or three ounces of the Oil of Linseed may be
taken by it self every fourth Hour, for it does not only Lubricate, but is also
very Anodyn.

Take of the Pectoral Decoction clarified one Pint and an half, of Tincture of
Saffron made in Treacle-water, and of Syrup of Maidenhair, each one ounce;
mingle them, make an Apozem for the use above described.

To recruit the Strength, and to attemperate the Effervescence of the Blood,
four or five Spoonfuls of the following Julep may be prescribed.

Take of the Aqua-lactis alexiteria eight ounces, of Cinnamon Water hordeated,
and of Plague-watery each two ounces; of prepared Pearl one dram and an half,
of white Sugar six drams; mingle them, make a Julep.

At Bedtime the following Anodyn and Diaphoretick Bolus may be prescribed to
be taken, with a Draught of the Cordial Julep, especially if the Belly, as it
often happens in this State of the Disease, be too loose.

Take of Venice-treacle half a dram, of the compound Powder of Crabs-claws one
Scruple, of Syrup of Gilly-flowers a sufficient Quantity; mingle them, make a
Bolus.

Presently after Bleeding apply Blisters to the Neck, to the inner parts of the
Arms and Legs, and a Cephalic Plaster with Euphorbium to the Soles of the
Feet, to relieve the Brain and Genus Nervosum.

To ease the Pain of the Side occasioned by the Convulsions of the Muscles and
the Membrans of the Breast, the following Fomentation and Liniment may be
applied by turns to the Parts affected.

Take of the Roots of Parsley* and Fennel, and of Linseeds, and of
Fenugreek-seeds, each two ounces; of the Flowers of Camomel, and of Melilot,
each two handfuls, mix them and boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain
Water, pour it into a fresh Ox-Bladder, let the Bladder be half full, apply it
hot to the Parts affected; when the Bladder is taken off, apply an hot Flannel
besmeared with the following Liniment.

Take of Ointment of Marshmallows half an ounce, of Oil of white-lillies, and
of Bricks, each three drams; mingle them, make a Liniment.

To attemperate further the Effervescence of the Blood and the Heat of the
Lungs, the following Powder may be used with good Success,

Take of pure Saltpeter two drams, of white Cristaline Sugar half an ounce,
mingle them, and make of them eight Papers, whereof let one be dissolved in
every Draught of Beer.

As to other things they must be left to the Judgment of the Physician that
attends, to be prescribed upon Occasion.

As to the putrid Fever of Consumptive People, it is to be noted, that
although the Sick being treated according to the Preceding Method, do not die
of a Peripneumonia, yet the Inflammation of the Tubercles of the Lungs ending
most commonly in an Ulcer, presently after the Inflammatory Fever, a putrid
intermitting Fever arises, returning at certain Periods every day or every
other day with Shivering, Heat and Sweats.

Which Fever seems impossible to be taken quite off unless the Ulcer be cured
from whence it arises; yet the Peruvian Bark, frequently repeated at due
Intervals, is often very Successful for suppressing the Fever for a while, and
the Lives of some, by the frequent use of it, have been protracted for many
Years.

Take of the Peruvian Bark finely powdered half a dram, of the Balsamic Syrup
a sufficient quantity; make a Bolus, which let the Sick take in the Morning,
and every sixth Hour for three days successively, drinking upon it three or
four ounces of the following Apozem.

Take of the Peruvian Bark powdered three ounces, of the Balsam of Tolu two
drams, of English-saffron, and Cochinele, each one Scruple; boil them in a Pint
of the Pectral Decoction clarified to six ounces, then strain it, and put on a
Pint more of the Decoction; repeat the Operation thrice, then mix all the
strained Liquor, and add to it of Maligo Saek, and Balsamic Syrup, each fou^
ounces; mingle them, make an Apozem.

Repeat the use of this Febrifuge in the manner now described twice in a Month,
or oftener if there be Occasion; and in the Intervals, the daily use of
Balsamic and Pectoral Medicines must be ordered, and they must be varied
according to the Temper of the Sick, and the Genius of the Disease: If the
Belly be too loose, a grain of London Laudanum may be added to every Bolus to
be taken at Bedtime, or instead of the Bolus's, Pills made of Diascordium, and
the Jesuits Powder may be substituted; but every Dose must contain half a dram
of the Powder,

Yet it must be confessed that the Bark is not constantly so successful in the
Consumptive Fever as in Agues.

To take off a Looseness, and to mitigate a Dysentery, and the Gripes, Opiat
Medicines must be used freqently and freely; and during these Symptoms, the
Sick must abstain from all sorts of Beer, and, instead of it, must use the
white Decoction or Milk-water: Let him take also, if there be Occasion, every
fourth Hour, the quantity of a Walnut of the Astringent Electuary described
before in the use of Asses-milk; or let him take twelve Drops of Helmont's
liquid Laudanum,

And to attemperate the Acrimony of the Humors, that are wont to be evacuated
by the glandulous Tunick of the great Guts, and to restore the Tone of the
Parts weakened thereby, let a Glister be daily injected made of Chicken broth*
or of a Sheeps-head with the Wool on, boiled in Water, or this that follows.

Take of Milk altered with red Roses, and by quenching often hot Steel in it;
six ounces, of Diascordium half an ounce; mingle them, make a Glister.

But in a moderate Diarrhea, viz. when the Gripes are not very violent,
especially if there be a Difficulty of Breathing, Opium must be prescribed
rarely and sparingly in any Form; for most commonly upon giving it, the Breast
is oppressed, and Breathing, and Expectoration are rendered more difficult, and
the Stomach becomes nauseous.

Wherefore it is safer only to moderate the Looseness, by giving an Opiat every
third or fourth Night, than to stop it quite; least a greater Injury should
follow; and always after the use of an Opiat, expectorating and lubricating
Medicines should be freely used; least the Matter should be so much fixed in
the Lungs, that the strength of the Patient should not suffice to bring it up.

When the Cough and Watchings are very violent, the following Medicines may be
used; but it is to be noted, that Opiats must be used very sparingly, and with
great Caution when the Sick is very weak.

Take of Syrup of Marshmallows, and Purslain, each one ounce and an half; of
the Species Diatragacanth frigid, of the Powder of Haly, each two scruples; of
Diacodium an ounce and an half, mingle them, make a Linctus to be taken in a
spoon, or with a Liquorish Stick, when the Cough is violent.

Aqua-mirabilis also mixed with Pectoral Syrups does good. Or,

Take of the Balsamic Syrup two ounces, of Helmont's liquid Laudanum two
Scruples; mingle them, let the Sick take a spoonful every Hour or every other
Hour,

The white and black Lozenges being leisurely dissolved in the Mouth, and
swallowed down, are also of use.

To moderate the great and Colliquative Sweats, let the Sick sleep but little
at a time, and let him take temperate Pearl Cordials often, and in a large
Quantity; to which it is fit to add Chalk, Coral, Dragons-blood, and other
temperating astringent and emplastick Medicines, which in some manner fix and
mitigate the Ferment of the Blood. For Instance,

Take of the Waters of Tormentil, Oak-buds, each three ounces; Cinnamon Water
hordiated four ounces, of Aqua-mirahilis one ounce, of Pearls, and Coral
prepared, and of Chalk, each two scruples; of true Bole, and Dragons-blood each
half a dram; of Jap^n Earth a scruple, of destilled Vinegar or Spirit of
Vitriol as much as is sufficient to make it gratefully acid, Syrup of Mirtles
an ounce and an half; Mingle them, make a Julep; let the Sick take two or three
ounces of it every third or fourth hour, shaking the Viol every time it is
used.

The Clothes on the Bed must be also lessened, and the Sick must be removed
into a thin, warm and free Air; let him always sleep in a large Room, and as
soon as his Strength begins to fail, the Sweat must be rubbed off with dry
Linen Clothes a little warmed; and the Patient must be removed to the other
Part of the Bed.

As to the violent Vomiting that seises Consumptive Persons at the latter end,
there is little Help to be afforded by Art, only the Physician ought to assist
by his prudent Counsels* since he cannot by Medicines. First therefore, The
Sick ought to be ordered to eat little (though frequently) at a time. Secondly,
He must eat those things that afford good Nourishment and are of easy
Digestion. Thirdly, After eating he must avoid (as much as he can) Coughing,
Sleeping, and lying down.

Sometimes it happens after the Putrid Fever begins especially if the
Evacuation of the Colliquative Matter by Stool or by other ways is hindered by
Art, that Nature endeavors, tho in vain, the Protrusion of the Enemy by the
Salivary Ducts, or the glandulous Tunick of the Mouth and Oesophagus, by which
means a troublesome Spitting arises that continues for many Weeks. Secondly, by
reason of the Acrimony of the Humor evacuated by these Parts, an Inflammation
not only of the Membrane of the Mouth, but also of the Oesophagus and Stomach
follows. Thirdly, By the Inflammation an Ulceration is occasioned, and from
thence little Ulcers called Aphth^^, accompanied with a very troublesome Pain of
the Throat. And Lastly, An Hicop that is very troublesome arises from the
Inflammation and Exulceration.

Which Symptoms, as they are troublesome, so are they sometimes long, and
always deadly, for the Cause from whence they proceed is incurable; yet
cleansing softning astringent and Mucilaginous Gargarisms must be injected with
a Syringe; and to ease the Pain of the Throat, a double Flannel worn about the
Neck does much Good, by defending it from the external Cold.

CHAP. LX. Of Swooning or Fainting.
THe next and immediate Cause of this Disease, is a Defect of the Vital
Spirits; and this Defect of the Spirits chiefly happens four ways, Either
because there is not a sufficient quantity of them generated, or because they
are dissipated and evacuated when they are generated; or they are
preternaturally altered, and corrupted: Or lastly, They are suffocated and
overwhelmed. They are not generated either by reason of a Fault of the Faculty,
or of the Matter; the Faculty of the generating the Spirits is hurt, either by
a Peculiar Disorder of the Heart or by Consent.

The peculiar Diseases of the Heart that are chiefly to to be taken Notice of,
are great Intemperies overturning the native Temper of it; or destroying the
Substance of the Parts, and of the Native Heat; as acute and malignant Fevers,
Colliquative, Pestilential and Hectic Fevers, also Organical Diseases, as
Constriction and too great Dilatation.

The Faculty of the Heart is hurt by Consent, as from the Brain and Liver,
which have a great Sympathy with it; and also often from the Mouth of the
Stomach, by reason of its nearness and Exquisite Sense, upon which account
Swooning is divided into Cardiack and Stomachick; that is Cardiack which
proceeds from the Heart being Primarily affected; that is Stomachick which is
produced by Consent of the Stomach: It also often arises from the Womb, by
reason of ill Vapors transmitted thence to the Heart.

The Fault of the Matter, is a Defect or Corruption of the Air and Blood, from
whence the Vital Spirits are generated. A Defect of the Air happens from
Respiration or Transpiration hurt: A Defect of the Blood from a Fault in
Nutrition.

The Corruption of both is occasioned by putting on another Quality; so from
the infected Air in a Pestilential Constitution, Swooning and Fainting
frequently happen, and some ill Smells occasion the same, and sweet Smells in
some Women.

The Blood is also often corrupted by unwholesome Food.

Too large Evacuations dissipate the Spirits, both sensible and insensible:
sensible Evacuatioins, are first of Blood it self by the Mouth, Nostrils, Womb,
Belly, Hemorrhoids, Bleeding, and great Wounds. Secondly, of other Humors,
which though they are Excrementitious, yet being evacuated in a large quantity,
they dissipate the Spirits and occasion Fainting. Such Humors are w^nt to be
evacuated by Vomit, Stool, Urine, Sweat, by opening a large Abscess, especially
inwardly, as of an Empyema; and also outwardly, as in a Dropsy, the Navel
being open.

Insensible Evacuations are made by too great a rarity of the Skin, and by
reason of Thinness or Acrimony of things contained, by immoderate Heat, Bathing
and excessive Labor.

They are also dissipated by long, Watching, long Fastting, immoderate Venery,
Anger or excessive Joy; long and acute Sickness, violent Pains of the Heart,
Stomach, Bowels, Veins, Ears, Teeth, and of all the Nervous Parts.

The Spirits are altered and corrupted by an ill Disposition of the Bowels, and
by any thing that has a malignant and an inimical Quality to the Heart; as a
venomous and pestilential Air drawn in by the Breath, or generated in the Body
by Putrefaction of Humors; Poison taken inwardly does the same, and the Biting
of Venomous Creatures.

Lastly, A violent Reflux of the Spirits and Blood to the Heart, and the like,
suffocates and overwhelms the Vital Spirits. A noble Virgin, which was very
subject to fainting upon every small occasion, died suddenly, by reason of a
sudden Reflux of the Blood, and Spirits to the Heart, as she was about to sign
a Contract of Marriage with a very handsome and accomplished Gentleman.

Fainting also sometimes happens from cold and thick Blood, heapt up in
abundance in the greater Vessels.

As to the Cure, it must be varied according to the Variety of the Causes; but
from whatever Cause it proceeds, that which follows must be observed in the
Fit, You must lay them on their Back, and sprinkle Water in their Faces, and
provoke Sneezing; put some good Wine or Cinnamon Water into their Mouths; apply
Bread hot out of the Oven to their Nostrils; call them aloud, shake them, pull
them by the Nose, double their Fingers, pull their Hair, use Frictions,
Ligatures and Cupping-glasses.

But the Cure must be varied according to the Variety of the Causes in the
following manner.

If it takes its Rise from want of Nourishment, the Sick must be refreshed with
good Wine, and by a Piece of Bread dipped in it and eaten, and also by nourishing
Broths, and the like.

If by reason of the Thinness of the Humors, the Spirits exhale, Perfumes and
meat of good Juice and Thickning must be prescribed, and the Pores of the Skin
must be stopped with Oil of Roses and by the cold Air.

If it proceed from an Hysteric Disease, Remedies proper for that must be
given; if from a malignant Quality Cardiacks and Alexipharmicks must be used.

If from taking Poison, things that evacuate must be used; a Vomit must be
given, and afterward Treacle must be prescribed; and then if a Heat and
Erosion of the Stomach be perceived, he must take Milk or Butter, or fat
Broths, or cooling Cordial Potions.

If from Immoderate Evacuation, the Sick must be refreshed with Perfumes, Meat
and Drink, Sleep and Rest.

If from too great a Loss of Blood, lay the Sick on a Bed with his Head
downward, Sprinkle his Face with cold Water, give him a little Wine diluted
with cold Water.

If by over-purging, give new Treacle; or for want of it old Treacle with two
grains of Opium; or rather with three grains of Laudanum dissolved in Wine.
Anoint his Belly with the following Oils.

Take of Oil of Mirtles, and of Quinces, each one ounce and an half; of Oil of
Wormwood one ounce, of Rose Vinegar a little; mingle them, anoint his Belly
with it often.

Inject a Glister of Calybeat Milk, adding to it the Yolks of three Eggs, of
Philonium Romanum two drams; rub his Arms and upper Parts; dip a Piece of Bread
in Wine and give it, or let him drink Wine it self.

And lastly, Every Evacuation, whether of Blood by the Nostrils, Womb, or other
parts, or of other Humors, by Vomit or Stool, is to be restrained by Remedies
described in their proper Chapters.

That Fainting which arises from too great Sweat, must be cured by Remedies
that restrain Sweat, as with cold Water, Rose Water alone, or with a little
Vinegar in it cast upon the Hands and Face; the Air also must be cooled with
the foresaid Waters, and with fanning; cold Epithems must be applied to the
Heart, made of Rose Water, Sorrel, Borrage, and of the Powder of Diamargarit;
frigid, and with a little Wine to make them penetrate.

Also cooling Juleps of Syrup of Sorrel, Violets, of Apples, or Lemmons, with
cooling Waters, and Sal-prunella, are frequently to be given; the Pores may be
stopped by anointing the Skin with Oil of Roses, Mastich and Myrtles. Let the
Sick abstain from Wine; he must by no means be rubbed; let him often change
place, and be lightly covered; let the Bed be sprinkled with the following
Powder.

Take of the flowers of Water Lillies, and red Roses, each three ounces; of
pure Labdanum half an ounce, of Storax two drams, of Myrtles, and the Grains of
Sumach, each two ounces; make a Powder.

If the Fainting arise from Suffocation of the Spirits, they must be called
back to the Surface of the Body, by Frictions, Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, and
the like; but if the Suffocation arise from Fullness, Blood must be drawn
plentifully by Intervals; if Fainting proceed from a Fright or Fear, Blood must
be also let, least an Obstruction or Inflammation should be occasioned.

CHAP. LXI. Of the Palpitation of the Heart, and of the Trembling of it.
THE Palpitation of the Heart is so violent sometimes, that it may not only be
manifestly felt, but also seen and heard at some distance: And some Authors of
note say, That by the violent Vibration of the Heart, the Ribs have been broke,
or thrust out in young People.

As to the Cure, it must be varied according to the variety of the Causes.

First therefore, when this Disease proceeds from a fault in the Blood, the
curative Intention will be, to exalt the watery Blood, and to render it more apt
for Fermentation; to which purpose Spiritous Medicines, also Saline of every
sort and Sulphurous, especially Chalybeats; and also those things which are
used for the Green Sickness, or Lucophlegmatia, and a cold Scurvy, do good.

Take of the Conserves of Roman Wormwood, of the yellow Peel of Oranges and
Lemons, each two ounces; of the Winteran bark powdered two drams, of the
Species Diacurcuma one dram, of Steel prepared with Sulphur three drams, Salt
of Wormwood one dram and an half, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of
Citron-bark; make an Electuary.

The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg in the Morning, and at five a Clock in
the Afternoon, drinking upon it three Ounces of the following Julep, and
walking after it.

Take of the Waters of Wake-robin leaves one pint, of Pennyroyal and Hyssop,
each four ounces; of the water of Worms, Snails, and Mirabilis, each one ounce;
of Sugar one ounce; mingle them, make a Julep.

Take of the Tincture of Antimony one ounce. The Dose is twenty or twenty five
drops twice a day in the same Julep.

Moreover, Tincture of Steel, or the Syrup of it, also Elixir Proprietatis are
proper.

Secondly, The Palpitation of the Heart is oftener and much more violent from a
fault in the Cardiack Arteries, which is either an Obstruction or a Convulsion.
The first is most commonly continual, and often incurable, especially if it be
occasioned by tabid Lungs, or by reason the roots of the Arteries are half
filled or compressed by a Tubercle, or bony Excrescence; which Causes, when
they are and can be perfectly known, it is to no purpose to endeavor to
remove; and then all that can be done, is only to give ease by Hypnoticks.

Moreover, It is probable, that the passage of the Blood is hindered, sometimes
by a Polypus growing within the Sinus of the Heart: But it is difficultly
known, and hardly cured; when there is a Suspicion of it, Saline Medicines seem
most proper, and of those such as are volatile or acid: But they are not to be
given together, you are to try one sort first, and if that does not do, you
must try the other.

Take of Compound Spirit of Sal-armoniack, viz. distilled with Millepedes, or
with other anti-asthmaticks, three drams. The Dose is from fifteen Grains to
twenty thrice a day, in some proper Julep or distilled Water.

In the same manner Spirit of Hartshorn, of Soot, of Blood, and of a Scull dug
up, may be tried.

Take of Spirit of Sea Salt, or of Vitriol, distilled with Spirit of Wine,
impregnated with Pectoral Herbs, and often cohobated, three drams. The Dose is
from fifteen to twenty drops.

Spirit of Tartar, of the Wood of Gujacum, or of Box, may be used to the same
purpose.

Thirdly, The Palpitation of the Heart is often Convulsive, and proceeds from
the same cause as other Hypochondriack or Asthmatick Passions do, and must be
cured also by Antispasmotick Remedies; but respect must be had to the
Constitution of the Sick.

Take of Spirit of Sal-armoniack with Ambar three drams. The Dose is from
fifteen to twenty drops twice a day, in some proper Julep or distilled Water.

Tincture of Tartar, of Steel, or of Antimony, may be also given by turns.

As to the Cure of the Trembling of the Heart, Medicines proper for Convulsions
must be given, it being merely Convulsive. Wherefore having made sufficient
Evacuation, the follow Medicines may be given.

Take of prepared Coral, and of Pearls, each two drams; of both the Bezoars,
each half a dram; of white Ambar two scruples, of Ambar-grease one scruple;
make a Powder. The Dose is half a Dram twice or thrice in a day, in some proper
Julep or distilled Water.

Take of Compound Powder of Crabs-claws two drams, of the Powder of the roots
of Male-peony, of Man's Skull prepared, each one dram; of the flowers of
Male-peony, and of Lillies of the Valleys, each half a dram; make a Powder to
be taken the same way.

Take of Ivory, and red Coral powdered, each three drams; of the Species
Diambra one dram, of white Sugar dissolved in a sufficient quantity of
Orange-flower-water and boiled to Tablets, seven ounces; make Tablets each
weighing half a dram: Let him take one or two often in a day, or when he
pleases.

Take of the Conserve of the Flowers of Lillies of the Valleys six ounces, of
Coral prepared, of Pearls, Ivory, and Crab's-eyes, each one dram and an half; of
Vitriol of Mars one dram, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Coral, make an
Electuary. The Dose is one or two drams twice a day, drinking upon it a Draught
of the following Julep.

Take of the Waters of Orange-flowers, and of the whole Citron, each six
ounces; of Orange-peels distilled with Wine two ounces, of Sugar half an ounce;
make a Julep.

Take of Syrup of Steel six ounces. The Dose is one Spoonful in the Morning and
at five in the Afternoon, in two ounces of the Julep above prescribed; but you
must omit the Sugar.

Take of the Powder of Ivory, and of Coral, each two drams and an half; of the
Species of Diambra one dram, of Salt of Steel two drams, of Sugar eight ounces,
of Ambar-grease dissolved half a scruple; make Tablets, each weighing half a
dram. The Dose is three or four drams twice a day.

Ta^e of fresh Strawberries eight Pints, of the outward Peel of twelve Oranges,
of the fresh Filings of Steel half a pound, beat them together, and pour upon
them four quarts of Wine: Let them ferment together in a close Vessel twenty
four hours; then distill them in a cold Still.

Take of Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Blood, or the like, three drams. The Dose
is twenty drops twice a day in some proper Vehicle.

Take of the Flowers of Sal-armoniack, and of Coral prepared, each two drams.
The Dose is one scruple twice a day.

Take of Sal-prunella two drams, of Salt of Ambar one dram, of Salt of
Hartshorn one Scruple. The Dose is from fifteen to twenty grains twice a day
in some proper Liquor.

Note, Such of these Medicines as agree with the Constitution of the Patient
are to be chosen.

CHAP. LXII. Of Weakness.
THE Cause of Weakness, is a Defect of Native Heat, and of Spirits: This Defect
is occasioned by the Defect of Vital Spirits: The Vital Spirits are wanting,
either when they are not generated in a sufficient quantity, or because, when
they are generated, they are dissipated, corrupted, or suffocated, as it
happens in Fainting: But the difference betwixt Fainting and Weakness is, That
in Fainting the Causes produce their Effect of a sudden, but in Weakness by
degrees.

The Cure of this Disease respects the taking away the Cause, and the
cherishing the Heart and Vital Spirits.

The Causes are, almost all great Diseases, whereby Nature is much weakened;
therefore the taking off the Causes, respects the Cure of almost all Diseases,
which must be sought for in their proper Chapters.

But the Strengthening the Heart, and the Restoration of the Vital Spirits, are
to be treated of a part, and sometimes to be preferred before the Cure of the
Morbifick Causes, when there is danger of Death: But you must always take care,
that whilst you endeavor to refresh the Spirits, you do not increase the
Morbifick Causes; and therefore in a hot Disease you must give temperate
Cordials, in a cold such as are hot.

And first, With Meat you must mix Cordials, as Confection of Alkermes, or of
Hyacinth in Broths; also Mutton Broth, the Fat and Skin being cut off, is good;
also Gravy of Mutton is frequently used, and the Gravy of the Heart is mightily
commended. The Italians make a Soop of Yolks of Eggs, Wine, Sugar and Cinnamon,
which is very restorative. Jelly of Hartshorn is also very good. Cordial
Juleps may be also prepared in the following manner.

Take of the Waters of Bugloss, Roses, and the Flowers of Oranges, each one
ounce; of Syrup of Apples, and of Lemons, each half an ounce; Confection of
Alkermes half a dram, of Cinnamon Water two drams; make a Julep.

To the Stomach may be applied Bags made of Spices, and moistened with Wine; the
private parts may be fomented with Confection of Alkermes dissolved in Wine:
The Arteries of the Temples, the Hands and Feet may be anointed with the same.
And Apoplectick Balsam may be often held to the Nostrils.

CHAP. LXIII. Of Appetite depraved, diminished, and abolished.
THE Cause of an excessive Appetite, is a sharp Juice abounding in the Body,
and especially brought from the Pancreas to the Intestine; and sending thence
Vapors that are sharper than usual to the Stomach. This Acid is increased in
the whole Body by sharp Meats, and Drinks, Cold and Serene Air, immoderate
Grief continued long, violent Motion, and long Watching.

The Appetite is diminished by Fat Choler, and by Fat and Viscid Meat, by Hot
or Rainy Weather, by too much Sleep, Sloth and great Cares.

The Causes that diminish Appetite will wholly abolish it, if they are extreme.

Depraved Appetite is usual in the Green Sickness, and in Women with Child, and
sometimes, but rarely, Men are troubled with it: It most frequently happens
before the Flux of the Courses, or when they are suppressed.

In the Green Sickness they crave for Meats that are improper and unusual, or
they eat Chalk, Ashes, Coals, Pitch, Dirt, Leather, and many other things.

Appetite increased, is to be cured with such things as temperate the acid
Juice, as Coral, Pearls, Crab's-eyes, Filings of Steel, and the like; also Fat
and Oily things, and Volatile Spirits.

Take of Coral prepared, and Pearls prepared, each one scruple; of white Chalk
half a scruple, of white Sugar three drams; make a Powder to be divided into
six Doses. Take two Papers in a day, three or four hours after eating, in a
Spoonful of strong Wine.

If a Liquid Medicine be more pleasing, let him take a Spoonful of the
following Mixture now and then.

Take of the Waters of Mint two ounces, and of Scurvy-grass-water, and of the
Tincture of Cinnamon made by Infusion in rectified Spirit of Wine, each half an
ounce; of Syrup of Wormwood one ounce; mingle them. Or,

Take of Oil of Mace by Distillation, and of the Oil of Juniper Berries, each
one scruple; mingle them in a Glass: Let the Sick take two or three drops of
this Oil in a Spoonful of Malago Sack, or in any other generous Wine, or in the
foregoing mixture, and let him eat fat Broths.

Appetite diminished or abolished must be cured by Medicines that evacuate, and
correct Phlegmatic and Viscid Humors: Acids and Spices correct them,
Coloquintida, Turbith, Hermodactiles, evacuate them.

Take of Mint-water two ounces, of Cinnamon Water half an ounce, of Syrup of
Fennel one ounce, of Spirit of Salt a sufficient quantity to make it pleasantly
Acid. Or,

Take of Tartar vitriolated half a dram, of Cream of Tartar one dram; of white
Sugar Candy two drams; mingle them; make a Powder to be divided into three
Doses. Let him take one or two in a day in Rhenish-wine, or in the preceding
mixture; and if he please, instead of Spirit of Salt, he may add half a dram of
Elixir proprietatis to be taken by Spoonfuls

They that dislike Acids, may take the following mixture by Spoonfuls.

Take of the Waters of Mint, and of Fennel, each one ounce and an half; of Aqua
vitae Matthioli six drams, of Oil of Mace by Distillation three drops, of Syrup
of Mint one ounce.

They that had rather take a medicated Wine, may use the following.

Take of the Roots of Elecampane, and of Acorus, each two drams; of the leaves
of Sage, Marjoram, Garden-rue, each one handful; of the Seeds of sweet Fennel
two drams, of Orange-peel dried one dram; being cut, and grossly bruised, put
them into a Bag, and hang it in a Glass, and pour on it twenty ounces of
Whitewine; after it has stood a night in a Cellar, three, four or five ounces
may be taken in a Morning Fasting, or at Dinner or Supper, as every one
pleases, or as they find it agrees best with them. And fresh Wine may be put on
as long as the Aromatic Virtue remains in the Ingredients.

When Purging is necessary,

Take of the greater Faetid Pills half a dram, of Coche one scruple, Extractum
Catholicon ten grains, Oil of Cloves two drops; mix them, make fifteen Pills,
gild them, or cover them with Powder of Liquorish or Cinnamon.

Let the Sick take five of these Pills, or more, if he be hard, to Purge.

But if you design to add Chemical Medicines in form of Pills, you may
prescribe in the following manner:

Take of Gum-ammoniacum, or Opoponax, or the like, cleansed by Vinegar, and
afterward thickened, half a dram; of the Troches Alhandal, Mercurius dulcis,
each one scruple; mix them, make fifteen Pills, and gild them: Let the Sick,
take five or more of them.

But if the form of an Apozem seem more convenient for the Sick, he having no
great Aversion to bitter things, the following is convenient.

Take of Liquorish rasped half an ounce, of the Roots of Smalage one ounce, of
the Shavings of Guajacum three ounces, of Laurel-berries, and Seeds of Annise,
each two drams; of the Pulp of Coloquintida half a dram; boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Rainwater, in thirty ounces of the strained Decoction,
dissolve of Syrup of Roses solutive, with Senna of Diacnicum, each one ounce
and an half; of the Salt of Tartar vitriolated two Scruples* Tincture of
Cinnamon one ounce; mix them.

Let the Sick take three, four or five ounces of this Decoction once or twice a
day, by which the Phlegmatic and viscid Humors, are both corrected and
evacuated per Epicrasin. In the mean time let the Sick abstain from fat and
viscid Meats: Let him use a clear Air that is hot and dry: Let Sleeping be
diminished if it be too long: Let the Mind be cheerful: Let the Motion and
Exercise of the Body be moderate. Evacuation by Stool and Urine, daily ought to
be proportionable to what is taken in by the Mouth, if it can be conveniently.

Appetite diminished by fat Choler is presently cured by correcting of it, if
it abound too much it must be evacuated either by Stool or Vomit,

For correcting of this Choler, there is nothing more effectual than Elixir
Proprietatis given in Wine, or any other convenient Mixture, five or six drops
at a time, especially before Eating.

Those who do not love Acids, may take in place of it sweet Spirit of Salt,
prepared with rectified Spirit of Wine by several Cohobations.

The same Choler is corrected by Wormwood, and Wormwood-wine; in the place of
which also, other Aromatic Plants may be likewise infused in Wine, which may
be drank in a small Quantity at Dinner and Supper.

Such Plants are Mountain-calamint, Marjoram, Rosemary, Garden-rue, Hyssop,
Thym, Sage, and the like.

Choler is very conveniently evacuated by Vomit, by several Medicines prepared
of Antimony, as Crocus Metallorum, Glass of Antimony, and the Sapa Vomitoria
that is made of it, Oxysarcharum, or Oxymel Vomitorium, Mercurius Vitae, or the
like.

Rhubarb, Scammony, Tamarinds, and the like, evacuate Choler by Stool.

Scammony may be prepared presently and well, if a convenient Dose of it,
twelve or fifteen Grains, more or less, according to the Age and Constitution
of the Sick, be powdered in a Mortar, and a little Baulm-water, Succory-water,
or the like, be poured upon it, and rubbed with it till it becomes of a milky
Color; pour it off and put more Water on, that all the Virtue of the Scammony
may be extracted leaving the black Faeces at the Bottom; then add to the Liquor
of Cinnamon Water, or Fennel-water, or some other Aromatick-water, two drams;
of Syrup of Roses solutive, or the like, two or three drams; and so you will
have a very pleasant Purging Draught; and that it may work the easier, a
Scruple or half a dram of Cream of Tartar may be drank in Broth half an Hour
after taking the Purging Draught.

Pleasant Tablets may be also made of Scammony in the following manner.

Take of Christals of Tartar one ounce and an half, of Diagridium three drams,
of Oil of Cinnamon six drops, of white Sugar dissolved in Rose Water eight
ounces; mingle them, make Tablets.

These Tablets may be conveniently prescribed for Infants, Children, and
delicate People; the highest Dose of them is from three drams to half an ounce;
an Infant must take but half a dram, or a dram, a Youth may take two drams.

They who are afraid to use Scammony or Medicines made of Scammony, though it
be a kind, safe, and powerful Medicine, may use Rhubarb in the following manner.

Take of choice Rhubarb rasped two drams, of the best crude Tartar half a dram,
of Succory-water a sufficient quantity; infuse them all Night over ashes or in
a Bath, to the Liquor strained, gently add of Syrup of Roses solutive, or of
Succory with Rhubarb, half an ounce, of Cinnamon water two drams, and to take
off the nauseous Smell of the Rhubarb, and to expel Wind, add of Oil of
Annise-seeds two or three drops; make a Draught.

To evacuate the over abounding Choler, those that had rather use an Electuary
may take of the following.

Take of the Pulp of sharp and sweetish Prunes ten ounces, of Cream of Tartar,
and the best Scammony, each two ounces; of choice Rhubarb ten drams, of sharp
Cinnamon half an ounce, of Yellow Sanders two drams, of clarified Sugar a
Pound; mingle them, make an Electuary. The Dose is from three drams to half an
ounce; It may also be dissolved in some convenient Water, and so you may make a
Potion of it.

The Cure of a depraved Appetite, depends on the Purification of the Blood and
Humors: But Volatile Salts are more successful in this case than any other
Medicines, a few grains of them being taken twice or thrice in a day in Wine or
some other Liquor, especially at Dinner or Supper; and to evacuate the vicious
Humors, Purging and Vomiting must be used.

CHAP. LXIV. Of Nauseousness, Belching, and Vomiting.
IN perfect Health nothing is wont to be evacuated upwards by the Mouth,
wherefore whatever comes this way signifies Sickness, whether it be Meat, Wind,
or a thick or thin Liquor.

When Wind comes forth with a Noise it is called Belching, when the Meat is
ejected it is called Vomiting.

Nauseousness always precedes Vomiting, and sometimes Belching.

Wind by reason of the Clamminess of its Nature, sticks to the Stomach, and is
difficultly excluded, and is often accompanied with an Inflation of the Stomach.

Belching arises from windy Meats, or from other flatulent things taken
inwardly, as Chestnuts, Pease, Beans, Turnips, Redishes, and the like, or from
Phlegmatic and viscid Humors sticking to the Stomach, and rarefied to Wind by
taking Aromaticks.

That the material cause of Wind, is a Phlegmatic and clammy Humor, is evident
from the Antecedent Causes; as from Meats of a like kind, viz. Milk, Fish,
especially Seafish, and the Feet of Animals, and Gellies; and from the Cure,
which is wholly performed by evacuating and correcting Phlegmatic Humors.

As in Belching, only Wind is evacuated, so in Vomiting, either Meat crude, or
more or less fermented, or various sorts of Humors, as Watery, serous
phlegmatic, and choleric, and the like; thin, thick, white, yellow, green, Sky
colored, or black Humors, or the like, insipid, bitter, acid, rough, sweet,
stinking, or Humors without Taste, and sometimes bloody Matter, or Excrements.

All Vomiting is occasioned by the Stomach being Primarily or Secondarily
affected.

The Stomach is Primarily affected, when the Cause of Vomiting, or of the
Peristaltick Motion inverted is in it self. It is Secondarily affected by
consent from other Parts; and it is provoked to the Inversion of its
Peristaltick Motion, in Part or altogether by the Peristaltick Motion of the
Guts, which is sometimes occasioned by the violent Agitation of the Diaphragma,
and of the Muscles of the Belly by a violent Cough.

The Stomach is primarily disposed to vomit, first when it is inflamed,
excoriated, or ulcerated; then it is easily excited to any violent Contraction
of it self from any sort of Nourishment taken. Secondly, When the Nourishment
by its Quantity, and chiefly by its Quality, is troublesome to the Stomach.
Thirdly, when sharp Humors from he Head fall upon the S^omach, and corrode the
lower Orifice, and so occasion Vomiting.

From the total Inversion of the Peristaltick Motion of the Guts, Vomiting is
occasioned, as in the Iliack Passion, whereby Glisters are often vomited up.

From the same Motion inverted in Part, Vomiting is occasioned frequently, as
in the Cholera Morbus, and from any other Motion upwards of Humors fermenting
in the small Guts, and by Reason of the Passage of the Excrements stopped.

In a violent Cough the Diaphragm being shaken violently, Vomiting is
occasioned; which we think to be caused by a conjunct Compression of all the
Bowels contained in the Abdomen made toward the Breast, which mightily
troubles the Stomach, and forces it to the Inversion of the natural Motion.

Vomiting oecasioned by things taken in at the Mouth, is quieted of its own
accord, so soon as they are vomited up, or upon use of a few Aromaticks, and
Opiats, it is stopped and cured. For Instance,

Take of Mint-water two ounces, Tincture of Cinnamon two drams, London Landanum
two grains, Syrup of Min^ half an ounce, mingle them, let the Sick take a
spoonful of this Mixture by short Intervals, and the Vomiting will presently
cease.

Sharp Humors flowing from the Head upon the Stomach, are to be evacuated by
proper Purges mentioned before, or corrected by Medicines, that alter and
temperate the Noxious Acrimony.

Vomiting of Blood occasioned by the Rupture or Erosion of the Vessels of the
Stomach and Intestins, is cured by conglutinating them by the following
Mixture, which is also useful in other Excresions of the Blood.

Take of Plantain-water two ounces, of Cinnamon two drams, distilled Vinegar
half an ounce, of red Coral prepared half a dram, of Dragons-blood ten grains,
of London Laudanum two grains, of Syrup of Mirtles one ounce; mingle them.

A Spoonful of this Mixture being taken often cures most Ruptures of the
Vessels, and will ^top Fluxes of Blood in a short time beyond Expectation.

But Blood collected in the Stomach, the Flux, and the Vomiting of it being
stopped, will be carried off of its own Accord by Stool; but if there is danger
of the Blood's coagulating, to the foregoing Mixture may be added half a dram
of Crab's-eyes, and one scruple of Diaphoretick Antimony.

Vomiting of Matter chiefly following an Inflammation of the Pancreas, or of
some neighboring Part, or some notable Ulcer, must be cured by curing the
Primary Distemper.

In the mean time you may use the above described Mixture, with Crab's-eyes and
Antimonium Diaphoreticum.

It will be also proper to give a drop of Balsam of Sulphur annisated in all
the Liquor he takes.

The belching and generation of Wind will be cured by, First, avoiding
Phlegmatic and Windy Meats: Secondly, By inciding and evacuating clammy Phlegm:
Thirdly, By attemperating the Choler if it be acrid: Fourthly, By discussing
the Wind that is already made.

Acids and Aromaticks, and volatile Salts, incide clammy Phlegm, and Flegmagoges
purge it off. Spirit of Nitre attemperates Choler when it is acrid better than
any thing else; two or three drops of it being taken in common Beer, or in some
convenient Mixture.

Most Spices discuss Wind, so do the Oils of them, but especially the Seeds,
Flowers, and Barks; but Spirit of Niter is better than all, for it corrects
Choler and Phlegm, and hinders the Generation of Wind, and discusses that which
is generated. The following Mixture is also good to expel Wind from the Stomach
and Bowels.

Take of the Waters of Mint, and Fennel, each two ounces; of Spirit of Wine
rectified one ounce, of the sweet Spirit of Niter twenty drops, of London
Laudanum three grains, of Oil of Mace by Distillation six drops, of Syrup of
Mint one ounce and an half; mingle them.

This Mixture must be taken by Spoonfuls, often or seldom according to the
degree of Pain, and Quantity of Wind.

Silvius's Carminative Spirit is made in the following manner.

Take of the Roots of Angelica one dram, of Master-wort, and Galingal, each one
dram and an half; of the Flowers of Rosemary, and Marjoram, Garden-rue, and of
the Herb called Basilicon, and of the Tops of the lesser Centaury, each half a
handful; of Bay Berries three drams, of the Seeds of Angelica, Lovage, and
Annise, each half an ounce; of Ginger, Nutmegs, and Mace, each one dram and an
half; of Cinnamon six drams, of Cloves, and the Bark of Oranges, each one dram;
cut them and powder them grossly, and pour upon them twenty quarts of Maligo
Wine; digest them two days in a Bath, then distill them till they are dry, pour
all again upon the Ingredients, and distill off three Fourths.

CHAP. LXV. Of the Hickops
THe Hickops are a Convulsive Motion of the Stomach.

The Matter occasioning the Hickops is either collected in the Stomach, or
communicated to it from the Liver, Spleen, Bowels, or other Parts, or from the
whole Body; so sharp Meats or Medicines, sharp Humors or Worms contained in
the Stomach, may occasion an Idiophathick Hickop: But a Sympathick is
occasioned by Inflammations of the neighboring Parts, or from Humors, or
sharp Vapors transferred to the Stomach from Diseases of the whole Body, as in
acute and malignant Fevers.

The Signs of the Causes must be thus distinguished: If it be Idiopathick it is
more continual, and Signs of Humors contained, in the Stomach appear, and then
it is cured by Vomiting.

The Peccant Humor collected in the Stomach, may be known by Vomiting,
Belching, a Taste in the Mouth, and other Signs,

If it proceed from a Disease of any other Part, the Signs of it must be sought
for in the proper Chapters.

As to the Prognostic, that Hickop from any Procatarctick cause, as from Meat,
Drink, or Cold, is not dangerous; and also that which precedes a critical
Vomiting

If it happen in a Fever, it shows that the Disease is very dangerous: A
Hickop coming after Vomiting is also dangerous.

The Cure of this Disease is to be directed to the Causes of it, which as is
said before, produce this Disease Sympathically, or Idiopathically; the Causes
that occasion a Sympathick Hickop, are the Diseases of other Parts, which being
cured, the Hickop is also taken off, though those Remedies which are proper to
remove the Symptom may be used in the mean while.

An Idiopathick Hickop is occasioned by Phlegm, Wind, Choler, or any other acrid
or malignant Humor.

That which is occasioned by a Phlegmatic Humor must be cured by Remedies that
incide, purge, and cleanse that Humor, and that strengthen the Stomach; to
which may be added the following Medicines, which are peculiarly proper for the
Symptom.

Take of Tincture of Castor one dram, of the Juice of Mint four ounces. Let the
Sick take a spoonful or two at a time, and let his Stomach be anointed with it
hot twice or thrice a day.

Vinegar of Squills may be taken frequently to incide and dissolve the Matter
impacted into the Tunicks of the Stomach; or instead of it Oxymel of Squills;
Cloves also held frequently in the Mouth do good; also Elixir Proprietatis
described by Crollius is good.

Take of the Seeds of Dill two or three drams; boil them gently in eight ounces
of good Wine: Let the Sick tak^ two Spoonfuls Morning and Evening.

The Seed also tied up in a Rag may be held to the Nostrils frequently; when
the Disease is obstinate the following Pills are very effectual.

Take of Castor, and Mirrh, each three drams; of Sal-gemma half an ounce, of
Diagridium, and Mastich, each one dram; of the fresh Troches of Agarick three
drams, of choice Aloes the Weight of all; mix them with the Juice of Mint, and
make a Mass. Of each dram make six Pills, gild them, let the Sick take two or
three in a Morning, two hours before Meat, twice a Week.

Pills also made of the Powder of Hiera, with Oxymel, are also good, whereof a
dram may be taken at a time.

Of the days the Sick does not Purge, let him take the following Powder.

Take of the Seeds of Dill half an ounce, of Zedoary, and of Woo^ (...) Aloes,
of Nutmegs, Cloves, and of the Powder of D^^mbra, each one dram; mix them, let
him take two scruples with a little good Wine, or adding three ounces of common
Salt, let him use of it with his Meat.

Let the following Cataplasm be applied to his Stomach.

Take of the Roots of long Birth-wort, of Florentine-orris, of Bayberries, of
the Leaves of Rue, and dried Mint, each three drams; of Castor, and Mirrh, each
two drams; of Cloves, and Hyposistis, each six drams; with Honey of
Rosemary-flowers; make a Cataplasm.

Lastly, when the Disease is very obstinate, we must use a Decoction of
Guajacum, and the Bath-water.

That which prooceeds from Wind, must be cured by Remedies that are proper to
expel Wind: Let Cupping-glasses be applied to the Region of the Stomach, which,
like a Miracle, mitigate and take off suddenly flatulent Diseases of the
Lower-belly.

That which proceeds from an acrid and choleric Humor, must be cured by
Bleeding if there be a Plethora, and by Vomiting, or by Purging every third day.

Take of choice Rhubarb powdered, and moistened with Endive-water, half an
ounce, of the Pulp of Tamarinds two drams, of the Seeds of Endive, Purslain,
and Spodium, each one dram; of Yellow Sanders, and of Diagridium, each half a
dram; with Syrup of Lemons, make a Mass for Pills; of half a dram, make four or
five Pills to be taken in the Morning.

Of other Days let him take the Conserve of Roses and Borrage, mixed with a
little of the Powder of the three Sanders.

Emulsions of the cold Seeds attemperate powerfully the Acrimony of the
Humors; Syrup of Apples mixed with Syrup of Quinces is also good; hot or cold
Water, or a Ptisan is also to be drank freely of.

Foment the Stomach with a Sponge dipped in Rose-vinegar, and apply the following
Plaster to the Back and Stomach.

Take of the Ceratum Santalinum, and of Ointment of Roses, each one ounce; of
Mastich half an ounce, of the Bark of Citron, and of the Flesh of Quinces, each
one dram; with the Juice of Housleek; and with a little Turpentine, make
Plasters.

If there be a Suspicion of a malignant Quality, Treacle or some other
Alexipharmick must be prescribed; and the Region of the Stomach must be
anointed with the Oil of Scorpions.

But from whatsoever Cause the Hickops arise, the following Medicines are to be
used. First, The Peccant Humor must be evacuated by Vomit, if the Sick can
bear it, and it must be repeated, if the Disease be lessened by it, but not
quite taken away: and strong Vomits must be given, if the Case so require, as
Platerus teaches in his Practice, whereof he mentions an Observation in these
Words. A Surgeon was seized with the Hickops, and they were so continual Night
and Day, that he could not sleep, nor scarce speak or eat, being extremely
weakened by them, he earnestly desired we should give him a strong Chimical
Vomit, which being taken, he cast up a vast Quantity of green and black Choler,
the Vomiting stopped, and he recovered.

But if the Sick cannot take a Vomit, he must be purged by stool, but the
Humor must be first prepared by things that incide and cleanse: Afterward
these things that follow are convenient.

Cupping-glasses must be applied opposite to the Region of the Stomach, and to
the Stomach.

The Stomach must be bound with a Swath-band, that it may not be so much
dilated. Ligatures of the Extremities must be used.

Let him eat Anniseeds, which is thought to Cure the Hickops peculiarly.

Frequently Glisters must be injected, to draw away the Noxious Humors from
the Stomach.

Young Animals must be applied to the Stomach.

Vinegar of Squills may be taken by Spoonfuls.

Sneezing casts off the Matter impacted in the Coats of the Stomach. As the
Physician Chrysimacus cured Aristophanes of a Hickop by provoking Sneezing,
when he could not do it by stopping of the Spirits, and Gargling with cold
Water.

Pills made of one dram of Aloes, and three grains of London Laudanum are good.

Platerus in his Observations says, That he cured a Boy of ten Years of Age,
that had the Hickops for eight Days and Nights continually, with the Water of
green Nuts distilled, with Radishes infused, first in Vinegar, which he gave
him to provoke Vomiting; and though he did not Vomit at all, yet he was cured.

But to conclude, Narcoticks wiil do the Business when nothing else will.

CHAP. LXVI. Of Vomiting of Blood.
THe conjunct cause, is the Quantity or Quality of the Blood exceeding.

The external causes, are Wounds and Bruises, and violent Heat, or immoderate
Cold, or unaccustomed Labor and Exercise, or Hollowing.

If the Blood flow from the Stomach, there will be almost always a continual
Pain and Weight there, and the quantity of it will not be much, because the
Veins of the Stomach are small, and Nauseousness will accompany it, and (...)
Blood will be mixed sometimes with Meat, sometimes with Choler, and sometimes
with Phlegm.

If it flow from the Head, there will be a Tickling perceived about the Jaws
and Palate, and Blood will flow sometimes from the Nostrils mixed with Snot,
and a Pain or Heaviness of the Head precedes.

If Vomiting of Blood proceeds from a Suppression of the Courses, it will be
Periodical.

As to the Prognostic, Vomiting of Blood from what Cause soever it arises, is
dangerous; for if too great a quantity be evacuated, there is Danger of Death;
if it coagulate in the Stomach, and corrupt there, it occasions Fainting.

But a Vomiting of Blood from Suppression of Courses is least dangerous.

They which fall into a Dropsy by Vomiting of Blood die.

It must be cured by Medicines that cause a Revulsion of the Blood from the
Stomach, and by such as attemperate it, and stop the Apertion of the Veins.

And First, Because an orderly Diet is of great use in this Case, the common
Diet ought to be astringent and Emplastick, and also cooling, as Barley Broths,
Almond and Rice Diet, Water Gruel, and Jellies, and especially Starch boiled in
Milk, whereunto may be added Pomegranate Juice, or a little Rose-vinegar; hard
Eggs may be also used dipped in Vinegar.

Also Bread dipped in Water; Chicken Broth, with Wood Sorrel, Purslain, and
Plantane boiled in it; but at the beginning of eating, some Astringent thing
should be taken, as a Quince baked under Ashes, Medlars, or the like.

Let the Sick abstain from all acrid, salt, peppered, and fried Meats, and also
from such things as yield a great deal of Nourishment, unless the Weakness of
the Sick requires that they should be taken sparingly.

He must drink but little, and when he does, he must drink Water wherein Iron
has been quenched, with a little Juice of Pomegranates in it.

The Air must be somewhat Cold, but he must not expose himself to the Winds,
nor to the Rays of the Sun or Moon: He must sleep moderately, and his Body must
be kept open, and his Mind free from Passion.

Bleeding must be used sparingly, and it must be repeated; Frictions and
Ligatures must be used, and cleansing Glisters must be injected. Apply
Cupping-glasses to the Buttocks, Legs, Loins, and Hypochondres.

Let two Spoonfuls of Oxycrat be given, if there be a Suspicion of coagulated
Blood; for by the use of it, it may be easily dissolved, and driven from the
Veins of the Stomach, and they will be stopped thereby; foment the Region of the
Stomach also with it cold; and if the Sick does not Vomit, the following
Mixture may be used to stop the Veins,

Take the White of one Egg, of Rose Water, and Vinegar, each one dram and an
half; shake them well, and add to them two drams of Starch; mix them, and let
the Sick take it by Spoonfuls. Or,

Take of prepared Coral, sealed Earth, Bole-armonick, Boodstone, Troches of
Ambar, each one dram; of Plantane-water, and Syrup of Mirtles, each two ounces;
mingle them, let the Sick take it as before. Or,

Let the Sick take Morning and Evening, four ounces of the Juice of Plantane
cold.

Galen says, That nothing is better than this Juice to stop any Flux of Blood.

The Juice of Purslain and Knot-grass is also good for the same Purpose.

Take of the Waters of Plantane, and Purslain, each one ounce and an half; of
Syrup of Mirtles half an ounce, of Syrup of Poppies one ounce; mingle them,
make a Julep to be repeated often.

Take of old conserve of Roses, and of Comfrey-roots, each one ounce; of
Marmalad of Quinces half an ounce, one Mirobalan candied, Troches of Ambar, and
of Lemnian Earth, each two drams; of Coral prepared, and of Saffron of Mars,
each one dram; with Syrup of dried Roses; make an Opiat to be used frequently.

Troches of Ambar do not only bind, but also dissolve concreted Blood, and
therefore are frequently to be used: Tincture of Coral, made with Juice of
Lemons, is also very good.

But when the Blood is evacuated violently, and cannot be stopped by the
forementioned Medicines, Narcoticks must be taken inwardly, and injected by
Glisters, and the Region of the Stomach must be anointed with Oil of Roses and
of Mirtles washed in Vinegar, and after you have anointed it, sprinkle on
Powder of Coral, Bolearmonick, and sealed Earth; or anoint the Stomach with the
following Ointment.

Take of the Juices of Plantane, and Knot-grass, each one ounce and an half;
Rose-vinegar one ounce, of Omphacin Oil six ounces; boil them to the
Consumption of the Juices, then add of Dragons-blood, Mastich, Pomegranate
peels, and Mirtles, each two drams; of Camphor one scruple, with a sufficient
quantity of red Wax, make an Ointment.

Let him drink Water wherein hot Iron has been quenched, with Syrup of Quinces
and Spirit of Vitriol in it, and let his Broths be made of the same Water.

Let his Loins and Hypochondres be fomented with a Decoction made of Plantane
and Purslain in Oxycrat; and let it be used when it is almost cold; and let him
put his Hands into cold Water; Afterward let the foresaid Parts be anointed
with Galen's cooling Ointment washed in Vinegar.

Bleeding being sufficiently used, gentle and frequent Purging must be ordered,
whereby the Blood may be cleared from Serous and Choleric Humors occasioning
this Disease: But they ought to be made of Rhubarb, Myrobalans, Tamarinds, and
the like, which Bind as well as Purge, and do not stir the Humors; they may be
given in the form of a Bolus with Syrup of Mirtles, or dried Roses, or in a
Potion made of a Decoction of Sorrel, Succory, Purslain, and the like.

When Purging is used, which ought to be continued for three or four days, at
Bedtime, after every Purge, the forementioned Opiate, Syrup of Coral, or some
other astringent and Corroberating Medicine must be used.

Lastly, For Precaution, a^ dram of Rhubarb powdered must be given once a week
for a long time.

CHAP. LXVII. Of the Cholera Morbus, i. e. Vomiting and Looseness.
THis Disease was most Epidemical in the Year 1669, says Doctor Sydenham, than
ever he knew it in any other Year; it comes as certainly at the latter end of
Summer, as Swallows at the beginning of Spring, and as Cuckows at the Heat of
the following Season. That Disease which is occasioned by a Surfeit comes at
any time, the Symptoms are indeed alike, and the Cure the same, yet it is of
another kind. The Disease is easily known, for there are violent Vomitings, and
an Evacuation of ill Humors, with great Difficulty and Trouble by Stool; there
is a violent Pain and Inflation of the Belly and Guts, an Heart-burning,
Drouth, and quick-pulse, with Heat and Anxiety, with great Nauseousness, and
sometimes a Colliquative Sweat, Contractions of the Arms and Legs, Fainting, a
Coldness of the extreme Parts, and suchlike Symptoms, which greatly terrify
the Bystanders, and kill the Patient in twenty four Hours. There is also a dry
Cholera from a flatuous Spirit breaking out above and below without Vomiting
and Looseness.

I have found, by diligent Application of Mind, and by manifold Eperience, that
if on the one hand I should endeavor to expel the sharp Humors, that are the
Fuel of the Disease, by Catharticks, I should do just as he that endeavors to
quench Fire with Oil, seeing the Operation of the most gentle Cathartick would
but give farther Disturbance, and raise new Tumults: And on the other Hand,
should I at the first restrain the primary Effort with Narcotick Medicines, and
other Astringents, whilst I hindered natural Evacuation, and detained the Humor
against Nature, the Patient would be undoubtedly destroyed by an intestine War,
his Enemy being enclosed in his Bowels: For these Reasons therefore, I thought
I must go the middle Way, that I might partly evacuate, and partly dilute the
Humor. I ^ound out this Method several Years ago, and have long experienced
it, and have by it many Times reduced this Disease to good Order.

A Young Chicken is boiled in about three Gallons of Spring Water, so that the
Liquor has scarce any Relish of the Chick. The Patient is ordered to drink
several large Draughts of this a little warm; at the same time a good quantity
will serve for several Glisters, to be given successively, until all the Broths
be consumed, and rendered upwards and downwards; an ounce of the Syrups of
Lettice, Violets, Purslain, Water-lilly, may be now and then mixed with the
Draughts and Glisters; though the Broth may do very well without any such
Addition. So the Stomach being loaded with a considerable quantity of the
Liquor, and as I may say turned, and the Injection of Glisters being
reiterated, the sharp Humors are either cast out, or their Acrimony being
taken off, they are reduced to a due Temper, the Filth being cast up by these
means, which require three or fours Hours: Some Paragorick Medicine perfects
the Cure; I use this often.

Take of Couslip-water one ounce, of Aqua-mirabilis one dram, Liquid Laudanum
fourteen drops.

Instead of which any Shop-Narcotick may be made use of, and this way of
diluting the Humors is much safer, and more expedite, than that which is most
commonly taken to stop this most dangerous Disease; viz. either by Evacuaters
or Astringents; because the Tumult is heightened by Evacuaters, and all things
are put in a Hurly-burly by them; and the other, on the contrary, detain an
Enemy in the Bowels, and of a Stranger do plainly make him an Inhabitant: To
say nothing of the tedious Trouble created to the Patient, when the Disease is
protracted, whereby at length the Bad Humors creep into the Mass of Blood, and
easily kindle a malignant Fever.

But it is to be diligently noted, That if the Phisician be not called till the
Voming and Looseness have continued many Hours, suppose ten or twelve, and the
Patient is worn out, so that the extreme Parts wax cold; I say in this case,
all other Remedies being omitted, he must immediately fly to Laudanum, the
sacred Anchor in this Disease, which is not only to be given when the Symptoms
are urgent, but also after the Vomiting and Looseness go off, and to be repeated
Morning and Evening daily, till the Patient has recovered his Strength and
Health.

Though this Disease be Epidemical, yet it very seldom lasts longer than
August, in which it first began; on which Account I have been induced to
contemplate that most subtle and elegant Artifice, which Nature uses in the
Production of Epidemick Diseases; for though the same Causes wholly remain, so
that many should be seized with this Disease as well in September as August, by
reason of eating too much Fruit, yet we see the same Effect does not follow:
And he that has carefully collected the Phenomenon of a legitimate Cholera, of
which only we treat at present, will confess, that that Disease which invades
at any other time of the Year, though coming upon the same occasion, and
accompanied with some of the same Symptoms, is quite different from this now
spoken of; just as if there were some secret and peculiar thing in the Air of
this peculiar Month, able to impress on the Blood, or on the Ferment of the
Stomach, some such specific Alteration adapted only to this Disease.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of a Pain in the Stomach.
A Pain of the Stomach proceeds from something that distends and gnaws it, and
so causes a Solution of the Continuum.

But in the Stomach three very different Parts are to be considered, viz. The
upper and lower Orifice, and the Body of it which makes its Cavity.

The upper Orifice is endued with an exquisite Sense, because a great Nerve is
placed there proceeding from the sixth Conjugation, and therefore the Pains in
it are very sharp, and the Heart, by reason of its nearness is also affected;
and therefore this Pain is called Cardialgia, and Cardiogmos; and so great is
the Agreement of the Heart with the upper Orifice of the Stomach, that the
Ancients called this Orifice (...)

But if the Membranes, constituting the Cavity of the Stomach, or if the lower
Orifice be affected, it is called a Pain of the Stomach, or the Cholick of the
Stomach, especially when it is occasioned by Wind.

The next cause of this Pain, is a Solution of the Continuum occasioned by
things that bite and distend; and those things that chiefly and most frequently
bite and distend the Stomach, are Humors, or Wind, whereunto may be added
Worms velicating the Tunicks of the Stomach.

Acrid and Malignant Humors, as green or Black Choler, salt Phlegm, corrupt
Ichor, Stinking Matter coming from an Abscess of the Liver or Breast broken,
and poured upon the Stomach, and all other Acrimonious Humors, may occasion a
Pain of the Stomach.

Also acid Vapors arising from the said Humors may occasion the same Pain:
Wind also contained in the Cavity of the Stomach may occasion Inflation, and a
painful Tension, but especially when it is contained within the Tunicks of the
Stomach, which makes the Disease obstinate, because it can be hardly discussed.

Diseases also of the Stomach, and of the neighboring Parts are wont to
occasion this Pain, as a hot or cold Intemperies, Inflammation, Schirrhus, or
any other hard Tumor occasioning a heavy Pain: And lastly, Wounds and Ulcers
of the Part, and Tumors and Inflations of the Neighboring Parts, by pressing
the Stomach may occasion Pain.

But Humors and Wind that occasion the Pain of the Stomach, are either
generated in the Stomach, or flow from the whole Body, or some Parts of it;
from the whole Body in Fevers, or when the Body is full of ill Humors; from
other Parts, but especially from the Liver, Spleen, and Brain; from the Liver
flows Choler, from the Spleen Melancholy and black Choler, from the Head salt
Phlegm.

Also from other extraordinary and rare Causes, such a Pain may arise, as from
Stones generated in the Stomach, and the like. Fabritius Hildanus relates, that
a Matron having swallowed a piece of the Rine of Bacon, kept it in her Stomach
two Years, and was afflicted with continual Pain, and at length by taking a
Vomit, she cast it up and was cured.

External causes occasioning this Disease, are either Meats infected with an
ill Quality, or endued with a great deal of Acrimony, which are sufficient of
themselves to occasion such a Pain, or they are apt to generate Winds; or taken
in too great a quantity, they putrify and become Acrimonious, or they are too
hot: Or strong and acrid Medicines, or such as are endued with a destructive
Faculty may occasion the Pain; or when they are taken in too great a quantity,
or not being well corrected, and Poisons may also occasion the same Pain.

The Diagnostick Signs are to be directed to the Part affected and to the
cause, and first the Situation of the Pain shows that the upper Orifice of the
Stomach is affected, when it is perceived under the Xiphoid Cartilage, but the
violence of the Pain occasioned by the exquisite sense of the Part shows more
certainly that this Part is affected, and that it is a true Cardialgia, so do
the Anxiety and Restlesness, so that the Sick cannot abide in one Posture,
there is also Fainting and Swooning by Reason of the Consent of the Heart,
wherewith there is a great Sympathy, not only by Reason of the Nearness, but
because there is a great Loss of Spirits by the violence of the Pain; sometimes
also the Brain is affected by Sympathy, by reason of the great Nerve that is
implanted in this Part, and because acrid Vapors are elevated to the Head from
the Stomach, upon which account Head-achs, Giddiness, and the Falling Sickness
arise sometimes.

In other Parts of the Stomach there are also sharp Pains, but they are not
accompanied with so grievous Symptoms, and they resemble Chollick Pains, but
they differ in Situation.

The causes occasioning these Pains are distinguished by their proper Signs,
whereof the most plain are known by things evacuated; for if Phlegm, or Choler,
or Wind, or Worms, are ejected by Vomit or Stool, it is easy to conjecture
that the Disease proceeds from such Causes; but though there be no Evacuation
of the Morbifick Matter, we may know by peculiar Signs, when Choler, Phlegm, or
Wind abounds.

The Signs also of Worms may be taken from the Chapter of Worms, and the
peculiar Diseases of the Stomach it self, or of the Neighboring Parts
occasioning this Disease may be known by every ones proper Signs; the Humor
causing the Pain may be also guessed at by the Time of the Invasion, of its
Increase and Cessation; for in some the Pain is* worst before eating, and this
signifies that Choler prevails, which when the Sick is fasting is drawn into
the Stomach, or becomes more acrid thereby; in others the Pain begins presently
after eating, because the crude and biting Humors, which before lay quiet in
the Tunicks of the Stomach, are disturbed by eating; or being seated in the
bottom of the Stomach, they at that time are raised, and offend the upper
Orifice, and in some the Pain is worst whilst the Meat is concocting, because
acrid and biting Vapors are elevated from the Morbifick Matter by the Heat
increased in the Stomach at the Time of Concoction; in others four or five
Hours after eating, because the Meat is corrupted by the Concoction being
depraved, by which means it velicates the Stomach; in others the Pain is
augmented after Sleep, and this is occasioned by a Catarrh, the Humor flowing
from the Brain in the Sleep, which being heaped up in a great quantity
occasions Pain when the Sick awakes; but the Pain is sometimes quieted by
eating, the Acrimony of the Humors being assuaged by the Benignity of the Food.

As to the Prognostic, it is certain that a Cardialgia is much more dangerous
than other Pains of the Stomach, by reason of the exquisite sense of the Mouth
of the Stomach, and the great Sympathy that is betwixt that and the principle
parts.

The greater or lesser is the Pravity of the Morbifick cause, and the violence
of the Symptoms, so is the Danger more or less.

A continual and acute Fever, joined with a great Pain of the Stomach,
threatens great Danger; for Hippocrates says, Aphor. 65. Section 5. A great
Heat about the Stomach, and Cardiogmos in Fevers, are ill, for they signify a
great Quantity of vicious Humors contained in the Stomach.

A Pain of the Stomach, occasioned by Worms or Wind is most commonly less
dangerous, for that the Cause is not so obstinate, and not fixed to the Part;
but yet sometimes violent Symptoms arise from Worms contained in the Stomach,
and biting it, whereby the Sick is presently killed; and also when the
Intemperies occasioning Wind is obstinate, as it were habitual, it is not
without Danger, because it degenerates into a dry Dropsy.

Hippocrates, Aphor. 7. Sect. 4. says, That Coldness in the extreme parts, in a
Cardialgia, portends Death.

The Cure of this Disease is to be varied according to the Variety of the
Causes, for if it arises from the Diseases of other Parts, the Cure of them
must be taken Care of; but if the Cause be seated in the Stomach it self, the
Pain proceeds either from Wind or sharp and choleric Humors, or from an
Inflammation, Abscess, or Ulcer.

That which is generated by Wind, must be cured by Remedies that discuss and
evacuate that flatulent Matter, and also Phlegm which breeds Wind.

And first, An emollient and loosning Glister must be injected, and presently
after a carminative and discussing Glister made of the Decoction of the Leaves
of Wild-marjoram, Calaminth, Pennyroyal, Rue, and the lesser-centaury, the
Seeds of Annise, Fennel, Daucus, Cummin, and the like, wherein may be dissolved
Benedictum Laxativum, Oil of Dill, Rue, and Honey of Rosemary.

If the Pain continue, a Glister must be made of Oil of Rue, or of Nuts, and of
generous Wine each equal Parts, you must add to it two ounces of Aqua-vitae, or
you may prepare a Glister of Whitewine mixed with eight drops of Oil of
Juniper, Cinnamon, or of Chemical Oil of Cloves* Afterward the following
Fomentation must be applied to the Region of the Stomach.

Take of the Roots of Cyperus, Galingal, sweet smelling Flag, each one ounce;
of the Leaves of Mint, wild-marjoram^ Marjoram, Pennyroyal, Hyssop and Sage,
each one handful; of the Seeds of Fennel, Daucus, Caraways, Bay Berries, each
half an ounce; of the Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, Rosemary, and Lavinder, each
one Pugil; cut them and beat them, and put them into two Bags, boil them in
generous Wine, press them out and ^pply them hot to the Stomach and Belly by
turns.

But when the Matter is not very cold, the following Fomentation may be
prepared, which is much commended by Forestus, and he says, it will give Ease
when other Medicines will do no good,

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows half an ounce, of red Roses, the Flowers of
Camomil, and of the Tops of Centaury, each one handful; boil them in Fountain
and Camomil-water to a Pint and an half; at last add a little good
Rhenish-wine, Rose Water, and Vinegar, make a Fomentation.

After the Fomentation, anoint the parts with Oil of Rue, and Dill mixed with
Aqua-vitae, and a little of the Oil of Sage, or of Cloves Chimically extracted;
after the Anointing apply the Plaster of Laurel-berries, or instead of it a
Cataplasm made of Honey and the Seeds of Cummin.

In the mean time whilst these things are about, if the Stomach be nauseous,
Vomiting may be provoked by some gentle Vomit, or a Purge may be given that
evacuates Phlegm.

After the Body is purged, Oil of bitter Almonds mixed with White Wind may be
taken, or Aqua-clareta, or Cinnamon Water.

The following Julep is very effectual to ease Pain, discuss Wind, to cleanse
Phlegm, and to strengthen the Stomach.

Take of the Leaves of common Wormwood, of the lesser Centaury, and Agrimony,
each half an handful; boil them to five ounces; in the Liquor dissolve one
ounce of white Sugar. Let it be taken for two days in the Morning.

Amatus Lusitanus greatly commends the distilled Water of Camomil-flowers, as a
special Remedy to ease Pains of the Bowels and Stomach; three ounces of it may
be taken warm; or in the place of this Water, a Decoction of Camomil-flowers
may be used, which is greatly commended by Forestus, who says, that he cured a
certain Merchant of a violent Pain in the Stomach, with only giving this
Decoction once; he had no sooner drank it than he fell into a Sweat, belching
up Wind, and in a Minute all the Pains went off, so that there was no occasion
for any other Remedies. A Vomit may be prepared of this Decoction, made with
Seeds of Dill, or with Agarick, or the Roots of Wake-robin, wherein may be
dissolved Oxymel, Syrup of Sorrel, or of Roses solutive, which may be given at
the beginning of the Disease to mitigate the Pain by evacuation.

Galen says, that a Cupping-glass applied to the Stomach removes the Pain
wonderfully, but this Caution must be taken notice of, viz. That but little or
no crude Humor be in the Stomach, for if there be, it will increase the Pain.

Bread fresh drawn out of the Oven, cut in the middle, and applied to the Part,
does good, either by it self or sprinkled with Aromatic Powders.

But if the Disease be obstinate, you must use a Bath made of a Decoction of
emollient and healing Herbs, which is safest and most effectual, for it eases
the Pain by discussing the Wind, and driving it through the Pores of of the
Skin.

But the Buisness will be sooner done, if in the Bath the Sick take some
discutient Remedy, for both concurring the Cure will be effectually performed.

The Bath ought to be very hot, that the Wind may be the easier discussed, and
that the gross Humors may be melted,

If Glisters cannot be injected or retained, by reason of the violence of the
Pain, a Purge must be given in the Bath, where the Sick must continue half an
hour or an hour till the Purge begins to operate.

But sometimes when there is danger, by reason of the violence of the Pain,
Narcoticks must be given, which being prudently administered do often a great
deal of good.

Some mix Narcoticks with Purgers, that the Pain may be eased, and the peccant
Matter evacuated at the same Time.

Take of Diaphaenicon half an ounce, of Philonium Romanum two Scruples; with
the Water or Decoction of Camomil make a Potion.

After the Pain is taken off, Purging should be repeated once or twice a Month
in such as are subject to this Disease, that the Cause of Wind may be removed;
corroborating Medicines must be also used, but if the Pain arise from Choler,
it must be cured by the Evacuation of the peccant Humor, as by a gentle Vomit,
or a Purging Medicine; or by injecting Glisters frequently, which ought to be
emollient, not sharp or hot.

Afterward the Acrimony of the Humors is to be mitigated by cooling and
thickning Juleps; by Emulsions of the four greater cold seeds, by new Milk, Oil
of sweet Almonds newly drawn, by Yolks of Eggs and the like.

Strenghning Medicines must be used, and Narcoticks upon occasion, and
outwardly must be applied a Cataplasm of White-bread Crumbs boiled in Milk,
Yolks of Eggs and Saffron being added. Or you may apply Bread fresh drawn and
cut in the middle and moistened with Vinegar; or let the part be fomented with
a Decoction of the Flowers of Camomil, Violets, and of Water Lillies; or which
is much better, let the Sick be bathed with warm Water, for this is very
effectual for the Cure of this Disease.

If when the Pain is eased, it should chance to return again, the Sick must be
purged twice a Month, and the hot Intemperies must be corrected by a cooling
Diet and convenient Remedies.

But when the Pain proceeds from an Inflammation, Abscess, or Ulcer, it must be
cured by Remedies to be proposed in the following Chapter.

CHAP. LXIX. Of an Inflammation, Abscess, and Ulcer of the Stomach.
THough in the Stomach, as in all other Parts, all sorts of Tumors may happen,
yet here we only treat of an Inflammation or Phlegmon, which is most frequent,
for other Tumors rarely happen, and may be cured by the same Method, wherewith
the Tumors of other inward parts are.

An Inflammation of the Stomach is a preternatural Tumor arising from Blood
poured upon the Substance of the Stomach, and its Membranes. And this Blood is
either pure and sincere, and then it produces a Phlegmon properly so called, or
it is mixed with Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, and then it produces an
Oedematous, Schirrhus, Phlegmon, or a Phlegmon mixed with an Erysipelas.

There may be many external Causes, viz. Whatsoever renders the Blood hot, as
hot Medicines; drinking of Wine, or whatever forces the Blood thither, as a
Bruise of the Stomach, especially when it is full of Meat; to which may be
added hot and acrid things taken inwardly, as Cantharides, Sublimate, and the
like.

The Diagnostick Signs of this Disease are, a great Burnining, Pricking
Distending, Pain with Pulsation, stretching it self to the Back. The Tumor may
be felt and sometimes seen; the Shoulders are drawn backward; the Breathing,
Swallowing, and Belching are difficult. Sometimes something Bloody is Vomited
up; there is a violent Fever accompanied with dreadful Symptoms.

If the Inflammation be purely from Blood it is somewhat gentler, but if it be
joined with an E^ysipelas, the Symptoms are very violent, and there is an
inward Fever, though the outward Parts are cold, and the Thirst is
unquenchable: To this Inflammation of the Stomach that Inflammation is near of
kin, which either seises that Part of the Liver, wherewjth the Stomach is
covered, or that lies upon the Region of the Abdomen, which can be only
distinguished by the violence of the Symptoms; for the Inflammation of the
Stomach is the most violent and most dangerous.

From what has been said, it may be easily prognosticated that this Disease is
very dangerous and most commonly deadly.

Nevertheless that is most dangerous which seises the upper Orifice of the
Stomach, and partakes of the Nature of an Erysipelas.

If the Inflammation do not kill, and be not resolved, it degenerates into an
Abscess, which is known by the Remission of Heat and Fever, the Tumor
remaining.

The Abscess being broken an Ulcer is left behind, which may be known by the
Evacuation of Matter by Vomit and Stool.

But an Ulcer of the Stomach does not only proceed from an Abscess broken, but
also from other causes, which must be here mentioned, least any thing should be
desicient in the Theory of it.

Therefore the causes of an Ulcer of the Stomach are either Internal or
External; the Internal causes are acrid Humors bred in the Stomach, or
transmitted from another place to it, as Yellow and Black Choler, or salt Phlegm.

The external causes, are acrid and corroding Medicines or Poisons, and hither
may be referred Wounds of the Stomach ill cured, which degenerate into an
Ulcer; and also the Rupture of some great Vein, which cannot be well cured
after vomiting much Blood up.

An Ulcer bred in the Stomach, may be known chiefly by the Evacuation of Matter
by Vomit and Stool, to which primary Sign others may be added: For first, There
is perceived in the Stomach a pricking Pain with Heat, especially when any
thing acrid, salt, acid, or any thing very hot or very cold is taken inwardly.
There is moreover a Loss of Appetite, Stinking, Belching, and a small and
continual Fever.

The Prognostic is most commonly deadly, unless the Ulcer be very small, and
possess the Superficies, and has not a Fever joined with it; for the Membrane
of the Stomach being ulcerated is difficultly cured, and the Nourishment cannot
be well concocted, and it is rejected before a due concoction; besides
Medicines can do little good, for things that cleanse, which are necessary for
the Cure of the Ulcer, cause Pain; and things that dry, which should satisfy
the other Indication of Healing the Ulcer, are continually spoiled by the Meat
and Drink, and Chyle, and other Humors which always stagnate in a weak Stomach.

The Cure of the foresaid Diseases is to be instituted particularly.

And first, The Cure of the Inflammation is to be begun by Bleeding repeated in
the Arm as often as the Strength will bear; and though it may seem to be
dejected at first by reason of the fainting and Coldness of the extreme Parts,
yet this Infirmity of the Strength proceeds from an Oppression which requires
Evacuation, and therefore Bleeding ought not to be forbid.

Moreover, the opening of the Hemorrhoid Veins, if the Sick has been accustomed
to this Evacuation, may conveniently cause a Revulsion of the Blood from the
Stomach. Cupping-glasses applied to the Back and Buttocks, both dry and moist,
Frictions and Ligatures of the extreme Parts, and the heating those that are
wont to be cold, by applying hot Clothes, and by anointing them with Oil of
Orris, Nard, and with other hot things, may be also conveniently used to draw
the Blood from the Stomach.

But Purging is not allowed of, because it disturbes the Humors, and draws
them to the Part affected. Yet Avicen commends a Decoction of Tamarinds, or
half an ounce of Cassia, dissolved in Endive-water, or in Whey, and would have
it given daily till the seventh Day; yet it is better to abstain from all
purging at the Beginning; but the Seventh Day being over, and some Signs of
Concoction and Declination appearing, Purging may be instituted with a dram of
Rhubarb, and a Scruple of red Sanders infused in Borrage-water; you must add
one or two ounces of the Syrup of Roses, that the Filth sticking to the Part
may be evacuated.

In the mean while Lenient, cooling, and emollient Glisters must be daily
injected.

Take of Chicken-broth, or a Decoction of Mallows and Violets, one Pint; of
Cassia fresh drawn one ounce, of Oil of Roses and Violets, each two ounces; of
Sugar one ounce and an half, Yolks of Eggs number two; make a Glister.

The same altering and corroborating things may be taken inwardly, which were
proposed for a Cure of the Pain of the Stomach occasioned by a Choleric Humor.

But Syrup of Water Lillies, and of the Juice of Purslain, are peculiarly
proper, especially at the beginning; because they may serve instead of a
repelling Medicine.

Emulsions also of the four cold Seeds, and of the Seeds of white-Poppies are
proper, for they are lenitive, and qualify the Heat, and so do also the
following Juleps.

Take of the Waters of Roses three ounces, of Plantane two ounces, of the Juice
of Sorrel one ounce and an half, of Sugar of Roses one ounce, boil them a
little and strain them. Let him take two ounces twice or thrice a Day.

If the Pain be very violent, Syrup of Poppies may be taken.

Let him use for his Drink Barley-water sweetened with Syrup of Violets, which
he must drink cold.

In Progress of the Disease, Medicines are to be mixed with the foregoing,
which may help the Resolution; to which end the following Julep may be
prescribed.

Take of the Syrups of Water Lillies, of Apples, and of the Juice of Purslain,
each one ounce; of the Syrup of Roman Wormwood half an ounce, of the Waters of
Sorrel, Lettice, and Fennel, each three ounces; of the Species Diamargarite
frigid one dram; make a Julep for three Doses to be taken twice a day*

To these may be added restorative Opiats, Narcoticks and the like; all which
are to be varied according to the Judgment and Discretion of the Physician.

Turpentine washed in Wormwood-water taken twice or thrice, resolves and ripens
Imposthumes of the Stomach.

The following Fomentation may be applied outwardly in the beginning.

Take of the Roots of Sorrel two ounces, of the Leaves of Endive, Succory, and
Mallows, each one handful; of the Seeds of Lettice, and of white Poppies, each
three drams; of white and red Sanders, each half a dram; of the Flowers of
Violets, and of Water Lillies, each one Pugil; make a Decoction, add to it a
little Rose-vinegar, foment the Region of the Stomach with it warm.

After the Fomentation, anoint the part with Oil of Roses and Oil of Violets
mixed.

Cataplasms are not convenient in the beginning, because they oppress the part
by their Weight, and by retaining the Heat increase the Inflammation.

If the Disease come to a Declination, and if the Tumor should be resolved,
which is most to be wished for, a resolving Fomentation may be applied made in
the following manner.

Take of the Roots of Florentine-orris two ounces, of the Leaves of Mint,
Marjoram, Pennyroyal, and of Roman Wormwood, each one Handful; of the Seeds of
F^enugreek and of Annise, each two drams; of the grains of Kermes one dram, of
the Flowers of Staechas, Rosemary, and Camomil, each one Pugil; adding toward
the the end a little White Wind, make a Decoction, wherewith foment the Region
of the Stomach.

After the Fomentation, anoint the Part with Oil of Nutmeg, Wormwood, Nard, and
the like; to which Wax, and the Powder of Florentine-orris, and of Cinnamon
being added, an Ointment may be made; but Plasters and Cataplasms are not
convenient, because they oppress the Part.

But if the Tumor seem to tend to Suppuration, foment the part with a
Decoction of the Flowers of Camomil, and red Roses, and afterward apply the
following Cataplasm.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows two ounces, of the Leaves of Bears-breech,
and of Roses, each one handful; boil them well, and then add of the Flower of
Barley, and of Linseeds, and Faenugreek-seeds, and of the Powder of Camomil,
each half an ounce; of white and red Sanders, each two drams; with Oil of Roses
and of Camomil, and with a little Hens-grease, make a Cataplasm to be renewed
often.

The Abscess being broken, cleanse the Ulcer by drinking Hydromel, to which
must be added sometimes, according to Galen's order, Manna of Frankincense, or
Barly-water, with Sugar of Roses in the beginning in a hot Constitution.

When the Ulcer grows old, from what cause soever it prooceeds, Broths are
proper, altered with cooling, and moderately astringent Herbs, Barly-broths
sweetened with Sugar of Roses, new Milk sweetened with Sugar and a little Honey,
Steel-waters for the ordinary drink, or Water wherein some Bole-armonick or
sealed Earth has been infused; to which may be added, a little red rough Wine,
if there be but little Heat in the Part; afterward the following Apozem may be
used.

Take of whole Barley one Pugil, of the Leaves of Scabious, Agrimony, Burnet,
and of Maidenhair, each half an handful; of the seeds of Melons two drams, of
red Roses dried one Pugil; make a Decoction to one Pint, wherein dissolve three
ounces of Syrup of dried Roses, make an Apozem for four doses to be frequently
repeated.

For internal Ulcers, a Decoction of China is also very good, when there is no
Fever, for being taken for twenty Days or more, it gently provokes Sweat, and
dries the Ulcer by degrees.

But if there be danger of a Consumption, the foresaid Root must be boiled in
Chicken-broth, with the foresaid Herbs, and with cleansed Barley.

When the Ulcer has continued long, Chalybeat or Purging Waters drank for a
Month do good; and gentle Catharticks, as Rubarb, and Tamarinds, Myrobalans,
Syrup of Roses, are to be used once a Week. Lastly, The following things are to
be used.

Take of Bole-armenick, sealed Earth, red Coral, Boodstone well washed in
Rose Water, each one dram; of Dragons-blood, Gum-arabick, and Tragacanth, each
half a dram; of the Seeds of white Poppies gently bruised and roasted, of
Hypocistis, Sarcoco, and Frankincense, each one Scruple; of Sugar of Roses one
ounce; make a Powder, whereof let him take a dram in Plantane-water, or with
Conserve of Roses daily.

Or of the same Powder may be made an Opiat with Conserve of Comfry, and Roses,
and with Syrup of Quinces or of Myrtles; or Troches may be made of it, with the
Mucilages of the Seeds of Psyllium, or of Tragacanth; of all which the Sick may
take by turns, least his Stomach turn by taking of one Medicine a long while:
And outwardly, to heal the Ulcer, may be applied to the Region of the Stomach,
a Fomentation made of Wormwood, Roses, Pomegranate-peel, Galls, Balaustins,
Myrtles, Frankincense, Mastich, and the like: And afterward the part must be
anointed with some Astringent Ointment, and an Astringent Plaster must be
applied over.

CHAP. LXX. Of the Chollick.
IT takes its name from the Gut Colon, which is the part affected, which is
long and winding, and designed by Nature to receive the Excrements of almost
all the Body; and when those Excrements are retained too long, they are wont to
occasion Pains of this kind.

Therefore the Causes of the Chollick is all Excrementitious Matter, that
occasions a Solution of the Continuum, either by distending, pricking, or
corroding, and is either Wind or Humors.

Wlnd generated by Crudities, or from a cold Intemperies of the Stomach or
Bowels, if it cannot be seasonably excluded, by reason the Feces are very hard,
or by reason the Intestines are obstructed, it is heaped up in a great quantity
in the great Guts, especially in the Colon, and occasions violent Pain.

Thick Cold and Phlegmatic Humors, stufft into the Tunicks of the Guts, may
occasion such Pains by corroding them, if they are endued with Acrimony or by
chilling them; which consequently occasions Costiveness and Convulsions, as
Galen says of himself, that he having a violent Chollick, evacuated glassy
Phlegm which was actually cold. Wind, which is easily elevated by a weak and
gentle Heat from gross and clammy Humors, may also occasion this Pain.

Choleric and Acrid Humors, and also Melancholy and Acid, may occasion these
Pains, by vellicating and pricking the Intestines: But in the Action of these
Causes, it may be asked how the Chollick Pain should have Exacerbations and
Remissions, the same Matter remaining in the Bowels, which as long as it is
there should always bite and distend them. To which I answer, that that Matter
does sometimes remain quiet, and then it occasions little or no Pain; but
sometimes is moved and excited by various Fermentations that happen to the
Humors, as is wont to happen to the Falling Sickness, Hysteric Fits, and in
Fits of Fevers.

But we must take notice, that the Wind or Humors do not only reside in the
Cavity of the Intestines, for then they would be easily excluded by things that
Evacuate and Cleanse, and by Carminative Medicines; but most commonly they are
fixed in the very Tunicks of the Intestines; upon which account it is difficult
to remove them, and so they occasion an obstinate Disease. The Gross,
Phlegmatic and Melancholy Humors, flow by little and little through the Veins
of the Intestines, and so do not presently cause Pain, till there is a quantity
sufficient to irritate Nature for their Expulsion, and then being moved cause
Pain; or Wind occasioned by them, and included in the Coats of the Intestines
distends them, and not easily getting out occasions a lasting Pain; also Choler
after the same manner, poured through the Veins of the Intestines upon their
Coats, and imbibed by them, causes violent Pains, which are wont to be long and
obstinate, because it is difficultly removed from their substance.

There is another Species of a bilious Chollick, which degenerates into a
Palsy, scarce known unto the Ancients, which proceeds from a bilious Humor,
not poured as the former upon the Colon, but upon the Membranes of the Abdomen
which is transferred thither, either from the Gallbladder, or from the
Mesentery in the Crisis of long Fevers, or by reason of violent Anger, or some
other external Cause, when because of Obstructions it cannot be carried to the
common Passages, but by a Preposterous Motion is put off suddenly upon the
foresaid Membranes of the Abdomen: And hence great Pain arises like the
Chollick, which yields neither to Glisters nor Fomentations, nor any other
Remedy, but continues for many Months, by which the Body wastes, and the Sick is
vexed with a sort of intermitting Fever, and often with a slow continual
Fever; at length the Pain remitting, a Palsy succeeds, that Humor leasurely
creeping through the Membranes of the Abdomen to the Spine of the Back; but
this Palsy chiefly possesses the upper parts; yet there is most commonly a
Pain in the Thighs and Legs, and in some few the use of them is wholly taken
away, and sometimes it breaks in upon the ^ra^, and causes the
Falling Sickness, from whence Death generally follows.

There are other causes of the Chollick, but less frequent, viz. Stones growing
in the Guts, Worms wound up in a bottom and obstructing the Intestines, a
Compression of the Guts by a Tumor of the neighboring parts, and the
narrowness of them, by reason of an Inflammation, and other Tumors of the
Guts, or a twisting of them occasioned by Wind, which is next to an Iliack
Passion, and sometimes the Matter which causes a Chollick is Venomous and
Malignant. Lastly, All hard Bodies, by obstructing the Guts, or distending
them, may occasion a Chollick, as stones generated in the Guts, a great
quantity of Cherry-stones, hard Cheese, and the like. As Platerus relates of a
certain Governor, a long while troubled with the Chollick and Convulsions, who
after the use of Glisters, evacuated a great quantity of hard Cheese by Stool.

The External Causes are a cold Constitution of the Air pressing and hardening
the Belly, or a hot Constitution which does likewise harden the Excrements, the
use of Meat and Drink unfit for the Man's Constitution, of crud^ and harsh
Roots, and of gross Meats of hard Digestion, too much rest, immoderate Sleep,
unseasonable Exercise, immoderate Venery, and other External Causes which may
injure the Concoction of the Stomach.

The Diagnosticks of this Disease are plain, for first the Pain is violent,
sometimes afflicting grievously this part, sometimes that, sometimes it
possesses the Region of the Spleen, sometimes of the Stomach or Liver, or of
the Reins, sometimes it is above, sometimes below the Navel, and oftentimes it
is most violent in the left side; the Patient often Vomits, the Pain is
increased after Eating, the Belly is most commonly bound.

The Signs of the Causes are distinguished in the following manner, If the Pain
proceed from Phlegm, it is not violent, unless it be accompanied with Wind; the
Sick is eased by hot things, and injured by cold things, a course of Diet
before apt to increase Phlegm preceded.

If the Chollick is occasioned by Wind, there is a stretching Pain, and a
certain Inflation of the Belly; the Sick perceive a great deal of Wind, and a
rumbling in the Belly; they are much eased by breaking Wind, a course of Diet
fit to breed Wind was used before, as unseasonably drinking cold Water, the
frequent use of Pulse, Turnips, and Chestnuts, Herbs and Fruits, and the like;
and if the the Wind be contained in the Cavity of the Intestins, the Pain is
wandering, and not fixed to one part, and is renewed by Intervals. But if it be
kept in within the Coats of the Guts, the Pain is fixed and is continual and
obstinate because it cannot find Vent.

If the Chollick proceeds from an acrid and Choleric Humor, it is most sharp,
there is a twitching and pricking Heat, Drouth, and for the most part a Fever,
the Disease is increased by hot Medicines and Diet, and is mitigated by cold.

By the following Signs the Chollick and Nephritick Pain may be distinguished,
if they are accurately examined.

First, The Nephritick Pain is fixed in the Kidney, and stretches it self from
that to the Testes according to the length of the Ureter, but the Chollick is
wandering, and painfully girds the lower Belly.

Secondly, The Chollick increases after eating, by reason of the pressure upon
the Gut by a full Stomach, but the Nephritick Pain is not at all increased
after eating, but rather lessened, because some of the Nutritious Juice is
carried to the Veins which somewhat asswages the Pain.

Thirdly, In the Chollick Vomiting is more severe, and the Belly is more bound,
because the Colon lies near the Bottom of the Stomach, and the Intestines being
full or violently provoked, contract themselves that they may expel the common
Enemy; but either of the Symptoms is common to either of the Diseases; so that
the Intention or Remission of them has a difficult Diagnostick.

For the Nephritick Pain being intense, may occasion greater Vomiting, and bind
the Belly more than a remiss Chollick.

Fourthly, In the Chollick, the Patient is more eased by Vomiting and going to
Stool, than in Nephirtick Pains,

Fifthly, In the Nephritick Pain, the Urine is first clear and thin, afterward
something settles to the Bottom, and at length Sand or Gravel is evacuated; bu^
in the Chollick the Urine is thicker from the beginning.

The Cure of this Disease must be varied according to the Variety of the
Causes: And first, There is the same Way of Cure for a Windy and Phlegmatic
Chollick, you must begin with an emollient Glister, and afterward you must
give a Carminative and discutient Glister, which must be repeated twice,
thrice, or four times in a day, till the Pain be gone; but if after the use of
one or two Glisters, the Sick does not go to Stool, as sometimes it happens,
the Belly must be irritated by a sharp Suppository, but it is convenient to add
to one of the Glisters four ounces of the Aqua-benedicta, or two or three drams
of Coloquintida may be boiled in an emolient and Carminative Glister.

If Glisters do not give ease you must not obstinately persist in the use of
them; for it has been observed, that when a Sick Person has taken, without any
Success, twenty Glisters, another Physician having given only an ounce and an
half of Manna, with two ounces of Oil of Almonds in fat Broth has cured the
Patient. But in that Pain which proceeds from thick Phlegm, stronger Medicines
must be given.

Afterward Fomentations, Ointments, Baths, Plasters and other Remedies are
useful, to which must be added some Specificks.

Boil simple Water, and when it is boiling hot, add a fourth part of common
Oil, and some grains of pepper grossly beaten. Let the Sick take three or four
Spoonfuls as hot as he can bear it, the pain will be gone as it were in a
Moment.

Take of the best Aloes one dram, of Laudanum Opiatum grains four; mingle them,
make six Pills, gild them, let the Sick take them at a convenient time, they
give ease in an hours Time, and afterward purge off the noxious Humors.

Instead of the Pills, a Potion may be taken made of half an ounce of
Diaphaenicon, and two Scruples of Philonium Romanum in the Water or Decoction,
of Camomil.

Take of the Oil of Almonds, or of some other Oil, for poor People, four
ounces; of generous Wine one ounce, of Syrup of Poppies one ounce; mingle ehem,
make a Potion.

Oil of sweet Almonds also taken with Manna in fat Broth asswages the Pain, and
evacuates the Peccant Matter.

If the Disease is lasting, it may be successfully treated with a Decoction of
Guajacum continued for many Days, purging now and then with Elixir Salutis, and
injecting Glisters frequently.

But if the Chollick proceed from Phlegm, boil the Guajacum with Wine.

A Bilious Cholick is cured by emolient Glisters, and with such things as
attemperate the Acrimony of the Humors.

Give Juleps of the Waters of Erratick Poppy, of Lettice and Sorrel, with the
Syrups of Violets, Apples, and Lemons: If the Pain is very violent we must use
Narcoticks; the Pain being somewhat mitigated.

An Infusion of Rubarb in Succory-water is to be given with Syrup of Roses, and
to be repeated often, till the Stock of Matter is evacuated. If gentle Purging
be not sufficient to eradicate the Disease, we must use Mercurius Dulcis, which
being given sometimes with purging Medicines that have Diagridium in them
perfects the Cure.

They that dislike Diagridium, may give Mercurius Dulcis alone made into Pills,
with Conserve of Roses, drinking upon them an Infusion of Rubarb and Senna,
with Manna, and Syrup of Roses added to it.

Afterward it will be convenient to use Tunbridge or such like Waters.

When the Pain is violent, you must fly to Laudanum, with which Catharticks may
be sometimes given, but in a large Dose, because they are much blunted by
Laudanum.

Bleeding is sometimes proper in this sort of Chollick, when there is danger,
least the Violence of the Heat should occasion a Fever; if there be a Fever
already it is presently to be used.

When there is a great Drouth cold Water must be given, according to Galens
Instruction. And Amatus Lusitanus says, he wonderfully cured of a sudden such a
Pain by the use of it; and Septalius declares, in two Observations, that he
used it inwardly and outwardly with great Success.

For the Cure of a Chollick that degenerates into a P^lsie, put the Patient
into a warm Bath, made of a Decoction of emollient things, the Belly being
loosned with various Glisters, and the first Passages opened by Catharticks,
the Patient must be bathed twice or thrice, or four or five times in a day,
that the Acrimony of the Humors may be attemperated, and that the Pores of the
Membranes may be opened. The next day let the Humor be purged with some proper
Cathartick, and then the Bath must be repeated, and so you must do every other
day, if the Patient be able to bear it, till the Humors being purged off, and
the pain quieted, he is recovered.

In the mean time you must continue the use of Glisters, but those made with
Milk are best to assuage the Pain, to which may be added Cassia, Oil of
Violets, and Oil of Lillies.

Let the Belly be frequently anointed with Oil of Camomil, of Dill, sweet
Almonds, Lillies, and with Butter. Lastly, Use Whey and Tunbridge-waters, or
the like; and if the Disease continues a long while, those things may be used
which are proper to cure Hypochondriack Melancholy; and Bleeding is to be used
at the beginning of the Disease, and before Purging, and to be often repeated,
if the Blood seem to be bad, or if something of a Rheumatism seems to be joined
wtih it.

Lastly, All those Remedies which are proposed for the Cure of a Bilious
Chollick may be used in this Case; and if these things do no good, some
Physicians prescribe the following Potion, which though it be loathsome, and
will not go down with the delicate, yet they say it presently mitigates the
Pain.

Take of Horse-dung one ounce, crumble it in small Pieces, and infuse it in a
Pint of Erratick Poppy-water, to which add eight or ten drops of Spirit of
Wine. Strain it gently, and divide it into three Doses to be taken when the
Pain is most violent.

But if the Disease degenerates into a Palsy, you must use to the Spine of the
Back, and the paralitick Parts, some resolving Balsam, and such an one as
strengthens the Nerves, if there be a Fever; but if there be no Fever, you
may apply Wool dipped in Oil or Ointment to the Paralitick Parts, taking great
Care that the Patient does not catch Cold, for by that means the Humor will be
more fixed upon the parts, and the Perspiration of it will be hindered.

CHAP. LXXI. Of the Bilious Chollick of the Years 1670, 71, 72.
IN all these Years the Blood was much inclined to put off upon the Bowels hot
and Choleric Humors, upon which Account this Chollick was more frequent than
is usual: The same Febrile Symptoms preceded this Disease as used to go before
the Dysentery, that reigned in those times; and sometimes this Disease followed
the Dysentery, when it had a long while afflicted the Patient, and was just
about to leave him; but when it did not follow a long Dysentery, it generally
took its Rise from a Fever, which after some Hours was wont to end in this
Disease; it chiefly seized Young People of a hot and Choleric Constitution,
especially in the Summer the Pain of the Bowels was extremely violent, and more
intolerable than any other that afflicts poor Mortals; it sometimes binds as
it were the Guts, and sometimes being contracted to a Point, it bores like an
Auger; the Pain now and then remits, and presently the Fit approaches again,
which as soon as the Patient perceives, he looks sadly, and bemoans himself, as
if it were actually upon him. At the beginning of this Disease the Pain is not
so certainly determined to one Point, as in the Progress of it; nor is the
Vomiting so frequent, or does the Belly so obstinately resist Catharticks; but
the more the Pain is increased, the more pertinaciously is it fixed in a Point,
the Vomiting is more frequent, and the Belly more bound, till at length by the
dreadful Force of these Symptoms, a total subversion of the Peristaltick Motion
of the Guts, if the Patient be not relieved; and by consequence an Iliack
Passion is procured, in which Disease all purging Medicines become presently
Emetick, and Glisters that are injected are vomited up with the Excrements.

The Matter that is cast up after this Manner, if it be sincere, and without
mixture, is sometimes green, and sometimes Yellow, and sometimes of an unusual
Color.

In order to the Cure, I bleed freely in the Arm, if no Blood has been taken
away before, and after two or three Hours I give an Anodyne; the next day I
prescribe some gentle Purge, and order that it should be repeated. The next day
save one, and sometimes thrice, according as the Relics of the Humor are more
or less.

But we must take notice, that if this Disease proceeds from eating too much
Fruit, or from any Meat of hard Digestion, upon which account ill and corrupted
Juices are first transmitted to the Blood, and afterward to the Bowels: I say
in this Case the Stomach must be washed with large draughts of Posset Drink,
which must be vomited up again; which being done, an Anodyne must be given and
the next Day a Vein must be opened; and as to other things, you (...) proceed
according to the Directions above mentioned; but when the Violence of the Pain,
and the Vomiting (by reason of which the Guts are as it were inverted) do
resist the Operation of the Catharticks, for it is in vain to give a gentle
Purge, unless the Patient is easily purged, which must be carefully inquired
into; for such a Medicine being not strong enough to make its way through the
Intestines, the Patient is more injured thereby; for by its ineffectual
Agitation the Vomiting and the pain are increased. A lenitive purging Potion of
the Infusion of Tamarinds, of the Leaves of Senna, and Rubarb, in which may be
dissolved Manna, and Syrup of Roses, is to be preferred before other
Catharticks, for it least exagitates and moves the Humors; but if the Sick
cannot retain a Liquid Medicine by reason of an Aversion, or because of the
Vomiting, you must necessarily use Pills; among which the Pill Coch pleases me
best, for they pass best through the Body in this, and in most other Cases. But
when the Weakness of the Stomach, or the Vomiting is so great, that the Pills
cannot be retained, then I first order an Anodyne, and a few hours after a
Purge; but there must be so much space betwixt them, that the Cathartick be not
quelled by the Narcotick, and so rendered ineffectual; but that it may continue
so long in the Stomach as is necessary for its imparting its purgative Quality
to it, that it may operate when the Virtue of the Narcotick is spent, though
the purge, if it could be conveniently done, is best given a long while after
the Anodyn, for twelve hours after taking it, the patient is difficultly purged.

But because in this, as well as in most other Diseases wherein Narcoticks are
indicated, a purge always increases the pain (at least when it has done
working, for while it is in Operation the patient is not so ill) therefore I
usually give an Anodyne as soon as the purge has done working, which I order to
be taken Morning and Evening daily betwixt the purges, that I may the more
certainly appease the pain, till the patient has been sufficiently purged.

The purging of the Humors being over, I endeavor to bridle the Fury of the
Disease (which now only remains to be done) by giving an Anodyne constantly
Morning and Evening, which must be sometimes repeated oftener; nor could I ever
take off violent Pains without a larger Dose than is usual, and that repeated
too; for that which is sufficient to vanquish another Disease, will be
altogether insufficient in this Case, the violence of the Disease subduing the
force of the Medicine: And it is indeed safe to repeat Narcoticks, while such a
Pain as this continues violent, but not when it is gone off. Wherefore I repeat
the Anodyne according to the degree of the Pain till it ceases, or till it be
very much lessened.

Yet there must be such a Space of Time between them, that you may find what
may be hoped for from the former Dose, before another be given; but for the
most part unless the Pain be very violent, a Paregorick given Morning and
Evening may be sufficient. Liquid Laudanum is the Anodyne I chiefly use,
whereof I give Sixteen Drops in some cordial Water; or the dose may be
increased according to the violence of the Pain. But here I must admonish you,
that though I have said Bleeding and purging must necessarily precede this
quieting Method, yet sometimes upon occasion both being omitted, you must begin
with Anodynes.

For Instance, when by reason of some preceding Sickness, large Evacuations
have been used not long before the Coming of the Chollick, for many Times they
who have recovered of another Disease have fell suddenly into this, by reason
of the Weakness of the Bowels; especially if there be a great degree of Heat
occasioned by drinking of Wine or some other Spiritous Liquor immoderately; I
say in this Case, it is not only unnecessary, but I think it is injurious, to
give Catharticks again; for by them new Tumults will be raised. Moreover, The
Guts are most commonly sufficiently cleansed by Glisters frequently used,
before the Physician is advised with; so that partly for this cause, and partly
by reason of the long continuance of the Disease, Narcoticks seem in a manner
to be only useful.

But because this pain of it is own Nature is wont to return more than any
other, all Occasions of its Relapse must be prevented, by giving an Anodyne
twice a day for some days; but if as often as the Narcotick is intermitted, the
pain now and then returns, as it sometimes happens, I do not know any thing
that will so certainly perfect the Cure, as riding on Horseback, or in a Coach,
with which the Patient must take long Journies; and in the mean while an
Anodyne must be given constantly Morning and Evening. But Riding must not be
used before the Patient has been well purged, and then it must be continued for
many Days.

If the Patient be young, and of a hot Constitution, I order a cooling and
thickning Diet, suppose Pulp of Barley, Panada, and the like; and every third
Day, if the Stomach is craving, a Chick or a Whiteing boiled; and I allow no
other Drink than small Beer, or Milk-water, and this is all I order, unless
Riding necessary to recover the Health requires more nourishing Food, and more
generous Liquor, whereby the Spirits exhausted by Exercise may be repaired.

But when the Disease, being unskilfully treated, has a long while afflicted
the Patient, so that the Bowels become weak and infirm, and he is in a manner
quite wasted, I say in this Case we find by experience, that the free use of
Epidemick Water, or of Aqua-mirabilis, or any other the Patient likes best,
relieves him at this Time beyond Expectation,

Moreover, As in the Cure of the Disease, so when it is over, the thin Diet we
have mentioned must be observed for some time; for this Disease being more apt
to return than any other, and seating it self upon the principle parts of
Concoction, the least error in this kind will presently occasion much Pain:
Wherefore in this and all other Diseases of the Bowels, Meats of hard Digestion
are carefully to be avoided, and things of easy Digestion must be taken only
in such a Quantity as will suffice to sustain Life.

CHAP. LXXII. Of the Hysteric Chollick.
A Certain kind of Hysteric Disease afflicts some Women very like the Bilious
Chollick, both as to the Sharpness and Situation of the Pain; and also upon the
account of the Humors ejected by Vomit of a Yellow and green Color. But least
any one should take it for the Bilious Chollick just now mentioned, I will
treat of it in a Chapter by it Self.

Those Women that are of a lax and crude Habit of Body, are chiefly afflicted
with this Disease; and they that have lately labored under some other
Hysteric Indisposition, (or which is very often) those that have scarce evaded
a difficult and hard Labor in bringing forth a large Child, whereby the
Mothers Natural Strength has been almost Spent.

A Pain, as violent almost as that of the Chollick or Iliack Passion, seises
the Region of the Stomach; and sometimes it comes a little lower, and then
violent Vomitings follow, and the Matter which is cast up is sometimes yellow,
and sometimes green. And moreover, (which I have often observed) there is a
greater Dejection of Spirit, and Despiration, than in any other Disease
whatever. After a day or two the Pain goes off, and returns again in a few
Weeks after as violent as it was before; sometimes it is accompanied with the
Jaundice, which is very visible, and which goes off of its own accord in a few
days, when all the Symptoms are gone off; and when the Patient seems very well,
the Smallest Disorder of Mind, whether it be occasioned by Anger or Sorrow (to
both which in this Case Women are very prone) almost recalls the Pain, which
may be said of walking, or any other Exercise used too soon, for by these means
Vapors are elevated in a Lax and weak Habit of Body; when according to the
Vulgar Opinion I say Vapors, whither they be so or no, or whither they are
Convulsions of particular parts, the Phenomenon may be solved either way. These
Vapors or Convulsions, when they invade this or that Region of the Body,
produce Symptoms agreeable to the part they invade, and though they are one and
the same Disease every where, yet they cunningly resemble most of the Diseases
Mankind is exposed to.

Bleeding and Purging repeated, which were plainly indicated at the beginning
of a Bilious Chollick, are not to be used here, but the whole Business must be
done by Anodyns, unless a great Quantity of Blood and Humors so resists the
operation of the Narcotick, that though it be often repeated, it cannot quell
the Tumult, till the Patient is blooded and purged, which I have observed in
Women of a very sanguine Constitution, and in Virago's. If the Case is so,
Bleeding or Purging, or perchance both, must make Way for the Anodyne; for
either of these being used, a moderate dose of the Narcotick will perform the
Business, which otherwise would signify nothing, though the largest Dose is
given: But this seldom happens, and these Remedies must not be repeated; and
when they are used, when there is need of them, you must proceed in giving
Anodynes in that Method which I have proposed in the Bilious Chollick; and they
must be taken often or seldom according to the degrees of Pain. But for as much
as this Disease, in Hypochondriack as well as in Hysteric People, often ends
in the Jaundice, and as this comes on that goes off, we must take notice that
in curing this kind of Jaundice, all Catharticks are to be wholly omitted; or
if they are given, you must use only Rubarb, or some other gentle Purge; for
there is danger least by purging new Tumults should arise, and so all the
Symptoms return; and therefore in this Case nothing must be done presently,
seeing the Jaundice taking its Rise on this Account, generally lessens of its
own accord, and wholly vanishes in a short time: But if it continues a long
while and seems to go off difficultly, Remedies must be taken for it. I use the
following.

Take of the Roots of Madder, and of Turmerick, each one ounce; of all the
greater Celandine, and of the Tops of the lesser Centaury, each one handful;
boil them in equal parts of Rhenish-wine, and of Fountain Water to a quart; in
the Liquor strained dissolve two ounces of the Syrup of the five opening Roots;
mingle them, make an Apozem. Let the Patient take half a pint Morning and
Evening till he is well.

But if the Jaundice comes of it self, the Chollick not going before it is
necessary, besides the alteratives just mentioned.

To give Cholagogues, that is such things as purge Choler by Stool, viz. once
or twice before the Patient enters upon the Apozem prescribed, and afterward
once a Week, as long as he takes it. As,

Take of the Electuary of the Juice of Roses two drams, of Rubarb finely
powdered half a dram, of Cream of Tartar one scruple; make a Bolus with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Rubarb with Succory; give it early in the
Morning; let the Patient drink upon it a small draught of Rhenish-wine.

But if notwithstanding the constant taking of these things a long while, the
Disease continues obstinate, the Patient must drink Tunbridge-waters, or such
like, from the Fountain every Morning till he recovers.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of the Iliack Passion.
THis dreadful Disease being hitherto almost in the Opinion of all Mortal,
takes its Rise from the inverted and preposterous Motion of the Intestines, to
wit, the Fibers of the Intestines, which ought to be contracted from the
Superior toward the Inferior, are drawn to the Superior; and whatsoever is
contained in the Intestines, is not protruded to the Belly, but toward the
Stomach, and is violently regurgitated to the Mouth, so that Glisters, how
sharp soever become vomitive; and also Catharticks taken by the Mouth are
suddenly cast up by Vomit. And in my Opinion, the exquisite and intolerable
Pain coming upon this Disease, is only occasioned by the foresaid preposterous
Motion of the Intestines; for whereas those Folds, which the many
Circumvolutions of the Intestines make, are so formed by Nature, that they
should most fitly conduce to the carrying down of the Faeces: When they, I say,
are forced to give way to a Motion contrary to their Fibers, the aforesaid Pain
is occasioned from thence, which is fixed to one part, and is like the boreing
of an Auger, when either the Valve, which is placed at the Beginning of the
Colon, hinders the going back of the Excrements to the Ilion, or any other
Membrane belonging to the Sinus sustains alone the Force of this preposterous
Impulse.

We may assign a twofold Cause of this Inversion, from whence the Pain arises,
viz. Obstruction and Iritation.

First therefore, Whatever violently obstructs the Intestines, so that nothing
can pass downwards, necessarily produces this contrary Motion in them. Among
these Authors are wont to reckon the Excrements hardened, gross Wind collected
in a great quantity, and tying up as it were the Intestines, the Constriction
of them in a Rupture: And lastly An Inflammation, and other great Tumors,
which stop up the Internal Cavity of the Intestine. In the mean time we must
not deny, that this contrary Motion, owing its rise to these Causes, is rather
to be accounted the Motion of these things taken in, than of the Intestines;
nor is this an Inversion of the whole Duct of the Intestines, but only of those
which are situated above the Seat of that Obstruction; wherefore I call an
Iliack Passion proceeding hence spurious.

Secondly, I think that in the Iliack Passion, the cause of the Inversion of
the Peristaltick Motion of the Intestines, is most commonly after this Manner,
viz. Sharp and malignant Humors are cast upon the Stomach, and the Guts that
are next to it, by which the Motion of the Stomach is inverted, and forced
violently to cast up what is contained in it; at length the small Guts that are
joined to the Stomach being weakened, yield to the violent Motion of it, and
with them at last the greater follow by Consent; the Stomach Vomiting, leading
as it were the Dance, this I call a true Iliack Passion, and which is treated
of now.

The Method of cureing it has been hitherto in a manner unknown, whatever some
boast of the use of Quicksilver and Bullets, which besides that they do little
good, are very often injurious.

I have successfully used the following Method,

When it appears by Glisters cast up by the Mouth, and other Signs, that it is
a true Iliack Passion, I endeavor these three things.

First, That the contrary Motion of the Stomach, which causes the like Motion
of the Guts, may be hindered. Secondly, That the Intestines being weakened by the
sharp Humor may be corroborated. Thirdly, That the Stomach and Guts be freed
from these Humors. And that I may Answer these Indications, I institute the
Cure after this Manner. First, I prescribe one Scruple of Salt of Wormwood in a
spoonful of Juice of Lemons to be taken Morning and Evening; but at other times
of the Day I order some spoonfuls of Mint Water, without Sugar or any thing
else, to be taken twice in an Hour; by the repeated use of which alone, the
Vomiting and the Pain arising from thence will soon vanish. At the same time I
order a living Kitling to lie continually upon the naked Belly. But after the
Pain and Vomiting has wholly ceased for the Space of two or three Days, I give
one dram of the Pill Coch-major dissolved in Mint-water, which I also order to
be used very often, all the time of the working of the Pills, that I may the
more certainly hinder the Return of the Vomiting; nor is the Kitling to be
removed, before the Patient has taken the Pills.

I have observed, that it is to no purpose to give these Pills, or any other
Purge, how strong soever, until the Stomach is strengthened, and reduced to its
Natural Motion, and the Guts also to that which is proper to them; for
otherwise all Catharticks taken inwardly would prove Emetick, and so do more
hurt than good, and therefore I do not use Purging Medicines, until for some
Time I have used those Medicines which respect the Stomach.

I prescribe a very thin Diet, for I allow only some spoonfuls of
Chicken-broath to be taken twice or thrice a day; in the mean while I order the
Patient to keep his Bed all the Time of the Sickness, till the Signs of perfect
Health appear; and when he is well I appoint him to persist in the use of the
foresaid Water for a long Time, and to keep his Belly warm with Flannels
doubled, that there may not be a Relapse where unto this Disease is very prone.

CHAP. LXXIV. Of Costiveness.
BY Costiveness we do not understand a pefect Stoppage of the Belly, so that
nothing is evacuated downwards as happens in the Iliack Passion, but only a
slow and unsuitable Evacuation that Way, whereby the Excrements, and the
Relicts of the Meat are seldom ejected, and not according to the quantity taken
in.

When the Belly is bound, Vapors arise to the Head, and Catarrhs and Diseases
of the Brain are produced, the Concoction is hindered, and the Actions of other
Parts.

For the Cure of this Disease the following Medicines must be used.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, and of Lillies, each two ounces; of the
Leaves of Mallows, Marshmallows, Mercury, Violets, Bears-breach, each one
Handful; of Linseed, and Fenugreek-seeds, each half an ounce; of the Seeds of
Annise one dram and an half, of sweet Prunes three pair, of the Flowers of
Camomil, and Melilot, each one Pugil; boil them to a Pint and an half, in the
strained Liquor dissolve of Oil of Lillies, and of Fenugreek-seeds, each two
ounces; of fresh-butter half an ounce, of Catholicon Duplicatum, and of
Diaprunum simplex, each six drams; make a Glister to be injected as often as
there is Occasion.

But we must endeavor to loosen the Belly by other Remedies, because by the
frequent use of Glisters Nature grows more slothful, and at length will never
ease the Body without a Glister.

To this End sweet Prunes, or roasted Aples, are to be eaten an hour before
Meals, or in a Decoction of Prunes an ounce of Mauna must be dissolved.

The following Broth certainly loosens the Belly and keeps it loose for some
Days.

Take of the Leaves of Beet and Mercury, each one handful, boil them in common
Broth, let it be taken an Hour before Dinner.

CHAP. LXXV. Of a Lientery, and the Caeliack Passion.
A Lientery is a sort of Looseness, wherein the Meat is voided in a short time,
nothing altered, but as it was taken in at the Mouth: In the Caeliack Passion
the Nourishment is voided crude and imperfectly digested.

There are many Causes of the Lientery and Caeliack Passion proposed by
Authors, all which may be reduced to three Heads; viz. A cold Intemperies of
the Stomach and Intestines; an Irritation of those Parts, and a great Debility
of the retentive Faculty, from a grievous and deadly Disease.

There is another Cause different from those mentioned, which uses peculiarly
to produce the Caeliack Passion, viz. The Obstruction of the Meseraick Veins,
whhich stops the Passage of the Chyle. Aetius and Celsus, and many of their
followers, do propose another Cause of the Lientery, viz. A hard Cicatrix upon
the Intestines produced by a Dysentery,

The Cure of this Disease is to be varied according to the Variety of the
Causes producing it: And first, that which is occasioned by a Phlegmatic
Humor, may be Cured with the following Remedies; but you must begin by Purging
Medicines made of Aloes, Rubarb, and Mirobalans,

Take of old Conserve of Roses six ounces, of the best Venice Treacle six
drams, Marmalad of Quinces a sufficient quantity, mix them. Let the Sick take
half a dram in the Morning drinking nothing upon it. Or,

Take of Japan Earth one dram and an half, of red Coral and Crab's-eyes
prepared, each one dram; of old Conserve of Roses one ounce and an half, of
Balsamic Syrup a sufficient quantity; mix them, make an Electuary.

The Quantity of a Nutmeg of it may be taken Morning and Evening.

Take of Gum-caranna, of the Magisterial Stomach Plaster, each a sufficient
Quantity; of the Chemical Oil of Wormwood twelve drops; mix them, make a
Plaster for the Region of the Stomach.

That which proceeds from a bilious Humor, is to be cured with the following
Remedies.

Take of the best Aloes washed in Rose Water three drams, of Rubarb powdered
and moistened with Borrage-water one dram, of Mastich, red Sanders, red Coral
prepared, each one scruple; of Syrup of Roses solutive a sufficient quantity;
make a Mass for Pills, of which let the Sick take half a dram, or one dram at a
time.

Take of sealed Earth, Bole-Armenick, red Coral prepared, Pearls prepared, of
the Seeds of Purslain and Sorrel each one dram, of the Shavings of Hartshorn,
and of the Leaves of Mint dried, each one scruple, of red Roses half a Pugil;
make a Powder to be sprinkled upon Broth, or to be taken in a Spoon with a
little Water wherein Iron has been quenched.

But if the Stools be pure Chyle, this Distemper does not proceed from the
Fault of the Stomach, but from the Obstruction of the Meseraick Veins, which is
very frequent, and is chiefly incident to Children, therefore it is to be cured
with Remedies that open Obstructions.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of a Diarrhea.
A Diarrhea, is that sort of a Looseness, in which excrementitious Humors,
without Blood, Chyle or Ulceration of the Intestines are voided by Stool.

There is another Species of a Diarrhea which is called colliquative, arising
from the Colliquation of the Substance of the Body.

If a Diarrhea be critical, and is easily born, and the Disease goes off by it,
or is greatly diminished, the Sick is benefited by it.

But if a Diarrhea be Symptomatical, it occasions a great deal of Pain to the
Sick, the Strength greatly decreases, and the Disease upon which it comes is
considerably augmented, or at least does not decrease.

As to the Cure a Symptomatick Diarrhea rises for the most part from bad and
corrupted Humors, therefore the Cure of it is to be begun with the Evacuation
of the Peccant Humor.

Take of the best Rhubarb six grains, of the Seeds of Coriander bruised two
scruples, infuse and boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water, to
three ounces of the strained Liquor, add of Rubarb torrified one Scruple, of
the Syrup of Succory with Rubarb one ounce, mix them, make a Draught to be
taken in the Morning.

A Vomit is also sometimes convenient, because it makes a Revulsion and
Evacuation of the Morbisick Matter.

If there be Signs of abundance of Blood, and the Body being strong, Bleeding
is necessary in the beginning.

The Body being sufficiently evacuated, both by purging Medicines, and the
Looseness it self; astringent and strengthening Medicines are to be given, as
well by the Mouth, as injected by Glisters, and applied to the Belly.

Take of Diascordium grains twenty five, of the compound Powder of Crabs-Claws
grains seventeen, of Syrup of Mint a sufficient quantity, mix them, make a
Bolus to be repeated upon Occasion.

Take of Epidemick-water half an ounce, of Cinnamon Water hordeated three
drams, of black-cherry-water, two ounces, of Liquid Laudanum prepared with
Juice of Quinces fifteen drops, Syrup of Mint a sufficient quantity; mix them,
let the Sick take this Mixture after the Bolus above prescribed, and at
Bedtime.

Take of Epidemick-water, and of Cinnamon Water hordeated each three ounces; of
Mint-water one ounce, of Black Cherry-water five ounces, of Syrup of Mint a
sufficient quantity; mingle them, let him take six spoonfuls after the
Bolusses.

Take of Hartshorn calcined two ounces, of Nutmeg four Scruples, of the Roots
of Tormentil three drams; boil them in Fountain Water to three Pints, adding
toward the end an ounce of White-bread, add to the strained Liquor two ounces
of Doctor Stephens's water, and sweeten it with Syrup of Quinces, let him take
it for his ordinary Drink. Or,

Take of Diascordim three drams, of Cinnamon Water, and simple Angelica-water,
each five ounces; infuse them hot in a close Vessel to draw a Tincture, strain
it, and add to it fifty drops of Laudanum Cydoniated, and a sufficient quantity
of Syrup of Mint; mingle them, let him take two Spoonfuls every Night at
bedtime, and in the Day a spoonful after every Stool. Or,

Take of London Laudanum three grains, of Doctor Stephens's water, and of
Cinnamon Water hordeated each one ounce, of Syrup of Quinces one dram, mingle
them, make a Draught, let him take it at bedtime, repeat it at three in the
Morning, and at eight in the Morning.

Take of the Leaves of Mint, the tops of Wormwood each four handfuls; of
Zedoary, Galingal, Cyperus, sweet smelling Flag, Nutmeg, sharp Cinnamon, Mace,
each half an ounce; of Cubebs, Cloves, each two drams; make two Bags to be
boiled in Clarret-wine and Smiths-water, each a quart; press them hot out of
the Liquor, and apply them by turns to the Region of the Stomach.

Take of Conserve of common Wormwood half an ounce, of old Mithridate Six
drams, of Powder of Mastich a sufficient quantity, make a Plaster to be spread
on Leather, and to be applied to the Region of the Stomach, you must spread the
Margin with Paracelsus's Plaster to make it stick. Or,

Take of the Stomach-plaister three drams, of Oil of Mace by Expression two
scruples, of Chemical Oil of Wormwood, and of Chemical Oil of Mace, each two
drops; mingle them, make a Plaster to be applied to the Stomach.

Take of Diascordium six drams, of Venice Treacle two drams* boil them in Cows
Milk, let eight ounces of the strained Liquor be injected for a Glister, and
let it be repeated thrice. Or,

Take of the Roots of Tormentil three drams, of Yellow Mirobalans two drams, of
Balaustins one dram and an half, of the Flowers of red Roses half an handful,
of Rice bruised half an ounce, of Coriander-seeds half an ounce, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Fountain Water, to fourteen ounces, strain it, and make
a Glister of half of it, and give the other half four hours after if the
looseness continues.

CHAP. LXXVI. Of the Bloody Flux.
SOmetimes it begins with shaking and shivering, and Heat of the whole Body
follows, as is usual in Fevers, and soon after the Gripes and Stools; but
oftentimes there is no Appearance of a Fever going before, for the Gripes
begin and Stools soon follows; but there are always great Gripes, and a
Depression of the Bowels with Pain, when the Patient goes to Stool; the Stools
are frequent, with a very troublesome Descent as it were of the Guts, and they
are all mucous, not excrementitious, excepting that sometimes an
excrementitious Stool comes between, and that is without any great Pain, these
mucous Stools are streaked with Blood, yet sometimes there is no Blood at all
mixed with them through the whole course of the Disease, yet notwithstanding, if
the Stools are frequent with Gripes and a mucous Filth, the Disease may be as
properly called a Dysentery, as if Blood flowed with them.

Moreover, The Sick, if he be in the Flower of his Age, or is heated by
Cordials, has a Fever, and his Tongue is covered thick with a kind of whitish
Matter; and if he has been much heated it is black and dry; the Strength is much
dejected, the Spirits are dissipated, and all the Signs of an ill favored
Fever are present.

And this Disease does not only occasion dreadful Pains and Sickness, but,
unless it be skilfully managed, it brings the Patient into great Danger of his
Life; for when a great many of the Spirits, and a great deal of the vital Heat,
have been exhausted by frequent Stools, before the peccant Matter can be cast
out of the Blood, his Hands and Feet growing cold, he will be in danger of
dying; and if he should escape Death this time, yet many Symptoms of a
different kind attend the Poor Wretch. For Instance, Sometimes in the Progress
of the Disease, instead of those Sanguineous Filaments which at the beginning
used to be mixed with the Stools, pure Blood is evacuated unmingled with Slime,
and in a larger quantity at every Time which is an Argument that some of the
greater Vessels of the Intestines are corroded, and so the Patient is in danger
of Death: And sometimes also, by reason of the great Burning which is
occasioned by a large Flux of hot and sharp Matter to the Parts affected, the
Intestines are gangrened. Moreover, a Thrush at the end of the Disease does
very often affect the Mouth and Jaws, especially when the Body has been a long
Time heated, and when the Evacuation of the peccant Matter has been hindered by
astringent Medicines, the Fomes of the Disease having not been first purged
off,; and this is most commonly the forerunner of Death; but if the Patient get
over the foresaid Symptoms, and the Disease continues long, at length the
Intestines seem to be affected successively downwards, till the Disease be
thrust down into the right Gut, and ends in a Tenesmus. But tho this Disease is
very often deadly in grown People, but especially to ancient People, yet it is
very gentle in Children, who sometimes have it some Months, without any Injury,
if it be left to Nature.

As to the Cure, When I was first called, I bled in the Arm, and at Night I
gave an Anodyne, and the next Morning the following lenitive Purge.

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce, of the Leaves of Senna two drams, of Rubarb
one dram and an half, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, in three
ounces of the strained Liquor, dissolve of Manna, and of Syrup of Roses
solutive, each an ounce; to be taken early in the Morning.

And because it is very obvious, that purging Medicines, tho they be never so
gentle, do heighten the Gripes, and cause a general Disorder and Depression of
the Spirits, by the Adventitious Tumult they raise in the Blood and Humors,
therefore I usually give an Anodyne after every Purge somewhat earlier than is
customary, viz. At any time of the Afternoon if the Purge seem to have done
working, whereby I may be able to quiet the Tumult I have raised. I repeat the
foresaid Purge twice, to be taken every other Day, and give an Anodyne after
every Purge at the Time above mentioned, and I order this to be used Morning
and Evening when the Patient don't Purge, that I may quell the violence of the
Symptoms, and gain a Truce while I am evacuating the peccant Humors. The
Anodyne I use is chiefly Liquid Laudanum, viz. Sixteen or eighteen Drops of it
in any Cordial-water for one Dose.

After Bleeding and Purging once used, I allow through the whole course of the
Disease, any temperate Cordial to be taken now and then, as Epidemick-water,
compound Scordium-water, and the like. For Instance,

Take of the Waters of Black-cherries and Strawberries, each four ounces; of
Epidemick-water, and compound Scordium water, and of Cinnamon Water hordeated,
each one ounce; of prepared Pearls one dram and an half, of Christaline Sugar a
sufficient quantity, add half a dram of Damask-rose-water to make it pleasant
to the Taste, mingle them, and make a Julep, of which let him take four or five
spoonfuls when he is faint, and any other time when he will.

I chiefly used these things in ancient and Phlegmatic People, that I might
somewhat refresh and comfort their Spirits usually dejected in this Disease:
their Drink was Milk mixed with three times the quantity of Water, or the white
Decoction of Hartshorn, and of white-bread, each two ounces, boiled in three
Pints of Fountain Water to two, and sweetened with a sufficient quantity of
white Sugar, and sometimes Posset Drink; and when they were very weak, they
took for their ordinary drink cold, a quart of Fountain Water boiled with half
a Pint of Sack; they were dieted sometimes with Panada, and sometimes with
Broths made of lean Mutton. I kept ancient People much in Bed, and permitted
them to use more freely any Cordial-water they had been accustomed to, than was
fit for Young People and Infants. This Method was the best I have hitherto met
with for the Cure of this Disease, which seldom lasted after the third Purge.

But if the Disease was obstinate, and did not yield to these things, I
prescribed the foresaid Paregorick every day in the Morning and at bedtime,
till the Patient was quite well; yea, that it might be the more certainly
quelled, I gave the foresaid Laudanum every eighth Hour, and a larger Dose than
I have mentioned above, viz. twenty five drops, if the former Dose was not
sufficient to suppress the Flux. Moreover, I ordered a Glyster made of half a a
pint of Cows-milk, and of an ounce and an half of Venice-treacle, to be
injected daily, which is exceeding beneficial in all manner of Fluxes of the
Belly.

Infants seized with this Disease are to be treated after the same manner, but
the quantity of Blood to be taken away, and the Doses of the Purging and
Anodyne Medicines are to be lessened with respect to their Age, so for example,
two drops of the Narcotick may be sufficient for a Child of a Year old.

The Liquid Laudanum, which as was said, I daily used, was prepared according
to this easy Method.

Take of Spanish-wine one Pint, Opium two ounces, of Saffron one ounce, of the
Powder of Cinnamon, and of Cloves, each one dram; let them be infused together
in a Bath for two or three days, till the Liquor come to a due Consistence,
strain it, and keep it for use.

In the Dry-gripe Dysentery, I used the following Method. If the Patient was in
the Flower of his Age, and had a Fever, I ordered him to be bled in the Arm,
and after an hour or two, that he should take great quantities of Liquor, as I
used to do in the Cholera Morbus, but not Chicken-broth, or Posset Drink, as in
that Case, but Whey, which I ordered to be drank cold in the same quantity as
in the Cholera; but the Glisters were to be injected warm, without Sugar, or
any other thing; I found the Gripes and the bloody Stools went off, with the
fourth Glister: This Business being over, and all the Whey ejected (which might
be done in the Space of two or three Hours, if the Sick minded his Business) I
presently put him to Bed, where he soon sweated of his own Accord (by reason of
the Whey mixed with the Blood) and I ordered it should be continued for twenty
four hours, but not at all provoked, allowing him all the while nothing but
Milk a little warmed, which he only used three or four days after he left his
Bed. If either by rising too soon, or by leaving the use of Milk too soon, the
Patient relapses, the same Method is to be repeated.

To conclude, It Is to be noted, that tho in those Years wherein the Bloody Flux
is Epidemical, the foresaid Evacuations are wholly necessary before we come to
the use of Laudanum, yet in any Constitution, not favoring so much this
Disease, they may be safely omitted, and the Cure may be performed more
compendiously by Laudanum alone in the manner we have described.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of a Tenesmus.
A Tenesmus is a continual Motion to go to Stool, whereby nothing but a mucous
Matter is evacuated.

The Cause of this Disease is an Ulcer of the right Gut, from whence a purulent
Matter continually flows, and irritates the expulsive Faculty. It is not
dangerous, unless it proceed from black Choler, and so should turn to a Cancer,
or should occasion Miscarriage in Women with Child.

The manner of Cure is much the same with that of the Bloody Flux. If there be
an Inflammation (which is chiefly known by a Fever) or an abundance of Blood,
Bleeding must be used; and if the Inflammation remains after Bleeding, and
occasion a Strangury (which sometimes happens) Bleeding by Leeches in the
Hemorrhoidal Veins is beneficial.

Glisters are also to be Injected according to the various Seasons of the
Ulcer, sometimes those that are lenient when the Pain is violent, sometimes
cleansing, glutinating, or astringent; but in giving Glisters you must observe,
first, that they must be given often and in a small quantity, because it is
difficult to keep them, and then the Pipe must be put up gently, least it
should anger the part and cause Pain.

And the part must be well fomented and Bathed, and Fumes, Suppositories and
Ointments must be used to it; a Fomentation may be made in the following manner.

Take of the Leaves of Mullein, and Wormwood, each six handfulls; boil them in
new Milk, and put them into two Bags, and apply them hot by turns to the
Fundament and Belly. Or,

Take of the Flowers of Camomil and Roses, each one handful, of red Wine a
quart; infuse them for two Hours upon hot Ashes, foment the Fundament as hot as
the Patient can bear it with Clothes four times double; afterward let hlm set
upon a Sponge pressed out of the same Liquor.

Or fill two Bags with wheat-bran, and boil them in Vinegar, let the Sick sit
hot upon them by turns, as he can bear them. If much Blood be evacuated, you
may make a Fomentation in the following manner.

Take of the Leaves and Roots of Mullein two handfuls, of red Roses one Pugil,
of the Bark of Pomegranates, and of Gauls, each half an ounce; boil them in two
Parts of Smiths Water, and in one of red Wine, 'twill be more powerful if you
add half an ounce of Alum.

A Bath to ease the Pain must be made of Emollients boiled in a Decoction of
Sheeps-feet, and if the Heat be much, Violets, Nightshade, Goards, and pieces
of Melons may be added: But to heal the Ulcer, a Bath must be made of
Astringents; Fumes are proper to dry the Ulcer, made of Frankincense cast on
Coals, or of a Decoction of Savine made with Oxycrate; the following is much
commended by Forestus.

Take of Mastich one dram, of Frankincense one Scruple, of Mirtles one dram and
an half, of red Roses two scruples, make a Fume to be received through a Chair
that has a hole at the Bottom.

Suppositories do much good in this Case, but they ought to be gentle, least
they should exasperate the sensible Part; they may be made of Goats Suet cut
into the Form of a Suppository; for it gives Ease and heals the Ulcer; but it
will be more powerful to ease the Pain, if you mix with it the Seeds of white
Poppies, and of Henbane bruised; but it is much better to add, instead of the
Seeds, three drops of the Oils pressed from the Seeds, or a grain of Opium
dissolved in half a Scruple of Oil of Almonds.

But to heal the Ulcer, it is best to add to the Suet dissolved, Starch, and
Gum-tragacanth beat or infused first in Plantane-water; or it may be compounded
in the following manner.

Take of Gum-Tragacanth as much as is sufficient, pour upon it a little
Plantain-water, that it may only swell, and not be too moist; add the Mucilage
of the Seeds of Psyllium, or of Quinces a sufficient quantity, and the Yolk of
one Egg, mingle them and make them warm; and of melted wax a sufficient
quantity, to make Suppositories. Narcoticks may be also added, and the Powders
of Ceruss, Tutty, Bole, Balaustines, and other things that dry, and are not
acrimonious, when there is a great Corrosion, but they ought to be finely
powdered least they should cause Pain.

Oils and Ointments may be also applied, as Ointment of Roses, Populeum of the
Mucilages, of Yolks of Eggs, and Oil of Roses, and the like, to assuage the
Pain and Inflammation.

Lastly, when the Disease is violent, Narcoticks must be used inwardly and
outwardly; Laudanum Opiatum is best, whereof three or four grains may be given
with Mastich, or sealed Earth, or mixed with a Glister made of a Decoction of
Camomil Flowers.

CHAP. LXXIX. Of Worms.
THe Worms are generated in various Parts of the Body, yet because that is very
seldom, and they most frequently abound in the Guts, therefore we shall treat
only of these.

The Signs of Worms in the Bowels are various, the following are most frequent
and ordinary, a stinking Breath, and Excrements like Cow Dung: There are other
Signs, but they are not so common, as a continual Fever, which has
Exacerbations often in a Day, with a cold Sweat, Anxiety, and sometimes with
fainting, Nauseousness, Vomiting, and great Thirst; the Pulse are unequal, the
Cheeks are red by turns, or wax livid, the Eyes shine, the Nostrils itch, the
Teeth gnash, there is a small dry Cough, the Spittle is more than usual,
sometimes the Head is heavy, there is a sleepy Disposition, sometimes a
Delirium and Convulsive Fits, there is most commonly a pain in the Belly, like
a gnawing or Biting, sometimes the Belly swells as in a Dropsy, sometimes the
Body wastes beyond Measure, and sometimes there is an insatiable Appetite. The
Worms called Ascarides are known by a troublesome itching about the Fundament,
and they also often appear upon the Excrements: To conclude, Putrefaction of
the Gums is also a Sign.

The Cure of Worms is to be directed to the Expulsion of them, by purging
Medicines that kill them, and expel the Matter from whence they are generated.

Take of calcined Hartshorn three grains, of Mercurius dulcis sprinkled with a
drop of Oil of Sulphur by the Bell grains fifteen, of Diagridium grains nine,
of Cinnamon grains two, of Spirit of Hartshorn drops three; mingle them, make
a Powder to be taken in the Pap of an Apple once a Week.

Take of Spirit of Hartshorn half a dram, give ten drops at Bedtime after
Purging thrice. Or,

Take of the Roots of Virginian Snake-weed one Scruple, of Hartshorn calcined,
and of Coraline, each half a Scruple, mingle them, make a Powder to be divided
into three Doses, give one Morning and Evening in a small Draught of the white
Decoction.

Take of Aloes, and Mirrh each one dram and an half, with a sufficient quantity
of Venice-Treacle, and Oil of Wormwood, make a Plaster for the Region of the
Navel.

For broad Worms and Ascarides make a Glister of bitter things, with
Catharticks, and repeat it often till the impurity from whence the Worms are
generated is evacuated.

Horatius Augenus mentions an Observation of a Man about twenty six Years of
Age, that grew extremely hungry, so that nothing would allay his Appetite, at
length he voided a Worm twenty five Cubits long, and recovered a moderate
Appetite; he cured him by the following Medicines, he gave him a pint and an
half of fresh Oil of sweet Almonds divided into four Doses, to be taken a
quarter of an hours distance one from another; just before Dinner he gave him
two Bolusses made of a dram of Hiera Picra, and one Scruple of Rubarb, and
presently after ordered him to take six ounces of a Decoction of Sebestines;
and before Supper he injected a Glister made of a quart of Goats-milk, and gave
him a dram and an half of the Pill of Aloes not washed.

CHAP. LXXX. Of an immoderate Flux of the Hemorrhoides, and of the Pain of them.
AN immoderate Flux of the Hemorrhoides is very dangerous, and occasions other
dangerous Diseases, viz. Weakness of the whole Body, a Consumption, Cachexy and
Dropsy. The same Remedies are good for the Cure which were prescribed for
Bleeding at the Nose.

The Hemorrhoidal Veins ending in the Extremity of the right Gut and Fundament,
are often swelled, whereby much Pain is often occasioned.

As to the Cure, first Blood must be drawn from the Arm, that Revulsion may be
made from the part affected, which being sufficiently peformed, a Vein in the
Foot must be opened for Derivation.

The Belly must be kept continually open, because hard Excrements; and
straining to evacuate them, exasperate the Pain; an Infusion of Cassia taken
Morning and Eve is very good to loosen the Belly.

Take of the Leaves of Lettice, and Purslain, and the Tops of Mallows, each one
handful; of Liquorish rasped and of Raisins of the Sun stoned each half an
ounce; of the flowers of Bugloss and Borrage and of Violets, each one Pugil;
boil them to eight ounces, in the strained Liquor dissolve of Cassia fresh
extracted one ounce, strain them and clarify them, and add to them one ounce
of Syrup of Violets.

In the mean while various Topics are to be applied to the Part, to assuage
the Pain and Inflammation, and to discuss the Tumor, Oil of sweet Almonds
fresh drawn, applied to the Part eases the Pain, and several Liniments and
Ointments may be prescribed for the same Purpose, whereof some ease the Pain,
others dicuss and dry, and others heat the Ulcers; they are to be applied with
Lint or Cotton.

Take one Yolk of an Egg, of Oil of Roses, or of Violets, as much as is
sufficient; make a Liniment, and if you add to it Populeum Ointment, 'twill be
more effectual to ease Pain, and when the Pain is very violent, a few grains of
Opium may be added to it. Or,

Take of the Mucilage of the Seeds of Psyllium and of Faenugreek extracted with
Wine two drams, of fresh Butter three ounces, of Kid Suet one ounce, stir them
together in a Leaden Mortar, make a Liniment.

Balsom of Sulphur made of the Flowers of Sulphur and Oil of Turpentine, is
excellent to ease Pain, and to discuss the Swellings, and to cleanse the
Ulcers; a white Onion roasted under Ashes, and mixed with fresh Butter like a
Cataplasm, eases the Pain, and discusses the Swellings; but if they cannot be
easily resolved they must be opened after convenient Revulsions with a Knife,
or by Leeches.

CHAP. LXXXI. Of the Jaundice.
THE Jaundice arises by the Consent of most, from an Obstruction of the
Gaul-bladder.

As to the Cure, a Vomit at the beginning of the Jaundice whilst the Strength
and Tone of the Bowels are firm, does often good.

Take of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum half an ounce or six drams, of Wine
of Squils one ounce, of simple Oxymel half an ounce, make a Vomit.

Purging Medicines are to be used in this Disease whether it be new or old.

Take of the Electuary of the Juice of Roses six drams, of Rubarb one dram, of
Salt of Wormwood and Cream of Tartar each half a Scruple, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Rubarb, make a Purging Bolus to be taken in the Morning.
Or,

Take of the Pill Ruffi one scruple, of extract of Rudius half a scruple, make
four Pills, take them in a Morning, and repeat them four or five Days,
afterward once a Week.

Take of Elixir Proprietatis one ounce, let him take twenty Drops in a glass of
Wite-wine every day in the Morning, and at five in the Evening. Or,

Take of Madder, and Turmerick, each one ounce, of all the greater Celandine,
and of the Tops of the lesser Centaury, each one handful; boil them in equal
parts of Rhenish-wine, and Fountain Water to a quart; in the strained Liquor
dissolve two ounces of the five opening Roots; let him take half a Pint Morning
and Evening hot till he is well.

Silvius much commends a Decoction of Hemp Seed, and Soap dissolved; our common
Remedy is Lice, nine being taken alive in a Morning five or six days following,
and I have known several that have been cured this way, when other Medicines
would not do the Business.

But if, notwithstanding all above mentioned, the Disease continues obstinate,
the Sick must use Iron-waters, such as are Tunbridge, which he must drink at
the Fountain till he is well. Moreover, Those that are afflicted with this
Disease are often subject to Pains that are very troublesome, and they rage
chiefly a Nights: And moreover, the Sick cannot rest well, wherefore Anodynes
are to be used.

Take of Aqua-mirabilis, and of the Water of Worms, each one ounce; of
Diacodium six drams, of Tincture of Saffron half an ounce; mingle them. The
Dose is one Spoonful or two late at Night when the Sick cannot rest.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of a Dropsy.
EVery Age and Sex are sometimes troubled with a Dropsy, yet Women are more
inclined to it than Men, it comes upon Men chiefly when they are old, and upon
Women when they have done breeding; but it sometimes seises barren Women when
they are young: The pitting of the lower part of the Leg by impression of the
Finger, is not so certain Sign of a Dropsy in Women as in Men; for Women that
are with Child, and such as have a stoppage of the Courses, are often subject
to the same; nor does such a Swelling certainly indicate a Dropsy; for when an
old Man of a gross Habit of Body, having been a long while afflicted with an
Asthma, is suddenly freed from it in the Winter, presently a great Swelling
seises the Legs, yet notwithstanding, generally speaking, the Swelling of the
Legs is to be accounted a Sign of an approaching Dropsy.

Three Symptoms accompany this Disease, Difficulty of Breathing, little Urine,
and great Thirst.

There are two sorts of Tumors of the Belly that resemble a Dropsy, that are
common to Women; the first is, a preternatural Excrescence of the Flesh in the
parts within the Belly, which makes the Belly as Bulky as when Water is
included in it; the other kind arises from Wind, which does not only occasion a
Tumor, but also other Signs of Breeding; Widows are most inclined to this
sort, or such Women as were not married till they were in Years.

The true and genuine curative Indications are wholly to be directed, either to
the Evacuation of the Water contained in the Belly and other Parts, or to
strengthen the Blood.

That Purging may be instituted to the Advantage of the Patient, we ought to
know whether the Sick is easily purged or hardly; which can be known no other
Way than by Inquiry, how purging Remedies used at other times worked.

A Dropsy, above all other Diseases, requires the strongest and quickest
Purges, and the Sick ought to be purged every day, unless by reason of the
Weakness of the Body, or the too violent Operation of the preceding Purge, he
ought to rest a day or two; for you must not leave off purging, unless
Necessity urge, till all the Water is quite carried off.

For those that are easily purged, Syrup of Buck-thorn may be sufficient to
carry off the Water.

But when the Sick is of such a Constitution, that gentle Catharticks will not
work quickly nor easily, stronger must be given; for which I have frequently
prescribed the following Potion with Success.

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce, of the Leaves of Senna two drams, of Rubarb
one dram and an half, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water to
three ounces; in the strained Liquor dissolve of Manna, and Syrup of Roses
solutive, each one ounce; of Syrup of Buck-thorn half an ounce, of the
Electuary of the Juice of Roses two drams; mingle them, make a Potion.

But this Potion must be given only to strong People; it purges when other
things will not, as I have found by frequent experience. Or,

Take of White Wind four ounces, of Jalap finely powdered one dram, of Ginger
powdered one Scruple, of Syrup of Buck-thorn one ounce; mingle them, make a
Potion to to be taken early in the Morning, and to be repeated every Day, or
every other Day, according to the Strength.

But two Medicines remain, which in my Opinion are better than all the rest,
for those that are difficultly purged, I mean Elaterium, and the Infusion of
Crocus Metallorum, Elaterium, or the Fecula of wild Cucumbers, being given in a
small quantity, purge watery Humors powerfully, for two grains of it are a
sufficient Dose for most People; I used to mix it with a scruple of the Pill ex
duobus, and to make three small Pills to be taken in the Morning.

As to the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, an ounce and an half of it, or two
ounces for those that are difficultly vomited, given in a Morning, and repeated
daily, according to the Strength of the Sick, though it may seem at first only
to evacuate the Water contained in the Stomach, yet at length it will free the
Belly from the Waters that are in it.

But if the foresaid Vomit does not sufficiently purge the Belly, for it uses
to purge at last, after the third or fourth Dose of the Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum by it self, I sometimes though rarely, use the following.

Take of the Water of Carduus Benedictus three ounces, of the Infusion of
Crocus Metallorum one ounce and an half, of Syrup of Buck-thorn half an ounce,
of the Electuary of the Juice of Roses two drams; mingle them, make a Potion.

But here it is to be noted, that if the Swelling of the Belly be but small,
the Water is not so easily evacuated by the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, as
when the Dropsy is great, and a great quantity of Water is heaped up;
wherefore unless the Belly be much swelled, it is best to do all by things that
purge downwards.

But you must take notice that it often happens, that Water is cast not only
upon the Thighs and Legs, but also into the Cavity of the Belly, and yet it is
not to be evacuated by Purging Medicines. For Instance, When such a Tumor
follows a long Consumption, or when it is occasioned by the Putrefaction of
some of the Bowels, or from the Tone of the Blood spoiled, and the Spirits
exhausted, or by long continuance of Fistula's in Carnous Parts, or occasioned
by great Weakness and Evacuations by Sweating, Fluxing, or by violent purging,
and by a thin Diet in the Cure of the French Pox, in these Cases the Patient
will be rendered worse by purging; wherefore we must endeavor all we can to
strengthen the Blood and Bowels: And among Remedies to this purpose, which are
to be mentioned by and by, I have found by Experience that the change of the
Air, and Exercise in a free Air, such as the Sick can bear, answers this
Indication excellently well.

And when the Sick is of a weakly Constitution, or a Woman subject to Vapors,
neither Purge nor Vomits must be used, but you must endeavor to evacuate the
Water by Diuretics.

I order one pound of the Ashes of Broom to be infused in the cold in three
Pints of Rhenish-wine, and that a Pugil or two of the Leaves of common Wormwood
be added to it, let the Sick take four ounces of the Liquor filtrated daily in
the Morning, at five in the Evening, and late at Night, till the Swelling goes
off; with which Remedy alone I have known some Dropsies that were accounted
deplorable cured, in such whose weak Constitution could not bear Purging.

But to come to the second Intention, half the Business is no more than done,
when the Water is evacuated; wherefore we must endeavor to strengthen the
Blood by a long and daily Course of heating and strengthening Medicines to
prevent a new Collection of Water, and to this end the Sick must drink Wine
whilst he is under Cure after the Passages are open for the Water to go out, or
instead of Wine strong Beer.

For poor People who could not provide better Medicines, I use to order
Srong-beer, wherein Horseradish Root, the Leaves of common Wormwood, Garden
Scurvy Grass, Sage, the lesser Centaury, and the Tops of Broom have been
infused, for their ordinary Drink. Rich People may use Canary-wine, wherein the
same bitter Herbs have been infused, whereof a small draught may be taken twice
or thrice a day, or they may take nine spoonfuls of Wormwood-wine instead of
it, after two drams of the following Digestive Electuary in the Morning, at
four in the Afternoon, and at Bedtime.

Take of Conserve of Garden Scurvy Grass one ounce and an half, of the Conserve
of Roman Wormwood, and of the yellow Rind of Oranges, each one ounce; of
candied Angelica, and Nutmegs candied, each half an ounce, of Venice Treacle
three drams, of the compound Powder of Wake-robin, two drams, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Oranges, make an Electuary.

The Sick must be sure to drink sparingly of small Liquors; but to take off his
Thirst, he may often wash his Mouth with cold Water sharpened with Spirit of
Vitriol, and he may hold Tamarinds in his Mouth now and then, or may chew a
Lemon, but he must swallow neither of them.

But amongst corroborating things, Steel is not the least. Garlic is also very
good; and without any Evacuatious I have known a Dropsy cured by it.

Take of Syrup of Steel a quart; let a spoonful be taken with fifteen grains of
Cream of Tartar, every Morning, in five spoonfuls of the following Julep.

Take of Aqua-lactis Alexiter. one Pint, of compound Water of Wormwood, and of
compound Water of Gentian, each three ounces; mingle them, make a Julep.

Take of Steel prepared, with Sulphur of astringent Saffron of Mars, each half
an ounce; of Crab's-eyes, and red Coral prepared, and of Salt of Wormwood, each
one dram; of Volatile Salt of Amber one scruple, of Extract of Gentian a
sufficient quantity; mingle them, make ten Pills of every dram, let him take
four every Night at Bedtime.

It Is to be noted, that that Dropsy which only swells the the Legs or the
Belly a little, does not presently require to be cured by Vomiting, and
Purging; for it is often removed by the heating and strengthening Medicines above
mentioned; but above all, it is to be minded, that when we undertake to cure
this Disease by Corroboratives or Lixivial Medicines, the Patient must by no
means be purged.

Topical or external Remedies, as far as I have observed do nothing
considerable, and Blisters often occasion a Gangrene. To conclude, though this
Disease, when it comes to a Dropsy of the Belly, has been always accounted
desperate, yet it will appear, that if it be treated according to the Method
above described, it may be as certainly cured (if the Bowels are not corrupted)
as many other Diseases which are not reckoned so deadly.

CHAP LXXXIII. Of a Timpany.
A Timpany is a fixed hard and equal Swelling of the Belly, that sounds when
it is knocked upon with the Finger, it proceeds from a Convulsive Inflation of
the Bowels, the Animal Spirits being obstructed in the Fibers; it generally
ends in a Dropsy.

Medicines do little good in this Disease, yet they are not wholly to be
rejected, the following are prescribed by Dr. Willis.

Take of Peach-flowers, and of Damask-roses, each two pugils; of the Flowers of
Broom, Elder, and the lesser Centaury, each one pugil; of the Leaves of
Agrimony, and of Sea-wormwood, each one handful; of the best Senna one ounce,
of Rubarb six drams, of the seeds of Bastard-saffron half an ounce, of
Dwarf-elder two drams, of yellow-sanders three drams, of the Roots of Galingal
two drams, cut them, and bruise them, and put them into a silken Bag, and hang
them in a Glass-bottle, and pour upon them a quart of White Wind, and a pint of
Saxifrage-water, and put into the Bottle, a dram and an half of Salt of Tartar;
let them infuse forty eight Hours, and then take four or six ounces every third
or fourth Day.

The following has been used with Success in this Disease in a hot Constitution.

Take of purging-waters four quarts, of Salt of Wormwood two drams, evaporate a
quart over a gentle Heat; and to these I used to add of the Water distilled
from Wine with Catharticks four ounces, the dose is four or six ounces.

Or to the Purging-water evaporated to a quart, add the Roots of Mecoacan, and
Tu^bith, each half an ounce, of Rubarb six drams, of yellow-sanders two drams,
of Cloves one dram, digest them hot in a close Vessel two hours, filter them
hot through Paper, the dose is three or four ounces.

Glisters are often used in this Disease, because they loosen the Belly without
much provoking the Fibers.

Take of the Infusion of Stone-horse-dung, with Camomil-flowers one pint, of
Mercurial-honey two ounces, make a Glister. Or,

Take of Urine one pint, of Sal-prunella one dram, of Venice Turpentine
dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg one ounce and an half; mingle them, make a
Glister.

Diuretics also seem proper.

Take of live Millepedes cleansed three ounces, one Nutmeg sliced, beat them
together, and pour upon them a Pint of the following Diuretick-water, strain
out the Liquor hard, the dose is three or four ounces twice a day.

Take of the green-berries of Juniper, and Elder, each six pounds; of the Tops
of Fir four pounds, of green Wallnuts two pound, of Winteran Bark four ounces,
of the yellow-Peel of six Oranges, and four Lemons, of the Seeds of
Bishops-weed, Rocket, and Cresses each one ounce and an half: of Dill two
ounces; cut them, and bruise them, and pour upon them four quarts of White Wind
Posset Drink, distill them in a common Still, and mingle all the Waters.

Whilst these things are taken inwardly, Topics must be also applied, not such
things as are hot and discussing, but those things which are endued with
Particles of Volatile Salt and Nitre.

Take of the Flowers of Sal-armoniack one ounce, of Sal-prunella two ounces, of
small Spirit of Wine a quart, mingle them, and dissolve them in a Bottle.

Flannels dipped in this are to be applied warm over the Belly twice a day for
the space of half an hour; afterward apply a Cataplasm made of Cows-dung, and
the powder of Dogs-dung, or the following Plaster.

Take of the Plaster of Soap, that is of the red-lead Plaster, with a
sufficient quantity of Venice Soap, spread it thin upon thin Leather, and apply
it to the Belly, and renew it within ten or twelve Days.

Altering Medicines are also requisite.

Take of the Filings of Steel finely powdered two drams, of the distilled Water
above described a quart, of the Syrup of the five opening Roots two ounces;
mingle them in a Glass, and let them clarify by standing. The dose is three or
four ounces in the Morning, and at five in the Afternoon.

Take of the Powder of the Roots of Wake-robin, and of Crab's-eyes, each three
drams, of Sal-Prunella two drams, of Vitriol of Mars one dram and an half, of
Anthosat Sugar two drams; mingle them, the dose is half a dram in a convenient
Vehicle.

And Medicines are to be prescribed against Fainting, Difficulty of Breathing,
Watching, and Drouth.

Cordials.
Take of the Waters of Orange-flowers, of the Flowers of Marigolds, and of
Camomil, each three ounces; of Dr. Stephens's water two ounces, of Tincture of
Saffron two drams, of Sugar one ounce, of Pearls one dram, make a Julep, the
Dose is four or five spoonfuls thrice, or oftener in a Day. Take of the Conserve
of Marigold-flowers two ounces, of Confection of Atkermes, and of Hyacinth,
each two drams; of Pearls powdered one ounce, of the Syrup of the Juice of
Citron a sufficient quantity; make a Confection, let him take the quantity of a
Nutmeg Morning and Evening, drinking upon it a draught of the Julep.
Hypnoticks.
Take of the Hysterick-water six drams, of Diacodium half an ounce, mingle
them, let it be taken at Bedtime. Or, Take of Syrup of Cowslips three
Spoonfuls, of compound Peony-water one spoonful, of Laudanum tartarized one
dram, let a spoonful be taken in the Night, if the Sick cannot sleep.
To quench the Thirst without much drinking, which is always very prejudicial,
let the Sick lick often a small quantity of the following Linctus.

Take of Conserve of Wood Sorrel pulped three ounces, of the Pulp of Tamarinds
two ounces, of Sal-prunella one dram, of the Syrup of the Juice of Wood Sorrel
a sufficient quantity; make a Linctus.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Of an Anasarca.
AN Anasarca is a white soft Swelling of the outward parts of the Body, or of
some of them, it yields to the Touch, and will pit, and is occasioned by watery
Humors extravasated.

As to the Cure, there are two things chiefly to be minded, First, That the
Water within the Skin should be evacuated. Secondly, That Care be taken to
prevent the heaping up of new Water, to which End we must endeavor (the
Viscera of Concoction being freed from Obstructions and Filth) that good Chyle
be made and carried in a due quantity to the Mass of Blood, and that it be
sufficiently fermented.

The Vital Indication is of little use in this Disease, because there is seldom
Fainting or Watching for which Cordials and Hypnoticks are required, and also a
strengthening diet; for Fasting and Abstinence do good in this Case, and often
perform the greatest part of the Cure; for the Vessels being emptied by
Fasting, absorb the Waters within the Skin or stagnating elsewhere, and
evacuate them by the Reins or the Pores of the Skin, or otherwise.

The Sick must use purging Medicines prescribed for a Dropsy, and the same
Diuretics.

A Decoction of the Woods is also very proper.

Take of the Shavings of Guajacum six ounces, of Sassafras two ounces, of all
the Sanders each six drams, of Ivory and Hartshorn rasped each three drams;
infuse them, and boil them in four quarts of Fountain Water till half is
consumed, adding to it the Roots of Sweet Smelling Flag, of the lesser
Galingal, of Burdock, and Butter-bur, each one ounce; of the Leaves of
Sharp-sage, and of dried Germander, each two handfuls; keep the strained Liquor
for use; the Dose is eight or ten ounces hot twice a Day, to every Dose add
twenty or five and twenty drops of Spirit of Sa^armoniack, with Amber, or of
Soot, or of the Tincture of Salt of Tartar half a dram, or a dram.

Frictions do often good in an Anasarca, wherefore the whole Body may be rubbed
once or twice a day with a course Napkin, or with Brushes made for that Purpose.

Blisters evacuate the Water plentifully, but there is Danger of a Gangrene by
the use of them.

But Escharoticks may be more safely used than Blisters; an Emperick often
evacuated successfully Water from the Members of Dropsical People, if they were
never so much swelled, in the following manner by an Escharotick, viz First, he
fomented their Legs Morning and Evening with a Decoction of Dwarf-elder,
Wormwood, Camomil, and other hot Herbs, the grounds of Beer or Wine being added
to it; and betwixt the times of Bathing he applied a Cataplasm made of the
Dregs of the Decoction and Bran; after these things had been used three days,
he covered the Legs and Feet with a Plaster made of Burgundine-pitch, leaving
only upon each Calf a little hole about the bigness of a small Nut, in which
places he applied an Escarotick Medicine to the naked Skin, made of the Ashes
of the Bark of the Ash, which being taken off, after twelve hours, a small
Eschar remained from the pores whereof the Water first drained gently and
daily; afterward it dropped more freely, but when the Eschar cast, it flowed as
from a Fountain, till it had emptied the Legs.

Another Way remains (as good as the former but less used) to drain the Water,
viz. By pricking with a Needle, which also must be used cautiously and
leisurely, lest the Flux of Waters should be too great; provide such a Needle
as Tailors use, and prick the Place that is most swelled with it so as that the
Blood may not come; you must prick only six or seven Holes at at a time, at the
Distance of the Breadth of a Thumb, one from the other; the Water will break
out drop by drop from each Hole continually, till all the Swelling about the
Parts pricked disappears; and then the next time, sometimes after twelve hours,
sometimes after eighteen, and sometimes after twenty four, prick again in
another part of the same Leg, or in the other; and so once or twice a day in
this or that Member, in one or two or more at a time, for the Water may be
drawn more plentifully and safer this Way than any other; and if the Breeding
of new Water be prevented by Medicines, the Disease will be easily cured.
Moreover, in a deplorable Dropsy the Life may be prolonged this way: An old
Man of Seventy Years of Age, that was dropsical all over, kept his Head above
Water, and lived many Months by this means, contrary to Expectation.

But to strengthen and restore the Blood, the following Medicines must be used.

Take of Conserve of Sea-wormwood, of Scurvy Grass, and the yellow Peel of
Oranges, each two ounces; of the Winteran-Bark two drams, of the Species
Diacurcuma one dram and an half, of Steel prepared with Sulphur three drams, of
Salt of Wormwood two drams, of Syrup of the Bark of Curon a sufficient
quantity, make an Electuary; the Dose is two drams in the Morning, and at five
in the Afternoon.

Chalybeats do often a great deal of good in this Disease.

Take of the compound Powder of the Roots of Wake-robin, of the Winteran-bark,
each three drams; of the Roots of the lesser Galingal, and of Cubebs, each one
dram and an half; of Steel prepared with Sulphur half an ounce, of Sugar
anthosated six drams; make a Powder to be divided into twenty Parts, give one
Part every Morning, and at five in the Afternoon.

Let him drink of the following Decoction instead of Beer.

Take of the Shavings of Guajacum, and Sassafras, each four ounces; of the
Roots of Florentine-orris, of Sweet-smelling-flag, the lesser Galingal, and of
Elecampane, each one ounce and an half; of the Berries of Juniper and Bays
each two ounces; of the Seeds of Annise, Carrawayes, Sweet-fennel, Coriander
and Dill, each one ounce; of Long-pepper, and Cubebs, each one ounce and an
half; of Cloves, Nutmegs, and Ginger, each half an ounce; of Jamaica Pepper two
ounces, of the dried Leaves of Sharp-sage, Wild-sage, Calaminth, Agrimony, each
one handful; of Liquorish four ounces, cut them and bruise them, and boil them
in four Gallons of Fountain Water till half is consumed, keep the strained
Liquor in Bottles for use. Many have been cured by this Liquor.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of the Scurvy.
IN the old Treatises of Physic, there is so seldom mention made of the
Scurvy, and the Description of it is so small, that some have doubted whether
such a Disease (that is now Endimial in many Places, and Sporadick almost every
where, and wherewith almost every one is affected, or thinks he is so) did at
all exist in ancient Times; and some think its Rise is of a newer date, as are
the French Pox and Rickets; but this Disease, though it had other Names, was
observed by the Ancients, and the Cure of it was described by them, though not
very exactly.

Many and various are the Symptoms of the Scurvy, and sometimes such as are of
a contrary Nature, are imputed to it; and if any unusual Accident happens to
the Body, that cannot be referred to any other certain kind of Disease, we
presently pronounce it Scorbutic. And so this notorious Disease bears the
Blame of all, but many truly belong to it which arise in almost every part of
the Body, and therefore we will trace it from Head to Foot; it occasions
violent, habitual, wandering or periodick Headachs, sometimes a Dullness of the
Spirits, and Drowsiness, sometimes Watchings, Giddiness, Convulsions, Palsy,
much Spitting, Ulcers of the Gums, Looseness of the Teeth, and a Stinking of the
Breath. About the Region of the Breast, Pains in various parts of the
Membranes, and especially on the Breast Bone, which are often very violent for
many Nights and Days; an Asthma, difficult and unequal Breathing, Constriction
and Narrowness of the Breast, a dry Cough, an inordinate Pulse, trembling of
the Heart, frequent Fainting, and almost a continual Fear of it. This Disease
makes the lower Belly its principal Seat, and occasions many Disorders there,
as Nauseousness, Vomiting, Wind, a Cardialgia, frequent Collicks, and
troublesome Pains running hither and thither, a Looseness that is almost
continual, sometimes a Bloody Flux, a Consumption, and a Dropsy.

The Urine is often red, with a Crust upon it, or sticking to the Sides of the
Pot, and sometimes it is pale and rendered in a great quantity; in the outward
Members, and over the whole Body, there are Wandering pains, and oftentimes such
as are violent, especially in the Night; also Spontaneous Lassitude, a Wasting
of the Flesh, a weakness of the Limbs, Spots of various colors upon the Skin,
Tumors, Tubercles, and ill Ulcers, Numbness and Contraction of the Muscels,
Twitching of the Tendons, Erratick Fevers, and great Hemorrhagies.

These are the common and usual Symptoms of the Scurvy, whereof sometimes more,
sometimes fewer, sometimes this kind, sometimes that kind afflict the Sick, and
sometimes unusual and prodgious Accidents happen.

As to the Cure, Because it is not one simple preternatural Disorder, but a
Legion is to be combated with; therefore the Method of Cure consists of many
Indications, that are variously complicated, but yet they may be referred to
these three Heads, viz. They must be preservative to respect the Cause of the
Diseases, and curative, that respect the Disease it self and its Symptoms.

And Lastly, Vital, which restore and defend the Strength of the Patient.

First, The Sick must be purged, and if there be a weight upon the Stomach, a
Vomit must be given; and if the Patient be strong and lusty, and used to bear
Vomiting well, the Vinum-benedictum may be given, and the like.

But if the Sick be of a weakly Constitution; you must give Wine of Squills, or
Gilla Theophrasti, and the Sick must fill his Stomach with Posset Drink, and
force it up with his Finger, or with a Feather.

As to Purging, If the Sick be of a hot Constitution; Medicines of Aloes and
Diagridium must be avoided, and such as are made of Senna and Rubarb, must be
given, As,

Take of the Leavss of Senna one ounce, of Rubarb six drams, of Dodder of Thym
three drams, of the Roots of Polypody of the Oak, and of English Rubarb dried,
each half an ounce; of yellow Sanders two drams, of Celtick Spike half a dram,
of Salt of Wormwood two drams; cut them and bruise them, and infuse them in a
Mattress, in the Heat of Sand, with Whitewine and Fumitory-water, each a Pint
for two days; evaporate the clear Liquor strained in the gentle heat of a Bath
to the Consistence of Honey, then add of the Powder of the Leaves of Senna, and
of Rubarb, each one dram and an half; of the Species of the three Sanders one
dram, of Cream of Tartar one dram and an half; make a Mass for Pills. The Dose
is from half a dram to a dram, to be taken once a Week, or oftener.

Or let the Infusion be evaporated to the Consistence of a Syrup, adding
toward the end, of Manna strained and of White Sugar, each two ounces; make a
Syrup. The Dose is one or two Spoonfuls in a proper Vehicle.

They who are of a cold Constitution may take the following Pills.

Take of the Stomach-pill with Gums two drams, of Rosin, of Jalap, grains
twenty; of Tartar vitriolated grains sixteen, of Oil of Juniper ten drops, with
a sufficient quantity of Ammoniacum dissolved in the Water of Worms; make
sixteen Pills, let four be taken once a Week.

Take of the Roots of Sharp-pointed-dock, of Polypody of the Oak, of
stinging-nettles, and of Chervil each six drams; of the Leaves of Hemp,
Agrimony, and Speedwell, each one handful; of yellow and white Sanders, each
one dram; of the Seeds of Bastard saffron one ounce, of White Wind Tartar half
an ounce; boil them in a quart of Fountain Water till half is consumed, add a
Pint of Rhenish-wine, strain it presently, and add to it half an ounce of the
best Senna, six drams of Rubarb, half an ounce of the Leaves of
Black-hellebore, of the yellow Peel of Oranges two drams; infuse it warm in a
close Vessel twelve hours; keep the strained Liquor in a Glass well stopped;
the dose is five or six drams.

After Purging once or twice, if Bleeding be indicated, you must bleed in the
Arm, or with Leeches.

After Bleeding many Remedies of another kind are necessary; but that you may
prescribe orderly, you must consider whether the Preservatory Indications have
only place here, or whether some curatory Indications, namely such as respect
the Symptoms that are violent ought not to be minded between whiles. But if
there be no urgent Symptom, you must wholly apply your self to the Cure
according to the following Method. And as to the Cure of the Symptoms, we shall
treat of them by themselves below.

Wherefore, If your chief Design be to erradicate the Cause of the Scurvy,
digestive, and Specific or Antiscorbutick Remedies must be used at all times,
except on the Days the Sick purges, whereunto, if there be Occasion,
Diaphoreticks or Diuretics must be sometimes added. Various Forms are
prescribed by Authors every where to answer these Intensions, but we will only
mention the chiefest, which according to the twofold Disposition of the
scorbutic Cause, viz. The Sulphurous Saline, and the Salino sulphurean
Discrassy of the Blood, we will distinguish, into two Classes; And First, Of
the cold Scurvy.

Among Digestive Medicines, Cream of Tartar, Salt and Tincture of it, Tartar
vitriolated, Elixir Proprietatis, or either of these, may be taken twice a day.
Or,

Take of the Winteran-Bark, of Wood of Aloes, of the Roots of the lesser
Galingal, each two drams; of Cinnamon, Cloves, and Cubebs, each one dram; of
the Seeds of Bishops Weed, and Cresses, each half a dram; bruise them, and pour
upon them the following Menstruum three Fingers high; digest them in a Mattress
six days in Sand, keep the strained Liquor in a Glass well stopeed. The dose is
twenty drops more or less, in a Spoonful of Canary-wine, or some proper Water
twice a Day.

The Menstruum is made in the following manner.

Take of Spirit of Vitriol rectified six ounces, of Spirit of Wine rectified
sixteen ounces; mingle them, and distill it in a glass retort, and Cohobat it
thrice, and keep it in a Glass well stopped for use. Elixir Proprietatis is made
easier and better by this Menstruum, than by the common way.

Whilst these Remedies are given in a small quantity Morning and Evening,
Antiscorbutick Medicines of another kind may be taken, which are generally
prescribed in a double Form, viz. Solid and Liquid to be taken together, the
Solid first, and the Liquid presently after.

Take of the Conserves of Scurvy Grass, and Roman Wormwood, and of Fumitory,
each two ounces; of the Powder of the Winteran-bark, of the Roots of Angelica,
and of Wake-robin, each two drams; of the Species of the three Sanders one dram
and an half, of the Powder of Crab's-eyes one dram, of Salt of Wormwood, two
drams, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of the Bark of Citron; make an
Electuary.

Take of the Conserves of the Leaves of Scurvy Grass, and Brook-lime, made with
an equal quantity of Sugar, each three ounces; of the Troches of Capers, and of
Rubarb, each two drams, of Salt of Wormwood, and of Scurvy Grass, each one
dram; of Ivory Powdered, and Coral calcined, each one dram; with a sufficient
quantity of the Syrup made of the Juice of Scurvy Grass; make an Electuary.

I use to prescribe Conserves made of the yellow Peel of Lemons and Oranges, of
the Purple-flowers of the Ash, of the Leaves and Flowers of Ladies-Smock, of
the Roots of sharp-pointed Dock, and of English Rubarb, made with an equal
quantity of Sugar, which I give by themselves, or mixed with other Conserves or
Species.

For Country and poor People, who desire Medicines that are cheap and easily
prepared, I prescribe after this manner.

Take of the Leaves of Scurvy Grass, and Brook-lime, each four ounces; of white
Sugar eight ounces; beat them together in a Mortar, and add to them of the
Powder of the Winteran-bark half an ounce, of Tartar calcined with Niter three
drams; with a sufficient quantity of Spanish-wine; make an Electuary. The Dose
is the quantity of a Wallnut twice a day, drinking upon it some proper Liquor.

Take of the Leaves of Scurvy Grass one pound, of Raisins of the Sun stoned,
and of White Sugar, each half a pound; of the Lees of the Root of Horseradish
two ounces; beat them together and reduce them to the Form of an Electuary.

In some scorbutical cases, where the use of Steel is indicated, three drams of
Steel prepared with Sulphur, or two drams of Vitriol of Mars, may be mixed with
any of the Electuaries: After the taking of the Medicine once or twice a day
the Body must be exercised.

Take of the compound Powder of Wake-robin one ounce and an half, of
Winteran-bark half an ounce, of Cubebs, grains of Paradise, and Cardamoms, each
two drams; of Salt of Wormwood three drams, of Tablets of Oranges three ounces;
make a Powder. The dose is one dram in some proper liquor.

For Delicate People the following Tablets may be prescribed.

Take of the Powder of the Winteran-bark, and of Crab's-eyes, each one dram and
an half; of Pearls powdered half a dram, of white-sugar dissolved in a
sufficient quantity of the Water of Worms, and boiled to Tablets, six ounces;
of Spirit of Scurvy Grass two drams; make Tablets, each weighing half a dram,
let two be taken twice a day, drinking upon them some proper Liquor.

Tablets of Oranges are made in the following manner.

Take of Orange, Lemmon, and Citron peel candied, each one ounce; of
Eryngo-roots candied half an ounce, of Pine, and Pistach-nuts, each twenty; of
sweet Almonds blanched number ten, of Annise-seeds powdered half an ounce; of
Ginger candied two drams, of the Species Aromatic Rosat, and of Nutmegs, each
one dram and an half; of the Roots of Galingal one dram, of Cloves number ten,
of Ambar-grease grains four, of Musk, and Civet, each grains two; of
White-sugar dissolved in Rose Water and boiled to Tablets, one pound and an
half, and so make Tablets.

Antiscorbutick Wines and Beers.

Take of the Leaves of Scurvy Grass four handfuls, of Horse-radish-root rasped
four ounces, of Winteran-bark bruised half an ounce, of the yellow peel of four
Oranges, and as many Lemmons; put them into a glass, and pour upon them six
quarts of Rhenish-wine; keep the Glass close stopped in a cold place; let a
quarter of a pint be taken Morning and Evening, and at dinnertime daily, and
pour off the Wine clear when you use it.

But medicated Beer is more common for the Scurvy, to be drank constantly for
ordinary Drink.

Provide four Gallons of Ale, and instead of Hops, boil in it four handfuls of
the tops of Pine, or of Fir; when it has done Working in the Vessels, put in
four handfuls of Scurvy Grass, four ounces of the Roots of Sharp-pointed Dack,
and the Peels of four Oranges; when it has stood a Week and is clear, it may be
drank for ordinary Drink.

Diet-drinks do a great deal of good in the Scurvy, because they being
continually taken with Meat they alter the Blood.

But in some Scorbutical cases, and in a hot Scurvy, Scurvy Grass,
Horseradish, and the Winteran-bark, and other acrid things, such as abound
with Volatile-salt are sometimes injurious; wherefore when the Morbisick
Discrasie of the Blood is hot, temperate Medicines are indicated.

Take of Conserves of Brook-lime, and Ladies-Smock, made with an equal quantity
of Sugar, each three ounces; of the Species of the three Sanders, of Diarrhodon
Abbatis, each one dram and an half; of Ivory powdered one dram, of Pearls half
a dram, of Salt of Wormwood, and Tamarisck, each one dram; with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Coral, make an Electuary

Take of the Conserves of Wood Sorrel, and of Hips, each three ounces; or of
the Conserve of the Roots of Sharp-pointed Dock, and of the Roots of Succory,
each three ounces; of the Troches of Rubarb two drams, of the Species
Diamargarite frigid one dram and an half, of the Bark of Tamarisck one dram, of
Sal-prunella one dram and an half, of Mirobalans candied number two, with a
sufficient quantity of the Syrup of candied Mirobalans; meke an Electuary.

For the Poor I used to prescribe the following Electuary.

Take of the Leaves of Brook-lime six ounces, of Wood Sorrel two ounces, of
White-sugar eight ounces; bruise them, and add to them half an ounce of the
Flower of the Seeds of sweet Fennel, of Ivory powdered two drams, of
Sal-prunuella one dram and an half, with a sufficient quantity of the Syrup of
the Juice of Brook-lime; make an Electuary.

Take of the Powder of the Leaves of Ground Pine, of the compound Powder of
Wake-robin, each one ounce and an half; of Ivory powdered, and of red Coral,
prepared with the Juice of Oranges, each two drams; of the Tablet of of Oranges
two ounces. The Dose is one Spoonful twice a Day,

Take of the Species of the three Sanders, of Diamargarite frigid, each one
dram and an half; of Pearls powdered, Red-coral prepared, and of Ivory
powdered, each one dram; of Sugar dissolved in Scordium-water, and boiled to
Tablets, six ounces; make Tablets.

But if Chalybeats are to be mixed with these temperate Antiscorbuticks, two or
three drams of Crocus Martis, or the like, may be added to the Electuaries: But
it is often best to take Calybeats in Liquors.

Wines and mediated Beers.
Although the use of Wines in the Scurvy, caused by reason of the Heat, and
sulpherous Saline Discrasie of the Blood, are not very convenient; nevertheless
when the Weakness of the Stomach, or Custom at least requires Wine mixed it
with Water.

Such a Liquor that is temperated and medicated may be prepared. In the first
place, Small Wines, mixed with Water, and those that are impregnated with the
Infusion of Baulm, Borrage, and Burnet, may be allowed. Moreover, Wines may be
prepared of the Juice of Currants, of Cherries and of Garden-fruits, which may
be ripened by Fermentation, and are very grateful to the Stomach, and purify
the Blood: Syder is also very good, if it be clear, and not sharp. Moreover,
many ingredients may be put into clear Syder, as the Tops of Pine or of Fir,
the Flowers of Tamarisck, the Raspings of Ivory or Hartshorn, which sweeten and
preserve the Liquor.

Temperate medicated Diet-drinks may be prescribed in the following Manner.
Provide six Gallons of Small Ale, and instead of Hops, boil the Tops of Pine or
Tamarisck in it, or the Raspings of the Wood of either of them; and when it has
done working; put into a Bag sharp-pointed Dock dried, which is an excellent
Medicine for the Scurvy; also the Leaves of Watercresses, or Brook-lime, and
Bank-cresses; also Citrons, or Oranges cut in Slices, and hanged in Vessels.

Hitherto we have treated about the Removal of the Morbisick cause, but when
the Symptoms are very violent, they require a peculiar Method of Cure. And
First, Difficulty of Breathing, with Narrowness of the Breast, and Asthmatical
Fits, must be taken off by Medicines proper for the Symptom: Elixir
Proprietatis is of excellent use in this Case.

Pain of the Stomach, Nauseousness, Belching and Vomiting, must be cured by a
gentle Vomit of Wine of Squils, or of Salt of Vitriol; or the Patient must be
purged with an Infusion of Rubarb, with Salt or Cream of Tartar added to it.
Elixir Proprietatis is also good in this Case.

The Colic and Gripes must be cured by Glisters, Opiats and testaceous
Powders.

Take of the Powder of Crab's-eyes, and of Egg-shells, each one dram and an
half; of Pearls, one dram; make a Powder to be divided into twelve Doses,
whereof one must be taken every sixth hour in some Antiscorbutical-water. And
in this case Epsom and Barnet-waters do a great deal of Good.

An inveterate Diarrhea which frequently happens to Scorbutical People, must
not be stopped by astringent Medicines, nor is it easily cured by Alteratives and
Antiscorbuticks. Tunbridge-waters and the like are of excellent use in this
case. Chalybeat Medicines are also very good, but Crocus Martis is the best. I
have used the following Method often with very good Success. First, The Sick
must be purged with the Powder or Infusion of Rubarb, with some astringent
Aromaticks added to it; and it must be repeated three or four days after. On
the days the Sick does not purge, he must take Morning and Evening the quantity
of a Nutmeg of the following Electuary.

Take of the Conserve of Roman-wormwood, made with an equal quantity of Sugar,
six ounces (in a hot Constitution Conserve of Roses may be used instead of it)
of Diarrhodon Abbatis two drams, of white and red Sanders powdered, each one
dram; of the best Saffron of Mars half an ounce, with a sufficient quantity of
Syrup of Steel; make an Electuary.

In a Bloody Flux and Tenesmus, the like Method is to be used, especially
Tunbridge-waters or the like. Moreover, Glisters made of Vulnerary Decoctions
must be often injected.

I lately cured a Man of a long Disentery who daily voided many Ounces of Blood
by the following Remedy.

Take of the best Rubarb powdered two drams, of Cinnamon one dram, of Crocus
Martis three drams; make Pills with a sufficient quantity of Lucatellus's
Balsam. He took four sometimes every day, sometimes every other day, for the
space of a Fortnight, and was perfectly cured.

But he constantly drank a medicated Beer made of the Roots of Sharp-pointed
Docks, and of the Leaves of Brook-lime.

A Vertigo often comes upon an inveterate Scurvy; as also frequent Swoonings,
and Numbness in the Limbs; they are very difficultly cured, by reason they are
produced by a Scorbutic Salt obstructing the Brain and Nerves. Cephalic
Medicines, such as are proper in the Vertigo and Paralitick Distempers, which
come of themselves, mixed with Antiscorbuticks, are to be given.

Therefore the Body being cleansed by Catharticks which are proper in the
Scurvy, you may proceed with Medicines proper to cure these Diseases after this
manner.

In the beginning of the Cure the Hemorrhoids are to be opened by the
Application of Leeches; and this ought to be often repeated, unless something
contraindicate.

Take of the Roots of Male-peony half an ounce, of red Cora^ prepared two
drams, of Man's Skull, and Elks-hoof, each one dram; take of fine Sugar
dissolved in Peony-water compound, or the compound Water of Horseradish, and
boiled to Tablets, eight ounces; of the best Oil of Amba^ rectified half a
dram; make Tablets. A dram and an half or two drams of them may be taken
Morning and Night, drinking upon them a draught of the following distilled
water.

Take of the Leaves of Scurvy Grass, Brook-lime, Lillies of the Valley, Sage,
Rosemary, Bettony, each three handful^, of green Wallnuts one pound, the Peels
of six Oranges and of four Lemmons, the Roots of Male-peony green ^ Pound and
an half; after they are bruised and sliced, pour upon them of Phlegm of Vitriol
one pound, of Who made with Syder five Pints; distill them after the common
manner; mix all the Liquor together. The Dose is three or four ounces.

Fluxes of Blood often threaten great Danger in the Scurvy; therefore these
Fluxes, whether they be too great, or from an inconvenient place, ought to be
stop for the present, and guarded against for the future.

The common Method of stopping Blood when it flows immoderately, is generally
known, and there is no peculiar thing more to be done on this Occasion, than
what is usual in other Fluxes of Blood. Nevertheless, to hinder these Fluxes of
blood, Remedies must be used which sweeten the Blood, and contract the Orifices
of the Vessels which are too lax and open. Both these Intentions are
excellently performed by Steel Medicines.

Take of the Conserve of red Roses, and of Hips, each three ounces; of the
Species Diarrhodon Abbatis, of the three Sanders, each a dram and an half; of
Salt of Steel one dram, of Saffron of Mars two drams, of red Cora^ prepared one
dram and an half, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Steel; make an
Electuary. The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg three times a day, drinking
upon it a Draught of some proper Liquor.

For the Poor you may prescribe after this manner.

Take of the Tops of Cypress, and of stinging Nettles, each four ounces; of
Brook-lime two ounces; beat them in a Mortar with ten ounces of white Sugar;
afterward add Filings of Steel finely powdered one ounce, of white and red
Sanders powdered, each two drams; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup made of
the Juice of Nettles, make an Electuary. The Dose is the quantity of a Wallnut
twice a day.

When the Scurvy does infect the inward Parts of the Mouth, as when the Gums
begin to swell, and their Flesh grows spungy, Medicines are presently to be
used that resist Putrefaction: Liquors to wash the Mouth, and Liniments are of
great use both at the beginning and height of this Distemper; and as they
respect various Intentions, so they are to be prepared after diverse manners.

Gargarisms or Waters for the Mouth are of diverse kinds, which are all made for
the most part of the Decoctions of Vegetables, or the Infusion of Minerals. The
Herbs and Roots which are boiled in a proper Liquor, viz. Water, or Wine, are
for the most part sharp, bitter, or stiptick. Afterward these Decoctions are
impregnated with a Salt either volatile, lixivial, vitriolick, or chalybeat and
aluminous.

When the Gums are swelled, and become spungy, a Gargarism may be prescribed
after this manner.

Take of the Bark of Elder, and of Elm, each half an handful; of the leaves of
Savory, Sage, Hedge-mustard, and Cresses, each one handful; of the Roots of
Pepper-wort two drams. After they are cut and bruised, boil them in three pints
of Limewater to the Consumption of the third part; make a Gargarism; it may be
sweetened with two ounces of Honey of Roses.

Liniments may be also prescribed for the same purpose, they are most properly
applied at Night. The following is greatly commended by Authors.

Take of the Powder of the Leaves of Columbines, of curled Mint, Sage, Nutmeg,
Mirrh (which is sometimes left out) each two drams; of Burnt-alum half an
ounce, of Virgin-honey a sufficient quantity; make a Liniment.

If the Flesh of the Gums be dried, and falls off from the Roots of the Teeth,
light Scarification is often used; the Mouth also is to be washed with this
Decoction.

Take of the Tops of Madder, Cypress, of the Leaves of Sanicle, Ladies-smock,
each one handful; boil them in three pints of Water wherein hot Iron has been
quenched, to the Consumption of a third part; add to the strained Liquor two
ounces of Honey of Roses; mingle them.

When the Gums are putrified and corrupted, and the Teeth being carious and
loose, stink, stronger Medicines, and such as greatly resist Putrefaction, are
to be used.

The Infusion of Vitriol camphorated, and of Lapis medicamentosus, is very
effectual in this case.

If deep and putrid Ulcers afflict the Gums, or any other part of the Mouth,
strong Remedies must be often used; also Cotton dipped in Aegyptiacum dissoloved
in Spirit, or in the Infusion of Lapis Medicamentosus, or sublimate, must be
sometimes applied to the part affected.

Scorbutic People are also oftentimes afflicted with Pains in the Legs and in
other Joints, especially in the Nightime, for the removing of which Pains,
which are sometimes very violent, besides the general Method of curing the
Scurvy, Specific Remedies are to be used: Therefore in such a case Purging
having been rightly performed, and Bleeding, if there be occasion for it,
Medicines both external and internal must be used.

As to the First, Those that evacuate by Sweat, and by Urine, are oft-times
very effectual: Testaceous Powders, Crab's-eyes, the Jaw of a Pike, the Spirit,
and Flowers of Sal-Armoniack, Spirit of Blood, Tincture of Antimony, and of
Coral, Decoctions of the Roots and Seeds of Burdock, Ground Pine, and
Germander, are very proper; and such like Remedies may be taken twice or thrice
a day ^n distilled antiscorbutick-waters. The distilled water of Horse-dung,
with Scurvy Grass, Brook-lime, and Ground-^ine, and the like, may be
conveniently used. In the mean time Fomentations, Liniments, Cataplasms, and
^uch like Applications must be applied to ease the Pain.

For a Scorbutical Gout, Henricus Petreus mentions ^wo Remedies, which are
frequently used in West^halia.

Take nine Worms, beat them in a Mortar with two spoonfuls of Wine, press it
through a Cloth, and add to it half a Measure of Wine; let three spoonfuls of
it be taken in the Morning, at Noon, and in the Evening for many days.

The other is as follows.

Take of Savin two or three Branches, of Virgin-honey two spoonfuls, boil them
in a measure of Wine till the Wine sink two Fingers; let four or five spoonfuls
of the strained Liquor be taken thrice a day.

Certainly the Magisterial-water, of Worms, of the London Dispensatory, is very
beneficial in this Disease, so are the Spirit and Salt of Hartshorn, Spirit of
Blood, Flowers of Sal-armoniack, which I have often used with good Success.

Moreover, Testaceous Powders, as Crab's-eyes, Coral, Pearls, and Vegetables,
which are counted good for the Gout, as the Roots of Birth-wort, the Leaves of
Ground Pine, and Germander, and the like, mixed with Antiscorbuticks conduce to
the Cure of this Disease. Oil of Worms, of Frogs and Toads, are often useful to
ease the Pain. I have been told by a worthy Man, that the Water drawn from what
is contained in the Stomach of an Ox newly killed, by Distillation, and applied
hot with Clothes, gives certainly ease.

For Convulsive and Paralitick Diseases occasioned by the Scurvy, Remedies
proper for them must be mixed with Antiscorbuticks,

For a Consumption and a Fever ocasioned by the Scurvy, gentle Catharticks,
Digestives, and things that corroborate must be used. And because they often
arise from a scirrhous Tumor in the Stomach, or Parts thereabouts, things that
open Obstructions are to be used, as Tunbridge-waters, and the like. Moreover,
Fomentations, Liniments and Plasters must be outwardly applied; Asses or
Cows-milk, diluted with Barly-water, or with some proper distilled-water is
often good; so is Broth made of Snails, and Snails boiled in Milk. Moreover,
Distilled waters of Milk or Whey with Snails, and Antiscorbutick Herbs, do a
great deal of Good in this Case. And for the Fever, the following Medicines
may be used with a thin Diet,

Take of the Raspings of Hartshorn, and Ivory, each two drams and an half; of
Eryngo Roots candied six drams, of the Roots of Chervil, Dandelyon, each half
an ounce; of the Leaves of Hart's-tongue, Liverwort, each one handful; one Apple
sliced, of Raisins one handful; boil them in four Pints of Fountain Water to
the Consumption of a third part; pour the strained Liquor upon two handfuls of
Brook-lime, and a dram and an half of Sal-prunella, or of Nitre fixed one dram;
let them infuse for the Space of three Hours; four or six ounces of it may be
taken three times a day.

Take of the Leaves of Brook-lime four handfuls, of Wood Sorrel, of the Herb
and Root of Dandelyon, each two handfuls; of Snails cleansed one pound and an
half, the Peels of two Oranges: After they are bruised and cut, pour upon them
six Pints of new Milk, or Whey made with Syder, or of the fresh Juice of
Apples; distill them after the common Way. Three ounces may be taken twice or
thrice a day.

A Scorbutical Rhumatism must be cured by Purging, but especially by Bleeding,
and repeated sometimes according to the Strength of the Patient.

Diuretics and Diaphoreticks must be also used, and four or six ounces of the
Infusion of Horse-dung in Wine or Ale may be taken twice or thrice a day on the
Days the Sick does not purge. Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Blood, is also very
good in this case.

A Scorbutical Dropsy arising from an evident Cause, or occasionally, is often
cured; wherefore, if the Sick cannot sleep, Opiats must be given, and Purging
must be repeated at due distances, according to the Strength of the Patient,
and Glisters must be often injected to keep the Body loose.

Take of Mercurius Dulcis one Scruple, of Rosin of Jalap five or ten grains, of
Cloves half a Scruple; mix them and give it in a spoonful of Panado: At other
Times Diuretics, and sometimes Diaphoreticks, must be given.

Take of Tincture of Salt of Tartar, impregnated with the Tincture of
Millepedes, as much as you please: Give a Scruple or two Scruples twice a day
in some proper Liquor.

Take of the Spirit of Sal-armoniack what quantity you please: The Dose is
fifteen drops.

Take of Mill pedes prepared three drams, of Salt of Tartar two drams, of
Nutmegs one dram; mix them, make a Powder. The Dose is half a dram twice a day
with some proper Liquor. Or,

Take of dried Bees powdered two drams, of the Seeds of Bishops-weed powdered
one dram, of Oil of Juniper one scruple, of Turpentine a sufficient quantity
for a Mass of Pills. The Dose is one scruple or half a dram to be taken twice a
day, drinking upon it three or four ounces of the following Water.

Take of the Leaves of both the Scurvy-grasses, of Watercresses, of
Pepper-wort, and Arsmart, each three handfuls; of the Roots of Wake-robin,
Briony, and Florentine-orris, each four ounces; of the middle Bark of Elder two
handfuls, of the Winteran-bark two ounces, of the yellow Peel of four Oranges,
and three Lemmons, and of fresh Juniper Berries, four ounces; cut them and
bruise them, and pour upon them two quarts of Rhenish-wine, and of the Wine
made of the Juice of Elder-berries one quart. Distill them in a common Still,
and mix the Waters. The Dose is three or four ounces twice a day, after a Dose
of any of the Medicines above prescribed.

There remains one Symptom, that comes, though rarely, upon the Scurvy, viz. A
crackling of the Bones; but the Cure of it is not yet known.

An orderly Diet is of great moment in the Cure of the Scurvy: The Sick must
only eat Meat of easy Digestion, he must avoid thick and clammy Meat, and such
as are smoaked, and Pulse, Milk-meats, unripe Fruit, and things that are
sugared; for the Scurvy has increased wonderfully of late by the immoderate use
of Sugar.

Their Drink must be middling mild Beer, that is clear and medicated with
Antiscorbuticks.

Exercise and Labor are so beneficial in the Scurvy, that many have been cured
by them alone. An Air moderately hot and dry, thin and pure, should be chosen.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of the Stone in the Kidneys, and of the Nephritick Pain.
THE Nephritick Pain is called that whick afflicts the Reins and Ureters: The
cause of this Pain is various; but the most frequent is a Stone or gross Phlegm.

The less frequent causes are Clods of Blood thrust into the Ureters, or thick
Matter, conveyed from the Reins or other Parts into the Ureters.

The diagnostick Signs of the Stone.

The first Sign is a fixed Pain about the Region of the Loins; the second is
bloody Urine; the third thin and little Water at the Beginning of the Fit,
which is sometimes succeeded by a total Suppression of Urine, if both the
Ureters be obstructed; the fourth is, the frequent voiding of Sand and little
Stones; the fifth is, a Numbness of the Legs; the Sixth is, the drawing up of
the Stones; the seventh is, Nauseousness and Vomiting.

The Cure of the Nephritick Pain, and Stone sticking in the Reins and Ureters,
is peformed by dilating the Passages, by the Explosion of the Stone, or any
other Matter which causes Pain; and also by removing the antecedent Cause, and
mitigating the Pain, to the which Indications the following Remedies answer.

Take of the carminative Decoction for a Glister ten ounces, of the Electuary
of Laurel-berries, of the Electuary of Juice of Roses, each three drams; of
Venice-turpentine dissolved in the Yolk of an Egg six drams, Oil of Saint
John's Wort ten drams; mingle them, make a Glister,

After the Glister has done Working, a Vein may be opened in the Arm.

It is diligently to be observed, that Purging Medicines are not to be given
until the pain be somewhat abated, notwithstanding a Vomit may be proper at
that time,

Take of Salt of Vitriol two Scruples; it may be taken in a draught of
Posset Drink with Regiment.

Those Medicines are to be taken at the Mouth that dilate the Passages and
mitigate the Pain.

Take of White Wind, compound-water of Horseradish, each one ounce and an
half, of the Juice of Lemmons one spoonful and an half, of Tartar vitriolated
one scruple, Oil of sweet Almonds one ounce, Syrup of Marshmallows two ounces,
Powder of Nutmeg one scruple; make a draught, let it be taken warm.

Take of the Decoction of the Syrup of Marshmallows two Pints, sweeten it with
Syrup of Water Lillies and Marshmallows; add to it six ounces of White Wind; a
large draught of it may be taken warm.

When the Pain is very violent Narcoticks must be used.

Take of the Waters of Pellitory of the Wall, Saxifrage, and Cowslips, each one
ounce; Syrup of Poppies six drams, London Laudanum one grain; mix them, make a
draught to be taken at bedtime.

Take of Mathews's Pill half a Scruple, of Turpentine half a dram; mix them,
make four Pills to be taken at Bedtime.

But because a great quantity of crude Humors ordinarily accompanies this
Disease, some purging Medicine must be given.

Take of whole Cassia half an ounce, boil it in a sufficient quantity of the
Decoction of Senna Geronis, to three ounces of the strained Liquor, add of
choice Manna one ounce; mingle them, make a Draught to be taken with Regiment.
Or,

Take of choice Manna two ounces, dissolve it in four ounces of Milk-water, add
to the strained Liquor two scruples of Cream of Tartar.

Anoint well with a warm Hand the Region of the Kidneys and Ureters, with the
Ointment of Marshmallows, and Oil of Scorpions of Mathiolus.

The following Medicines are often used.

Take of Turpentine of Chios two drams, of Balsam of Tolu half a dram, with a
sufficient quantity of Troches of Alkakengi, make middling Pills, let four of
them be taken at Bedtime.

Take of the Powders of Crab's-eyes, and of Millepedes, each two Scruples; of
the Seeds of Daucus powdered, and of Sal-prunella, each one scruple; make a
Powder to be divided into four Parts, let one be taken at Bedtime.

To prevent this Disease, Tunbridge-waters, and the like, and Whey, drank for
the Space of a Month in the Spring are good.

In the use of all Diuretics, this is perpetually to be observed, viz. They
must not be frequently given.

The immoderate Heat of the Reigns may be qualified by wearing continually upon
them Plates of Lead with holes in them.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Of the Stone in the Bladder.
IT is very difficult to know this Disease, especially at the beginning, when
the Stone is small; but when it is great it is easily known.

The first Sign is, a pain in the Neck of the Bladder, which is exasperated
about the end of making Water, and stretches it self to the Glans; it is very
like a Heat of Urine, and can scarce be distinguished from it at first, till
other Signs begin to appear.

The second Sign is, an itching on the Yard, which forces the Sick to handle
and scratch it often.

The Third Sign is, a Weight in the Peritonaeum, and in all the Region of the
Pubis, with a heavy Pain; this is when the Stone is large.

The fourth Sign, when the Stone is large, there is a great Difficulty in
making Water; the Sick endeavors to make Water often, but renders it by drops.

The sixth Sign is, a Suppression of Urine in making Water, when it stops
suddenly in the middle Course, the Stone being brought with the Urine to the
Neck of the Bladder.

The sixth Sign is, the voiding Urine most easily upon lying on the Back,
because the Stone in that Position goes farthest from the Channel of the
Bladder; also when the Urine, being suppressed in making Water, flows freely;
when the Body is laid back and shook, the Stone falling then to the bottom of
the Bladder.

The seventh Sign is, frequent Erection of the Penis, which prooceeds from a
retention of the Urine, and from an Inflammation of the Bladder occasioned by
the rubbing of the Stone.

The eighth Sign is, a Tenesmus, and a frequent Endeavor to go to Stool, which
follows the Endeavors of making Water, by reason of the consent betwixt the
Sphincter of the Anus, and the Bladder; and the one being irritated, the other
is so too, because they receive Branches from the same Nerve.

The ninth Sign is, that the Sick cannot rest in one place, they move their
Legs alternately; and if the Stone be large, he can scarce stand upright, or
ride or walk in stony places.

The tenth Sign is, that the Sick are eased by no Remedies, but most commonly
grow worse thereby, because all Medicines that come to the Urinary Passages
increase the Disease, either by bringing new matter to the Bladder, or they rub
off the Phlegm which encompasseth the Stone, and then it grates harder upon the
Bladder.

The eleventh Sign is, that when the Sick has been subject to Nephritick Pains,
and used to void Gravel at the end of the Fit.

If after such Pain he has not voided a Stone as he was wont, it is a Sign that
the Stone remains in the Bladder, and increases by degrees, and occasions the
foresaid Symptoms.

The Cure is much the same with that described in the foregoing Chapter; when
the Stone is small, Water distilled from Onyons being used for forty days, has
evacuated a Stone of the bigness of a Bean: But daily Experience shows, that a
Stone cannot be dissolved in the Bladder by any Medicines; wherefore we are
generally forced to leave such Patients to the Lithotomist; and having been
intimately acquainted with one of the chiefest Lithotomists in the City of
London, and made some Observations upon his Practice; I find that Children bear
cutting well, and generally recover; but that Men past forty Years of Age, most
commonly die.

If the Sick will not undergo Cutting, or if it be not safe, by reason of his
Age, gentle Medicines must be used, such as are prescribed for Heat of Urine,
least the Stone should ulcerate the Neck of the Bladder by its Roughness, upon
which it is often rolled; and if it happen to be thrust upon the Neck of the
Bladder, and so stop the Urine, the Patient must lie upon his Back, and you
must endeavor to remove it by shaking the Body and lifting up the Legs;
afterward you must use an emollient Fomentation or Bath, and you must force
back the Stone with a Catheter.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. Of an Inflammation of the Reins and Bladder.
BEcause an Inflammation of the Reins and Bladder is cured by the same
Remedies; therefore we include them both in one Chapter,

The Signs of an Inflammation of the Reins are, a heavy Pain in the Region of
the Reins, and there is sometimes a pulsation: If the place wherein the
Arteries are be affected, and the Pain is extended to the neighboring Parts,
so that the Sick cannot raise himself upright nor stand, and but difficultly
turn himself to the opposite side, neither can he lie upon that side nor upon
his Belly, and therefore he is forced perpetually to lie upon his Back; if his
Knees, or if his Body be any way moved, the Pain is much exasperated; there is
a Numbness of the same side, by reason of a Nerve which goes from thence to the
Leg; his Urine is hot, and in the beginning thin and yellow; afterward red and
thick. The Sick has a continual and acute Fever, and it is often accompanied
with watchings, a Delirium, Nauseousness and Vomiting.

But in an Inflammation of the Bladder, the Pain is seated upon the Region of
the Pubis, and Perinaeum, in which Parts there is a Heat, and sometimes an
apparent Redness, the Urine is always hot, and voided difficultly, the Passage
being stopped by the Tumor; and the right Gut is affected by reason of its
Nearness; upon which account there is frequent endeavors to go to stool, and
sometimes the Belly is bound: There are also other Symptoms that are common
with the Inflammation of the Reins, as a Fever, watching, and the like.

The Cure of an Inflammation in the Reins and Bladder, is performed by
Medicines that cause Revulsion and Derivation, and by such as cool and
moderately repel, by Anodyn, resolving and suppurating Medicines.

And First, Bleeding is very necessary twice, thrice, or oftener, acccording to
the Strength, until the Fluxion is stopped and the Pain abated. A large
quantity of Blood being taken away from the upper Veins, the lower are to be
opened also in the Foot to make Derivation. The Hemorrhoidal Veins are also to
be opened, especially if they are swelled; and Cupping-glasses with
Scarification are to be applied to the upper and lower parts to make Revulsion.
Frictions and painful Ligatures of the extreme parts are also to be used;
Emollient cooling, and moderately loosning Glisters must be injected in a small
quantity.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows one ounce, of the Leaves of Mallows,
Violets, and Lettice, each one handful; of sweet Prunes four pair, of Barley
cleansed, and of the Flowers of Violets, each one Pugil; make a Decoction to
eight or ten ounces; in the strained Liquor dissolve one ounce of Cassia, of
Oil of Violets four ounces, of Yolks of Eggs number two, make a Glister.

The Heat of the Blood must be mitigated by Juleps and Emulsions.

Take of the Waters of Endive, Lettice and Purslain, each four ounces; of Syrup
of Pomegranates two ounces, of Syrup of Water Lillies one ounce; mingle them,
make a Julep, for three Doses to be taken Morning or Evening. Or,

Take of the Roots of Sorrel two ounces, of the Leaves of Mallows, Plantane,
Purslain, and Endive, each one handful; of the Tops of white Poppies half an
handful, of the Seeds of Annise and Lettice, each one dram; of the Flowers of
Borrage, Violets, and Water Lillies, each one pugil; boil them to a Pint and an
half; then add of the Syrup of Pomegranates four ounces. Or,

Take of sweet Almonds blanced one ounce, of fresh Pine-nuts half an ounce, of
the Seeds of Lettice, Sorrel, Purslain, and white Poppies, each three drams;
beat them in a marble Mortar, and pour upon them of the Waters of Barley, or
Lettice, or Purslain one Pint and an half; in the strained Liquor dissolve one
ounce of Sugar of Roses; make an Emulsion for three Doses. Syrup of Poppies may
be conveniently added to this Emulsion, to restrain the Fluxion more
powerfully.

Cooling Glisters must be also injected.

In the Beginning of these Inflammations, Purging is not convenient, but at the
Declination gentle Purges may be used, as of Manna, Cassia, Rubarb, Tamarinds
and the like.

But cooling and moderately repelling Medicines must be used outwardly at the
beginning, as liquid Epithems made of the Waters or Juices of Plantane, Sorrel,
Endive, Nightshade, and of Roses, with a little Vinegar, red Sanders, and
Camphor; also Liniments of Oil of Roses Omphacine, and of Violets, the white
Ointment, or Populeon alone, or mixed, a little Vinegar being added to them,
may be applied almost cold to the Parts every hour.

If the Pain be very violent, it will not be improper to add to the Epithem or
Liniment, a little Opium or Saffron.

A Cataplasm may be also made of Barley-meal, with the Juice of Endive,
Purslain, and Nightshade, Oil of Roses being added to it and Populeum
Ointment; but it must be frequently changed before it grows hot.

But here three things are to be observed: First, We must not continue too long
the use of cooling Medicines; least the Expulsion of the conjunct matter by
Sweat should be hindered, and the Tumors should grow Scirrhous. Secondly, in an
Inflammation of the Bladder, things that are but a little cooling and
astringent must be used, least a Suppression of Urine should happen, which is a
Symptom that is very frequent of it self in this Disease. Thirdly, Cataplasms
are not so proper in an Inflammation of the Bladder, as Liniments and
Ointments, because they oppress the part with their Weight.

Wherefore when cooling Medicines have been used a very little while, and after
Bleeding repeated, the Fluxion being pretty well stopped, we must use Emollients,
and gentle Resolvents, as Fomentations made of a Decocton of the Roots of
Marshmallows, of the Leaves of Mallows, Violets, Pellitory, of the Seeds of
Flax, Fenugreek, Mallows, and of Cotton, of the Flowers of Camomil, Melilot,
Rosemary, and Roses; and Liniments are to be applied of Oil of Lillies, Roses,
and with a little Oil of Camomile,

The following Pultis is very softning, and Anodyne.

Take of the Crumbs of white Bread one pound; boil them in Goats-milk to the
Consistence of a Pultiss; then add the Yolks of three Eggs, of Oil of Roses
four ounces, of Saffron half a dram; make a Cataplasm; it must be often
changed; a little Opium and Camphor may be added to it if the Pain be very
violent.

If there be danger of a Gangrene, a corroborating Cataplasm must be made of
the Meal of Beans, Orobus, and of Lupins boiled in Wine.

But when the Inflammation is in a manner taken off, then resolving Decoction
and Liniments must be used.

In the whole course of the Disease, respect must be always had to the Fever,
Pain, Watchings, Suppressions of Urine, and the like.

And to ease the Pain of the Bladder, Anodyne Suppositories, or Yolks of Eggs,
with a little Opium, and with the Juice of Henbane, or the like, must be tied
up in a rag, and put up the Fundament.

If the Inflammation of the Reins cannot be discussed, but tends to
Suppuration, which may be known by the Increase of the Fever, of the Pain, and
of other Symptoms; also by shaking and Vomiting, and by a greater Weight about
the Part, especially when the Sick bends toward the well Side; the Motion of
Nature must be furthered by applying Cataplasms made of emollient Roots, and
Herbs, of the Seeds of Flax, and of the Flowers of Camomil, to which being
boiled, bruised, and pulped, Meals, Butter, Grease, and proper Oils must be
added, whereby, unless the Abscess break and cleanse it self by Urine, the
Matter breaks into the Cavity of the Belly; upon which account sudden Death, or
an hectic Fever follows. Sometimes the Tumor swells outward, and then it
must be opened by a Potential Cautery, or with a Knife.

It also happens sometimes, that the Tumors become Scirrhous, the Fever
ceasing, but the Pain continuing with a greater Sense of Weight, and a Numbness
of the neighboring Parts, which are most commonly incurable, for the Sick
falls into a Cachexy and Dropsy; yet the Cure may be attempted by emollient,
inciding, and digestive Medicines.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of Bloody Urine.
BLood may be conveyed from many Parts to the Urinal Passages, and be mixed
with the Urine, and so render it bloody; but that rarely happens, and we only
discourse here of Diseases of the Reins and Bladder, and of that bloody Urine
which proceeds from the fault of those Parts: The Blood flows from the Reins
and Bladder, as from all other Parts, either by opening of the Vessels, by a
Rupture, or a Solution of the Continuum, but very rarely, by reason of the
Thinness of the Veins which carry Blood to these Places.

The most frequent causes, are Fullness and Acrimony of the Blood, and a Stone
in the Kidneys, a Fall or Blow, the lifting or carrying of a great Weight,
violent Motion of the Body, or the like.

When Blood flows from the Bladder it is little in quantity.

The Cure of this Disease must be varied according to the Variety of the
Causes: And first, If it proceed from a great quantity or Acrimony of the
Blood, Bleeding must be used frequently, but little must be taken away at a
time; and in this case Cupping glasses, Frictions, and Ligatures must be used
to the upper Parts, and Derivation must be made by bleeding in the Foot, or by
opening the Hemorrhoidal Veins.

When serous and Choleric Humors promote this Evacuation, they must be purged
off by Catharticks used by Intervals.

Take of Rubarb a little torrified and powdered one dram, of Coral prepared
half a Scruple, of the Whey of Goats-milk, or of Plantane-water, three ounces;
make a Potion.

Take of Cassia fresh drawn half an ounce, of the Pulp of Tamarinds six drams,
of Bole-armonick half a Scruple; with Sugar make a Bolus.

After due Revulsions and Evacuations, or whilst they are used, if there be
occasion, such things as restrain the Blood, and heal the Veins must be given;
but they must not be presently used, least the Blood should be stopped too soon,
and being thickened, it should coagulate somewhere; for this Purpose the Juice
of Plantane fresh drawn is much commended, four or five ounces of it being
taken Morning and Evening, which is also very proper in all Hemorrhagies, but
if it be too cold for the Stomach, it may be boiled a little with Sugar.

Sheeps-milk is also much commended, four ounces of it being taken with a dram
of Bole-armenick, but after taking it, the Sick must not sleep nor exercise
himself. Decoctions also of Knot-grass, Horse-tail, Purslain, and of the Tops
of Brambles, sweetened with Syrup of Quinces; or to qualify the Heat of the
Blood, the following Apozem may be used.

Take of the Leaves of Lettice, Purslain, Plantane, and Comfrey, each one
handful; of the four greater and lesser cold Seeds, each one dram; of Jujubes
three pair, of Liquorish half an ounce, of the Flowers of Water Lillies, of
Violets, and of Roses, each one Pugil; make a Decoction to a Pint and an half;
in the strained Liquor dissolve of Gum-tragacanth a dram and an half; of Syrup
of Violets, and of dried Roses, each one ounce and an half; of Sal-prunella
half an ounce, of the Troches of Alkakengi without Opium half a dram; make an
Apozem for four Doses.

To thicken and restrain the Blood more powerfully, we may add to it an ounce
of Syrup of Poppies.

If the Disease be lasting, an Electuary may be made in the following manner.

Take of the Conserves of Roses, and of the Roots of Comfrey each two ounces;
of sealed Earth, and Bole-Armenick, of Dragons-blood, red Coral, Boodstone,
and Troches of Ambar, each one dram; of Hypocistis, grains of Kermes, and of
the Seeds of Plantane, each one scruple; with equal Parts of Syrup of Mirtles,
and of Poppies, make an Electuary, whereof let him take the quantity of a
Walnut Morning and Evening, drinking upon it a little Plantane-water.

Dr. Gordon's Troches are also reckoned excellent in this Case.

But because Clots of Blood are wont to be retained in the Bladder, and to
occasion violent Symptoms, for the Dissolution of them, it will be convenient
to drink warm now and then Mallow-water, mixed with a little Vinegar, but the
quantity of the Vinegar must be so small, that it can scarce be tasted.

Outwardly Topics must be applied to the Region of the Loins, such as are
proper to cool and bind the Reins.

Take of the Roots of Bristort, and of Comfrey, each one ounce; of the Leaves
of Plantane, Purslain, Shepherds-purse, Knot-grass, each one handful; of the
Flowers of Pomegranates half an ounce, of the grains of Sumach, and Mirtles,
and of Hypocistis, each two drams; of the Cups of Acorns, and of yellow and red
Sanders, each one dram; of red Roses three Pugils; boil them in Smith's-water
with a little Vinegar, strain the Liquor, and foment the Reins with it warm. A
Bath may be made of the same Decoction the quantity of it being increased.

Take of the Juice of Plantane, and of Blood-wort, each two ounces; of Vinegar
half an ounce, of Omphacine Oil one ounce, boil them to the Consumption of the
Juices, then add of Dragons-blood, Mastich, and of Pomegranate-peel, each two
drams; of Champhor half a dram, of the Countesses Oynoment four ounces, of Wax
a sufficient quantity; make a Liniment.

Anoint the Loins with it frequently; at the time you use it, mix a little
Vinegar with it.

Leaden Plates with many holes in them, worn upon the Reins, are very proper.

When the Voiding of Blood proceeds from the Stone, the following Method has
been found very successful by Dr. Sydenham, who was much troubled with the
Gout, the Stone in the Kidneys, and a bloody Urine; and I have also found it
very successful, I drank, says he, two ounces and a half of Manna dissolved in
a quart of Whey, swallowing now and then a little of the Juice of Lemmons,
while I was purging, to quicken this Cathartick, which used to work slowly, and
to render it more pleasant to the Stomach. It can scarce be said how much Ease
I received about the Region of the Reins by the use of this Remedy; for though
they did not always ach before, yet they were affected with a heavy and
troublesome Pain; and because it succeeded so well with me, I took the same of a
set day once a Week for some Months, and after every Purge I plainly found my
self better, and could bear the shaking of a Coach when it went fast, and was
indeed wholly freed from this Symptom. But it returning again, some time after,
I took it twice a Week for three Weeks, and afterward only once a Week: I
continued this Method some Months on set Days, and the Bleeding quite stopped:
The Diet that I observed is as follows, In the Morning when I rise I drink a
Dish of Tea, at Dinner I moderately refresh my self with any sort of Meat of
easy Digestion that I like; a draught of small Beer is to me instead of a
Supper; and when I am in Bed I take another draught, that by this Julep I may
cool and dilute the hot and acrid Juices lodged in the Kidneys, whereof the
Stone is generated; and I prefer at this time, and at Dinner time, small Beer
that has Hopps in it, before that which has none, for though that which is not
hopped is smoother and softer, and so fitter to carry off the Stone from the
Kidneys, yet that which is hopped, by reason of the stiptick Quality which the
Hopps impart to it, is not so apt to generate sandy and stony Matter, as that
which is not hopped, the Substance whereof is more viscous and slimy. I take
care to go to Bed early, especially in Winter; and to prevent a bloody Urine, I
take care, that as often as I have occasion to ride a long Way upon the Stones,
to drink a large draught of small Beer before I go; and also before my Return,
if I be abroad a pretty while, whereby I secure my self pretty well from bloody
Urine.

CHAP. XC. Of an Ulcer of the Reins and Bladder.
AN Ulcer is occasioned in the Reins and Bladder by three Causes, first, from
an Abscess broken, secondly from the Acrimony of the Humors, and thirdly, from
a rough Stone, and this is the most frequent and ordinary cause.

Among the Diagnostick Signs, the first and chief is the voiding of Matter with
Urine, which continuing a while, certainly shows an Ulcer in the urinary
Passages; but whither the Reins or the Bladder are affected with the Ulcer, may
be known by the Situation of the Pain, as whether it be in the Region of the
Loins, or in the Pubis, or Perinaeum. Moreover, Matter proceeding from the
Reins is better concocted, is white, light, and not at all stinking, because
the Parenchyma of the Reins being fleshy concocts better, and the Matter is
also in a greater quantity, and more mixed with the Urine, which looks like
Milk, along while after voiding it the Matter is separated from it, and falls
to the Bottom of the Chamber Pot. But Purulent Matter flowing from the Bladder,
is little and not much mixed with the Urine, nor so concocted, but crude,
variegated and stinks much, for the Part having little Heat, cannot
sufficiently concoct the Matter, but from the Neck of the Bladder, or from the
urinal Passage, pure Matter without Urine is often voided. Moreover, In an
Ulcer of the Bladder or of its Neck, there is a continual Heat of Urine, and a
continual Pain in the part, which is not so in an Ulcer of the Reins; for in
that Ulcer the Heat of Urine and Pain cease sometimes.

When the Ulcer is deep, Blood sometimes flows out plentifully, which is
difficultly stopped, and often small pieces of the Parts are voided with the
Blood and Matter, viz. most commonly small Caruncles from the Reins, sometimes
they are larger, and passing difficultly through the Ureters, they occasion a
Nephritick Pain, but from the Bladder small Scales, or small Membranous Skins
flow like Bran.

And lastly, In a long and callous Ulcer of the Bladder, a mucous Phlegm is
produced.

As to the Prognostic, these Ulcers are very difficultly cured, because there
is a perpetual Flux of Humors to the Part; for though the Serum of its own
Nature is cleansing, yet when it is infected with other qualities it is not so,
and when acrid and salt Humors are mixed with it, ^hey occasion Ulcers, or
further them.

Fresh Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder may be cured, but when they are
inveterate they are incurable.

In old Men they can never be cured, in young Men they may sometimes, but with
great Difficulty.

Ulcers that are occasioned by the Stone cannot be cured till the Stone is
extracted.

The Pain and other Symptoms which accompany these Ulcers, occasion Watchings,
and waste the Body, and at length the Sick is brought into a Cachexy and
Consumption.

The Cure of the Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder, as of all other Ulcers, is
performed by cleansing, drying, and consolidating Medicines. To which end the
following things may be used.

And First, if there be a Plethora, or an Inflammation of the Part, Bleeding
must be ordered, first in the Arm, and afterward in the Foot.

Afterward Purging must be prescribed frequently, that the vicious Humors
abounding in the whole Body, and flowing to the Part affected may be evacuated;
but only gentle and lenitive Medicines must be ordered, as Cassia, Manna, Syrup
of Roses, Rubarb, and Agarick reduced to a Bolus, or some other solid Form,
because in a liquid Form they easily run to the Urinary Passage, and so
increase the Acrimony. The following Electuary may be prescribed.

Take of Polypody of the Oak, and of Liquorish rasped, each half an ounce; of
the four greater Cold Seeds each one dram, of the Flowers of Violets, and
Borrage, each half a pugil; of Jujubes six pair, of Damask Prunes three pair,
of Raisins half an ounce, of Senna cleansed two ounces and an half; infuse them
a Night in Barley-water, boil them in the Morning and strain them; afterward
dissolve an ounce and an half of Manna in a sufficient quantity of the
Decoction, strain it again, add to it three ounces of Cassia fresh drawn; boil
them to the Consistence of an Electuary, adding at last half an ounce of Rubarb
powdered. The Dose is one ounce once a Week two Hours before eating. Or,

Take of Cassia two ounces, of Manna one ounce and an half, of the Pulp of
Sebestines, and Tamarinds, each one ounce; of the Mucilage of the Seeds of
Psyllium six drams, of the four greater cold Seeds each one dram, of Juice of
Liquorish two drams, with Syrup of Roses solutive make an Electuary. If you add
Mercurius Dulcis to the Electuaries above mentioned it will succeed the better;
for it is of great Virtue to cleanse and heal all inward and outward Ulcers.

Among Purgers Turpentine is reckoned, and is much commended in this case,
because it loosens the Belly, and cleanses the Ulcer; half an ounce of it
washed in Plantane water must be given in Powder of Liquorish; but it is
chiefly to be used when the Urine is very mucous and thick.

Vomiting is much commended by many, whereof some provoke it before Meals with
warm water and Oil, with which only Remedy often repeated, they say this
Disease has been cured. But it is to be noted, that Vomiting must be only used
in those that vomit easily, for violent Vomiting irritates the Ulcer.

After due Evacuations and Revulsions we must come to the use of such things as
cleanse, the chief of which are Whey drank in a great quantity in the Morning,
and small Mead, whereof also six or eight ounces may be taken in a Morning, and
it may be used for the ordinary Drink. A Decoction of Barley with Liquorish and
Sugar may be used in the same manner.

If Mead be thought too hot, the greater cold Seeds, or the Roots of Liquorish,
and the Tops of Mallows may be boiled in it. Asses-milk also does not only
cleanse but it also consolidates; but it must not be given when there is a
Fever; or the following Decoction may be used.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows half an ounce, of the Leaves of Plantane
Agrimony, Maidenhair, and the Tops of Mallows, each one handful; of the Seeds
of Mallows, and of Mellons, with the Barks bruised, each half an ounce; of the
grains of Alkakengi six drams, of Liquorish rasped one ounce, of whole Barley
one pugil; boil them to a quart, in the strained Liquor dissolve of Honey of
Roses three ounces, of Sugar Candy two ounces; make a Julep, whereof take eight
ounces in a Morning, for ten Days. Those things which are given for Diseases of
the Reins and Bladder, must be prescribed in a large quantity, for otherwise
their Virtues will not reach the Parts affected.

But instead of all, Barnet or Epsom-water, or Tunbridge-waters may be used;
for by the long use of them, the hot Intemperies will be corrected, and the
Ulcers cleansed and cured.

Some commend to dry up the Ichor, and to cleanse and heal internal Ulcers,
especially in Patients of a Phlegmatic Constitution, and for such as have been
at any Time infected with the French Pox, and when there is no Fever nor Flux
of Blood, a sudorifick Decoction made of China, Sarsa-parilla, Sassafras, or of
Guajacum, to be taken for thirty Days or more, and that the second Decoction
should be used for ordinary Drink, with a thin and drying Diet. In the mean
time, least the Bowels should be too much inflamed by the use of this
Decoction, they may be qualified by cooling Broths given about the Evening, and
by anointing the Reins with cooling Ointments*

But the following Decoction is safer and more successful in every case.

Take of the Roots of Sarsaparilla three ounces, of Lignum Lentiscinum two
ounces, of Sassafras one ounce, of the Raspings of Ivory and Hartshorn, each
six ounces; of Jujubes, and Sebestines, each half an ounce; of Nephritick Wood
four ounces, of Barley cleansed two ounces; infuse them twelve Hours in five
pints of Fountain Water, boil it to three, for six Doses to be taken twice a
Day. Aromatise them with two drams of Cinnamon.

When the Ulcer is sufficiently cleansed, which may be known, for that the
Matter is voided with the Urine in a lesser quantity, and is white, and does
not stink at all, Astringent things and such as heal must be given,

Take of Bole-Armenick, of sealed Earth, and of red Coral, each three drams; of
Gum-Arabick, and Tragacanth, each half an ounce; make Troches with
Agrimony-Water, weighing each two drams; one of them must be taken Morning and
Evening with a Decoction of Comfry.

But Dr. Gordon's Troches are better than all the rest, to cleanse and heal
Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder; and at the same time ease the Pain, and take
off the Heat of Urine; two drams of them may be taken at a time in Mead, or a
Decoction of Barley, when you design most to cleanse; and in Goats or rather
Sheeps Milk, when you chiefly design to heal.

Consolidating Juleps may be made in the following manner.

Take of the Roots of Comfry two ounces; of the Leaves of Plantane, and
Mouse-ear, each one handful; of the Tops of Mallows, and Maidenhair, each half
a handful; of Liquorish rasped half an ounce, of White-starch, Gum-arabick,
Tragacanth, and Bole-armenick, each one dram; of the Seeds of Lettice,
Purslain, each one dram; of the seeds of red Roses one pugil; make a Decoction
in Rainwater to one Pint and an half; in the strained Liquor dissolve four
ounces of Sugar, and two ounces of Penids; make a Julep, whereof let him take
eight ounces in a Morning for ten or twelve Days.

The following Pills are also very good.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, and of Comfry dried, of Gum-arabick, and
of the Gum of the Cherry-tree, and Prune, each one dram; of Olybanum and Mirrh,
each four scruples; of the Seeds of white Poppies, and of Alkakengi, each one
dram and an half; of Camphor two scruples; powder them finely, or with a third
part of the Weight of all of Ceruss, of Antimony, and with a suffici-quantity
of Venice Turpentine, make a Mass for Pills, whereof let him take a dram
Morning and Evening.

If the Turpentine should cause Pain, the Juice of Liquorish may be used
instead of it; but new Cows-milk is the best of all, a quarter of a pint of it
being taken with half a dram of Bole-armenick every Morning.

In inveterate Ulcers a Decoction of round Birth-wort in White Wind sweetened
with Sugar is very beneficial.

The following Ointment may be used outwardly to consolidate the Ulcer.

Take of the Juice of Plantane, and Nightshade, each four ounces; of Oil of
Roses Omphacine three ounces, of Vinegar one ounce, of Letharge finely powdered
one ounce and an half, of Ceruss washed half an ounce, of Tutty finely powdered
two drams; of Dragons-blood one dram; reduce them all to the Form of an
Ointment.

Injections are peculiarly proper for an Ulcer of the Bladder, they must be
used twice a Day: First, Such as cleanse made of Hydromel, of Whey, or a
Decoction of Barley, with a littie Honey of Roses; but afterward astringent
and consolidating Injections must be used, wherein the Roots of Comfry, Mirrh,
Alum, Sarcocoll, and Tragacanth have been boiled; Dr. Gordon's Troches
dissolved in Milk are of excellent use.

Fabritius Hildanus cured a great Ulcer of the Bladder with the following
Injection, and with some other Remedies. See his 69 Observation, Cent. 3.

Take of the Roots of Comfry one ounce, of whole Barley one handful, of the
Leaves of Agrimony, Speedwell, Scordium, Ladies-mantle, Sanicle, each half a
handful; boil them to a Pint; in the strained Liquor dissolve of Honey of Roses
two drams; mingle them, make an Injection.

It is to be noted, that these Injections are not to be squirted in with a
Syringe, because they do not penetrate into the Cavity of the Bladder, the
Sphincter Muscle hindering; but a Catheter being put into the Bladder, you must
syringe through it, and so the Injection will reach the Part affected.

But because these Ulcers are commonly painful, all the course of the Cure you
must endeavor to mitigate the Pain with Anodynes taken inwardly, and used
outwardly, Syrup of Poppies, London Laudanum, and the Troches of Alkakengi,
which are peculiarly proper in this case, must be used inwardly: Also Emulsions
of the cold Seeds, of the Seeds of white Poppies, adding if there be occasion,
Syrup of Poppies. And lastly, The Conserve of the Flowers of Marshmallows must
be frequently given.

And the following Fomentation may be used to the Region of the Reins,

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, of the Leaves of Mallows, Pellitory, and
Violets, each one handful; of the seeds of Flax, Fenugreek, and Alkakengi, each
three drams; of the Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, and Water Lillies, each one
Pugil; make a Decoction, wherewith foment the Part with Flannels.

After the Fomentation use the following Liniment.

Take of Oil of Violets, and of sweet Almonds, each one ounce and an half; of
Oil of Roses one ounce, of the Mucilages of the Seeds of Marshmallows and
Fenugreek, each two ounces; of Suffron one scruple; make a Liniment.

But to ease the Pain, new Milk from the Cow, with Dr. Gordon's Troches
dissolved in it injected, is the best Anodyne, for it eases the pain and cures
the Ulcer.

CHAP. XCI. Of a Diabetes.
THis Disease was so rare amongst the Ancients, that many famous Physicians
made no mention of it; but in our Age, wherein excessive Drinking has been,
especially of Wine, so much used, there are many Instances of it.

As to the Cure, The chief intentions of Healing, are to prevent fusion of the
Blood, and to take off that which is so. First, The Fusion of the Blood is
hindered, when its gross and watery Parts contain one another, and are contained,
so that they do not too hastily separate, which may be effected by thickning
Remedies; and for this Purpose Rice, Starch, and Mucilaginous Vegetables, also
Gums, and some resinous things are of use. Secondly, That the Fusion of the
Blood may be taken off, such Remedies are indicated as dissolve the Concretions
of the Salts. I have prescribed in this Disease, the Tincture of Antimony with
good success, and Limewater, with the Seeds of Annise, Raisins, and Liquorish,
is much commended by some.

A Nobleman fell into a desperate Diabetes, for besides that, he voided a
Gallon and an half of clear Urine, that was almost as sweet as Honey, in the
space of a Night and a Day; he was also afflicted with great Thirst, a Hectic
Fever, great Weakness, and with a wasting of the whole Body; he was cured in a
short time by the following Medicines.

Take of the Tops of Cypress eight handfuls, of the Whites of Eggs a quart, of
Cinnamon half an ounce; having cut them small, pour upon them four Quarts of
new Milk, and distill them in a cold Still. Have a care of an Empyrema. He took
six ounces of it thrice a day.

Take of Gum-Arabick, and Tragacanth, each six drams; of Penediate Sugar one
ounce, make a Powder; give one dram, or one dram and an half, twice a day, with
three or four ounces of the distilled Water.

Take of Rubarb powdered fifteen grains, of Cinnamon six grains, make a Powder;
let him take it in the Morning and repeat it six or seven days after.

Take of Cowslip-water three ounces, of Cinnamon Water hordeated two drams,
with half an ounce of Diacodium; make a draught to be taken at Bedtime every
Night.

His Diet was altogether in a manner of Milk, which he eat sometimes crude,
sometimes boiled, with Bread or Barley; sometimes it was diluted with a
distilled water, or with Barley-water.

When he had been well a long time, he fell into the same Disease again, and
the same Method and Medicines were ordered again, whereby he grew better in a
few Days; afterward he took five or six ounces of Limewater daily thrice in a
Day; and having used it four days, he voided Urine in a moderate quantity well
colored and somewhat salt. I cured another of a deplorable Diabetes by the
same Method, especially with Limewater.

CHAP. XCII. Of Incontinence of Urine.
INcontinence of Urine proceeds from a fault of the retentive Faculty of the
Bladder; it befalls either People waking, and then the cause is great, or
sleeping, and then it is less, for at that time the Animal Functions are not so
freely exercised; and this happens two Ways, viz. Either by the Weakness, or
Laxity of the Sphincter Muscle of the Bladder; which sucking Children are
subject to, old People, and some in their middle Age, and others by false
Imagination; for many there are, who by reason of excessive Drinking, or by
reason of the exquisite sense of the Bladder, or sharp Urine, piss in Bed, in
some sort willingly; for they imagine in their Sleep, that they are making
Water against the Wall or some other Place; and they are so accustomed to this
Vice, that they do it where there is no Fault either in Bladder or Muscle of
it, and they are not cured by Medicines, but by rectifying their Imagination,
as in Children by the Rod, and in grown People by placing some precious things
upon the Places where they think they make water in their Dreams; and by
showing such things to them often.

But a preternatural Disorder occasioning an Incontinence of Urine, is seated
in the Sphincter Muscle, which is either affected Sympathically, or
Idiopathically, it is affected by Sympathy many Ways, as when the whole Body is
weak, and the Natural Heat decayed, as when Death approaches, or when the whole
Body, or half of it, is seized with the Palsy, or those Branches of the Nerves
only, which arising from the Os sacrum, are communicated to the Bladder. This
Resolution of the Muscles, is occasioned sometimes by reason of the Nearness to
other Parts affected; as in Women with Child, in swellings and Pains of the
Womb, and great Diseases of the right Gut.

But the Sphincter Muscle is also affected various ways, Idiopathically, as by
Wounds upon it, as it happens in cutting for the Stone, or by reason of deep
Wounds that hinder the Contraction and Shutting of it; but the chief and most
frequent cause, is a cold and moist Intemperies, whereby that part is weakened
and relaxed. This Intemperies is much furthered by a natural cold and moist
Constitution, by Childhood, Age; the Feminine Sex, by Diseases of the whole
Body, or of some Parts arising from a cold and moist Intemperies, to which may
be added, external causes proper to produce such an Intemperies.

The Diagnostick Signs of this Disease, either show a Sympathick Disease, which
are to be taken from the Effects proper to produce an Incontinence of Urine
mentioned above; and if they are present, we must suppose the Disease proceeds
thence; but if they are absent we must count it Idiopathick; and if it be
occasioned by a Wound, Ulcer, or any other Disorder of the Sphincter, it is
easily known, but if none of these appear, we must consider whither there be a
cold and moist Intemperies of the part, which may be known by the Constitution
of the Internal and external Causes, and by the Effects of them; as softness of
the whole Body, a pale Color, a Laxity of the Genus Nervosum, and of the
genital parts by Childhood, Age, and a Phlegmatic Cachexy, and the like.

As to the Prognostic. This Disease is incurable in old Age, in a Fever it is
dangerous; but it may be cured in Children by increase of Years, for in time
the superfluous Moisture may be consumed, and the lax parts rendered firm and
strong.

The Cure of Involuntary Urine must be directed to the correcting of the cold
and moist Intemperies, and to the Laxity of the Sphincter Muscle, for that
which is occasioned by Sympathy from other Parts primarily affected, must be
referred to the Cure of those Diseases; and that which proceeds from a Wound,
Ulcer, and other manifest Diseases, depends on the Cure of them; wherefore the
following Method of Cure must be observed, both for Children and grown People;
but in Children the most gentle Medicines must be used, and they must be dosed
accoding to their Age.

First, Bleeding is not of use in this case, unless there be a Plethora of the
whole Body in Youth, but Purges are always necessary in this case; they must be
made of Phlegmagogue Medicines, and astringent things may be mixed with them,
especially such as purge too, as Rubarb, Mirobalanes, and the like. Afterward
Electuaries, medicated Wines, and the like, must be used to dry up the
phlegmatic Matter, and to constringe the relaxed part.

Take of the Nuts of Cypress, and of Mirtles torrified, of the Raspings of
Ivory, Coriander seeds prepared, red Coral, Ambar, each two drams; of Spodium
one dram, of the Roots of Cyperus, and Galingal, each half a dram; with candied
Citrons; make an Electuary, whereof let him take the quantity of a Chestnut
Morning and Evening, drinking upon it a little red Wine.

Take of the Roots of Comfry half an ounce, of the Roots of Cyperus, and
Galingal, each one dram; of the Leaves of Plantane, Horse-tail, five leaved
Grass with the Roots each one handful; of Cypress Nuts* and of the Cups of
Acorns, each four Scruples; of the seeds of Rue, and of the chaste Tree, of
Frankincense, and of the Raspings of Ivory, each half a scruple; of red Roses
one Pugil, of red Wine two quarts; infuse them twenty four Hours, then strain
them, and add to it half an ounce of Cinnamon, and with a sufficient quantity
of Sugar make a Claret, whereof let him take three or four ounces twice a day.

Many Specificks are proposed by Authors for the Cure of this Disease, as the
Brains and Testicles of a Hare burnt, also a Cockle in its Shell burnt, and
drank; the Dung of a Hare, the Ashes of a Mouse burnt the Hoof of a Boar
torrified, the Ashes of Date-stones, the Powder of Egg-shells, but above all
the Powder of Agrimony, and the inward Coats of the Stomach of a Hen dried,
which may be given a part, or together, in red Wine.

Solinander, says, he saw excellent Success by the use of a Cocks Throat
torrified, the Powder was taken before Supper in a little red Wine, it was
repeated for some Days.

In grown People Sudorifick Decoctions made of Guajacum and Sassafrass, and
used for twenty Days, are proper to dry the Body. So are also Bath-waters,
applied with Flannels.

The Sick must drink red rough Wine by it self, or diluted with Chalybeat
waters, and he must drink but little at Supper, he must make Water just as he
is going into Bed, in the middle of the Night, and early in the Morning.

And outwardly Topics must be applied to the Pubis and Perinaeum, such as
heat, strengthen and dry.

Take of the Roots of Elecampane, sweet smelling Flag, of Acorus and Cyperus,
each half an ounce; of the Leaves of Mint, Sage, Wild-marjoram, Calaminth, and
Wormwood, each half an handful; of the Nuts of Cypress, Mirtles, Galls and
Balaustines, each one dram; of red Roses one Pugil; boil them in equal parts of
Smiths Water and red Wine, to one quart; in the strained Liquor dissolve of
Salt and Alum, each one ounce; foment the Region of the Pubis and Perineum,
Morning and Evening hot.

Of the same Decoction, the quantity of it being increased, a bath may be made
to be used for many days.

After the Fomentation or Bath, the Parts may be anointed with a Liniment made
of Oil of Foxes, rue, Orrise, Unguentum, Martiatum, Aregon, and with the Powder
of Mastich, Cyperus, and Mirtles, or the following Plaster may be applied.

Take of Labdanum, and Mastich, each two drams; of the Wood of Alces, and of
Storax calamite, of Cinnamon, and of Turpentine, each one dram; of Mirtles, and
of the Roots of Cyperus, each half a dram; of the Juice of Mint and Hors^-tail
extracted with red Wine, a sufficient quantity; make a Plaster.

CHAP. XCIII. Of a total Suppression of Urine, and of the Strangury.
A Total Suppression of Urine is called by Authors Ischuria, but when the
voiding of Urine is lessened they term it a Strangury.

An Ischuria or total Suppression of Urine is twofold, viz. true when the
Bladder is full, and false when the Bladder is empty, and nothing comes from
the Reins to it.

The true Ischury depends on three Causes, the first whereof is Sense abolished
in the Bladder by reason of a Palsy or Obstruction of its Nerve, or because
the Spirits are diverted another Way, as in a Delirium or the like.

The second cause is a cold Intemperies of the Bladder.

The third Cause is a narrowness of the Neck of the Bladder, and of this three
Causes are assigned, for the Muscle incompassing the Neck of the Bladder is so
swelled that the Passage is stopped, or a Caruncle grows in the Neck of the
Bladder, or a Callus is generated there, the Passage is also obstructed by a
Stone, by a thick Humor, a Clot of Blood, or by Matter. The Passage is also
stopped by a Swelling of the neighboring parts, as by a large Child in the Womb,
by the Excrements hardened in the right Gut, and by the Piles much swelled.

This Suppression also happens sometimes by too great a quantity of Water
retained too long, that so much distend, the whole Body of the Bladder, that it
cannot be contracted to expel it; first, when any Person that is well retains
his Urine for want of a Convenient Place to void it in, or when the Nerves of
the Bladder are affected, so that the Bladder cannot be sensible of the Weight
and Fullness.

A false ischury is occasioned by reason either the Serum is not put off upon
the Reins, or not conveyed through the Ureters, they being stopped by a Stone
or the like.

A true Ischury is known by a Weight and Tension of the Hypogaster, and by a
Swelling resembling the Bladder.

The causes of it are known by things that go before, and accompany it; for if
it proceed from a large quantity of Urine, which hinders a Contraction of the
Bladder, it is perceived by the Relation of the Sick, he having omitted to make
Water, by reason of long traveling, or by being in the presence of great
Persons; and if he never had it before in those parts; but if he be delirious
or paralitick, the Suppression of Urine may be imputed to either of these
Diseases.

The Compression that is made by Tumors, of those or of the neighboring
parts, or by other Causes above mentioned may be known by the proper Signs of
those Diseases. The Obstructions of the Channel of the Bladder may be known by
probing it with a Wax Candle, or a Catheter; and if they do not penetrate, but
stop in the Passage, it is a Sign that a Stone or a Caruncle, or some other
Matter obstructs; and these things that obstruct may be distinguished, viz. If
a Stone stop the Channel, Nephritick Pains went before, if it fell from the
Reins, and if it was bred in the Bladder, or lay a long while there, the Signs
of the Stone in the Bladder preceded, at least some of the gentlest of them; if
a Caruncle stop the Passage, a virulent Gonorrhea preceded, or an Ulcer in the
Passage of the Yard, that emitted purulent Matter for a long time. Lastly, If
clotted Blood, or concreted Matter, or thick Pus, occasioned the Obstruction,
small parts of them have been evacuated through the Yard, or have stuck to the
Catheter, when it has been used.

A false Ischury may be known, for that there is no Tension nor no Tumor nor
Weight in the Region of the Pubis, but rather a Vacuity is perceived there;
there is no desire of making Water, nor no Irritation of the Bladder; and when
the Catheter is used it passes in easily; but Signs of the Stone in the Kidneys
went before, or of an Inflammation of the Ureters, or of great Fullness, or
large Drinking went before, but little Urine followed; upon which account the
Veins were too much filled. Or Lastly, there is a burning Fever or a Dropsy,
whereby the Serous Matter is diverted.

As to the Prognostic, A Suppression of Urine is very dangerous, if it exceed
the Seventh Day it certainly kills, for the Serum regurgitates upon the whole
Body, and the Patient is in danger of a Suffocation, or a Coma.

Suppression of Urine, occasioned by a Wound in the Spine, or by reason of a
Luxation of a Vertebra is incurable.

If the Smell of Urine can be perceived from the Mouth, or Nostrils of the
Sick, it is deadly.

If a Tenesmus come upon a Suppression of Urine, the Sick dies in seven Days.
The Hickops also indicate sudden Death.

The Cure of a Suppression of Urine, whether it be total or partial, is to be
directed to the taking off the Causes: And First, The false Ischury, that
depends on the Diseases of the Reins or Ureters, must be cured in the same
manner as an Inflammation, a nephritick Pain, or the Stone in the Kidneys: But
that which proceeds from a Fullness of the Emulgent Veins must be cured by large
Bleeding, and by Hydragogue Medicines.

A true Ischury must be also cured by Remedies that take off the cause
producing it. And First, If it proceed from an Inflammation of the Bladder, or
neighboring Parts, it must be cured as an Inflammation of the Bladder is; but
if the Suppression is caused by a Stone thrust into the Neck of the Bladder, it
must be removed by the following Remedies. First, The Sick must be laid upon
his Back, and his Legs must be elevated, and he must be shook much, and a long
while, that the Stone may fall back into the Bladder; and if by this means it
cannot be moved, it must be forced back with a Catheter; but if the Stone has
passed into the Passage of the Yard, we must endeavor by all Ways to exclude
it, by moving gently with the Fingers toward the end of the Yard, and also by
dipping the Yard into warm Milk, or by placing the Sick in a Bath, to enlarge
the Passage: But if it will neither go backwards nor forwards, Practitioners
teach that it must be cut out, the upper and lower part being tied.

But an Obstruction of the Neck of the Bladder, which proceeds from an
Inflammation, must be cured by proper Remedies for an Inflammation. But in the
mean time, if the Urine be retained too long, it may be gently let out by a
Wax-candle dipped in Oil of sweet Almonds: But you must forbear the Use of a
Catheter, least Pain being occasioned, you should increase the Inflammation
thereby.

But the Suppression of Urine, which proceeds from a Caruncle, must be cured by
the Extirpation of the Caruncle.

This must be done by proper Remedies thrust in by a skillful Surgeon upon a
Wax-candle. But Necessity urging, for sometimes the Caruncle swells, and
obstructs the whole Channel, we must use the Catheter to evacuate the Water,
though there is danger that the Part will swell more. But you must first
endeavor to lessen the Inflation of the Caruncle by Bleeding and Vomiting, and
by repelling Medicines applied to the Pubes and Perinaeum.

If the Suppression of Urine be occasioned by thick Phlegm, Purging is first
convenient, with Diaphaenicon and Rubarb made up in a Bolus, and afterward
Turpentine must be given frequently with Powder of Liquorish; afterward a
Decoction of the opening Roots may be given, with Oxymel and Byzantine Syrup.

In the mean while Glisters, Fomentations, and emollien and opening Baths must
be used; and all those things are proper that are proposed to dissolve or
expel the Stone. And amongst the rest the following are found by Experience
peculiarly proper.

Take of Benedictum Laxativum half an ounce, of the Troches of Mirrh two
scruples, of a Decoction of Savin three ounces; mingle them, make a Potion,
whereby a Suppression of Urine was cured in a short time in a certain Woman.

If there seem to be abundance of Phlegm in the whole Body, a universal Purge by
an Apozem prepared for three or four Days must be ordered, which is proper at
the beginning, Bleeding being first used. A Julep also of the Juice of
Pellitory, of Sea-fennel, and of Lemmons, with Oil of sweet Almonds, is also
very beneficial.

Dodoneus mentions an Observation of one of eighty Years of Age, that was
perfectly cured of a Suppression of Urine, by only using once a Lee made of the
Ashes of Egg-shells, mixed with Rhenish-wine.

Arnoldus Villa Novanus commends Winter-cherry-wine, and he mentions a
Cardinal, who had not made Urine for four Days, and was much swelled, was cured
by drinking Winter-cherry-wine; the Wine was made by beating five or seven or
more winter-cherries with good White Wind; afterward it must be strained.
Millepedes also beat and given in White Wind are very Effectual to provoke
Urine; Oil of Scorpions of Mathiolus also forces Urine powerfully, five or six
drops of it being given with Broth or some other Liquor. The frequent use of
Sal-prunella does also the same, especially when there is danger of an
Inflammation, which is often occasioned in the inner Coat by the Urine too long
retained; Spirit of Salt also does the same, but is more effectual; the Juice
of Pellitory clarified, and four ounces of it given with half an ounce of Sugar
is very good; Sal-prunella, or the Spirit of Salt may be mixed with it.

If Suppression of Urine occasioned by a phlegmatic Matter often recur,
nothing is better than the Bath-waters, which easily dissolve and cleanse away
the Mucilaginous Matter.

A certain Nobleman, that was afflicted with a Suppression of Urine for many
Days, after other Medicines used to no Purpose, was freed by injecting the
following Glyster, which he retained two Hours.

Take of the Roots of Smallage and Parsley, Knee holm, Asparagous Mallows, each
two drams; of Pellitory two handfuls, of the Seeds of Annise, Fennel, Daucus,
Bishop-weed, bastard Saffron, Rue, Cummi^, and Juniper Berries, each half an
ounce; of the Flowers of Camomil, Mellilot, Dill, and Stoechas, each two
Pugils; boil them in Whitewine till half is consumed; in one Pint of the
strained Liquor dissolve four ounces of fresh Butter, of Honey of Roses two
ounces, of red Sugar one ounce, of Benedictum Laxativum half an ounce, of the
Yolk of one Egg, of Oils of Nuts, Dill, or Linseeds, one ounce; make a Glister.

In the whole Course of the Cure Fomentations, Liniments, Cataplasms, Baths,
and the like, must be used; among other things a Cataplasm of Pellitory fried
with Butter, or rather with Oil of Scorpions is good; also a Bladder half full
of Oil wherein Cantharides have been boiled. A Cataplasm made of Onyons fried
in Lard and with some Oil, is commonly applied to the Region of the Pubis and
Loins.

When an Ischury proceeds from clotted Blood, Troches of Ambar, Mumny, simple
Oxymel, Oxymel of Squills, Syrup of Sorrel, and the like, must be used; and
Cow Dung outwardly applied does Wonders.

Lastly, when the Suppressions proceeds from Pus, things that cleanse and
incide must be used, such chiefly as were proposed for an Ulcer of the Reins
and Bladder.

CHAP. XCIV. Of a Dysury, or Heat of Urine.
THe next and immediate Cause of rendering Urine with Pain, is a Solution of the
Continuum in the Sphincter Muscle, or Channel of the Bladder, and therefore
whatsoever causes Solution of the Continuum in those Parts, occasions also a
Dysury or Heat of Urine.

Among these Causes, the chief and most frequent is an Acrimony of the Urine,
sometimes simple without the Mixture of other Humors, which a hot Intemperies
of the Bowels, or of the whole Body, or the use of acrid and hot Meats,
occasions it. But it is most commonly from a Mixture of acrid Humors,
sometimes Matter flowing from the Reins or Bladder ulcerated, occasion such an
Acrimony in the Urine, and sometimes a white and Milky Matter that is emitted
plentifully with the Urine, occasions the Heat of it; also a Stone in the
Bladder, or Gravel produces the same. Lastly, An Inflammation, as in a
Gonorrhea, as long as the Prostratae are Inflamed, the Heat of Urine continues.

The Signs of the Causes may be thus distinguished, If it proceeds from an
Acrimony, the Urine is thin and high colored, or there will be a Mixture of
Purulent Matter, and an Intemperies of the Bowels went before, or hot and acrid
Aliments, the Heat of the Air or the like heating causes preceded. Lastly,
Stones and Inflammations of these parts, may be known by their proper Signs.

As to the Prognostic, This Disease is not of it self dangerous, but is very
troublesome to the Patient, and is sometimes difficultly cured, especially in
old Men, who, if they are decrepid, have it as long as they live; and if it
continue long in any Age, it ulcerates the Neck of the Bladder.

The Cure is first to be directed to the taking off the Cause; and therefore if
it arise from the Stone, an Inflammation, or from an Ulcer of the Bladder, or
the Neck of it, the Cure must be taken from the Chapters of these Diseases; but
those things which are mentioned below, may much abate the Symptom.

But that which proceeds from an Acrimony of Urine, and from hot Humors mixed
with it, must be cured with the following Remedies.

And first, To qualify the Intemperies of the Parts, frequent Bleeding is
necessary, and it must be often repeated, if there be a great quantity of
Blood, or danger of an Inflammation: Purges are also convenient in this
Disease, but they must be lenitive and cooling, for otherwise they mightily
exasperate the Heat of Urine, wherefore some do not dare to give any thing
besides a simple Bolus of Cassia; and this is certainly to be preferred before
all other things. Yet it may be made more cooling if Tamarinds are added to it,
or a Decoction of Lettice, Purslain, and the Tops of Mallows with Cassia, may
be taken for many Days, that the acrid Humors flowing to the Urinary parts,
may be by degrees turned upon the Bowels, but yet if a large quantity of ill
Humors requires more Purging, we may use the following Potion.

Take of the Leaves of Lettice, Purslain, Plantane, and the Tops of Mallows,
each half an ounce; of Tamarinds, half a dram, of yellow Mirobalans one dram;
boil them to six ounces; in the strained Liquor dissolve one ounce of Cassia
fresh drawn; strain them again, and afterward add the Infusion of one dram and
an half of Rubarb in Lettice water, with yellow Sanders, of Manna, and of Syrup
of Roses, each one ounce; make a Potion.

Vomiting also, with gentle Remedies, is excellent, for it makes Revulsion from
the Part affected, and does not occasion those Disorders that Purging does; and
therefore such as can bear Vomiting well, may take a gentle Vomit once or twice
a Week. Glisters also frequently injected do good.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows one ounce, of the Leaves of Mallows,
Violets, and Lettice, each one handful; of the flowers of Water Lillies, and of
Barley cleansed, each one Pugil; boil them to a Pint, in the strained Liquor
dissolve an ounce of Cassia newly extracted, one whole Egg, and two ounces of
Oil of Violets; make a Glister.

The Mucilages of the Seeds of Marsh mallows, Quinces, Fenugreek, may be mixed
with Glisters to ease the Pain.

But to qualify the Heat, and to ease the Pain, Glisters of Milk by it self or
mixed with the foregoing things are usually so effectual, that I have known
some eased of long Pains with this Remedy only, and by the Bath which shall be
mentioned by and by.

But many things may be given inwardly to assuage the Pain, and to correct the
Intemperies of the Parts affected.

Take of the Waters of Purslain, Lettice, and Water Lillies, each one ounce; of
the Syrup of Violets, and of Water Lillies, each six drams; Sal-prunella one
dram; mingle them, make a Julep to be repeated often.

Emulsions may be also used, though they are diuretic, because they cool and
gently cleanse the Urinary Passages.

Take of the four greater cold Seeds, and of White Poppies, each three drams;
of Sweet Almonds blanched, and infused in cold water, half an ounce; bruise
them in a Marble Mortar, and pour upon them gently a pint and an half of the
Decoction of Barley, of Liquorish, and the Tops of Mallows; make an Emulsion for
three Doses, adding to each one ounce of Syrup of Violets, and a dram of
Sal-prunella; if the Pain be very violent, some Syrup of Poppies may be added
to it, and a dram of Gum Arabic powdered.

Broths may be also prepared in the following manner.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows half an ounce, of Mallows one handful, of
Liquorish half an ounce, of the Seeds of Quinces one dram; boil them with
Chicken Broth, and let it be taken for several Days together.

The Whey of Goats Milk is also very good, a large draught of it being taken at
a time; and if there be no Fever, milk it self is more effectual, especially
Asses Milk.

If the Disease is inveterate, Epsom and Tunbridge-waters are very proper.

Forestus cured himself of a violent Dysury, by only using a Decoction of
Mallows sweetened with Syrup of Violets; a Conserve of Mallows has also done
much good, an ounce of it having been taken Morning and Evening, and three
ounces of Mallow-Water being drank presently after; the Conserve of the Flowers
of Marshmallows is as good or rather better; some Practitioners commend the
Troches of Alkakengi; a dram of them being taken at a Time in some proper
Liquor.

When the Pain is very violent, the dipping the Yard in Milk, whilst the Urine
is rendering, or in a Decoction of Mallows, and the Seeds of white Poppies, does
much good in this case.

A small decoction of Mallows sweetened with Syrup of Violets, or with Conserve
of Roses, is very proper for the ordinary Drink.

And to ease the Pain, Injections may be made for the Passage of the Bladder of
Milk, an Emulsion of the cold Seeds of Plantane and Whey, whereunto may be
added the White of an Egg well beaten, and a Scruple of the Troches of
Alkakengi. External Remedies do also much good to qualify the Heat of Urine,
as Baths and Fomentations applied to the Pubis and Perinaeum, made of a
Decoction of cooling Herbs; also Liniments made of Oils of Roses, of
white-lillies, and of Ointment of Roses, and of the white Ointment with Camphor.

CHAP. XCV. Of a Chlorosis, or the Green Sickness.
THe Green Sickness is a vicious Habit of the Body proceeding from
Obstructions, it is accompanied most commonly with a Palpitation of the Heart,
Difficulty of Breathing, and a longing for absurd things, and with an Unfitness
for Motion, and other Symptoms.

The Diagnostick manifestly appears by the following Series of Symptoms. First,
The Face and whole Body is pale, and sometimes of a leaden, livid, and green
Color. Secondly, An Inflation, and as it were a Swelling, appears upon the
Eyelids; the Legs also swell, especially about the Ankles. Thirdly, There is a
Dullness and Unwillingness for Motion. Fourthly, There is a Difficulty of
Breathing, especially when they move much, or go up Stairs. Fifthly, There is a
Palpitation of the Heart upon Motion. Sixthly, There is a heavy, and often a
lasting pain of the Head. Seventhly, The Pulse is quick. Eighthly, The Sick are
drowsy, and incline to Sleep. Ninthly, There is a great Aversion for wholesome
Food. Lastly, The Disease increasing, and the Obstructions being multiplied, a
Suppression of the Courses at length follows which shows the Disease is
confirmed.

As to the Prognostic, This Disease most commonly is no^ dangerous, but if it
be neglected too much, it occasions great Diseases, as a Scirrhus, Tumors, a
Dropsy, and other grietvous Diseases, which at length kill the Patient.

When the Disease is small, and chiefly arises from Obstructions of the Veins
of the Womb, it is easily cured by Marriage in Young Virgins.

Women that have had this Disease a long while, are either barren, or bring
forth Children that are Sickly and short lived.

There is great Hopes of Cure, when the Courses keep their exact Periods, and
flow in a due Quantity and Quality.

The Cure of this Disease is performed by opening Obstructions, by purging off
the vicious Humors, by Correcting the Intemperies of the Bowels, and by
Strengthening them.

First therefore, A gentle Purging Medicine must be given that is agreeable to
the Constitution, that the first Region may be only emptied; and if the Belly
be bound, a Glister must be given first of all.

Afterward Bleeding must be ordered, unless the Disease is very inveterate,
and the Maid be inclined to a Cachexy.

But a Vein in the Arm must be opened, though the Courses are stopped, for at
that Time if you should bleed in the Foot, the Obstructions of the Veins and of
the Womb would be increased: That quantity of Blood being taken away that is
necessary, proper Purges must be used, viz.

Take of the Pill Coch Major two Scruples, of Castor powdered two grains, of
Peruvian Balsam four Drops; make four Pills, let her take them at five in the
Morning, and let her sleep after them.

Let these Pills be repeated twice or thrice every Morning, or every other
Morning, according to the Strength of the Sick and their Operation.

After the purging Pills let her take the following.

Take of the Filings of Steel grains eight, with a sufficient quantity of
Extract of Wormwood; make two Pills to be taken in the Morning, and they must
be repeated at five in the Afternoon. She must continue this Course for thirty
Days, drinking presently after the Pills a Draught of Wormwood Wine.

If a Bolus be more pleasing.

Take of the Conserve of Roman-Wormwood and of the Conserve of the yellow Peel
of Oranges, each one ounce; of candied Angelica, and Nutmegs candied, and of
Venice Treacle, each half an ounce; of Ginger candied two drams, with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Oranges, Make an Electuary.

Take of this Electuary one dram and an half, of the Filings of Steel well
powdered eight grains, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Oranges, make a
Bolus to be taken in the Morning, and at five in the afternoon, drinking upon
it a draught of Wormwood-wine.

Take of choice Mirrh, and of Galbanum, each one dram and an half; of Castor
sixteen grains, with a sufficient quantity of Peruvian Balsam; make twelve
Pills of each dram. Let her take three every Night at Bed time, drinking upon
them three or four Spoonfuls of compound Briony water through the whole Course:
But if these Pills should purge, then the following must be used instead of
them.

Take of Castor one dram, of Volatile Salt of Ambar half a dram, with a
sufficient quantity of Extract of Rue; make five and twenty small Pills. Let
her take three every Night at Bedtime.

CAHP. XCVI. Of the Suppression of the Courses.
THere is said to be a Suppression of the Courses, when in Women of a mature
Age, that neither give suck, nor are with Child, the Evacuation of Blood by the
Womb, which naturally is wont to be monthly, seldom or sparingly proceeds or is
wholly stopped.

The Cause of this Suppression, is to be referred either to the Womb or to the
Vessels of it, or to the Blood which flows or ought to flow through them.

Various Diseases of the Womb may occasion this Suppression, namely a cold
moist Intemperies, or a hot and dry Intemperies; also organical Diseases of the
Part, as an Inflammation, or Scirrhus, or the like. The Vessels of the Womb
also often occasion Obstructions, which is the most frequent cause of the
Suppression of the Courses, they being stopped by cold and thick Humors, or
compressed by Swellings of the neighboring Parts.

The Blood is peccant, when it is thick and Clammy, or when it is evacuated by
other ways, as by the Nostrils, Vomiting, Spitting, Hemorrhoides, and many
other Parts. I saw, says Riverius, a Girl that had a Pustle in the Head which
opened Monthly, and evacuated a large quantity of Blood; and I have seen many,
says he, that by casting up Blood Periodically from the Lungs, had the Courses
that Way.

The external Causes occasioning this Suppression, are cold and dry Air, and a
Northerly Season going into Cold Water, especially when the Courses flow, too
little or too much Nourishment taken, also gross and cold Meats, or such as are
astringent and such as are too hot, or such as are salted and spiced too much,
violent exercise, immoderate Watchings, much sleep, immoderate Ease, Bleeding
at the Nose, or Piles, a Looseness, and other Evacuations by Vomit, Urine, and
Sweat: And lastly, violent Passions, as extreme Anger, a sudden Fright, long
Sorrow, great Jealousy, and the like.

The Diagnostick of the Suppression must be received from the Sick; but because
it proceeds both from natural and preternatural causes, the Signs of both shall
be distinctly proposed, least Physicians should be deceived by Women being with
Child, by illegitimate Coition, and so prescribe Medicines to provoke the
Courses rashly to Women with Child.

First therefore, Women with Child most commonly retain their natural Color,
and others do not.

Secondly, the Symptoms which use to happen to Women with Child, at the
beginning abate daily; but on the contrary, in a Suppression of the Courses,
the longer they are stopped, so much the more the Symptoms are increased.

Thirdly, In Women with Child, after the third Month, the Motion and Situation
of the Child may be sensibly perceived, by laying the hand on the Belly; but in
others the Swelling is Oedematous, and not at all hard; nor is it always
contained within the Limits of the Womb.

Fourthly, If the inward Mouth of the Womb be touched by a Skilful Midwife, she
will find it not exactly closed, as it is in Women with Child, but rather hard,
contracted, and somewhat painful.

Fifthly, Women with Child are most commonly cheerful; but on the contrary in a
Suppression they are most commonly sorrowful and sad.

The Faults of the Womb which occasion a Suppression, may be seen by
Inspection, and be felt by touching the Parts.

The Obstruction and Narrowness of the Vessels of the Womb, may be known by the
Disorder that is felt in the Loins, and in the Parts near the Womb, especially
just before the Coming of the Courses; and if any thing flows out it is mucous,
whitish or blackish. The Diseases of the neighboring Parts, which stop the
Mouth of the Womb, or the Veins, may be known by their proper Signs.

An abundance of Blood may be known by the Veins being much swelled in the Legs
and Arms, if the Woman be fleshy, and of a ruddy Countenance, and has indulged
her self for a long while in high Eating. But a Defect of Blood may be guessed
at, if the Woman be fat, if she has had a long Fever, and has fasted a long
while* or has loathed he^ Meat. An ^ll quality of the Blood may be known by an
ill Habit of Body; the preposterous Motion of the Blood, viz. When it flows by
contrary Passages, is manifest of it self.

As to the Prognostic, a Suppression of the Courses is very dangerous, and
many desperate Diseases rise from it; some in the Womb, as Tumors Abscesses,
and Ulcers; others in the whole Body, and in various Parts, as Fevers,
Obstructions, Cachexies, Loathing of Meat, a Dropsy, a Cardialgia, a Cough,
Difficulty of Breathing, Fainting, Melancholy, Madness, Pains of the Head,
Gout, and many others; if the Suppression continue long the Belly grows hard,
great quantity of Urine is voided, there is a Loathing of Meat, and long
Watching, the Legs, Feet, and Belly swell, and they die of a Dropsy.

The Cure of this Disease must be varied according to the Variety of the
Causes. And first, If it proceed from too great a quantity of Blood, Bleeding
must be ordered in the Arm, and a large quantity of Blood must be taken away,
afterward it must be drawn downwards by opening the lower Veins, about the
time the Woman used to have her Courses before she was ill.

Frictions, Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, with and without Scarification, may be
used.

If by reason of want of Blood the Courses stop, as after long Fevers, after
great Evacuations, and when the Body is much wasted, you must not endeavor to
provoke the Courses, till the Body is replenished, and till a sufficient
quantity of Blood is bred; which being done, they generally follow of their own
accord. But if it happen that Nature forget her Office, she must be roused up
by opening the lower Veins, and by Medicines proposed in the foregoing Chapter;
but the quantity of Blood taken away must be moderate, least the Strength
should be dejected, and the Sick should fall into a Consumption. But here it
must be carefully noted, That every Wasting of the Body does not indicate a
Want of Blood; but only that which succeeds great Evacuations, and the like;
for sometimes it happens, that the Courses being suppressed, and retained in
the Veins, occasion an ill quality, whereby the Blood is rendered unfit to
nourish the Parts; upon which account the Body wastes though the Veins are full
of Blood, in which Case large Bleeding is required.

As to the Suppression of the Courses, which happens by a preposterous Motion
of the Blood, when it is evacuated by Bleeding at the Nose, by Vomiting,
Spitting, or the Hemorrhoides, and other Parts.

The Cure of it is performed by repelling the Blood from the Parts through
which it flows preternaturally, and by drawing it back to the Passage of the
Womb. The first is performed, when the Blood rushes out of the upper Parts, by
washing the Arms, Head, and Face with cold water, and by forbearing the
Exercise of those Parts, especially Singing, and speaking aloud. The second is
performed by opening the inferior Veins three or four Days before the Blood
breaks out, and by Cupping-glasses applied to the Thighs and Legs, sometimes
with, sometimes without Scarification, by provoking the Hemorrhoids, by
Frictions, Ligatures, Walking, Fomentations, Baths made of opening Herbs,
Pessaries, uterine Glisters, and by other things to be described below. But the
Bath-water is especially commended, and the Sick must bath in them often a good
while after Meals; but the Water must not rise above the Hypochondres, and at
the same time, the upper Parts must be cooled by fanning them.

If the Blood flow by the Hemmorrhoides, the Cure is very difficult, for if you
use things to draw downwards, they bring the Blood also to the Fundament; and
if you use astringent things to it, they, by reason of the Nearness of the
Parts, repel what should be brought to the Womb, so that the only Way of Cure,
is to apply such things to the Womb as may allure the Blood thither, after you
have used such things as draw the Blood downwards.

But the most frequent Obstruction of all, is that which proceeds from an
Obstruction of the Veins of the Womb, the Cure whereof is in a manner the same
with that of the Green Sickness: But the Eruption of them must be helped by
opening a Vein in the Foot about the time they used to flow when the Patient
was well; as also by Cupping-glasses applied to the Hips and Legs, instead of
Bleeding with, or without Scarification, by Frictions of those Parts, and by
painful Ligatures.

Take of the Roots of round Birthwort half a dram, of the leaves of dried Savin
one dram and an half, of Dittany of Crete, and of Troches of Mirrh, without
Assa-Faetida, each one dram; of choice Cinnamon two drams, of white Sugar two
ounces; make a Powder, whereof let her take two drams every Morning for some
days, with the Broth of red Vetches wherein two drams of Cinnamon, and half a
dram of Saffron have been boiled.

Take of Roots of Briony, of Lillies, Cyperus, Valerian, Angelica, Asarabacca,
Orris, and Parsley, each one ounce; of the Leaves of Mugwort, Bays, Rue, Savin,
Thym, Rosemary, Pennyroyal, Nep, Mallows, Mercury, each one handful; of the
Flowers of Elder, of Wall-flowers, and of Camomil, each two Pugils; of the
grains of Juniper two ounces; boil them in Water and Whitewine; with the
strained Liquor foment the Belly and Thighs with a Sponge.

With the same Decoction, the quantity being increased, a Bath may be made,
wherein the Sick may sit up to the Navel, and the boiled Herbs being put in a
Bag, may be applied to her Belly; but you must take care that she does not
sweat, for that rather stops the Courses.

Take of the Leaves of Mercury bruised one handful, of the Powder of Hiera
Picra, and of Benedictum Laxativum, each two drams; of the Powder of long
Birthwort one dram, with a sufficient quantity of Honey, or the Juice of
Mercury; make a Pessary

Injections are also wont to be made for the Womb, which are called uterine
Glisters, for they cleanse it from Filth sticking to the Sides, and they open
the inner Orifices of the Vessels: They may be prepared with a Decoction for
the Fomentation above described, the acrid things being left out, or of fat
Figs with Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Mercury, or only of the Juice of Mercury
clarified, wherein a little Benedictum Laxativum has been dissolved, for you
must not use acrid things, lest they should occasion an Inflammation. And after
the use of these things, which must be retained only an hour, it is convenient
to inject a Decoction of Mallows, Barley, and Violets, or a little Hydromel
diluted with the Whey of Goats Milk.

When the Disease is inveterate, Issues in the Leg do much good.

In the use of the forementioned Medicines some things are to be observed.

First, You must never use Remedies to force the Courses, unless general
Evacuations went before. Secondly, You must begin with gentle Means, and
proceed by degrees to stronger. Thirdly, Medicines that are given to move the
Courses must be taken in a large quantity. Fourthly, Pessaries and uterine
Glisters must be prescribed only for married Women: But for Virgins
Fomentations, Baths, and the following Fume may be ordered.

Take of Cloves, Cinnamon, and Mace, each two drams; of Juniper Berries half an
ounce, of the Seeds of Nigella one dram, of Storax Calamit two drams; make a
gross Powder which must be cast upon Coals, and the Fume must be received
through a Tunnel.

Lastly, In Choleric and Melancholy Constitution, the hottest Medicines must
be avoided, and only such as are gentle must be used, and things that are
opening, moistening, and mollifying, must be mixed with them.

CHAP. XCV. Of an immoderate Flux of the Courses.
AN immoderate flux of the Courses invades either in Childbed, or at other
Times: As to the first, that afflicts Women most on the first Days after a
difficult Labor, and is accompanied with a long train of Hysteric Symptoms;
and as it happens only on the first days, so usually does not last long, for if
a thickning Diet be ordered, it soon abates. The following Drink may be also
used.

Take of Plantain Water, and red Wine, each one pint; boil them till a third
part is consumed: Sweeten it with a sufficient quantity of white Sugar, and let
her take half a pint of it twice or thrice a day, and in the mean while some
gentle Hysteric Julep may be used, and the following Nodulus may be often held
to the Nostrils.

Take of Galbanum and Assa Foetida, each two drachms, of Castor one Dram and
an half, of volatile Salt of Amber half a dram; mingle them, make a Nodulus.
Or two drachms of spirit of Sal Armoniack may be often held to the Nose.

But as to the Flux which happens out of Childbed, though it befalls Women at
any Time, yet most commonly it invades a little before the Time they leave
them, viz. when they are about forty five Years of Age, if they had them very
young, and about fifty if it was late before they began to have them: And by
reason of the great quantity of Blood, which is continually evacuated, they are
almost continually seized with Hysteric Fits; and though in this Case
Hystericks both inward and outward may be used by the by (but you must forbear
the strongest, lest they should further the Flux) yet the Cure must be managed
by such things as stop the Flux.

You must bleed in the Arm, and eight Ounces of Blood must be taken away. The
next Morning the following Purge must be given.

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce, of S^na two drachms, of Rhubarb one dram
and an half, infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water: In three
ounces of the strained Liquor* dissolve of Manna and syrup of Roses solutive,
each one ounce; make a purging Potion, which is to be repeated every third day
for twice, every night at bedtime, through the whole course of the Disease;
let an Anodyn be given of an ounce of Diacodium.

Take of the conserve of dried Roses two ounces, of the Troches of Lemnian
Earth one dram and an half, of Pomgranate peel, and of red Coral prepared,
each two scruples, of Boodstone, of Dragon's-blood, and of Bole-Armenick,
each two scruples; with a sufficient quantity of simple Syrup of Coral make an
Electuary, whereof let her take the quantity of a large nutmeg in the morning
and at five in the afternoon, drinking upon it six spoonfuls of the following
Julep.

Take of the waters of Oak-buds, and of Plantain, each three ounces, of
Cinnamon Water hordeated, and of Syrup of dried Roses, each one ounce, of
Spirit of Vitrial a sufficient quantity, to make it pleasantly acid.

Take of the Leaves of Plantain, and of Nettles, each a sufficient quantity,
beat them together in a Marble-Mortar, and press out the Juice, clarify it and
give six spoonfuls of it cold three or four times in a day.

After the first Purge apply the following Plaster to the Region of the Loins.

Take of the Plasters of Diapalma, and ad herniam, each equal parts, mix them
and spread them upon Leather.

A cooling and thickning Diet must be ordered, only it may be proper to allow
once or twice a day a small Glass of Claret; which though it be not so proper,
because it is apt to raise an ebullition, yet it may be allowed to recover the
Strength. This Method may be also used to prevent Miscarriage, but the Juices
and the Purges must be omitted.

CHAP. XCVI. Of the Whites.
THis obstinate and lasting Disease may be cured by Bleeding once, and by
purging with two Scruples of Pill. Coch. major four times, and by the following
Corroboratives.

Take of Venice Treacle one ounce and an half, of the Conserve of the yellow
Peel of Oranges one ounce, of Diascordium half an ounce, of Ginger candied, and
Nutmegs candied, each three drachms, of compound Powder of Crab's-eyes, one
dram and an half, of the outward Peel of Pomgranates, of the Roots of Spanish
Angelica, and of the Troches of Lemnian Earth, each one dram, of
Bole-armenick two scruples, of Gum Arabic half a dram, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of dried Roses make an Electuary; whereof let her take the
quantity of a large Nutmeg in the morning, and at five in the afternoon, and at
night drinking upon it six spoonfuls of the following Infusion.

Take of the Roots of Elecampane, Masterwort, Angelica and Gentian, each half
an ounce, of the Leaves of roman Wormwood, white Horehound, the lesser
Centaury, and Calaminth, each one handful, of Juniper Berries one ounce: Cut
them small, and infuse them in five pints of Canary-Wine, let them stand in
Infusion, and strain them only as you use them.

Through the whole course of Corroboratives purging must not be used, for every
Evacuation spoils what the Corroborative has done.

CHAP. XCVII. Of Hysteric and Hypochondriack Diseases.
THese Diseases, if I calculate right, are the most frequent of all chronical
Diseases; and as Fevers, with those Diseases that appertain to them, if they
are compared with chronical, taken altogether, make two thirds; so, Hysterical
Diseases, at least those that go under that Name, are half the remaining third,
that is, chronical Diseases are half Hysteric; for very few Women, which Sex
contains half of grown People, are wholly free from all kinds of Hysteric
Diseases, if you except those who being accustomed to Labor live hardly; yea,
many of those Men that live sedentary Lives, and are wont to study hard, are
afflicted with the same Disease; and though, heretofore, Hysterical Symptoms
were always reckoned to proceed from a vicious Womb, yet if we compare
Hypochondriack Symptoms, which were supposed to proceed from Obstructions of
the Spleen or Bowels, or from some other I know not what Obstructions, with
Women's Hysteric Symptoms, an Egg is scarce more like an Egg, than these
Symptoms are like one another in all respects: But it must be confessed, that
Women are much more subject to this kind of Disease, than Men.

This Disease is not only frequent, but so wonderfully various, that it
resembles almost all the Diseases poor Mortals are subject to; for whatever
Part it seats it self in, it presently produces such Symptoms as belong to it;
and unless the Physician be very sagacious and very skilful, he will be
mistaken, and suppose that t^ese Symptoms proceed from an essential Disease of
this or that part, and not from an histerical Distemper.

Sometimes, for instance, it possesses the Head, and occasions an Apoplexy,
which also ends in an Hemipl^gy, and this seizes Women very often after
Delivery; or it is occasioned by hard Labor, or some violent commotion of the
Mind.

Sometimes it produces violent Convulsions very like an Epilepsy, the Belly and
Bowels swelling toward the Throat, the Patient struggling so violently, that
though at other times her Strength is but ordinary, she now can scarce be held
by all the strength of the Bystanders, uttering some odd and inarticulat
sounds, and striking her Breast. Women who are accustomed to this Disease,
commonly called Mother-fits, are generally extraordinary Sanguine, and have a
habit of Body almost like that of a Virago.

Sometimes it possesses the outward part of the Head, betwixt the Pericranium
and Skull, causing violent Pain continually fixed in one part, which may be
covered with the top of your Thumb, and violent Vomiting accompanies this Pain:
I call this Species Clavus Hystericus, chiefly afflicting those that have the
Green Sickness.

Sometimes falling upon the vital Parts, it occasions so great a palpitation of
the Heart, that the Women who are afflicted with it, may verily believe that
the Bystanders may hear the sound of the Heart thumping upon the Ribs. This
kind chiefly afflicts those that are of a thin habit of Body and of a weak
Constitution, and who look almost tabid; and also, young Maids that have the
Green Sickness.

Sometimes the Patient coughs almost without intermission, but expectorates
nothing. This kind of Hysterick-cough is very rare, and chiefly invades Women
that abound in Phlegm. Sometimes rushing violently upon the Colon, and the
Region under the Scrobiculum Cordis, it occasions violent Pain, much like the
Iliack Passion, and the Woman vomits exceedingly, ejecting a certain green
Matter somewhat like that they call porraceous Bile; and sometimes Matter of an
unusual color: And often after the Sick have been almost destroyed by the said
Pain, which would tire a stoical Apathy, and reachings to vomit for many days,
at length it is carried off by the Jaundice tincturing the superficies of the
Body like Saffron. Moreover, the Sick is oppressed by an anguish of mind, and
wholly despairs of recovery, with dejection of mind, and as it were a certain
desperation; as certainly accompanies this kind of Hysteric Disease, as the
Pain and Vomiting abovementioned. This kind chiefly invades those that are of
a lax and crude habit of Body, and those that have suffered much in bringing
forth great Children.

When this Disease falls upon one of the Kidneys, it plainly represents, by the
Pain it causes there, a Nephritick Fit; and not only by that sort of Pain, and
by the place it rages in, but also by the violent Vomitings that accompanies
it, and for that sometimes the Pain extends it self through the passage of the
Ureter; so that it is very difficult to know whether these Symptoms proceed
from the Stone, or from some Hysteric Disease; unless, perchance, some unlucky
Accident disturbing the Woman's mind, a little before she was taken ill of the
vomiting of green Matter, shows that the Symptoms rather proceed from an
Hysteric Disease, than from the Stone. Nor is the Bladder free from this false
Symptom; for it does not only cause Pain there, but it also stops the Urine,
just as if there were a Stone, whereas there is none: But this last kind
seizing the Bladder, happens very seldom. That which resembles the Stone in the
Kidneys is not so rare; both use to invade those Women, who are much weak'ned
by Hysteric Fits coming frequently, and whose health of Body is much impaired.

Sometimes falling upon the Stomach it causes c^ntinual Vomiting, and sometimes
a Looseness, when it is settled upon the Guts. But no Pain accompanies either of
these Symptoms, though oftentimes in both the green Humors appear. Both these
kinds are familiar with those that are weak'ned by the Hysteric Fits coming
frequently.

And as this Disease afflicts almost all the inward Parts, so sometimes it
seizes all the outward Parts, and the musculous Flesh occasioning Pain, and
sometimes a Tumor in the Jaws, Shoulders, Hands, Thighs, Legs, in which kind
that Tumor which swells the Legs, is more conspicuous than the rest. But
whereas in Hydropical Swellings, these two things may be always taken notice
of, viz. That the swelling is most in the Evening, and that the Finger pressed
upon it, leaves a pit: In this Tumor the swelling is most in the Morning, nor
does it yield to the Finger, or leave any mark behind it, and for the most part
it only swells one of the Legs. As to other things, if you mind the largeness
of it, or its superficies, it is so very like Hydropical Swellings, that the
Patient can scarce be brought to believe that it is any other Disease; nor can
the Teeth free themselves from the assaults of this Disease, though they are not
hollow, and though there is no apparent defluxion that may occasion the Pain, yet
it is no whit gentler, nor shorter, nor easier cured. But these Pains and
Tumors which afflict the outward Parts, chiefly seize those Women that are in
a manner quite destroyed by a long series of Hysteric Fits, and by the force
of them.

But among all the Torments of this Disease, there is none so common as a pain
in the Back, which most certainly all feel, how little soever they are
afflicted with this Disease. Moreover, this is common to the foresaid Pains,
that the place on which they were, will not bear touching after they are gone;
but is tender, and aches just as if it were soundly beaten: But this tenderness
goes off by degrees.

And this is worth observing, That often a notable Cold of the external Parts
makes way for these Symptoms, which for the most part does not go off till the
Fit ends; which Cold I have observed is almost like that by which a Carcass
grows stiff, yet the Pulse is good.

And moreover, all Hysteric Women which I have hitherto taken care of,
complain of a dejection and sinking of the Spirits; and when they would show
the place where the sinking of the Spirits is, they point to the region of the
Lungs.

Lastly, every one knows that Hysteric Women sometimes laugh excessively, and
sometimes cry as much, without any real cause for either.

But among all the Symptoms that accompany this Disease, this is the most
proper, and almost inseparable, viz. a Urine as clear as Rock-water, and this
Hysteric Women evacuate plentifully; which I find, by diligent Enquiry, is in
almost all the pathognomonic sign of this Disease, which we call Hysteric in
Women, and Hypochondriack in Men; and I have sometimes observed in Men, that
presently after making Water of a Citron color (yea, almost the next moment)
being suddenly seized with some violent commotion of the Mind, they make Water
as clear as Cristal, and in a great quantity with a continued violent Stream,
and continue ill till the Urine comes to its wonted color, and then the Fit
goes off.

And it happens to all Hysterical and Hypochondriacal People, that sometimes
they belch up ill Fumes as often as they eat, though they eat only moderately,
and according as they have an Appetite; and sometimes the Wind that comes from
the Stomach is sower just like Vinegar.

Nor are they unhappy upon this account only, viz. That their Bodies are so ill
affected, and as it were tottering like ruined Houses just about to fall; for
their Minds are more diseased than their Bodies, and an incureable desperation
is mixed with the very nature of the Disease; and what the Roman Orator said of
the Superstitions exactly agrees with these melancholy People, Sleep, says he,
seems to be a Refuge to the Laborious and Careful, but from thence Cares and
Fears arise, whilst only Funerals and Apparitions of their deceased Friends are
represented in Dreams, and they are so tormented in Body and Mind that one
would think their Lives were a Purgatory, wherein they were to purify
themselves, and to expiate Crimes committed in some other State. Nor does this
happen only to mad People, but also to those who, if you except those
Impetuosities of Mind, are very prudent and judicious, and who much excel for
deep thought and wisdom in Speech, others, who is Minds were never excited by
these Provokments to thinking. But this dreadful condition of Mind which we
have above described, seizes on those only that have much and a long while
conflicted with this Disease, and have been at length wholly vanquished by it,
especially if Adversity, care or trouble of Mind or hard Study, or the like,
joined with an ill habit of Body, have added Oil to the Flame.

A day would scarce be sufficient to reckon up all the Symptoms belonging to
Hysteric Diseases, and I think Democritus reckoned pretty right (though he
mistook the cause of the Disease) when he said in an Epistle to Hippocrates,
That the Womb was the cause of six hundred Miseries, and of innumerable
Calamities.

The procatarctick or external causes of this Disease are either violent
motions of the Body, or which is much oftener, vehement commotions of the Mind.
But to these disorders of the Mind, which are usually the occasions of this
Disease, is to be added emptiness of the Stomach, by reason of long Fasting,
immoderate Bleeding, and a Vomit or Purge that works too much.

As to the internal, efficient Causes, in my Opinion* those Diseases which we
call Hysteric in Women, and Hypochondriack in Men, proceed from a confusion of
the Spirits. The origin and antecedent cause of this confusion, is a weak
constitution of the Spirits.

In order to the Cure, I order, That 8 ounces of Blood be taken from the right
Arm, and that the following Plaster be applied to the Navel.

Take of Galbanum, dissolved in tincture of Castor and strained, three drachms,
of Tacamacha two drachms; mix them, make a Plaster.

The next Morning, let her make use of the following Pills.

Take of the Pill Coch. major two scruples, of Castor powdered two grains, of
peruvian Balsam four drops; make four Pills, let her take them at five in the
Morning, and sleep after them. Repeat them twice or thrice every Morning, or
every other Morning, according to their operation and the strength of the
Patient.

Take of the Waters of black Cherries, Rue and compound Briony, each three
ounces; of Castor, tied up in a Rag and hanged in the Glass, half a dram; of
fine Sugar a sufficient quanity, make a Julep, whereof let her take four or
five Spoonfuls when she is faint, dropping into the first Dose, if the Fit is
violent, twenty drops of the Spirit of Hartshorn.

After the Purging Pills just described are taken, let her use the following.

Take of the filings of Steel eight grains, with a sufficient quantity of
extract of Wormwood; make two Pills, let her take them early in the Morning,
and at five in the Afternoon, for thirty days, drinking upon them a draught of
Wormwood-wine.

Or, if she like a Bolus better.

Take of conserve of Roman-wormwood, and of the conserve of the yellow rind of
Oranges, each one ounce; of candied Angelica, and Nutmogs candied, and of
Venice Treacle, each half an ounce; of candied Ginger two drachms; make an
Electuary, with a sufficient quantity of Syruy of Oranges.

Take of this Electuary one dram and an half, of the filings of Steel well
rubbed eight grains; make a Bolus, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Oranges, to be taken in the Morning, and at five in the Evening, drinking upon
it a Glass of Wormood-wine.

Take of choice Myrrh and Galbanum, each one dram and an half; of Castor
fifteen grains, with a sufficient quantity of Balsam of Peru; make twelve Pills
of every dram. Let her take three every Night, and drink upon them three or
four Spoonfuls of compound Briony-water, through the whole course of this
Process.

But if the Pills last prescribed move the Belly, which sometimes happens in
Bodies that are very easily purged, by reason of the Gum that is in them; the
following may be used instead of them.

Take of Castor one dram, of volatile Salt of Amber half a dram, with a
sufficient quantity of extract of Rue; make twenty four small Pills: Let her
take three every Night.

But here you must take notice, That Chalybeats, in whatsoever Form or Dose
they are taken, occasion sometimes in Women great disorders both of Body and
Mind, and that not only on the first days, which is usual almost in every Body,
but also all the time they are taken; in this case, the use of Steel must be
interrupted at those times; but Laudanum must be given every Night for some
time, in some Hysteric Water, that they may better bear it.

But when the Symptoms are mild, and it seems that the business may be done
without taking Steel, I think it sufficient to bleed and to purge three or four
times, and then to give the altering Hysteric Pills beforementioned, Morning
and Evening, for ten days; which method seldoms fails, when the Disease is not
violent; yea, the Pills alone, bleeding and purging being omitted, oftentimes
do a great deal of good.

Yet we must take great notice, That some Women, by a certain Ideosyncrasy, so
abhor Hysterical Medicines (which give ease in most of the Symptoms of this
Disease) that they don't only not receive benefit, but are much injured
thereby; therefore, they must not be given to such; for Hippocrates says, It Is
in vain to do any thing contrary to Natures inclination.

Which Ideosyncracy is so great and so frequent, that if we have not regard to
it, the Lives of the Sick may be hazarded.

And so Hysterical Diseases are most commonly cured and most Obstructions of
Women, especially the Green Sickness; and also, all Suppressions of the
Courses. But if the Blood is so very feeble, and the confusion of the Spirits
so great, that Ste^l ordered to be used according to the Method prescribed, is
not sufficient to cure the Disease, the Patient must drink some mineral Waters
impregnated with an Iron Mine, such as are Tunbridge, and some others lately
found out, for the Chalybeat Virtue of these is better mingled with the Blood,
by reason of the great quantity that is taken of them, and also because they
are more agreeable to Nature, and they cure Diseases more effectually than Iron
how much soever exalted by Art.

But this is more especially to be observed, in drinking of them, that if any
Sickness happens that is to be referred to Hysterical Symptoms, in this case
the Patient must forbear drinking them a day or two, till that Symptom that
hindered their Passage is quite gone; and it is to be noted, that Purging must
be avoided all the time the Patient drinks these Waters.

But if this Disease, by reason of its Obstinacy does not yield to
Steel-waters, the Sick must go to the Bath, and when she has used them inwardly
three mornings following, the next day let her go into the Bath, and the day
following let her drink them again, and so let her do by turns for two months;
for in these and in others, of what kind soever they are, this must be
carefully noted, That the Patient must persist in the use of them, not only
till she perceives some benefit, but till she is quite well, that the Symptoms
may not return again in a short time. Venice-Treacle alone if it is used often
and a long while, is a great Remedy in this Disease; and not only in this but
in very many other Diseases, that proceed from want of heat, or concoction or
digestion, it is perhaps the most powerful that has been hitherto known. Spanish
Wine medicated with Gentian, Angelica, Wormwood, Centory and other
Corroboratives infused in it, does a great deal of good, some Spoonfuls of it
being taken thrice a day, if the Woman be not of a thin and choleric habit of
Body; and truly, a large Draught of Spanish Wine by it self taken at Bedtime
for some Nights, by my Advice, has been very beneficial to some Women; for by
it the habit of the whole Body was rendered stronger, and they who before were
Cachectical, became fresh-colour'd and brisk.

Moreover, sometimes we find that the Peruvian Bark wonderfully comforts and
invigorates the Blood and Spirits, a Scruple of it being taken Morning and
Evening for some Weeks; but it succeeds best in that kind of Hysteric
Diseases, wherein Women are afflicted with Convulsions. But if any of the
Remedies abovementioned don't agree well, which often happens in choleric and
thin Constitutions, then a Milk-diet may be used, for some Women (which one
would wonder at at first) that have been conflicted a long while with Hysteric
Diseases, and even such as have frustrated all the endeavors of Physicians,
yet have recovered by dieting themselves for some time only with Milk; and
especially those that labor with that Disease, I call an Hysteric Cholick;
which cannot be appeased by any thing but Narcoticks, to which, repeated by
Intervals, the Women are much accustomed, the Pain returning as soon as the
Virtue of the Anodyne fades.

But nothing of all I have hitherto mentioned does so much comfort and
strengthen the Blood and Spirits as riding on Horseback every Day for a long
while, but though it may be inconvenient for Women that are accustomed to a
slothful and delicate way of living, for they may be injured by Motion,
especially at the beginning, yet it is very proper for Men, and soonest recovers
their Health. One of our Right Reverend Bishops, famous for Prudence and
Learning, having studied too hard a long while, fell at length into an
hypochondriac Disease, which afflicting him a long Time* vitiated all the
Ferments of the Body, and wholly subverted the Concoctions; he had passed
through long Courses of Steel more than once, and had tried almost all mineral
Waters, with Purging often repeated, and antiscorbuticks of all kinds, and very
many testaceous Powders, which are reckoned proper to sweeten the Blood, and so
being in a manner quite worn out, partly by the Disease, and partly by Physic,
used continually for so many Years, he was at length seized with a colliquative
Looseness, which is wont to be the forerunner of Death in Consumptions, and
other chronical Diseases, when the Digestions are wholly destroyed. At length
he advised with me; I presently considered that there was no more room for
Medicine, he having taken so many already without any Relief; for which reason
I persuaded him to ride on Horseback, and that first he should take such a
small Journey as was agreeable to his weak condition. Had he not been a very
judicious Man, and one that weighed things well, he would not have been
persuaded so much as to have tried such a kind of Exercise: I entreated him to
persist in it daily, till in his own Opinion he was well, going daily furthur
and further, till at length he went so many miles in a Day as prudent and
moderate Travelers, that go a long Journey upon Business, use to do, without
any regard to Meat, Drink or the Weather: But that he should take every thing
as it happened: To be short, he continued this Method, increasing his Journies
by degrees, till at length he rode twenty or thirty miles daily; and when he
found himself much better in few Days, being encouraged with such wonderful
Success, he continued this course a pretty many Months; in which Time, as he
told me, he rode many thousand Miles, till at length he did not only recover,
but also gained a strong and brisk habit of Body.

This is the general way of Curing this Disease, which is applied to the
original Cause, viz. the weak Crasis of the Blood, and so is to be used only
when the fit is off: Therefore as often as the Fit invades, joined with any one
of the foresaid Symptoms, if the Disease be such, or so great an one, that it
will not bear a Truce, till it may be cured by Medicines that corroborate the
Blood and Spirits, we must presently make use of hysteric Remedies, which by
their strong and offensive Smell recall the exorbitant and deserting Spirits to
their proper Stations, whether they are taken inwardly, or smelled to, or
outwardly applied: Such are Assa Foetida, Galbanum, Castor, Spirit of Sal
Armoniack, and lastly, whatever has a very ungrateful and offensive smell.

In the next place, you must take notice, that if some intolerable Pain
accompanies the Fit, in whatever part it is; or violent Vomiting or a Looseness,
than besides the Hystericks abovementioned, Laudanum must be used, which only
is able to restrain these Symptoms.

But in quieting the Pains, which Vomiting occasions, we must take great care
that they are not mitigated either by Laudanum, or any other Paregorick, before
due Evacuations have been made, unless they almost exceed all human Patience.
First, because sometimes there is so great a quantity of Blood and Humors
heaped up (especially in sanguine Women, and in Men of a proper Habit) that is
able to withstand the Operation of the most effectual Narcotick, though it be
often repeated, and therefore in such Blood must necessarily be evacuated from
the Veins of the Arm, and a Purge must be given before we come to use Laudanum;
for when these things are duly performed, that which before given in a large
Dose would do no good, does now perform the Business in a moderate Dose; and
then because I have found by frequent Experience, that when the Sick has been
accustomed by little and little to Laudanum, and has not been duly evacuated
before she was forced, by reason of the return of the Pain presently after the
Virtue of the Medicine vanished, to take a Paregorick again, and so daily for
some Years, the Dose being sometimes by degrees increased, so that at last they
can by no means abstain from Laudanum, though thereby all the Digestions are
vitiated, and the natural Functions weakened; though I do not think that the use
of Laudanum does immediately hurt the Brain, or Nerves, or the animal
Faculties: Therefore I judge and speak what I have found, That Evacuation ought
to go before Anodynes, viz. in Virago's, and in Women that abound with Blood, a
Vein must be opened, and the Body purged, especially if they have been lately
seized with the Fit: But if weak Women, and those of a quite contrary
Constitution, labor with such a Fit and Pain, and have been not long ago
afflicted with it, it will be sufficient to cleanse their Stomachs with a
gallon of Posset Drink, more or less, taken in and ejected by Vomit, and then
to give a large Dose of Venice Treacle and a few Spoonfuls of some Spirituous
Liquor, that is pleasing to the taste, with a few Drops of Liquid Laudanum to
be taken presently after it.

But if the Sick has vomited a great while before the Physician was called, and
there is danger, lest by further Provocation, by Emeticks, the Spirits should
be put in a rage, and the Sick too much weakened: In this case you must give
Laudanum without delay, and such a Dose that is not only suitable to the
Violence and Duration of the Symptom, but such an one as is sufficient to
vanquish it.

But here two things are to be chiefly noted; First That when you have once
begun to use Laudanum after due and necessary Evacuations, it must be taken in
that Dose, and often repeated till the Symptom is quite conquered; only such a
space must be betwixt each Dose, that we may know what the former has done
before we give another: And then when we treat the Disease with Laudanum, we
must do nothing else, and nothing must be evacuated, for the gentlest Glister
of Milk and Sugar is sufficient to spoil whatever has been repaired by the
Paregoric, and to occasion the return of the Vomiting and Pain. But though the
Pains abovementioned, as we have said, are apt to overcome the Virtue of the
Anodyne, yet violent Vomiting indicates the largest Dose of it, and that it
should be very often repeated; for by the inverted peristaltick Motion of the
Stomach (by which that which is contained in it ought to be carried downwards)
the Paregorick is ejected through the Oesophagus, before it can do any good,
unless after every time the Sick vomits the Narcotick be given afresh, and
chiefly in a solid form, or if it be given in a Liquor the Vehicle must be so
small, as that it must but just wet the Stomach, so that by reason of the small
quantity of the Matter it cannot be cast up. For instance, some Drops of liquid
Laudanum in one spoonful of strong Cinnamon Water, or the like; and the Sick
must be admonished to keep her self quiet, presently after taking the Laudanum,
and that she keep her Head, as much as possible, immovable, for the smallest
motion of the Head provokes Vomiting more than any thing else, and then the
Medicine, just taken, is ejected; and when the Vomiting ceases, and is, as it
were, tamed, it is expedient to give an Anodyne morning and evening for a few
days, to prevent a Relapse, which also ought to be observed after a looseness,
or an hysteric Pain taken off by a Narcotick; and so at length by this method
we may readily cure the symptomatick Pain and Vomiting, whereby, because they
are very often like other Diseases, Physicians are easier imposed upon than by
any other Symptoms whatever.

CHAP. XCVIII. Of an Inflammation in the Womb.
AN Inflammation of the Womb is a Swelling of that Part, from Blood poured upon
it.

The Inflammation either possesses all the Womb, or a part of it; and it is
occasioned either by pure Blood, and then it is called simply a Phlegmon, or it
is mixed with Choler, or with Phlegm or Melancholy.

The diagnostick Signs are a Swelling, Heat and Pain in the region of the Womb,
with a continual Fever. But because the right-Gut and the Bladder possess the
same region, therefore an Inflammation of the Womb must be distinguished by
other Signs, as by a Suppression or Diminution of the Courses, the pale or
yellow Color of them, and by the Pain in Evacuation of them, and when the
Courses are gone off, by a fetid Itchor that moistens the Privities, the inward
Mouth of it will appear swelled, drawn back and painful, and the Neck will be
red and inflamed.

If all the Womb be inflamed, all the Symptoms will be more violent; if the
Inflammation be most upon the Neck of the Womb, the Heat and Pain will be
extended most to the Croins and Privities. If the forepart be most afflicted,
the Bladder will most sympathise: If the hinder part be most afflicted, the
right Gut will most sympathise, and the Pain will stretch it self to the Loins:
If the right part or the left part be inflamed, the Swelling and Pain will
appear about either Groin, and the Leg of the same Side will have a Weight upon
it.

The Signs of the Causes are to be known in the following manner: If the
Inflammation be occasioned by pure Blood, all the Symptoms will be gentle; but
if Choler be mixed with it, the Fever will be high, and all the Symptoms
violent; but if the Blood be flegmatic or melancholy, the Fever is not so
acute, but more lasting and obstinate: Also the Signs of the Humor
predominating in the Body are to be referred to the Diagnostick.

If the Inflammation tends to suppuration, the Pain and Fever increases, and
there are Shiverings which come most commonly about Evening, and all the rest
of the Symptoms are increased. When Suppuration is made they all abate, but the
Tumor is more increased, whereby the Belly, and sometimes the Urine are
suppressed. But if the Inflammation is discussed without Suppuration, the Tumor
is lessened, and the Symptoms abate.

Lastly, If it degenerate into a Scirrhus, the Fever and Pain, and the rest of
the Symptoms lessen, but the Swelling grows hard, and a weight remains, not
only in the Womb but also in the circumjacent Parts; so that the Sick moves
difficultly.

As to the Prognostic, this Disease is very dangerous, and most commonly
deadly, for the Inflammation easily turns to a Gangrene.

As to the Cure of this Disease, Revulsion and Derivation must be made of the
Flux of Blood to the Womb.

And it must be repelled from thence, and that which has flowed to the part
must be resolved, and if the Tumor tends to suppuration, it must be furthered,
and the Abscess being broken, the Matter must be evacuated, which may be done
by the following Remedies.

An emollient and cooling Glister being first given, the Sick must be blooded
in the Arm; and it must be repeated twice, thrice or four times, according to
the strength of the Patient, and the greatness of the Inflammation.

After sufficient revulsion, and the increase of the Disease being over, and
when there is no more fear of the fluxion, the lower Veins must be opened for
derivation from the Part affected. But as long as there is any Indication for
revulsion, it is safest to open the Veins of the Arm.

And for revulsion, Frictions and Ligatures of the upper Parts are proper, and
Cupping-glasses applied to the Shoulders, Back and Loins.

If vicious Humors, especially Choleric, abound in the Body, which are, as it
were, a Vehicle for other Humors in the Flux, they are to be evacuated by
gentle Medicines; as with Syrup of Roses, Manna and Rhubarb, or with lenitive
Electuary. By reason of the Fever, cooling Medicines are to be used; as Juleps
and Emulsions; if there be great Watching, Pain or Restlesness, Narcoticks may
be mingled with them, or they may be given apart.

After the first evacuation Topics may be applied to the Belly, betwixt the
Navel and the Pubes, or about the Reins; first, things that cool and repel in
the form of a Liniment, Epithem or Cataplasm.

A Liniment may be made of Oil of Roses washed in Vinegar, or with Ointment of
Roses.

An Epithem may be made of Waters, or of a Decoction of Plantain, Sorrel,
Nightshade, of the tops of white Poppies and of Roses, adding to them a little
Bole-armenick, Dragon's-blood, or sealed Earth.

A Cataplasm may be made of Crumbs of Bread boiled in Milk, to which may be
added a little Oil of Roses* the Juice of Henbane or of Nightshade, with the
yolks of Eggs, or of the Meal of Barley; of the Seeds of Flax or of Fenugreek,
with Oil of Roses; to which also may be added, the Plants abovementioned
bruised.

Injections may be made for the Womb, in the following manner.

Take of the leaves of Plantain, Water Lillies, Nightshade and Endive, each
one handful; of red Roses, two pugils: Boil them till a third is consumed, and
add to them one ounce of Oil of Mirtles, and half an ounce of Vinegar; make an
Injection.

Pessaries for the Womb may be made of the same Herbs bruised, and with Oil of
Roses and Vinegar.

But you must not use repelling and cooling things too long, lest the Tumor
grow hard, and turn to a Scirrhus; therefore, things that mollify and dissolve,
must be mixed with Repellents, with this caution, viz. That the farther the
Inflammation is from the beginning, the greater must be the quantity of the
things that digest: To the forementioned Remedies may be added, Mallows,
Marshmallows, Mugwort, Fenugreek, Camomile and Melilot; the quantity of them
being increased or diminished as there seems occasion. In the mean time if the
Belly be hard, it must be loosened by things that purge gently; and cooling
Glisters frequently injected, do much good in qualifying the Inflammation, the
Womb lying upon the right Gut. But the quantity of them must be very small,
that they may be the longer retained.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows one ounce, of the leaves of Mallows,
Violets and Lettice, each one handful, of Nightshade half an handful, of the
flowers of Violets and red Roses, each one pugil, of acid Prunes number ten;
boil them in Barly-water; to six ounces of the strained Liquor, add three
ounces of Oil of Roses; make a Glister.

If the pain be very violent, to the foresaid Glister may be added yolks of
Eggs, Hens grease, Woman's milk, the mucilages of the Seeds of Fenugreek, Flax
o^ Mallows, and a little Opium, and a little Saffron.

Injections may be also made for the Womb, of Goats or Sheeps milk with Opium
or Saffron, each Grains three or four, with a little Rose Water.

Or to the Pessaries, may be added a moderate quantity of Opium with a little
Saffron, yolks of Eggs, and Oil of Roses; or Pessaries may be made of Philonium
Romanum with Cotton, or an anodyne Fomentation may be prepared in the following
manner.

Take of Marshmallows with the roots, of Mallows and Violets, each one
handful; of Camomile, Melilot and Roses, each one pugil; boil them for a
fomentation

The Disease decreasing, Purging must be repeated with gentle Catharticks; but
if it tend to resolution, which may be known by a remission of the Symptoms,
and by a lesser weight in the part, Discutients must be added in larger a
quantity to the foresaid Remedies; or make the following Cataplasm.

Take of the Powder of the roots of Marshmallows one ounce, of the flowers of
Melilot and Camomile, each two drachms, of the leaves of Mugwort powdered, of
the Meal of Barley and Beans, each half an ounce; boil them a little in rough
Wine, add to them of fresh Lard, of the Oils of Camomile and of white Lillies,
each one ounce; make a Cataplasm.

A dissolving fomentation or bath is here also of use.

If the Tumor cannot be dissolved, but tends to supparation, it must be
furthered by the following Cataplasm.

Take of the powder of the roots of Marshmallows, of the flowers of Camomile
and Melilot, of the Meal of Linseeds, Fenugreek-seeds, each one ounce, of fat
Figs number eight; boil them to the consistence of a Cataplasm; then add of the
yolks of Eggs number four, of Saffron ten grains, of Oil of Lillies and fresh
Butter* each one ounce; make a Cataplasm.

The Pus being made, which may be known by the remission of the heat and pain,
and by its ^loating when it is touched, the breaking of the abscess must be
endeavored by the motion of the Body, Sneazing, Coughing, by applying
Cupping-glasses, by cleansing and attenuating Injections, or by Pessaries that
have a faculty of breaking Tumors. For instance,

Take of Goose-fat half an ounce, of Turpentine two drachms; of the powder of
the seeds of Rue, and of Orris-root, each half a dram; mix them, and make a
Pessary.

The Abscess being broken, we must endeavor to cleanse and heal the Ulcer; as
shall be showed in the following Chapter.

CHAP XCIX. Of an Ulcer in the Womb.
AN Ulcer follows an Inflammation of the Womb suppurated; it also proceeds from
other causes, viz. from whatever corrodes the Womb.

Therefore, the causes of it are an Abscess broken, acrid Humors flowing to
the Womb, acrid and corr^ding Medicines injected, or taken inwardly, as
Cantharides.

The antecedent causes are all those things that occasion an Inflammation, as
hard Labor, violent and ungovernable Copulation, acrid and long Whites,
Wounds, Falls, Contusions; but especially a virulent Gonorrhaea, and the French
Pox, the Contagion whereof is easily communicated to the Womb, and the neck of
it.

The differences are to be sought for from the Place, Magnitude, Figure and
Complication with other Diseases.

The diagnostick Signs are a Pain and Gnawing, and the evacuation of purulent
Matter.

The cure of the Ulcer must be performed by stoping the defluxion of acrid
Humors, and by cleansing and conglutinating the Ulcer.

And first, if the Body be Plethorick, or if the Ulcer be accompanied with an
Inflammation, a Vein must be opened in the Arm, and bleeding must be repeated
as often as there is danger of a new fluxion, especially at the time of the
Courses, to lessen them, which are wont to increase the matter of the Ulcer,
and to promote the flux of other Humors to the Womb.

Purging is also very necessary to cleanse the Body from ill Humors; but it
ought to consist of gentle Catharticks, as of Sena, Rhubarb, Tamarinds,
Myrabolanes, and the like, which must be often repeated, that the vicious
Humors may be diverted; and this is of so great moment, that Forestus says,
That a noble Matron was cured of an Ulcer of the Womb, by taking every fourth
day five ounces of the decoction of Sena, Dodder of Thym, red Roses, Indian
Myrabolanes sweetened with Sugar, and by injecting a cleansing decoction into
the Womb.

For common use, a magisterial Syrup may be made in the following manner.

Take of the roots of Comfry, and of fresh Polypody of the Oak, each one ounce;
of the Bark of dried Citron six drachms; of the leaves of Plantain, Periwinkle,
Sanicle, Sorrel and Maidenhair, each one handful; of Liquorish rasped, and of
Raisins of the Sun stoned, each one ounce; of Sena cleansed six drachms; of the
seeds of Bastard-saffron bruised, two ounces; of Agarick fresh trochiscated,
and tied up in a Rag, ten drachms; of the seeds of Anise and Melon, each three
drachms; of the Cordial Flowers of Rosemary and of Dodder, each one pugil; make
a decoction of all, in a part of which infuse half an ounce of choice Rhubarb,
and one dram of Cinnamon; in a pint and an half of the strained Liquor,
dissolve three ounces of Syrup of Roses solutive, and a sufficient quantity of
Sugar; boil them well and make a Syrup, whereof let her take two or three
ounces twice or thrice in a month, with a decoction of Agrimony and Plantain,
or with an infusion of Rhubarb in Endive water.

If the sick vomits easily, a Vomit is most useful, for it makes a revulsion of
the Humors from the Womb; and the days the sick does not purge a vulnerary
decoction must be used a long while, made in the following manner.

Take of the leaves of Agrimony, Knot-grass, Burnet and Plantain, each half a
handful; of the roots of China three drachms, of Coriander-seed one dram, of
Raisins half an ounce, of red Sanders one scruple; boil them in Chicken Broth,
strain it. Let the sick take of it morning and evening. Or,

Take of the leaves of Mugwort, Plantain, Yarrow, each one handful; Rhaponticum
half an ounce, of the seeds of Nettles one dram; boil them in a measure of
white Wine, and sweeten it with Sugar; let the sick take two or three ounces in
a morning.

If the Fever be violent, and if a great quantity of Sanies be evacuated, Whey
is very proper; half a pint or more being taken in a morning, with a little
Honey of Roses.

If the Body begin to waste, and there is a hectic Fever, Asses Milk must be
taken, with Sugar of Roses for a whole Month.

Sudorificks, there being no Inflammation, or a hot Intemperies may also do
good to dry the Ulcer, and to drive the serous Humors toward the habit of the
Body.

Turpentine washed in some proper Water for the Womb, as in Mugwort or
Feferfew-water, or in some Water proper for the Ulcer, as Plantain or
Rose Water, taken with Sugar of Roses, by Intervals cleanses and heals the
Ulcer.

Pills of Bdellium taken daily or every other day, are also very good.

Take of Bdellium three drachms, of Myrrh and Frankincense, each one dram; of
Sarcocoll, Amber, Storax, and of Myrabolanes, called Chebule, each one dram;
of red Coral two scruples, with syrup of Poppies, make a mass for Pills; to
which, when the Pain is violent, may be added a little Opium.

Troches of Alkakengi with Opium, may be also used when the pain is violent;
and to ease the pain, the same Remedies may be prescribed, which were proposed
in an Inflammation of the Womb, for the same Symptom.

The following Powder is also very effectual to dry the Ulcer.

Take of Acacia and Hypocistis, each one dram, of Dragon's-blood, white
Starch, the roots of Plantain and of round Birthwort, each half a dram; of
Bole armenick one dram, of Mastich and Sarcocol, each half a dram; make a
fine Powder; the dose is one dram in Plantain or Rose Water, or in some
Chalybeat-water.

To cleanse, dry and heal the Ulcer, various Injections are prepared; but they
must not be used till the Inflammation is taken off, and till the Pain is
eased; and, therefore, upon account of the Inflammation and Acrimony, Emulsions
of the cold Seeds, the Whey of Goat's-milk, or the Milk it self, or mixed with
the juice of Plantain or Shepherd's purse, may be injected first; if necessity
requires, a decoction of Poppy-heads and tops of Mallows may be injected. Some
Practitioners say, The Sick may be much relieved by injecting frequently warm
Water.

The hot Intemperies, and the Pain being quieted, or at least diminished, we
must use such things as cleanse, beginning with the gentle, and proceeding by
degrees to the stronger.

The gentle, are Whey with Sugar, a decoction of Barley with Sugar, or Honey of
Roses; but simple Hydromel cleanses more.

A decoction will be a little stronger made with Barley, Lentils, Beans not
excorticated, of the Leaves of Smallage, Plantain and Pellitory, a little Honey
of Roses being added.

When the Ulcer is very sordid, the following decoction may be used.

Take of the roots of Gentian, Rhaponticum, Zedoary, and round Birthwort, each
one ounce, of white Wine three pints; boil them to the consumption of a third
part; in the strained Liquor, dissolve half a pound of Sugar, and keep it for
use.

If the Ulcer be very fetid, a little Vnguentum Aegyptiacum may be added to the
decoction.

When the Ulcer is well cleansed, we must use such things as dry and consolidat.

Take of the roots of Comfry and Bistort, each one ounce, of the leaves of
Plantain, Horsetail, Shepherd's-purse, Sanicle, Mouse-ear, Milfoil, each one
handful, of red Roses half an handful; boil them in a measure of Water for an
injection.

The following Sarcotick Powder may be added to it.

Take of the roots of Orris, Birthwort and Comfry, each half an ounce, of Myrrh
one ounce, of Aloes three drachms; make a Powder, whereof let half an ounce be
mingled with every injection.

Take of Turpentine washed in Plantain-water, two drachms, dissolve it with
Honey and the yolk of an Egg, and mingle it with the Injection. This is very
effectual; but is more so, if the sarcotick Powder be also added.

Oil of the yolks of Eggs stirred well about in a leaden Mortar, is also very
good.

Fumes must be used for deep Ulcers, for they penetrate to the bottom of the
Womb, and dry the Ulcers.

Take of Frankincense, Myrrh, Mastick, Gum-juniper, Labdanum, each one ounce,
with a sufficient quantity of Turpentine; make Troches for a Fume.

When the Ulcer is very obstinat, Cinnabar must be added, which is of excellent
use.

The Bath-waters have cured Women, when all other Medicines have been
ineffectual.

Plasters may be also conveniently applied to the Epigaster. If the Ulcer be in
the Neck of the Womb, it must be anointed with Liniments, that cleanse and dry.

Take of the juice of Smallage two ounces, of honey of Roses one ounce and an
half, of Turpentine half an ounce, of the meal of Barley or of Orobus, a
sufficient quantity; make a Liniment.

Ointment of Diapompholigos may be also applied, adding to it Frankincense,
Mastich, Myrrh, Aloes, according to the condition of the Ulcer: These things
cleanse.

After you have sufficiently cleansed the Ulcer, you must apply a drying and
cicatrizing Ointment.

Take of Tutty washed half an ounce, of Lytharge, Ceruss and Sarcocoll, each
two drachms, of Oil and Wax a sufficient quantity; make an Ointment.

Sometimes the Ulcer penetrates the right Gut, and sometimes the Bladder, which
may be known by the Matter evacuated by those Parts.

If it flow by the right Gut, lenitive, cleansing and drying Glisters must be
injected: But if it flow from the Bladder, gentle and cooling Diuretics must
be used, as an Emulsion of the greater cold Seeds, Turpentine and other
Remedies prescribed for an Ulcer of the Bladder.

If the Ulcer turn to a Fistula, which chiefly happens, when it is opened
outwardly toward the Hip, though it may happen in the Womb it self, or in the
Neck of it; in this case we must consider, whether it be best to leave the
accustomed Passage untouched, through which Nature endeavors to evacuate
various Excrements, or to undertake the Cure of it: But if that be thought most
proper for the Sick, a Cure that is called palliative must be instituted by
Purges frequently repeated, and by sweating twice a year, and by cleansing and
strengthening Injections, and by applying over a Plaster of Diapalma, or the
like. But if there be any hopes of a Cure, the same Remedies must be used which
are proper for other Fistula's.

If the Ulcer be occasioned by the French Pox, it cannot be cured without an
universal Cure; in performing which, the Fumes of Cinnabar received through a
Tunnel into the Womb, are peculiarly proper; also, the anointing the inner
Parts of the Womb with a mercurial Ointment.

In all Ulcers of the Womb, if there be a troublesome itching about the Neck,
as it frequently happens, by reason of a defluction of an acrid and salt Humor
to the part; a Pessary must be made to qualify it, dipped in the Ointment of
Elecampane with Mercury, or in Aegyptiacum dissolved in Sea or Alum-water, or
in fresh Butter, wherein quick Silver has been extinguished; to which must be
added Sulphur.

CHAP. C. Of the Scirrhus of the Womb.
THE signs of a Scirrhus in the Womb are a hardness in the region of it, a
sense of weight in the part, especially when the Sick stands, but there is no
Fever or Pain, whereby it is distinguished from an Inflammation, and if there
be any Pain it is small. If it be in the body of the Womb it is easily known by
feeling the region of the Pubes, but if it be in the Neck of the Womb it may be
touched with the Finger; it is distinguished from a Mola by the preceding
Causes, also because in a Mola the Courses, if they flow, flow disorderly: But
in a Scirrhus, if they flow, they keep their order. Also in a Mola, the Breasts
are full of Milk, but in a Scirrhus they grow small.

As to the Prognostic, every Scirrhus is difficultly cured; for great hardness
once contracted can scarce be mollified: Moreover the Natural Heat in the part
affected with the Scirrhus is very weak, so that it can scarce discuss the
gross and almost stony Matter.

A great and obstinate Scirrhus occasions at length a Dropsy.

If a Scirrhus of the Womb be treated with too hot, and too moistening
Remedies, it degenerates into a Cancer.

The Cure is to be directed to two things, viz. to the antecedent and conjunct
cause.

By reason of the antecedent Cause, Bleeding must be ordered first in the Arm;
if the Disease be not very inveterate: But afterward in the inferior Veins,
especially when the Courses are stopped.

The opening of the Hemorrhoidal Veins is also very proper, for they evacuate
feculent Blood, and draw from the Womb, by reason of the Communication which
they have with it.

Purging is also necessary, and it must be repeated by intervals. The Purges
must be made of such things as evacuate Melancholy. First you must use such as
are gentle, afterward stronger.

But opening Medicines, and such as prepare the Melancholy Humor must be given
before Purges, in the Forms of Apozems, Juleps or Broaths, according to the
Disposition of the Sick.

But besides common Apperitives, chalybeat Medicines must be also used, whereby
the great Obstruction in the Womb and other Parts may be dissolved.

And that the superfluous Humors may be diverted, Issues should be made in the
Legs, and must be continued there till the Courses, which are generally stopped
in this Disease, return orderly.

For the conjunct Cause emollient and resolving Medicines must be applied
outwardly in the following manner.

Take of the Roots of Marshmallows, and of Lillies, each two ounces; of the
Leaves of Mallows, Violets, Marshmallows, and Bears-breach, each one handful;
of the Leaves of Mugword and Calamint, half an handful; of the Seeds of Flax
and Fenugreek, each one ounce; of the Flowers of Camomile and Melilot, each one
pugil: Make a Decoction, wherewith foment the Region of the Pubes and Groin
with a Sponge dipped in it and pressed out.

To mollify more, a Decoction may be made of the Entrails of a Sheep, and the
Roots of Briony and wild Cucumber may be added: But you must begin with things
that are gentle, and proceed by degrees to stronger

Of the same Decoction, the Dose of the Simples being increased, a Bath may be
made, which is very effectual in this case, and more powerful than the
Fomentation.

Glisters also and Injections may be made of the same Decoction, and frequently
used; whereunto may be added the Oils of Lillies, Camomil and Sweet Almonds.

Take of the Oils of Lillies, and of Sweet Almonds, each three ounces; of the
Mucilage of the Seeds of Fenugreek, extracted with White Wind one ounce; of the
Fats of Hens, Geese and Ducks, each one ounce and an half; of fresh Butter and
of Lard, of each two ounces; with a sufficient quantity of Wax and Turpentine
make an Ointment.

The following is approved of in all Scirrhus's.

Take of Bdellium, Ammoniacum, and Galbanum, each equal parts; beat them in a
Mortar with Oil of Ben and Lillies; then add of the Mucilages of the Seeds of
Fenugreek, Flax, and of Figs a like quantity; make an Ointment.

Of the same Matter, Wax being added, an effectual Plaster may be made, and
applied to the region of the Womb behind and before; or Diachylon with Orris
may be applied. A Cataplasm may be made of the residue of the Decoction for the
foresaid Bath, bruised and pulped, adding to it of the Meal of Fenugreek and
Flax-Seeds, each one ounce, of Figs, number six, of the Powder of Orris Root
two drachms, of Saffron half a dram, of hens Fat and Oil of Sweet Almonds,
each a sufficient quantity; make a Cataplasm.

The Mud of a Sulphurous Bath may be applied instead of a Cataplasm.

But these Medicines must be used with great caution, lest the Scirrhus should
be hardened; or what is much worse, should degenerate into a Cancer. So that it
is best to desist by intervals; and it is to no purpose to use Medicines when
the Scirrhus is without Pain, and of a stony nature.

CHAP. CI. Of a Cancer of the Womb.
A Cancer of the Womb is a hard Swelling of the Body or Neck of it, with
pricking and lanceing Pain.

It is occasioned by black Choler collected in that part, or by a Scirrhus ill
cured, which easily degenerates into a Cancer in that part, especially by
reason of a great afflux of Blood, which being retained in the Veins near the
Scirrhus, and not sufficiently evacuated by the Courses, acquires a malignant
quality.

It is twofold, either ulcerated or not ulcerated.

As long as the Morbific Matter is of lesser Acrimony and Malignity the Cancer
does not break; but when the Matter becomes more acrid, it causes an Ulcer.

It is easily known by what has been said; for if there be a hard Tumor in the
Body or Neck of the Womb, which occasions a pricking and lancing Pain, you may
pronounce it cancerous: But it is more evidently distinguished, if it be seen
by the Eyes, as when it is in the Neck of the Womb, by the help of a Speculum
Matricis, for then an unequal, livid, or black Tumor, encompassed with Branches
of Veins will appear: But if it be ulcerated it casts forth a yellow or black
Sanies that stinks much, and sometimes Blood, by reason the Veins are corroded
which run to it, so that sometimes when a large Vessel is opened, it flows so
much that the Life of the Sick is hazarded. There is also a small Fever,
Anxiety, Nauseousness, and a Heat of the Privities, and the like.

As to the Prognostic, a Cancer is incurable, whether it be ulcerated or not;
wherefore seeing a perfect Cure cannot be expected, we must endeavor to hinder
the breaking of it, and the increase of it when it is broken, and in both we
must qualify the Violence of the Pain; which may be done by such things as
evacuate the whole Body, and by other Remedies which alter and evacuate the
melancholy Humor, and black Choler, and hinder their Growth: As by bleeding in
the Arm, Hemorrhoids, Foot, Potions, Apozems, Juleps, Broth, Milk, Whey, cold
mineral Waters, and the like, which are commonly prescribed for any Cancer: But
Purging, most especially must be repeated, that the antecedent Cause of the
Cancer may be diverted.

Topics must also be applied, which moderately bind and cool without
Sharpness; they must especially be used in form of Liniments.

Take of Oil of Myrtles, and of Roses, each two ounces; of the Juice of
Nightshade, and of Housleek, each one ounce; stir them all about in a leaden
Mortar, with a leaden Pestle, till they grow black; then add of Litharge, and
Cerus washed in Scabious Water, each three ounces; of Tutty prepared two
drachms, of Camphor ten grains; make a Liniment, wherewith anoint the Part
three or four times in a day. Or,

Take of the Oils of the Yolks of Eggs and of Roses, each one ounce and an
half, of Sacharum Saturni one dram; stir them about in a leaden Mortar till
they change color.

The following is better than the rest, and with it Tumors of the Paps, which
are counted cancerous, may be perfectly cured.

Take of the Oil of Yolks of Eggs two ounces, of the Juice of Nightshade and
Speedwel, or of Housleek, each half an ounce, of crude Mercury two drachms;
stir them about in a leaden Mortar, with a leaden Pestle, till they acquire the
consistence of a Liniment.

The foresaid Liniments are to be put into the Womb with a long Tent, or with a
Wax-Candle, wrapped round with a Rag: But Injections may be much easier used.

Take of Barly-Water half a pint, of the Waters of Nightshade, and Plantain,
each two ounces, of the Water of Speedwel one ounce, of the white Troches of
Rhasis two drachms, of Sacharum Saturni one dram: Make an injection.

If the Pain be very violent add to four ounces of the Injection one ounce of
the Syrup of Popies.

Foment the part affected with the Waters of Plantain and Nightshade, or with
the decoction of them, whereunto may be added the Leaves of Water Lillies,
white Poppies, and red Roses and Camphor; which Decoction may be also
frequently injected into the Womb, and it will be much more effectual, if it be
stirred about in a leaden Mortar, or if Sacharum Saturni be mixed with it.

Among Specificks, are commended Frogs washed and boiled, and applied instead
of a Cataplasm, or a decoction of them injected; also, the decoction or juice
of River-crabs injected into the Womb, or Herb-Robert taken inwardly or applied.

If the Cancer be ulcerated the Dose of the Minerals to be added to the
foresaid Linimenss must be increased. and the Ashes of River-Crabs may be
conveniently added to them; but with the Injections may be mixed the white
Troches of Rhasis and Barly-water.

If the Pain be very violent, Fomentations of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Water Lillies, Poppies, Henbane, green Coriander, Dill, of the seed of
Psyllium, Milk, Saffron, and the like, may be used by Intervals, or a Cataplasm
made of them may be applied, with which also Decoctions, Injections and Baths
may be also prepared.

But all these things are not sometimes sufficient to appease the violent Pain,
which sometimes will not suffer the sick to sleep or rest, so that we are
forced sometimes to use Narcoticks; and indeed, they are not injurious in this
Disease. I knew a Woman that was afflicted with a Cancer in her Breast, who
took every Night for four Months two or three Grains of Laudanum, and was much
relieved by it.

If much Blood flow from a Cancer ulcerated, as it often happens, inject into
the Womb the juice of Plantain, with a little Frankincense.

CHAP. CII. Of a Gangrene and Mortification of the Womb.
A Gangrene is an incipient Mortification; this Disease is easily generated in
a Woman's Privities, because those Parts are very moist and soft, and easily
receive the Excrements of the whole Body; it often succeeds an Inflammation,
Absess or Ulcer ill cured, when the vital heat of the part is suffocated and
destroyed, it is suffocated in great Inflammations, when more Blood flows in,
than the innate heat of the part can digest; it is destroyed either by a cold
Intemperies that extinguishes it, or by an hot that dissipates and resolves it.

An incipient Gangrene is known by an unusual heat that is perceived in the
part; a shaking and shivering also invades, with a languid and frequent Pulse,
and with Fainting, and because most commonly this Disease is chiefly seated on
the Neck of the Womb, and so the part affected may be seen, that appears soft,
livid, black and cadaverous, and may be pricked and cut without feeling, and
sends forth a fetid and cadaverous Stink.

As to the prognostic, this Disease is very dangerous and most commonly
deadly. But it has been observed by many Authors, that the Womb having been
corrupted or gangrened has fallen off of its own accord, or has been cut off,
and the Woman has done well.

The Cure is to be performed by the same Remedies wherewith the Gangrenes of
the other parts used to be cured; if the Gangrene be in the neck of the Womb,
or tend toward the external parts, Scarification must be used, and a decoction
of Wormwood, Myrrh and the like; also Unguentum Aegyptiacum, and a Cataplasm
made of the three Meals.

Take of the Meals of Barley, Beans and Orobus, each two ounces, of Oxymell, one
pint; boil them to the consistenee of a Cataplasm, but it will be more
effectual, if you add the Meal of Lupines, Myrrh, Aloes and Wormwood.

But if it be wholly corrupted it must be cut off, or in a falling of the Womb
it must be bound by degrees harder and harder, till at length it falls off, of
which Operations Schenkius has collected many Observations.

In the whole course of the Cure, Corroboratives must be used, and emollient
cleansing and cooling Glisters must be frequently injected.

CHAP CIII. Of a Dropsy and Inflation of the Womb.
THE Inflation and Dropsy are confounded by almost all Authors, but they are
to be distinguished; for there is a certain Inflation of the Womb which ought
not to be called a Dropsy, viz. when the Womb is inflated and stretched
suddenly by Wind rushing in, upon which account a violent pain is occasioned,
as it happens in the Cholick; and, therefore, if this Inflation does not last
long, it does not deserve the name of a Dropsy; such an one is often in
hysteric Diseases.

Wherefore, a Dropsy of the Womb is twofold; one from Wind, which is like a
Timpany; another, from a watery Humor, which is like the Dropsy of the Belly:
Some add a third, from Phlegm.

And first of Wind, contained in the cavity of the Womb. Sennertus mentions an
observation in a Woman, That when she thought she was with Child and about to
be delivered, evacuated a great quantity of Wind, and her Belly presently
asswag'd. He also mentions Observations of great quantities of Water, contained
in the cavity of the Womb.

But Authors testify, That Water is sometimes contained in Bladders, and
excluded in them, and sometimes a Dropsy of the Womb is complicated with being
with Child, as Fabricius Hildanus relates of his own Wife.

As to the Diagnostick of this Disease, many things are to be inquired into;
first, how this particular Dropsy of the Womb may be distinguished from an
universal Dropsy; secondly, how the Species of it may be known, viz. Whether
it proceeds from Wind, Water or Phlegm; thirdly, Whether it arise primarily
from the Womb, or be occasioned by the fault of some other part; fourthly,
Whether the peccant Matter be contained in the cavity of the Womb, or within
the Membranes of it, or in Bladders; fifthly, How it may be distinguished from
other Tumors of the Womb; sixthly, How it may be distinguished from being
with Child; seventhly, How it may be distinguished from a Mola.

As to the first Question, it is distinguished from an universal Dropsy; for
that in a Dropsy of the Womb the Tumor possesses more the bottom of the
Womb, but an universal Dropsy extends equally the whole Belly; besides, in a
Dropsy of the Womb, there is not so soon a paleness and wasting of the whole
Body, as in an universal Dropsy, in which also most commonly there is
considerable Drought, and dryness of the Tongue, but not in a Dropsy of the
Womb; and also in this, all the Symptoms are much milder, and the hardness
when it is from VVind, or the fluctuation when it is occasioned by Water, do not
possess so great a space, as in an universal Dropsy. And, lastly, in a Dropsy
of the Womb, wind breaks out by Intervals, or a little water flows out, which
manifestly show, that wind or water is contained in it.

To the second Question we answer in the following manner: The Species of a
Dropsy in the Womb are thus distinguished; if it be occasioned by wind, the
bottom of the Belly sounds, being struck; there are pricking pains in the
belly, which sometimes run through the Diaphragm, Stomach, Loins, Navel and
other parts; and sometimes the wind does evidently break through the Neck of
the Womb, and the Women perceive the Womb to rise up often to the Stomach
like a Ball; breathing is sometimes difficult, the Disease grows worse upon
eating or drinking, and they often belch, and are better after it, and they are
often troubled with Mother-fits: They sometimes perceive a pain in the region
of the Hypogaster, so that they cannot bear an Hand laid upon it; these Signs
are also in an inflation of the Womb; but there is this difference, for as we
said before, an inflation is but for a small space, but a Dropsy from wind
continues much longer.

But if a Dropsy of the Womb is occasioned by Water, that Region appears soft
and flaccid, for Wind causes a Tension; there is a greater weight in the part,
and a sound as it were of Water floating, and Water sometimes drops from the
part. And, lastly, if it proceed from Phlegm, there is a greater softness and
flaccidity of the part, which daily increases and afflicts the neighboring
Parts, viz. the Hypogaster, the Pubes Perineum and Loins, with an Oedematous
swelling.

As to the third Question, if there be Signs of the whole Bodies being ill
affected, as by acute or long Fevers, by immoderate Hemorrhagies, by weakness
of the Stomach, swellings of the Liver or Spleen, or by other obstinate
Diseases of those parts, with which the Dropsy of the Womb began and increased
with them, there is good reason to conjecture, That the matter of the Dropsy
is received in those parts; but if when the whole Body is well, such a Tumor
happens, and succeeds particular Diseases of the Womb, as hard Labor,
suppression of the Courses, or too large an evacuation of them, or Ulcers and
Tumors, we may guess that the Dropsy of the Womb proceeds from them.

To the fourth Question we answer, That the Matter which is contained in the
cavity of the Womb, causes a much greater Tumor than when it is contained within
the Membranes.

To the fifth Question we answer, That a Dropsy of the Womb may be
distinguished from Tumors that proceed from a Phlegmon or an Erysipelas,
because in these there is a Fever and Pain upon the least touching; it may be
distinguished from a Scirrhus or cancerous Tumor, by the hardness that resists
the Finger upon touching.

To the sixth Question we answer, That when a Woman is with Child, the Tumor is
not equal and depressed, but thrusts it self out above the Navel. Secondly,
when a Woman is with Child, after some Months she is better most commonly; but
the longer a Dropsy lasts, the worser it grows. Thirdly, in a Woman with
Child, the motion of the Fetus is manifestly felt, after the third or forth
Month, which does not happen in a Dropsy; yet sometimes when a Dropsy arises
from Wind, a Palpitation is perceived in the Womb; but it may be easily
distinguished from the motion of a Child, because it is more equal, and is wont
to possess more parts of the Belly. Fourthly, when a Woman is with Child the
Breasts swell, but in a Dropsy they grow small.

To the seventh Question we answer, That in a Mola there is a weight felt in
the Belly, which is not perceived in a Dropsy of the Womb; and when the sick
lie on either side, a weight is perceived, as if a Stone rolled thither.
Moreover, in a Mola there are violent Fluxes of the Courses by Intervals, viz.
every third of fourth Month, which does not happen in a Dropsy of the Womb.
And, lastly, in a Mola the Breasts swell, and have Milk in them sometimes; but
there is no such thing in a Dropsy.

As to the Prognostic, a simple Inflation of the Womb is not dangerous; but if
it continue long, it may turn to a Dropsy.

If Wind or Water be contained in the cavity of the Womb, it is easier cured
than when it is included in the Membranes or in Bladders.

The Cure of this Disease is performed in a manner by the same Remedies which
are proposed for the Cure of a Dropsy or the Green Sickness, but some things
that are peculiar to this Disease must be added. And first, as to bleeding in a
recent Disease occasioned by an obstruction of the Courses, and there being a
fullness of Blood, it may be proper, otherwise it is injurious.

But Purging is always necessary, and it must be often repeated; and after
sufficient Purging, Aperitives, Diuretics, and such things as move the Courses
must be used; to which may be added the following.

Take of the Roots of Smallage and Madder, each half an ounce, of the Leaves of
Savine, Feverfew and Pennyroyal, each one pugil, of the Seeds of Daucus, one
dram; boil them in the Broth of young Pigeons, and let her take it strained
in a Morning for many days, but before she takes the Broth, let her swallow
one of the following Pills.

Take of the best Castor, Myrrh and Madder, each half a dram, of Saffron one
scruple, with the juice of Lemons; make nine Pills.

After the use of which Medicines violent Exercise must be used, that thereby
the Excrements bred in the Bowels and in the habit of the Body may be
dissipated; and also, all that which is contained in the Womb, the Skins being
broken by the violence of the exercise.

And if the Woman vomit easily, 'twill be proper to vomit her twice a Week,
whereby not only the Humors flowing to the Womb may be recalled and evacuated,
but also the Skins sticking to the Womb, and sometimes containing a watery
Humor, may perchance be broken, and so the ill Humors may flow out.

The following Bolus is very effectual to discuss the Humor contained in the
Womb.

Take of Mineral Borox half a dram, of Saffron half a scruple, with the juice
of Savin; make a Bolus, to be taken twice a week.

Sudorificks are also very proper in this Disease, for by them the watery
Humors contained in the Womb, or the whole Body, may be discussed and
evacuated.

In the mean while the heat of the Stomach must be strengthened by things taken
inwardly, and outwardly applied.

And outwardly must be applied proper topical Remedies to strengthen the Womb,
and to discuss the Humors contained in it.

And first, may be prepared Fomentations and Baths, made of a decoction of the
Roots of Briony and wild Cucumber, of the Leaves of Dwarf-elder, Mercury-elder,
wild Marjoram, Calaminth, Wormwood, Rue, Sage, Marjoram, Thyme, Bays,
Pennyroyal, Mugwort, of the Seeds of Broom, Daucus, Cummin, Annise, Fennel,
Laurel-borries and Juniper Berries, the Flowers of Camomile, Melilote and
Rosemary, of which may be made Bags to be boiled in Wine, or the foresaid
things may be boiled in a Lee made of the ashes of the Twigs of a Vine.

But that the forementioned Fomentations may operate the better, they must be
applied before and behind, and the Sick ought to sweat, if she can, in the Bed,
or in a Bath.

In a windy Dropsy dry Fomentations are more beneficial with Bags made of
Gromwel, Salt, Cummin and Bran, torrefied in a Drying Pan, and sprinkled with
Wine.

After the Fomentation, anoint the Belly with the Oils of Nard, Dill, Rue,
Wormwood, and Southernwood, which if they are drawn chymically will be much
more effectual.

After you have anointed the Belly apply the Plaster of Laurel-berries, or a
Cataplasm of Cow Dung, Sheeps-Dung, of the Seeds of Smallage, Parsley, Cummin
and boiled Honey.

For the same use is commended the Skin of a Sheep newly killed, and sprinkled
with hot Wine.

Glisters must be also frequently injected made of a Decoction of Wormwood,
wild Marjoram, Pennyroyal, Rue, Centory and the like, or with Oils of Rue,
Nuts, Dill and White Wind or Mallago-Sack, wherein must be dissolved Benedictum
Laxativum, Turpentine, Rosemary, Honey and the like.

Injections for the Womb may be prepared in the following manner, to evacuate
the Humors contained in it.

Take of the Roots of Asarabacca three drachms, of the Leaves of Pennyroyal and
Calaminth each one handful, of the Seeds of Savine one pugil, of Mechoacan one
dram, of the seeds of Annise and Cummin, each half a dram; boil them, and
in the strained Liquor dissolve of Oil of Orrice and of Elder, each one ounce,
in six ounces of the Liquor, and make an Injection.

For the same Use Pessaries may be made in the following manner.

Take of Coloquintida and Mechoacan each one dracm, of Salt of Niter half a
scruple, with a sufficient quantity of boiled Honey, make a Pessary. Or,

Take of Elaterium half a dram, of Figs bruised a sufficient quantity, make a
Pessary.

When the Inflation is occasioned by Wine, a Fume made of Nutmegs and conveyed
through a Tunnel has done much good.

And in the same case a Cupping-Glass applied to the Navel, with much Flame,
discusses Wind powerfully.

But when the Disease is humoral, Issues in the Legs discharge the Filth of the
Womb by degrees.

The Bath-waters used inwardly and outwardly, are also very good, if the Body
be not very hot.

For the Pain of the Womb, which often afflicts the Sick in this Disease,
Amatus Lucitanus commends the Water or Decoction of Camomel, four or five
Ounces, of it being taken at a time.

And lastly, if an Inflation happen after Delivery there is no need of any
other Cleansing than that of the Womb; but if it does not proceed well, it must
be helped by drawing Pessaries, and by Cupping-Glasses applied to the Thighs,
and by other Remedies prescribed for the Stoppage of the Courses; and if Wind
be the cause, the Fume of Nutmegs above-proposed is very proper.

CHAP. CIV. Of a Falling of the Womb.
FOR the Cure of this Distemper regard must be had to two things; the first is
to reduce the Womb into its natural Place, and the second is to strengthen it,
and keep it there.

For the Execution of the first, which is to reduce it, if the Womb be quite
out or turned, the Woman must first of all render her Urine, and a Glister must
be given, if it be necessary, to empty the gross Excrements that are in the
right-Gut, that so the Reduction may be the easier performed; then place her on
her Back, with her Hips raised a little higher than her Head, and then foment
all that is fallen out with a little Wine and Water lukewarm, and with a soft
Rag put it up into its proper Place, thrusting back not all at once, but waging
it by little and little from side to side, in case this be too painful, because
it is already too big and swelled; anoint it with Oil of Almonds, for the more
easy reduction of it, being careful as soon as it is reduced, to wipe off the
Oil as much as may be, to avoid a Relapse: But if notwithstanding all this, the
Womb cannot be put up, because it is very much inflamed and tumified, which
happens when it has been a long time so, without the use of necessary means,
during which time it is continually moistened with Urine and other Excrements,
which contribute very much to its Corruption, in this case there is great
danger that 'twill gangrene.

Also the second part of this Cure, which consists in the retention of the Womb
in its place, and the strengthening of it; It will be done by a convenient
situation* Let the Woman, for this purpose, keep her self in Bed, on her Back,
having her Hips a little raised, her Legs something crossed, and her Thighs
joined together, to prevent the falling of it out again; but the best way is to
put up a Pessary into the Neck of the Womb, to keep it firm. There are two or
three sorts of them made for this purpose, the Figures of them may be seen in
Moriceau's Midwifery; see Page 311.

Take of Oak-Bark two ounces, boil it in two quarts of Fountain Water, add at
the latter end one ounce of Pomegranate-Peel bruised, red Roses,
Pomegranate-Flowers, each two handfuls, and then add half a pint of red Wine,
strain it, and bath the part affected with Flannels dipped in it, in the Morning,
two hours before the Woman rises, and at Night, when she is in Bed; continue
the use of it 'till the Symptom is quite gone.

CHAP. CV. Of Barrenness.
AS to the Cure of Barrenness, too much Fat must be corrected by an orderly
Diet, and by convenient Evacuation.

Such as are of a robust and manly constitution must be reduced to a womanly
state by all means; they must forbear strong Meats and Labor, and the Coarses
must be forced, and by Bleeding and Purging, and the like, the Habit of the
Body must be rendered moist and cold.

If from Distortion, Obstruction, Tumors or Ulcers of the Womb, or from its
being shut, Barrenness is occasioned, proper Remedies must be applied.

If too hot an Intemperies be the cause, it must be corrected, so must
immoderate siccity by Milk and Bathing.

But the most frequent Cause of Barrenness is a cold and moist Intemperies of
the whole Body, and of the Womb, which the Whites often accompany, and for the
Cure in this case, the Whites must be cured by the Method prescribed in the
Chapter for the Whites, and the following things must be ordered, which are
peculiarly proper for the said Intemperies, which may be varied according to
the discretion of the Physician, so as that they may heat more, or dry more,
according as Humidity or Frigidity exceeds.

And first, the phlegmatic Humors, stagnating in the Body, must be evacuated by
Medicines that purge, sweat and force Urine; and Revulsion must be made by
Issues in the Arms, Neck and Legs, and the principal Parts must be strengthened
by Treacle, Mithridate, Confection of Alkermes and the like.

Aftewards such things must be used as are proper by a specific quality to
strengthen the Womb and to help Conception.

Take of the Roots Eryngo and Satyrion candied, each one ounce; of green Ginger
candied, half an ounce; of Hazel-Nuts, Pine-Nuts and Pistaches, each six
drachms; one Nutmeg candied; of the Seeds of Rocket and Cresses each two
drachms; of the Ashes of a Bulls-Pisle, of the Reins of Scinks, and of the
Raspings of Ivory each one dram; of Confection of Alkermes, three drachms; of
Diambra and sweet Diamoch each one ounce and an half; of Ambergrise half a
drachms, with the Syrup of candid Citrons, make an Electuary; let her take the
quantity of a Nutmeg at Bedtime, drinking upon it a Glass of good Wine.

Some count the Secondine of a Woman dried and powdered very effectual, one
dram of it being taken. The Seeds of Bishop's Weed is also much commended.

Many good Authors affirm, That if a Woman drink six ounces of the Juice of
Garden-Sage with a little Salt, the fourth Day of her menstrous Purgation, and
a quarter of an hour after has Conversation with her Husband, she will
infallibly conceive: And by the use of this Remedy, Aetius says, the Egyptian
Women became fruitful after a great Plague.

Topics are also to be used, but purging must always go before.

Take of Diaphenicon and Hierapicra, each half an ounce; of Turpentine and
Mercurial Honey, each one ounce; of Castor one dram: Mingle them, and reduce
them to a convenient consistence, that Pessaries may be made for the Womb.

If the Womb abound with a great quantity of Excrements, a stronger Pessary may
be made in the following manner: But this injection must be first used.

Take of the Leaves of Wormwood, Mugwort, Mercury and Rue, each one handful and
an half; of the Pulp of Coloquintida one scruple; of Agarick trochiscated, half
a dram; of Ginger and Myrrh each one scruple* Make a Decoction in Water and
White Wind to a Pint, in which dissolve two ounces of Honey of Roses: Let three
ounces of this Decoction be injected for three or four days, morning and
evening, after the Flux of the courses; and afterward immit the following
Pessary.

Take of Hiera picra and of Benedictum Laxativum, each one ounce; of the Pulp
of Coloquintida and of Agarick trochiscated, each half a dram; of Spikenard
and of the Seeds of Roman Nigella, and of the Leaves of Savine powdered, each
one dram: let them be incorporated with Rosemary-Hony, and put them up in
Silk, and make Pessaries; let one be put into the Privities at Bedtime, and
let it remain there two hours; afterward let the part be washed with
White Wind.

To bind, strengthen and dry the Womb the following Medicines may be used.

Take of round Birthwort, half an ounce; of Wood of Aloes, three drachms; of
Cypress-nutts, and of the Roots of Cypress, each two drachms; of sweet smelling
Flag, one dram; of the Leaves of Dittany of Crete, and of Savory and Myrtles,
each one handful; of choice Myrrh, Storax Calamit and Benzoin, each two drachms
and an half; of the Flowers of Stechas, Rosmary and Marjoram, each one pugil:
Boil them in a sufficient quantity of good White Wind; in a pint of the
strained Liquor dissolve of the Troches of Alipta moschata two drachms; of
Ambergreese and of Musk, each seven grains; of Civet five grains: Make an
Injection Morning and Evening, hot, for some Days.

Before or after the Injection the following Fume may be used.

Take of the Troches of Gallia and Alipta moschata, each two drachms, of Storax
Calamit, Benzoin and pure Labdanum, each half an ounce; of Wood of Aloes and of
Rhodium, each one ounce; of the Seeds of Roman Nigella, Cubebs and Cloves, each
four scruples, of Amber and Tacamahaca, each one dram and an half; of Mace
half a dram: Make a Powder, and with Gum Tragacanth dissolved in
Orange-flower-water, make Troches; whereof let one or two be cast upon the
Coals, and let the Fume be received through a Tunnel.

Poor People may be fumed with equal Parts of Myrrh, Franckincense, Wood of
Aloes, Storax, Benzoin, Cinnamon and Cloves. After the Injections and Fume the
following Pessary may be used.

Take of Frankincense and Mastick, each two drachms; of the Troches of Gallia
and Alypta Moschata, each four scruples; of the Roots of Bistort, of
Cypress-Nuts, shavings of Ivory and of red Roses, each one dram; of Storax,
Benzoin and Labdanum, each two scruples; of sweet smelling Flag and Cyprus,
each half a dram: Moisten them with Orange-Flower-Water, and with a fine Rag
make two Pessaries of a due magnitude, whereof let one be used at Bedtime, the
top of it being anointed with Oil of Nutmegs and Civet mixed.

Before the strengthening Injections and the Fumes, the Sick may use the
following Bath.

Take of the Roots of Briony, Masterwort, Valerian, Orris, Elecampane; each
three ounce; of the Leaves of Marjoram, Mugwort, Catminte, Pennyroyal, Mercury,
Sage, Laurel, each four handfuls; of the Berries of Laurel and Juniper, each
one ounce: Boil them for a Bath.

But sulphurous and Bituminous Baths are the best, as our Bath-waters, and the
like, to which such Women fly as to an Asylum.

After the Bath and Fume, the Region of the Pubes and Perinoeum must be
anointed with the following Liniment.

Take of Nard-oil, one ounce and an half; of Oil of Wall-flowers, half an
ounce; of Diambra and Dimosh, each one dram and an half; of liquid Storax,
one dram; of Civet half a scruple; of Musk and Ambergrise, each six grains:
with a little white Wax make a Liniment, wherewith anoint the said Parts, and
anoint within with Civet, or with natural Indian Balsam.

Lastly, let Plasters be applied to the Perineum and the Loins, and let rhem be
worn continually.

Take of the Plaster for the Matrix four ounces, of the Plaster of Mastick two
ounces; of Gum Tachamacha and Caranna, each one ounce; of the Powder of the
Roots of Tormentil and Bistort, each three ounces; of the Powder of Myrtles two
drachms; of Aromatic Rosat, four scruples; moisten them with Oil of Quinces,
and with a dram of Oil of Nutmegs, spread two Plasters upon Leather, the one
round for the Pubes, and the other square for the Loins.

CHAP. CVI. Of Miscarriage.
MIscarriage is the Exclusion of an imperfect or unripe Child, and consequently
a Child dead in the Womb is not said abortive till it is excluded; so that
whether alive or dead Child be brought forth not being ripe, nor having
attained to the just growth in the Womb, it is to be termed abortive.

The causes of Abortion are some Internal, some External; the Internal may be
reduced to four Heads, viz. to the Humors, to the Child, to the Womb, and to
the Disease of the Mother.

The Humors may occasion Abortion, when they offend in quantity or quality.

They offend in quantity, either by way of excess or defect.

The quantity is excessive in a Plethora; for there being more Blood than is
requisite to nourish the Fetus, it flows into the Veins of the Womb, and is
excluded like the monthly Courses, and so the Child comes away with it.

There is too small a quantity of the nutritious Humor when the Child's
nourishment is by any means lessened, as by Fasting, whether volunary or
forced; and when Women with Child nauseat all sorts of Food, or vomit it up
again: Likewise, by reason of a thin Diet in acute Diseases, or by an
immoderate evacuation of Blood: Likewise, by reason of extreme leanness of the
whole Body.

In respect of the Child, Abortion may happen if it be over great, so that it
cannot by reason of its bulk be contained in the Womb; and for this reason
little Women often miscarry, especially if they are married to Men bigger than
ordinary, whose Children grow very great, and find not in the Womb a space
large enough to contain them, till they come to their perfect growth; also,
plurality of Children may occasion Abortion, as when two or three, or more, are
contained in the Womb at one time.

The Womb it self occasions Abortion, if it be not large and capacious enough
to widen it self sufficiently according as the Child grows, or if there be any
thing preternatural in the Womb, as an Inflammation, a Scirrhus, or Imposthume,
or the like; or if the Womb be over moist and slack, so that it cannot contain
the Child so well as it ought to do.

Abortion comes two ways from the Diseases of the Mother: First, when her
Diseases are communicated to the Child, whereby it is killed or so weakened,
that it cannot receive due nourishment nor growth; such are continual Fevers
and Agues, the French Pox, and many such like. Secondly, when the said Diseases
of the Mother cause great Evacuations, or great Commotions of the Body; as
large Bleeding from what part of the Body soever, Fluxes of the Belly, grievous
Swooning, Falling Sickness, Vomiting and a Tenesmus, which above all other
Diseases is wont to cause Abortion.

External Causes which further Abortion, do some of them kill the Child, others
draw away it is nourishment, and others dissolve those Bands wherewith the Child
is fastened to the Womb.

The Child is killed by great Commotions of the Mind, as by Anger, Sadness,
Frights, and the like; by Meats earnestly longed for, and not obtained; by
strong purging Medicines, by things that provoke the Courses, and by those
things that expel the Child, and by such things as are reckoned by a Specific
Quality to destroy the Child in the Womb, by abominable Smells; especially the
stink of a Candle ill put out.

Violent Exercise dissolves the Bands that fasten the Child to the Womb; as
Dancing, Running, Riding, Jolting in a Coach or Cart, carrying or lifting from
the Ground a heavy Weight, a violent Fall, a Blow on the Belly, vehement Motion
of the Belly, by Coughing, Vomiting, Looseness, Sneezing, Convulsions,
Crying-out, immoderate or over-wanton Embraces, and in a word, vehement motion
of the Arms, the turning a Wheel, or doing some such work, may exceedingly
promote Abortion.

The Signs of present Abortion are manifest of themselves; but such as go
before Abortion, and prognosticate the same, are these: An unusual heaviness of
the Loins and Hips, an unwillingness to stir, Appetite gone, shivering and
shaking coming by Fits, pain of the Head, especially about the Roots of the
Eyes, a straitening of the Sides and Belly above the Navel, the flagging or
falling, and extenuation of the Dugs; but if frequent pains, and almost
continual Torment, the Reins and Loins reaching toward the Share, as far as
the Os sacrum, with endeavors to evacuate the Womb, certainly the Woman will
shortly miscarry.

If from violent external Causes, such as are a Blow, a Fall, and the like,
vehement Pain and Perturbation arise in a Woman with Child; she ought to keep
her Bed three days or longer.

As to the Prognostics, Women are more endangered by Abortion than by a true
and timely Birth, because it is more violent and unseasonable; for as in ripe
Fruit, the Stalks are loosened from the Boughs, and the Fruit falls off of it
self; so in a natural Birth, the Vessels and Ligaments wherewith the Child is
tied to the Womb are loosened and untyed, as it were, of their own accord,
which in Abortion must needs be vioiently broken asunder. Abortion is most
dangerous in the sixth, seventh and eighth Month.

Our ordinary Women say, A miscarrying Woman is half with Child again.

The Cure of Abortion consists in Preservation; for that which is past, cannot
be helped: But all the Symtoms which follow Abortion, are the same which
accompany Women duly brought to bed.

The preservation from Abortion consists principally in these two things; the
one concerns the Woman before she is with Child, and the other when she is with
Child.

Before the Woman is with Child, all Indispositions of the Body, which are wont
to cause Abortion, must be removed; as fullness of Blood, ill Humors, and
peculiar Diseases of the Womb, viz. Intemperies, Swellings, Ulcers, and the
like.

Fullness of Blood opens the Veins of the Womb, or strangles the Infant while it
is in the Womb; this, if it be a pure and simple Plenitude, may be cured by
Blood-letting, such as shall answer the quantity of Blood superabounding.

A Cacochymy is either Choleric, and partaking of Acrimony, so as to open the
Orifices of the Veins, or by provoking Nature; it stirs up the expulsive
Faculty, whereby the Child comes to be expelled with those ill Humors; or it
suffocates the Child, by reason of plenty of Excrements heaped together in the
first Region, and distending the Belly; or it vitiates the Blood in the whole
Body, rendering it unfit to nourish the Child; or it fills the Vessels of the
Womb which retain the Child, with a slymy moisture.

Bleeding may be also used for this Cacochymy, in a small quantity; but the
chiefest way of Cure is by frequent Purging, that the superfluous Excrements of
the Body may be evacuated; and betwixt Purge and Purge, such things must be
used as assuage the Intemperies of the Bowels, and the Acrimony of the Humors
if there be any, and thicken the said Humors, in case they be too thin, and if
phlegmatic Humors abound, they must be discussed with Sudorificks and
Diuretics, and other Remedies; howbeit, we must diligently observe, that
whatever ill Humors abound, Issues are very proper to prevent Abortion; of
which Zacutus Lusitanus gives a special note in these words: By most happy
Experiments I have observed, That frequent Abortion caused by corrupted Humors,
which flow from the whole Body to the Womb, and by their evil disposition or
abundance kill the Child, is hereby, as by a most present help, prevented; many
Women have miscarried on this account, among whom some having oftentimes
brought a Child of seven Months, or four Months growth, torn and putrified,
could by no other means be freed from so great a Calamity, save by Issues made
in their Arms and Thighs, which were always made at the beginning of the
Fluxion; by which means they went out their time, and brought forth Children
healthy, and not defiled with any Infection.

The peculiar Diseases of the Womb, as overgreat Moisture, Swellings, Ulcers,
and such like, must be cured by their proper Remedies.

If these Diseases happen when a Woman is with Child, the difficulty is
greater, because big-bellied Women cannot so easily bear all kind of Remedies;
yet, lest being destitute of all help, they should remain in extreme danger of
Miscarriage and Death, some kind of Remedies are to be used.

In case, therefore, the Patient be too full of Blood, she must have a Vein
opened, though she be with Child, especially in the first Months, and so twice or
thrice if need be, always remembering that there never be much Blood taken away
at a time.

And when there is abundance of some ill Humors, gentle Purging must be
repeated, especially in the middle Months; and if a moist and flatulent, or
slymy Intemperies annoy the Patient, we may sometimes proceed to a Sudorifick
Diet, at least a gentle one, in the strongest sort of Women.

In the mean while, these astringent and strengthening Medicines are to be used
all the time the Woman is with Child, that are proper to hinder Abortion.

Take of Kermes-berries and Tormentil-roots, each three ounces, of Mastich, one
dram and an half; make a Powder, of which give now and then half a dram, or
as much as will lie on the point of a Knife.

Or, Take of red Coral, two drachms, Kermes-berries, Date-stones, each one
dram, shavings of Ivory half a dram, of Pearls not bored, one scruple; make
a Powder.

Or, let her take every day in the morning, some grains of Mastich.

Our ordinary Women use frequently Plantain-seed, which they take in the
morning to the quantity of half a dram with Wine and Water, or in an Egg, or
Broth, or by it self, almost every day, all the while they are with Child, and
with good success.

To the same purpose, very effectual Electuaries are compounded, according to
the following Example.

Take of Conserve of Roses, two ounces, of Citron-peel candied, six drachms, of
Myrabolans candied, of the pulp of Dates, each half an ounce, of Coral
prepared, Pearl prepared, and shavings of Hartshorn, each one dram, with
syrup of Quinces; make an Electuary, of which let the Patient take often the
quantity of a Nutmeg.

If a Liquor be more pleasing, a Decoction of Tormentil-roots sweet'ned with
Conserve of Roses, may be given successfully.

The following Lozenges are very good; for they strengthen, and by little and
little free the Body from Excrements, though they do not sensibly purge
sometimes.

Take of Mace, of the three sorts of Sanders, Rhubarb, Sena, Coral, Pearl, each
one scruple, of Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, four ounces; make all into
Lozenges, weighing three drachms apiece. Let her take one twice a week by it
self, or dissolved in a little Broth.

Ointments and Plasters are to be applied outwardly.

Take of Ship-pitch, half an ounce, of Frankincense one ounce, Mastich half an
ounce, Dragons blood and red Roses, each two drachms; make a Cerecloath.

Or, Take of Oil of Myrtles and Mastich, each one ounce, of red and yellow
Sanders, Hypocistis and Acacia, each half an ounce, of Spodium and red Roses,
each two drachms, of Bole-armonick, sealed Earth, Ivory, each two scruples, of
Turpentine washed in Plantain-water, one ounce, with a sufficient quantity of
Wax; make a Cereloath, spread it on Cloth, and apply it to the Reins,

Or, Take of the Plaster for the Matrix three ounces, of Bistort-roots, Acacia,
Hypocistis, Pomgranat-peels, each half an ounce, of Labdanum, six drachms;
soften them with the juice of Quinces, and make a Plaster for the use aforesaid.

As to Plasters it is to be noted, That they must not be worn long together,
but taken off now and then; otherwise, if they stick too long upon the Back,
they do so heat the Kidneys, that sometimes they occasion an heat of Urine, and
the voiding by Urine Sand, Stones, yea Blood it self.

Nor are those things to be omitted, which are accounted Specificks for
retaining the Child in the Womb, as the Eagle's stone worn about the Neck, a
Lodestone applied to the Navel, Corals, Jaspers, Smaragds, Bones found in the
Hearts of Stags, and such like, worn under the Armpits or hanged about the
Neck.

But that the success of these Medicines may be good, the Patient must be
ordered to rest, and to keep her self as quiet as possibly she can, both in
Body and Mind, and to abstain from Coition, which does much disquiet the Womb;
for whilst the Womb opens it self to receive the Semen, with which it is much
delighted, it drops out the tender Fetus, not yet well settled in the Womb.

But if notwithstanding the Medicines aforesaid, by reason of the vehemence of
the Cause, whether it be external or internal, the Patient be ready to
miscarry, we must do the best we can with these following Remedies. And, in the
first place, so soon as Pains and Throws shall be perceived to be in the lower
parts of the Belly, toward the Pubis, in the Loins, and about the Os sacrum,
we must seek to allay and stop them, both by Medicines taken inwardly, and
outwardly applied, according to the variety of the Causes; for if Abortion be
caused by Crudities and Wind (which is most usual when it begins from an
internal Cause,) a Powder must be given, made of Aromaticum Rosatum and
Coriander-seeds; and we may give of the Aqua Imperialis, if Phlegm and Wind
abound.

At the same time let Carminative Medicines be applied below the Navel of the
Patient; such are, Bags of Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, Fenugreek-seeds, Flowers of
Camomile, Elder, Rosemary and Stechas mixed together; or a Rose-cake fried in a
Pan with rich Canary, and sprinkled with Powder of Nutmegs and Coriander-seeds,
or the Gaul of a Wether newly killed, or his Lungs laid on warm,

If by these means the pains cease not, let a Glister be injected made of Wine
and Oil, wherein two drachms of Philonium Romanum may be dissolved, or
Narcoticks may be given inwardly in a small quantity, to allay the violence of
the Humors and Wind, as we are wont to do in the pains of the Cholick.

But if by reason of contumacious pains that will not be assuaged, or of the
violence of some external cause, Blood begins to come away, Medicines that
cause Revulsion are to be applied to turn the course of the Blood from the
Womb; such are, Frictions of the upper parts and painful Ligatures, also
Cupping-glasses fastened to the Shoulder-blades under the Dugs, and under the
short Ribs on both sides; and if the Woman be full of Blood, it will not be
amiss to take some blood from her, when she begins to void blood, and
especially before it begins to come; and the blood must be taken away at
several times, a little at once.

And if the flux of blood continues, we must proceed to an astringent and
thickening Diet and Medicines, and so the Powders and Electuaries before
described may be administered; also juice of Plantain new drawn, and syrup of
Poppies to the quantity of an ounce, with Powder of Bole-armenick or
Dragons-blood.

Also binding and astringent Fomentations may be used outwardly, made of
Pomgranate-peels, Cypress-nuts, Acorn-cups, Baclaustins, Grape-stones and the
like boiled in Smiths water and red Wine.

Or a little bag full of red Roses and Balaustins may be boiled, and applied
hot to the Patient's Belly.

The abovementioned Plasters and Cere-cloaths may be used; and to bind more,
make a Pultiss of astringent Powders, with Turpentine and whites of Eggs,
spread it upon Tow or course Flax, and apply it to the Navel and Reins warm:
The Tow that is to be applied to the Navel must be moistened with Wine, that
which is to be applied to the Kidneys, with Vinegar. The two following
Medicines are accounted Secrets, and it is believed they will certainly retain
the Child in the Womb, if they be used before it be torn from the Vessels of
the Womb.

Take of Leaves of Gold, number twelve, of Spodium one dram, the Cock's
treading of three Eggs not addled; mix all very well, till the Gold be broken
into small pieces, afterward dissolve them in a draught of white Wine, and
give it three Mornings following.

At the same time let the following Cataplasm be applied.

Take of Male-frankincense powdered, two ounces, the whites of five Eggs; let
them be stirred together over hot Coals; add Turpentine to make them stick,
then spread them upon Tow, and lay them upon her Navel as hot as she can
possibly endure them twice a day, Morning and Evening, on the three days
aforesaid.

CHAP. CVII. Of hard Labor.
THAT is said to be hard Labor which does not observe the due and ordinary
course of Nature, and longer time is spent in it, and the pains are more
violent than usual, and the Symptoms that accompany it are more grievous.

Many Causes may be assigned of it, both external and internal: The internal
depend on the Mother, the Womb or the Child.

As to the Mother, the natural weakness of the whole Body may make the Labor
difficult, or her Age, she being too young or too old, or it may be occasioned
by Diseases which she had with her Big-belly, Leanness and too much dryness of
the Body, or Fat compressing the Passages of the Womb; the ill conformation of
the Bones encompassing the Womb as in those that are Lame, may also occasion
it, Wind swelling the Bowels, a Stone, or a preternatural Tumor in the Bladder
that presses the Womb, may be the cause; so may the ill constitution of the
Lungs, or of the parts serving Respiration: For the holding of the Breath is
very necessary to help the exclusion of the Child.

As to the Womb, various Diseases of it may render the Delivery difficult, as
Tumors Ulcers, Obstructions, and the like.

As to the Child, hard Labor is occasioned, when by reason it is dead or
putrified, or any way diseased, it cannot confer any thing to its own
exclusion: Also, when the Body or Head of it is large, or when there are many.

So Twins most commonly cause hard Labor, or when it is ill situated, as when
the Hands or the Feet offer first, or when one Hand or one Foot comes out, or
when it is doubled, or when the Membranes break too soon, so that the Water
flows out, and leaves the Orifice of the Womb dry at the time of exclusion, or
when the Membranes are too thick, so that they cannot be easily broken by the
Child.

The external causes depend on things necessary and contingent; things
necessary are those which are commonly called Non-natural; so cold and dry Air,
and a North Wind are very injurious to Women in Labor, because they bind the
Body, and drive the Blood and Spirits to the inner Parts, and they are very
injurious to the Child coming from so warm a place; also, hot Weather
dissipates the Spirits, and weakens the Child, and causes a Fever in an ill
habit of Body. Crude Aliments and such as are difficultly concocted, and those
that bind, taken in great quantity before Labor, do render it difficult, the
Stomach being weakened, and the common Passages contracted, which ought to be
very open in this case.

Drowsiness hinders the action of the Mother and Child, and shows that Nature
is weak. The unseasonable motion of the Woman much retards the delivery; as
when she refuses upon occasion to stand, walk, lie or sit, or flings her self
about unadvisedly, so that the Child can not be born the right way, being
turned preposterously by the restlesness of the Mother.

The retention of such things as should be evacuated at the time of Labor, as
of Urine that swells the Bladder, or Excrements in the right Gut; the
Hemorrhoids also much swelled, narrow the neck of the Womb, and so hinder
Natures endeavors.

And, lastly, violent Passions of the Mind, as Fear, Sorrow and Anger, make the
Labor difficult.

To things contingent ought to be referred, a Blow, a Fall or a Wound, which
may much obstruct Labor; also, the Bystanders, which ought to assist the
Woman, viz. strong Women and Maids, which may lift her up just at the time of
Delivery, especially a skilful Midwife, which ought to advise in every matter,
for if she be unskilful she may make the Labor difficult: For sometimes the
Midwife orders the Woman to endeavor an Expulsion, and to stop her Breath when
the Ligaments of the Fetus stick firmly to the Womb, so that the Woman is tired
before the time of her Delivery.

Difficult Labor is known, both by the Woman, by the Bystanders, and
especially by the Midwife. And, first, if the Woman continue a long time in
Labor, viz. two, three, four or more days, whereas a natural Birth is finished
in 24 hours. Another Sign of difficult Labor is languid pains, returning at
long Intervals; also, the pains tending backward rather than forward: But the
Causes of difficult Labor may be known by the Woman's Relation, and most
commonly upon sight. So the weakness of the Woman, or leanness, or overfatness,
may be seen by the habit of Body. The Diseases of the Womb may be known by
their proper Signs, the weakness of the Child by the weak and slow motion of
it: But the signs of a dead Child may be known by the following Chapter. The
bigness of the Child may be judged of by the stature of the Parents, especially
if a gigantick Man be married to a dwarfish Woman: But when there are none of
these Causes, and the Woman's and Child's endeavors are strong, and yet the
Labor is difficult, it is a sign that the Secundine is so strong, that it
cannot be easily broken, and this will be confirmed if no water or moisture
flows out in Labor. The preposterous figure of the Fetus may be perceived by
the Midwife, and other things, as has been said, by sight.

As to the Prognostic, difficult Labor is of it self dangerous, and sometimes
the Woman, and sometimes the Child, and sometimes both are extinguished.

If a Woman continue in Labor four days, she will hardly escape.

Sleepy Diseases and Convulsions coming upon hard Labor, are most commonly
deadly.

Sneesing coming upon hard Labor, is good.

As to the Cure of hard Labor: First, all those things which retard it must,
as much as may be, be removed; afterward, Medicines that further Labor must
be methodically administered.

And first, it is common with Women to give a spoonful or two of
Cinnamon Water, or Cinnamon powdered with a little Saffron, or half a dram of
Confection of Alkerms in broth, or half a scruple of Saffron alone in some
broth, or every hour in a little Wine.

Or, Take of Oil of sweet Almonds and of white Wine, each two ounces, of
Saffron and Cinnamon, each twelve grains, of Confection of Alkermes, half a
dram, of syrup of Maidenhair, one ounce and an half; mingle them, make a
Potion.

If these things are not sufficient, the following may be used, which I have
frequently found very effectual.

Take of Dittany, of Crete, and both the Birthworts, and of Troches of Myrrh,
each half a scruple, of Saffron and Cinnamon, each twelve grains, of Confection
of Alkermes, half a dram, of Cinnamon Water half an ounce, of
Orange-flower-water, and of Mugwort-water, each one ounce; make a Potion.

Oil of Ambar, of Cinnamon, and extract of Saffron are very effectual in a
small quantity, viz. five grains of extract of Saffron, four or five drops of
Oil of Cinnamon, twelve or fifteen drops of Oil of Ambar, in Wine, Broth, or
some other Liquor.

Sneesing hastens Delivery; it may be provoked by the following Powder.

Take of white Hellebore, half a dram, of long Pepper, one scruple, of
Castor, five grains, make a Powder; let the quantity of a Pease, be blown up
into the Nostrils.

But difficult Labor must be helped, not only with inward Remedies proposed,
but also with external; let the Midwife, therefore, frequently anoint the Womb
with the Oils of Lillies, sweet Almonds, Linseed and the like; and let the
Belly be fomented with an emollient decoction of the Roots of Marshmallows,
Lillies, the leaves of Mallows, Violets, Mugwort, of Linseeds, Fenugreek-seeds,
of the flowers of Camomile and Melilot.

Sharp Glisters are to be injected, by the irritation of which the expulsive
faculty of the Womb will be stimulated, and the Guts being emptied thereby,
there will be more room for the Womb.

Anoint the Navel with Oil of Ambar; and such things as are thought to help
Delivery by a specific quality are to be used, as the Eagle's-stone, the
Lodestone, Storax, Calamint and the like bound to the Hips; and if the Woman
has any Gems about her, as in Rings or the like, they must be pulled off; for
many Women think, that such things retain the Child by a specific Quality. If
the Child seem to be weak, it must be refreshed, by giving strengthening things
to the Mother, as hot Wine, Confection of Alkermes, Cinnamon Water, and the
like.

If the Child begins to come forth preposterously, as with one Arm, or first
with the foot, or the like; the Midwife must thrust them back, and turn the
Child right, which may be done by placing the Woman in a Bed upon her back,
with her Head low, and her feet high; and then force the Child gently into the
Womb, and then the Midwife must endeavor to turn it right, viz. to turn the
Face toward the Mothers back, and the Buttocks and Legs must be elevated
toward the Mothers Navel, and so she must hasten a legitimate Birth.

But all hopes of Delivery being past, or the Mother being near Death, some
Authors propose the Cesarian Section, whereof Franciscus Rossetus wrote an
excellent Treatise, wherein he endeavors to show, by many Arguments, that it
may sometimes succeed: But because this operation is dangerous, and very
terrible, it ought rarely or never to be attempted by a prudent Physician, if
he values his own Reputation.

CHAP. CVIII. Of a Dead Child.
WHen the Child is dead the Motion of it ceases, which either the Mother felt
before in the Womb, or the Midwife with her Hand; a greater sense of weight
with Pain afflicts the Belly; when the Woman turns from side to side, she
perceives the Child fall like a Stone from one part to another, the Belly feels
cold, the natural Heat being extinguished, and the Spirits dissipated, which
were contained in the Child; the Eyes are hollow, the Face and Lips pale, the
extreme parts cold and livid, the Breasts flaccid, and at length, the Child
putrefying, a fetid Ichor and Sanies flows from the Womb, an ill and strong
smell exhales from the Woman's Body, and her Breath stinks: If the Secundine be
excluded before the Fetus, it is a certain Sign that the Child is dead.

The whole Cure consists in the exclusion or extraction of the Child.

Take of the Leaves of Savin dried, of the Roots of round Birthwort, of the
Troches of Myrrh, and of Castor, each one dram; of Cinnamon half a dram; of
Saffron one scruple: Mingle them, make a Powder, whereof let her take one
dram in Savin Water.

In the mean while apply to the Pubes, Privities, and Perineum an emolient
Decoction.

After the Fomentation anoint the Parts with the Ointment de Arthanita, and let
a Pessary be put up the Privities.

Take of the Roots of round Birthwort, Orris, black Helebore; of Coloquintida
and Myrrh, each one dram; of Galbanum and opopanax, each half a dram: With
Ox-Gall make a Pessary.

It is also proper, if the Strength be sufficient, to give a Purge.

Angelus Sala says, That he has used with very good success Mercurius Vitae in
this Case, four or five grains at a time, and that it does powerfully exclude a
dead Child, and is better than other Remedies: But it must be used with great
Caution, because it is a violent Medicine.

If after having tried Medicines a long while, the Child cannot be ejected,
Chirurgical Operation must be used, that is performed either by Instruments or
by the Hand alone,

CHAP. CIX. Of the Secundine retained.
IN a Natural Birth the Secundine is wont most commonly to be excluded
presently after the Child, yet sometimes it is retained, whereby the Life is
much endangered.

The internal causes of this Retention are too great a thickness of the Coats,
so that they stick firmly to the sides of the Womb, the swelling of them, by an
afflux of Humors occasioned by hard Labor, and the shutting of the Mouth of
the Womb after the exclusion of the Fetus. The external causes are, coldness of
the Air, whereby the Secundine is expelled, and the orifice of the Womb shut;
certain Perfumes, whereby the Womb is allured upwards; violent Passions of the
Mind, as fear and sudden Frights; the perverseness of the Woman, who will not
abide in such a position, or use such Endeavors as are requisite; the weight
of the Child, whereby the Navel is broken, the Secundine remaining within; the
unskilfulness of the Midwife, who cuts the Umbilical Vessels too soon, or does
not hold them in her left hand as she ought, for if they are let go they are
drawn back into the Womb, and are hid there with the Secundine, whereas it
ought they serve for the extraction of the Secundine.

It is easy to be known when the Secundine is retained in the Womb; but
sometimes a piece of it is separated and remains in the Womb, which is not so
easily found; yet it may be known, for that the Womb after delivery endeavors
to eject something: But though its endeavors are but small, a sense of Heat and
Pain is perceived in the Womb, and after a few Days a cadaverous Smell exhales
from the Womb.

The retention of the Secundine is very dangerous, and if it continues some
Days, an acute Fever, Nauseousness, Fainting, difficulty of Breathing, Coldness
of the extreme Parts, Epileptick and Hysteric Fits, and at length Death follow.

The Secundine retained is expelled by the same Remedies which were proposed
for a dead Child, to which may be added some Specificks delivered by Authors.

Gesner and Augenius commend much the Testicles of a Horse cut in pieces, and
dried in an Oven, as much of the Powder of them as may be contained with three
Fingers, being taken in Chicken-Broath, and it may be repeated twice or thrice
upon occasion.

Rulandus says, He has given, with success, thirty Drops of the Oil of Juniper.

Some order the Woman to bite an Onyon three or four times, and to swallow the
Juice, and presently after to drink a small draught of Wine, by which she may
be soon relieved.

Forestus mentions a Widwife who received the following Secret from a Jewish
Physician; He took the Leaves of Green Lovage, and pressed out the Juice with
good Rhenish-Wine, and gave a Draught of it.

Angelus Sala commends Mercurius Vitae, as before in a dead Child.

To these things may be added Sneezing-Powders, Fomentations, Liniments and
other things both external and internal, described above for difficult Labor.
The following Decoction has been very succesful.

Take of Vinegar of Roses four or five quarts, of the Leaves and Berries of
Bays, each three handfuls; one Rose-Cake cut in pieces: Boil them, and with
the Decoction, hot, wash the Hips and Legs from the Groin to the Feet for a
long while. To this Decoction may conveniently be added of Myrrh and both the
Birth-Worts, each one ounce.

But among other things the Hand of a skilful Surgeon may do much, before the
Inflammation and Inflation are increased; for so the Secundine may be gently
drawn out, and the Woman freed from all the Symptoms and Fatigue of Medicines.

If the Secundine cannot be ejected by any means, but sticks firmly to the
Womb, and putrifies there, Suppuratives must be injected, mixed with things
that cleanse, that that which is putrified may be drawn out by degrees; to this
purpose, Rondoletius commends Basilicon, especially being dissolved in the
following Decoction.

Take of the Leaves of Mallows, with the Roots three handfuls; of the Roots of
both the Birth-worts, each six drachms; of Flax-seeds and Fenugreek-seeds, each
half an ounce; of Violets one handful; of the Flowers of Camomel, and the
lesser Centaury, each half an handful: Make a Decoction in Water, mingle Oil
with it, if you would have it suppurate much; but if you more design to
cleanse, add a little Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.

CHAP. CX. Of a Suppression of the Childbed Purgations.
THere is so great a Flux of Humors from all parts of the Womb, when a Woman is
with Child, and during the Commotion in her Labor, that in case there be not
afterward sufficient Evacuation of them, the Woman is in great danger of very
ill Accidents, and sometimes of Death it self; because these Humors corrupting
by their stay there, will certainly cause a great Inflammation: And this is the
reason why the Suppression of the Lochia is one of the worst and most dangerous
Symptoms which can befall a Woman after Delivery, especially if they happen to
be totally and suddenly stopped the first three or four days, which is the time
they should come down plentifully; for then follow an acute Fever, great Pains
in the Head, Pains in the Breast, Reins and Loins, Suffocation of the Mother,
and an Inflammation, which is suddenly communicated to the Belly, which becomes
very much swelled and blown up; there happens also a great difficulty in
Breathing, Choakings, Palpitation of the Heart, Fainting, Convulsions, and
often Death it self, if the Suppression continues, and if the Woman over-lives
it, she is in danger of an Abscess in the Womb, and afterward of a Cancer, or
there may happen great Imposthumes in the Belly, also the Gout, Sciatica and
Lameness, or an Inflammation and Abscess in the Breast.

The Causes of the Stoppage of the Lochia proceed either from a great Looseness,
because a great Evacuation that way turns the Lochia, and makes them stop, or
any strong Passion of the Mind; so do great Colds, and cold Drink.

To bring the Lochia well down, let the Woman avoid all Perturbations of
Spirit, which may stop them; let her lie in Bed with her Head and Breast a
little raised, keeping her self very quiet, that so the Humors may be carried
downwards by their natural tendency: Let her observe a good Diet, somewhat hot
and moist, and apply an Hysteric Plaster to her Navel.

Take of the Conserves of Roman Wormwood and of Rue, each one ounce; of the
Troches of Myrrh two drachms; of Castor, English Saffron, Volatile Salt of Sal
Armoniack and of Assa Fetida, each half a dram: with a sufficient quantity of
the Syrup of the five opening Roots; make an Electuary. Let her take the
quantity of a large Nutmeg every third Hour, drinking upon it three or four
spoonfuls of the following Mixture.

Take of the Water of Penny Royal and Balm, each three ounces; of compound
Briony-Water two ounces; of Syrup of Mugwort three ounces and an half; of
Saffron two drachms; of Castor tied up in a Rag and hanged in the Glass, one
scruple; mingle them.

If these things are used presently upon the Suppression, they generally take
it off: But if they have been used so long that all the quantity is taken, and
the Lochia are still stopped, in this case we may use Laudanum for once, but it
is best to mix it with hysteric things: For instance,

Take of liquid Laudanum sixteen drops, in a spoonful of compound Briony-water:
Or,

Take of solid Laudanum one grain and an half; of Assa Fetida one scruple and
an half: Make two Pills.

But it must be carefully noted, that if upon once taking the Business is not
done, Opium by no means must be repeated again: But having waited a while to
see what it will do, we must return again to Emmenagoges mixed with Hystericks,
and afterward we must Inject a Glister: But what was said before of Opium is
also to be taken notice of in respect of Glisters; for unless the first bring
down the Lochia, nothing is to be hoped for from more.

These things therefore being done, it is safest, and the duty of a prudent
Physician to wait and see what Time will do; for every Day the Danger will
lessen, and if the Sick live over the twentieth Day, she will be in a manner
out of Danger; for then she will be able to bear that Method, which is fittest
to conquer the Diseases which were occasioned by the Suppression of the Lochia.

CHAP. CXI. Of After-Pains.
PAins happen so frequently to Women in Childbed, that few are free from them;
but they seldom require the Physicians help, because they usually cease in two
or three Days: But if they are sharp and continue longer, they are forced to
send for Physicians, who before they prescribe ought to enquire into the causes
of the Pains.

The chief Causes therefore of Pains after Labor are a great quantity of
Blood, the Thickness and Acrimony of it, and the Narrowness of the Vessels; for
when the Veins of the Womb have ceased to evacuate Blood for nine Months; and
when that is heaped up in a great quantity, and also grows thick and
acrimonious by it is long stay, it occasions Pain while it passes through the
narrow Passages, which returns by Intervals, as often as the Womb endeavors
the Evacuation of the Blood* And when that is over, the Pain ceases till more
Blood endeavors to come out.

These Pains are also sometimes occasioned by Wind, or cold received into the
Womb; but the Pain seldom happens from these Causes

This Pain is distinguished from other Pains, that are wont to afflict the
Belly, by the continuance or Intervals, which follow the Evacuation of Blood,
and Women can easily distinguish them themselves.

The thick Blood easily coagulates, but the thin is known by its thinness and
fresh color.

If the Pain arises from Wind, it is more wandering, and possesses more parts of
the Belly, nor does it follow the Intervals of the Evacuation of Blood: If cold
Air be admitted into the Womb, it may be known by those things which have been
done about the Woman.

These Pains are not dangerous, but are most commonly very troublesome, and
therefore are to be taken off or assuaged as soon as may be.

As to the Cure, the Vessels of the Womb must be relaxed, and the thickness of
the Blood attenuated, and its Acrimony qualified, all which may be done by the
following means.

And first the Woman's Belly must be gently swathed, that it may subside and
not move hither and thither, as it often happens after Delivery, upon so sudden
an evacuation, and then give of Oil of Almonds fresh drawn three ounces, mixed
with an ounce and an half of Syrup of Violets.

And Glisters may be injected made of Milk and Sugar, and Yolks of Eggs; or
they may be prepared of a Decoction of Camomel-flowers, and of Mugwort in
Chicken-broath, adding to them Oil of Lillies and Yolks of Eggs.

And the Belly of the Woman must be anointed with Carminitive and Aperitive
Oils, as with Oil of Dill, Rue, Jasmin, or with the following, which is very
effectual, which may be prepared for this use in due season and kept in the
Shops.

Take of the Roots of round Birth-wort, of Orris and Peony each one ounce, of
Cyprus half an ounce, of the dried Leaves of Mugwort, Feverfew, wild Marjoram,
Calaminth, Pennyroyal, Dittany of Creet, of Wormwood, Savin, Rue, Bettony and
Sage, each one handful, of the Flowers of Rosemary, Stechas, Lavender, Camomel,
Dill, S. John's Wort, Elder, each half an handful, of the Grains of Laurel and
Juniper, each half an ounce, of Cummin, the Seeds of Rue, Peony, Daucas, of the
Chaste Tree, each three drachms, of Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon and Ginger, each
two drachms, of Storax and Myrrh each one ounce: Bruise them and cut them, and
infuse them in three quarts of old Oil, adding a litte White Wind; keep them in
an earthen Vessel, well stopped, for the space of a Week, then boil them upon hot
Ashes four or five hours, then press out the Oil, and keep it for use. If you
have it not ready prepared, you may boil the Simples upon occasion with equal
parts of Oil and White Wind, to the consumption of the Wine, afterward press
out the Oil.

A Fomentation may be also made of a Decoction of Mugwort, Feverfew, Baulm, of
the Leaves of Bays and Calaminth, of the Seeds of Daucas, Cummin and Caraways,
of the Flowers of Wall-flower and Camomel made in Water and White Wind, or in
Milk: Or the following Cataplasm may be applied.

Take of Onions boiled in Water number three or four, bruise them in a Mortar,
and add to them of the Seeds of Cummin and Flax bruised, each one handful: With
a sufficient quantity of the Flowers of Camomel and Barly-meal, make a
Cataplasm; and if there be occasion, add a little of the Water wherein the
Onions were boiled: Spread it upon a cloth, and apply it hot to the Navel.

It is also proper to cover the Belly with a Sheep's-skin fresh flayed off, and
applied hot, for the Heat of it is very agreeable, it eases the Pain, and keeps
the Belly from wrinkling. And the following things may be taken inwardly.

Take of the Seeds of Daucas powdered one dram, of White Wind three ounces:
Mingle them and give it twice in a day. Or,

Take of Nutmegs, Aniseeds and Cinnamon, each one scruple: Mingle them, make a
Powder, give it with White Wind, or one scruple of Oil of Nutmegs with Broth.

Forestus used the Flowers of Camomel in Beer, or a Decoction of Camomel and
Mugwort in Chicken-Broath with good Success.

It is good presently after Delivery to give the Broth of an old Cock early in
the Morning fasting, for three Days, with a little Cinnamon and Saffron.

The following Powder taken presently after Delivery, preserves the Woman from
Pain, in a wonderful manner; and some think if a Woman takes it the first Lying
in, she will never be troubled in Childbed with these kind of Pains.

Take of Comfry dried one dram, of the Kernels of Peach-Stones, and of
Nutmegs, each two scruples, of Ambar half a dram, of Ambergrise half a
scruple: Make a Powder, whereof let her take a dram with White Wind, and if
there be a Fever with Broth.

Let her use for her ordinary Drink a Decoction of Mugwort and Cinnamon.

When the Pains arise from Choleric and Acrid Humors, they must be cured in a
manner the same way as the Cholick, occasioned by Choler. For instance,

Take of Syrup of Violets and of Borrage, each one ounce, of the Mucilage of
the Seeds of Quinces, extracted with Violet-Water half an ounce, of Borrage,
and Scorzonera-Water, each three ounces; mingle them, make a Julep for two
Doses: Or,

Take of Oil of Sweet Almonds two ounces, of Syrup of Violets one ounce, of
Borrage Water half an ounce: Mingle them for one draught.

External Medicines that loosen and mollify the Passages must be applied.

Childbed Women after Delivery are often troubled with a Pain in the Groin; it
may be taken off by applying a Plaster of Galbanum and Assafetida to the Navel,
in the middle whereof some grains of Musk must be placed.

CHAP. CXII. Of the Acute Diseases of Women in Childbed.
THE Fever from Milk, whilst the Childbed Purgations proceed right, seldom
lasts beyond three Days, for about that Time it usually goes off, by a great
Sweat coming of its own accord: But this Intemperies occasioned by the coming
of the Milk is somewhat heightened, and continues longer, when the Milk flows
plentifully to the Breasts, and is not milkt out, but repelled: For by its
going back as well as its coming, there is a Disturbance in the whole Body
usually, which comes more certainly, if the Milk be driven violently back by
Repelling Topics.

Some common Rules are to be observed concerning the Coming of the Milk, or in
driving of it back.

If the Milk flow too freely into the Breasts, that the Inflammation of them,
and the immoderate Effervescence of the Blood may be prevented, a thin and
spare Diet must be ordered, viz. of Broth without Flesh, and the Breasts must
be often sucked, and if it be not thought convenient that the Woman should give
Suck, it is customary on the First or Third day of Lying-in, to apply over the
Breasts moderately Astringent Cere-cloaths: But this kind of Remedy must be
used with Caution, lest the Milk should be Excluded altogether, or too hastily,
and so cause a disorder in the Blood, and a putrid or malignant Fever, of which
we shall speak next.

Women with Child, by reason their Bodies are ill affected, are as it were
infected with a Pestilential Contagion, and so are very subject to a putrid, or
rather malignant Fever. This Fever seizes Childbed Women at various Seasons,
and upon several Occasions; sometimes presently after Delivery, especially if
it has been difficult and hard; sometimes on the first, sometimes on the
second, third, or fourth Week; but the later it begins, the better it goes off.
It begins and proceeds, most commonly, in the following manner: After a
previous Indisposition the Fever begins most commonly, with a Shaking and
Shivering, which Heat presently follows, and after that Sweat; the first or
second day fits of Heat and Cold succeed one another, and then all the Blood
being inflamed, the Lochia, if they were not suppressed before, flow but
little, or quite stop. If the Disease be acute and of quick motion, it comes to
its height the third or fourth day; the Heat is violent, and the Thirst very
much, the Pulse vehement and quick, Watchings obstinate, there is great
Restlessness, so that the Sick tumble from one side of the Bed to the other
continually, the Urin is thick and red, and there are many other grievous
Symptoms; when this Fever is in its State, no Crisis is to be expected; for I
never saw this Disease go off by a critical Sweat; for when the Blood has a
while Boiled, the adust Matter being presently translated to the Brain,
dangerous disorders of the Genus Nervosum are occasioned, and convulsive
motions of the Tendons, and inflations of the Bowels, like Mother Fits, and
sometimes a Frenzy, or Delirium, and often a Stupo^ and loss of Speech
follow, and the Strength is suddenly dejected, almost in all, without any
manifest Cause; the Pulse is weak and unequal, and the Sick soon die: And if
any chance to escape, the flux of the Courses being restored, or a Looseness
happening, they recover difficultly after a long Sickness.

The acute Diseases of Women in Childbed, are not always according to the
manner of the forementioned Fever, but sometimes they are accompanied with
some great Symptom, as with a Quinsie, Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, Bloody Flux,
Smallpox, and the like. Of these a Quinsie, Pleurisy, and Peripneumunia, by
reason of the great similitude of the Cause and analogy of the Cure, may be
considered together. Presently at their first beginning, we must endeavor,
that the Blood fixed any where, and beginning to be Extravasated, be restored
to Circulation, lest an Imposthume should be occasioned; wherefore internal
Remedies, which free the Blood from Coagulation, must be used, of which sort
are Diaphoreticks abounding with Volatile Salt, as Spirit of Harts-horne and
Soot, Urin, also Testaceous, and Bezoartick Powders, Lapis Prunella, Decoctions
and Juleps, made of Vegetables that force Urine and the Courses; with all which
must be mixed such things as have been found by Experience to have been proper
for Uterine Diseases. Moreover Discutient Medicines, which disperse the Matter
Impacted, such are Liniments, Fomentations and Cataplasms, must be carefully
applied to the Parts affected: In the mean while the violent Motion and
immoderate Effervescence of the Blood must be driven far from thence, and the
Filth must be driven, as much as possible, downwards. To this end Frictions,
Ligatures, Epispasticks, and if there be occasion, Cupping-glasses must be
applied about the Legs and Feet; if the Disease be very violent, Bleeding is
indicated, and unless there be a Plethora in the whole Body, and the
Inflammation be very acute in the Part affected, it will be best to open a Vein
in the Foot, or to apply Leeches to the Hemorrhoidal Veins: But if necessity
urge we may Bleed in the Arm, and afterward, if it can be admitted, in the
Foot. But you must take notice, that Bleeding must be cautiously used in these
Cases; for unless it does good, which I have seldom found, the Sick is in worse
condition, the Pulse being thereby rendered weaker.

A Dissentery is very often deadly, and so much the rather because such things
as qualify the Blood, and that moderately bind are Indicated; but the flux of
the Lochia forbid the use of them. Wherefore in this case till she has been
well Purged by a long flux of the Lochia, the fierceness of the Symptoms must
at present be only appeased.

The Indications of the Smallpox are not only contrary to those
above-described, but also to one another; for the flux of the Lochia must be
moderately restrained; but in the mean while the Efflorescence of the Blood and
gentle Sweating must be continued: For seeing a twofold venomous Ferment is in
this Disease, and the corrupt Particles of the Blood are to be carried out two
ways, we must take care that the least and narrowest Passage do not draw all
the Matter, or more than it can let out. Wherefore, lest the Lochia flowing
plentifully should turn inward the Venom that is inclined to go off by Sweat,
the course of Diet must be somewhat changed, and first such things as are of an
Alexipharmick and astringent nature must be boiled with their Broaths, as the
Roots of Tormentil and Bistort, also Powders, Juleps and Electuaries endued
with such Virtues must be given at due Intervals; and in this case the Woman
must be no ways allowed Flesh, or the Broth of it, not must she Rise, but she
must be kept as quiet as is possible, and the whole Business must be left in a
manner to God and Nature.

All Women in Childbed have an inbred Venom, and they ought to be careful of
it, and to avoid it as much as the greatest Malignity. Wherefore they ought to
use an exact course of Diet, whereby the Impurities of the Blood and Humors
may be purged in Childbed without the danger of a Fever; and that the
disorders of the Womb may be healed, and their strength, weakened by Delivery,
may be restored: To which end three things are to be minded; First, An exact
course of Diet must be ordered, viz. That they be fed for a Week at least with
Water Gruel, sometimes made with Beer, sometimes made with Water mixed with
Whitewine, or with Panada, and other things of easy Digestion. Secondly, They
must take great care that they do not catch Cold, whereby the Pores and the
Lochia may be stopped; wherefore let them continue in Bed, at least till the
Tenth day. Thirdly, The Lochia must be gently provoked; to this end Midwives,
when after hard Labor, there is danger of a stoppage of the Lochia; give
Sperma Caeti, Irish Slates Powdered, or White Wine tinctured with Saffron, and
they make the Gruel with Water and White Wine, wherein, as also in Posset
Drink, they Boil Marygold Flowers, the Leaves of Pennyroyal or Mugwort.

CHAP. CXIII. Of Childrens Diseases. Of ordering them; and of the Choice of a
Nurse.
A Child, which during the stay in its Mother's Belly, had no other
Nourishment, but the Blood it received by the umbilical Vessels, has for want
of that after its Birth, need to take some by the Mouth, and Suck Breast-Milk;
however, it is not good to give it Suck, as soon as it is Born, to prevent that
so sudden a Change, as well in respect of the difference of Nourishment, as the
manner of receiving it, lest it cause some alteration in its Health. First
therefore empty the Phlegm out of its Stomach, by giving it the first three or
four days some Wine and Sugar to cut and loosen it, to prevent the Milk he
shall take from Corrupting, it being mixed with this viscous Phlegm; wherefore
it is best to stay until the next day before you give it Suck.

It were to be wished that the Mother should not give it Suck until the Eighth
day of her Childbed at soonest, and it is best if she stay three Weeks or a
Month, for in that time she will be well Purged by the Lochia, and the Blood
will be much more pure; besides the small holes of the Nipples are not at first
sufficiently opened, and therefore it is necessary for a Woman to Suck first.

But often poor People cannot observe so many Precautions, and such Mothers are
obliged to give their Children Suck from the first day; and likewise others
will not suffer any but themselves to do it. In this case let her Breasts be a
little drawn by some old Woman, or some lusty sucking Child, or they may Draw
them themselves.

If the Nurse has much Milk, she must not give the Child any thing else, at
least the first two Months. As to the quantity of Milk the Child ought to suck,
it must be proportionable to his Age and Strength; in the beginning he must not
suck too much, nor too often, afterward by little and little let it be daily
augmented, until he may take his fill; but he may suck at any time night or day.

After the Child has sucked two or three Months, more or less, according as one
finds he needs stronger Nourishment, give him then Pap made of Flower and Milk,
though but little at first, and not too thick, lest his Stomach may be
overcharged. When the Child has taken Pap thus made, which must be but once a
day, especially in the Morning, or twice at most, the Nurse may give it a
little suck, to the end that being washed down into the Stomach, the Digestion
may be the better and easier made.

There are many Women who give their Children Pap as soon as they are Born, and
Nurses who have little Milk, ordinarily do so to hinder their Crying, as they
will do when they are Hungry: But sometimes this of it self is enough to kill
them, because of the Indigestion and Obstruction it occasions, which by reason
of its gross and viscous consistence can scarce find Passage through the
Stomach and Guts, which at the beginning are weak and not sufficiently opened
and dilated, whereby there happens to Children great Oppressions, difficulty of
Breathing, Gripes, Swellings, Pains of the Belly, and often Death. Wherefore do
not give it the Child, till after the first or second Month at soonest, and if
you forbore it three or four Months he would thrive the better, provided the
Nurse does not want Milk.

When he is in the Cradle, let it be so turned as it may be toward the Fire,
the Candle, or the Chamber Window, that having the Light directly in its Face,
he may not be allured to look continually on one side; for doing so often, his
Sight will be so perverted, that he will grow Squint-eyed. Wherefore for the
better secucurity, throw some Covering over the head of the Cradle.

Many Children are so Gripped that they cannot forbear Crying night nor day, and
some die so, and this is very often the first and most common Disease that
happens to little Infants after their Birth.

To remedy all these Pains which Women generally call Gripes, respect must be
had to their different Causes: As to that which is the general cause, viz. The
too sudden change of the Nourishment, you must forbear giving the Child Suck
till the next day, lest the Milk being mixed with the Phlegm which is in the
Stomach corrupt; and at first it must Suck but little until it be accustomed to
digest it, if it be the Maeconion of the Intestines, which by its long stay
causes these Pains, for to help to discharge them of it, give them inwardly a
little Oil of sweet Almonds and Syrup of Roses; and to provoke it further, give
it beets-Stalk covered with Honey for a Suppository, or a Sugared Almond also
dipped in common Honey, or you may give a small Glister.

And when the Child is Gripped, give no Pap, because this Food by its Viscosity,
easily causes Obstructions, which afterward engender Wind. If the Pain be
occasioned by Worms, lay a Cloth dipped in Oil of Wormwood mixed with Ox Gall
upon the Belly, or a small Cataplasm mixed with Powders of Rue, Wormwood,
Coloquintida, Aloes, and the Seeds of Citrons incorporated with Ox-gall and
Flower of Lupines; and to drive them downwards if the little Infant can take
any thing by the Mouth, give it a small infusion of Rubarb, or half an Ounce of
Compound Syrup of Succory, having before given a small Glister of Sugared Milk.

When the Gripes are caused by Wind, as it often happens, or by sharp Humors
in the Guts, anoint the Child's Belly all over with Oil of Violets, or else
with Oil of sweet Almonds, or else with the Oils of Wallnuts, Camomel and
Melilot, mixed together, having first warmed them, in which also a Cloth may
be dipped to lay upon it, and a little Anodyne, or Carminative Glister may be
given.

Very frequently the Milk of a Nurse that is red Hair'd, given to Wine, or very
Amorous, may by its heat and acrimony, cause small Ulcers in an Infant's Mouth,
which are called Apthae, or the Thrush; and Vulgarly Cancers: Sometimes also
though the Milk have no ill Quality in it self, it may however corrupt in the
Stomach, because of its Weakness, or for some other Indisposition.

Of these Ulcers some are benign, as they are caused by a simple heat of the
Nurses Milk, or by the Child's Blood and Humors being a little Overheated, or
also from having had a small Fit of a Fever, and they are then very
superficial, of a small continuance, and easily yielding to Remedies: Others
are Malignant, such as are caused by a Venereal Venom, or that happen after a
Malignant Fever, and are Scorbutic; these are putrid, corrosive and spreading,
and do not only possess the Superficies of the Membranes, which cover the Roof
of the Mouth and Tongue, but make deep Scabs, and are communicated to the
internal Parts of the Throat, the Venereal ones especially, which can never be
Cured by ordinary Remedies, but must be handled with Specificks, without which
they ever augment, and soon kill little Infants, who are too weak to undergo
the Remedies fit for their Cure.

To Cure these Ulcers, when they are small and without malignity, you must take
care to temper the Nurse's Milk, prescribing her a Cooling Diet; Bleeding and
Purging also if there be occasion, and wash the Child's Mouth with Barley or
Plantain Water, and Honey of Roses, or Syrup of dried Roses, mixing with them a
little Verjuice, or Juice of Limons, as well to loosen and cleanse the viscous
Humors, which cleave to the inside of the Child's Mouth, as to cool those
Parts, which are already overheated. This may be done by means of a small fine
Rag, fastened to the end of a little Stick, and dipped in the Remedy, wherewith
the Ulcers may be gently rubbed, being careful not to put them to too much
Pain, lest by irritating them an Inflammation should be caused. The Child's
Body must be kept open, that the Humors being carried to the lower Parts, so
many Vapors may not ascend, as usually do, when the Excrements of the Belly
are too long retained.

If the Ulcers participate of any malignity, let topical Remedies then be used,
which do the Business speedily, and as it were in an instant. For this purpose,
touch the Ulcers with Plantain-water, sharpened with Spirit of Vitriol, taking
great care that the Infant swallows none of it; and the Remedy must be so much
the stronger and sharper, as the Ulcers are profound and malignant. As soon as
they have been cauterized with this Water, by only touching them once or twice
with it according to their bigness, depth or corruption, that no sharp
Serosities may destil upon the parts not yet ulcerated, and upon the Infants
Throat, wash its Mouth with Plantain-water, or with a decoction of Barley,
Agrimony and Honey of Roses, continuing to touch and wash the Ulcers, as it may
be judged convenient, and until you find they spread no further. To prevent
that in the use of these sharp Medicines, not the least portion of them should
fall upon the Child's Throat, and that by swallowing of them, you may receive
no great prejudice. Some choose rather to cauterize these Ulcers with small
Linen Tents dipped in boiling Oil, and if it should be swallowed, it would be no
great hurt. It will not be amiss to punge the ill Humors out of the whole habit
of the Child, by giving him half an ounce of syrup of Succory with Rhubarb.

The Teeth, which were hidden in the Jaws, usually begin to come forth, not all
at a time, but one after another, toward the fifth or sixth Month, sometimes
sooner and sometimes also later; for to effect which, they cut the Gums
wherewith they were covered. Then because of the exquisite sense of those
parts, there happens so great pains to the Children, that many who were
hitherto very well, are now in great danger of their Lives, and often die by
reason of many mischievous Accidents, which happen to them at that time. And
Hippocrates says, When Children begin to breed their Teeth, they are troubled
with itching of their Gums, Fevers, Convulsions and Loosnesses, and principally
when they breed their Tusks or Dog-teeth, especially those Children who are
fat, and full of Humors, and bound.

The Dog-teeth, commonly called the Eye-teeth, cause more pain to the Child
than any of the rest, because they have a deep Root and a small Nerve, that has
communication with that which moves the Eye. The Teeth, which are first bred,
are the Cutting or Foreteeth. The Signs when Children will breed their Teeth,
are, when the Gums and Cheeks are swelled, they feel a great heat there with an
itching, which often makes them put their Fingers in their Mouths to rub them,
from whence much Moisture destils into the Mouth, because of the Pain they feel
there. The Nurse in giving them suck, finds their Mouths hotter; they are much
changed, and cry every moment, and cannot sleep, or but very little at a time.
And one may feel and see small points of the Teeth through the Gums, which
appear thin and pale on the top, and swelled and red on the sides; and if it
happen that the Teeth are a long time 'ere they are cut, or that too many of
them cut at a time, there is great danger that the Child will fall into those
Accidents mentioned above. In this case two things are to be regarded; first,
to preserve the Child from the ill Accidents that may happen to it, by reason
of the great pain: Secondly, to assist as much as may be the cutting of the
Teeth, when they can hardly cut the Gums themselves.

To prevent these Accidents, the Nurse must keep a good Diet, and use all
things that may cool and temper the Milk, that a Fever may not follow the pain
of the Teeth, and to hinder the falling of the Humors upon the inflamed Gums,
keep the Child's belly always loose, to which purpose give him a gentle
Glister, if the Belly be bound; but there is commonly no need of it: For at
this time the Children are usually troubled with a Looseness.

As to the second, which helps the cutting of the Teeth, that the Nurse must do
from time to time, by gently rubbing the Child's Gums with her Finger; to which
end the Child it felf may be useful, if they give a little Stick of Liquorish
to them, or a small piece of a new Wax-candle, which is very good to soften the
Gums. Coral is also often used to this purpose, and the Teeth of a Wolf. But
these things that are peculiarly proper, what they do is by their Solidity and
Roughness: But if these things do no good, the Gums must be cut with a Lancet
to prevent ill Accidents.

As soon as little Infants are in the least indisposed, they very commonly fall
into a Looseness, to which their natural moisture very much contributes.

For the most part the Looseness happens to them, by reason of the great Pain
they have at the cutting their Teeth: It may also happen by the vitiousness of
the Nurses Milk. But if the Looseness be not accompanied with a Fever, or some
other Accident, it is not dangerous; but if it continue so long, it will not be
amiss to remedy it. For this purpose, let the Child suck good Milk, and give it
a slight Infusion of Rhubarb, or a little compound Syrup of Succory; gentle
Anodyn Glisters may be also given, made of Milk, yolks of Eggs, and Honey of
Violets; and after Purging, let them be made with Plantain-water, and mix the
yolk of an Egg with the Pap. Anoint the Belly with Oil of Quinces, and lay on
the Stomach a Compress dipped in red Wine, wherein Province Roses have been
boiled.

Vomiting usually happens to Children, because they often draw more Milk than
their little Stomachs can easily contain or digest: A Cough does sometimes
occasion it, so does the swathing of the Belly too hard.

When the Vomiting is too frequent, it is fit it should be stopped; to which
end, regard must be had to that which causes it, as when the Child sucks more
than it should, the Nurse must not give it so much, but it must suck but little
at a time, that the Stomach may the easier contain and digest what it receives.
If it be occasioned by an ill quality of the Milk, the Nurse must be changed
for a better; if from a Cough, it must be helped by things fit to appease it.
The Nurse must not dance it rudely, nor rock it fiercely after it has sucked.
Care must be likewise taken, that it be not too close wrapped, and swathed about
the Stomach. And it will be very convenient to purge the Infant with a gentle
Infusion of Rhubarb, or with half an ounce of compound syrup of Succory: And
after it has been well purged, it may take a little syrup of Quinces to fortify
the Stomach, and a Compress dipped in red Wine, wherein Province-roses, Cinnamon
and Cloves have been boiled, may be applied to the region of the Stomach.

Children are sometimes afflicted with Scabs in the Head and Face, but the
course of these Humors must by no means be hindered by driving them inwards;
because their Evacuation defends little Infants from many ill Diseases; and we
ordinarily see them, whose Bodies have a long time purged away such
Superfluities, to be better in health, after they have cast forth all this kind
of Corruption. But Endeavors must be only used to hinder the generation of
more of these ill Humors in the Child; wherefore, a healthy Nurse must be
provided, whose Milk is pure and cool, the Child's Belly must be kept open, and
purged upon occasion with a little syrup of Roses or of Succory, that so the
Humors may not be sent in too great abundance to the Head, and that the Sanies
under the Scabs may not eat and corrode the Skin, and so cause deep Ulcers; it
will not be amiss also to make the Scabs fall off, that there may be a freer
vent or issue; for which end, fresh Butter is ordinarily made use of to moisten
them, or Oil of sweet Almonds; afterward, apply a Cabbage-leaf, and change it
twice or thrice a day.

As to the choice of a Nurse, the first and principal of all the Qualities in a
good Nurse, is, That she be the own Mother of the Child, as well because of the
mutual agreement of their Tempers, as that having much more love for it, she
will be much more careful than an hired Nurse, who ordinarily loves her
Nurse-child but with a feigned and seeming Love, having no other end or
foundation, but the hope of the Recompense she expects for her Hire. Wherefore
the true Mother, though not the best Nurse, should ever be preferred before a
Stranger. But because there are several that either will not, or cannot suckle
their own Children, there is a necessity to provide an other Nurse, which
should be chosen as convenient for the Child, as may be.

Now as we see Trees produce Fruits of a different Taste, by reason of the
difference of the nourishment, so the Health of Children, and sometimes their
Manners depend on the nourishment they receive at the beginning. For as to the
health of the Body, it is well known, it answers the Humors that all the Parts
are nourished and maintained with, which Humors ever retain the nature of the
Food whereof they are engendered: As for the Manners, they ordinarily follow the
Temperament, which also proceeds from the quality of the Humors, and the Humors
from the Food. By this consequence, as the Nurse is, so will the Child be, by
means of the nourishment it draws from her; and in sucking her, it will draw
in both the Vices of her Body and Mind. This appears very easily in Animals
that suck a strange Dam, for they always partake something of the Creature they
suck; being accordingly, either of a mild or fiercer Nature, or of a stronger
or weaker Body, which may be noted in the Example of young Lions, tamed by
sucking a domestic Animal, as a Cow, a Goat or Ass; and, on the contrary, a
Dog will become more furious or fierce if it sucks a Wolf.

The necessary Conditions of a good Nurse are usually taken from her Age, the
time and manner of her Labor, the good constitution of all the parts of her
Body, and particularly of her Breasts, from the good Nature of her Milk; and,
in fine, from her good Manners.

As to her Age, the most convenient is from twenty five to thirty five years of
Age, because that during this space the Woman is most strong, healthy and
vigorous: She is not fit before five and twenty, because her Body not having
yet acquired all its dimensions, cannot be so robust; nor after thirty five,
because not having Blood enough in so great abundance, she cannot have Milk
enough for the nourishment of the Child. However, some Women are indifferent
good Nurses from twenty to forty, but very rarely before or after.

As to the time and manner of her Labor, it must be at least a Month or six
Weeks after it, that so her Milk may be thoroughly purified; because, at that
time, her Body is usually cleansed of the Lochia, which follows Labor, and the
Humors are no longer disturbed with it; nor must it be above five or six
Months, that so she may be able to make an end of Nursing the Child, that there
may be no necessity to change her afterward for another. She must not have
miscarried, but have been brought to Bed at her full time of a healthful Son,
for it is a mark of a good Constitution; and it must be her second or third
Child, that she may by experience know the better how to tend her Nursery.

As to the healthful Constitution of her Body, it is the principal thing, and on
which almost all the rest depends.

In general, she must be very healthful and of a good habit, not subject to any
Distemper; that she be come of Parents that never had the Stone in the Reins
and Bladder, nor subject to the Gout, King's Evil, Falling Sickness, or any
other hereditary Disease; that she has no spot, nor the least suspicion of any
venereal Distemper; that she have no Scab, Itch, Scald, or any other filth of
the like nature; that she be strong, the better to watch and tend the Child in
all things necessary for it; that she be of a middle Stature, neither too tall
nor too low, too fat nor too lean, because a Person of such a natural Symmetry
performs all the Functions more perfectly, and as is usually said, In medio
consistit Virtus. But above all, she must not be with Child: Let her be of a
sanguine Complexion, which may be known by her Vermilion Color, not altogether
so red, but inclining to white; of a firm Flesh, not soft; she must not
likewise have her Courses, for that is a Sign that her Blood is too hot, either
because her Temperament is such, or from an amorous Passion, or otherways;
neither must she be subject to the Whites, for such Superfluities are a Sign of
a bad habit; she must not be red haired, nor marked with red Spots, but her
Hair must be black, or of a Chestnut brown: She must be well shaped, neat in her
Clothes, and comely in her Face, having a sprightly Eye, and a smiling
Countenance: She must have good Eyes, sound and white Teeth, not having any
rotten or spoiled, lest her breath should smell; she ought to have a sweet
Voice to please and rejoice the Child, and likewise ought to have a clear and
free Pronunciation, that he may not learn an ill Accent of her, as usually
red-haired have, and sometimes also that are very black-haired and white Skins;
for their Milk is hot, sharp and stinking, and also of an ill Taste: She must
not have a strong Breath, as they who have a stinking Nose and bad Teeth, as we
have said before, because the Nurse that constantly kisses the Child, would
infect its Lungs by often drawing in her corrupted Breath: Her Breasts ought to
be pretty big, to receive and concoct there a sufficient quantity of Milk, but
not big to excess; they must be sound and free from Scars proceeding from
former Impostumes; they must be indifferent firm and fleshy, and not flaggy and
hanging: The Nurse must be broad-breasted; as to the Nipples they must be well
shaped, they must not be too big nor too hard, nor grisly, nor sunk in too
deep, but they must be a little raised and of a moderate bigness and firmness,
and with many little holes, that the Child may not take too much Pains to draw
the Milk.

The quantity of the Milk must be sufficient for the Child's nourishment, it
must be of a middle consistence, neither too waterish nor too thick, which may
be easily judged, if the Nurse milking some into her Hand, and turning it a
little on one side, it immediately runs off; but if it remains fixed, without
running by turning of the Hand, it is a Mark it is too thick and viscous. As to
the color, the whitest is best; it must taste and smell sweet and pleasant.

The Nurse must not be subject to Choler nor be quarelsome; she must not be
melancholy, but merry and cheerful, smiling often to divert the Child: She must
be sober, not given to Wine, and yet le^^ to the excess of Venery; but she may
moderately use the first, and not totally abstain from the second, if her
Nature requires it.

If a Nurse has all, or most part of these Conditions here specified, as well
respecting her Person as Manners, and that she maintains this condition by a
Diet fit for the Child's Temperament, and not contrary to her own, there is then
great reason to believe she is fit to make a very good Nurse, and to bring up,
in perfect Health, the Son of a Prince.

CHAP. CXIV. Of the Rickets.
THIS Disease began about fifty years ago in the West of England: It is a
Disease of Children, and it seizes them when they are about half a year old.

The Diagnostick of this Disease, as of all others, depends upon the knowledge
of the Symptoms, which follow.

The proportion of the parts is irregular, viz. the Head is bigger than
ordinary, so is the Face, the Wit is sharper than is usual at such an Age, the
external Members, especially the Muscular, are thin and wasted, the Skin is
loose and flaccid, the Bones most commonly bowed, and about, the Joins sticking
out and knotty, the Spine is variously bent, the Breast is narrow and sharp,
the extremity of the Ribs knotty, the Belly somewhat swelled and stiff. These
things are observed outwardly.

As to the inner Parts, the Liver is larger than usual, so are all the
Parenchyma, the Stomach and Bowels are larger than in those that are well, the
Mesentery is affected with Glandules that are larger than ordinary, if they are
not Scrophulous; these things are observed in the Belly.

In the Breast the Lungs are stuffed and swelled, they are sometimes purulent
and scrophulous, and often stick to the Pleura, the jugular Veins and the
carotid Arteries are sometimes larger than they should be, but the Brain is
only peccant in bigness.

To these are added a weakness of almost all the parts and unwillingness to
move, for such Children will play only sitting and do not care to stand, and at
length in progress of the Disease, the Head can scarce be sustained by the weak
neck.

As to the Prognostic of this Disease, most commonly it is not deadly; but
sometimes the Symptoms growing to a height, it degenerates into a Consumption,
Hectic Fever, Dropsy of the Lungs or an Ascitis, and so at last is deadly; but
the Prognostic may be easier instituted by the following Rules.

First, if this Disease invades before the Birth, or presently after, it is very
dangerous, and most commonly deadly.

Secondly, the sooner it comes the worse it is.

Thirdly, the more violent the Symptoms are, viz. if the Parts are very much
disproportioned and much wasted, the Cure is the more difficult.

Fourthly, if this Disease is accompanied with the foresaid Diseases, it can
scarce ever be cured.

Fifthly, those that are not cured before they are five years of Age, are ever
after sickly.

Sixthly, an Itch coming upon this Disease, much conduces to the Cure.

Seventhly, in those the Symptoms are not increased, but rather lessened, the
Cure need not be doubted.

As to the Cure, we must begin with Purging, because most commonly there is
abundance of slegmatick Humors heapt up in the Belly, and the Bowels are
frequently affected with scrophulous Tumors; but Purging is to be instituted by
Glisters, Vomits and lenitive Catharticks.

The use and forms of some Glisters.

If the Belly be bound, or the Bowels are troubled with Wind or Gripes,
Glisters must be used frequently, which must not be only solutive, but
sometimes alterative and corroborative. For instance:

Take of the leaves of Mallows, one handful, of the flowers of Melilot,
Camomile and Elder, each one pugil, of the seeds of Annise and Fennel bruised,
each half a dram; boil them in a sufficient quantity of new Goat's Milk, to
four, five or six ounces of the strained Liquor; add of red Sugar and of syrup
of Violets and Roses, each one ounce: Make a Glister, inject it warm a good
while after Eating.

Take of the roots of Marshmallows bruised, half an ounce, of the leaves of
Mallows and Pellitory, each half an handful, of the flowers of Camomil and
Elder, each one pugil, of the Carminative seeds, two drachms; boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Posset Drink to 5 or 6 ounces of the strained Liquor;
add of Lenitive Electuary, or of Diacassia half an ounce, of fresh Butter six
drachms; mingle them, to be injected warm.

Corroborative Glisters may be made in the following manner.

Take of fresh Stone-Horse dung, one ounce and an half, of the flowers of
Rosemary and Sage, each one pugil, of Juniper Berries, two drachms, of the
seeds of Annise, Fennel, each half a dram; infuse them close and warm in a
sufficient quantity of Whey, in four ounces of the strained Liquor, dissolve
one ounce of brown Sugar and six drachms of fresh Butter; mingle them, make a
Glister: There may also be added, if it seem convenient, six drachms of Manna.

Take of Millepides washed number 20 or 30, bruise them, and pour upon them 4
or 5 ounces of Posset Drink made of white Wine, in the strained Liquor dissolve
an ounce of brown Sugar, and a dram of Venice-Turpentine dissolved in the
yolk of an Egg; mingle them, make a Glister to be injected warm.

The use of Vomits and Forms of them.
If the Stomach be burdened with vicious Humors, and they tend upwards, Vomits
must be given; but in the prescription of them, respect must be had to the
tender Age, and they should consist rather of Salt of Vitriol and the Wine of
Squills, than of stibiat Medicines; for it is not so safe to give these to
Infants for fear of Convulsions, though sometimes they may be of use.

Take of Wine or Oxymel of Squills, half an ounce or an ounce, which being
taken, give half an hour after a great quantity of Posset Drink, and provoke
Vomiting with the Finger, and let it be repeated now and then. Or,

Take of Oxymel of Squills, half an ounce or an ounce, if it does not vomit in
half an hour, give of Salt of Vitriol half a scruple or fifteen grains, in a
draught of Posset Drink.

If the Strength will bear stronger Vomits, let them be used. As,

Take of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum well clarified by standing, one or
two drachms, according to the Age and Strength, of Oxymel of Squills three
drachms or half an ounce, of simple Walnut-water, or of the water of the lesser
Centaury, six drachms; mingle them, make a Vomit.

Forms of Catharticks.
Some days after Vomiting, or if Vomiting be not to be used, gentle Purging
must be instituted, and repeated by Intervals. As,

Take of the Augustan syrup, or of syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, six drachms
or an ounce, of Cream of Tartar ten or fifteen Grains, mingle them, let them be
taken early in a morning, either by themselves or in a draught of Posset Drink.
Or,

Take of Calabrian Manna, half an ounce or an ounce, of Tartar vitriolated five
or ten grains, mingle them, let them be taken in a morning in broth or in
Posset Drink.

Take of the roots of Polypody of the Oak, and of sharp pointed Dock each six
drachms, of the bark of the roots of Elder, and of Dwarf-elder, each half an
ounce, of the roots of flowering Fern, male Fern and Succory, each half an
ounce, of the herbs Agrimony, Liverwort, Speedwel, Hartstongue and Spleenwort,
each half a handful; boil them in three pints of Fountain Water to the
consumption of a third part, strain the Liquor into a mattress, and put to it
two ounces of Senna, one ounce of Rhubarb, of Dodder, of Thyme and yellow
Sanders, each two drachms, of the seeds of Annise and Fennel, each one dram,
of salt of Wormwood, one dram and an half; infuse them hot in a close Vessel
12 hours: To the Liquor, cleared by standing, add an equal weight of Sugar, and
by gentle boiling make a syrup. The dose is one, two or three spoonfuls, either
by themselves, or in some proper Liquor.

Or to the abovementioned purging Infusion, add of Cassia and Tamarinds
extracted, with part of the same Infusion of Manna strained and of the best
Sugar, each one ounce and an half; evaporate them over a gentle heat to the
consistence of an Electuary. The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg, more or
less, as it works.

Take of the Species hiera picra simple, one dram, of the best Rhubarb
powdered half a dram, of Tartar vitriolated ten grains, of Gum Ammonieum
dissolved in Vinegar fifteen grains, with a sufficient quantity of Elixir
Proprietatis, of Paracelsus, make a mass for Pills, of which half a scruple or
a scruple may be made into Pills, and taken at Bedtime.

A Bochet made of Rhubarb and yellow Sanders, in convenient distilled Waters,
may be used.

If the Sick be affected with Worms or the King's Evil, or if there be any
suspicion of the King's Evil, the following Bolus may be given by Intervals.

Take of Mercurius Dulcis, from six to ten grains, Rosin of Jalap, or of
Scammony two or four grains, of the chemical Oil of Juniper, one drop; make a
Powder, which may be made into a Bolus with the pap of a roasted Apple, or a
dram of the Conserve of Violets; let it be taken early in the morning. Or,

Take of Mercurius Dulcis, six or ten grains, of the Conserve of flowers of
Succory, half a dram; mix them, make a Bolus. Let it be taken early in the
morning, drinking presently upon it a sufficient dose of the purging Infusion
or Syrup.

Chyrurgical Remedies.
After gentle Purging, if the Sick be of a sanguine Constitution, Blood-letting
is of use. Our Empericks use to draw a small quantity of Blood by scarifying
the lobe of the Ear; which operation they rather perform with a blunt Knife,
than with a sharp Lancet; and they repeat it twice or thrice, intermitting
about the space of 7 days. Although Practitioners greatly praise this way by
Scarification, I do not know but Leeches may be more effectual. Neither do I
think it is to be feared that the sucking of Leeches should cause a greater
afflux of Blood to the Head. For whatever Blood is drawn to the part by their
Sucking, is also evacuated by it; and as to the greater afflux of Blood, by
reason of the emptying of the Vessels, the same happens in bleeding by the
Lancet.

Issues are also very effectual in this Disease, especially an Issue made
between the first and second Vertebrae of the Neck. The usefulness of Issues
consists in that they are very effectual to evacuate the superfluous ferosity
of the Brain, and also to lessen the irregular form of it, and likewise to dry
up the too great moisture of the spinal Marrow, and consequently to strengthen
the Nerves that arise from thence. A Seton may be put in the place of an Issue.

As to Vesicatories, it is not to be doubted, but that they give ease being
applied upon the Vertebres of the Neck or behind the Ears. But their Strength
is soon gone, and the use of them seems to be both troublesome and painful to
Children.

Moreover, Cupping-glasses, without Scarification, applied along the Backbone
are very effectual to correct the moist and cold Temperies of the spinal
Marrow, and to remove the dullness of the Nerves. And I think also that they may
be applied upon the upper Vertebres of the Neck, with a light Scarification.

Besides Purging and Chyrurgical Remedies, Specific altering Medicines are to
be used, to which sometimes Diuretics and Diaphoreticks are to be added; of
which we shall add some Examples.

The specific Remedies, that are found most effectual to cure this Distemper,
are either simple or compound; among Simples, the following are most approved.
Wood of Guiacum and its bark, Sassafras, Lentiskwood, Rosemary, the knotty
parts of Firr, the roots of China, of Sarsaparilla, the three Sanders, the
roots of Osmund-royal, or rather the Cloves of the roots; the roots of
Sea-fern, or rather the buds of them; Grass-roots, the roots of Asparagus,
Eryngo, Succory, Burdock, the barks of the roots of Cappers; the capillary
Herbs, and chiefly Trichomanes, Ceterach, Wall-rue, Hartstongue, Liverwort,
Male-speedwell, Agrimony, Brook-lime, Watercresses; the leaves and flowers of
Sage, of Rosemary, Betony, dead Nettle and of Tamarisk; also Steel prepared, or
its Salt or Vitriol. Tartar, Castor, flowers of Sulphur, Earthworms, Millepides
prepared, and the like.

Of which Compositions may be made after this manner:

Take of the Cloves of the roots of Osmund-royal, or the roots of Sea-fern, or
the Twigs of the roots of it scarcely sprung above Ground, onehandful; boil
them in a pint of Milk or Spring Water to the consumption of a third part. Let
the strained Liquor, sweetened with Sugar, be drunk twice or thrice a day.

Take of the leaves of Tea, one dram, of the flowers of Sage, Betony, each
half a dram; put them in a convenient Vessel, and pour upon them a pint of
boiling Water, let them stand close and warm about an hour. Sweeten the
strained Liquor with Sugar, and let it be drunk in the same manner as the
former.

Take of the Cloves of the roots of Osmund-royal, of the roots of Burdock,
Grass succory, each one ounce, of the herbs Male-speedwel, Agrimony,
Hartstongue, Liverwort, Maidenhair, each half an handful, of the raspings of
Ivory and Hartshorn, each an ounce, of Raisins of the Sun stoned, one ounce;
boil them in two quarts of Fountain Water, to the consumption of a third part,
add of White Wind or Rhenish-wine, half a pint; strain it presently, and then
add to it of the leaves of Watercresses and Brooklime, and of the tops of Fir,
each half an handful, of Juniperberries, half an ounce; make a warm Infusion in
a close Vessel for about two hours; keep the strained Liquor in a Glass well
stopped, and sweeten it at pleasure. The dose is two or three ounces at nine in
the morning, at three in the afternoon, and six in the evening.

Take of Lignum Lentiscinum, Rosemary, of the roots of Sarsaparilla, flowering
Fern, or of male Fern, each three ounces, of the herbs Agrimony, Maidenhair,
Speedwel, Hartstongue, Sage, Bettony, each two handfuls, of the teps of Fern
and Tamarisk, each 2 handfuls, boil them in four Gallons of Ale till one is
consumed; when it has done working in the Vessel, put into a bag 200 Millepides
washed in Whitewine, and gently bruised, of Juniper Berries, two ounces, of
Nutmegs cut number two, hang the bag in the Vessel, and put a piece of Steel
into it to make it sink. If there be any suspicion of the Scurvy, you may add
of Watercresses and Brooklime, each two handfuls; after a fortnight, let it be
drunk for the ordinary drink.

But the Medicine which is most approved of in this Disease is ens veneris,
five or six grains of it may be taken every night at bed time, in half a
spoonful of syrup of Gillyflowers.

If the Lungs are stuffed with viscid Humors, as happens often, and the
Mesentery with scropholous Glandules, Balsam of Sulphur may be given, three or
four drops being mixed with Sugar Candy powdered, and taken morning and evening.

Sometimes the use of Steel agrees; but it must not be used in Coughs,
Pleurisies, a stoppage of the Lungs and hectic Fever, and the like.

To the foresaid Remedies are sometimes added Diaphoreticks, as a decoction of
Guaiacum or the like, which must be taken in Bed, and Sweat must be promoted
according to the strength.

The Bath-water also is very proper, and is excellent to take off the swelling
of the Belly. The following artificial Bath is much commended. Place the Sick
in a large Vessel, and put round him warm Barley fermented, which has been a
while infused in boiled Water, as is usually done for making Beer; cover him
well, and let him abide in it to provoke sweat.

Of the Symptoms.
Regard must be had to the Symptoms coming upon this Disease, the most frequent
whereof is a Looseness; for the Cure whereof gentle Catharticks, as an infusion
of Rhubarb and Tamarinds, and of Sanders, or a Bolus made of them is of use:
But sometimes Astringents, and gentle Opiats may be used; but Purging and
sometimes Vomiting must go before. Sometimes immoderate sweating afflicts the
Child, which if it follow a feverish Fit, is critical, and ought not to be
rashly stopped; but if it flow inordinately, it is a Sign that the Body is
oppressed with ill Humors; and, therefore, this sort of Sweat must be corrected
by a gentle Purge, especially with Rhubarb. A Vomit does also good sometimes in
this case. Aperitives also, and such things as help Concoction, must not be
omitted.

Moreover, breeding of the Teeth difficultly is familiar to this Disease, which
often occasions a Fever; in which case, gentle Evacuations, especially by
Glisters must be made, though sometimes Purging and Vomiting gently are of use.
If the Tooth be about to pierce the Gum, Nurses are wont to rub the Gum with a
piece of polished Coral; but the roots of Marshmallows or sharp pointed Dock
will do as well: But sometimes it is necessary to cut the Gum to make way for
the Tooth, and to apply Blisters behind the Ears; and if there be great pain
and watching, Hypnoticks must be used; as one or two drachms of Diacodium in a
spoonful of Cowslip-water.

Besides internal Medicines and chirurgical Helps, external things also must be
used, as Exercises of all sorts, and if the Child be able, walking frequently;
if not, he must play sitting, or be carried about in the Nurses Arms, and the
like.

Frictions are also good in this case, with warm Flannels; the parts to be
rubbed are the Spine, which is primarly affected, and the muscular Parts; but
with this caution, that you must not rub the Bones where they stick out; but
you may rub freely the concave parts of the Bones.

Ligatures are also of use, which are to be made above the Knee and above the
Elbow; but they ought to be soft and loose. Boots are also of use, but you must
take care that they press a little upon the protuberant part of the bone, and
scarce touch the cavity. Bodice are also to be used to keep the Body upright.
Swinging is also necessary.

Lastly, we will mention some things that are to be applied outwardly. A
fomentation of all sorts of Wine, also common Aqua Vitae is very good to
corroborate the nervous parts, which must be used for the weak parts and
especially for the Spine; which being done, the parts must be anointed with
Oil, or some proper Ointment, which we shall mention by and by, and instead of
Wine, the following Decoction may be used.

Take of the roots of Osmund-royal, or of male-fern three ounces, of the leaves
of Bettony, Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Watercresses, each one handful, of the
flower of Camomel, Melilot and Elder, each one pugil, of the berries of Laurel
and Juniper, each half an ounce; boil them in a sufficient quantity of fountain
Water to a quart, add of White Wind, or of common Aqua Vitae, one pint; keep
the strained Liquor for use.

Take of the leaves of Elder, Laurel, Marjoram, Sage, Rosemary, Bettony and the
tops of Lavender, each two handfuls, of the berries of Juniper and Laurel, each
one ounce; cut them and bruise them, and put them into a Vessel with three
pound of May butter, or of fresh butter not salted, and add to them half a pint
of Aqua Vitae; boil them to the consumption of the Aqua Vitae, and while the
strained Liquor is hot, add half an ounce of the Oil of Nutmegs by expression,
and one dram of Peruvian balsam; mingle them, make an Ointment. Instead of
May-butter, Beef, Marrow, or Deers Suet, and Oil of Worms or Oil of Foxes, each
one pound and an half, may be used.

The Ointments must be applied warm before a hot Fire and naked, with a warm
hand, till the parts are dry.

If the Belly be hard and swelled, the following Ointment must be applied.

Take of the Oils of Cappers, Wormwood and Elder, each one ounce, of the
Ointment above described, one ounce and an half, of Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in
Vinegar, half an ounce, make a Liniment.

Whilst Ointments are applied to the Hypochondres, the bowels must be handled
by the Nurse.

If the Lungs are affected, the Breast must be anointed with the pectoral
Ointment, or with the Ointment of Marshmallows, or both mixed together; and at
the time of Unction a little Oil of Nutmegs by expression may be mixed with it.

The Nerve-Plaster, or a Plaster of Bettony may be applied to the Spine.

CHAP. CXV. Of the Gout.
THe Gout chiefly seizes those Old Men, who after they have lived the best part
of their Lives tenderly, and delicately indulging themselves freely with
splendid Banquets, Wine and other spiritous Liquors, at length, by reason of
the sloth that always accompanies old Age, wholly omit those excercises of
Body, which young Men are accustomed to. Moreover, they who are obnoxious to
this Disease have large Skulls, and are most commonly of a gross habit of Body,
moist and lax, and of a lusty and luxuriant Constitution, the best and richest
foundation for Life.

Not that the Gout only seizes those that are corpulent, for sometimes, though
seldomer, it invades thin People; nor does it wait always till they are Old,
for sometimes it seizes those that are in the flower of their Age, when they
have received the unhappy Seeds of the Disease from their Parents, as it were
ex traduce: Or if this be not the cause, they have too early used Venery, or
have quite forsook violent Exercises that they used formerly. Moreover, they
have great Stomachs, and have drank spirituous Liquors immoderately, and
afterward they have suddenly betook themselves to thin and cooling Liquors.

I will discourse of this Disease as it proceeds regularly, and afterward of
its anomalous and uncertain Phenomenon. When the Gout is regular, it seizes the
Patient most commonly after this manner, about the latter end of January, or at
the beginning of February it comes suddenly and for the most part without
giving any notice, except that the Patient has been troubled with indigestion
and crudities of the Stomach for some Weeks before. Moreover, the Body is
oppressed and puffed up with Wind, which daily increases till the Fit thunders
upon him; but a few days before it comes the Thighs are benumbed, and there is
as it were a descent of Wind through them, with convulsive motions; and the day
before the Fit the Appetite is sharp, but not natural. He goes to Bed, and to
sleep well, but at two a clock in the morning is waked by the pain, seizing
either his great Toe, the Heel, the calf of the Leg or the Ankle: This pain is
like that of a dislocated Bone, with the sense as it were of Water almost cold,
poured upon the Membranes of the part affected, presently shivering or shaking
follows, with a feverish disposition, the pain is very gentle but increases by
degrees, (and in like manner the shaking and shivering go off) and that hourly,
till toward night it comes to its height, accommodating it self neatly
according to the variety of the Bones of the Tarsus and Metatarsus the
Ligaments, whereof it seizes, sometimes in a manner resembling a violent
stretching or tearing those Ligaments, sometimes the gnawing of a Dog, and
sometimes a Pressure: Moreover, the part affected has such a quick and exquisit
pain, that it is not able to bear the weight of the Clothes upon it, nor hard
walking in the Chamber, and the night is not only passed over in pain upon this
account, but also by reason of the restless turning hither and thither till two
or three a clock in the morning, ( viz. a night and a day being spent from the
first approach of the Fit) at which time the Sick has suddenly ease; and now
being in a breathing sweat, he falls asleep; when he wakes, he finds the pain
much abated, and the part affected swelled; the next day, and perhaps two or
three days after, if the Matter apt to degenerate the Gout is copious, the part
affected will be in pain, but 'twill be eased about the Cock's crowing; within
a few days the other Foot will be in pain as the former was; and if the former
has left off aching, the weakness which rendered it infirm, will presently
vanish. After it has vexed the Feet, the Fits that follow are irregular both as
to the time of invasion and duration, yet the pain always returns in the
Evening and is less in the Morning; and of a series of these small Fits,
consists that which is called a Fit of the Gout.

But when the Gout is disturbed by improper Methods, or by the obstinate
continuance of the Disease, the very substance of the Body being as it were
perverted to the nourishment of the Disease, and Nature unable to eliminate the
same by its wonted method, then the Phaenomina are much different; for whereas
the pain was hitherto only troublesome to the Feet (which are the genuine seat
of the peccant Matter, and if it possesses any other parts, it is most certain
that either the method of the Disease has been altered, or that the vigor of
the Body is by little and little diminished;) now it possesses the Hands,
Wrists, the Arms, the Knees and other Regions, tormenting these as much as it
used to do the Feet; for sometimes distorting one or more of the Fingers, it
makes them like a bunch of Parships, taking away the motion by degrees, and at
length it generates stony Concretions about the Ligaments of the Joints,
sometimes the Matter occasioning the Disease thrust upon the Arms causes a
whitish swelling almost as big as an Egg, which is by degrees inflamed;
sometimes falling upon the Thigh, it feels as if there were a great weight
hanging upon it, yet without any considerable pain; but, passing to the Knee,
it handles that more severely.

And whereas the Gout before did not use to invade before the latter end of
Winter, and was wont to go off after two or three Months, now it continues upon
the Sick a whole year, excepting only two or three of the hot Months.

The Sick is also afflicted with many other Symptoms, as with a pain of the
Hemorrhoidal Veins, and with unsavory Belchings, and upon Yawning, especially
in the morning, the Ligaments of the Bones of the Metatarsus are violently
pulled; and sometimes when Yawning does not go before, the Sick just dropping
asleep, suddenly feels a blow, as it were, of a Club breaking in pieces the
Metatarsus.

Women are very seldom troubled with the Gout, and if they are, not till they
are old, or unless they are of a masculine habit of Body.

As to the Cure, Bleeding, Purging and Sweating are not indicated; but the
Intention of curing is to be directed to the helping Concoction. Whatsoever,
therefore, assists Nature in duly performing her Offices, whether in comforting
the Stomach that it may rightly concoct the nourishment, or the Blood that it
may well assimulate the Chile brought into it, or the solid Parts that they may
the better convert it to their proper substance, the Juices designed for their
nourishment and increase. Lastly, whatever preserves the various Organs of
Excretion, and the Emunctories of the Body in such a state, as that they may be
able to discharge duly and orderly the Excrements of each part: This, and such
like, conduce to the answering this intention, and are properly called
Digestives, whether they are Medicines or a course of Diet, or Exercise, or any
other of those things which are called the six Non-naturals.

Medicines of this kind are those in general which moderately heat, and are
bitter, or gently bite the Tongue; for they are very agreeable to the Stomach,
they purify the Blood and comfort all the Parts. The Remedy which I use, is
made in the following manner.

Take of the roots of Angelica, sweet smelling Flag, Master-wort, Elecampane,
leaves of common Wormwood, the lesser Centaury, white Horehound, Germander,
Groundpine, Scordium, Calaminth, meadow Saxifrage, S. John's-wort, golden Rod,
Feverfew, Thyme, Mint, Sage, Rue, Carduus Benedictus, Pennyroyal,
Southern-wood, of the flowers of Camomil, Tansie, Lilly of the Valleys, English
Saffron, of the seeds of Treacle, Mustard, Garden scurvy grass, Carraways,
Juniper Berries, each a sufficient quantity; let the herbs and flowers, and
roots be gathered when they have most virtue in them; let them be dried, and
kept in Paper-bags till they may be finely powdered: To six ounces of each well
mixed, add a sufficient quantity of purified Honey and Canary-wine, to make an
Electuary: Take two drachms morning and evening. Or for want of this, use the
following.

Take of conserve of Garden-scurvygrass, an ounce and an half, of Roman
Wormwood and of the yellow rind of Oranges, each one ounce, of candied
Angelica, and of Nutmegs candied, each half an ounce, of Venice Treacle, three
drachms, of compound Powder of Wake robin, two drachms; make an Electuary, with
a sufficient quantity of syrup of Oranges; let him take two drachms twice a
day, drinking upon it five or six spoonfuls of the following water.

Take of the roots of Horseradish sliced, three ounces, of Garden-scurvygrass,
twelve handfuls, of Watercresses, Brooklime, Sage and Mint, each four
handfuls, the peels of six Oranges, two Nutmegs bruised, of Brunswick Mum, six
quarts; distill them in a common Still, and draw only six pints of Water for
use.

Among the Medicines commonly known, Venice-Treacle is the best; but because it
contains a great many Species that heat too much, and besides a great deal of
Opium, the Electuary abovementioned may be more commodiously prepared of the
chief heating Vegetables; but we must take care to choose such Simples as are
pleasant to the taste, for the Sick must take it a long while, viz. almost as
long as he lives.

Among the Simples, the Peruvian-bark is the best; for it strengthens the Blood
and renders it vigorous, if some Grains of it are taken morning and evening.

A Mediocrity is to be observed in Meat and Drink, so that neither more
nourishment be taken in than the Stomach can concoct: Nor, on the contrary,
must the Parts by too much Abstinence, be defrauded of that proportion whereby
their Strength and Vigor ought to be sustained. Morever, as to the quality of
the Meat, though things of easy digestion considered by themselves are to be
preferred before things of hard digestion, yet regard must be had to the
Patient's Palate; for we must take notice, That that which the Stomach earnestly
craves for, though of difficult digestion, is sooner concocted by Nature, than
that which is accounted to be of easier digestion, if it be offensive to the
Stomach; but those things that are reckoned of hard digestion, are therefore to
be eaten more sparingly: And, I suppose, the Patient ought to feed upon one
sort of Meat at a meal; for various sorts of Flesh eaten at once, disturb the
Stomach more than one sort eaten in the same quantity; as to other things
besides Flesh, let him eat at pleasure, if they are not sharp, nor salted, nor
spiced.

As to the times of eating, a Dinner is only necessary, for the Bed being most
proper to digest the Humors, that time ought not to be wasted about concocting
the Meat; therefore, they that are subject to the Gout should not eat Suppers,
yet they may allow themselves a large draught of small Beer; for such are
inclinable to breed the Stone in the Kidneys, the concretion whereof is much
hindered by such kind of Liquor drunk at this time, the Reins being cooled and
cleansed thereby.

The drinking of Milk or a Milk-diet, either crude or boiled without any thing
else, except perhaps a piece of Bread with it once a day, has been much used
this 20 years, and it has done more good to many than any other sort of Remedy
for this Disease, as long as they kept to it; but as soon as they return to
common Diet, though of easy digestion, the Gout returned more violently than
before, and held them longer; therefore, he that intends to betake himself to
this method, ought, first, to consider seriously whether he can persist in the
use of it all his Life long, which perhaps is not in his power, how resolved
soever he may be. For I knew a Noble Man, who after he had been dieted with
Milk only a whole year with pleasure (all which time he went to Stool daily
once or oftener) was forced to leave it off by reason he was suddenly bound in
Body, and the temper of his Body altered, and because at length his Stomach
nauseated Milk, though the inclination of his Mind still continued; but some
Hypochondriacal People of a gross habit of Body, or who otherwise have
accustomed themselves much and a long while to spirituous Liquors, can by no
means bear a Milk-diet.

As to Liquors, those in my opinion are best, that are neither as strong as
Wine nor as weak as Water, of which sort is our London small Beer, either with
or without Hops, for extremes on either hand are hurtful.

But now though it may be sufficient for him that has the Gout but little and
at sometimes only, to use small Beer and diluted Wine, the degree of his
Disease not requiring more severe usage; yet when the whole substance of the
Body is as it were degenerated into the Gout, he will be less able to conquer
the Disease, who does not wholly abstain from any sort of fermented Liquors
though small and mild; therefore, a dietetick Drink must be prescribed for his
ordinary Drink. The following pleases me best.

Take of Sarsaparilla, six ounces, of Sassafras, China and the shavings of
Hartshorn, each two ounces, of Liquorish, one ounce; (...) them in two gallons
of Fountain Water for half an hour, afterward let them stand covered in hot
ashes 12 hours; afterward boil them to the consumption of a third part: As
soon as it is taken from the fire, infuse in it half an ounce of Anniseeds;
after two hours strain it, and let it stand till it is clear; keep the clear
Liquor in Glass-bottles for use.

This Liquor is most conveniently used at first when the Patient recovers of
the Fit, and he must persevere in the use of it all the rest of his Life, as
well when he has the Fits as at other times; at the same time the foresaid
Electuary must be used daily, as well in the Fits as when they are off.

Yet if the Sick, by reason of a long and too great use of intoxicating
Liquors, or by reason of old Age or Weakness cannot concoct his Meat without
Wine or some other fermented Liquor, he cannot leave it off suddenly without
great danger, the doing whereof has been fatal to very many; therefore, in my
Opinion, he should not use the dietetick Apozem at all.

The Sick must go to bed early; for besides Bleeding and Purging, nothing does
so much destroy the strength of Nature as watching a-nights.

Moreover, Tranquillity of Mind must by all means be obtained; but the exercise
of the Body is more profitable than all other things that are used to hinder
the indigestion of the Humors, and to corroborate the Blood and to restore
strength to the parts; but unless it is used daily 'twill do no good, yet it
must not be violent. As to the kind of Exercise, riding on Horseback, when old
Age and the Stone do not hinder, is much to be preferr^d before the rest; if
this cannot be used, riding in a Coach does almost as well: And on this
account, at least, it is well with gouty People, for their Riches, which
enticed them to Luxury, whereby the Disease was bred, can provide them a Coach,
which kind of exercise they may use, when they cannot the other: But it is to
be observed, that it is best to use exercise in a good Air, viz. in the
Country, and not in the City, where the Air is filled with Vapors exhaling from
the Shops of various Artificers, and thickened by the closeness of the
Buildings, as it is here in London, which is generally supposed to be the
largest City in the whole World.

As to Venery, old and gouty People must not indulge themselves in it.

But notwithstanding what has been said of the utility of exercise in the Fits
of the Gout; if the Sick, by reason of the violence of the Fit is as it were
overwhelmed presently by the first assault of it, which happens to those, for
the most part, in whom the Gout has now come to its height, nor is yet grown
gentle by a course of many years; In this case, if the Sick is confined to a
Chamber, it will also be convenient that he keep his bed for some of the first
days, till the violence of the pain is abated; for the bed does somewhat supply
the want of Exercise: For the continual use of it does more powerfully digest
the morbisick Matter in a few days, than keeping up in many, especially at the
beginning of the Disease, if the Sick can abstain from Flesh without fainting
or other ill Symptoms, and can be contented only with Barly-broath, small Beer,
and the like. But you must take notice, that if the Gout is inveterate and
inclines the Sick to Fainting, Gripes and Looseness, and such kind of Symptoms,
he will scarce avoid being destroyed by one of the Fits, if he do not use
Exercise in a free and open Air; for a great many gouty People, perish by these
Symptoms, whereunto they have been obnoxious by being confined to their
Chambers, and especially to their Beds, whereas had they bore the fatigue of
riding in a Coach the greatest part of the day, they had not died so soon.

But as to the Symptoms of the Gout, we must apply our selves to those whereby
the Life of the Patient is endangered, viz. the debility and faintness of the
Stomach with Gripes of the Belly; for the Sickness and faintness, a small
draught of Canary Wine is very good.

But if any great Symptom, scarce bearing a truce, comes suddenly, by reason of
striking in of the gouty Matter, and threatens Death, we must neither trust to
the Wine nor to the Exercise above commended; but in this case, if it does not
fall upon the Head, but upon the natural or vital Parts, we must presently fly
to Laudanum, viz. give 20 drops of liquid Laudanum, mixed with a small draught
of Epidemick Water, and let the Patient compose himself to rest in his Bed. But
if the Matter occasioning the Gout produces a Looseness, because it is not yet
cast upon the Limbs, if it be not the crisis of a particular Fit, and if
notwithstanding the Laudanum above commended, and Exercise of all sorts (for
these must be first used for the cure of the Diarrhaea) the Looseness continues
accompanied with Sickness and Gripes, there is only one Remedy that I know of,
viz. to provoke Sweat by a method, and Medicines designed for this use, which
if it be done two or three days, Morning and Evening, for two or three hours at
a time, it most commonly stops the Looseness, and forces the Disease upon the
Limbs.

There is another Symptom not so frequent, though I have seen it diverse times,
viz. a translation of the peccant Matter upon the lobes of the Lungs, when a
Winter-cough, by reason of cold taken in the time of the Fit, has by degrees
drawn the Matter upon the Lungs. In this one case, the curative Indication is
not to be directed to the Gout, but this Symptom is to be treated as a true
Peripneumonia, by Bleeding repeated, and cooling and thickning Remedies and
Diet. Moreover, the Sick must be purged betwixt the Bleedings; but Sweating
does hurt in this case.

Moreover, it is to be noted, That almost all gouty People, when they have been
conflicted a long while with this Disease, are subjected to the Stone in the
Kidneys, most commonly at the declination of a general Fit. In this case,
setting aside all other Medicines, let him presently take a Gallon of
Posset Drink, wherein two ounces of the roots of Marshmallows have been boiled,
and let the following Glister be injected.

Take of the roots of Marshmallows and Lillies, each one ounce, of the leaves
of Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, Bears-breech, and of the flowers of Camomil,
each one handful, of Flax and Fenugreek-seeds, each half an handful; boil them
in a sufficient quantity of Water; dissolve in the strained Liquor, of brown
Sugar and syrup of Marshmallows, each two ounces; mingle them, and make a
Glister.

As soon as he has rendered all the Posset Drink by Vomiting, and has ejected
the Glister, let him take a large dose of liquid Laudanum, viz. 25 drops, or 15
grains of Mathew's Pill.

If any one inquires for external Remedies to ease the pain of the Gout, I have
hitherto known none, excepting things merely cooling and repelling, which are
very dangerous; and I confidently affirm, That the greatest part of those who
have perished in the Gout, have not so properly been killed by the Disease, as
by an improper use of Medicines; therefore, if the pain be very violent, it
will be better for the Sick to keep himself a bed till the pain is a little
abated, than to use external Anodynes. But it will not be amiss to take a
little Laudanum in the Evening, if the pain is intolerable, otherwise it will
be better to omit it.

CHAP. CXVI. Of a Rheumatism.
THIS Disease comes at any time, but especially in the Autumn, and it chiefly
seizes those that are in the flower of their Age, and it begins most commonly
upon the following occasion, viz. the Sick catches Cold after having been much
heated with violent Exercise, or any other way. It begins with Shaking, and
Shivering and Heat, Restlessness, Thirst, and the other unhappy train of
Symptoms which accompany Fevers, follow, after a day or two, and sometimes
sooner, the Sick is seized with a violent pain sometimes in one Limb, sometimes
in another in the Wrists, Shoulders, Knees especially, which changing place,
seizes them by turns, redness and swelling remaining in the part which was last
affected.

There is another sort of this Disease, though it is commonly thought of
another kind, it may be properly called Lumbago Rheumatica, viz. a violent and
fixed pain about the region of the Loins, which sometimes reaching to the Os
sacrum, resembles the Stone in the Kidneys, only the Sick does not vomit. This
violent pain, unless it be removed in the same manner the former is, lasts as
long, and is full as painful.

Having seriously considered that this Disease arises from an Inflammation, I
thought it was probable it might be cured by a simple cooling Diet moderately
nourishing, as well as by Bleeding repeated, and a Whey-diet I found did as
well as Bleeding.

Mr. Malthus, an Apothecary, an honest and ingenious Man, was seized violently
with a Rheumatism; and because he was of a weakly and dry habit of Body, I was
afraid he would not be able to bear large Bleeding; and therefore I ordered,
That he should be dieted with Whey alone for four days: Afterward, besides the
Whey, I allowed him white Bread for Dinner; being contented with this Diet, he
continued it for 18 days, only at last he eat Bread for Supper also. He drank
daily four quarts of Whey; afterward, when he went abroad, he eat Chicken, and
other things of easy digestion; but every third day he was dieted with Whey
only, till he was quite well.

But how well soever a Whey-diet may agree with young People, and with those
that live temperately, it is not safe to treat old People so, or such as have
too much addicted themselves a long while to Wine, and other spirituous
Liquors, for in such it will weaken the Stomach and chill the Blood, and so
cause a Dropsy. In this case, therefore, it is necessary to bleed twice or
thrice, and after the second, or at most after the third Bleeding, to purge
very often till all the Symptoms quite cease with Lenitives, as with Tamarinds,
Sena, Rhubarb, Manna and syrup of Roses solutive; and you must give, every
night after Purging, one ounce of Diacodium, somewhat earlier than is usual.

But here we must take notice of a Symptom like a Rheumatism, which also
sometimes resembles a nephritick pain, but it proceeds from an Ague, and must
be cured as that is.

There is also another sort of Rheumatism which comes near the Scurvy, and
requires in a manner the same Cure; and, therefore, I call it a scorbutic
Rheumatism; the pain seizes sometimes this, sometimes that part, but seldom
swells; nor is it accompanied with a Fever, nor is it so fixed, but is of a more
wandering and uncertain disposition, and accompanied with irregular Symptoms:
Sometimes it seizes this or that Member, and then presently it affects only the
inner Parts, and occasions Sickness, which goes off again, when the pain of the
external Parts returns, and so afflicts the Patient by turns, and continues a
long while like those Diseases that are accounted most Chronical, it chiefly
seizes Women, and Men of a weakly nature.

They who for a long while have used the Peruvian-bark are subject to this
Disease, which, by the by, is the only inconvenience I ^ver knew follow upon
the use of this Remedy; but, however it be, whether the Disease take its rise
on this occasion, or from any other cause, it is very easily cured by the
following Remedies; which should have been kept secret, if I had a greater
regard to my private Advantage than to the public Good; for by these alone, I
have cured many Afflicted after the manner I have described.

Take of fresh Conserve of Garden scurvy grass, two ounces, of Wood Sorrel, one
ounce, of the compound Powder of Wake-robin, six drachms; make an Electuary,
with a sufficient quantity of syrup of Oranges. The dose is two drachms, to be
taken thrice a day for a month, drinking upon it three ounces of the following
Water.

Take of Garden scurvy grass, eight handfuls, of Watercresses, Brook-lime,
Sage and Mint, each four handfuls, of the peels of six Oranges, of Nutmegs
bruised half an ounce; infuse them in six quarts of Brunswick-mum, and distill
them in a common Still, and draw off three quarts for use. The precise dose of
the compound Powder of Wake-robin must be observed, or, at least, it must not
be lessened.

CHAP. CXVII. Of the Pestilential Fever, and of the Plague of the years 1665
and 1666.
THE Plague rarely rages violently in England oftener than once in the space of
30 or 40 years: The last dreadful Plague destroyed 8000 in the space of a Week,
notwithstanding that two thirds, at least, of the Citizens of London fled into
the Country for fear of the Infection.

Its first approach was always accompanied with shaking and shivering like the
Fits of an Ague, presently violent Vomitings, a pain about the region of the
Heart as if it were pressed, a burning Fever, with the usual concourse of
Symptoms perpetually molest the Sick, till either Death it self, or a happy
eruption of a Bubo or Parotis, discharges the morbifick Matter, and so frees
them from that deplorable condition. It does, indeed, now and then happen, but
it is seldom that it comes without any sense of a Fever before, and suddenly
destroys Men, the Purple-spots, which are the Forerunners of present Death,
breaking out, as they are about their Business. It sometimes also happens, That
Tumors appear, when neither a Fever, nor any other grievous Symptom went before.

As to the Cure, if a Tumor has not broke out, I bleed moderately with respect
to the strength and temperament of the Sick, and afterward a Sweat is easily
and soon raised (whereas otherwise it is not only very difficulty procured, but
there is also danger, lest the Inflammation should be heightened by it, and so
the Tokens forced out) and the benefit of the Sweat immediately following
abundantly, compensates the loss of Blood, which how little soever it be, would
otherwise be very injurious. After Bleeding, which must be performed in Bed
(when all things are in a readiness to promote Sweat) without any manner of
delay; I order the Patient to be covered quite over with Clothes, and that a
piece of Flannel be bound to the forepart of his Head; and, indeed this
covering of the Head conduces more to the procuring Sweat than any one would
easily imagine; afterward, if the Patient does not vomit, I give these and the
like Sudorificks.

Take of Venice Treacle, two drachms, of the Electuary of the Egg, one scruple,
of compound Powder of Crabs Eyes, twelve grains, of Cochinel, eight grains, of
Saffron, four grains, with a sufficient quantity of the juice of Kermes; make a
Bolus, which let him take every sixth hour, drinking after it six spoonfuls of
the following Julep.

Take of Carduus water, compound Scordium water, each three ounces; of Treacle
water two ounces; mingle them, make a Julep.

But if the Patient be troubled with Vomiting, as he is very frequently in the
Plague and other pestilential Fevers, I defer the giving of Sudorificks so long
as till he begins to Sweat by means of the covering only, excepting that
sometimes I put part of the Sheet over the Face to collect the Vapors, for
(which is indeed very well worth Observation) when the Rays of the morbifick
Matter extend themselves to the circumference of the Body, the Looseness and
Vomiting that were occasioned by their being inwardly reflected and cast upon
the Stomach and Bowels, cease presently of their own accord; so that how great
soever the preceding subversion of the Stomach was, the Medicines that are
taken afterward are easily retained, and procure Sweat as well as can be
wished.

I order, That the Sweat should be continued for the space of a natural day, by
Sage-posset-drink or Maceale, now and then taken; and I strictly forbid, That
the Patient should be any way cleansed; neither indeed do I permit, that the
Shirt, how moist and foul soever it be, should be changed within the space of
24 hours from the end of the Sweat, which I would have observed with the
greatest caution. But if the Sweat be circumscribed in a narrower compass of
time, the violence of the Symptoms soon returns, and the health of the Patient
is very uncertain, which a longer continuance of the Sweat would have put out
of danger. If any defection be perceived toward the latter end, I permit the
Sick to take a little Chicken-broath, the yolk of an Egg or the like, which
with Cordials and Draughts commonly used to keep up the Sweat, abundantly
repair the Strength.

I admonish, that Cold be carefully avoided, that their Clothes dry on their
Body of their own acc^^d, and that all Drinks are taken somewhat hot, and that
the use of Sage-posset-drink be continued for the space of 24 hours after the
Sweat. The next morning I give a common Purge, viz. of the infusion of
Tamarinds, of the leaves of Sena, of Rhubarb, Manna and syrup of Roses
solutive; and with this method, the next year after the Plague, I recovered
very many that were seized with the Pestilential Fever, so that not one died of
this Disease that was under my care, after I began the use of the same.

But where the Tumor has been out already, I have not hitherto ventured to
bleed, though in a Body unapt to sweat, fearing least the sudden death of the
Patient should prevent the designed sweat, by reason of the morbifick Matter
flowing back to the empty Veins; yet perhaps Bleeding may be very safely
administered, if a sweat be procured presently after it, without any manner of
delay, which being prolonged to the space above required, may be able to
dissipate and consume by little and little the whole bulk of the Humor, and
with much less danger than when a legitimate maturation of the Imposthume
(which is very uncertain and fallible in so very acute a Disease) is long
waited for.

CHAP CXVIII. Of the regular Smallpox.
THere are two sorts of them; either they are Distinct or Confluent.

The Distinct begin with a shivering and coldness, which is presently followed
with excessive heat, a violent pain in the Head and Back, Vomiting, a great
propensity to Sweat; I mean in grown Persons, for I never yet observed any such
disposition in Children, either before or after they came out; a pain at the
cavity of the Breast, beneath the region of the Heart, if it be pressed with
the Hand, dullness and sleepiness, especially in Children, and sometimes
Convulsive Fits; and if these happen to them that have all their Teeth, I
reckon the Smallpox are at hand, which most commonly coming out a few Hours
after, sufficiently answer the Prognostication: For instance, if the Child has
a Convulsive Fit in the Evening, as it usually happens, the Smallpox appear
the next Morning; and moreover I have very often observed, that when they come
immediately after these Fits, they rise in large Pustles, and are mild and
favorable, and seldom flux: And these for the most part were the Symptoms
which accompanied this Disease at its beginning, and preceded the eruption of
the Pustles. But here it is proper to acquaint you, that sometimes it happened
so, that in a looser texture of the Blood, which is easily changed, the course
of separation was passed over gradually without any violent sickness, before
the expulsion of the Matter discovered it self, by the eruption of the Pustles.

The Distinct Smallpox usually come out on the fourth day inclusively, and
sometimes a little later, but rarely before, at which time, for the most part,
the symptoms are very much abated, or totally vanish, and the Patient thinks
himself very well; only grown People are so disposed to Sweat, that they can
scarce be kept from it, though they have little or no Clothes on them, which
disposition does not leave them till the Pustles begin to ripen, and then it
vanishes of its own accord: The eruption is after this manner, first Pimples as
big as small Pins heads here and there show themselves, and first of all in the
Face, Neck and Breast, and afterward in the whole Body. At this time the Jaws
are affected with a pain that increases as the Pustles rise, which growing
daily bigger and higher, inflame the neighboring skin and Flesh; for about the
eighth day from the first approach of the Sickness, which I always diligently
observe in this Disease, the spaces between, that before were somewhat white,
now begin to be red and swell more or less, according to the number of the
Pustles, with a tensive and launcing pain of these Parts, which increasing,
hourly occasions the Inflammation and Swelling; so that in progress of this
Disease the Eyelids are so filled up and extended, that the Patient is
sometimes deprived of Sight, and when they are thus Tumified, they shine and
are like a Bladder blowed up; and if a greater number of Pustles besiege the
Eyes at the first eruption, they sooner retire to their dark Mansions; next
after the Face, the Hands and Fingers, swell more or less, according to the
number of the Pustles: The Pustles that were smooth and red to this day, are
now grown rough and somewhat white, which is indeed the first sign of their
coming to maturity; moreover, they cast out by degrees a certain yellowish
Matter, in color like a Honeycomb, and the inflammation of the Face and hands,
when it is at height, causes a very florid Color, not unlike a Damask-Rose, in
the spaces between the Smallpox. On the Eleventh the Tumor and Inflammation
of the Face manifestly diminish, and on the Fourteenth or Fifteenth day totally
vanish.

That sort of Smallpox which we call the Flux, has the same Symptoms with the
Distinct, only they are more violent; the Sickness, the Vomiting, the Fever,
and the Restlesness, rage more violently: Moreover, a Looseness sometimes
precedes the Eruption, and continues a day or two after it. This sort comes out
generally on the third day, sometimes before, scarce ever after it. But it is
to be Noted, when some grievous Symptom afflicts the Patient before the
eruption, as a most violent pain, sometimes in the region of the Loins, like a
fit of the Stone; sometimes in the Side, like a Pleurisy, sometimes in the
Limbs, like a Rheumatism; lastly in the Stomach, with violent Sickness and
Vomiting; In these cases I have observed the Smallpox to come out later than
ordinary. And in the nex place, I must acquaint you, that the Fever and other
symptoms molest the sick many days after the coming out of the Pustles. This
sort comes out sometimes like an Erysipelas, sometimes like the Measles, and as
to the outward appearance they cannot be distinguished by any but those that
are very conversant in this Distemper; yet he that shall diligently consider
the great difference as to the time of eruption in these Diseases, and other
Circumstances which he may gather from the History of each of them, will easily
be able to distinguish them. These do not rise so high as the Distinct,
especially those in the Face; after the eighth day they begin to change into a
duskish Color.

There are two other Symptoms that attend the Flux-pox, which are as
considerable as the Pustles or Swelling, viz. Salivation in grown People, and a
Looseness in Children. The first of these is so perpetual a Concomitant, that I
never knew but one that had the Confluent kind and was free from Salivation;
but the latter, viz. a Looseness, does not so certainly vex Children that have
this sort. Sometimes Salivation discovers it self at the first coming out,
sometimes not till a day or two after; first the matter is thin and easily spit
up, so that the sick foul a great many Clothes in a nights time; but about the
Eleventh day it is most commonly more clammy, so that it is difficulty hawked
up, the Sick is thirsty, and now and then coughs as he drinks.

A Looseness does not invade Children so soon, as spitting does old People; but
at what time soever it comes, if it be not stopped by Art, it continues through
the whole course of the Disease.

In both kinds of small Pox, the Fever is highest from the beginning to the
eruption; after which it is more moderate, till the Pustles begin to ripen, and
afterward it totally evanishes.

I have always observed, that when the disease was violent, the sick had, as it
were, a Fit in the evening; and then the Symptoms raged more cruelty.

In the next place I will treat of the irregular Symptoms that happen in this
disease, when it is unskilfully handled.

It is to be noted, therefore, that the irregular Symptoms that occur on the
eight Day, in the distinct small Pox, and those that happen on the eleventh in
the Flux, always reckoning from the first approach of the Disease, are of very
great moment with respect either to the Life or Death of the patient; and,
therefore, they ought to be exactly weighed; for it is manifest that the
greatest part of those that die of either sort, die on the days abovementioned.

When Sweat is promoted much by Cordials and hot Regimen, the Particles are
eliminated, which should have served to elevate the Pustles, and to swell the
Face on the Eight Day; and it appears flaccid and white, and the Sweat, which
flowed freely to this day, now ceases of its own accord, nor it can it be
raised again with the hottest Cordials: The patient is taken lightheaded of a
sudden, with Anxiety, violent Sickness and restlessness, he makes Water often,
but little at a time, and in the space of a very few hours, takes leave of his
Friends, and repairs to his long home.

But in the Flux the Sick is in the greatest danger, and most commonly dies on
the 11th Day; for the Salivation which hitherto preserved the Patient is wont
to cease of its own accord at this time: Therefore, unless the swelling of the
Face persists a little longer, and that of the Hands now manifestly beginning
supplies it is place, the sick must necessarily perish: But it happens too often
in this hot Disease, that the Cras^s of the blood being weakened, and broke by
an over-hot Regimen, and being so highly inflamed, that it is no longer able to
exterminate leasurely the inflammatory Particles, (to say nothing at present of
those Mischiefs that are occasioned by sweat unseasonably forced) so that
either the Face or Hands do not swell at all, or the Tumor vanishes with the
Salivation.

There are yet other symptoms that happen at any time of the Disease, and
belong as well to the distinct small Pox as the Flux. As a Frenzy, a Coma and
Purple Spots, which are most commonly the forerunners of Death; and sometimes
there is a bloody Urin, or Blood is cast up from the Lungs, both these
Hemorrhages happen most commonly at the beginning of the Disease, before the
Pustles come out; sometimes also there is a total suppression of Urine. There
are also other symptoms that sometimes arise from a cause contrary to those
above mentioned, when the Patient has been injured by violent Cold or excessive
Bleeding, or by being over purged, viz. the Pustles fall of a sudden, and a
Looseness supervenes, so that the Patient, if he be Adult, is in great danger;
moreover, the Tumor of the Face and Hands is repelled on this account.

But the Symptoms that proceed from taking Cold very rarely occur, for what
those do that are occasioned by too hot a Regimen.

As soon as the Signs of this Disease show themselves, I keep the sick from the
open Air, and forbid them the use of Wine and Flesh, and allow them small Beer
gently warmed with a Tossed for their ordinary Drink, and now and then permit
them to drink as much of it as they will, I order them for their Victuals,
Oatmeal and Barley Broaths, and roasted Apples, and other things, which are
neither too hot nor cold, nor too hard to be digested; I forthwith prohibit a
hot Regimen and the use of all manner of Cordials. On the fourth day I commit
the sick to his Bed; and then if they come not out well, some gentle Cordial
may be properly prescribed, at least for once, to drive out the Pustles. Among
the Medicines for this purpose, those they call Paregoricks, such as liquid
Laudanum, Diascordium, and the like, if they be mixed in a small quantity with
some proper cordial Waters excel the rest: But it is to be noted, That if I am
called to a strong young Man, who has besides given occasion to the Disease by
excessive drinking of Wine, or any Spirituous Liquor whatsoever, I reckon it
not sufficient for the restraining of the ebullition of the Blood, that he
abstrain from his Bed and Cordials; unless, moreover, he be blooded in the Arm.

When the Pustles first come out, I then diligently consider whether they be of
the distinct or confluent kind, because they differ exceedingly one from the
other, though they agree as to some symptoms. If, therefore, from the bigness
and paucity of the Pustles, and the slowness of their coming out, and from the
vanishing of sickness and other symptoms, which tire the Patient after the
eruption of the flux Pox, it appear that they are the distinct sort, I take
care that the sick be refreshed with small Beer, Oatmeal and Barly-gruel, and
the like. And if the small Pox be but few, and in Summertime, and that very
hot, I see no reason why the Patient should be kept stifled up in Bed, and why
he may not rather rise a few hours every day, provided the inconveniences of
too much Cold or Heat may be prevented by the place and clothing; but if
either the cold season of the Year, or a large eruption of the Pustles, put the
Patient under a necessity of keeping his Bed continually, I take care that he
lie not hotter nor has more Clothes on him than when he was in health, and that
he have a Fire kindled only morning and evening, unless it be Winter; nor do
(...) require that he should be always fixed to one place, lest he sweat, which
I confidently affirm cannot be promoted without great danger.

When the Disease is going off, it is proper to give three or four spoonfulls
of Canary-Wine hot, or some other temperate Cordial Medicine. At the same time
also, a little hotter and more Cordial-diet may be allowed. For instance,
Sugar-so^s, and Oatmeal-candie and the like; nor is there need of any other
thing at all in the distinct and gentle sort, if the Patient will suffer
himself to be treated moderately in this method and diet, unless by change
Restlessness, or Watchings, should now and then persuade the use of a
Paregorick.

But if the small Pox Flux, the case is very hazardous; for I reckon this sort
is no less different from the other than the Plague is from this; though among
the Vulgar, who take names and words for things, the cure of both is said to be
the same; for toward the end of the disease the sick is in great danger, viz.
on the 11th Day in the common Flux-pox, on the 14th Day in a worser sort, and
the 17th Day in the worst sort: But sometimes, though rarely, one the 21st Day,
the Fever, the Restlessness and other symptoms invading together, whereby the
sick is generally destroyed, unless Art relieve him: Wherefore, seeing there is
so much danger when they Flux, the Physician should endeavor all he can to
hinder their Fluxing, by bleeding presently in the Arm, if there be the least
suspicion of the Flux-pox, and by giving a Vomit afterward, and by keeping the
sick up till the 6th Day from the first sickness. Afterward he must be put to
Bed, and keep there to the end of the disease; but he must have no more Clothes
on, nor a greater fire in his Chamber than he used to have when he was well,
and he must drink freely of small Beer or other cooling Liquors. But because,
notwithstanding the sick frequently grows hot, lightheaded, and restless, I
give an Anodyne every Night, but a little earlier than is usual; because in
this Disease, a fit of heat and restlessness comes almost every day toward the
evening.

But, which is to be lamented, notwithstanding these things, and all other
Physical Helps, the sick is very often seized on the 11th Day, or on some other
of those Days, which we said, were most fatal in the various kinds of Flux-pox,
with a violent Fever, difficulty of breathing, and restlessness, and dies
suddenly. In this case nothing is more effectual than the taking away of ten or
twelve ounces of Blood, and in the evening a large Anodine must be given, as
before; and so afterward morning and evening, and sometimes oftener; for it is
diligently to be noted, that in some the fury of the Disease is so high, that a
very large dosed Anodyne cannot stop its force in 12 hours; in which case it is
necessary to repeat the Anodyne every 6th or every 8th hour.

But because it happens often at the latter end of the Disease, that the Body
is bound up so much, that the sick is like to be suffocated, and consequenrly
is in great danger; in this I have given successfully an ounce and an half of
Lenitive Electuary dissolved in four ounces of Succory-water or the like; which
Draught gives some stools before night; but if it does not, an Anodyne must be
given in the evening, and sooner, notwithstanding the Purge, if great
Restlessness or some considerable sickness threaten danger.

If, therefore, the Purge does not answer the first day, it must be repeated
the next, and then it seldom fails, and in this manner Bleeding and Purging may
be repeated by Intervals, as occasion requires. But it is to be noted, that the
sick must not be purged till the 13th day or after, nor then, unless Bleeding
has gone before. For spitting of Blood and a bloody Urine coming upon the small
Pox, for both these Hemorraghes come sometimes at the beginning of the Disease:
After bleeding largely once, give an Anodyne.

Take of red Poppy water, two ounces, of liquid Laudanum, 14 drops, of
distilled Vinegar, three drachms, of Diacodium, half an ounce; make a Draught
to be repeated every night at bed time.

Take of Troches of Lemnian Earth and of Bole-armenick, each one dram, of
sealed Earth, Bloodstone, Dragon's-blood and red Coral prepared, each half a
dram, of Mastich and Gum-arabick, each one scruple; mingle them, make a fine
Powder, whereof let him take half a dram every third hour in a spoonful of
syrup of Comfry, drinking upon it four or five spoonfuls of the following
Julep.

Take of the Waters of Plantain and Oak-buds, each three ounces, of
Cinnamon Water Hordeate, two ounces, of syrup of dried Roses, one ounce; make
it a little acid with spirit of Vitriol.

Emulsions also of the four greater cold Seeds with white Popies do a great
deal of good. But after the Hemorrhage is stopped, you must proceed according to
the method described in the small Pox.

Great care must be taken that the Salivation continue according to the manner
of it, from the beginning to the 12th or 13th day; for if it quite stop before
the 11th day, the Sick is in great danger: It may be much promoted by ordering
the Sick to drink freely small Beer, or any other Liquor, which is neither
heating nor provokes sweat.

In the next place the Looseness in Children must be permitted, because it
evacuates the morbifick matter. At last, when the Pustles are crusty and hard,
I use to anoint the Face often with Oil of sweet Almonds.

If in the distinct small Pox the Face does not swell, I give an Anodyne
presently; but if the Patient be lightheaded and very sick, and makes Water
often, but little at a time, he can be relieved no other way, Death being near
at hand, than by giving Narcoticks freely, or by taking away a large quantity
of Blood, and by exposing the Body to the Air; but I would not be so understood
here as if in every Phrensy coming upon the small Pox, there being no Symptom
more frequent, that I should advise Bleeding presently; but only in that which
therefore happens, because the Face does not swell in the distinct kind, though
there be a great number of Pustles.

If in the Flux-Pox the Spitle be so thick and clammy that the Sick is in
danger of being suffocated, which happens often on the 11th day, a Gargarism
must necessarly be prescibed, and must be ordered to be used often Day and
Night: It may be made of small Beer or Barly-water, with Honey of Roses. Or, the
following may be used.

Take of the bark of Elm, six drachms, of Liquorice, half a dram, of Raisins
of the Sun stoned number twenty, of red Roses, two pugils; boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Water to a pint and an half: In the strained Liquor
dissolve of simple Oxymel, and of Honey of Roses, each two ounces; mingle them,
make a Gargarism.

But when the sick is in danger to be suffocated every moment, and is stupid,
an ounce and an half of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum must be given, for a
less Dose will not work, by reason of the stupidity of the sick. But this
Remedy does not always do the business.

The Coma may be easily relieved by the help of a moderate Regimen.

For a Suppression of Urine, which sometimes afflicts young and brisk People,
nothing does so well as taking the Sick out of Bed; and after he has walked
twice or thrice cross the Room, by the assistance of the Bystanders, he will
presently make Water freely, and be much relieved thereby.

But the Symptoms arising from catching cold, or by Evacuations unduly used,
whereby the small Pox are struck in, must be removed by Cordials, and an
agreeable Regimen; but they must not be continued after the Symptoms are gone
off: The chief of these are a flatting of the Pustles, and a Looseness in the
distinct small Pox; for in the Flux a depression of the Pustles is natural; nor
is a Looseness dangerous in Children. In both these cases, a Cordial-potion made
of distilled Waters, Diascordium, liquid Laudanum, and the like, is proper, not
only to remove these Symptoms, but also at any time of the Disease, if the Sick
complain of a pain at the Heart, or of sickness. But to speak the truth,
Symptoms of this kind are very rare, compared with those which owe their
original to the other extreme, which is more fatal, though less blamed.

When the Patient is mending, and the Pustles are falling off, after he has
(...) Meat a few days, namely, about the 21st or 22d day, I think he ought to
be blooded, if the Disease has been violent; and, after Bleeding, he must be
purged three or four times.

But sometimes after the Sick has recovered of the Flux-Pox, and rises daily,
he has great swellings in his Legs; but they either go off of themselves, or
are easily cured after Bleeding and Purging, by the use of emollient and
discutient Herbs boiled in Milk, as Mallows, the leaves of Mullein, Elder,
Bays, with the flowers of Camomil and Melilot.

The distinct irregular small Pox of the years 1670, 1671 and 1672, differed
from the general distinct small Pox in the following things: First, the
Eruption was generally on the third day, and then in the process of the Disease
the Pustles did not arrive to a due bigness; and toward the end, when they
began to ripen, they seemed black.

Moreover, there was a salivation sometimes, though rarely, when there were
very few Pustles: But the flux-Pox differed in many things from the other
Flux-Pox; for they came out sometimes on the second, sometimes on the third
day, in the form of a redish Tumor covering the whole Face, and thicker than
an Erysipelas, and scarce any visible distance betwixt the Pustles, with a heap
of almost infinite, red, angry Pimples running into one, and disguising the
whole Body between the Pustles; especially in the Thighs appeared some little
Bladders very conspicuous like a burn, and distended with clear Water, which
flowed out plentifully, when the skin was broken, the Flesh underneath being
black like a Mortification. But this dreadful symptom seldom happened.

The Fever, and all other symptoms which either preceded or accompanied this
kind of small Pox were more violent than in other sorts of Pox, and had a
greater Inflammation. The free use of the white Decoction and Milk-water did a
great deal of good in this sort.

The Flux of the Courses, which happens often to Women when they have this
Disease, requires a free use of these Liquors, if they flow at an unusual time.

A Gentlewoman that had this black sort of Pox was seized with so large a Flux
of the Courses at an unusual time, that the Women about her thought she had
miscarried, and though this Symptom continued many days, yet I continually used
the Milk-water through the whole course of the Disease.

CHAP. CXIX. Of the Measles.
THIS Disease chiefly invades Infants, and all those that are together in the
same House. It begins with shaking and shivering, and with an inequality of
heat and cold, which mutually expel one another the first day; the second day
it ends in a perfect Fever with violent sickness, drowth and want of Appetite,
the Tongue is white but not dry, there is a tickling Cough with a heaviness of
the Head and Eyes accompanied with a perpetual drowsiness, and for the most
part a Humor distills from the Eyes and Nose, and this effusion of Tears is a
certain sign of the approaching Measles. To which this is to be added, no less
certain, that though this Disease shows it self most commonly in the Face after
the manner of little swellings in the skin, yet in the Breast rather red spots
than swellings are perceived, arising no higher than the superficies of the
skin; the Patient sneezes as if he had taken cold, and the Eyelids swell a
little before the Eruption; he vomits, but is oftener troubled with a Looseness
with greenish Stools: But this chiefly happens to Children that are breeding
their Teeth, and they are frowarder in this Disease than they are wont to be
for the most part; the symptoms increase till the fourth day, at which time
generally, (though sometimes they are deferred) little red spots like Fleabites
begin to come out about the Forehead and other parts of the Face, and being
increased in number and magnitude branch into one another, and so paint the
Face with large red spots of various Figures, which are occasioned by little
red Wheals, not far distant one from another, that are elevated a little above
the superficies of the skin, and their Protuberances may be perceived by a
gentle touch, though they can scarce be seen. These spots spread themselves by
degrees from the Face, which at first they only possessed to the Breast, Belly,
Thighs and Legs: But they affect the Trunk and Members with redness only,
without any sensible inequality of the Skin. The symptoms of the Measles do not
abate by the Eruption, as in the small Pox, yet I never observed the Vomiting
afterward; but the Cough and Fever increase, with the difficulty of Breathing,
weakness of the Eyes, and the defluxion on them, with perpetual drowziness and
want of Appetite, continuing the same as before. On the 6th day, or
thereabouts, the Skin breaking, and the Pustles drying off, the Forehead and
Face grow rough, and at that time the spots in other parts of the Body are very
large and very read. About the 8th day, the spots in the Face vanish, and are
scarce perceived in the rest of the Body: But on the 9th day they totally
disappear, and as we said the Measles most commonly vanish on the 8th day, at
which time the Vulgar, being deceived by reckoning upon the time the small Pox
use to last, affirm, They are struck in, though really they have finished their
course, and they think that these symptoms which come upon their going off are
occasioned by their being struck in so soon: For it is to be noted, That the
Fever and difficulty of Breathing are increased at that time, and the Cough is
more vexatious, so that the Patient can neither sleep night nor day. Children
are chiefly subject to these ill symptoms, which appear now at the going off of
the Measles by reason of too hot a Regimen or hot Medicines that were used to
force them out; and by this means they are cast into a Peripneumonia, which
destroys more than the small Pox or any symptom belonging to it; and yet the
Measles are not at all dangerous if they are skilfully managed. And among the
rest of the ill symptoms, a Looseness often happens, which either presently
succeeds the Disease, or continues many Weeks after it and all its symptoms are
gone off, not without great danger to the Patient by reason of a continual loss
of Spirits; and sometimes after a very hot Regimen, the Measles are first livid
and afterward black; but this only happens to grown People, and they are
utterly lost when the blackness first appears, unless they are presently
relieved by bleeding and a more temperate Regimen.

As the Measles are much of the same nature with the small Pox, so is the
method of Cure much the same. Hot Medicines and a hot Regimen are very
dangerous, how frequently soever they are used by ignorant Nurses to drive the
Disease from the Heart. This method, above others, has been most successful in
my practice, viz. That the Patient be kept in his Bed only two or three days
after the Eruption, that the blood may gently breath out, according to its own
genius, through the Pores of the Skin, the inflamed Particles, which offend it;
and that he have no more Clothes nor Fire than he is wont to have when he is
well: I forbid all Flesh, and allow him Oatmeal and Barly-broaths, and the
like, and sometimes a roasted Apple; his Drink must be either small Beer, or
Milk boiled with treble the quantity of Water. I oftentimes mitigated the
Cough, which almost continually accompanies this Disease, with a draught of
some pectoral Decoction, or with a Linctus fitted for the purpose; but above
all the rest, I took care to give Diacodium every night through the whole
course of this Disease. For Example,

Take of the pectoral Decoction, one pint and an half, of syrup of Violets and
Maidenhair, each one ounce and an half; mingle them and make an Apozem, take
three or four ounces three or four times a day.

Take of Oil of sweet Almonds, two ounces, of syrup of Violets and Maidenhair,
each one ounce, of white Sugercandy, a sufficient quantity; mingle them and
make a Linctus, of which let the Sick lick often, especially when his Cough
troubles him.

Take of black Cherry-water, three ounces, of Diacodium, one ounce; mingle them
for a draught to be taken every night. But if the Patient be an Infant, the
dose of the Pectorals and of the Narcotick is to be lessened with respect to
the Age.

But if by means of too hot Cordials and too hot a Regimen, the Patient be in
danger of his Life after the Measles go off, which is very frequent by the
violence of the Fever and the difficulty of breathing, and other Accidents that
use to afflict those that have a Peripneumonia, I have bled the smallest
Infants in the Arm, and have taken away that quantity of Blood which their Age
and Strength indicated, with very great success; and sometimes when the Disease
has been obstinate, I have repeated bleeding: The Looseness also which follows
the Measles, is also cured by bleeding.

What we have now said of the Cure of those symptoms that come upon the going
off of the Measles, may be sometimes also of use when they are at their height,
if they are occasioned by a false and artificial heat.

I was called to visit a Maidservant that had this Disease, together with a
Fever, difficulty of Breathing, and purple spots all over her Body, with very
many other dangerous symptoms; all which I attributed to the hot Regimen and
hot Medicines, which were too much used. I ordered her to be bled in the Arm,
and I prescribed a cooling pectoral Ptisan to be taken often; by the help of
which, and a temperate Regimen, the purple Spots, and all the other symptoms
vanished by degrees.

CHAP. CXX. Of a continual Fever.
FIRST, I observe, That the inordinate commotion of the Blood, the Cause or
Companion of this Fever, is stirred up by Nature, either that some
heterogenious Matter contained in it, and inimical to it, should be excluded,
or that the Blood should be changed into some new disposition.

I reckon that the true and natural Indications that arise in this Disease
show, That the commotion of the Blood must be kept to that degree, which is
agreeable to Nature's purpose, that it does not rise too high on the one hand,
from whence great symptoms flow, nor be depressed too low on the other, by
which means the protrusion of the morbisick Matter may be hindered, or the
endeavors of the Blood affecting a new Condition frustrated; so that whither
the Fever takes its rise from heterogeneous Matter provoking it, or from the
Blood affecting a new State, in either case the Indication is the same. These
things being premised, I institute the method of Cure in the following manner.

When I am called to Patients, whose Blood of it self is weak, as it is most
times in Children, or when it wants Spirits, as in old Age, and in young Men
weakened by long Diseases, I forbear bleeding; for if I should bleed such, their
Blood being already too weak, it would be rendered altogether unfit to perform
the business of Despumation.

But when I have to do with those whose Blood is of a contrary Nature, such as
is wont to be in young Men of a robust Constitution, and sanguine Complexion; I
order Bleeding in the first place, which cannot be omitted here without hazard;
beside, in some other cases to be mentioned hereafter; for otherwise not only
Phrensies, Pleurisies and suchlike Inflammations may be feared, but also by
reason of the superfluity, a Stagnation of the whole Mass.

As to the quantity, I only take away so much Blood as I conceive will free the
Sick from such dangers he is obnoxious to by the immoderate commotion of the
same; furthermore, I regulate the Estuation by repeating Bleeding, or omitting
it, by using or forbidding the use of hot Cordials, and lastly by keeping the
Body loose, or stopping it, as I perceive the commotion is high or low.

After Bleeding, if it be necessary, according to the cases abovementioned, I
diligently enquire whether the Patient was inclined to Nauseousness at the
beginning of the Fever, and if so, I presently prescribe a Vomit, unless the
tender Age, or some great Weakness of the sick forbid it: Truly a Vomit is so
necessary when an inclination to Vomiting has preceded, that unless that Humor
be expelled, it will occasion many difficult Symptoms, that will hinder the
Physician in performing the Cure, and will very much endanger the Patient; a
Looseness is the chief and most usual of these, which most commonly follows in
the declination of the Fever, as often as Vomits are Indicated. The Vomit I
frequently use is this following.

Take of the infusion of Crocus Mettalorum six Drachms, of Oxymel of Squills,
and compound Syrup of Scabious, each half an ounce, mingle them, make a Vomit,
which I order to be taken in the Afternoon, two hours after a light Dinner.

And that the Vomit may succeed the better, I appoint six or eight pints of
Posset Drink to be provided, for these Medicines are dangerous, if they are not
washed off; and therefore as often as the Patient Vomits or goes to Stool, he
must presently take a draught of it, by which means the Gripes will be
prevented, and he will vomit easier.

It is to be Noted, that if the condition of the Patient requires Bleeding and
Vomiting, it is safest to bleed first, for otherwise, whilst the Vessels are
distened with Blood, there is great danger, lest by violent straining to Vomit,
the Vessels of the Lungs should be broken and the Brain hurt, and so the
Patient may die Apoplectick, of which I could produce some Examples, if I
thought it convenient; let it suffice that I warn you to use great caution in
this case.

If any one should ask, at what time of the Fever I would give a Vomit, I say
at the very beginning, if I had my choice; for by this means, the Sick may be
defended from those horrid symptoms that take their rise from the filth of
those Humors that lurk in the Stomach and Neighboring Parts, and perhaps we
may crush the Disease in its beginning.

But if we are called in late, as we are often, so that we cannot assist the
Patient at the beginning of the Fever by prescribing a Vomit, yet I have
thought it proper to order one at any time of the Disease, provided the Patient
has strength enough to bear the operation of it: I have given a Vomit on the
twelfth day, and I should not doubt to prescribe one later, unless the weakness
of the Patient forbids.

The Evening after taking the Vomit, I always endeavor to quiet the tumult
raised in the Humors by the Vomit, and therefore I prescribe an Anodyne to be
taken at Bedtime, for Instance,

Take of Erratick Poppy two Ounces, of Aqua-Mirabilis two drachms, of Syrup of
white and red Poppies, each half an ounce, mingle them, make a Draught.

But if there be no fear of raising the ebullition for the future, either by
reason of a great loss of Blood, or by frequent Vomiting and Stools, or by a
present apurexy, or debility of the Fever, or its declining State, I boldly
order a large Dose of Diascordium, either by it self, or mixed with some
Cordial-water, instead of the Anodyne above-described, and it is indeed an
excellent Medicine, if it be given in a due quantity.

And now before I leave off discoursing of Vomits, I must acquaint you, that it
is by no means safe, at least in this Fever, to give Vomits of the infusion of
Crocus Metallorum to Children, or to any under Fourteen, no, not in the least
quantity.

The Fatigue of Vomiting being over, I further consider with my self, whether
notwithstanding the preceding Evacuations, the Blood continues yet to rage so
much, that it is still necessary to restrain its effervescence, or whether it
be so very languid that it wants to be heightened, or lastly whether the
Fermentation being reduced to a due degree, may be left to it self, without
danger to the Patient.

First therefore if the Blood ferments so violently, that we may reasonably
suspect that the Patient is either obnoxious to a Frenzy, or any other
troublesome Symptom, proceeding from too great an ebullition of the Blood; the
day after taking of the Vomit, I prescribe a Glister. For Instance,

Take of the common Decoction for a Glister one pint, of Syrup of Violets and
Brown Sugar, each two ounces; mingle them, make a Glister.

And I order it should be repeated upon occasion; by which it often happens
that the Blood being somewhat ventilated and cooled, its effervescence is
sufficiently bridled: But sometimes it is necessary to repeat Bleeding once and
again, viz. In those of a very Sanguine Complexion, and in the flower of their
Age, or in others who have imprinted on their Blood a certain inflammatory
disposition, by the too frequent use of Wine: But for the most part there is no
need of so great a remedy as is repeated Bleeding; and except in the cases
abovementioned, the effervescence may be sufficiently suppressed by the help
of Glisters; wherefore, if the Blood ferment too much, I order a Glister to be
injected every day, or every other day, as the case requires, and that it he
done to the tenth day of the Disease, or thereabouts; but if much Blood has
been taken away, or the Patient is Aged, I order no Glisters at that time,
though the Blood be very hot; for in these cases as there is no fear that by
the omission of Glisters, the ebullition begun should proceed so far as that
there should be eminent danger from some violent Symptom; so it is most
certain, that by the use of them, the Strength, and as I may say, the Tone of
the Blood, is so much relaxed, that especially in old Men, (for Glisters are
not used with so good Success in old Men as in young) Nature is obstructed in
her business.

But whether Bleeding has been used or omitted, if the effervescence be too
languid, and wants to be stirred up; in this case we must wholly abstain from
the use of Glisters, even before the tenth day, and much rather if it be past,
for to what purpose should we endeavor to suppress the fermentation that is
too weak already?

As to Cordials, I have found by experience, that the too early use of them has
been very injurious, viz. (Bleeding having not been first used) there is danger
lest the crude Matter should fall upon the Membranes of the Brain, or the like,
or on the Pleura; and therefore I always take care that Cordials be not given,
when no Blood, or but very little has been taken away, and there has been no
other considerable Evacuation, or when the Patient has not passed the flower of
his Age. But if the Patient be weakened by profuse Evacuations, I use to give
Cordials even at the beginning of the Fever; but on the twelfth day of the
Disease, things then tending to Secretion, I suppose we ought freely to indulge
the use of hotter Medicines, and indeed a little sooner, if there be no danger
of driving the febrile Matter upon the principal Parts.

If the Fermentation proceed well, the Despumation will be finished about the
Fourteenth day. But if you use Coolers too late, and so by their means suppress
the effervescence, it is not strange if the Fever continue to the Twenty first
day, and much longer in feeble Bodies ill managed.

The Cordials I prescribe are such as those, which I will mention by and by;
those that are more moderate, I use at the beginning of the Disease, when the
heat is very violent, always proceeding gradually to the use of hotter,
according to the progress of the Disease, and the degrees of ebullition, always
remembering that it is lawful if much Blood has been taken away, or if the
Patient be Aged, to administer stronger Cordials than when bleeding has not
preceded, or when the Patint was in the flower of his Age.

Those Cordials I call Moderate, are made of Distilled Waters. For instance, of
Borrage, Citron, Strawberries, Treacle, compound Scordium-water, mingled with
the Syrup of Baum of Fernelius, of Gilliflowers, of juice of Citron and the
like; but the Stronger of Gascoin's Powder, Bezoar, Confection of Hyacinth,
Venice Treacle and the like. These which follow are frequently used.

Take of the Waters of Borrage, Citron, compound Scordium, Black-cherries, each
two ounces, Cinamon-wawater hordeated one ounce, Pearls prepared two drachms,
of Christaline Sugar a sufficient quantity; mingle them, take four spoonfuls
often in a day.

Take of the Waters of the whole Citron and of Strawberries, each three ounces,
of the cold Cordial-water of Saxony, one ounce, of Treacle-water, and of the
Syrups of Baulm of Fernelius, of Gilliflowers, and of the juice of Citron, each
half an ounce; mingle them, and make a Julep, of which take often.

Take of Gascoin's Powder, of oriental and occidental Bezoar-stone, of each one
scruple, one leaf of Gold; mix them and make a fine Powder. Take to the
quantity of twelve grains when there is occasion, in the Syrup of the juice of
Citron, and of Gilliflowers, each two drachms, drinking upon it a few spoonfuls
of the Julep prescribed.

Take of Treacle-water four ounces, of the Seeds of Citron two drachms; beat
them together and make an Emulsion; add to the strained Liquor a sufficient
quantity of Pearl-sugar, to make it grateful to the Taste. Take two spoonfuls
three times in a day.

But if the Fermentation be neither too high nor too low, I leave it in that
state, and use no Remedies unless I am forced to do something by the
importunity of the Sick, or his Friends about him, that may please them without
obstructing my design.

And now I must tell you, that when I was called to a poor Body, who was not
able to be at the charge of going through a long course of Physic, I did
nothing else, after Bleeding and Purging was over, if they were indicated, but
order them to keep their Beds all the time of their Sickness, and to drink
Oatmeal and Barly-broath, and the like, and that they should drink Small-beer
warm, moderately, to quench their Thirst. I took care that they should have a
Glister of Milk and Sugar every day, till the Tenth or Eleventh day, and
toward the end of the Fever, separation being now begun, if it were slow, I
permitted them now and then stronger drink to help it instead of a Cordial. And
so without any more ado, except that I used to give a gentle Purge at the end
of the Disease, I cured them.

If the Patient be very weak, or if there be not a perfect Despumation, so that
I cannot boldly give a Purge on the Fifteenth day, I defer it to the
Seventeenth, at which time I give the following, or the like, according to the
strength of the Patient.

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce, of Senna two drachms, of Rhubarb one dram
and an half; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water; to three ounces of
the strained Liquor, add Syrup of Roses solutive and Manna, each one ounce;
mingle them and make a Potion.

Purging being over, I order the Patient to rise, who has been hitherto kept in
Bed by my prescription, and to return gradually to his accustomed Diet.

It happens often, especially in old Men, that the Patient, though the Fever be
cured and the Body sufficiently purged, is notwithstanding very weak, and
sometimes expectorats by Cough, and sometimes also hauks up a great quantity of
clammy Phlegm, which Symptom does not only affrighten the Patient, but also
imposes upon the Physician, especially if he be unwary, and induces him to
believe, that this will make way for a Consumption, though I have observed that
this is not so very dangerous. In this case I order the Patient to drink Old
Malago, or Muskadine with a Toast, which takes off this Symptom in the space of
a few days, as I have often Experienced.

If the fermentation proceed well, there will be a perfect despumation of the
morbifick Matter within the time aforesaid; but if cooling Remedies or Glisters
have been given too late, the Fever will continue much longer, especially in
very ancient Men, ill managed by the Physician. I have been sometimes called to
such after they have labored under a Fever forty days or more, and have tried
all things to induce despumation of the Blood; but it was so much weakened,
partly by old Age, and partly by Glisters and cooling Medicines, that I could
not attain my end, either by Cordials, or any other corroborating Medicines,
but either their Fever stood its ground, or if otherwise it seemed to cease,
the Patient's strength was very low, and in a manner gone.

But other Remedies being unsuccessfully used, I have been often forced to take
this course, and indeed with very good Success, viz. I have applied the brisk
heat of young People to the Sick; neither is there any reason why any one
should much wonder, that the Patient is so mightily strengthened and weak Nature
relieved by this method, though it be unusual, as that it can deliver it self
from the relics of the Matter to be eliminated; seeing it is easy to conceive
a transfusion of a great quantity of vigorous Es^luvia from the sound and
strong Body into the withered one of the Sick. Nor have I ever found, that the
repeated application of hot Clothes could at all do that which the now
mentioned method has performed, where both the heat applied is more agreeable
to the human Body, and gentle, moist, equal and lasting: And though this way of
emitting balsamic Spirits into the Body of the Patient may seem absurd, yet it
has been used by others with happy success. Nor truly am I ashamed to mention
this Remedy, though perhaps some impertinent Men, superstitiously contemning
all things Vulgar, may ridicule me for it; for I think the health and good of
my Neighbor is very much to be preferred before their vain Opinions.

He that prudently and with due consideration has observed ^he method hitherto
delivered, will free the Patient, if not from all, yet at least from most of
these Symptoms, which are either wont to accompany this Fever, or to come after
it. But forasmuch as such accidents often happen, either because the Sick
neglected to call the Phisician in time, or by reason of the unskilfulness or
carelessness of the Physician, I think it not amiss to treat briefly of their
particular Cure, but will confine my self to those Symptoms that require a
different Cure proper to themselves.

And to begin with a Frenzy; if the Sick either upon the account of taking
hot Medicines unseasonably, or by being naturally of too hot a Constitution,
becomes Lightheaded; or which is next to it, if he does not sleep at all; if
he looks and talks fiercely; if he rakes Medicines and common drink greedily,
and as it were snatches it, and lastly has a suppression of Urine; in this case
I say, I bleed more freely than before, and use Glisters and cooling Medicines
oftener, especially in the Spring. And though this Symptom does not appear in
young People, and in those whose Blood is brisk, they admit of these Remedies
without much hazard, and by the use of such Remedies I endeavor to keep up the
Patient till the Disease has lasted a while, and then it is not difficult to
free him at once of the Symptom and the Disease too; and this may be done by
giving some Narcotick Medicine in a large Dose; for though when the Fever is at
the height, those things that are of a narcotick quality, do no good nor answer
the Physician's end; yet being given seasonably at the declination of the
Disease, are very beneficial. But if the use of a Narcotick be deferred till
the 14th. day, it will do the better. The Narcoticks which I am wont to use,
are either London Laudanum, from one Grain, to one Grain and an half, or the
following.

Take of Cowslip-flowers, one handful, boil them in a sufficient quantity of
black Cherry-water, mix half an ounce of Diacodium and half a spoonful of the
juice of Lemons, with three ounces of the strained Liquor. Or,

Take of black Cherry-water, one ounce and an half, epidemick Water, two
drachms, liquid Laudanum, sixteen drops, syrup of Gillyflowers, one dram;
mingle them.

I will only add this, which I think worth observation, to wit, That if this
symptom will grant a Truce so long, and the Fever continues a long space, so
that the Patient may be safely purged before the taking of the Anodyne, it will
prove more effectual; wherefore, I used to order two scruples of the Pill Coch.
Major dissolved in Bettony-water ten or twelve hours before the taking of the
Narcotick; nor is there any danger from the Tumult which that hot Pill would
otherwise occasion; for the virtue of the following Narcotick will appease
these Commotions, and establish most gentle and sweet Peace.

But if the Watchings continue after the Fever is gone off, all the other
symptoms being likewise ceased, I have observed that a Rag dipped in Rose Water,
and applied cold to the forepart of the Head and Temples is more beneficial
than any Narcotick whatever.

It often happens that the Sick is vexed with a Cough through the whole course
of the Disease; it is first dry, because the Matter being yet thin frustrates
the expulsive Faculty, but it soon grows thick, and is difficulty expectorated,
because by degrees it is baked by the febrile heat; and hence it comes to pass,
that the Patient is discouraged by fear of choking, because he wants Strength
to cough off this viscid Matter. In this case, I rarely use any other Medicine
than Oil of sweet Almonds fresh drawn, unless it happens (and sometimes it is
so) that the Patient has wholly an aversion to Oil, and then we must use the
common Pectorals: But I think Oil of Almonds, if the Patient can bear it, is to
be preferred before other Pectorals for this Reason chiefly, for that is
necessary, they are given in a larger quantity, if we would do any thing to the
purpose, and by this means we overcharge the Stomach, which was too weak before
and inclined to be nauseous; and sometimes also, we are hindered upon the same
account, so that we cannot mind those things which are to be dispatched at the
same time. Nor can I understand nor learn by experience, why we should abstain
from the use of this Oil (which we have now mentioned) in Fevers, because it is
inflammable, and therefore to be feared lest it should increase the Fever; for
suppose it naturally hot, yet certainly its heat is not so great, but that the
advantage of it on another account may compensate for it; for it is manifestly
more pectoral than other things, and opens and lubricates the Passages, and
promotes Expectoration, by which especially if it happens to be large, the
Blood is both freed from a troublesome Humor now conveniently evacuated, and
also somewhat cooled; and, therefore, I am not much concerned, when I perceive
this Symptom: But the Oil must be given frequently, a little at a time.

Sometimes the Hickops happen, but most commonly to old Men, after large
Evacuations, either by Looseness, or especially by Vomiting. In this case a
large dose of Diascordium, viz. two drachms, has done the business, when I
could do no good with the seeds of Dill, and other things that are cried up as
Specificks.

If in the course of this Disease a Looseness arise, which uses to happen when a
Vomit was indicated at the beginning of the Disease, and was not taken: In this
case a Vomit may be given at any time of the Disease, if the Strength does not
contraindicate, though the inclination to Vomiting be long since past. But if a
Looseness comes, though a Vomit has been given, I have found the following Glister
more beneficial than any other Astringent whatever.

Take of the bark of Pomgranats, half an ounce, of red Roses, two pugils; boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Cows Milk, dissolve half an ounce of
Diascordium in half a pound of the strained Liquor; mingle them, make a
Glister.

I would not advise that a Glister should be injected in a greater quantity;
for though it may be naturally Astringent, yet there is danger lest it should
weary the Intestines by its b^^^, and so provoke the Flux more.

CHAP. CXXI. Of the Scarlet Fever.
THE Scarlet Fever, though it may happen at any time, yet most commonly it comes
at the latter end of Summer, and seizes whole Families, especially Children:
They shake and shiver at the beginning as in other Fevers, but they are not
very sick; afterward the Skin is covered with smali red Spots, but they are
more, and much bigger and redder, and not so uniform, as in the Measles. These
Spots continue two or three days; when they vanish and go off, Scales of Skin,
like Bran, cover the whole Body.

This Disease seems to me to be nothing else than a moderate Effervescence of
the Blood occasioned by the foregoing Summer, or something else; and,
therefore, I do nothing that the Blood may not be hindered in its despumation
and injecting the peccant Matter through the pores of the Skin; only I order,
That the Sick should abstain wholly from Flesh, and from all spirituous
Liquors, and that he should not go out, nor contine himself perpetually to his
Bed: But after all the Scales are fallen, and the Symptoms cease, I think it is
proper to purge the Sick with some gentle Medicine agreeable to his Age and
Strength; and by this simple and natural method, this name of a Disease, for it
is scarce any thing else, is easily removed without trouble or danger; whereas,
on the contrary, if we are over officious, by confining the sick to his Bed
continually, and by giving Cordials and other Medicines unnecessarly, the
Disease is increased, and the Patient killed secundum artem.

CHAP. CXXII. Of Childrens Fevers.
THE first Indication in curing Childrens Fevers, is, to prepare well the acid,
that it may be the easier ejected: But this preparation must not be endeavored
by Sudorificks, properly so called, that is, such as heat the Body, which are
by no means to be used for Infants or Children; but such things as absorbe the
acid, and gently restrain the Ebullition, are to be used; the chief of these
are Crab's Eyes and Claws, Oister-shells, Cuttle-bone, Egg-shells, Coral,
Chalk, Coralline, Pearl, Mother of Pearl, both the Bezoar stones, Hartshorn
burnt, burnt Ivory, the bone of a Stag's heart, shavings of Hartshorn,
Bole-armenick, sealed Earth, Boodstone, and the like; and among Compounds,
compound Powder of Crab's Claws, the Goa-stone, and Confection of Hyacinth.

Being called to an Infant of a year old troubled with a Fever or the Gripes,
as they frequently are, I used to relieve them with the following Prescriptions,

Take of the compound Powder of Crab's Claws, and of Pearl prepared, each one
dram; mingle them, make a Powder to be divided into six equal parts. Or,

Take of Oriental Bezoar, prepared Pearl, and Crab's Eyes prepared, each half a
dram, of the species of the confection of Hyacinth, one scruple; make a
Powder to be divided as before. Or,

Take of the simple Powder of Crab's Claws, one dram, of Crab's Eyes
prepared, two scruples, of Cochinel, six grains; mix them, make a fine Powder
to be divided into six Papers; let one be taken as soon as may be, and another
two hours after, and afterward let one be taken every fourth hour for the
first two days, unless the Child be asleep: But let the Powders be taken in a
spoonful of the following Julep, and give a spoonful presently after.

Take of the Aqua lactis alexiteria, four ounces, of black Cherry-water, two
ounces, of compound Peony and epidemick Water, each two drachms, of pearled
Sugar, half an ounce; mingle them, make a Julep. Or,

Take of Pennyroyal-water and Aqua lactis alexiteria, each three ounces, of
syrup of Gillyflowers, 6 drachms, mingle them Or,

Take of sweet Almonds blanched, number ten; beat them in a marble Mortar, and
pour upon them gently half a pint of Barley-water, or of Aqua lactis
alexiteria; strain it, and add six drachms of small Cinnamon Water, half an
ounce of white Sugar; mingle them, make a Julep.

Sometimes I am wont to use, other things being omitted, a Julep that has much
Pearl in it, but I order that the Glass should be well shook, before it be
poured out.

Take of black Cherry-water, four ounces, of all the Citron, two ounces, of
Aqua mirabilis and prepared Pearls, each two drachms, of white Sugar, half an
ounce; mingle them, make a Pearl-julep; give three spoonfuls at a time.

But if the Child be troubled with the Cough, give half a spoonful of some
pectoral Mixture or Linctus, and let him take less of the Powders
above-prescribed.

Take of the Powder of Coralline and simple Crab's-claws, each one dram and
an half, of the syrups of Maidenhair and Marshmallows, each one ounce, of
balsam of Tolu, half an ounce, of red Poppy-water, half an ounce; mingle them,

Bole Armenick is often properly mixed with such things to good purpose, it
powerfully stops Catarrhs flowing upon the Lungs; the juice of Pennyroyal
heated and sweetened with Sugarcandy, is also better than most other Remedies;
Oil of sweet Almonds is also very good, if Children can take it; so is
Brimstone, and the Flowers of it.

The foresaid Powders are to be repeated, seldom or often, according to the
degree of the Symptoms; but it is here to be noted, that the Gripes,
Restlessness and the Watchings of Children are as easily appeased by testaceous
Powders, as pains and watchings by Narcoticks in grown People.

The third day, unless the small Pox, Measles or a Scarlet Fever appear, I
order a Child of one year old to be purged in the following manner.

Take of syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, two drachms, of choice Rhubarb
powdered, fifteen grains or a scruple, of the Aqua lactis alexiteria, one
dram, of small Cinnamon Water, thirty drops, mingle them. Or,

Take of syrup of Buckthorn, one dram and an half or two drachms, of the
Powder called Diasenna, eight grains; mingle them.

Take of the Earl of Warwick's Powder, which is also called Pulvis Cornachinus,
described in the last Edition of the London Dispensatory, six grains; let it be
taken in a spoonful of black Cherry-water, sweetened with a little Sugar.

Take of sweet Almonds blanched, number three; beat them in a marble Mortar,
and pour upon them gently an ounce or an ounce and an half of Barley-water, or
any other simple Water; in the strained Liquor, dissolve three drachms, or half
an ounce of the best Manna; mingle them, make a purging Emulsion.

Take of Lenitive Electuary, two or three drachms, and dissolve it in an ounce
of the Aqua lactis alexiteria.

Sometimes I order this or the like Plaster to be applied to the region of the
Navel, especially, if they are troubled with Worms.

Take of Succotrine Aloes, one dram, of the Powder of the leaves of Savin, of
the tops of the lesser Centaury, and of the flowers of Camomil, each one
scruple, with a sufficient quantity of Venice-turpentine; make a Plaster, let
the margin of it be spread with the Plaster of Cummin, to make it stick the
better; and sometimes it may be convenient to add to the other Ingredients, a
scruple of Coloquintida.

There is no purging Medicine more proper for Children and more innocent than
Rhubarb; it gently and safely evacuates the Matter occasioning their Fever, and
it gently purges off the Humors that burden the Stomach and whole Body, and it
strengthens; wherefore, it is very proper for Infants, Children, big-bellied
Women, old Men, and such as have been weakened by Diseases.

After the Purge has done working, some Powder like the former must be given
in the Evening, and afterward must be repeated three or four times in a day at
fit times, for two days, and on the third day Purging must be used, and it must
be dosed according to the operation of the former.

These things being performed, the worst Symptoms most commonly cease, or at
least are much abated.

It is to be noted, That the first Purge we give to Children that have Fevers,
must not be only Lenitive, but the Dose of it must be less than otherwise it
ought to be; and the night before Purging, a gentle Glister, made of four
ounces of Cow's Milk, Sugar and a little Salt, must be injected, if the Belly
be bound.

Moreover, to quicken the Purge, a scruple or two of Cream of Tartar may be
dissolved in some spoonfuls of Water-grewel or the like, and so given.

As to bleeding of Children, though it may be used, when the febrile Matter is
cast upon the Lungs, or in a hooping Cough, yet it is plain that it is a Remedy
not agreeable to their Nature.

A Child about three years and an half old, was seized with a small Fever that
was continual, and accompanied with Exacerbations that were very irregular; she
complained of a great pain in the Head especially, and sometimes of the Belly,
she nauseated all Meat, and was very sleepy, so that the Standers by thought
she would have the small Pox; there was a twitching of the Nerves in sleep, and
she had sometimes a dry Cough; I prescribed the following things.

Take of the Aqua lactis alexiteria, six ounces, of Epidemick water, half an
ounce, of prepared Pearl, one dram, of the simple Powder of Crab's Claws, two
drachms, of Cristaline Sugar, half an ounce; mingle them, make a Julep, whereof
let her take three spoonfuls every fourth hour, shaking the Glass well before
using it.

Take of Succotrine Aloes, one dram, of the tops of the lesser Centaury, of
the leaves of Savin dried, each half a dram, of Burgundy-pitch, one dram,
of Venice-Turpentine, a sufficient quantity, make a Plaster to be applied to
the Navel.

The next day she persisted in the use of the Julep, and a blistering Plaster
was applied to the Neck; a Glister made of six ounces of Milk, with Sugar and
Salt was injected, because the Belly was bound.

Take of Aethiops mineralis, and of Mercurius dulcis, each six grains, of
Marmalade of Quinces, two scruples; make a Bolus, to be taken at Bedtime.

The next Morning, she took the following Cathartick syrup.

Take of syrup of Buckthorn, two drachms, of the Earl of Warwick's Powder, six
grains, of choice Rhubarb powdered, twelve grains, of Tincture of Saffron
twenty drops, of black Cherry-water, one dram; mingle them.

Half a dram of Cream of Tartar was given in a draught of Posset Drink to
quicken the Purge; the same night, at Bedtime, four spoonfuls of the foresaid
Julep were given. On the fourth and fifth days, the following mixture was given
by spoonfuls.

Take of Coraline, two drachms, of the leaves of Mint dried and powdered, one
scruple, of the simple Powder of Crab's Claws, one dram, of balsamic syrup
and of the syrup of Marshmallows, each one ounce, of Orange-water, half an
ounce; mingle them.

The Evening preceding the sixth day, the Bolus before-prescribed was repeated,
and the Morning following the purging Syrup, by the virtue whereof the Child
vomited up a Worm a span long, and soon ^^^erwards was well.

CHAP. CXXIII. Of Agues.
AS to the Cure, I have for many years taken notice how dangerous it is to
endeavor to cure by Sudorificks, in Tertians and Quotidians, when they are
new, and have not yet formed themselves, being at present like continual
Fevers: For though it is well known, that upon Sweating, the restlesness and
other symptoms presently vanish; yet if Sweat be forced too much, the Fever
will be made continual, and the Life of the Sick will be endangered. Having
therefore considered how ineffectual this method is, and the inconveniency of
other Evacuations by Bleeding and Purging, I suppose the Peruvian Bark would do
best; and I can truly affirm, notwithstanding the prejudice of the common
People, and of a few Learned Men, I never perceived any injury by the use of
it, nor can imagine any; only they that have used it a long while, sometimes
fall into a scorbutic Rheumatism; but this seldom happens upon this occasion,
and when it does, it is easily cured by the Remedies proposed for it in the
Chapter of a Rheumatism.

Being called to a Patient of a Quartan Ague, for instance, on a Monday, I do
nothing if the Fit be to come that day, only I give the Sick hopes that he may
be freed from the next Fit; and therefore on the two well days, namely, Tuesday
and Wednesday, I give the Bark in the following manner.

Take of the Peruvian Bark finely powdered, one ounce, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Gilliflowers, or of dried Roses, make ad Electuary to be
divided into twelve parts, whereof let him take one every fourth hour,
beginning presently after the Fit, drinking upon it a draught of some Wine. Or
if he likes Pills better,

Take of the Peruvian Bark finely powdered, one ounce, with a sufficient
quantity of the Syrup of Gilliflowers, make Pills of a moderate bigness,
whereof let him take six every fourth Hour.

But an ounce of the Powder may be easier taken, and as successfully, mixed
with a quart of Claret Wine, eight or nine spoonfuls of it being taken every
fourth hour. On Friday when the Fit is feared, I give nothing, for most
commonly no Fit comes; but lest the Disease should return, eight days exactly
after the last Dose, I give the same quantity of Powder, viz. One Ounce divided
into twelve parts, according to the method abovementioned: But though most
commonly by giving the Powder after this manner, the Disease is commonly Cured;
yet to secure the Patient from a relapse, it is safe to repeat it three or four
times, at the same intervals, especially when the Blood has been weakened by
foregoing Evacuations, or by catching Cold.

But though this remedy has no purging quality, yet by reason of the peculiar
Constitution of some Bodies, it often happens, that the Sick is violently
purged by it; in this case it is necessary to give Laudanum with the Powder;
wherefore I give ten drops of Laudanum in Wine, after every other Dose, if the
Looseness continues.

I use the same method for Tertians and Quotidians; but Tertians and Quotidians
often are almost continual, and there is only a remission of those days they
should intermit, especially when the Sick has been confined to his Bed, and has
used too hot a Regimen, and Medicines: In this case I give the Powder, as soon
as I perceive any remission.

But there are some that cannot bear the Bark, neither in the form of a Powder,
nor of an Electuary, nor of Pills; for these I infuse in the cold two Ounces of
the Bark grossly powdered in a quart of Rhenish-wine, and four Ounces of the
Infusion standing some days, seem to contain the virtue of one Dram of the
Powder; and because it is neither unpleasant, nor oppresses the Stomach, it may
be taken as often again as any other form of this Remedy.

Sometimes it happens, that before this Disease is come to a regular Type, the
Sick cannot retain the Bark in any form, by reason of continual Vomiting; in
this case the Vomiting must be first stopped before the Bark can be given, to
which end I order, that six or eight times in the space of two hours, one
spoonful of the fresh juice of Limons be taken with a scruple of Salt of
Wormwood; afterward I give sixteen drops of liquid Laudanum in a spoonful of
strong Cinamon-water, and soon after, if the Vomitting stop, the Jesuits
Powder. For Infants, whose tender Age would scarce bear the taking of this
remedy in another form, at least so much of it as would cure the Disease; I use
to prescribe the following Julep,

Take of Black-cherry-water, and of Rhenish-wine, each two ounces, of the
Peruvian Bark finely powdered, three drachms, of the Syrup of Gilliflowers one
ounce, mingle them, make a Julep; let one or two spoonfuls of it be taken
according to the age, every fourth hour, till the Ague is cured. If there be a
Looseness, you must give a drop or two of liquid Laudanum with every other Dose.

As to the Diet, the Sick may eat any thing that agrees with his Stomach, only
he must avoid cold Liquors and Summer Fruits, and let him use Wine moderately
for his ordinary drink, by which alone I have cured some Patients that could
not be cured with the Jesuits Powder.

The Disease being taken off, the Sick must carefully avoid all evacuations,
for the gentlest Purge, yea, only a Glister of Milk and Sugar, will be apt to
cause a Relapse.

CHAP. CXXIV. Of the various Forms and Shapes of intermitting Fevers.
THese Fevers often resemble most other Diseases, and such as are most acute,
yet they yield to the Peruvian Bark, and if the Bark is not given, they often
become deadly. Sometimes they come with great Shivering and with violent
Vomiting, a Looseness with Gripes, the Cholera Morbus, the Colic of the
Stomach, a periodical Hemicrania, Apoplexy, fainting Rheumatism, general
Convulsions, Frenzy, Peripnumonia, and the like.

Mr. Amblar, dwelling at Mile-end, a Man of Fifty years of Age, that was lean
and sickly, was often before subject upon slight occasions, to an obstinate
Ague, accompanied with violent Symptoms, but in the Year, 1690, having taken a
great Cold, he was suddenly taken with Shaking and Shivering, which was
succeeded by an universal Chilness, during which, his Pulse could scarce be
felt; he was also violently afflicted with Vomiting, a Looseness, and with a
horrid oppression and Sickness: I visited him the next Morning, and found his
Face plainly Hippocratick; his whole Body was cold as clay, and a Dew upon it,
the Skin looked black, by reason of the congelation of the Blood, his strength
was almost spent by the perpetual Sickness, and the evacuation of diverse
colored Choler by Vomit, and stinking white Excrement by Stool, of the
consistence of a Cream; all things showed that Death was approaching, for the
vital principal, or the animal Spirits, was so oppressed by the Venom, that
there was no hope that they could expand themselves: But to blunt the malignant
acrimony of the Humors, I ordered that he should drink Chicken-broath
plentifully, and that it should be injected through a Syringe into the Anus, I
also ordered that the Stomach should be well fomented with Aromatic Bags made
hot, and a very cordial Bolus, with as much Laudanum in it as the strength of
the Patient would bear, was given with a draught of a Cordial, and
alexipharmick Julep, every fourth hour. After the third or fourth Bolus, I
perceived the Pulse was much stronger, and the blackness of the skin went off,
and heat returned to the extreme Parts, and the evacuations were something
suppressed, the colliquative Sweat was diminished, and he was more quiet, he
slept a little, and was not so sick after he waked. After this remission of the
Symptoms, I endeavored to remove the Venom, by giving the Jesuits Powder mixed
with Laudanum in the form of a Draught, every fourth hour, knowing well that
the Sick could not bear a second Fit; but before the third Dose of the Powder,
the Fit returned again unexpectedly, accompanied with the former dreadful
Symptoms, and the poor Man died within the space of twenty four Hours.

I was called to one Mrs. Baker, an ancient Woman dwelling in Fleet Street, I
found her oppressed with continual Sickness and Vomiting, and so she had been
for four days: She presently vomited up all she took; she fainted often, her
Pulse was quick and Weak; but her temper by reason of faintness and perpetual
sickness, was moderate, and in some sort cold, her Urine looked in a manner
well, she could not rest, and was almost delirious, but she complained only of
Nauseousness and Vomiting. Having enquired carefully about every thing, I was
told that this Woman had been sick six Weeks, that she was hot and cold by
turns, the periods were uncertain, and that she was troubed with a Nauseousness
and Vomiting frequently. After I had prescribed a Cordial, Bolus, and Julep,
and Chicken-broath for her ordinary Drink, I ordered a Julep made of Salt of
Wormwood and juice of Limons, to be taken by Spoonfuls, to comfort her
Stomach; afterward I ordered the Peruvian Bark should be given freely in the
form of a Draught and of a Tincture, adding twice or thrice a day ten or twelve
drops of liquid Laudanum, upon the account of the violence of the Vomiting, and
in a days time the Sickness and Vomiting were lessened, and critical white
Aphtha covered the whole Mouth, the Urine was very red, and other signs of the
expansion of the Spirits, and of the feverish heat were present, and soon after
a tertian Ague appeared in its proper form, the cold, heat and sweat succeeding
one another alternately, and after two Fits, the Sick was cured by the Bark.

CHAP. CXXV. Of Over-purging.
AS Purging Medicines are sometimes necessary to loosen the Belly, and to
evacuate ill Humors, so if the evacuation be immoderate, remedies must be used
to stop it.

To prevent it, consideration must be had of the Constitution and Strength of
the Patient, and of the Nature and Dose of the Medicine, and while the Medicine
is in operation, the Bowels and Blood and Spirits must be kept free from
disturbance; wherefore at this time, gross and viscous Meats must be avoided,
and much must not be eaten; Cold must be carefully avoided, and the mind must
be clear and free; and after the operation of the Medicine, the Animal Spirits
must be quieted, and the effervescence of the Blood, by giving an Anodyne.

Take of Cowslip Flower-water two ounces, of Cinnamon Water hordeated, and of
Diacodium, each half an ounce, of Pearls half a Scruple; make a Draught to be
taken at Bedtime.

But if Over-purging happens, the Patient must be presently put into a warm
Bed, and you must apply to his Belly a Plaster of Venice-Treacle, and he must
presently take inwardly a Bolus of Venice-Treacle and burnt Claret diluted with
Mint-water, often by Spoonfuls, and if he be much gripped, a Glister must be
injected, made of Milk and Venice-Treacle.

CHAP CXXVI. Of the French Pox.
THE French Pox came first from the West Indies into Europe, in the Year, 1493.
but a violent Gonorrhea showed it self first about an hundred years since. It
is propogated either by Generation, as when a Child is infected by the Parents,
or by touching of some soft part, as when a Child is Infected by sucking a
Diseased Nurse, or a Nurse by Suckling a Diseased Child, or by a Child's lying
in Bed with such as are Infected; but it chiefly comes by impure Coition: But
in sound and firm Constitutions impure Coition it self is not always sufficient
to Infect; for sometimes many lying with an infected Woman, some are infected
and others not, though they all equally deserve it. When a Man has to do with
an impure Woman, either he has a heat or inflammation of the Penis with
Exc^riation, or else he finds a heat in his Urine, and in a day, two or three,
a Gonorrhea, or virulent Matter issuing from the Privy parts; sometimes
Chancerous Ulcers, and when the Infection has been very violent, or the
Inflammation neglected, a Gangren, and christaline Bladders arise, and the part
Mortifies.

Sometimes there is no Gonorrhea, but instead of it a Bubo arises in the Groin,
which according to the degree of its Malignity, either proves easily curable,
or else improves its Venom, and terminates in a phagedenous Ulcer with jagged
Lips: There are also many vene^^l Ulcers upon the Scrotum and Perineum.

A Cancer is commonly attended with breaking out all over the Body like a
Flea-biting, which terminates in various sorts of ulcerous Scabs, or Tete^rs;
or it may be Pustles arise in one or more places of the Body, as Head, Face*
Arms, Thighs, or Legs, or Ulcers in the Throat; then wandering pains begin
toward night to affect the Shoulders, Arms, Legs, Head; and about this time
appear in the Fundament, Warts, and other kind of Proturbances; also about this
time Tumors arise in the Breast, Arms, Legs, and become Ulcers that are
difficultly Cured.

The pains growing more fixed, Nodes usually arise, and continually afflict
them, but toward night grow more intolerable.

Co-incident with several of these later degrees, are the noise in the Ears,
Deafness, a Polypus, Opthalmia, the Fis^ula, Lacrimalis, fierce Catarrhs,
Colic, Looseness and Consumption.

Authors, upon the entrance of the Pox into Christendom, generally looked upon
it as not only Incurable, but also so highly infectious, that they ran away
from it as much as the Jews did from the Leprosy; but later Ages and long
experience, have made it less formidable; yet even to this day, it must needs
be acknowledged difficult to Cure, in consideration of its malign and
contagious quality, and the ungovernable disposition of the Patients.

If the habit of the Body be strong, the cure of all the species of the Pox,
whether they be Chancer, Pustles, Tetters, or eating Ulcers, or Ulcers in the
Throat and Nose, are much easier cured, than the same are in many other
chronick Diseases; but to root out the malignity is somewhat more difficult.

If the Patient has been Clapped formerly, it will be more difficult to cure him
the second time, and worse the third.

If he has passed through long courses of Mercurial remedies ineffectually, his
Cure will be difficult; and if he has been Salivated by unction, and relapsed,
the Cure will be hard, by reason the Mercury is become familiar to him, and his
Body is for the most part wasted.

Nodes are more difficultly Cured than any of the Species above mentioned, and
those whose Bones are corrupted are yet more difficult to cure; but if the
habit of the Body be strong, and the Bowels sound, all the Species of this
Disease are curable, if the Patient keep his Chamber, and submit to the rules
of Physic and Diet; without which submission we can scarce cure the lesser
Species.

If the Bowels be unsound, or the Patient hectic, the Disease is incurable.

As to the Cure, though Bleeding does not take off the Disease, yet in the very
beginning of it we usually let Blood to quiet the fermentation of the humors,
and to dispose them for evacuation, and prescribe a Glister before or after.

If the Disease be of long continuance, and they have been let Blood some
Months before, yet if we design Salivation, we do again let them Blood, if the
Body be not too much wasted; for in some of those a Fever has happened in the
time of raising the Salivation, and in Bodies of a Strong habit I have often
seen them to break out in heat all over in the beginning of the Flux, so that
then I have been necessitated to let them Blood when it was not so proper: But
when there is a Bubo in the Groin, bleeding is not proper. But purging is more
Universally necessary.

Of Purges some are only lenitive, as Manna with Cream of Tartar in Whey or
Posset Drink, Tamarinds, Cassia, Senna, Rhubarb, lenitive Electuary and the
like. Stronger Purges are these that follow.

Take of the Leaves of Sena four ounces, of Gummy Turbith, Hermodactiles, each
two ounces, of black Helebore, and of the pulp of Coloquintida, each six
drachms, of the raspings of Guiacum, and Sassafras, each one ounce, of the Bark
of Guiacum, of the Berriei of Juniper, of the outward Peel of Citrons, each
half an ounce, of Cinnamon four Drachms; infuse them in equal parts of the
Water of Baulm, Meadow sweet, and Carduus Benedictus for forty eight hours;
then boil them gently, and press them out strongly; in the strained Liquor
dissolve too ounces and an half of Aloes, one ounoe of Diagrydium, evaporat
them to the form of an extract for use. The Dose is half a Dram or a Dram.

Take of Pil. Coch. min. A Scruple or half a Dram, Mercurius Dulcis twenty
Grains, make six Pills. Or

Take of the extract above mentioned, of Gum Guiacum half a Scruple, of
Mercurius Dulcis one Scruple, with Syrup of Buck-thorn make pills.

Vomiting is of use in great disorders of the Stomach, when the foulness of
that requires it, or when the Ulcers of some particular part require a sudden
revulsion; so likewise when after the use of much Mercury outward or inward to
Salivate, it does not rise kindly; they generally give strong Vomits if the
party can bear them, viz. some preparations of Mercury, as Turbith, Mineral,
and the like, or Crocus Metallorum: But in weaker constitutions, such as we may.

The next thing which offers it self to our consideration is Salivation,
without which few great Cures are done in this Disease.

The methods of Salivating are diverse, but all by Mercury. Inwardly are
prescribed various preparations of Mercury. When we design Salivation by
Mercurius dulcis, we give it from twenty to twenty five grains, and sometimes
to thirty, either in a spoonful of white Bread and Milk, or in conserve of red
Roses, or the like; when we suspect it may work by Stool, we prescribe it with
Diascordium or Venice-Treacle at Bed time. If after taking of it four or five
Days, their Chops do not swell, it may be reasonable to move it upward with a
few grains of Turbith Mineral; according as their Chops swell, they will
Salivat; if their Mouths be much ulcerated and swelled, the Salivation may last
eighteen or twenty Days, during which they are to be kept warm, especially
about their Head Neck and Chops, and to drink Chicken Broth or Posset Ale.

Arcanum Corallinum, as it is generaly sold in the Shops, may be given from
three grains to five, one Dose of it prescribed to a Woman Vomited her often,
and Salivated twenty Days.

Red Precipitat. is also Vomitive, but being well washed may be taken as safely
as the white Precipitat. White Precipitat may be given proportionably as has
been said of Mercurius dulcis. Turbith Mineral made of Vigo's Precipitat is
best, twelve or 18 grains of it may be taken at a time, but that which is sold
in the Shops is a rough Medicine, and must be given in a less quantity.

There is also a way of raising a Salivation by suffumigation, the prescription
whereof is as follows.

Take of Cinnabar two ounces, of Crude Mercury one ounce, of Mastich,
Frankincense, and Sandarach, each half an ounce, of Storax, Calamit, and
Benzoin, each three drachms; make a fine powder of all, and with Turpentine
make Troches, each weighing three drachms for use.

But when the Pox is grown inveterate and affects the most solid parts with
Node's, and the like, Salivation by unction must be used.

Take of Lard two ounces, of Crude Mercury one ounce, mix them well.

You must begin the unction in the following manner; the Patient must lodge in
a close warm Chamber; if the Season be cold, the Windows must be covered with
Blankets, and the Bed must be placed near the Fire, and encompassed with a
Skreen, if the Chamber be large; you ought also to have a strong healthy Nurse,
such as has been accustomed to the employment, that she may know how to wash
the Patients Mouth, and direct and encourage him in such rules, as may be
necessary in the time of Salivating.

The most proper place for unction is a Stove, if it may be had, and the
Patient can bear it; if he be weak, his Bed must be used, otherwise for want of
a Stove, he must sit encompassed with a Screen by the Fire side, but not too
near it. He must anoint himself, beginning at the Feet, and then the Legs,
Thighs, Hips, and so upwards taking in the Arms and Shoulders; the Belly must
not be anointed, and indeed much of the trouble in weak Bodies may be spared;
for in such the anointing of the Legs and Arms may be sufficient, the parts
first anointed ought to be covered before you proceed to the next, as the Legs
with Stockings, the Thighs with Trousses and the like; at last his Neck must be
well wrapped with a Napkin tacked up to his Cap round about to his Ears and
fastened before to keep his Chops warm; after this a warm Bed will be
convenient and a Draught of Posset Drink to procure a breathing sweat; having
reposed himself an hour or two he may rise and provide for his Dinner, which
must consist of Meat of easy digestion Roast or Boiled, at his Dinner he may
drink Beer or Ale with a Toast, the rest of the Day he must be confined to
Posset Drink.

You must use a third part of the Ointment at a time and continue daily to use
it for three Days following; when the Patient spits you must keep him to
Posset Drink or Chicken-Broath, also a Cordial must be at Hand to prevent
fainting, his Mouth must be syringed with Barly-Water and Liquorice and the
like. New Milk held in his Mouth or Chicken-Broath will ease the pain and
digest the Sloughs that rise; a rolled Clout ought to be placed between his
Teeth to keep his Chops from closing; he must be raised high in the Bed if his
weakness constrain him to it, and kept forward that the Rheum may run out of
his Mouth and not down his Throat; but if he can rise he will spit the better
and more plentifully. Salivation by unction commonly lasts twenty four or
twenty five Days; sometimes to the thirtieth Day.

In the hight of it our work is to keep up the strength, and if through
Costiveness they Spit little, give them a Glister, that they may Spit better,
and attend the washing their Mouths; but as the Sloughs begin to separate,
which will be toward the declension of the Salivation, prescribe them a
decoction of Sarsa or the like, to drink at least thrice a day; and before the
Slough is quite cast off, purge them, and as they are able to eat Meat, put
them into a drying diet, and sweat them, as shall be showed in its proper place.

It happens sometimes in anointing, that their Mouths are much Ulcerated, and
their Breath smells strong, yet their Cheeks do not swell, nor do they Spit
considerably; in which case, forbear the anointing, and consider the cause of
it, and if the body be strong and plethorick, Vomit them with Turbith, or
infusion of Crocus metallorum: But if they are weak or costive, administer a
Glister; and if afterward it rise not, dispose them to Sweat with draughts of
warm Posset Ale, or bath them; for that way it will sometimes arise, when with
the other it will not. But if they have faintness, palpitation of the Heart,
shortness of Breath, Fever and the like, your best way will be to purge it off,
with an infusion of Sena, and the like with the adition of Syrup of Roses
solutive, or of Syrup of Buckthorn, and keep up their Spirits the while with
Cordials, and good Broaths; if their Lungs be oppressed, let them Blood, and
prescribe Lohochs; but if there be also a suppression of Urine, or if they make
but little and high colored, purge them with Barnet or Epsom Water turned into
Posset, and quicken it with some purging Syrup. If by these ways of purging the
accidents remit, and the Salivation rises, it is well; but if it does not, yet
there being a colliquation made, you may by well purging, strict diet, sweating
and the like, obtain your end. While you are removing the abovesaid acciden^s,
you must have a special regard to the Ulcers within their Mouths; for it is
from the fixing of the Mercury, that those malign Ulcers are made, which the
less sensible they are of them the more corrupt they are. Sometimes by raising
the Salivation by unction, it passes downwards by Stool, in which case, we
prescribe Venice-Treacle, Diascordium, Laudanum, Opiatum and the like, which
being given at Night will not only strengthen their Bowels. but dispose them to
rest, and encourage them to go on in the anointing, a Vomit of Turbith mineral.
After the unction has been some while used, does frequently raise the
Salivation, and after it is well raised, you may heighten, or continue it by
the application of some of the following Plasters: But if after all your
endeavors to raise the Salivation it does discharge it self by a looseness,
with great evacuation, you are then to defend the Intestins from the acrimony
of the humors, by Glister of Chicken-broath, lest the bloody Flux follows.
Inwardly we prescribe large draughts of Chicken-Broath, a Decoction of burtnt
Hearts-horn, and Milk-water boiled with a Stick of Cinnamon.

After the Flux is stopped, you must consider the strength of the Patient, and if
the Sick be very weak, you must not insist upon Fluxing, but proceed with
Sudorificks, and the like, not doubting of success in the Cure; for such a
looseness does for the most part contribute as much to the Cure, as if they had
Salivated.

There is yet another way of Fluxing, and that is by the application of
Mercurial Plasters about the Arms Legs, and the like; they were first designed
I suppose for the more tender, and delicate sort of People, who would not admit
of the unction.

Take of Diachylon with Orris one pound, of Red-Lead Plaster eight ounces, of
Gum Carranna, and Tacamahaca, each four ounces, of Benzoin, Storax Calamit, and
Ambar, each two ounces, of Liquid-storax, and of Peruvian Balsam, each a
sufficient quantity; mingle them over the Fire, and when it is removed from the
Fire, add eight ounces of Crude Mercury extinguished with Turpentine; make a
Plaster.

These being spread upon a Cloth thick, and applied, you must then put them
into a warm Bed, and with a draught of warm Posset Drink, sweat them daily, and
treat them, as has been said, in the Salivation by unction. If it arise not by
the first Plasters, you must apply fresh once in four or five days; and if
there be occasion you may hasten the Salivation by a few grains of Turbith
Mineral. I have sometimes Salivated Persons by these Plasters, but for the most
part, I use them to raise a Salivation, or continue it in such, where I began
it with internals, and for that purpose they are of excellent use.

The humors being evacuated by Salivation and purging, sweating will be
necessary; they may sweat in Bed or out of it; the Bed is proper for the weaker
sort, and there they may sweat with Bottles of hot water, or Bricks heated and
placed about them; or they may sweat under a Frame; if they sweat with Bottles
or Bricks, they must have many Clothes, as Blankets and the like to cover them
close, and the Bottles or Bricks may be wrapped in Napkins, and applied
according as you design to sweat, more particularly any one part; generally
they are placed one each side near the Armpits, Hips, and at the Soles of the
Feet. If you sweat with Bricks, let them be heated rather by boiling Water than
Fire, lest in the Bed they burn the Patient.

The way by a Frame is this, you are to fold a well aired Sheet four double,
and lay it under the Patient; then his Shirt being stripped off, the Frame must
be placed over him, and a Sheet over the Frame, and Blankets over that Sheet
and both Sheet, and Blankets must be brought over the end of the Frame, and be
tucked down close to the Neck; then a Pan of well burnt Charcoal, or Spirit of
Wine must be put in the lower end of the Frame; this being done shut the Door,
and take care that the heat be kept in. His Head ought also to be covered warm
that it may sweat; if he took not his Sudorifick before, he must take it now,
the Diet-drink must be warmed, and may be commodiously given with a Glass pipe;
a couple of Servants must attend the Patient during his being in the Frame, the
one of them must attend him with a warm Napkin to wipe the sweat off his Face,
and to give him Clothes to rub his Body with, which Clothes ought to be thrust
in and taken out at one side of the Frame; this Servant ought to have regard
his Master, that upon the least complaint, he may give warning to his fellow to
renew the Fire, or to take it out according as there should be occasion. The
Fire being removed, and the Sheet next the Frame somewhat cool, one of the
Servants must hold the Clothes close to the Patients Neck and Shoulders, whilst
the other draws the Frame away. Then shall they both tack the Blankets and
Covering close to him, and give him another draught of his Diet-drink, and
continue him in his sweat half an hour or more, if he can admit it; then
gradually cool him, and pull away the wet folded Sheet from under him; then rub
him with dry Clothes and put on his Shirt; and if he be disposed to slumber an
hour he may; otherwise he may rise and Dine at his pleasure. They commonly
sweat three quarters of an hour in the Frame, and an hour in Bed, after the
Frame is pulled away.

The ways of sweating out of Bed are by Stove, Tub, Chair, or Cradle; the Stove
is most eas^y in regard they may sit, stand, or walk up and down; but when they
go out of them to Bed, there is danger of taking cold.

Bathing is of great use in this Disease, whether it be new or old; in dry
Bodies, where the Disease has been long confirmed, bathing is necessary to
dispose them to Salivation; it is also proper after the Patient has past
through the strict course of Salivation, purging and sweating; the Body being
thereby dried and wasted is hereby cooled, moistened, and restored to its
natural temper.

In order to bathing, we generally let blood and purge, if there be a
Plethoria; but when the Body is wasted and dry, a Glister may serve: Before the
Patient enters into the Bath he may drink a draught of Caudle or Broth, and in
the Bath he may take a spoonful or two of Harts-horn-Gelly, or the like.

The Vessel we bath in is a Tub wherein the Patient may sit up to the Neck, for
want of such a Barrel may serve, the one end being beat out, and a stool placed
in it to sit on; the bath Liquor is according to the occasion, and quality of
the sick. Sometimes it is all Milk, other times Milk and Water, or only Water
with a Bag of Wheaten Bran, which serves the Patient as a cushion and makes the
water milky: They are sometimes Perfumed with Wood of Cassia, Rhodium, yellow
Sanders, and the like. The Baths of Milk are apt to sour, therefore ought to
be renewed daily; the other will last longer sweet. In the time of Bathing,
there ought to be plenty of hot and cold water, to continue the Bath of a
moderate temper, neither too hot nor too cold; some Hoops should be fastened
over the head of the Tub, whereon a Blanket or Sheet as a Canopy may be cast,
in case the Air be cold; a Servant or two ought also to be attending in case of
Fainting, lest he sink into the Water; therefore upon his complaint, raise him
up, and casting a Sheet about him, put him into a warm Bed, where he may
refresh himself, and at his pleasure rise and cloth himself, and Dine or Sup,
as his appetite requires. Bathing may be used twice a day, but never upon a
full Stomach.

During the cure of this Disease, it will be requisite that the Patient keep
his Chamber, and that it be made temperately warm; the taking of Physic and
rambling abroad in the Cold being extremely prejudicial to their Cure, and is
frequently attended with a Looseness and noise in the Ears and Deafness There is
also a special care to be taken concerning their Diet, that on those days they
Purge, their Dinner be of good Nourishment, Boiled or Roasted. We also allow
them good Broth, and Beer or Ale to raise their Strength, so as they may be
able to bear the evacuation which is required. But in the time of their
Sweating, we confine them to a very slender and drying Diet, only sufficient to
support their Spirits. A Chop of a Neck of Mutton or two Ribs dry Roasted, was
the old stint. I permit them to make choice of one sort of Meat, and keep them
to it; which among the better sort is, Partridge, and that without Sauce, their
Suppers may be Biscuit, Raisins of the Sun, and a few blanched Almonds, and
their Drink a Decoction of Sarsa, and the like; but in weak and extenuated
Bodies, China Broth, or a mixture of Milk with their Diet-drink may be
necessary.

Exercise is of use in the beginning of this Disease, and may serve to rouse
the native heat, and to thrust forth the malignity, and waste superfluities;
but after the Disease is more confirmed, violent exercise is hurtful.

Sleep is allowed in the day to refresh them, they being for the most part
disturbed in the night by their Pains, which are therefore called Nocturnal.

Venery ought to be avoided, and the Passions of the Mind.

As to a Gonorrhea, the main of the Cure is performed by Purging; but because
the Disease is accompanied with an Inflammation, and cured by Purging Medicines
that are hot, cooling Diet must be ordered through the whole Course.

Take of the mass of the Pill Coch. Major, three drachms, of Extract of Rudius,
one dram, of rosin of Julap, and Diagridium, each half a dram, with a
sufficient quantity of Opobalsamum; make six Pills of every dram.

The Sick must take four of them at four or five a Clock in the Morning, and
sleep upon them for twelve or fourteen days or more, till the heat of Urine and
the yellow color of the Matter be much lessened; afterward every other day
for a Fortnight, and afterward twice a Week, till the Humor quite stop, which
will not be done till a long time, though it be commonly affirmed, that that
Ichor that is seen especially in a Morning at the top of the Yard being
pressed, proceeds only from a looseness of the parts, by reason of the long
continuance of the running: Yet the Sick will find it otherwise, if he neglect
Purging before it is quite gone: For upon any small occasion, as by immoderate
Drinking, violent Exercise, or the like, the Gonorrhea will return.

But if the Gonorrhea does not yield to such kind of Purging, it will be proper
instead of Pills, especially if the Sick are difficultly Purged, to give
betwixt whiles some more powerful Medicines, as is the following Purge.

Take of Tamarinds half an ounce, of the leaves of Sena two drachms, of Rhubarb
one dram and an ha^f; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, in three
ounces of the strained Liquor; dissolve of Manna and syrup of Roses solutive,
each one ounce, of syrup of Buckthorn and of Electuary of the juice of Roses,
each two Drachms, mingle them; make a Potion.

If the Cure proceed slowly, give eight Grains of Turbith Mineral, only twice
or thrice, and at due distances, lest a Flux arises; and this Medicine is
certainly the best for an obstinate running of the Re^ns.

But sometimes the Sick has such an ^ver^^on for Purging often repeated, that
he cannot so much as see or smell the Medicine; and sometimes by a certain
Idiosyncrasy, there is such an obstinate opposition to Purging, that a due
quantity of the peccant Humor cannot be evacuated; and whilst we waste time to
no purpose in endeavoring to purge the Sick, the Pox creeps on; when the case
is so, we must use Glisters, and on those days the sick does not use them, we
must give Catharticks by the Mouth: I proceed in the following manner, I give
the foresaid Pills, or the like for two or three Mornings following, and
afterward I order the following, Glister to be injected in the Morning, and at
five in the Afternoon daily, till all the Symptoms cease; only once or twice a
Week I give a Purge, omitting on those days the Glister.

Take of the Electuary of the juice of Roses, six drachms, of Venice Turpentine
dissolved in the yolk of an Egg an ounce, mix them with a pint of Barly-water;
to the strained liquor, add two ounces of Diacatholicon; mingle them, make a
Glister.

Every night at Bedtime I give twenty five drops of Opobalsamum, mixed with
Sugar, or for want of it, Cyprus Turpentine, to the quantity of a hazel-Nut.

I forbid salt Meats and other things of hard digestion, as Beef, Pork, Fish,
Cheese, Roots and Herbs, and all Summer Fruits, and instead of them, I order
Veal, Mutton, Chicken, Rabbets, and the like, and the Sick must eat but
sparingly of these. He must forbear Wine and all strong and sharp Liquors; but
he may drink Milk boiled with thrice the quantity of Water, and a small
quantity of small Beer at Meals, and betwixt the Purging, he may drink of the
following Emulsion frequently, to qualify the heat of Urine, and the
Inflammation.

Take of the seeds of Melons and of Pompious, each half an ounce, of the seeds
of white Poppies, two drachms, of blanched Almonds number eight, beat them
together in a marble Mortar, pouring upon them gently, a pint and an half of
Barly-water; to the strained Liquor add a sufficient quantity of Christaline
Sugar, and make an Emulsion.

When the Sick is of a very sanguine Constitution, and when the Disease is
obstinate, after I have Purged him a Month or thereabout, I order eight or nine
Ounces of Blood to be taken from the Arm.

In this disease he that Cleanses well, Cures well, only Mineral waters must
not be used.

But it is to be noted, if the Glans be covered all over with the Prepuce, and
if by reason of the Inflammation it be swelled hard and callous, so that it
cannot be drawn back, it is in vain to attempt the cure of the Running, unless
at the same time the Part affected be reduced to its natural State, the
hardness and swelling being removed; therefore the following Medicines must be
used

Yake of the roots of Marshmallows and of Lillies, each one ounce and an half,
of the leaves of Mallows, Mullein, Elder and Henbane, of the flowers of
Camomile and Melilot, each one handful, of the seeds of Flax and Fenugreek,
each half an ounce, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water, make
a Fomentation, wherewith foment the part half an hour at a time, twice or
thrice a day.

After the fomentation I order that the part affected be anointed with the Oil
of Flax-seeds fresh drawn, and that a Plaster of the Mucilages be applied to
the swelled lips of the Prepuce; but if the Ulcer in the Lips of the Prepuce or
on the Glans under it hinders it from being drawn back easily, besides the
fomentation above mentioned I prescribe also the following Liniment.

Take of Basilicon six drachms, of the Ointment of Tobacco two drachms, of red
precipitat washed in Rose Water and well powdered half a dram; mingle them,
make a liniment wherewith make Pledgets and apply them to the Chancres after
the use of the fomentation.

But when the Scrotum is the seat of the Disease, after the use of the
fomentation, if the pain and swelling be not abated, apply a Cataplasm of
Oxycrate and Bean-flower; also at the same time, I use inwardly Catharticks and
cooling Medicines, and order the Diet abovementioned, and bleed at any time of
the Disease, if the swelling in the Scrotum be great, and if the pain be
violent.

If a swelling arises in the Groin, apply the follow-Plaster to suppurate it.

Take of Galbanum and Ammoniacum, each two ounces, of Opopanax and Sagapenum,
each one ounce, of Mustard Seed and Pellitory of Spain, each six drachms, of
common Soap, two ounces, of Burgundine Pitch, four ounces, of Oil of Lillies,
two ounces, of Wax a sufficient quantity; make a Plaster.

For Ulcers in the Palate and Tonsis.

Take of all the Throatwort, three handfuls, of Holm, Self-heal and Male
Speedwell, each one handful, of red Roses, one pugil, of red Sanders and the
Wood of Juniper, each one ounce; make a Decoction in two quarts of Barly-water;
boil it to the consumption of a third part; in the strained Liquor dissolve of
syrup of dried Roses and Diamoron, each three ounces, of Honey, two ounces; make
a Lotion.

With this the Ulcer may be washed daily either by Syringing or Gargling: but
if the Ulcers be behind or over the Palate, the best way to cleanse them will
be to pass the Injection up into the Nostrils; but the Patient must keep his
Mouth full of Water all the while to prevent Coughing.

If the Ulcers are sordid, dress them with the Lac sublimate upon an armed
Probe; if there be a Caries in the bone of the Palate, touch it with Aqua
divina Fernelii; if the bone be corrupted through, 'twill be necessary to wear
a plate.

In Ulcers of the Nose, the matter usually mixing with the excrementitious
humors dryes in the passage, and thereby prohibits the discharge, and
increases the ulceration, and also the Caries, and therefore you are in the
first place to supple and remove that, by casting up mucilaginous decoctions.

Take of cleans'd Barley one ounce, of the roots of Marshmallows two ounces, of
the Seeds of Quinces three Drachms, of Liquorish two drachms, boil them in a
quart of Fountain Water; to the strained Liquor add three ounces of Oil of
Almonds; let it be injected often in a day; the mucus being thus removed,
inject the following Water.

Take of Sarsaparilla sliced three ounces, infuse them twenty four hours in
three pints of plantain-water, then boil half away, toward the end add of the
Leaves of Agrimony, Sage and the tops of Brambles each one handful, of red
Roses and Balaustines each half an handful, quench Steel often in the strained
Liquor, and add to it two drachms of Roch Alum, and make an Injection.

This will cleanse the Ulcers, and in the mean while you may by Anti-venereals
hasten the exfoliation of the Bones, and consolidation of the Ulcers. For the
extirpation of Warts and the like Excrescencies magisterial water of Alum, lac
Sublimati, Spirit of vitriol, and the caustic Stone, are proper; when these
will not do the business, the Ligature and Knife and actual cautery will; but
the growing of them again must be prevented by Anti-venereals.

To cure the fluttering noise in the Ears arising in this Disease,

Take of the bark of Guiacum one dram, of the bark of Sassafras two drachms,
of Castor four scruples, of the flowers of Lavender one dram and an half, of
Cloves half a dram, of Spirit of Wine rectified, eight ounces; make an
Infusion in a glass Vessel, twenty four hours upon hot Ashes; keep the strained
Liquor for use. Put some of this daily into the Ears warm with Cotton.

To ease Pains,

Take of Lard four ounces, of Oil of Scorpions two ounces, of the Oils of
Camomil, Rosemary and Sage, each half a dram, of Petroleum and Spike Oil,
each one dram, of London Laudanum one Scruple more or less; mingle them and
anoint the Part.

If Nodes cause the Pain, apply the Plaster of Frogs, with four times the
quantity of Quicksilver.

CHAP. CXXVII. Of the Itch, and Spots and Pimples in the Face.
OFten and constant eating of salt Fish or Flesh, and dried in the Sun, also
Drinks that are disagreeable and poisonous, do commonly cause cutaneous
eruptions; also the Humor gathered in the cutaneous Glands, sometimes by mere
Stagnation, becomes not only itchy, but oftentimes corruptive; wherefore, not
only they that have been long kept in Prison, but also they that have lived a
Sedentary Life and are used to Filth and Stinks, are subject to these Diseases.

As to the cure of the Itch, there are two primary Indications; First, that the
glandulous Humor be reduced to a due disposition. Secondly, that the pores of
the Skin be freed from ichorus concretions.

The preservative Indication respects these two things. First that the itchy
Humor does not regurgitate upon the Blood and nervous Liquor. Secondly, that
itchy Humor, if it be fallen upon the noble Parts, be eradicated.

All these intentions of Healing, ought to be complicated, or at least provided
for by turns, by external and internal Remedies. You must begin and end with
Purging; and Bleeding, if nothing contra-indicates, must be used at the
beginning. Alteratives must be also used, and Liniments and Baths, or Topics
of other kinds. I will set down some choice forms of Medicines of every kind,
and first as to Purges; a Purge or a Vomit must be given at the beginning, and
after bleeding, (if it be used) a purging Apozem, or Diet-Drink, must be taken
for seven or eight days.

Take of the Electuary, called Diacarthamum, three drachms, of the Species
called Diaturbith with Rhubarb, one dram, of Cream of Tartar and Salt of
Wormwood, each half a Scruple, of the purging Syrup of Apples a sufficient
quantity; make a Bolus.

Take of Sulphur of Antimony grains seven, of Scammony sulphurated, grains
eight, of Cream of Tartar, half a scruple; make a Powder.

Take of the Roots of Polipody of the Oak, of sharp-pointed Dock prepared, each
one ounce, of the leaves of Sena ten drachms, of Turbith, Agarick, and Dodder
of Thyme, each one ounce, of the seeds of Carthamus half an ounce, of yellow
Sanders two drachms, of the Seeds of Anise and Caraways, each two drachms, cut
them and beat them, and digest them hot in two quarts of White Wind in a Vessel
close stopped for twenty four hours; pour off the clear Liquor without
pressing. The Dose is six ounces, either by themselves, or with a spoonful of
the Syrup of Dodder of Thyme. Or,

Take the foresaid Ingredients and boil them in three quarts of Fountain Water
till half is consumed, then add a pint of White Wind, strain it presently to be
taken as before. Or,

Take of the roots of Polypody of the Oak, of sharp-pointed Dock, each three
ounces, of the best Sena four ounces, of Dodder of Thyme, Turbith, and
Mechoacan, each two ounces, of yellow Sanders one ounce, of Coriander-seeds six
drachms, prepare them according to Art, make a Bag for four Gallons of Ale,
after five or six days Tap it, and take three quarters of a pint, more or less
every morning for eight or ten days.

For the ordinary drink provide four gallons of small Ale, and hang in a Bag in
it the following Ingredients.

Take of the tops of Tamarisk and Fumitory dried, each four handfuls, of the
roots of sharp-pointed Dock dried six ounces, of the bark of Woody Nightshade
two ounces, cut and beat them.

As to altering Remedies, there is little need of others besides the altering
drink above prescribed; only the Patient must observe a good course of Diet, he
must forbear salt and peppered Meats, Shellfish, and such as are Pickled; also
Wine, Strong Water and strong Beer.

As to Ointments, the following is commonly used.

Take of the powder or flower of Brimstone, half an ounce, of Butter that is
not Salted, four ounces, of Ginger powdered half a dram, make a Liniment.

The following is neater, though not much more effectual.

Take of Ointment of Roses four ounces, of Brimstone half an ounce, of the Oil
of Tartar per deliquium, a sufficient quantity, make a Liniment; you may
perfume it with a scruple of Oil of Rhodium.

But after all, I have found by much Experience, that Quicksilver Girdles
(though they are generally much disliked) are most effectual for curing the
Itch, and as Safe as any other Medicine, if they are prepared in the following
manner.

Take of Quicksilver three quarters of an ounce, the White of one new laid
Egg, beat them together in a wooden Dish with a Stick two hours, then spread
it on a Girdle of new Flannel the breadth of three Fingers; you must spread it
all by degrees and dry it in the Sun, or by a moderate Fire, and it must be
worn a Month or six Weeks, being sewed strait round the Waste; the side whereon
the Mercury is being turned to the Body. The Patient must be Purged once before
the use of the Girdle, and once after the Itch is cured.

And by this short and easy Method, I have cured whole Families infected with
the Itch, and never perceived the least Injury, though I have used it
frequently and several Years.

The following Water is excellent for taking off Spots and Pimples from the
Face, and the redness of it, and that blackness which looks like Gunpowder in
the Face, especially about the Nose and Forehead, which is sometimes the black
heads of Worms.

Take of Sublimate one ounce, put it into a tin Pot with three pints of
Fountain Water, let them stand together twenty four hours, stir them now and
then with a Stick, till all the Liquor looks black; filter it through Paper,
and with a Feather or the like dipped in it, touch the Face gently once in a day
or two.

FORMS OF MEDICINES Frequently used by the London Physicians.
Medicines for a Consumption.
TAKE of the Pill of Hound's Tongue, half a scruple, of Balsam of Tolu, one
scruple; mix them, make six Pills: Let two be taken at Bedtime every other
night.

Take of liquid Pitch, of Balsam of Tolu, each 26 grains, of Chios-turpentine,
1 scruple; make a Mass, whereof make middling Pills: Let three he taken in the
morning and at bedtime, drinking upon them four spoonfuls of the following
Julep.

Take of the Waters of Hyssop, one pint, of Ground Ivy, six ounces, of the
tincture of the Balsam of Tolu, one dram and an half, of White-sugar-candy, a
sufficient quantity; mingle them.

Take of the pectoral Decoction clarified, one quart; boil it in an handful of
Ground Ivy leaves, and of the syrup of Raspberries and of the balsamic Syrup,
each six drachms; mingle them: Let a small draught be taken in the morning, and
at four in the afternoon.

Take of Conserve of red Roses, two ounces, of Flowers of Sulphur, two drachms,
of the species of Diatraga^^nth frigid, one dram and an half, of Lucatellus's
Balsam, two drachms, of Opobalsam, half a dram, with a sufficient quantity of
balsamic Syrup; make an Electuary, whereof let him take the quantity of a
Nutmeg in the morning and at four a clock in the afternoon, drinking upon it a
draught of the following Apozem.

Take of the roots of China, one ounce, of Sarsaparilla, two ounces, of Lentisk
wood, one ounce, of Ivory and Hartshorn rasped, each one dram and an half, of
the leaves of Hyssop and Coltsfoot, each one handful, of Figs two pair, of
Dates number three, of Raisins of the Sun an ounce and an half, of Liquorice
three drachms; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fountain Water to three
pints of the strained Liquor, add one ounce of the tincture of Saffron, with
syrup of Violets and Maidenhair, each one ounce and an half* make an Apozem.

Take of Lemnian-earth, half a scruple, of Bole-armenick, twelve grains, of the
Pill of Storax, one dram and an half, of Jesuit's Powder, half an ounce, with
a sufficient quantity of syrup of Clove Gillyflowers; make fourscore Pills: Let
him take five every sixth hour during the Looseness, drinking upon them seven
spoonfuls of the following Julep.

Take of the Aqua lactis alexiteria, twelve ounces, of Cinnamon Water
hordeated, three ounces, of Dr. Stephans and Epidemick-water, each two ounces,
of Diacodium, three ounces; mingle them, make a Julep.

Apozems.
TAke of burnt Hart's horn, of the Roots of Scorzonera and Bread, each one
ounce; boil them in two pints and an half of Barly-water, till half is
consumed; to the strained Liquor, add of Christaline sugar and of
Cinnamon Water hordeated, each one ounce; mingle them, make an Apozem: Give
four ounces every third or fourth hour.

Take of Citron-bark candid, one ounce and an half, of candid Angelica, half an
ounce, of Hart's horn rasped, one ounce and an half, of Currants, six ounces, a
Crust of white Bread; boil them in a sufficient quantity of thin Barly-water to
a pint and an half; to the strained Liquor, add of the syrup of the juice of
Oranges, one ounce; mingle them, make an Apozem: Drink of it at pleasure when
thirsty.

Take of the Roots of Scorzonera and Angelica, each six drachms, of the Leaves
and Roots of Wood Sorrel, two handfuls, of Hart's horn and Ivory rasped, each
half an ounce, of the opening Roots, each half an ounce, of Liquorice, two
drachms; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Barly-water to a pint and an
half; to the strained Liquor, add of compound Scordium-water, and of the cold
Cordial-water of Saxony, each three ounces, of the syrup of Raspberries, three
ounces; mingle them, make an Apozem: Let him take three or four ounces at
pleasure.

Take of the Peruvian Bark, one ounce, of Balsam of Tolu, three drachms, of
Cochinel, one scruple; boil them in a pint of Carduus-water; to the strained
Liquor, add of the syrup of Raspberries and epidemick Water, each two ounces.

Take of the Roots of spanish Scorzonera, one ounce and an half, of the
raspings of Hart's horn, 6 drachms, of Ivory rasped, three drachms, of Marigold
flowers, two pugils, of fat Figs cut two pair; boil them in Barly-water: To a
quart of the strained Liquor clarified, add of Epidemick-water, one ounce and
an half; sweeten it with white Sugar and make an Apozem, whereof let him take a
draught at any time when he is thirsty.

Take of calcined Hart's horn powdered, two ounces, of Fountain Water, two
quarts; boil it till half is consumed, strain it gently through a linen Rag,
and add two it three ounces of syrup of Oranges: This is the white Decoction,
and is an excellent drink for Worms in Children, for a Looseness, and for Fevers.

Cordials.
TAke of the Waters of Wood Sorrel, all the Citron and Strawberries, each four
ounces, of syrup of the juice of Citron, one ounce, of Pearls powdered, one
dram; mingle them.

Take of the Waters of black Cherries and Aqua Lactis alexiteria, each five
ounces, of Elder-flowers, Cinnamon hordeated, and epidemick Water, each two
ounces, syrup of Raspberries, two ounces and an half; mingle them.

Take of Confection of Hyacinth, one scruple, Conserve of Wood sorrel, one
dram, of species Liberans, half a scruple, with a sufficient quantity of the
syrup of the juice of Citron; make a Cordial Bolus.

Take of the compound Powder of Crab's claws, half a scruple, of Volatile salt
of Hart's horn, three grains, of confection of Hyacinth, a sufficient quantity.

Take of the Cordial magisterial Powder, of compound Powder of Crab's claws,
each twelve grains, of the temperate Cordial Species, eight grains; mingle
them, make a Cordial-powder for two Doses.

Take of the compound Powder of Crab's claws and of the Goa-stone, each half a
dram; mingle them* Make a Powder, to be divided into three doses.

Catharticks.
TAke of Quercetan's pill of Tartar, one dram and an half, of the Pil. Coch.
major, two scruples, of chimical Oil of Marjoram, three drops; mingle them,
make twelve Pills, and let three be taken at Bedtime, once in two or three
days.

Take of the fetid Pill and of Troches of Myrrh, each one dram, of volatile
Salt, of sal Armoniack, one scruple, of peruvian Balsam, a sufficient quantity;
make midling Pills.

Take of the fetid Pill and of Rudius's extract, each half a dram, of salt of
Wormwood, ten grains, of Oil of Cloves, two drops, with a sufficient quantity
of Elixir Proprietatis; make twelve Pills: Let him take four every third day
with Regimen.

Take of the Pills of Storax, ten grains, of Aloes Rosat. two scruples; make
eight Pills: Let him take them every other night, and the next morning an ounce
of Manna, and a dram of Cream of Tartar.

Take of Pil. ex duobus and of Pil. Coch. minor, each one scruple, of salt of
Tartar, half a dram, with a sufficient quantity of syrup of Backthorn and
four drops of Juniper berries; make twelve Pills: Let him take six, with
Regimen.

Take of the Pill of Hound's-tongue, one scruple, of Aloes Rosat. and of the
Pil. Coch. minor, each one dram, of salt of Tartar, half a dram, with a
sufficient quantity of syrup of Violets; make eighteen Pills: Give six when the
cholick pain is violent, and let the sick keep his bed six hours, and repeat
them upon occasion.

Take of Manna, one ounce and an half; dissolve it in two ounces and an half of
black Cherry-water; add one ounce of the purging syrup of Apples, of spirit of
Sulphur, three drops: Let the Child take half of this every other day.

Take of Gerion's decoction of Sena, four ounces, of syrup of Buckthorn, six
drachms, of spirit of Sulphur, six drops, of Aqua mirabilis, one dram; mingle
them, make a Potion to be taken in the morning.

Take of the Powder of Rhubarb, twenty five grains, of salt of Wormwood, eight
grains, of syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, a sufficient quantity; mingle them,
make a Bolus; to which add two drops of chimical Oil of Aniseeds.

Take of Mercurius dulcis and Diagridium, each fifteen grains; mingle them,
make a Powder to be taken in the morning.

Diaphoreticks.
TAke of Venice-treacle, half a dram, of bezoartick Powder, one scruple, of
syrup of the juice of Citron, a sufficient quantity: Make a Bolus.

Take of the Powders of the roots of Contrayerva, Virginian snakeweed and
Butterbur, each one dram, of Cochinele and Saffron, each half a dram;
mingle them, make a Powder: The dose is half a dram.

Take of the compound Powder of Crab's claws, half a dram, of conserve of
VVoodsorrel, one dram, of Mithridate, two scruples and an half; mingle them.
Presently after taking it, drink a draught of Posset Drink, wherein Camomil or
Marigold-flowers have been boiled.

Take of Venice-treacle, one dram, of Laudanum Opiatum, one grain and an
half, of the pulp of Conserve of Roses, half a dram; mingle them, make a
Bolus, to be taken at bedtime, drinking upon it the following draught.

Take of Treacle-water, one ounce, of Carduus-water, two ounces, of syrup of
Cowslips, three drachme; mingle them, make a draught.

Take of Venice-treacle, two scruples, of volatile Salt of Amber and Bezoartic
mineral, each half a dram, of Laudanum opiatum, three grains; mingle them,
make a Bolus.

Take of Salt of Hartshorn, two grains, of the magisterial Cordial-powder, six
grains, of Camphor and Cochinele each four grains, of Venice-treacle, one
scruple, of the Aqua Coelestis, a sufficient quantity; mingle them, make a
Bolus. Let it be taken at a convenient time, and let nine ounces of the
following Apozem be taken every third hour.

Take of the roots of Scorzonera, two ounces, of Butturbur, Angelica and
Fennel, each one ounce, of rasped Hartshorn, six drachms, of Ivory rasped,
three drachms, of Marigold-flowers, one pugil, of Vetches, half a handful; boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Barly-water; to a quart of the Liquor
strained, add half an ounce of tincture of Saffron, of Christalline Sugar, one
ounce; mingle them, make an Apozem.

Diuretics.
TAke of Sal Prunellae, two drachms, of Sugar candy, one dram; make a Powder
to be divided into six parts: Let one be taken thrice a day.

Take of Sal Prunella, three drachms, of Salt of Amber, half a dram; make a
Powder: The dose is half a dram thrice a day.

Take of Compound-water of Horseradish, two ounces, of Pellitory-water, four
ounces, of spirit of Salt, one scruple fifteen grains, of salt of Tartar,
fifteen grains, of syrup of Violets, half an ounce; mingle them, make a Potion.

Take of the Powder of Bees, one scruple, of the seeds of Lovage, half a
scruple; mingle them, make a Powder.

Take of the Powder of Egg-shells, half a dram, or one dram, give it in a
draught of Whitewine.

Take of the Waters of Arsmart and Wake-robin, each six ounces, of compound
Briony-water and compound Radish-water, each two ounces, of the syrup of the
five opening Roots, one ounce and an half, of spirit of Salt, forty drops;
mingle them, make a Julep: Let four or five ounces of it be taken twice a day.

Eye-Waters.
TAke of the water of Spawn of Frogs, of Plantain and of Roses, each one ounce,
of Tutty-stone prepared, two scruples, of the white Troches of Rhasis, half a
scruple; mingle them, make an Eye-water to be used twice or thrice a day cold.

Take of red Rose water, two ounces, of Salt of Vitriol, finely powdered, five
grains; mingle them, make a Collyrium.

Take of Crocus metallorum, one dram, of Plantain-water, three ounces; digest
them hot for six hours, and then filter them: Make a Collyrium, to be dropped
into the Eyes often in a day.

Emulsions.
TAke of blanched Almonds, number three, of the seeds of Melons, Lettice and
white Poppies, each one dram, of the pulp of Barley, three drachms; beat them,
and pour on them a sufficient quantity of Barly-water; to eight ounces of the
strained Liquor, add five drachms of Diacodium; mingle them, make an Emulsion.

Take of blanched Almonds, twelve, of the four greater cold Seeds, each one
dram and an half, of the seeds of Lettice and white Poppies, each half a
dram; beat them in a marble Mortar, and pour on them gently a sufficient
quantity of Poppy-water; make an Emulsion for 2 doses, to which add an ounce of
syrup of Violets, and half a dram of sal Prunella.

Take of blanched Almonds infused in Rose Water, two ounces, of the four
greater cold seeds, and of Plantain and Purslain, each one dram, of seeds of
Marshmallows and white Poppies, each one scruple; beat them according to Art,
and pour on them a sufficient quantity of the decoction of Barley and Liquorice;
make an Emulsion for two doses: To each add, of syrup of Water Lillies, one
ounce, of sal Prunella, half a dram.

Gargarisms.
TAke of the Waters of Plantain and spawn of Frogs, each four ounces, of syrup
of Mulberries and dried Roses, each one ounce, of spirit of Vitriol, a
sufficient quantity to make it pleasantly acid; make a Gargarism.

Take of the middle bark of the Elm, two ounces, of Barly-water, one pint and
an half; boil it to a pint: Add to the strained Liquor when it is clear, of
Epidemic-water and syrup of Rasberries, each two ounces, of spirit of Sulphur,
half a scruple; mingle them, make a Gargarism.

Take of the mucilage of the seeds of Quinces made in Rose Water, two ounces,
of syrup of Rasberries, one ounce; mingle them: Let him take one spoonful often
and hold it a little upon his Tongue, and swallow it by degrees.

Take of Plantain-water, one pint, the whites of two Eggs, of Sugar, a
sufficient quantity; mingle them, make a Gargarism.

Take of the roots of Marshmallows, one ounce, of Liquorish rasped, three
drachms, of the middle bark of the Elm and of common Bramble-bush, each three
drachms, of the leaves of Sage and Columbine, each half a handful, of fat Figs,
number five, of red Roses, half a handful, of Balaustines, half a dram, of
Jew's Ears, two drachms, of Cochinel, one scruple; boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Fountain Water to one pint; strain the Liquor, and sweeten it with
Honey of Roses strained; make a Gargarism.

Take of the Waters of red Roses and Plantain, each two ounces, of Honey of
Roses strained and of syrup of Mulberries, each three drachms, of crude Alom
powdered, ten grains; mingle them, make a Gargarism.

Glisters.
TAke of the carminative Decoction, ten ounces, of mercurial Honey, one ounce,
of brown Sugar, two ounces and a half, of the Electuary of Laurel-berries, half
an ounce; mingle them, make a Glister.

Take of the common Decoction for a Glister, one pint, of Lenitive Electuary,
one ounce and a half, of Diacatholicon, one ounce, of Oil of Camomil, half an
ounce; mingle them, make a Glister.

Take of Cow's milk, one pint, of yolks of Eggs, number two, of Venice-treacle,
half an ounce; mingle them, make a Glister.

Take of the carminative Decoction with Laurel and Juniper Berries, ten ounces,
of the Electuary of Lawrel-berries, one ounce, of Vinum Benedictum, two ounces,
of brown Sugar, three ounces, of chimical Oil of Juniper, ten drops; mingle
them, make a Glister.

Take of the common Decoction for a Glister, six ounces, of the species of
Hiera pi^ra, one dram, of Cassia, six drachms, of mercurial Honey, one ounce
and a half; mingle them, make a Glister.

Take of Cow's Milk, with a pugil of red Roses boiled in it, six ounces, of
Diascordium, one dram; mingle them, make a Glister.

Take of the roots of Tormentil, of yellow Myrobalans, of the seeds of
Coriander, each three drachms, of the Flowers of Camomil, half a handful, of
Balaustines, one scruple; boil them in a quart of Fountain Water; to half a
pint of the strained Liquor, ade one dram of Mithridate; make a Glister.

Liniments.
TAke of the red Ophthalmic Ointment, of the last Edition save one of the
London Dispensatory, two drachms, of Oil of bitter Almonds, twenty drops;
mingle them, make a Liniment, wherewith anoint the Eyelids with a hot Finger.

Take of pure Sperma ceti, two drachms, dissolve it in half an ounce of Oil of
Almonds fresh drawn, add six drachms of Pomatum; mingle them, make a Liniment
for the Face.

Take of Oils of Scorpions and of sweet Almonds, each one dram, of Saffron
powdered, half a scruple; mingle them, make a Liniment, wherewith anoint the
region of the Heart with a hot Hand, and apply over a Pidgeon cut in the
middle, and renew it every third hour.

Take of the Alabastrine Ointment, one dram and a half, of Oil of Nutmegs, by
expression, two scruples, mingle them; anoint the Forehead and Temples, and
apply over a Rose-cake sprinkled with Vinegar.

Take of Populneum Ointment, half an ounce, of Opium, one scruple; mingle them.

Take of Ointment of Tobacco, one ounce and a half, of Flowers of Sulphur, half
an ounce, of Oil of Nutmegs, by expression, two drachms, of sal Ammoniac, one
dram; mingle them.

Take of the pectoral Ointment and of the Flowers of Oranges, each one ounce
and a half, of the chimical Oil of Camomil-flowers, one scruple; mingle them,
make a Liniment, wherewith anoint the Breast with a hot Hand.

Pectorals.
TAke of Olibanum, Spema, ceti and of the Powder of Liquorice, each one
scruple, of syrup of Marshmallows, a sufficient quantity; mingle them, make a
Bolus. Repeat it twice or thrice in a day.

Take of Storax, strained Myrrh, Balsam of Tolu, Juice of Liquorice and Honey,
each a sufficient quantity, make Pills: Take a scruple thrice a day upon an
empty Stomach, drinking upon it two spoonfuls of the following Julep.

Take of compound Gentian-water and of strong Cinnamon Water, and of Oxymel of
Squills, each three ounces; mingle them.

Take of syrup of Maidenhair and of Jujubes, each three ounces, of Oil of Flax
fresh drawn, two ounces; mingle them, make a Lohoch: Let him take half a
spoonful every other hour, and when the Cough is violent.

Take of Aniseeds finely powdered and of Liquorice powdered, each three
drachms, of flowers of Sulphur, one dram and a half, of the best Honey two
ounces and a half dissolved in three spoonfuls of Cinnamon Water hordeated;
make an Electuary, to which add fifteen drops of Balsam of Sulphur, of Oil of
Aniseeds, ten drops: Let him take two drachms in the morning, and at bed time.

Take of the Lohoch Sanans, half an ounce, of syrup of Maidenhair, two ounces,
of Oil of sweet Almonds, half an ounce, of syrup of Jujubes, half an ounce;
mingle them, make a Linctus, to be taken when the Cough is violent.

Take of the Lohoch Sanans, three ounces, of syrup of Rasberries, one ounce;
mingle them: Make a Linctus.

Plasters.
THE Head being shaved and washed with equal parts of Canary and compound
spirit of Lavender, apply a Plaster made of the Cephalic Plaster, and a fourth
part of Gum Tacama-haca.

To the Breast and Region of the Stomach, apply the Stomach-Plaster, with eight
drops of Oil of Wormwood.

Take of the Plaster ad Herniam and of red Lead, each a sufficient quantity;
mingle them, make a Plaster to be applied to the Vertebrae of the Loins and the
Os Sacrum.

Take of the Plasters of Hemlock with Ammoniacum, of compound Melilote and
Cummin, each equal parts, of sal Ammoniac, half a dram; mingle them, make a
Plaster for the region of the Spleen.

Take of the best Aloes and of the Ointment de Arthanita, each one ounce, of
Turpentine, a sufficient quantity; mingle them, make a Plaster to be applied to
the Navel.

Take of the Cephalic Plaster with Euphorbium, three parts, of Burgundy-pitch,
one part; make a Plaster for the soles of the Feet.

Pultisses.
TAke of white Bread baked the day before, two ounces, of red Sanders powdered,
one dram and a half, of Camphor powdered, half a dram; mingle them, and
with a sufficient quantity of cold Fountain Water, beat them; make a Pultiss to
be applied to the Eye shut, the quantity of a small Wallnut being used at a
time twice a day.

Take of the seeds of Mustard bruised, two drachms, of Garlic, one ounce, of
black Soap, two ounces; mingle them, make a Cataplasm to be applied to the
soles of the Feet.

Take of an Onion and the tops of Savine, each half an ounce, of Currants and
Sea Salt, each half a handful; beat them, and make a Cataplasm to be applied to
the Wrists.

Stomach Medicines.
TAke of the Stomach Pill with Gums of Aloes Rosat. each fifteen grains, of
London Laudanum, one grain; mingle them, make four Pills to be taken at
Bedtime, the next morning let him take two quarts of Epsom-waters or the like:
Let the Pills and the Waters be repeated every third day for four times.

Take of the Tinctura sacra, one pint and a half, let him take four spoonfuls
every third night at Bedtime, and the next morning let two quarts of
Epsom-water be boiled and turned with Milk, and let him drink it then.

Take of the bitter Decoction, a quart; in making it put in but half the
quantity of Sena, and add a dram of salt of Wormwood. To the strained Liquor,
add four ounces of compound gentian Water made with White wine: Let four ounces
be taken in the morning fasting, three hours before Dinner.

Take of the bitter Tincture without Sena, two ounces, of Steel-wine, one
ounce, of spirit of Saffron, eight drops; take it morning and evening for
thirteen days.

Take of Crab's Eyes, prepared Pearl, red Coral prepared, each two scruples, of
the best Chalk, one scruple; mingle them, make a Powder to be divided into
eight parts; let one be taken in a spoonful of syrup of Mint, thrice a day.

Take of the Waters of black Cherries and Baulm, each three ounces, of Dr.
Stephans's water, one ounce and a half, of spirit of Mint, three drachms, of
Confection of Alkermes, two drachms, of syrup of Mint, a sufficient quantity;
mingle them, make a Julep: Let five spoonfuls be taken at a time.

Take of the tops of the lesser Centaury, of the flowers of Camomil and
Agrimony, each half a handful, of common Wormwood, half a pugil, of the roots
of Gentian sliced, half a dram, of Zedaary, one dram, of the seeds of
Carduus Benedictus and of Citrons, each one dram and a half, of Filings of
Steel, two ounces; digest them all over a gentle Fire in two pints and a half
of Whitewine, for four days; filter the Liquor, and let nine ounces of it be
taken every morning, and at four in the afternoon.

Take of Salt of Wormwood, one scruple, of syrup of Lemons, a sufficient
quantity to take off the Ebullition: Let it be used upon occasion.

Suppositories.
TAke of Hiera piera, two drachms, of Coloquintida and Agarick, each half a
dram, of Diagridium, one scruple, of sal Gemma, two drachms, of Honey boiled
to a due consistence, a sufficient quantity; make Suppositories.

Vomits.
TAke of salt of Vitriol, half a dram, of compound Water of Wallnuts, two
ounces, of compound syrup of Scabious, half an ounce; mingle them, make a Vomit.

Take of Vinum Benedictum, six drachms, of the Water of Carduus Benedictus, one
ounce, of Oxymel of Squills, half an ounce; mingle them, make a Vomit.

Take of Oxymel of Squills, three ounces, of compound syrup of Scabious, one
ounce; let it be taken in an Evening, in a draught of clear Posset Drink, and
let him drink Posset Drink frequently with a spoonful of Oil of Almonds in each
draught.

Take of Mercurius Vitae, four grains; give it in the pulp of a roasted Apple.

Take of Turbith Mineral, nine grains, of conserve of red Roses, a sufficient
quantity; mingle them, make a Vomit.

ADVERTISEMENT.
EXcellent Purging Pills, prepared by the Author, are to be sold by Mr. Henry
Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. They cure the Scurvy, the
most reigning Disease of this Kingdom. They purge the Head, Breast, Stomach and
Reins, and cleanse the Blood; and are a very proper Purge for those that cannot
confine themselves when they want Purging, but are forced to go abroad about
their Business. The Price of each Box is 1 s. 6 d. with Directions for use.

BOOKS Printed for Henry Bonwicke at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
COllections of Acute Diseases, in five Parts. I. Of the Small Pox, and
Measles. II. Of the Plague, and Pestilential Fevers. III. Of Continual Fevers.
IV. Of Agues, a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia, Quinsie and the Cholera Morbus. V.
and last, of the Bloody Flux, Miscariage, of Acute Diseases of Women with
Child, a Rheumatism, Bleeding at Nose, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and several other
Diseases.

Collection of Chronical Diseases, viz. The Cholick, the Bilious Cholick,
Histerick Diseases, the Gout, and the Bloody Urine from the Stone in the
Kidneys.

Promptuarium Praxeos Medicae; seu Methodus Medendi, Praescriptis
Celeberrimorum Medicorum Londinensium Concinnata, and in Ordinem Alphabeticum
digesta.

The Complete Herbal of Physical Plants: Containing all such English and
Foreign Herbs, Shrubs and Trees, as are used in Physic and Surgery; and to the
Virtues of those that are now in use, is added one Receipt or more, of some
Learned Physician. The Doses or Quantities of such as are prescribed by the
London Physicians, and others, are proportioned. Also Directions for making
Compound-waters, Syrups, Simple Medicines. Moreover the Gums, Balsams, Oils,
Juices, and the like, which are sold by Apothecaries and Druggists, are added
to this Herbal; and their Virtues and Uses are fully described.

These four by the Author of this Practice of Physic.

The General History of the Reformation of the Church written in Latin by John
Sleidan, faithfully Englished. To which is added, A Continuation to the End of
the Council of Trent, by E. Bohun, Esquire in Folio.

Pains afflicting Human Bodies: Their various differences, Causes, Parts
affected, Signals of Danger or Safety; showing the Tendency of Chronick and
Acute Diseases, for a seasonable prevention of fatal Events. With a Tract of
Issues, and Setons; by E. Maynwaring. M. D. Octavo.

A New Description of Paris; Containing a Particular Account of All the
Churches, Palaces, Monasteries, Colleges, Hospitals, Libraries, Cabinets of
Rarities, Academies of the Virtuosi, Paintings, Medals, Statues, and other
Sculptures, Monuments, and Public Inscriptions. With all other remarkable
Matters in that Great and Famous City. Translated out of French. The Second
Edition, to which is added a Map of Paris.

Letters of Religion and Virtue to several Gentlemen and Ladies; with some
short Reflections on diverse subjects.

Pia Desideria: Or, Divine Addresses, in three parts; 1. Sighs of the Penitent
Soul. 2. Desires of the Religious Soul. 3. Ecstasies of the Enamored Soul.
Illustrated with 47 Cuts. Written in Latin, by Herm. Hugo; Englished by Edmund
Arwaker, Octavo.

The Art of Catechizing, or the complete Catechist, in four parts. 1. The
Church Catechism resolved into easy Questions. 2. An Exposition of it, in a
continued, full and plain Discourse. 3. The Church Catechism resolved into
Scripture-proofs. 4. The Whole Duty of Man, reduced into Questions. Fitted for
the meanest Capacities, the weakest Memories, the plainest Teachers and the
most uninstructed Learners.

Country Conversations: Being an account of some Discourses that happened in a
Visit to the Country last Summer, on diverse Subjects; chiefly of the modern
Comedies, of Drinking, of translated Verse, of Painting and Painters, of Poets
and Poetry.

Golden Remains of Sir George Freeman, Knight of the Honorable Order of the
Bath: Being choice Discourses on select Subjects.

The Present State of Persia; with a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion
and Government of that People. By Monsieur Sanson, a Missionary from the French
King. Adorned with Figures. Done into English.

FINIS.

