Advice to Balam's Ass; OR, Momus Catechized. IN Answer to a certain
Scurrilous and Abusive Scribler, ONE JOHN HEYDON, AUTHOR OF Advice to a
Daughter.

By T. P. Gent.

Pendentem volo Zoilu^ videre.
My longing Eyes desire to see,
Zoilus embrace the Fatal Tree.
LONDON: Printed by E. B. for Henry Marsh, at the Princes Arms at the lower
end of Chancery Lane near the Inner Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, 1658.

To the Ingenious READER.
WHen the Wisdom, Prudence, and Learning, of Mr. Osborn lively depainted in
his Book entitled Advice to a Son, had five times been invested with the
Trabea Triumphali, the honorable Robe of universal applause, we had less
reason than the female instructor has brains, to suspect an Homero-mastix,
one that durst malepertly endeovour by the interposition of his opacous and
ridiculous conceptions, to eclipse the splendor of such an eminent Author.

Had any Man of Learning and Modesty thrown down his Gantlet in defiance of
some particulars, referring to study, Travail, Government, Religion, or perhaps
like a Knight Errant in defense of Ladies seemingly wronged, my Pen should
still have retained its quiet repose, and only my wishes have supplied the
place of Heralds, to search the Champion, least instead of the Sword of Truth,
he should wound his Antagonist with the unlawful weapon of Malice, lent him by
her Sister Vainglory. But since the Master of Gotham College, a grand
proficient in Bacchus's School, and meriting to be chief professor of
Billings-Gate begins to bark, I shall (he being far unworthy of Mr. Osborn's
Lash) muzle him, and thank my auspicious fortune, if in requital of my journey
to fetch him Hellebore, I might pluck Narcissus, the Secretary of God and
Nature, (as he styles himself) from a fond admiration of the Chymaeraes of his
own brain.

He will brag perhaps that I durst not affix my Name to these my castgations of
his Advice to a Daughter; and very true, for if a Cedar in literature be a
namelesse overworn wittall, what may a shrub whose* highest honor is only to
be a lover of such, expect? I for my part esteem it little wit, and less
breeding, to use such dirty language as he delights in, which a Gentleman
should abhor to vent, when a just offense has blown his possion into a flame,

Yet he shall find me so favorable as to interpret what is dubious to the
best sense, and to let every thing pass for weight, which wound up in candor,
shall prove equally ponderous to one grain of reason. the Author often
boasts, that this his Gourd sprang up in Sixteen days, I may truly affirm
that what you see, was but the employment of a few vacant hours.

Let your candid approbation (Courteous READER) second me whilst I fight this
great Giant, whose thundering name would affright many, although nothing is able
to terrify me; but a non-permission to subscribe your ready Servant,

T. P.

Upon the Title.
Advice to a Daughter. MODESTY is the greatest Ornament that a Daughter can
borrow from her common Mother Nature, or has inoculated into the flexible
years of her Minority, by the circumspection of a prudent education which your
Daughter must of necessity want, if she either follow her Father' s footsteps,
or imprint in her memory his sullied exclamations.

In opposition to the Advice to a Son. Your opposition is only culpable in
this, that such a Pygmy as you, wage war with an Eagle in stead of a Crane.

Under these general heads. What shall your Daughter be a Minerva, or rather a
Pope Jone, for she must it seems be a Student, and your first two heads treat
about Free-Schooles, and Universities, that there wants nothing but the pretty
little Elixar, and then Squire Rosa-Crucian the trick is done.

2 Marriage. Any that we will allow, let them have their longing.

3 Travel. Your Daughter must be a gossip forsooth, but let her travel we
shall not want any of your breed, and perhaps by diligent enquiry, she may find
out and transport her Fathers wits; which have so long been a wool gathering in
Spain, or at least in Vino Hispanico, and are now fallen under the inquisition.

4 Government. This head, by him that had an head piece, might have been
totally omitted. A woman shall not need to make Machiavel her sampler: And it is
the privilege of the weaker Vessels to lie at ancre in safe Harbors, whilst
men, the serviceable ships of war frequently sink one another, by the
impetuous firing of open violence; or give chase, until the quick sands of
dissimulation and envy, glory in the wrack of the now transparent carrick.

5 Religion. Let serious study first embroyder your own soul, with the eleven
moral virtues, resolutely solicit Heaven until you obtain the three Christian
graces, Faith, Hope, and charity: Then when your soul shall be a pure fountain,
I shall not resist, that all your daughters should zealously imbibe your religious
precepts.

Conclusion. I am glad your Book shall have an end although sorry that you
should stagger six miles in such a difficult road, where your despicable wit,
and indiscernable learning know scarce one step of the way, yet you are sure of
fit company, if the Adage be true, Stultorum omnia plena. But it matters not
when your book ends, for a few lines will make the Reader weary, and enable him
to conclude, what both it and the Author are; that is to say none of the
wisest. And if there be any one misdoubts it, let him or her rather (for it is
the advice to a daughter,) open, and they may at the first search receive an
undeniable demonstration.

By Eugenius Theodidactus. Make room for the noble Gentleman Mr. Eugenius, and
his friend Mr. Mr. a very hard name, I wonder who was his Godfather: His name
begins with T. H. but it is not Thomas, nor Theophilus, nor Theodosius, O now it
comes, now it comes, it is Theodidactus. Pray sweet young Gentlewomen, let me
add this advice to your good Fathers, that ye would every day get without
book, one syllable of your Dad's name; And so in nine days, ye shall overcome
a nine days wonder, but honest Sir Eugenius, would no name serve your ^urne
that is English, or Latin, but you must needs trouble some old Reader, to buy a
new pair of Spectacles, that he might take up an old snip of Greek to make
John Heydons daughter an Apron? Alas why should thou provoke him to curse
Scapula, because it is a longer voyage from A to B. then from the twenty fifth
to the twenty sixth of Job? If you had been desirous to have been adopted a
Grecian; I could have furnished you with a name, but I dare not write it in
Greek, least you should make Affidavit my pen drew conjuration circles, it is
Diabolus; not that I esteem you a Devil, no, for the Devil has wit,
although he wants grace. But because I find that name in the Muster-roll of
that Regiment to which you belong, namely, in Plautus his Asinaria.

Thus having escaped the formidable jaws of this Attick B^gg. Bear, if we
please to turn over a new leaf, fortune may be so propitious as to show us a
name suitable to an English ear, and not bafling the retention of a vulgar
memory.

To the excellently accomplished Gentleman, Mr. Charles Bruton Citizen and
Merchant Adventurer of London, etc.

Whither these Epithites are deservedly ascribed, let Mr. Brutons acquaintance
be Umpires: If they be, I wish his Fame had a more worthy Trumpeter: If they
are not, let him (to supply those defects*) without procrastination admit
himself Pupil to Morality, and what erudition is ingenuous.

Much Honored Sir,
I shall only make this adjoynder:

Luctare ut niveum Laudis meruisse Lapillum,
Te Famae insignis Buccina Vera canat.
Honored Sir is espoused to your name,
Let desert force the World to vouch true fame.

I here trouble you with a short discourse, if your Patron instead of every
way, be but any way accomplished, you never spoke truer, then when you said I
trouble you.

It is no labored piece, That Is easily granted,

And indeed no fit present! That Is right, unless it be to Dunne Lord of
Tyburn, who by way of requital, may for the small sum of thirteen pence
halfpeny, added as a gratuitie, make you tenant for life of his tri-angular
patrimony.

But I beg your acceptance, you may very well beg it, for you don't deserve
it. But it is well, that you will have one Place in your book, that carries a
tincture of modesty.

The first time I ever saw the advice to a Son, was the last day of Hillary
Term, may be so, but had thou had but half the conference with the stars,
that Nic. Culpeper thy predecessor had; Thou would have begun thy reading,
or to be sure thy scribbling, under a more fortunate Planet, both for thy own
credit, and the Stationers profit.

I read it, and found it full of biternesse against women, etc. Indeed this
particular is something severe, but he that would drive an head strong youth to
riches and honor, may well take leave to hold the Reins straight.

I shuffled up the answer in sixteen days for your spare hours, you are no
artificial gamster it seems, for in recompense of sixteen days shuffling, I
know no body ever cut you an Honor, yet you have aptly expressed your mushrom
to be sauce for spare hours, for he must have very little to do, that bestows
the reading.

In which you may make your self merry, yes, for it is not a Doctors Gown, but a
fools coat that excites laughter.

For it w^^ in this last Vocation when, I did not ^^ much labor as play, etc.
I don't know whether it be your ign^rance or the Printers negligence, that
can^^ distinguish betwixt Vocation and Vacation but, peradventure your Vacation
is you^ Vocation, as it is with others busy to as litt^^ purpose as your self.

I found him a Namelesse Overworn Wittall. He was namelesse it is true, but it is
this ^ wonder at, how he durst at last disclose hi^ name, when such a Man as
Mr. John Heydon had vowed himself the Champion of wronged and abused Ladies.
And as for over worn wittal, because you are not Compos Mentis, you shall be
constrained to die intestate, and reserve that for your heirs; but because you
are ambitious to be eminent in something, since there was one Asinius Pollio a
famous Orator among the Romans, and one Porcius Cato, a Man almost as wise as
our Author, what if you assume Wittalius? that you who are Vir trium Literarum,
may become a nobleman Trium Nominum, or rather if you would set up Bills, and
exact Farthings a piece for the Sight of a profound exact Rosacrucian, style
your self, Don Johannes Heydonus, Wittalius, Eugeni^, Theodidactus De More
Fields, and then it will do, I Will warrant you.

That five times before I espied him, had adulterated the Press, and abused
Ladies and Gentlewomen. It was you adulterated the Press, for not only two at
a time, but two hundred witnesses will attest, that Nonsense and your Daughter
lay there together, and it is you abuse Ladies and gentlewome^, and not he, who
dare take upon you to instruct them when a chequered kitchingstuff Wench might
reach you to reverence your betters, and a Lady of fourteen judiciously deride
some of your notions.

And no Man dare answer him, (for so be reported) etc. Sir, I should have been
thankful if you had quoted the place; but take it, for once upon your credit,
it houlds true yet, for although he said no Man durst answer him, He was never
so angry with AEsop, as to deny that the dull Ass could bray Reproaches against
the courageous Bore.

I will see what and who this diseased Maccabee is. You are very charitable in
pleasing to visit the sick, but since you have borrowed so much Divinity to
garnish out the collation of Advice you present the Ladies with; let me entreat
this favor, that you would not defy a Maccabee of all People, because the
Maccabees are descended from the house of Levi.

And prove his discourse and hard censure of Ladies and Gentlewomen, like the
blasts of Roms horns before the walls of Jericho; that throws down the
reputation of Ladies at one utterance. What Sir are you horn mad? I thought all
this while by your mad prating, that your brains were at Jericho, but make an
antidote of a poison, and if Rams-Horns blew down the outworks of Ladies
reputations, wind your own horns whether you have the horns of Aries, Taurus,
or Capricorn, actually left you by Nic. Culpepper for a legacy, or only
vertually in Causa Efficiente. and then one don't know, but that you may tote
the diseased Maccabee into Repentance, down with His Honor like the Walls of
Jericho, and force him to give all His Estate to the Printer, that His
Recantation might be published in Capitals large enough to be distinctly Read,
by the Inhabitants of any interjacent place, betwixt Oxford, and Quinzay.

To the BOOK and READER.
And now my Book let it not stop thy flight,
That thy just Author is not Lord or Knight.
An. Who dreams you Lord or Knight? prove if you can,
First your self just, then next a Gentleman.
Thy Bulk's not great; it will not much distress
Their empty Pockets, but their Studies dress.
An. The Bulk's not great; yet it does much express,
Not Students Help, but your own Nothingness.
And this perhaps may sometimes move their Laughter,
That thou art called Advice unto a Daughter.
A. She that don't Laugh at Advice to a Daughter,
I shall never count for A Wise Woman after.
I could have voyc'd the forth in such a dress,
The Spring had bin a Slut to thy express.
That Is nothing, it is ordinary for you, and your Brethren to work Wonders.

It Is Women's Virtue I do tell abroad,
For Women-Angels are, sent us from the Lord.
Women-Angels, observe that Angels are of the Feminine Gender, you may Read all
Haward through, and not gain such a remarkable Notion: I am none of the
Greatest Strangers to Latin and English Poetry, and yet I think the last
Verse, was longer than Parnassus by half a foot.

But least you should fall too much in Love with Our Authors Muse, Pray lend
your View to this Elegant Prose.

To his Daughter.

Daughter, I have forborne to set your Name on the forehead of these
Aphorisms, not that I am ashamed of either of them, or you.

You ashamed of your Aphorisms, No, it is enough for the Stationer and Reader,
to be so. Make but your Daughter as Brazenfaced as her Father, And if any of
her Uncles the Chemists take like their Coryphaeus Friar Bacon, Send Her to
them; And they shall not need watch three Weeks, to hear A Brazen Head Speak.

But because your Enemy, and his Son, have done so before me. If they have
bin your Enemies, No question but Gratitude will reconcile them to you, since
you are pleased to Honor them with an Imitation, for which they are wonder
fully beholding.

First we give to all the Virtues, the Habits, and Visages of Women. I hope you
are so well Verst in Axioms, as to understand Nullu^ simile est Idem; All is
not Gold that Glisters: And are not all the Furies also pourtraied like Women?

Justice is naked, and is it not fit that all the Sex should imitate such an
excellent pattern and Mistress. Excellent advice, surely your Father is the
Key that unlocks Venus Cabinet. By going Naked you will save A great Deal of
Money, And though ve shall have no Pockets to put it in, your Father with his,
will supply that defect, And ye shall be sure not to want credit, as long as
your personal Estate is so Evident. But how will ye reconcile going Naked,
with the Advice in the latter part of the Epistle?

Follow not Daughter their Fashion, that uncover the chiefest parts of their
Beauty, As their Face, Neck, Breasts, and Hands, as the Index of the more secret
object. Note, ye must always wear Masks, Eat with your Gloves on, Not hold
up your Head for fear ye should show your white Necks. But since he would have
you cover all parts, let your Names be written upon your Breasts, Or for the
satisfaction of your Acquaintance, hire a Crier for a GentlemanUsher; that he
may salute each passenger with O yes! O yes! here goes Madam such An One, etc.
Really it would be a Riddle how to please your Father, (first ye should go
Naked, page 2, then all covered page 4,) But that his worship is his own
Interpreter page 5.

My Advice is to show all, or Nothing. It Is great pity He is not chosen Major
of Blomsbury, or carnal Rector of St. Giles in the Fields. Such Titles were
More proper to such An Adviser, than the Secretary of God and Nature, page 3.

Women uncloathed are all alike? Yes, as much as Venus and Hecube, Alabaster
and a Westphalia Gammon.

Man is the Consummation of the Creation.

The great Book of Nature was perfected by Man's Creation; Only Woman was made
Vice Corollarij, as a Postscript, or Appendix.

And Woman the Consummation of Man. Nay, Pray Iet Man be the consummation of
Woman, for reflect either upon the Admired pulchritude of the Body, or
excelling faculties of the Soul, and what may glory of these, but the Head?

How general is the affection of Old Men to Women? Well, perhaps by continued
practice, they have at last obtained Virtue in Gradu Heroico, in the highest
exaltation; And therefore now dare grapple with the worst of Evils.

If any Clumsy Old Doting Wittall, etc. You do well to furnish your Daughters
with Complements, I hope they will retort them upon their Father; Although He is
such An Eminent person for His writings, that He who protests against the
sufficiency of Them, Adventures to make the Sun Stand Still, and wilfully goes
about to Counsel his Master. page 7. and 8.

The World is full of Deceit. And your Book is not without; For when I saw it
first, I charitably expected prudent Admonitions, drawn by the Pencell of an
Eximious Rhetorician; but found A few frigid Conceptions, distilled in the
Balneo Mariae, of a Rosa-Crusians Noddle.

Beauty affords contentment. But it is too feeble a foundation, for a Wise Man
to build his Felicity upon; yet thus far I Will accord with you, as I once vented
my Thoughts upon this Subject. Beauty alone may for a time content,
But to my Bed a Virtuous Wife present.
Let Age, or Sickness^, surrow her smooth Skin,
They cannot raise her Beauty that is within.


I know there was much of Naked Truths in it.

If your Daughters would follow your Advice, forecited page 2. they should also
as well as your Book, show much of the Naked Truth.

Your Loving Father, etc. You might have spared, etc. for every intelligible
Person will ad an, et caetera; And so for this time we will say, You writ this
Epistle, etc.

Advice to a Daughter.

Who is this that darkneth Knowledge by Words without understanding?

I answer, John Heydon.

Come thou Embrio of an History, thou Cadet of a Pamphleteer. Why thou Geoffrey
in swabberslops, thou little Negro mounted on the Elephant of thy own Folly,
you and I will be sure to write something Authentic, as long as we can steal
from Mr. Cleeveland's Diurnall-Maker.

And now I think upon it, I will allow thee time to Breath. Bravely resolved,
a Noble Enemy is always courteous.

It speaks like a Man, etc. Then by your own confession it is rational.

It is the first tincture and Rudiments of a Writer, dipped as yet in the
preparative Blew, like an Almanac Well-willer. Our Gentleman likes Mr.
Cleeveland's entertainment so well, that he is come again for the other Dish,
and falls on like a most undaunted Plagiarie. Send out an Hue and Cry, and you
will overtake him in Company of a Uncharacterized Diurnall-Maker.

Behold his directions, etc. Under the five general Heads I will cut off, and
you will think him the Tripple-headed Porter of Hell.

Alas Sir, that you should forget to make a Commentary in Folio upon this
Mystical Expression: Your Enemies five Heads shall be cut off, Ergo the
leaving Him no Heads, is the way to make him Tripple-Headed. If Little David
(as you style your self) stumbles thus upon Nonsense, the Ladies may account
it a sad Omen, that their Champion may chance not to kill great Goliath.

I scorn to kill him, I Will only box Bim, Kick, and Cudgel him for his
boldness. You scorn to kill him; Oh show me the like favor, and let us both
Live to make Panegyricks of your Clemency, yet we are courageous; Against your
Cudgel we will furbish our old rusty Back-sword, and since you are Nettled, you
shall have leave to Kick. And let him know, he is the better Man, who has
besiedged and taken a Town; not plotted to rob an Orchard.

The robbing of an Orchard was not attributed to the better Man, but to the
craftier Boy. But whither you are that better Man that besiedged and took a
Town, I Will not dispute: However, without question since you wrote this
Excellent Piece, the Town has been your own. STUDY.
Para. 1.Here, He complains of the loss of those times, which I could wish I
had not known. Mr. Osburn complains of losing the Advantage of his most docil
time, but you see our Author loves not Learning so well, as to think his most
docil time worth taking notice of. Then he runs from the Sense of his
Antagonist, and lends his Daughter an Use of Instruction, which he borrowed
himself.

2 I believe our much use of Srong Beer, and gross flesh, is a great occasion
of dregging our Spirits and corrupting them, till they shorten life. You may
believe him, for Experientia docet Ebrios, aeque ac Stultos.Experience is the
Mistress of Ale-adorers, as well as of Fools. And those grosser fumes
corrupting the Spirits are the probable cause why his Style is so languishing,
and Booke-short-Liv'd.

Weigh every Man's Education as his means have been. If you were as Rational
in every thing as in this, you had saved me the trouble of Animadversions: It
is indeed in vain to expect the modestly-blushing-Roses, and the dapled
Gilliflowres, vapouring with their double and treble diadems, in an
incultivated Field, which an affected neglect of the despairing Tenant, has
dedicated to Briars, Nettles, and the contemptible production of Thorns and
Thistles.

3 Besides, if I must describe a mere Scholar, he is an Intelligible Ass, or
a silly Eellow in Black. Must I? must Sir Thomas Overbury, you should have
said? from whom without so much as mention of his Name, you impudently steal a
whole Leaf: See over Character of a mere Scholar.

4 There is no Syntax betwixt a Cap of Maintenance, and an Helmet. What Is the
reason, but because most Men like Hacknyes, cannot endure to go out of their
Usual Road? for if a Scholar durst as well read the lines Engraven in Men's
Foreheads, as those written in Cassick Authors; He (being not only Gold Ore, as
he is a Scholar, but refined Gold, as having learned to exchange Probo quod
Non. a contradictory humor, into Sir I kiss your Hand, a Politic and
Submissive compliance) would become fit to receive the impresse of supreme
Authority; Being Stamped with Honor on the forepart, and bearing on the
Ranverse Regal Favor and Munificency.

5 Here he fancies the Habit of the Jesuits. This is without controversy,
that what is exemplarily good may and ought to be followed, let whose will be
the Professors, Even pur-blinde Pagans, and the more barbarous Turks. And
although some Fellows of Colleges, have more Pride than Learning, yet since
they are as petty Magistrates, their Place commands Reverence from Inferiors.

6 Here he would have his Son make some inspection into Physic, etc. It is
implanted in all Men by Nature to desire long life; And consequently, his
Society must be acceptable, who is supposed a fit Ambassador, to persuade a
League betwixt the four Elements, that they may unanimously concur in
resisting Death, their common and Fatal Enemy.

The seventh is tolerable.

8 Idle Books (like you Natural Knave and Artificial Dissembler) are nothing
else but corrupted Tables, in Ink and Paper. What still more of the
Beere-Warders Dialect? I must confess your foul-mouthed Thunderbolts cannot be
retorted; For you are no Natural Knave, although a Natural Fool, and you are
no Artificial Dissembler, although you be an In-artificiall Slanderer, and so
long you are safe.

Our Law makes no difference betwixt the Thief and the Receiver. Ans. Then woe
be to them who buy your Books, where there is so much stolen.

His foolish Sentences dropped upon Paper in his Advice to a Son, has set folly
on an Hill, and is a Monument to make Women infamous Eternally. I Answer, They
are wise Sentences; but only when they stand in competition for the Garland
with yours; But without an Ironie, I take leave to suspect you looked through
the Vitiated Medium of your own stupendous Ignorance, when you saw his Folly
upon an Hill, for if it were so evident, some other should have seen it as
well as you, And if it be folly, ( Te ipso Iudice) it is as long lived as the
greatest Wisdom; for it is an Eternal Monument, although not to make Women
infamous.

9 Would you know what kind of Stuff this is? It is all his own, and that is
a very punctual Answer.

10 This is full of very significant Expressions; Mr. Cleeveland is huge happy,
that he has so much worth the borrrowing by such a Learned Author.

12 He advises his Son to converse with the wits of the Town, to refine his
Spirit better than Books. He speaks of no wits in the Town, but says Good
Company is a better refiner of the Spirits, than Ordinary Books: Good Sir, be
a little more honest in citing your Author.

13 Of the Advice to a Son. Propose not them for patterns, who make all places
rattle where they come with Greek, and Latin. Now mark Heydon's Inference, I
should believe him a foolish Jugler, that sprinkles his words in any vulgar
Tongue against the Lawful Magistrate, Ecclesiastical or Civil: A Rare
Commentator, you don't blame them who murmur against a Magistrate; ay, and
against a Lawful Magistrate, so it be but in an unknown Tongue.

14 Arm! Arm! The Advice to a Son speaks Treason against the Majesty of our
Rosa-Crucian, and yet you never regard it: He affirms no Thief (The Genius of
a Plagiary) is sufferable, who comes not off like a Lacedemonian, without
discovery.

16 Here he commends John Cleeveland. What plain John? your fellow? but let
that pass toward the latter end. He insinuates want of Study makes fugitive
Divines, like Cowards to run away from their text. He is an expert Disciple of
theirs, and loves dearly to run quite away from the Subject he undertakes.

The 18 is nothing to the purpose; yet we will allow Sir Tho. Over. Paradox to
be witty.

19 He that reads the Fathers, shall find them written, as it were with a
Crisped Pen. Although this be true, I suppose I may pass without being branded
as censorious, if I Judge the Languages the Fathers are written in, no very
intimate acquaintance of Mr. John Heydon's.

23 This is the Author of Advice to a Son, that goes to Sermons only to show
his Gay Clothes. It is very unjust that the Accuser should be Judge; but I Will
grant you an Admirable Chemist, if you can extract Pride out of this Advice:
Wear your Clothes neat.

But it is no Prodigy, if an Author be Injuriously interpreted, on whom
Ignorance and Malice are Scholiasts. Here is almost an other Leaf stolen from
Sir Tho. Overburie's Charact. of a Proud Man.

26 To the Father advising his Son not to Gallop through a Town. He replies
thus;

Why so? A Party may be riding post upon Life and Death, and then it is but
being careful, and there is no danger. Who can forbear adoring this Man's
Ingenuity? But to his exception, I may ad another; That if he should chance to
crowd a Cart up Holborn Hill, he shall have leave to make the Horse Gallop as
fast as he can.

29 Our Author commends Hunting; and I shall not discommend it, provided the
Hounds chase not away Moderation, without which, the Choicest Recreations are
culpable. But for my own part I affect no Hounds, but such as the Duke of
Saxo^ showed the enquisitive Ambassadors, which were a Pack of poor indigent
persons, whom he phrased the Hounds, with which he hunted for Heaven.

38 Impudence is no virtue, but able to beggar them all. Advice to a Son. How
rare would this be Jack, if it held in all circumstances? why then, you long
before this time had bin a very Landed Man.

40 A Wife is so wise that she can know her Servants Qualities, by their
Countenances; and finding the first fault, will endeavor to amend it. Very few
Wives can do the first, unless they Marry Sander's Disciples, or at least
hear six score Lectures in Physiognomy: And when a Wife dies endowed with the
second qualification, I will make a Funeral Oration for her; and speak it in
the Audience of all the Good Women in the Parish: Nay more, write a Chronicle
on prupose, that I might insert the strange History of her Life.

42 It were a brave thing by use and custom so to order your self, that you
could endure to live without Food. This were a rare knack indeed, doubtless
Ladies it would make ye very slender.

53 If there be virtues, and you be called to speak of him that ownes them,
tell them forth unpartially; if there be vices mixed with those, be content to
let the world know them by some other tongue then yours; do as you would be
done unto. How little you practiced this when you called your Combatant
Natural Knave, and artificial Dissembler, Para: 6. And with the bitter and
detestable Gall of Detraction, squeesed into a rash, and maliciously censorious
Pen, write him the curled lock of Antichrist Par: 39.

54 As our Savior cursed the cozening Fig-teee, never to bear fruit after; So
He is worthy to be hated of Ladies for ever, who boasts of their Favors. A
strange comparison, what will he that has discovrsed so. Theologically, make
of Sion? A Temple for Dagon, by profanely comparing together the Curse of the
King of Kings, and the slights of proud vain glorious Dust. The sweet waters
of Jordan ought not to be contaminated, by commixing the Marah of our Trivial
conceptions.

56 He is virtuous, that is so for virtues sake; (so far we shall not oppugn,) And
chooses rather to lie in Sackcloth, then in Beds of Down, with silken
delights, and Sarsne^ embraces, from Taffata Mobs; who within are nothing but
rotten Bones, and loathsome Diseases. If this be to be Virtuous for Virtues
sake, doubtless Virtue has A numerous Retinue of such, who had rather lie in
Sackcloth then in Beds of Down, where Rottenness should be their
Bedfellow, and loathsome Diseases, not with Flea-bites, but Viperous Stings,
mortally wound the brittle Fabrics of their Bodies; anticipating Hels Eternal
Torments, by the Violent Rackings of temporal Miseries.

LOVE and MARRIAGE.
1 Here like A Spoon-feathered Philosopher, He discourses what Love is; and
has nothing worth Observation but one deep Criticism: How that Hatred is
expressed by the Latins, sometimes by Odium, sometimes by Taedium.

2 You Tredeskin fopperie, do you place Ladies in your Cabinet of November?

If they be such Jewels as you talk of, they merit some Cabinet, or other; And
I think your Book might augment Tredeskins fopperies; for if that were but
there, you had enabled Him to show, another Feather of the Bird of Paradise.

3 He is so favorable now as not to answer by way of opposition, but of
illustration; and since he has consulted with Reason rather then Rage, I will not
deny him my Euge.

4 John a Nokes, I have answered this in my last Paragraph, etc.

Here John A Styles brings his Action of Defamation, against John a Nokes,
because He has compared his Daughters to painted Boxes, which Children, and
Time will empty of delight, and leave nothing but Diseases: well played
Sophister, you only take what you can carp at, A little Honesty would have
inserted what was immediately subsequent to your Quotation; namely these words,
Or at the best incurable Antiquity. And I suppose few Ladies think their
^^dding Beauty, counter-proofe, against the con^ensed Frosts of old Age.

5 Here He inhibits Marriage, etc. It Is true like a prudent Father, He would
persuade His Son (when He might make A ^rosperous Voyage going Mate with
Riches,) (...)

11 Libidinous, etc. A very proper Term; why, because he is an Enemy to Women?

13 Woman is far more merciful than Man. The threatening Waves of Cruelty rore
in some Men's Breasts, but for the most part they submit those frothy Tympanies
to the experimented Physic of right Reason, but Feminine Malice is too often
found inexorable.

14 All their aspersions are the less, because they are from their Enemies
Men. There are few Enemies so generous, and brave spirited, as not reciprocally
to wound one another, with the secret Stilletto o^ forged Disparagements. Some
of our Sex experimentally condemn their Brawling Wives. And some out of a
peevish affected singularity, endeavor to stain the immaculate Candor of
Women's Goodness. Yet thus far we must acquit Men, as to a vow that many Skars
in their Reputation have not bin the result of Virile Hatred, bu^ of the
unbridled flashings of fema^^ Tongues.

17 When the Husband and Wife are together, the World is contracted into a Be^^
Man of himself Sir, is a Microcosm; but this Matrimonial Incorporation,
proves often a contraction of the great World; when thousands of Acres are
contracted by Pride and Prodigality, into the narrow limits of a Burying-Place.

He that is perfect and Marries not, may in some sort be said to be guilty of a
contempt against Nature, as disdaining to make use of her Sports, and Natural
Endowments. I answer, Pleasure may fitly be a sufficient Invitation to a short
Walk; But he who Travels, without certainty of Return to the Happiness of a
Single Life, must furnish himself with an answerable Viaticum, and cannot
undertake such a Journey soly upon hopes to meet Pleasure, without he first
banish Discretion. Although I should write a libell against Nature, if I should
accuse Her of noting my Body with such an impotency, (discoverable by others,
or known to my self,) as might render me unapt for the Slaughterlesse
conflicts of Venus; Yet I can read thus much by the slender Glimmerings of
Reason my Soul enjoyes, that the gratification of the sensual appetite is
very Momentary, and it is only Virtue that as a secondary Cause, can Echo GOD's
promise, and say, I will make him an help meet for him.

20 Episco-mastix, etc. He that discharges his Birding-Piece heedlessely,
deserves not the Title of a Good Shooter, although perchance a straggling shot
should tumble down a Bird; just so you let fly at random your Chaine-Shot,
Episcomastix; and therefore should you hit, ingenuity would not assoyle;
because you could not level at any irreverent speech, vomited upon the Pillars
of the Church.

Because she has the subtiler Brain, and To those who account Every Woman a
kind of Sybil, and what ever falls out of their mouths a sacred Oracle, this
may hold good: None can deny that some Women are wiser than some Men, but that
in the general Men's wits should be comparatively blunt, I shall scarce make
the 13 Article of my Creed.

23 Though the Romans had their Vestals, yet after thirty years continuance,
the cruelty of enforced Chastity was not enforce against them, etc. The Vestals
were chosen into the Nunnery, betwixt the Sixth and Eleventh year of their Age.
And it is observable, that notwithstanding they were not prohibited Marriage
after their thirty years expiration; yed did they usually abstain, because,
who Married, in the end dyed A fearful death. I for my part account it facil
to carry that chastity inviolated to the Coffin, which for the succession of
forty years, had quenched the wild Fires of Lust.

Read the twenty fourth in Sir Tho: Overburies Character of A Good woman, And
the Twenty fifth in that of A Good Wife. This conclusion excepted; Ladies now
your Enemy is vanquished, you may take your pleasures. The old Knights Errant,
used to make the Breath-lesse Giants Heads witness to confirm the Victory:
Had you struck of your Enemies Head, and on the top of your Spear Presented it
to the Ladies, you should have purchased belief: The only way to conquer, is
to beg some auxiliary forces of sagacitie from the Rosa-Crucians; for you may
fear that at length the badnesse of your cause, and the impossibility of
paying Arreares, may make your Lord General and Lord Admiral, Overbury, and
Cleaveland, to desert you.

TRAVEL.
Para. 1. I have discovered more with my Eyes, then Kings can comprehend in
their thoughts. A King is frequently Surnamed Longimanus, because the Energie
of Supreme Authority is very comprehensive: But what is the extent of action,
compared to the immense circumference of Thought? and yet you have seen more
then Kings can comprehend in their thoughts? did you not in your travells see
the poles upon which the Heavens turn? and were you never Astrolo-Medicus to
the Queen of Fairies.

2 He has lived but locked up in A Chest, who has never seen but one Land.
It Is A Maxim, Vnus Oculatus Testis, ualet Auritis december: One eyewitness is
worth ten such as have no other basis for their Testimony then Hear say. If
English Gallants crossed the Seas, (as Posthumous, Sulpitius, Manlius, by whose
observations the Romans made those excellent Laws, called after ward Leges,
Duodecem Tabularum) to dreine other Nations of what might be really serviceable
to themselves, or the commonwealth; Travel would prove A great
accomplishment: but since it is. A general Debaucher, I count him no more
Fool that takes upon Trust from good Authors, and can confine his desires to
the Chest (as you call it) of one Country, as He that dares vie for all things
except Antiquity, with Drakes Ship; the imagined Girdle of the world.

3 The Philosophers Dogmatically aver that every Man has duos Genios, Two
Angels, A Good one exciting to virtuous Actions: And A bad, seduceing him to
all kind of vicious enormities. If you please to know what A Genius is, be sure
to set the edge of your apprehension, and attend this Description.

A Genius is that which from God to one of the seven Spirits is given, to be
transferred by Sephiroth the several orders of Angels, to the Spheres of the
Planets; Lastly, the Moon raises it through the Elements, and infuses it into
the body of Man.

Risum teneatis Amici? I wish I had A Genius that enough,
Could deride Heydon and such rauing stuff.
6 Without Registring these things with the Pen, they will slide away
unprofitably etc. This Bolt is shot against that grave advice, Shun all
Disputes, but Especially concerning Religion. See how Non-disputation, and the
registring cohere. And observe what A strong man our Author is that there is
not any thing, but he can Pull in by the Head and Ears. As you have Examples,
in this and the following Paragraph.

The Sitxh subsequent are pretty moderate and though he writes at the beginning
of every One, I answer, I answer; His answers are not occasioned by A
contradictory Spirit, but because He has sworn to say something though it be
the same in Sense with those Aphorisms flourishing in that Rhetorical Tempe
Advice To A Son.

18 Either Good Wits jumpt, or you and Sir T. Over. Traviller met.

The ninteenth is A Remnant of the (...)ame stolen Cloth.

20 Here He mislikes that His Antagonist should be Servant both to AEsculapius
and Astraea. A Doctor of Physic, and A Justice of Peace,: Why? I hope Sir,
that you are not offended, if A Physician Anatomises the Law, but if He be A
Doctor of Physic, I wish he would cure you of the Frenzy; Or if He be A
Justice, make you a Mittimus to Bedlam.

21 I Advice young Gentlemen not to marry uncomely Women for any respect, etc.
Surely all your Daughters are lovely, or not much beholden to you for your
Council, what must none but Comely Girls have Husbands? Pray see what a good
Father ye have, excellent Council, except sage advice. If any one be crooked,
she is A Bride for None but Death. If the Small Pox digges your Face, And
makes it self Cavities, as A Common shore to carry away the filth and
corruption of the Blood; Ye, may whistle for An Husband and Cry into the
Bargain, and yet go without.

But what if ye were lame or had but One Eye? then ye should be thought stark
blind, if ye entertained A thought of An Husband. And why may not Men marry
unhandsome Women? Oh, because then of Necessity they shall have such Children:
which quotidian experience confutes. I admire Beauty, and yet can look upon the
greatest fulgour of A charming countenance, without dazeling my Eyes. I entend
tolerable Comeliness, should make A part of my entertainment in the Bridal
Bed: yet I both can, and do look upon Notorious deformities, not with contempt,
but Pity, and that Pity is not blab'd abroad to their discontent, but locked
up in my Breast, as a motive to thankfulness for God's more Merciful
Dispensation, And disposition of corporal Materials, in the Architecture of my
Souls Mansion.

24 Here you have the second part to the same tune of affectate Traveller which
(ah me) is now at A period. Well, however it has done, you know who, good
Service; in this, and the forementioned places. I am afraid you will shortly be
a bankrupt; You use to sell Overbury by whole Sale as in the mere Scholar, P.
7. etc. and what is Wit such a scarce commodity, as you are compelled to
Retaile? And he that uses to steal whole Characters makes one serve to stop
three Vacuities, Para. 18. 19. and 24. fie, fie, you drive but a pitiful
Trade.

25 Innes are dangerous if Men be not careful. Ay, and carfulness too is
far short as to warranting security from the Theevish contrivances of A whole
Family not seldom trained up from their Cradle in such excercises.

25 By not calling Servants to an account, I my self have lost more thereby
then I am worth. Our Author was A Gentleman of Quality, and Estate, in the
Golden Age; and I believe much about that time kept great Store of servants.
Only perhaps the Fallacy lies here, that as much as He is worth may quickly
be lost. But if you don't like that Solution, I can reconcile his words to Truth
another way, as thus, our Author makes use of A Prosopopaeia, And so it is not
He to his Daughters, but Sir Walter Rawleigh to His Son, that secures Truth,
and fills this twenty fifth Paragraph.

27 Bestow your Youth in Traveling that you may have comfort to Remember it
when past. Yes, yes, by all means put your Daughters in breeches instead of
Petticoats; And Saylors Frocks instead of Gowns: And let them Ramp through
Greece, Egypt, Arabia, Part of Africa, Italy, Spain, France, and Germany,
which their Father did trash over, if you list to believe Him. Pa. 104. But no
mote of that; let Him who has Traveled so many Kingdoms answer this Dilemma.
This and several other improper Passages in your Book, are either Advice to A
Daughter, or to a Son, if to A Daughter, why do you foolishly and impertinently
put Hercules Clubbe, into the Hand of An Omphale, by giving Advice to A
Daughter concerning Travel? when the greatest Commendation of A Woman, is to
keep the House, and not to Travel further then Duty (if you view Her as A
Daughter) and coniugal obedience (if A Wife) commands, or the Poverty of Her
Neighbor implores. On the other side, if your directions be only proper to A
Son, why bears your Book this Inscription and Title; Advice unto A Daughter.

To the men READERS concerning WOMEN.
Now Men's Heads are broke, there is A kind Gentleman will afford them An
Emplaster, I mean the very same that blazons Himself by the name of Mr.
Heydon, Pa. 111. This Gentleman of his own dubbing, there mentions A Book of
his, which He calls the Rosacrutian Method of Physic, but I shall refer no
man thither, to transcribe a Receipt for the procuring Content, since He may
consult these words in the next Leaf.

Therefore if you cannot forbear to Love, forbear to Link. His Reason is,
because after a while you shall find an alteration in your Self, and see
another far more pleasing then the second or third Love.

A wise Reason: that may only expect the Suffrage of the Bestial part of A
Man. By long smelling to A Rose, my satiated Sense strives to make Me credulous
that the Rose is not so odoriferous as at first. But my reason quickly
discovers the deceit, So by often repetition, the chaste embracers of A Loving
Wife may happen to be nauseated; And the Brutall Appetite promises Her self
Pleasure in a change: but then (In wise Men especially) Reason comes in as
Umpire, and Evinces that A moderate cessation, will be as Sauce to whett
Scaligers sixth Sense, regard we pleasure: And what can be more dear to Virtue,
then Two Souls (or rather one) perpetually engaged to mutual respect, and the
sweet reciprocation of Matrimonial affection. From their Talk you may
infer, that their Heads are not troubled with foundding of Tyrannies.

Nothing is more undecent, and distasteful, then that A Woman should act the
part of an Eagle, and domineer over her Iron: yet sometimes We see, that the
Husband has only the name of Master, whilst the Wife exercises A Tyrannical
Monarchy, over the family.

It is most fit that since Women bring forth Children, they should have the
rule over them when they are brought up: I deny that, unless they want A
Father, for if the Mother, who is better then Her Children, considered as A
concurrent cause to their Being, is obliged by right Reason to be ruled by her
Husband: it is irrational She should Challenge his Prerogative, to rule over
them, unless as A Deputy under Him.

4 Government.
Several Sections at the beginning if Candor be their Advocate, may endure the
test: they being rather A Straggling Comentary, then A refutation. Therefore we
shall leap over the four first Mole Hills, without leaving the foot steps of
our Disdain.

5 Para. The Graecians gave great Gifts, and divine Honors, to those that
killed Tyrants, I answer, It Is true, Liberty is the Darling of the Universe, and
has had such A confirmed Empire in the Hearts of every Man, that few are so
pusillanimous, as not to dare to encounter manifest Disadvantages, and the most
Astonishing Remora, in defense of this their great Diana. Nay, not those alone
whose Souls are enlightened by the Caelestiall Rays of Reason; But the very
Beasts whose entitie is one way or other to be serviceable to their great Lord
Man; do show either a more secret, or violent reluctance, against the
ungrateful yoke of Servitude* The Lion by His Roaring, is his own Herald to
proclaim War against his Jailer. And the Innocent Linnet, which ravishes our
jocund Ears, with the sweet, and Harmonious Agitation of his little Throat:
will notwithstanding ransack the upper, and lower rooms of his nauseated Cage,
and seem by A melancholy posture, to insinuate discontent, because he is
prohibited the enjoyment of chirping Revels, which His warbling Kindred dance
on the contiguous Bushes. It was therefore venial in the ettimicks who had
second Causes for their Hemisphere, and were not assisted by divine Benignity
to take the Altitude of Providence; to reward them with the triumphal Laurel,
who nefariously had died their own Robes Purple, in A Tyrants Blood. But
Xtians, who shall not need to consult deluding Delphos, with the blindfold
Heathen; but may enquire at the sacred Oracles of God's most holy Word: shall
not find their affected Ignorance a satisfactory Apology, if they understand
not that God permits as well A Jeroboam, for A Scourge to chastise refractory
Israel: as sends a Josiah, for a consolation to God's peculiar People. The
result of all is, that it is the greatest Liberty to obey Lawful Authority, and
to use no other Weapons against the supreme Power (suppose it tyrannical) but
heaping Coals of fire upon its Head, by the Evangelicall Stratagem of
forgiveness and Prayer.

8 This learned Gentleman, etc. Who is this learned Shentle man? Learned is the
received compellation of Grotius: What is it he? Oh no, it is the Learned Mr.
Heydon. But I think our Author, (who is well known to be an intimate
Acquaintance of His) cannot prove his words no, not although he had the stout
and approved Duellists, Barbara, Celarent, Darij, Ferio, to be His Seconds.

12 I have often wondered with my Self what should move Governors to Print
Justifications of themselves; which I suppose never made An understanding man A
Convert. One of Regal Dignity, desired not to trouble His Son with the
Acquisition of any other Learning, but the neat Art of Dissimulation. And
AEsop's Cat, knew no greater allurement to destructive Security, then the
making A League with the Credulous Mice. Yet the sincere Lovers of Government,
are content to receive excuses from their Common Fathers, Without A rigid
examination of their Validity.

13 If this please you, pay your Thanks to the Urn of Sir Walter Rawleigh, from
whom (Pardon my audacitie) I a little dissent in one particular, beginning Line
the seventh. For it is frequently seen that Age consolidates that Friend-ship
which was begun young, and makes that to become sincere, which had first
peradventure had no stronger Conglutination, then A Plaufible compliance in
youthful vanities.

15 I answer you mildly where you do not abuse Ladies, and Gentlewomen. And I
for my part Mr. Heydon, delight not in arguing any thing blameworthy which may
deserve a favorable construction: and therefore (as you may often observe) I
shall requite a minim of Modesty, by my Pens leaping over this fifteenth Para:
without a cross Dash of Correption.

16 Praise not your Self, except you will be counted a vain glorious Fool;
neitake delight in the Praises of other Men, except you deserve it. Your
Daughters may retort upon you, as the young Crabb did upon his Mother,
reprehending: Him for retrogradation I shall follow, if you set Me an example.

18 I hate a Coward. So do I, and yet I know that I should be voted worthy of
Death, by the Council of War belonging to the Lord of Hosts; if I should
engage my Enemy, before Divinity as General, and Prudence as my Captain give
the Word.

20 I have perused this head, and find experience ready to attest the truth of
your Adversaries advice. And therefore I adjudge him an English Knave that
squirts aagainst him an opprobrius scoff; in denominating him Don Guzman, the
Spanish Rogue.

23 This is very Poetical, if Fiction suffice, And A mynsterious Hirmos,
guarded with an Army of Hyperbolies, commonstrate, that He is Cousin Germin
(not above nine times removed) to a Rhetorician. As for the charge you exhibit
against your subtle Proteus, in excilling the Chamaelion by the assumption of
whiteness, you your self may (if fame, and certainty, have drunk to one
another the Poculum Charitatis) excel the Camaelion in his unacquainted Red:
For although Nappy Ale, seldom displies the pockets Or; yet it often blasons
the Nose Gules.

30 Take heed how you manage A bad Cause for your Client. Take heed likewise
how you manage A good Cause for your Client. Negligent Remissness, is many
times Mother of as mischievous Events, as down right Knavery. A good advocate
sets all his wits upon the Tenter-hookes, that his Clients Cause may not be
overturned, by the boisterous winds of his opposing Brothers. A confident
Pleader, is well nigh sure to crown A good Cause with conquest when A bad
Cause, (if the Judges Head has a shelfe for St. Austin, as well as for Sir
Edward Cook, I mean is both Learned and Conscientious) shall make A bad Market:
Although fringed with the most select Rhetorical Raptures, and burnisht with
an undaunted impudency: Our times would prove Halcion days, if every Gentleman
dignified with the long Robe, did but intently ruminate upon Christ' s precept,
and King James his motto; Beati Pacifici; neither can we totally attribute it
to the Lawyers Breath, that the sparks of discencion are cherist into
destructive Flames. The impetuous vulgar, seems resolved to blow up their own
estates with the restless prosecution of Revenge: And that contention many
times devours whole estates, besides the tedious exactation of many years
patience, (as if poverty were so coy, that She requires such obsequious
Servants, and necessity must needs be Treated at such vast expense) which by
two Judicious and impartial arbitrators, might have been composed, and ended
for the honest Corydon, in little more time, then He takes to bounce on his
Leather Array, when the shrill Song of a pusillanimous Cock, hurries him away
to Plough. I shall commend to Lawyers serious thoughts, as an Amulet against
Covetousness, their capital Crime, A Quaere of more concernment, then any to
be found in Dyer; which himself puts Math. 16. verse, 26. What is A Man
profited if He shall gain the whole world and lose his own Soul? or what
shall A Man give in Exchange for His Soul. To the Comminality, I shall
prescribe Arbitration as the most Speedy, and Sovereign emplaster, to heal
their Wonndes: whither in Good-name, Body, or Estate. And never Trot to
Westminster Hall, unless irreconcilable Oppression, and violent Necessity
serve ye with A Sub Paena.

34 Princes words are as good as their Oaths; for they are both Trifles. I
answer, A Noble-mans protestation, is looked upon by the Eye of the Law, as
aequipollent to the Oath of An inferior person. If the unanimous Reason of A
numerous Assembly of Wise Men, thus aporov'd the Stars; what may We
conjecture of the Sun? If Honor can equitably plead A general comprobation,
much more may the luster of Words, of Oaths, which can vouch Majesty, be
conceived abudantly able to expel the Mists of unbeleefe, praejudice, and such
gross Calumnyes, as yours, That they are both Trifles.

36 A Rosacrutian sometimes, to my knowledges, loses Himself in the World,
etc. It Is great pity you speak experimentally; Alas, it was for want of that
profound Science, published by Heydon, and mentioned, Pa. 114. to converse with
their Genius, or Angel, in A corporeal Shape; who knows but he might have
rounded Him in the Ear, and taught, how to extricate Himself out of the
fallacious Labyrinths, of Humane Machinations.

RELIGION.
Para: 3.

I do not think the greatest Clerks are nearest Heaven, much of their Learning
is superfluous. Since England was made A Goshen, by the distinguishing light of
refined Religion, whilst some of her neighbor Nations were left groping, and
stumbling in the langible darkness of Error, and Superstition; Scholars have
not (as I may say) Monopolized Heaven: But the unlearned can understand God,
speaking in their own language, by the mouth of His holy Word. Let Agrippa
write de vanitate Scientiarum to to prove that Every Science, has its mixture
of vanity: Only Ignorance, the professed Enemy of the Muses, dares take up the
Gantlet against this Truth, That Men polisht with Literature, are more adapted
to serve God, and their Country, and to become Vessels of the Sanctuary, then
the knotty Blocks of common Capacities which never were so happy as to meet
with the Plainer of Education: But although this is confessed, yet let those
brave Souls, whose Victories over the most crabbed and disheartning Sciences,
have merited Statues upon the Ambitious Brow of Parnassus; take this as A
Memento; that God is no respect or of Persons: And Pride, that tumbled Angels
out, shall exclude from Heaven Man, who is but Dust, and the Son of Man, who is
but A Worm. A Scholars greatest Embellishment is Humility ushered into the
World, by an inaffectate affability.

No pleasure can make deceit lawful, etc. When the Scribes, and Pharisees, by
veiled and claudestine Wickedness, had so far insenced the Lamb of God, that
takes away the Sins of the World; as that He like A Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, denounces Vae Vobis Scribis, et Pharisaei. We be unto you Scribes, and
Pharisees! the Ever blessed Jesus, often times immediately subjoyns Hipocritae,
ye Hipocrites: denoting that Hipocrasie, was A principal matter in their
indictment: it being of so heighnous A Nature, that it forces A curse from the
bowels of infinite Mercy. Some of the ancient Heroes, have detested A Vistory,
borrowed from their Enemies security, and the opportunity of A dark night*
(When Sol taking repose after his diurnal Careere, and fair Phaebe Neglecting
to light her Torch,) woed them to surprise their Enemies Pavilions, And makes
them Exchange an opacous Sky, for the gloomy Tenements of solitary Ghosts. And
what A shame is it for Christian Soldiers, who fight under the Banner of the
cross, to steal a Victory over their Bretherens Lives, and Estates, be trayed
by an innocent Credulity, not able to discover the frowns of An Enemy, touched
under the Mask of A formal Hypocrasie: yet this Glo-worme, although it shines
to the heedlesse passinger, taken up in the Hand of prudent Circumspection,
loses its fraudent splendor; And He that was always* odious in the Eyes of
God, becomes now dispicable in the sight of the World. A Man cannot cheat
another of A penney, but He loses. A Talent of that caelestiall Gold, which
will Crown uprightness, and Piety, in the Heaven of Heavens. Permit
Hypocrasie to blind the World, thou art represented base in thine own Eyes, by
the terrible knawings of Conscience: so that were there never A Cato to pass
sentence on thy misdemeanors, Self conviction would at last compel Thee, to
approve the Orators Council: (...).

Do nothing culpable, out of Hopes to conceal it: for although you may hide it
from others, you will be conscious to your Self.

Levellers and fifth Monarchy Men, etc. THE grand prop of the Levellers
assertions, is that community practiced by the Primitive Xtians: which Argument
is not satisfactorie to any, but Ignorant, and Ambitious Persons; who abhor
the thought of cuffing Poverty away, with A Fist hard Labor has made
Brawney: and are very sorry to Plough any man's ground, but their own. No
wonder, if under the Churches persecution they lived together who were to die
together, They might well sacrifice their Estate to Charity, who every day
expected to have their Lives offered up to malicious Fury: And this community
was by Consent, not by Constraint; And so now, A Man may Lawfully share half
another Man's Estate, by the owners permission. We need no other Stratagem to
tumble down the Levellers Scaling-Lathers, then this; That the maugurating
Sentence, Come ye Blessed, etc. As also that dreadful Doom, Go ye Cursed,
are expressly referred by the Omnipotent Lord Chief Justice of Heaven to works
of Charity. As feeding the Hungry, Clothing the Naked, etc. From hence I
conclude, it Evident, to every unbyassed Judgment, that it is God' s Pleasure,
(And therefore not to be Contradicted,) that there should be some Poor to the
end of the World. Or else, how should the Goats on Christ's left Hand, go into
everlasting Punishment, ( Math. 25. verse. 46.) for the Omission of feeding the
Hungery, Clothing the Naked, Visiting the Sick, etc.

Now if every ones Estate be equal, where will be the Object of Charity, of
which there is such A singular Care taken by the Holy Jesus? As for the
irrational, and peremptory Fifth-Monarchy Men, (the faeces of An impudent, and
perverse Generation,) who by Stalking with the Enthusiasticall notion of A
Fifth Monarchy, Catch some male content Artificers, and infine endeavor to
Erect A sedicious, and Diabolical Anarchy, Since they will not Learn Obedience
to Governors from the Word of God; I leave Them to the Sword of the
Magistrate, for Confutation

18 That of the Civilians must Be remembered, Licere in Bello, quae ad finem
sunt necessaria: Nothing is unlawful in War, that serves the end, and
design thereof. By this the Civilians intend A Legal War, for if the War
it Self be illicit, it follows, that every Medium, subservient to the
Accomplistment of its unlawful intention, and Design, does circumstantially,
aggravate the crime. If I have no other way to secure my Life, I may be any
means, repel any Power, that assaults it, though Just. You seem to descent
from this opinion, and father it upon Culpeper; Let it be whose Child it will,
Reason scorns to acknowledge it Legitimate: For I must not resist an unjust
Power by unjust Means; how much less repel, A Just Power by any means I can
complot*

21 We cannot be our own choosers in Religion, but must take it upon Trust from
Others. There is no necessity you should venture your invaluable Soul, in the
Bottoms of your Progenitors opinions: You may choose your Religion; only as an
obsequious Son (because nothing is more facil then to err,) let the plausible
infallibility of your tender, and indulgent Mother the reformed Church, assist,
and direct you in the Choice.

26 Fear nothing but God. He that is Holy will endeavor to do this; And he
that is wise, will regard nothing throughout the Paragraph, but only this.

27 There are some things (as the Kings Death) so written, that neither
Astrologer, Geomancer, nor Inchanter, is able to read; But only A Rosacrucian.
I see second Thoughts are best you said pa. 162. you have seen matters fall out
so unexpected, neither Astrologer, nor Rosacrucian, could give any successful
Judgment of them: And that A Rosacrucian, sometimes to your knowledge lost
himself, in the Clouds of the Worlds occasions. I admire How the World should
delude them to whom alone, the misterious Writings of Providence are Legible.

32 The Clergy is as full of Changes as the Moon; for I cannot see one of them
settled in A Church, but before I have heard four Sermons, His face I perceive
is full of strange Gestures, and His tongue of Novelty. Oh Sir, I know you draw
near your end you talk so Idle. Now you are Lunatic, the Clergy is as
changeable as the Moon. I suppose you are beholden to the Clergy, and Shelton,
or some of his Brother Brachygraphers, for the best part of your Book. A Good
Divine, indeed, may be compared to the Moon; which (with due reverence) I do
thus. The Moon communicates no light of her own. So the Piow, Clergy, will not
obtrude their own conceptions: but speaks to the People, as the Spirit gives
them utterance. The Moon increases, and decreaseth. So does the Orthodox
Clergy; first increase in Learning, then decrease in their own conceit, and
bodily strength; spending the Oil should feed the Lamp of Life, That they
might guide their Flocks, in the ways of Truth: But how are Ministers Tongues
full of Noveltie? can any thing be News to A Rosacrucian? Mira canis, This is
News indeed to Me.

CONCLUSION.
Para. 3.

Remember how much Mr. Culpeper and his Wise have done* for you, and thank God
for your happiness, I shall not strive to break Mr. Culpeper's Urn: Yet you
cannot say of him, in relation to us, What we can ( posito Sexus discrimine) say
of his Wife, in relation to you; That she has done for you, even more then one
would desire A Woman to do; And therefore least you should forget Her, (who so
frequently forget your Self,) and so rest unthankful for your happiness, rob
the Art of Memory, of such images, as are apt for that purpose. For example,
suppose you were to remember A certain Animal, called A Cuckold; you may Seal
your Memory, with the sign of the Bulls head or else meditate upon the
Brow-Anclets of Actaeon.

7 Let it be A piece of our daily oraisons that God would guard our Pulpets,
from such Bontefeu's; as like AEtna, and Vesuvius, blench cut nothing, but
flames and fiery discourses, of the Day of Judgment. I answer, if your Prayers
be such, my Amen, shall not conclude them. Spiritual Physicians, sorrowfully
understand, that where one Patient needs A Cordial, Thousands want Corrasives.
Our Corruptions, require several Cupping Glasses.

Let thy Ministers, O Lord! cry aloud, and Awake our drousy Souls; let us
swallow, and digest their Reproves, although never so bitter. And let us
always, with A filial, fear so dread thy Judgments, that thou may not
enter into Judgment, with thy Servants: But drown, oh drown, and over-whelm
our Sins, in the fathomlesse Ocean of thy Mercies, and Crown our souls with
bless, and Immortality. Amen.

Against the second Edition, I will make an Addition. When will that be in
Platos great year? you may save your Labor, the old rusty Sword will never be
furbished; We will grant you an Act of Oblivion, if in the Next Book you choke
the Press with; (for all your works are very dry) you prostrate your self in
an ingenious Recantation, at the feet of Grave, and Learned Mrs. Osborn. With
indefatigable sedulity, Study that great Lesson, of knowing A man's Self. Learn
Humility. Court modesty. Exercise Candor, on all Occasions. And be not so
stupid as to imagine, the Shadow of your frothy, and Contumelius expressions,
able in the least to obtenebrate The Honor, and Luculent Reputation of A
Star, of the first Magnitude, in the Sphere of Parnassus.

Now you are taught some Wit; there is Nothing I,
Wish your next lesson but morality.
FINIS.

