JERICHO'S Downfall;

IN A SERMON Preached upon Jan. 31. 1688/9.

Being a day of Public Thanksgiving to God for our Deliverance FROM Popery and
Arbitrary Power.

By Samuel Peck Minister of Popler.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1689.

Joshua 6. 26. Cursed be the man before the Lord, that rises up and builds
this City Jericho.
THE Notion of Doctrine or a Purgatory in the other life, has been long since
exploded as an idle Dream or Fiction, by a great part of the Christian world.
But that a double Purgatory attends the Church and People of God, in this Life,
all sound Christians firmly believe; the one of Water, the other of Fire. The
former that great Apostle St. Paul styles the washing of Regeneration; Tit. 3.
5.
the other St. Peter calls the 1 Pet. 4. 12.
Fiery Trial. And no sooner almost are they passed through the one, the Water
of Baptism, but instantly they are plunged into the other, the Fire of
Affliction; and both are needful. That they may be cleansed and made like to
Christ in Purity and Holiness, the Laver of Regeneration, or washing of the
Isa. 27. 9. Heb. 12. 10.
New Birth is necessary: And that they may be made conformable to Christ in
suffering, the Fiery Trial is necessary also. It may seem strange indeed; that
Afflictions and Troubles should await Heavens darling, Gods beloved, the Spouse
or Church of Christ; yet it is so Romans 8. 29. 1 These. 3. 3.
predestined, it is so appointed, says St. Paul, for their purification, not
their destruction; no, Christ has said, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against his Church to destroy it. Though God may suffer his People, as the
Prophet, Isa. speaks, to pass through the Fire, and through Isa. 43. 2.
the Water, to Try, Purge, Refine and Prove them; yet is he so far from
intending their destruction, that he has breathed forth many terrible
threatenings against, yea entails an heavy curse upon those that seek or
endeavor his Churches Extirpation and Ruin, by upholding and maintaining the
professed and Implacable Enemies thereof, saying, -- Cursed be the man before
the Lord, that rises up and builds this City Jericho. Whereupon Joshua here
adjures or charge them that they put not their helping hand to this work, for
whoever shall do it, is cursed before the Lord: And Joshua adjured them at that
time, saying, Cursed be the man before the Lord, that builds this City
Jericho.

In this Chapter you have the Story of the Overthrow and Conquest of that once
famous City Jericho, with the reason of it. It seems, it stood in the way to
hinder Gods People in their passage to Canaan, the Land of promise, and
therefore down it must, it must be removed; God will clear a way for his people
to what he had promised, though he be at the expense of a Miracle to do it; as
you find he was here. For Joshua by Gods Direction and Commission compasses
the Walls of the City seven days together, and at last (not by Storm and
Battery but) by the blast of Rams-horns, and the Shout of the People, the Walls
fall flat to the ground; (this was to show the Israelites that the Conquest was
not owing to their power, but to Gods mercy, and what great things God can do
for a people by small means, when he pleases.) Well, the Walls being down,
Joshua and the People enter, and destroy all that was therein (Rahab and her
Family only excepted) sparing neither man nor Beast, Young nor Old, but cut off
all with the Edge of the Sword, and then burn the City, as you read in the
former part of the Chapter. Now this being done (to show what the Enemies of
Gods People must expect) Joshua does, in the name of God, impose a curse upon
him that should go about to build this City again, saying, Cursed be the man
before the Lord, that rises up and builds this City Jericho.

The Text then, you see, contains a curse breathed forth against the Enemies of
Gods Church, wherein you have these particulars.

1. The denuntiation of the Curse [Cursed be the man. 2. The Reality and
certainty of the curse expressed in these words [Before the Lord. 3. The
Subject of the curse or the person cursed [The man that shall rise up to build
the City Jericho.
1. The Denuntiation of the curse [Cursed be the man. We read in Scripture of
many curses denounced both by God and Man: It was an heavy curse God denounced
against Adam, Eve and the Serpent, for their sin: Genesis 3.
Our Savior often poured out Woes and Curses against the Scribes and
Pharisees, for Mat. 23.
their hypocrisy: Moses denounces many curses Deuteronomy. 28.
against the transgressors of the Law: Jacob cursed the wrath of Simeon and
Levi, Cursed be their wrath; for it was Cruel. And Genesis 49.
these curses were often used by Abraham and the Prophets. What a Roll of
curses have you in Psalm. 109. Denounced by the Prophet David against the
Enemies of Gods Church? And such is this of Joshua in my Text, Cursed be the
man that shall build this City.

Qu. But the question is, Whether Joshua did well to curse any in this manner,
since the command is (given by our Savior) Bless, and curse not?
Ans. Yes, No doubt but Joshua might lawfully do it; because in this he was a
Prophet; God had revealed to Joshua thus much, that the man should be accursed,
that should build the City Jericho; so that he spoke this by the Spirit of
Prophecy, foreknowing the mind of God in this matter. This plainly appears by
what you read, 1 King 16. last, In his days (that is in the days of Ahab) did
Hiel the Beth-elite build Jericho; he laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his
firstborn, and set up the Gates thereof in his youngest Son Segub (that is in
the death of these Sons) according to the word of the Lord, which he spoke by
Joshua the Son of Nun, that is in this place, cursed be the man before the
Lord, that rises up and builds this City Jericho, he shall lay the
foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest Son shall he set up
the Gates of it. So then Joshua spoke no more, than what God had revealed to
him, and which he knew would most certainly come to pass; he did it by the
direction and inspiration of the Holy Ghost; for this reason Joshua might
lawfully denounce this curse. -- Yet we must not hereupon think it lawful for
us to curse our Enemies; No, our Rule is, Bless, and curse not: Bless those
that curse you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you,
says our Savior. It may be a wretched Goliath, an uncircumcised Philistine may
accustom his mouth to curses, but such Gall and Poison becomes not the mouths
of Gods People. Besides, he that curses another, does in truth curse himself.
Observe that of David, Psalm. 109. 17, 18. As he loved cursing, so let it come
unto him, let it come into his Bowels like water, and like Oil into his Bones.
As the Bird taking her flight from her Nest, fetches a Circuit, and then
returns thither again, so Curses come in where they went out, and at last
return upon our own heads, as Dust cast in the Air against the Wind. This
therefore is not the use we are to make of such Examples as this in my Text.
But where we meet with Curses in the Writings of the Prophets and holy men of
God, who had the Spirit of Prophecy, we are to apply them to the Enemies of
Gods Church, who seek the Ruin of the true Religion, and profess an open
enmity to the Gospel and Faith of Christ. We may ever with safety take Gods
part, our Saviors side, and curse all those that are Enemies to him, saying,
with Deborah and Barak; So let all [thine] Enemies perish, O Lord: But for
Judge. 5. 31.
our Enemies that have done us any personal or private wrong, to curse them is
(as I said before) unwarrantable, uncharitable and ungodly. -- So much of the
first particular, the denunciation of the curse, Cursed be the man.

2. The next is the reality and certainty of the curse, contained in these
words, [before the Lord] cursed be the man before the Lord. Which words are not
added in vain, therefore not to be passed by without some notice. The meaning
is, let him be, or he is cursed indeed: for what is done before the Lord, is
truly and solemnly done: And therefore the sense is this, That man that shall
build this City Jericho is cursed of God, the Lord Ratifies and Confirms the
curse, and it shall certainly light upon him. There are many curses, which in
this sense are not before the Lord: Such are the Popes Bulls and
Excommunications against Kings and Princes, and all Heretics, that refuse
Subjection to the Papal Power, Obedience to the Sea of Rome: But the persons
thus cursed with Bell, Book and Candle, are not cursed before the Lord, the
Lord has not Ratified and Confirmed the curse; nay, a curse unjustly denounced
and by one, who has no power to denounce it, is not a curse, but a blessing;
As the Prophet speaks of Balaam's cursing Israel, Neh. 13. 2. The Lord turned
the curse into a blessing; So where Rome curses the Lord shall bless.
Therefore we need no more to fear or care for the Popes Curses than a man in
Armor needs to fear an headless Arrow, or a Child's Pot-gun, for an unjust or an
undeserved curse hurts not. But when a man is cursed by a qualified person,
commissionated of God, and that for a just cause, this is dreadful indeed; for
such a one may be said (as in the Text) to be cursed before the Lord. And this
leads us to consider the third particular, viz.

3. The Subject of this curse, or the person cursed [The man that shall rise up
and build this City Jericho.

Qu. And why is there a Curse denounced against him that shall build this City,
or why would not Joshua have Jericho built again?
Ans. For these Reasons.

1. In obedience to Gods command, who had revealed unto Joshua, that he would
curse the man that built it, and therefore he denounced him accursed; besides,
you read, Deuteronomy. 13. 15, 16. That when any City was destroyed for its Idolatry
and other sins committed in it, God Commands it should be an heap for ever, and
not be built again; therefore in Obedience to Gods Command (which Joshua could
not be ignorant of) he would have Jericho as a ruinous heap for ever, and
curses the man that should raise it out of its Ruins, out of its Ashes, in
which he had laid it by Gods Commission.

2. That it might be a remembrance both of Gods Mercy and Justice. In mercy to
the Israelites God takes this City by a Miracle; Now that this miraculous work
of God might never be forgotten, Joshua would have it remain desolate; that so
when People in after ages, beholding the Ruins of it, should enquire the cause
of its destruction, and the reason why it so remained, this might give occasion
to speak of the mercy of God toward his people. -- And also of his Justice
against the Idolatrous Inhabitants of that City whose sins and abominations had
rendered them ripe for Vengeance.

3. Joshua would (or God rather would) have it remain a ruinous heap, for
terror to the rest of the Inhabitants of the Land. As great Conquerors usually
set up some terrible monuments and signal examples of Justice to terrify
others; so this being one of the first or chief Cities after their passage over
Jordan, God, to strike terror into others, will have it destroyed, with the
sentence of a curse upon any that should build it again for ever. By which we
may take notice what a curse sin brings upon most famous Cities and Places.
Jericho was a goodly place, a City, of Palmtrees, a fenced City, whose Walls
reached up to Heaven; yet being a sinful, an Idolatrous City, what a woeful
curse fell upon it, to be utterly destroyed and demolished, and never to be
built again. We have the like instances in Sodom, Gomorrah and the adjacent
Cities, upon which the fire of Gods wrath broke forth and consumed them in a
miraculous manner.

Thus you have heard the words run over in a literal sense: Now be pleased to
hear them in the Mystical, and then you will see how well they suit the present
occasion.

1. First then, by way of Analogy and Proportion, there be many that venture
upon this curse by endeavoring to build up Jericho. Popery is a Spiritual or
Mystical Jericho; and how many are there, that in this sense, have put to their
hearts, heads and hands to build Jericho? Whereby they stop or hinder the
Church and People of God from entering into the heavenly Canaan, as ancient
Jericho did the People of Israel from entering into the earthly. What Strange
and Crafty Means, what Subtle and Wicked Methods have they used and still do
use to raise up this building? As by shutting out the Light of Gods Truth in
those places, where Popery prevails, and is established. By falsifying and
corrupting ancient Authors, that there might be none to witness against them.
By laboring to make divisions between Kings and their Subjects, where their
Religion has not obtained, that they may bring it in, and have it uppermost.
By barbarous Homicides and secret Murders, to remove those out of the way, that
are opposers of their designs, and by endeavoring to root those out of all
places in Church and State, that would not promise and engage to promote the
work. It was Julians Policy to provide that no Christian should be a General, a
Captain, or bear any Office in his Armies. And were not the Jesuits and Papists
Promoting and practicing the same Policy amongst us; when men of Worth and
Honor, both in Church and State, were displaced, only because they would not
subscribe, or set to their hands for the building up of Jericho again in this
Kingdom? And those men advanced to places of greatest trust and profit, as well
as honor, that were for it, and would any ways contribute to it? There is no
end of their Intrigues, Plots and Devices to build up Jericho again. Three most
public and notorious attempts (besides smaller essays) have they made this
way, since the fall of their Jericho in this Kingdom; or since our first
Reformation; In all which they have been bafled and defeated, through the mercy
and goodness of our God, for which we this day praise his name.

1. The first was by a Spanish Armado, styled the invincible Armado, when they
came to rebuild their Romish Jericho, furnished with all Instruments of
Cruelty, and hearts full of confidence that the work would be done, that they
should cut us off from being a Nation, and that the name of Protestant, of
Heretic should be had no more in remembrance. They were so big with hopes, as
to say with Moab, (before the fight) Up Moab to the spoil; 2 King, 3. 21, 22,
23.
up Rome, to the spoil, for the Victory shall be ours; but God, in mercy to us,
Crossed, Cursed that design and wonderfully disappointed that hopeful
enterprise.

2. Their next was the Powder Plot, designed to cut off the King, the Prince
and Royal Family, with all the Noble Peers and Commons (the Flower and Glory of
our English Nation) assembled in Parliament. These blown up, they doubted not
but their Popish Jericho would be built up. Wherefore, as while Nehemiah and
his men were at work to make up the Walls of Jerusalem, the adversaries came
upon them to temper the Mortar with their blood, for they said, they shall not
see nor know, till we come upon them, Neh. 4. 11.
and slay them, and cause their work to cease: And as Pilate came upon the
Galileans, when they were sacrificing, and mingled their Blood with their
Sacrifices; Luke 13. 1, 2.
So when both houses of Parliament were met to make Laws against the rebuilding
of Popish Jericho and for settling the true Religion, then did these Plotters
of Rome contrive to blow up those Lawmakers, resolving they should write no
Laws but in their own Blood. And what a Vesuvius had those houses been had the
Plot taken, had the blow been given? What an Aceldama, what a Golgotha had this
Land been; what a Chaos had our Church and State been? How had our Laws,
Liberties and Religion been swallowed up in that fiery Gulf, and for ever
buried in those Ashes? How would the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, have
triumphed and rejoiced to have seen the Foundation of his Romish Jericho laid
in the Ruins of our English Israel? But our God delivered us from the
barbarous and bloody intendments of our adversaries that time also; As he did
his Church of old from the Bloody Conspiracy of Haman, and brought the Plot
upon their own heads; So that hitherto God has said, as in the Text, Cursed be
those that shall rise up to build this Jericho.

3. And yet they will not give over, but they will to work still, and try once
more. And their last (we pray and hope it will be their last) attempt was
indeed as fair for it, as any before. -- For now they had gotten over a vast
number of builders, Priests and Jesuits, who were night and day employed to
help the work forward in Court, City and Country. Some parts of Jericho they
had erected, some Mass-houses they had set up in the City, and in many great
Towns and Populous places in the Country; which Antichristian Conventicles
were countenanced and upheld contrary to our known Laws; where the Priests with
unheard of impudence decry'd the true Religion as Heresy, and all Protestants
as damned. Heretics; Yea and most blasphemously reproached our very Bibles
(where our Religion, not theirs, is to be found) as false and spurious,
preferring their own Old and Rotten Traditions before the Sacred Oracles, and
the lying Legend of their Saints, before the Testament of the Holy Jesus. Thus
far, I say, were they gotten, which gave them great hopes their Jericho will
now up again. -- And which is more, they had now a zealous King, a Puissant
Prince on their side, who was able by his power, not only to Countenance, but
in some measure to Command that Jericho should be built, having brought over
some of our Judges and Nobles to his Service, having at his Command a well
furnished Exchequer, a vast annual Revenue, a formidable standing Army, with a
great number of inferior Missionaries, that went from Country to Country to
reform (as 'twas called) the Corporations, and to find out such men for our
Houses of Parliament as should abrogate and abolish those Laws that obstructed
them in the erecting of their Popish Jericho amongst us; and all this gave them
great hope it would be done. And in truth this Plot was so formed and so far
promoted, that in their eyes 'twas beautiful as Absalom, without defect or
blemish from Head to Foot. And they were so taken with the Beauty and comeliness
of it (as Nebuchadnezzar was with his Golden Image) that they fell down before
it and worshipped it. What was the matter then that the building went not
forward? Surely it must be this, that the curse of God was upon it. Had there
been so much pains taken, so much time and treasure spent, to advance Gods
Church and the true Religion, God would have blessed it; but the design was to
build up mystical Jericho, which God has cursed, therefore it could not
prosper, therefore all their power and policy could not bring it to perfection;
for which our God is to be praised from generation to generation.

2. Must not Jericho be built again? are the builders of it cursed before the
Lord? Then let us be none of them. I hope none here present, ever had, or ever
will have either heart or hand for this work, or any way contribute toward it:
No, let us in our several Places and Capacities heartily oppose it, and do all,
that lawfully we may, to hinder the building of it. -- To this purpose,

1. Let Magistrates Minister Justice Impartially, and duly Execute the Laws of
this Kingdom against the builders of Jericho; Laws made on purpose to hinder
that work, and to keep up and preserve the true Church of God among us.

2. Attend upon the Ministry of Gods word; this is a Light will discover the
Errors of Popery: And though it seems but a Weak means or instrument yet like
the Trumpets of Rams-horns, it will make the Walls of Jericho to reel. The
Jesuits, and Priests found this by late Experience; when by the Sermons and
other Writings of our Divines, they were bafled and put to silence, yielding up
their Paper Controversy as a foundation too weak to bear up the tottering Walls
of their Jericho.

3. You that have Youth, Children or Servants, under your charge, instruct them
in the grounds of Divinity and Principles of Christian Religion. The Seduction
of many in this Nation to Popery has risen from hence, their not being well
seasoned with the grounds of true Religion.

4. Encourage Learning what you can: For Popery is a Kingdom of darkness and
ignorance, nothing Ruins it like knowledge. It first fell in this Nation with
the beginning of good learning; and the continuance and increase of this will
keep it down; and therefore amongst the rest of the Contrivances of Jericho's
builders, this was one of the chief, to poison our Colleges, to propagate
Popery in our most famous Schools of Learning, and by a Malicious and Illegal
Prosecution to have extinguished, the brightest Luminaries of the English
Church; to the end that the benighted people might the more easily have been
misled into the pitfalls of Superstition and Slavery.

5. And because they Love to fish in troubled Waters; and gain ground by
divisions: therefore let us labor to promote Peace and Union amongst our
selves; let us not differ and quarrel, tear and devour one another for small
matters, but unite, be of one heart, of one mind, and love one another; leading
Holy and Religious Conversations, as becomes our Profession. Popery ever
thrives best in a Land of profaneness; debauchery always did, and always will
help forward Popery.

6. Lastly, one special means to prevent the rise of Jericho is that which this
day occasions; thankfulness to God for the downfall of it; or a thankful
remembrance of the great things God has done for us. When we call to mind
their attempts against us, and how God has crossed and cursed them, it will
make us love our own Religion (which God has witnessed by so many
deliverances) the better, and to hate theirs the more. Therefore let our Souls
and all that is within us this day praise the Psalm. 10. 3.
Lord, for all his mercies of this kind vouchsafed to us; and in an especial
manner for the glorious deliverance we this day commemorate: It is his doings,
and it is mavelous in our Eyes; Not unto us therefore, not unto us, but to
him be all the glory of it. But if we shall be unthankful for this and the like
gracious preservations; if the wonders of Gods Love do not melt our hearts, and
work in them a sincere gratitude to God, an hearty Love to Religion and an
universal holiness in our Conversations; if all the favors of our God toward
us do not win us to a most constant, and Cheerful Obedience to his holy
commands, it will be just with God, that those adversaries should still prove
goads in our Sides, and thorns in our Eyes: Just with God to lay us open again
to their enraged Malice and Hatred, and when we stand in need of deliverance,
to say to us as he did to Israel in distress, I will deliver you no Judge. 10.
13.
more. Stir up your Souls therefore to thankfulness, and testify your
gratitude, not only by words, but deeds; not only by the fruits of holiness,
but also by works of Charity and Mercy: Your labor shall not be lost; your
cost not cast away, for God will reward you. Thus honor him, and he will
honor you; thus bless him, and he will bless you; give him his praises due on
Earth, and he will give you immortal renown in Heaven.

3. And in the last place, to our praises for Jericho's fall, let us add our
prayers that it may rise no more in our days, or in the days of our posterity.
In order to this let us pray,

1. That God would more and more discover and make known the abominations of
Romish Jericho, both in respect of their Religion and practice. That he would
give all men amongst us a more clear understanding of the errors of their
Religion, of the Falsity, Idolatry and Superstition of it, which consists of
unwritten Traditions, diabolical Revelations and Illusions: In fruitless
Penances, and Pilgrimages; in antiscriptural merits, praying to Saints and
worshipping of Images; in unlawful Vows, Masses, indulgences and Dispensations;
that seeing the Errors of their Religion, we may abhor it, and Shun the Society
of those that profess it, and seek the Propagation of it.

2. Pray that God would lay open to the view and observance of all men their
ungodly practices: their promoting Discord and Division in all Places and
Societies; their imposing new Articles of Faith as necessary to Salvation;
their absolving some from lawful Oaths and Vows, and obliging others to
themselves and their cause by Vows and Oaths unlawful. That the all-seeing Eye,
which beholds men in their most secret acts, would detect their barbarous
Homicides, and private Murders, and hear the cries of that innocent Blood which
has been shed both formerly and lately, to enlarge the borders of their
Jericho; a discovery of which would do the cause of God this Service, to take
off the hearts of many from them, and to lessen their strength and number
amongst us. -- And let us conclude our prayers, as our Church has taught us,
-- That God would scatter our Enemies that delight in blood, infatuate and
defeat their Counsels, assuage their malice and confound their devices, and
strengthen the hands of all that are in Authority with Judgment and Justice, to
cut off all such workers of iniquity, as turn Religion into Rebellion, and
Faith into Faction; that they may never prevail against us, or triumph in the
Ruins of his Church amongst us: That Babylon may never tread down Zion, nor
Jericho boast her self a Conqueror over Jerusalem; but that we, being preserved
in the true Religion, may all our days serve him, and give him thanks in his
holy Congregation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

