THE BEST WAY To MEND the WORLD, AND TO Prevent the GROWTH of POPERY: BY
Persuading the Rising Generation to an Early and Serious Practice of PIETY:
With Answers to the principal Cavils of Satan and his Agents against it, etc.

By SAMVEL PECK, Minister of the Word at Popler.

Eecles. XII. i. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the
evil days come not, and the years draw nigh, wherein thou shall say, I find no
pleasure. Minime bonus est, qui melior fieri non vult. Bern. Macte nova virtute
Puer, sic itur ad Astra. Virg. London, Printed by I. A. for Thomas Parkhurst,
at the Bible and three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, near
Mercers-Chappel, 1680.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE Governor, Deputy and COMMITTEES Of the Honorable
EAST INDIA COMPANY: S. P. Wishes Temporal and Eternal Felicity.
Right Honorable,
I Can call God and the Congregation over which God and you have set me, to
witness, that according to my Duty, I cease not to pray for an increase of your
Success and Prosperity, Righteousness and Mercy. That as by the former you may
augment your Treasures on Earth, so by the latter you may secure your Treasure
in Heaven. Or as the Apostle speaks, lay up to your selves a good foundation,
that you may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 1. 6. 18, 19. And can say
withal, as in the hearing of my great Lord and Judge, I have faithfully
endeavored in my place the Promotion of true Religion and Virtue amongst all
sorts; especially the Younger; knowing what advantages attend on Early Piety;
and how much the Hopes and Happiness of our Church and State depend upon a
sober and Religious rising Generation. Consequently, how much it concerns us
all to look to the well seasoning of those Youth that are committed to our
Charge, as we tender the future good of the Kingdom wherein we live. And when I
consider how too sadly true those words of the Poet are (which agree well with
those of our Savior, Math. 7. 13.)

-- Mundi pars maxima nigros
Tendit ad Inferni manes, ubi luctus and irae.
That the most go the worst way. And the many Setters we have in this Age,
whose design is to pervert Youth, and draw them on to Atheism, Popery and
Profaneness; I judged it my duty to endeavor their Safety and preservation.
To which end, I have in this small Essay (to avoid prolixity) summed up what
Arguments I could to prevail with them to be Religious betimes; showing them
both the Necessity, Reasonableness and Advantage of an early Dedication of
themselves to God.

Multa ferunt anni venientes commoda secum,
Multa recidentes ademunt. Hor.
And that Youth affords them many Adjuments and Opportunities for Heaven, which
old Age will deprive them of.

Now my Reasons (Right Honorable) of Craving your Patronage of so small a
work, are these.

My great Obligations to you, which I am willing to take this Opportunity to
acknowledge to the World: A great part of my Encouragement and Maintenance in
the place where I am, arising from your Bounty.

And because I know your countenance of this Undertaking will render it much
more acceptable to those for whom it is designed. The Hand oft-times commends
the Gift. If therefore you shall pardon my presumption, and Recommend it to the
Youth you have relation to, and influence upon, both at Home, and in Foraign
parts, I hope God will send his Blessing with it, and make it successeful, that
you may see an hopeful Progeny rising up to inherit your Virtues, as well as
Riches. Which that you may, shall be the Prayer of

Popler, April 24. 1680. Your Honors Most humble Chaplain and Servant in the
Work of Christ, Samuel Peck.

TO THE YOUTH OF THE PARISH of STEPNEY, especially those of the Hamblet of
Popler and Blackwall, which are under my more particular Charge: S. P. wishes
Early Piety and Endless Glory.
Courteous Youths,
REligion is by some derived from Religando, because it binds us to God; by
others from re Elegendo, a choosing again. Man's first choice is usually evil,
and when he comes to see his Error and choose again, he mends his choice. That
you may make the best choice at first, and so prevent much trouble to your
selves, is my bearty desire. And therefore I have in this Essay recommended
Religion and the timely and serious practice of it to you, in your youth. And
however you may esteem of this Counsel now, in a little time more I am sure
you will say it is good; and wish (if you neglect it) you had been wiser. For
though Satan blinds the eyes of men in life, yet death will open them. I have
ever observed dying persons to have the truest sentiments and notions, the
deepest impressions and strongest convictions of a God, an Heaven and Hell, the
souls Immortality, and future Judgment, of any other. If the profoundest
Hobbist, the rankest Atheist of our Age were present with a dying man, whose
Reason is sound and Conscience not seared, he could 1 Timothy 4. 2.
not by all his reasoning persuade him to believe, that there is no God, no
future state, no reward or recompense to be expected or feared, that his soul
is like the Beasts that perishes, and being once dead there is an end of him.
No, the light of Reason and Conscience, and Principles of Religion, are not so
easily baffled and extinguished when men are leaving the World. Nor can I
believe he that has most and longest endeavored to eradicate all notions and
sense of Religion and of a Deity out of his mind, can at all times quietly sit
down, void of all trouble and hesitation, with this resolve, that he may live
as he list, there is none above him to please or displease, to love or fear, or
to call him to an account for what he has done. Doubtless therefore, you have
a God to serve, and souls to save, and a Rule to direct you how to do the
former, so as you fail not of the latter, viz. The written Word of God: Which
tells you, the World, Satan and your own hearts (if followed) will lead you to
Vanity, fin and endless misery: That it is a timely and an hearty repentance, a
lively faith in Christ, a superlative love to God, and an holy and constant
obedience to his reasonable and divine commands, which alone can make you happy
in this and the other World: That Heb. 12. 14. Phil. 3. 20
without holiness no man shall see the Lord; that your Conversation must be in
Heaven here, as ever you hope Heaven shall be your habitation when you go
hence. So that let the mad World say what it will, Religion is to be minded as
your main business, and the practice of Piety as your greatest concern. And the
sooner you make it so, the sooner shall you be in favor with God, and armed
against the killing sting of the King of Terrors. Which whenever it comes, in
Youth or Old age; will make you either as miserable as Devils, or as happy as
Angels. I shall add no more, but desire you to make this little book your
pocket-companion, which may sometimes be an assistant to you in grapling with a
Lust, encountering a Temptation, or answering any objection or Cavil, which the
Devil or his Agents may make against the early dedication of your selves to
God, by an holy life. Nor shall I make any other apology for this publication
in this Censorious age but this; He that wins souls is wise. Pro. 11. 30.
It Is my duty and desire by all ways and means to promote the good of Souls.
And if among the many thousand young ones in this Parish, I can gain but one
from sin to righteousness, from Satan to God, I shall neckon it an abundant
Recompense for all the Censures I can suffer from evil men. If with holy David
I may glorify God, and serve my generation by doing good, in this or any other
kind, I shall answer the end of my being, and of my being what I am. Which that
I may, let him have the help of your prayers, who compassionately wishes the
eternal health and happiness of your Souls,

April 24th. 1680. Samuel Peck.

IN LAUDEM OPERIS.
IE to reform the Age, and stop the Sluice
Of flowing wickedness that is now let loose
Throughout the world, if to restore in one
The life and beauty of Religion
Unto their primitive perfection,
Or to revive languishing piety,
Any endeavor may conducive be,
It must be such as these preventatives,
The only means to save those precious lives
That yet are free from the inveterate rage
Of Vicious habits, mortal made by age:
Obste principiis, Sin's encroachments be
Best Smothered by an Early piety;
The young men of the Princes must be they
That must the Enemies of Israel slay, 1 King. 20. 14.

And gain the conquest; young men, it must be
Your selves must gain the glorious Victory
Over God's Enemies; such by St. John
Are said to Overcome the wicked one:
Now be Courageous, and to lead you on,
See here is come a Christian Champion,
The will Conduct you against the armed files
Of Hellish Powers, and betray their wiles
Unto your View; follow his conduct, let
Your Eyes be now upon his Counsels set
Hearken unto his Exhortations, bend
Your minds to the advice of such a friend
That sees your danger, and endeavors thus
To render you at last Victorious:
Youths, let your practice be his praise, as one
That seeks no more, the profit's still your own.
R. Tuke.

Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside.
ONe Hundred Select Sermons on several Texts: Preached by Tho. Horton, late of
St. Hellens, London. Printed from his own Manuscripts left under his hand.

Sermons by the same Author on 4th. Psalm: 42, 51, 63. Psalm.

Several Discourses concerning the actual Providence of God, in 55. Sermons on
several Texts: by John Collings, D. D.

Sermons of Grace and Temptation: by Tho. Froysel late Minister of Clunne in
Shrop-shire.

Kingdom of God among Men, with a discourse of Unity and Schism: by John
Corbet, Author of Interest of England.

Christ displayed as the choycest Gift, and Best Master; by Nath. Heywood.

Glimpse of Eternity; by Abraham Caley.

An Exposition on the Assemblies Chatechisme; by Tho. Vincent.

Divine Consolations against the fear of Death; by John Gerrard.

Mr. Edward West's Legacy.

Counsel and comfort for Troubled Souls: by Hen. Wilkinson, D. D.

A Warning to young men, in an Impartial Relation of the horrid murder acted
by Robert Brinkhurst.

A practical Discourse of Prayer; wherein is handled the nature and duty of
Prayer; by Tho. Cobbet.

Of quenching the Spirit; the evil of it, in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered; by Theophilus Polwhiele.

The re-building of London encouraged and improved in several meditations: by
Samuel Rolls.

The sure way to Salvation; or a Treatise of the Saints mystical Union with
Christ; by Richard Stedman. M. A.

Sober Singularity, by the same Author.

The mischief of sin: by Tho. Watson.

The Child's Delight; together with an English Grammar.

Reading and Spelling made easy: both by Tho. Lie.

The Young-mans Instructor, and the Old-mans Remembrancer; being an Explanation
of the Assemblies Catechism.

Captives bound in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; both by Tho.
Doolitle.

Eighteen Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture, by William Whitaker.

The life and death of Edmund Stanton, D. D. To which is added, a Treatise of
Christian-conference; and a Dialogue between a Minister and a Stranger.

Sin the plague of Plagues, or sinful sin the worst of Evils; by Ralph Venning,
M. A.

Cases of Conscience practically resolved; by I. Norman.

The Faithfulness of God considered and cleared in the great Events of his
Word; or a Second part of the fulfilling of the Scripture.

A Cordial Endeavor TO Prevail with YOUTH to be Pious.
CHAP. I.
SInce the first quarrel in the Garden between Man and the Devil, wherein
Satan proved so successeful, he has never wanted Seconds to take up his
Weapons and manage his warfare against the promised seed. God told the Woman
then, I Will put enmity, and has it not Genesis 2. 15.
proved true? Has it not been so all along from Adam to Noah, from Noah to
Abraham, and so to Christ? Mark the whole passages of our Saviors life, and
tell me what day was not to him a persecution? how was he tossed from post to
pillar, and from one danger to another? How many wiles and snares did the
Enemies contrive and lay for him, that they might take him and Mark 14. 1.
put him to death? which though he long avoided, yet at length this their
wicked purpose was effected. And now the Captain is taken, the Soldier must
look to suffer; v. 46.
when the principal is slain, the followers must expect to bleed. The
apprehension of Christ could not quench or satisfy the bloody thirst of these
blinded Jews, but having laid hands on the leader, they eagerly seek after all
the herd. Having rent the Lamb from the fold, they seek to worry the whole
Flock, as appears by the Evangelists relation of the Soldiers dealing with a
young man that followed Christ. And there followed him a certain young man v.
51, 52.
having a linen cloth about his naked body, and the young men laid hold on him;
and he left his linen Cloth and fled from them naked; Fled for his life, and
glad he could escape with an whole skin. Some would have this tragedy foretold
by the prophet Amos; And Amos 2. last.
he that is Courageous among the mighty, shall flee away naked in that day,
says the Lord. But I conceive otherwise: that the prophet here speaks of the
flight of the Israelites before their enemies, which the Lord himself had
threatened of old by Moses Deuteronomy. 28. 15.
for their disobedience. This therefore of the Evangelist cannot be said to be
any accomplishment or fulfilling of any particular prediction of any of the
Prophets. But an Historical relation of what befell this young man, and
consequently may befall any, who will be faithful followers of Christ in a day
of trouble. Which History St. Mark records for two reasons: First, to show the
truth of Christ's saying, That the servant is not greater than his John 15. 20.
Lord, and if they persecute me they will persecute you. Which saying he bids
them remember. Secondly, to discover the Malice of Christ's enemies, whose rage
and malice against him was such, that a bare suspicion to be of his party, to
be one of his followers, was enough to bring a man into eminent danger of his
life. So that it had been Impossible for the Apostles to have escaped their
Violence, had not the Divine power of Christ preserved them for that great work
to which He had assigned them. For seeing this young man following of Christ,
they laid hands on him, and 'twas a narrow escape he made from them. I shall not
enquire who this young man was, concerning whom there are different opinions.
But only note, his action bespake his affection to Christ, for he followed
him, followed him in bonds, left all to follow him, and that when his own
Disciples v. 49. 50.
(the great Preachers and first professors of his Name) fled away and forsook
him. All which circumstances duly weighed and put together, may make up a
demonstration of love and affection. And what this young man did, is the duty
of all young ones to do, viz. to follow Christ, that is, to be truly
Religious, according to their Baptismal Vow, and the Gospel which they prosess
and own. To govern themselves by the rule of righteousness, endeavoring to
answer the hope they have through Christ of future glory, and the many and
great obligations Christ has laid upon them to duty and obedience. And to
convince (you young men) that this is your duty, and to draw you to the speedy
and sincere practice of the same, is the end of this small Essay and
undertaking. Since I am equally concerned for the good of your souls, with
those that are Elder. The soul of the Child is as precious as the soul of the
Servant: The soul of the Servant of as much value as the soul of the greatest
Lord or Master. And when I consider the general Corruption and looseness of this
age, and think how many lie in weight to seduce young ones, some to Popery;
others to open profaneness and debauchery, the high way to direct Irreligion
and Atheism, I judged it greatly needful (in my place and capacity) to give
warning, to discover, and show you your danger, and to prevent it, by exciting
you to your duty. If possibly, I may save some of your souls, or at least clear
my own. Ezekiel. 3. 8, 19.
For when I read and meditate on those words of the Lord by his Prophet; When I
say unto the wicked, thou shall surely dye, and thou give him not warning,
nor speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life, the same
wicked man shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine
hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor
from his wicked way, he shall dye in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy
soul; I tremble, as well to think what will become of those Watchmen, that warn
not, as of those people, who are warned and regard it not. Now though this
Essay speaks more directly to you that are younger, yet the matter of it may be
suitable and profitable to all, both old and young. For when Elder persons hear
how much it behooves young ones to be religious, they may rationally conclude it
highly concerns them to be so much more, who according to the Course of Nature
have less time to spend, and are so many years nearer to Death, Judgment and
Eternity, than the former. I shall therefore entreat your regard to what you
read, in the Psalmists Compellation, Young Men and Maidens, Old Men and
Children, mind the Word of the Lord, which like the rain falling upon the
Earth, shall accomplish the end for which it is sent, either to soften or
harden, to be either a savor of life unto life, or a savor of death unto
death, to every Soul that reads it. And that my words may make the better and
deeper impression, I shall press your duty in this Method.

1. Show you that it is your duty to be Religious in your Youth. 2. Urge the
Utility and safety of it. 3. Answer the many Cavils or discouragements, that
Satan, wicked men, or your own corrupt hearts do or can make against it. 4.
Show the Reasonableness and excellency of it.
1. It is the Duty of young persons to follow Christ, to put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.
To be religious, mindful of God, and the wellbeing of their own souls, both in
this and another world. Hence it is that the Wise man, so frequently calls upon
young men to hear instruction, to learn wisdom and the Eccles. 12.
fear of the Lord; and to Remember their Creator in the days of their youth;
that is, know, love, fear, and serve him: for words of knowledge in Scripture
imply Affection and Practice, Love and Obedience. Beware that thou forget not
the Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 8. 11.
and his Judgments, which I command thee this day; so that not to keep the
Commandments of God, is to forget him; and to do them, is rightly to remember
him: thus Solomon requires thee to remember thy Creator in the days of thy
Youth; while thou art strong, vigorous, and best able in all the faculties of
thy soul and parts of thy body to do good service. So that Question of David,
Wherewith shall a young man Psalm. 119. 9.
cleanse his way, has the force of a command to cleanse and free your ways
from all uncleanness, unrighteousness, perverseness and crookedness, and to make
them direct, upright, straight and holy, according to the Word. And in the
judgment of Jeremiah, this is the proper season for obedience and subjection.
It is good for a man to bear the Lam. 3. 27.
yoke in his youth. Whether you will understand it of Jugum crucis, the yoke of
divine Chastisements, or Jugum precepti, the yoke of Divine Precepts, which is
so heavy and irksom to the generallity of youth, who cannot bear restraint, or
limitation, no not from God himself. Liberty, liberty, they are all for this,
not considering that deteriores omnes sumus licentia, we are all the worse for
taking more liberty than God allows. And men never meet a more certain and
speedy ruin, than when they follow their own Wills. So true is that Proverb of
ours, Wilful persons never want woe. Yet as heavy a yoke as this seems to be,
young men, you must take it up sooner or later, if you will be saved; and the
sooner, the better, the Prophet tells you so: it is good to bear the yoke in
your youth. And St. Paul, who paid so dear for setting out after Christ no
sooner, gives this advice to his young son Timothy, to flee all youthful lusts,
and to follow after righteousness, 2 Timothy 2. 22.
faith and charity. And you read under the Law it was Gods ordinance, that in
the Lev. 2. 14.
Meat offerings of their First fruits, they should offer green Ears of corn.
The Gospel of it is this, that God expects and requires a primary and early
dedication of our selves to him. That so soon as we come to age and
understanding to dispose of our hearts and affections, we should first offer
them to him. For with such offerings, the first fruits, the green Ears, the
youthful age, God is well pleased; as you may gather by the favor of God to
those persons, who very early devoted themselves to his service; as Samuel, who
began to serve God in his minority; Josiah, who at eight years of age did that
that was right in the sight of God; and Tymothy, who knew the Scriptures from a
child; and the children of the elect Lady, whom St. John testifies walked in
the truth. These precepts and presidents from Scripture, 2 Epist. v. 3, 4.
are sufficient to prove that it is the duty of young men to mind Religion, to
walk in all the ways of God, and to take up Christ's yoke and burden, and to
follow him, who in the days of his humiliation encouraged such to come to him,
by telling them, that of such was the Kingdom Mark 10. 14.
of God.

CHAP II. Containing some Arguments to prove the Equity, and Necessity, and
Safety of this Duty, and to enforce the Practice of it.
. 1. SIrs, though at first view this may seem an hard saying, and an harsh and
unreasonable task; yet upon deliberate and serious thinking, you will find it
is founded upon good, upon great, very great reason. It is highly reasonable
and just, that God, who made you should have the best of you, the best of your
age and time. Now our first days are our best. Optima quaeque dies miseris
mortalibus aevi, prima fugit. The choycest part of man's life is that, which
first passes from him. Youth is the Golden age, wherein our souls are brisk
and lively, and our bodies active and strong to labor. Now are you fittest and
best able to watch and pray, and undergo the severities of Religion. Old age
is full of infirmities, dim eyes, shaking heads, trembling hands, and feeble
legs: Old men are dull of apprehension, of bad Capacity and remembrance, and
clogged with those cares and crosses, which youth is free from. And is there
any reason God should be put off with the dregs of old age, when you have spent
your spriteful youth in the service of sin? You read that the King of Babel
would have young men, well favored, Dan. 1. 4.
without blemish, and such as were of great ability to stand before him, and
shall the King of Israel, the Lord of Glory have none to stand in his Courts,
but the halt, the blind and the lame, such as David hated? Old Barzillay
rendered this as a reason why he was unfit to wait on the King at Jerusalem, his
old age; and is old age, which is neither serviceable nor acceptable to men,
good enough for God? When you have not a good leg to bring you to Gods House,
nor good Ears to hear his Word, nor a good Eye to read the Scriptures, nor a
good head to retain nor a good Intellect to apply or improve what you read or
hear, shall God be served now and not before? Has God given you those members,
senses and faculties perfect and good, and will you not employ them in his
service till they are spoiled and fit for nothing? Till the members of your
bodies are multiplied by Crutches and Glasses, and the powers of your souls
quite debilitated and decayed? is there any reason for this? Were you to
present a gift to the King, would you not present the best you have? how much
more ought you to do this to God? dare you think he deserves less than man, or
will be put off with what man will not accept? If you do, you are vilely
mistaken. If you offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil, or the lame and
the Mal. 1. 8.
sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy governor, will he be pleased with
thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of hosts? Take heed therefore you do
not reserve that for God, which you would be ashamed to offer to man: he will
not accept it, nor is there any reason he should. It Is highly reasonable and
just you give him the best of all, from whom you receive all you have and hope
for.

. 2. Youth is the most seasonable time for Religion and the service of God.
Then are men most capable of instruction, advice and Counsel; then are they
most flexible and most apt and easy to be wrought upon, to be brought to a
good course of piety and Religion. Pueri ad omnem disciplinam sunt
flexibiliores: ad omnem disciplinam tardior est senectus. There is a vast
difference between Youth and old age, in respect of discipline and flexibility.
The Wax when it is soft receives the best and fairest impression; the Tree while
young is most easily bowed. Young persons are most receptive of wholesome
instruction, and most easily brought to any thing that is good. Remember this,
you that are young, if you shall neglect Religion, slight and shun the ways
and Commands of God now, and vanquish all thoughts of God and his service till
you are old; you cannot imagine what an hard matter you will find it then, to
dispose your minds to holiness, and frame your lives to godliness and Religion:
as hard a matter, as for an aged person to learn to read well in a day that
never knew a letter in all his life. We say of a man, who has long addicted
himself to sloth, he cannot work. Why what is the matter? has he not his
limbs, his health, his strength, and a Calling to employ them in? yes, but he
has gotten such an habit of idleness that he cannot work, he had rather suffer
than labor, want then work. Thus it is in respect of Religion, if you now
addict your selves to impiety and sin, and are wholly unhinged as to Religion
and the service of God, while you are young, in old age you will find a kind of
impossibility to be otherwise, to change your course, seriously to mind
Religion, to brook an holy and strict course of life, to imitate, obey and
follow Christ whithersoever he calls you, though it is to save your immortal
souls. There is very much in those words of Solomon to this purpose; Train up a
child in the way he should go, and when he is old Pro. 22. 6.
he will not depart from it. If thou art trained up in sin, trained up in a
loose, licentious course of living in thy youth, when thou art old thou will
not depart from it. Men think when they are old, then they will mend, then they
will forsake their evil ways, leave their youthful vices, and become
mavelous devout, holy, heavenly, and close followers of Christ. But very
hardly, it is the way you have been trained up in, the course you have many
years been accustomed to, and you cannot now alter or depart from it. No less
power than that which stops the Sun in its course, and turns the Rivers of the
south, can stay thy carier, or turn thee out of the way wherein thou have so
long walked. St. Paul makes it a Peradventure, if such repent and recover 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
themselves out of the snare of the Devil. When men have deferred repentance so
long, and been the willing captives of Satan so many years, it is an hazard if
they repent, recover themselves, and return to God. When the Devil had gotten
possession of that man in the Gospel, and it was so hard a matter to cast him
out, that the disciples Mark 9. 20. 21.
of Christ could not do it, with all their power and prayers; when Christ had
dispossessed him, and observed with what extremity, foaming and renting, the
Devil came forth, he asked the Father of the possessed, how long this had
happened to his son? Answer is made of a child. So if Satan get possession of you
in your childhood and youth, and continue till you are old, he will plead right
and title to you then, and if ever he be dispossessed it will be with great
pain, great grief and sorrow, yea and with no small hazard of your life; I mean
the life of your soul, for he will hold fast and rent you to purpose e're he
part with you. As good old Polycarpus said concerning Christ, These eighty six
years he has been my Master, and I his Servant, shall I deny him now, or leave
him now at last cast? No, I will dye first. So does Satan say concerning men;
This person has served me from his youth, I have been his master these forty,
fifty, sixty years, and shall I let him go now at last cast? no I will keep him
mine to the end, if all the power of hell can do it. Therefore now is the
fittest and most seasonable time to make choice of the Master you intend to
follow and serve, Christ or the Devil; one must be, and which you take to now,
it is probable you will stick to and serve to your Dying Day. Moreover, if you
consider the requisites to a Disciple of Christ, and sincere professor of
Religion, you will find Youth the most proper Season to attain them in. If you
will be Disciples of Christ, true Christians, and unfeignedly religious, you
must be humble and broken in heart for sin. Soul-compunction is necessary to
Salvation. St. Peter's Converts to Christ were humble and pricked in their
hearts, and cried out, Men and Brethen what shall we do? you must either Act.
3. 37.
mourn for sin here, or burn for sin hereafter; Sow in tears if you will reap
in joy: And the time of youth is most sesonable for this. The sooner you begin
to mourn for sin, your sorrow is like to be the less heavy, and the more
kindly. Your hearts have upon them a natual hardness, and if by neglect of
repentance they gather a Contracted hardness too, they will be broken with the
more difficulty. Custom in sin takes away the sense of it; and the longer you
continue in it, the more will you find a senseless stupidity growing upon your
spirits. Your Consciences, that are now tender and timorous, and somewhat shie
and fearful of sin, will by degrees grow hard and seared, and past feeling.
Do you not know this by experience, that those sins which a few years since,
were a great terror to you, you can now commit without the least trouble? if an
Oath or a Curse had slipped from you, or if you had been overtaken with
intemperance, what stings and gripes have you felt after it? but now you are
frequently guilty of these Crimes, yet without the least remorse or trouble for
them. Therefore now is the time for this work, while your consciences and
hearts are tender and free from contracted hardness; for the longer you delay,
the more difficult will it be to bring your hearts to this duty. Again, you
must forsake sin, your hearts must not only be broken for, but also broken off
from sin. You must repent and turn Ezekiel. 18. 30. Luke 13. 3.
from all your evil ways, otherwise iniquity will be your ruin, and you will
perish by it; and the longer you continue in sin, the harder will it be to
forsake it. Custom will become a second nature to you, and the changing of your
Course will be like the Jer. 13. 23.
changing the Ethiopians skin and the Leopards spots. When once sin gets
rooting in the heart, and enslaves and captivates the affections, it will be
extreme difficult to get it out and cast it off. While the Cockatrice is in the
egg it is easily crushed. Before sin gets too much life and strength, you may
with the better success oppose it, and with the greater ease gain victory over
it. Now is the time to open your hearts and give entertainment to Christ, who
is said to knock Rev. 3. 20.
at these doors by his Word and Spirit, which you must open to him, as ever you
expect he should open heaven to you; and become subject to him in his Kingdom
of Grace, if ever you will reign with him in his Kingdom of Glory. And
doubtless the fittest season for it is now in youth, for if you shut these
doors now, you will find them fast bolted and barred when you are old. Sin in
the soul is like rust in Iron, it renders it unapt to move, though pulled with
great strength. The Devil is a subtle adversary, and the longer you permit him
to hold possession of this Royal fort, the more will he fortify it against
Christ, and beat off with the more ease, whatever assaults are made upon you by
the Word and Spirit of God. Christ will enter most willingly, if you will
receive him, he desires it, he seeks it, behold I stand at the door and knock;
but if you refuse, your affections will be more allenated, and hearts more
hardened. Qui non est hodie cras minus aptus erit. If you are not inclined or
disposed to God, to Religion, and that that is good, to day, you will be more
indisposed to morrow: if you are not willing Christ should take possession of
your hearts this week, or month, or year, you will be less willing the next.
The sooner the better. That proverb is true here, and cannot be crossed,
Blessed is the Wooing that is not long a doing. O blessed and treble blessed is
that Soul, that is early married to its Savior, betimes espoused to Christ, as
its Husband, Head and Lord. Now therefore is the time to gain and flourish in
Grace, which is the Earnest of Glory: to set up the Kingdom of Christ Luke 17.
21.
within you, as ever you hope to be admitted into his Kingdom above you.

. 3. An early practice of Piety and Religion will bring you the greatest
comfort. A pious Youth makes a joyous old Age. Age is a time, wherein we are to
solace our selves with the remembrance of our forepast life, to feed upon the
spiritual stores, upon the graces, comforts and Experiences which your former
godly and Religious course of life has gained you. For this reason it is that
Solomon sends the young sluggard to the Ant or Pismire to learn prudence, which
gathers her food in the Summer, Prove. 16. 6, 7, 8.
and lays up her store in the harvest. If you sleep in harvest, sloth, sin
away the summer season, what will you live upon in winter? will not spiritual
want and poverty pinch you in old age? But if thou art Religious in thy youth,
diligently careful to lay up a stock of grace and virtue, a store of prayers
and good works, in thy youth, then thine old age cannot but be attended with
joy and comfort, peace and plenty. You say usually, you must work when you are
young to keep you when you are old. It Is true here, you must work the works of
God and of Religion while you are young, to support you, comfort you, and keep
you from despair when you are old. Do but think, what peace, what comfort an
old man can have, who is about to leave the world, and has all the sins of his
youth flying in his face, following at his heels, and waiting when death shall
give them an opportunity to accompany him to Judgment. When he shall remember
that in his youth he forgot God, and spent the prime of his years in the Devils
service, in ryoting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, in strife and
envy: I say, what peace, what comfort can he now reap of those things where of
he is ashamed, where with his conscience is terrified, and soul wounded? How
loath is he to leave the world, how unwilling and afraid to die? How does his
aged heart ache, his shrinked flesh tremble, to think of Death and Judgment? Who
can express the horror and disturbance of his mind, when his Reason tells him
he is too weak to live, and his Conscience, that he is too wicked to dye?
Whereas, when a man can truly say, and his conscience bears him witness when he
is old, that he has laid out his youth and strength for God, in the practice
of piety and service of his Savior, when he can now say, he has made Religion
his business; the glory of God and his own salvation his main work and design
in his youth; when in a word he can say with old Hezekiah, Lord Isa. 38. 3.
remember that I have walked before thee in truth and with an upright heart;
what an heart full of comfort, what a mind full of peace, what a soul full of
joy shall that man have, in old age, even in death it self? How cheerful may
such an old Simeon sing his Nunc dimittis, Lord now let thy servant depart in
peace, for I have sought, and the eye of my faith has seen thy salvation,
which thou have prepared for me? Therefore if you would be joyous when you are
old, be Religious while you are young. Qualis vita, finis ita. As is your life,
such shall your end be. To me to live is Christ, to dye is gain, says the
great Phil. 1. 21.
Apostle: And it is the righteous has hope in his death, says Solomon. And you
deceive your selves, if you think you may live vitiously and yet dye happily.
Holiness in youth is the Tree, upon which the choice fruit of Comfort in old
age alone grows.

. 4. As it will bring the most Comfort, so it deserves the greatest Honor. To
see young persons following Christ by an holy and heavenly life, it is
honorable and deserves the gteatest commendation. It is written in the Gospel,
that when Christ heard a young man say, he had kept the Commandments from his
youth, he loved him; to show how God loves the early obedience and devotion of
young ones to himself. To speak in the Scripture language, God honors such,
for they greatly honor God, and them that honor me, will I honor, says the
Lord. Yea and God makes 1 Samuel 2. 30.
more account and takes more notice of a little goodness, a little holiness and
obedience in a young person, than of a greater measure in him that is elder.
When Jeroboams child was sick, God sent him word by 1 King. 14.
his Prophet, that his child should dye, and that he only should go to the
grave in peace of all Jeroboams family, because in him was found some good
thing toward the Lord. There could not be much good in him being but a child,
and bred up in Idolatry too; yet because some good was found in him being so
young, God took a liking to him, and showed his acceptance of him, by
conferring that favor and honor upon him above all the Family, that he should
go to his grave in peace. And Solomon tells you, that Religion carries length
of Pro. 3. 16.
days in the one hand, and honor and dignity in the other; and she will
confer it Pro. 4. 8.
upon thee, she will bring thee to honor: and the Lord honors them that
fear him, says David; where Fear is put for all Religion Ps. 15. 4.
and Worship toward God, and those that devote themselves to him by an holy
fear, will God honor. And the sooner you do this, the greater love and
honor, the greater favor and esteem will God have for you. Yea, as it will
procure you honor from God, so from all good men; Religion and piety is the
Image of God in man, and wherever a good man sees this he cannot but honor it,
and those that bear it. St. Paul writes to his Romans, to show singular respect
to Andronicus and Junia, as persons of Note, upon this Romans 16. 7.
consideration, because they had the happiness and honor to be in Christ
before him. And surely it is the greatest honor and happiness in the world, to
be early in Christ, early in the Covenant of grace. Is thy Servant in Christ?
is he Religious and devoted to God? he is more honorable than thee his Lord
and Master, who art irreligious and out of Christ; and shall be preferred
before thee in the favor and esteem of God, both in this world and that to
come. Nay Religion will make you honorable even in the eyes of the wicked.
Jehoram a wicked King honors and waits upon a Religious Elisha; proud
Herod reverenceth the holy Baptist. Piety is a silent but a powerful Orator;
to persuade all that see it, to love and honor it. What Diogenes said of
Learning; is truly applicable to Grace and Religion, it makes poor men Rich,
old men Happy, and young men Honorable. It gives such lasting honor, as the
rusty teeth of old Time can never eat out; the Name of the Ps. 112. 6.
righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Would you be truly great,
then be sincerely good. For true honor (of which all men are greatly
ambitious, non parvas animo dat gloria vires: immensum gloria calcar habet: The
itch of honor, scratch till the blood come, still abides) is not attained by
building of Babels, nor by gathering wealth, or adorning your selves with the
plumes of pride. Pharaohs Horses may have costly Trappings, and the Midianites
Camels chains of gold: Cant. 1. 9. Judge. 8. 26.
nor yet by being Masters of mischief, or notable for some act of villainy: as
he who to get himself a name, burnt the famous Temple of Diana. Can any man
think the dunghill of wickedness, a fit Mine to dig an honorable Name from? Or
that the only way to make a man sweet, is to wallow in Jakes's and Kennels?
Certainly Grapes grow not on Throns, nor Figs on Thistles: Neither is the sweet
Ointment of an honorable estimation, or good Name (which Solomon says is
better than life) compounded of those stinking ingredients, pride,
lasciviousness, prodigality, covetousness, intemperance and profaneness. No,
the name of the wicked shall rot, in despite of all Offices, Preferments,
Titles, Policies, or favors whatsoever. Their impious deeds, wherein they
gloried while living, shall be raked up to their reproach and dishonor, by
after ages. Cains malice, and Pharoahs pride and rebellion against God, have
hitherto kept pace in the world with Abels devotion and Moses his meekness. And
as the names of the wicked are thus torn on earth, so their souls are committed
to hell, covered with shame and delivered over to everlasting contempt. Impiety
Dan. 12. 2.
therefore is not the mean to true glory. But the way to true and lasting
honor, is to seek it by a Religious conversation. A good name arises out of
things true, just, honest, lovely, and of good report. Famam extendere factis,
hoc virtutis opus. Whoever would be truly famous must be really Virtuous. Be
faithful, sober and just, honor God and do good, and you shall be honored of
God and good men while you live; and when you leave the world, you shall leave
your name a blessing to Posterity. Your remembrance shall be sweet, your name a
perfume, and your memorial precious. In a word, do worthily in Ephrata, and so
be famous in Bethlehem. Virtue Ruth 4. 11.
and Religion shall emblazon thy name, when nothing else will, or can. A Field
of sincerity charged with the deeds of piety, cannot but be accomplished with
the Crest of Glory.

. 5 Now is the most Acceptable time. What the Apostle says of the day of the
Gospel, I may say of the day of Youth, Behold now is the accepted time. The 2
Cor. 6. 2.
Noontide or Evening of thy life may be acceptable; some are received at the
eleventh hour. But the Morning is most acceptable. God is pleased to see young
sinners looking and inquiring after a Savior, to see them setting out for
Heaven betimes, and seeking the Kingdom of God in the first place, before Satan
or the World has revished their Virgin affections. The youngest disciple was
the beloved disciple, and Christ's first care and Command is for these, Feed my
Lambs. O these are most Joh. 21. 15.
acceptable and dear to him; because their Graces are most visible and
conspicuous. Early goodness is like the morning blush, like the first opening
of the Rose, like a Diamond set in a Ring of Gold. It has a Delightful
fragrancy and a glorious luster, every ones eye is upon it, and every one that
is truly godly admires and loves it. As the witty speeches of a prattling Babe
are many times more taken notice of, than the grave sayings of an old Cicero,
so early grace in young converts is more observed than in those of gray heads.
The beauty of their virtue does then snine clearest, and the power of it does
then appear greatest. To see young ones delighted in reading and hearing Gods
Word, much in Prayer, frequent at Sacraments and other holy Exercises; to see
young persons deny themselves, taking up the cross and yoke of Christ, casting
off the World, mortifying the flesh with the affections and lusts of it,
deafning their ears to all inticements and allurements of pleasing sins,
advising others so to do. To see there manfully opposing and conquering the
Tempter in his wiles and policies, following God fully, and with full purpose
of heart cleaving to the Lord, none but must needs take notice of this. The
grace of Christ in them is so powerful, and the activity of that grace in them
so lively, that it must needs be visible. And this tending much to Gods glory,
must needs render them more acceptable. Add to this, that your strength to
serve God is greatest, 1 John 2. 14.
and your time longest; which gives you this double advantage: you may not only
escape many pollutions in the world wherewith others are defiled, to the
dishonor of God, and wounding of their own souls; but you may bring much glory
to God in your generations. God has work enough for you to do, all tending to
his glory and your own salvation, throughout the whole day of you lives, though
you begin in the Morning of your Youth, and continue very diligent till the
weary Evening of decrepit Old age overtake you. I might instance in some of the
chief part of your work; you have a Pardon of sin to sue out, Evidences for
Heaven to clear, corruptions to mortify, lusts to subdue, a treasure or store
to lay up, graces to gain and improve, temptations to resist, enemies to
defeat, Relations to mind, and many duties toward God and men to discharge;
work enough for the whole day; to do all this well, begin as soon as you will,
as soon as you can. And as a Master, who has many servants, and a multitude of
business, is best pleased with that servant that goes about his work betimes,
and continues at it all day, because he does his Master the most service, and
brings him the greatest gain; so God, who has variety of work for his people
and servants, is most delighted with those that set to it betimes, and continue
diligent in his service to the end. I say of all others, these are most
acceptable to God. Gods Firstlings are his Darlings, for these do him the most
service, and bring him the greatest glory.

. 6. Now is the most safe time in respect to your selves, your own souls. At
first if you be careful, no doubt but you may prove successful in this great
and weighty concern, soul-work, God-work, eternity-work. But if you make
delays, you run your souls upon great hazards and uncertainties. There are
many dangers and great peradventures in a little delay. Your lives are
perfectly uncertain, since no age is fenced or secured against the killing
Shaft of Death. Some Flowers are nipped in the bud, some springs fall into the
sea, as soon as they rise out of the earth. The thread of life in some is soon
cut off; and the candle blown out almost as soon as lighted. When you walk
through a Churchyard, you may see little Graves and small skulls, as well as
great ones. And you hear of many snatched away in the full strength and prime
of their years. So that you may dye while you are young; and without piety and
grace, be damned while you are young. Therefore it is most safe to become
Religious, and secure your salvation in the first place, having no assurance of
your life for a day, and being subject to Death every moment: Nor have you any
security of the means of Grace; though with Hezekiah you had a Lease of your
Life, and for as many years as the longest lived Antedeluvian arrived to, yet
you have no assurance that God will hold the light of his Gospel to you, to the
period of that long day. Now you have means and opportunities, lights and
helps, Sabbath upon Sabbath, line upon line, one motion and call upon another,
to remember your Creator, to make Religion your business, and to mind Heaven in
good earnest; and if you will not do this now; if you will be idle and
unfruitful, and run the hazard of what God can do, he can and may quickly take
away his Gospel from you, and turn your light into darkness; that like the
blinded Sodomites for Lots door, you shall grope for the strait gate to Heaven,
and not find it. He that can sweep away thousands by a Plague, and by devouring
burnings lay stately Towns and Cities in the dust, can find out a way to bring
a famine, not of Amos 8. 11.
bread, but of hearing the Word of the Lord, so that you shall run from one end
of the Land to the other to seek the Word, and shall not find it. I know you
cannot be ignorant, that at this very day there are many in England that pull
hard for it, to take away the Means of Grace and knowledge from you: To take
away the written Word; and to give you a Legend to read instead of a Bible; The
Gospel of the Virgin Mary, or of St. Francis, in lieu of the Gospel of Christ;
and dumb Idols to worship instead of the living God. And I must tell you, if
the youth of this Age, if the present rising Generation don't speedily heighten
and increase their regard to Religion, and their esteem of Gods Word and
Ordinances, Gods Ministers and the means of Grace, I fear lest God should
suffer those things to come to pass. For why should God continue that you care
not for, and will not improve; but account rather a burden then a benefit? But
put case none of all this should be, but that the day of your life should
belong, and the day of the Gospel as long as it; yet there is still a further
hazard in delay, in regard of the uncertainty of Gods working with the Means:
For the wind of the spirit blows when and where it lists. You may now feel
the fair gales and sweet breezes of the spirit moving upon your hearts, and
blowing fair for Heaven, and if you do not now hoist the sails, the wind may
slack, and duller, and you may be becalmed for ever: God may say, his spirit
shall strive no more, or swear in his wrath you shall not enter into his rest.
Now God calls, if you will not hearken, you may call and cry hereafter and he
will not hear. Then shall they cry unto Pro. 1. 24. etc.
the Lord, but he will not hear them. But they refused to hearken, and pulled
away Mich. 3. 4.
the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear, they made
their hearts Zech. 7. 11, 12, 13.
as an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the words which the
Lord of Hosts, has sent in his Spirit, therefore it is come to pass that as he
cried (that is the Prophet) and they would not hear, so they cried and I would
not hear, says the Lord of Hosts. This is sufficient to caution you to take
heed of stopping your ears when they should be most open and ready to hear. Do
you not read of Esau's weeping for the blessing to no purpose; of the foolish
Virgins going to buy Oil too late; and of our Saviors telling Jerusalem, that
her day was spent, and those things belonging to her peace were hid from her
eyes? And don't these sad examples tell you, that there are many, who have the
sun of mercy set to their souls, before the day of their lives may be half
spent? that God cease to call, Christ to invite, the Spirit to strive, and
obstinate sinners are given over to hardness, judicial hardness, and to
treasure up to Romans 2. 5.
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous
judgment of God; which is the greatest judgment Act. 28. 26, 27.
on this side Hell? And may not this heavy sentence pass against you when you
are old, who wilfully neglect God and Religion while you are young; seeing God
is just and righteous in all this? Justum est ut a Deo contemnatur moriens, qui
Deum Omnipotentem contempsit vivens. It Is just with God to contemn thee old and
dying, who have despised him young and living; not to know you then, who will
not know him now; not to accept the blew Milk, when the Devil has sucked all
the Cream; just with God not to accept a Sacrifice from those hearts and hands
of yours at death, which never knew how to offer but to Beelzebub all your
life. Be wise therefore and consult your own safety, which lies in being
religious betimes, in following Christ by an holy conversation while you are
young; then come life, come death, if you have hold by faith but of the skirt
of his garment you are safe, and not before; and it is (you see) a threefold
Peradventure, if you refuse this now, that you shall gain it hereafter.
Peradventure you may dye young, peradventure you may be deprived of the means
of Grace, or peradventure God may not hereafter work with the means, but leave
you to a judicial hardness.

. 7. Last of all weigh this: You cannot begin so soon, but your time will be
spent by that time your work is done. Young men, if once you become Christians
indeed, disciples of Christ in truth, as you enter upon a very profitable and
honorable, so upon a very difficult calling. You have now a very great work
lying upon your hands, and but a short time to dispatch it in, many Irons in
the fire, which call for your continual attendance. If you consider seriously,
in how many Relations a Christian stands, and how many duties each of these
Relations require, you will acknowledge you have time little enough for the
discharge of them. For how many duties are required of you, as you are
creatures to God, how many more as Subjects to a Prince, how many more as
Brethren, as Servants, as Masters, how many more as men, as Christians, in
Relation to your selves, your own souls, in the whole converse of your lives?
Take a review of these by serious reflection, as every one is multiplied into
many, and then tell me, Whether you can begin to be Holy and Religious too
soon; whether when your time is gone, you will not wish you had begun sooner,
or that you were to begin again, that you might do your work better, doubling
your diligence for God and your own souls; whether when your life is spent, you
will not give the same counsel to others that I give to you, and say, O remember
your Creator in the days of your youth, and make Religion and the serious
practice of holiness and righteousness your study betimes? Let me be your
Monitor, who know by experience, what a task you have in hand, which calls for
all your strength, time and diligence, if you would approve your selves
faithful to God. My time is gone, I am dying, and going to give my account, I
wish I had begun sooner, and wrought harder after I begun. Therefore mind the
words of a dying man, (for such have the best and deepest Impressions of things
to come, as well as of things past upon their minds) cast off the world and the
vanities of it, seek the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof in the
first place. This will bring you the soundest peace and greatest comfort in old
age, and upon a dying bed: This no doubt, will be your advice to others then;
be persuaded to take and follow the same now. 'Twill be your honor, your
crown, your glory here, and it will bring you to a glorious crown and endless
hapiness hereafter.

CHAP. III. Showing the many Prejudices Satan raises in the minds of men
against the Way of Religion.
SAtan, who is the grand Enemy to Gods glory and man's salvation, uses his
utmost Power and policy to raise a prejudice in the minds of young men against
the ways of Christ, and the practice and pursuit of what is good. And this he
does by making false and unjust representations of the ways of God and
Religion.

. 1. And first he reproaches the way of Religion, wherein all the disciples of
Christ walk toward heaven and happiness, as uncertain and doubtful. Do you
not see, says the Accuser, how the professors of Religion and professed
disciples of Christ are divided in their Judgments, how many different
persuasions they are of, and how one party decries the other? One cries this is
the way, another that, a third differs from both the former: And every one
applauds his own way as best and safest, and exclaims against all others as
erroneous and dangerous: And how shall you, young Novices, of immature parts,
short experiences, little reading and weak judgments, know which is right, or
which to choose? Alas! you are not able to determine; therefore you had as good
stay where you are, till all parties are agreed, and all parties unite and join
in one, and then you may venture. Thus he inveigles you to stand off from God,
upon pretense there is no certain way of serving of him agreed upon, and if you
take the wrong, you no whit mend the matter, and had as good go on in the way
you are in, though it be the way of sin, which is the infallible road to death
and hell. And I would to God the Devil had not so much advantage here, as he
has; that he had not so just ground for this prejudice against Religion and
the way of holiness, as he has, by the many endless divisions, groundless
factions and different persuasions that are amongst professing Christians, and
professed followers of Christ. For I am persuaded nothing does more startle
young ones, and more stagger old ones, causeing the one to depart from, and the
other to keep out of the way of Religion, and from following Christ in the way
of his Commandments, than the shameful and unchristian divisions that are
amongst us. And if God do not (which for his Mercies, his Churches, his
Gospel's sake I earnestly beg and hope he will do) unite us, our divisions in
Religion will terminate in the destruction of our Religion. For a Family, a
Church, a Kingdom divided cannot stand, says he, whose word shall stand, when
the Heavens and the Earth fail. And these Killing Maladies to Religion and
sound practice of piety, every follower of Christ, or sincere Christian ought
to bewail, and in his place to endeavor the healing of. But yet this is a
vincible prejudice, and to this stratagem and wile of the Devil, answer may be
given.

1. That there is a necessity that there should be Heresies; the Apostle tells
you so, and gives you the reason for it, viz. That they which are approved
might be made manifest. There are two ways, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
whereby God tries his people, and makes manifest their sincerity. One is by
Persecution; when Persecution arises many Hypocrites drop off, and Formalists
flinch away from the Truth, and forsake their Religion and the bold profession
of it, leaving the sincere to bear all the brunt and burden. The other is by
Error and heresy: And here many that have held out some time, fall away,
drinking in the poison of damnable Errors, to the destruction of their souls:
While the sincere hold fast the Truth, and stand to their profession, thereby
discovering what they are; sound Christians, whom no Persecutions can alter, or
Errors corrupt. So that divisions are useful, not to beat you off from, but to
try whether you are firm and well grounded in Religion. And if for these you
desert Christ and the ways of holiness, this is so far from vindicating or
excusing you, that it declares and condemns you for dissemblers and Hypocrites,
that have in you no sincerity or stability at all. Beware therefore you do not
suffer the Devil thus to delude you, and mark you for his own.

2. Besides, if you resolve never to be Religious, till all professing
Christians are of one mind in Religion, you must never be so; never set a step
in the way to Heaven while you live, nor look to enter into the Kingdom of God
when you dye; because this is never like to be in this world. If when there
were but two brethren in the world, there was a difference, and that about
Religion or Sacrificing to God; if in the first Christian Churches in the
Apostles days there were Divisions, when the number of Professors was small;
now there are many Millions, how can you expect a perfect Union? He that takes
up a resolution neither to eat nor drink till all the Clocks in the Town strike
together, or till all the Cocks in the Parish crow together, or till all his
singers are of one length, and all the spires of Corn or Grass in the Earth are
of an equal height, must also resolve to starve and dye. So if you resolve
never to leave the ways of sin, never to look after salvation by turning your
feet into God's Testimonies, but to remain Scepticks in Religion, and perfectly
unhinged as to the principles of Religion, and practice of piety and holiness,
till there be a sweet harmony, a perfect Concord and agreement in all things
amongst the professors and followers of Christ, you must also resolve to dye in
your sins, and perish everlastingly. This trick and prejudice of the Devil
against Religion is as old as Christ, as old as the 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4, 5, etc.
Gospel, yet thousands have been true followers of Christ, and are gone to
Heaven for all that; therefore let not Satan deceive and shut you out, or make
you fall short of Heaven by this delusion.

3. It Is also to be considered, that though there be some difference and
dissension amongst the sincere, amongst the true professors of Religion and
followers of Christ; yet it is chiefly (if not only) in the Modes and
circumstantials of Religion, not the Fundamentals. They are all in the way to
Heaven, they differ only about the nearness and cleanness of the way; some say
this is the purest way and some that, but they all tend to the same place, to
the same Port, Heaven. Now suppose two of you were to eat together, and you
cannot agree about the sauce, will you therefore never eat; Or to be clothed
together, and you differ about the trimming only, will you therefore resolve to
wear no clothes, but to go naked? Why, Ceremonies or circumstantials are but as
the sauce or trimming to Religion; and shall disagreement about these fright
you from the substance? God forbid. Let not Satan thus blind and baffle you of
your very reason. All true Christians agree in the main; their Journey is for
Heaven, and at the end of it there shall be peace, concord and harmony never to
be broken more. And to guide you in your Journey, you are to observe when
differences arise about circumstantials and Ceremonies, which side the Lawful
Magistrate is of, and what his Injunctions are in the case; which must bear a
great sway with you. For if it appear not that what the Magistrate injoyns, is
as clearly sinful by the Word of God, as it appears by the same Word,
Obedience to Magistrates is a duty, then you are to obey and join with the
Established Church; otherwise you neglect a certain Duty for an uncertain, and
run upon a known sin to avoid what is only suspected or doubted to be so; which
no considerate person will be guilty of. And certain it is, the Devil could
never stave you off from being Religious by this wheedle, the Divisions that
are amongst Christians, if you would but consult your own Reason. For if it be
any reason to hold out because of differences, then to come in and to be
Religious, so far as we all agree in Religion, is highly reasonable. Well, get
but this start of the Devil, and you win the Goal. For all the professed
followers of Christ agree thus far, that all known immoralities and vices are
to be forsaken, as leading to Hell and to destruction, and that all the moral
Duties are to be done and practiced as the way to Heaven and happiness. Now be
but persuaded to this, to flee all youthful lusts, rioting and drunkenness,
chambering and wantonness, cursing and swearing, cheating and lying, pride and
revenge, malice and envy, and oppression and covetousness, which all the
sincere professors of Religion and followers of Christ agree to be sins, and
ought to be avoided, repented of and forsaken: And on the other hand, perform
all christian duties, which the Word of God plainly requires, consisting in
devotion toward God, righteousness and charity toward others, and sobriety
toward your selves, which all true Christians agree ought to be performed and
done, and the force of the Devils argument falls. But because Christians differ
in some things, which are Niceties, therefore to do nothing in Religion, no not
those things wherein they all agree; not to leave those vices which all agree
ought to be abandoned, nor discharge those duties, which they all agree ought
to be done, is highly unreasonable: This is to grant the Devil more than he
asks, and to give him such an advantage, as he could never expect from a
rational Creature, much less from a professed Christian.

4. Add to all this, that this is a mere Calumny and unjust charge of Satan's
upon the ways of God. The way of God and Religion is certain, whatever Satan
suggests to you; and the seeming uncertainty arises from our blindness, or
difference of sight. Till we can all see with one eye, or all attain the same
measure of knowledge and understanding, we can never be of the same mind in all
things, either civil or religious. How different are men in their opinion, in
the same trade or calling: Yet the Devil cannot persuade them to lay aside
their callings and imploys because of this. Wherefore let him not by this
prejudice keep you any longer off from your Christian calling: But resolve for
Heaven speedily and in good earnest; and take the plain way of faith,
repentance, and an holy life, which Christ in his Gospel has plainly
prescribed you; and beg of him to direct and uphold you in it, and doubt not
but you shall go safe to Glory. For as many as walk according to this Rule,
Mercy and Peace shall be upon Gal. 6. 16.
them. And to close this First particular, remember this [young men,] whose
consciences tell you, your lives are yet irreligious and unholy; and treasure
it up as a strong shield against this fiery dart of the Devil: That whatever
uncertainties or differences Satan may suggest to be amongst Christians in the
way to Heaven; there is no difference or dispute about this, that the way of
sin is the way to Hell.

. 2. Satan does prejudice young men (and others) against Religion, and serious
practice of Christianity, by representing it as a reproachful undertaking, a
scorned and derided calling; which none but a company of Milk-sops, timorous
women and half-witted men will take upon them. Have the Pharisees or Rulers
Joh. 7. 48.
believed on him? what great or wise men, what men of repute in the World, what
brave or noble spirits or minds are there that regard or trouble themselves
with these things? and can you brook the loss of such men's countenance and
favor, or endure to be slighted and frowned on by these? or can you bear the
reproach of your old Cronies and associates, that they should digitis not are,
point at you wherever you go, saying, There goes your convert, how like a
Phanatick, a fool, he walks, and looks as if he had neither life nor soul in
him? This says Satan you must expect and meet with, if you will be so precise
and singular, and can you bear this?

1. Well, be it so; Yet to overcome this prejudice against Religion and the
practice of it, think who they be, that are offended at your new course of
life, and well-doing: They are the most vile, contemptible people in the world,
that vilify the ways of God, and sincere followers of his Son; And it is most
absurd and ridiculous in them to do it: it is as if a man should laugh at the
shining of the Sun; as if a crooked and deformed person should deride one that
is straight and beautiful; as if a company of Vassals should vilify those
that are at liberty: Yea, as if a company of condemned Malefactors should laugh
at all that are not in the same condemnation. And therefore their derisions and
reproaches are not at all to be valued or taken notice of.

2. Though you may be reproached for being good, religious and holy, by men,
yet you are most highly esteemed of God, and most dearly beloved of Jesus
Christ. He esteems you as the most excellent persons here, and will own you,
reward and crown you, in the face of the proudest scorners, at the last day.
Those persons you read of in Heb. 11. who were vilified and reproached as the
Rubbish and Off-scowring of the world, were the men (says the Apostle) of whom
the world was not worthy. The World, as highly as it thought of it self, and as
meanly as it judged of them, was not worthy of their company; and for whom God
had provided some better thing than the world is. Now having honor and Heb.
11. 38, 40.
esteem with God, what need you value the reproach or scorn of men? This is but
the common lot of the righteous, to be debased and vilified by the wicked:
Jeremiah not worthy to live, David the song of the Drunkards, Job an Hypocrite,
and St. Paul a pestilent fellow, and mover of Sedition; nay Christ himself, who
had no sin in his Nature, and did nothing amiss in his Life, was vilified and
reproached, beyond what you ever were or can be: He was reputed an Impostor, a
cheat, an enemy to Caesar, a Blasphemer, a Friend to Publicans and sinners, a
conjurer, who cast out Devils by Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. And were
Christ now on Earth, the Hectoring Atheists, and hellish Ishmaels of our time
would mock and scoff at him. For it is not you, but your godliness; not you, but
Christ in you, that they deride and vilify. Now what Christ said of
persecution, is true of derision: If they persecute me, deride me, they will
also persecute and deride you; and surely if you have your Masters fare, you
have little reason to complain. Moreover, these men shall one day pay dear for
their taunts and scoffs at the followers of Christ, when he shall come in the
Glory of the Father, Matt. 18. 6. Jude v. 14, 15.
with his holy Angels, to take vengeance on them for all their hard speeches
against the godly: When they shall wish their tongues had had as many blisters
on them, as their Jaws had teeth: wish that their tongues had cleaved to the
roof of their mouth, yea that they had never been. For they shall be now
convinced Christ was the Butt they shot at through your sides; who will now
reward them for what they have done against you, or said against you, as said
and done against himself. And their bitter scoffings shall now be turned into
hellish and eternal howlings. Now they would lie at the feet of the meanest of
you who are found holy in that day, to share with you in your happiness, if it
might be. Therefore when you have any thoughts or Motions of serving God and
setting your faces Heavenward, be not disheartened by this, the reproaches of
wicked men. They are not to be regarded, they did the same to Christ himself,
you are never the less, but the more Esteemed and Beloved of God, who will
shortly convince the mad world, who are the most worthy, and render to them a
full and just recompense of reward.

. 3. The Devil endeavors to quash all thoughts and purposes in young persons,
of being Religious, by representing Religion as too difficult and hard for
them: Tells them, that the way which is called holy is mavelous uneasy, and
paved throughout with difficulty. As the disciples once said to our Savior,
when they heard him declare Joh. 6. 60.
himself to be the Bread of life; and that they which did not eat his flesh and
drink his blood, had no part in him. O say they, this is an hard saying, who
can hear it? So says Satan to young men, when they hear of the necessity of
following Christ, of the necessity of being Religious, holy, and walking
circumspectly: O this is a rough way, who can walk in it? There are many harsh
sayings in Religion, which you cannot hear, many heavy yoaks which you cannot
bear, and many hard duties which you cannot do. Can you endure to hear of
renouncing the world, mortifying the flesh, and denying your selves your
youthful sports and pastimes, and all innocent and necessary delights and
Recreations? To be tied up to a strict austere, precise life, living like
Diogenes in his Tub, or an Hermit in his Cell, never giving your selves liberty
to please your selves in one sinful action, in one graceful Oath, gainful
Lie, or wanton dalliance? can you go bound hand and foot, and tongue-tied all
your days? can you hear these sayings, and truckle to these intolerable
restrictions? You can never bear it, never brook it, to continue constant in a
way so difficult. Is not the way you are in, where you have all the liberty you
can desire, much better? Are you not greatly imprudent to be bound, who may go
free? Free from the severities of Religion, and niceties of holiness, which the
way of wisdom is made up of, and which all the followers of Christ must daily
and hourly observe, or else they can have no peace night or day? Thus does this
hellish adversary, by his wiles, wind himself into the hearts of young persons,
that he may gain upon them, and win them to his will, to their eternal
perdition, if they yield to him. But to obviate so great an evil, be always
prepared with these, or the like Meditations.

1. That the most difficult things, are the most Excellent. Difficilia quae
pulchra; difficulty implies excellency; the way of Religion though difficult,
is excellent. It Is called a more excellent way. It Is 1 Cor. 12. ult. Rev. 15.
3. Prove. 3. 17. Prove. 8. 32. Psalm. 110. 24, 25.
the way of truth and righteousness, a way of peace and pleasantness, a way of
pleasure and delightfulness, yea a way of glory and happiness. And what
difficulty will not men go through to obtain things excellent? what hazards and
hardships do men expose themselves to for Silver and Gold, for Pearls and
Diamonds, and such things as are excellent in the worlds esteem. So grant there
be some difficulty, in following Christ, yet oppose its excellency to its
difficulty, that it will bring you to honor, peace, plenty, to a Kingdom, a
Crown, to Rivers of pleasures, and a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, and you will yet conclude it the best choice you can make. It Is also
absolutely necessary you must walk in this way, if ever you will be blessed or
happy in this world or that to come, and this you are convinced of.

2. Add to this, that the difficulty lies not in Religion, but in your own
lusts, that clog and hinder you in your Christian course, called by the Apostle
that weight Heb. 12. 2.
which so easily besets us. Let a man who has fetters on his feet walk in
never so smooth a path, yet he complains; whereas were he free from these, he
could go cheerfully on, making no complaint of the way at all. So though the
way of Gods Commandments be never so delightful and fair, yet while you are
clogged with the weights of sin, and fetters of your lusts, no wonder you find
some tediousness and difficulty in it. But as the Apostle exhorts, lay these
aside, and you will find this way so pleasant, that you will walk in it with
great delight, with much pleasure, and without much complaint. And the greater
progress you make in it, the more easy and delightful will it be to your
souls; as it was to St. Paul, who met with as rough a path in Religion, and as
great difficulties in following Christ, as you are like to meet with; yet he
delighted in the Romans 7. 22.
Law of God, after the inward man, that is, the new man. This way was once as
cross and difficult to St. Paul, as it can be to you; yet afterward it was his
delight. It Is true, as St. Paul, would not so; that slothful, lazy part, thy
old man, will never take pleasure in Gods service, but thy new man will.
Wherefore let not Satan deceive you, by his false impositions on God and
Religion. For what difficulty is, arises from himself and your own sins. Were
you in some measure rid of these, and love to them, the practice of Religion
would be more pleasant and easy than the Devil represents it to be. For the
divine power and grace will assist and strengthen you in it; which is able to
make this difficult way delightful, this crooked, thorny way (as Satan and sin
make it) smooth, strait and plain before you. Christ has as much power now as
ever, to make the blind to see and the lame to walk. God by the powerful aid
and influence of his holy Spirit and Grace, can make those feet that have been
swift in the ways of sin, nimble and strong in the way of holiness; those
hearts of yours which have been ravished with the pleasures of sin, the
delights and vanities of the World, he can as strongly and powerfully incline
to delight in his Commandments. He can give you new wills, affections, desires,
new aims, purposes and ends; so that you shall tend Heavenward, mind religion,
and follow the example of his Son Jesus Christ with great readiness. He can
make the severest precepts pleasant, the hardest part and most difficult duties
of Christianity delightful to your Souls; yea his whole service perfect
freedom. Nor is God only able, but willing to this; Nay, he has promised to
help by the assistance of his Spirit; the Spirit of truth will Joh. 16. 13.
Luke 1. 79.
guide you. Christ will be your leader; and God has said he will write his Law
in your hearts, take away your natural enmity and indisposition, and give you a
sutableness of heart and spirit, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his
Judgments and do Jer. 31. 33. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
them. Having therefore these precious promises, cleanse your selves from all
filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God;
never doubting, but that your sincere endeavors shall prove successeful; and
that there is no difficulty in the way to Heaven, but the divine assistance and
your own diligence. will carry you through it.

3. And whereas the Devil would discourage you by suggesting great difficulty
in the way of Religion, know it is far easier than the way of sin. It Is easier
to follow Christ than the Devil. The yoke of Christ's commands is easier and
lighter than the yoke of Satan's injunctions, whose servants and followers are
all drudges, perfect slaves and Vassals; but Christ's servants are Freemen, set
into a glorious liberty, and are styled Freemen, a servant and yet free, says
the Apostle. There is 1 Cor. 7. 22.
not such an expression in all the Book of God concerning a servant of Satan or
sin. And when you have a while accustomed your selves to the exercises of
Religion, and ways of Wisdom, you will be of Solomon's mind, that (compared
with the bondage and drudgeries of sin) her ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths Prove. 3. 17.
are peace.

. 4. And lest this should prove too weak, and srail, he has another, like it
and not less powerful, ready at hand; how Unpleasant the ways of God are: Not
only strawed with difficulty, but destitute of all delights. If once you
embrace Religion, you must shake hands with all earthly felicity; you must
never look for a merry hour more. Will you believe a great Religionist, one,
who had all the advantages a Kingdom could afford to make his way pleasant, yet
complains how he was plagued all the day long, and Psalm. 73. 14.
chastened every morning. That tears were his repast day and night, and he
watered his couch with his tears. Cries out of wounds and broken bones, and
want of rest. He found this way so unpleasant, as to imbitter all the pleasures
and delights that a Scepter and Crown could yield. And it is no where recorded,
that the great Founder of Religion, Jesus Christ himself, ever laughed, but
wept frequently: and the same may be said of all his followers. And can you
dispense with this? That all your laughter should be turned into monrning, all
your joy into heaviness, and all your Mirth into Lamentations. Continual
experience tells you what a company of Mellancholy persons Christ's Disciples
are, and how they censure and find fault with all that are not like themselves;
and can you take any pleasure in their society, who must be your constant
companions?

1. Here this wicked warrier makes his pass very home, yet with a little
consideration you may easily put it by, without any damage at all. Indeed you
must repent of sin, if ever you will be saved, and your sorrow, in some measure
must last as long as life lasts, because of the continuance of sin: You must
mourn for sin here, or burn for sin hereafter, where you shall mourn without
measure, without profit and without end. So that here the Father of lies speaks
some truth. The Disciples of Christ must be mourners; Math. 5. 4.
mourners for sin, though he conceals that such are pronounced blessed by
Christ: But withal here is a great Lie couched under this little truth: viz.
that in the ways of sin you shall meet with no sorrow, which I say is a huge
lie: for in the way of sin, there is no avoiding sorrow. Your Pride crossed,
expectations frustrated, the world failing, afflictions and crosses coming
unexpectedly upon you, will cause great sorrow and anguish of mind. These
things the Religious and holy man can bear with much patience and cheerfulness,
but they are an heartbreaking to others. For if the world frown upon you, and
friends forsake you, as they did Job, in affliction and trouble, who have you
to smile upon you, or to comfort you? God will not; his wrath is revealed from
Heaven against all the ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; and he is angry
with the wicked every day: Satan cannot; this Master whom you serve, will
torment you then, vex and grieve you then, by adding to and aggravating of your
miseries; but (as you commonly speak) the Devil a bit of comfort must you
expect, or shall you receive from him. No, young men, be not thus deluded: A
sinful course is and will be a sorrowful course; it will bite like on Adder
and sting like a Serpent in the end. The wages Satan gives for all the service
you can do him, is shame, reproach and sorrow. And is not Godly sorrow for sin,
which works salvation, better than sorrow by sin, which ends in damnation?
Is not that sorrow or kind melting of the heart by a sweet sense of Gods love,
which will yield more solid delight and pleasure to your inward man, than ever
you found in the ways of sin, much more Eligible than sorrow that works
death? Then it is better to be Gods servant, then the Devils slave.

2. Besides, this is a real slander cast upon Religion, that there is no
pleasure to them that pursue and practice it. The faithful servants of God and
disciples of Christ, are not required to throw away all comfort and pleasure in
Creature-enjoyments. God does no where command you to leave them but only
injoynes the prudent and moderate use of them; the contrary to which breeds
more bitterness in the disappointment, than ever it yielded sweetness to any in
the enjoyment. Religion allows eating and drinking, though not to gluttony and
drunkenness; affords you to take a subordinate comfort and delight in food,
raiment, friends and possessions; and herein more true delight and comfort, by
sweetning these enjoyments with the mercy, love and blessing of God, than ever
you could find in them before: for before you enjoyed the Creature only, now
God with the Creature. Therefore Christ is not so severe a Master as Satan
represents him. He is bountiful enough to his servants, allowing them not only
for necessity, but delight; Gives them all things richly to enjoy, with
Christian moderation. He does not command 1 Timothy 6. 17.
David to throw away his Harp, nor Christians utterly to abandon all mirth and
pleasure, but to take and use it in due measure and season. Eat thy bread with
joy (says God) and drink thy wine with a Eccles. 9. 7, 8.
merry heart. What can you desire more? Religion gives you leave to be merry,
though not to be mad. It allows you so much pleasure and delight as will do you
good, and no more; and to desire more than this, is prodigious folly and
madness.

3. Grant that all sinful delights must be denied, yet God promises other and
better delights in exchange, and I hope there is no wrong or injury in this.
Are not those joys which affect and refresh the Mind, preferable to them which
only stir the Spleen? Those joys, which arise from this sure hope of an
enduring Substance, are they not better than those joys which spring from the
embraces, the feigned and fancied embraces of a shadow? what think you of
spiritual, heavenly joys and delights? If you will thoroughly forsake the ways
of sin, and works of Satan, and heartily embrace the practice of Religion,
carefully endeavoring an imitation of Christ by an holy life, with constancy
and resolution, you shall find such sweet peace and freshing joy flowing from
the sense of Gods love, the light of his countenance, communion with him in his
holy Ordinances, and in the hope of the beatifical vision hereafter in heaven,
as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life could never
afford, nor the greatest sensualist ever boast of, or pretend to. And whatever
sorrow you have for sin, whatever griefs, afflictions or losses you may be
exposed to in this life, for the sake of Religion, they shall last but a while,
a little while, and in the end be turned into the fullest joy. Sorrow may
continue for a Psalm. 126. 5, 6.
night, but joy comes in the morning; you may sow in tears, but you shall reap
in joy, you may go forth weeping, yet bearing precious seed, yet you shall
certainly return again rejoicing, bringing your sheaves with you. This light
affliction, for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal 2
Cor. 4. 17.
weight of glory. Which text alone is sufficient to wipe off this prejudice of
Satan against Religion, and to make you strictly Religious in good earnest.

. 5. There is but this one objection or prejudice more (that I shall mention)
which Satan has to discourage you from following of Christ. He represents it
as a thing exceeding perilous and dangerous. O says he, you cannot follow
Christ, but you must run your selves upon great hazards and dangers: you may
lose all you have for your profession; if perilous times come, your Religion
may cost you your Estates, Liberty, nay your very Lives; and is it not better
sleeping in a whole skin, and to save all, then hazard and lose all for an
humor and fancy, of which you may repent, when it is too late?

1. As fierce as this Lion in the way appears, yet you need not be frighted, if
you will remember, that as great losses attend you in the ways of sin, as in
the way of Religion: In reference to your Estate, which you may lose for the
sake of Christ, (which you ought not to reckon upon) yet you shall be no looser
in the end. And whatever your profession may cost you, Sin may cost you as
much. Some men's lusts are more expensive to them, than other men's consciences
are to them. And if you should lose your worldly comforts, yet you may have
never the less comfort in the world. For if the stream fail, the fountain
cannot. You may fetch comfort from above, if you have none below. And usually
the less comfort the sinner has from the creature, the more the Soul has from
God. The treasure of grace in your hearts, and your hope of glory in Heaven
none can take from you; and therefore whatever you lose of worldly wealth for
Religion, shall be abundantly recompensed in things of an higher nature; else
that divine promise must fail; Jesus answered Mark 10. 29, 30.
and said, Verily I say unto you, there is no man has left house, etc. for my
sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now, in this time,
and in the world to come eternal life. Whence you may make this Orthodox
Parodox; no man ever lost by Christ, who was a loser for Christ. Then for your
Liberty, though men should cast your bodies into a Prison on Earth, yet they
cannot cast your Souls into the prison of Hell. If they should throw you into a
Dungeon, they cannot shut Christ out of that Dungeon, or hinder the light of
his countenance from shining there. If they take away your Civil liberty, they
cannot take away your spiritual liberty. They may exclude you Gods House and
public Ordinances, but they cannot debar you the throne of Grace. Keep Friends
from you they may, but cannot hinder God from visiting of you with the sense of
his love, and pledges of his divine favor, which will make the closest prison
a delightful palace. And as to Life it self, know, that though men may kill
the Body, Math. 10. 28.
yet they cannot kill the Soul. The argument our Savior uses, to persuade you
to fear God more than man. So that suppose the worst that can come, that men do
go to the uttermost link of their power, which is to kill the body, why dye you
must, and dye you may while you are young; and can you dye upon a better
account, than for Christ, and for Religion? certainly, none in the world dye
with more peace and comfort, with greater joy and triumph over death than they
that dye Martyrs for Christ, dye for the sake of Religion and a good
conscience. So that all the wrong the enemies of God and his truth can do you
is, with John Baptist and St. Steven, to give you a quick passage to Glory, and
send you with the more speed to Heaven, to Christ Jesus, which is far better. I
beseech you therefore resolve upon it, to follow Phil. 1. 23.
Christ, and secure the salvation of your immortal souls, whatever it cost you.
Hearken to none of these objections of Satan against Religion. For if once he
can prejudice you against what is good, he will soon, by another assault, draw
you to the practice of what is evil.

CHAP. IV. Several Temptations of Satan whereby he seeks to draw young persons
to his own service, the service of sin.
. 1. SAtan having bid fair to bar you off from what is good, his next attempt
is to allure you to evil. Being prejudiced against Gods Service, he prompts you
next to his own: In which method as he is very subtle, so oft-times very
successful. As he that would gain another man's servant to himself, decries
the service he is in as laborious, slavish and unprofitable, and withal
commends his own as full of, and attended with all good properties; so does
Satan to gain souls, not only reproach and discommend the Service of Christ,
but cries up and applauds his own. Five objections he has made against
Religion and the practice of it, and he has as many temptations drawing to the
way and practice of sin, the first whereof is this.

. 2. 1. The delight and pleasure of it; nothing so delightful and pleasant as
sin; none enjoy so much pleasure and content as his servants. Will you take it
(says Satan) upon the word of David, who was forced to acknowledge this, and
to leave it upon record in Divine Writ, that my servants are prosperous, there
are no bands in their Psalm. 73. 1. to 7.
death, but their strength is firm. They are not in trouble as other men,
neither are they plagued like other men. Their eyes stand out with fatness;
they have more than heart could wish. Where do you find such a commendation of
Religion or the service of God, as David here gives of my service, says the
Tempter? And huge cunning he is in the management of this temptation, that it
may take effect. For he labors what he can to conceal from your eyes those
more excellent, pure, spiritual delights and pleasure, which Religion procures
to the Soul, both here and hereafter. And withal hides from you the sting and
bitterness of sin; covers the hook, guilds the pill, that the sorrow, the
vexation and torment which sin will procure to you in the conclusion, may not
be descerned, nor so much as once seriously thought of. He would not for a
world (could he prevent it) you should read and believe that of Job; Thou Job
13. 26. Eccl. 9, 11.
writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of
my youth: Or that caveat of Solomon, Rejoice O young man in thy youth, walk in
the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that
for all these things God will bring thee into judgment: Lest you should know
and consider how dear you must pay at last for sin, and so be discouraged from
his service. And still to give his temptation the greater force, he represents
the delights of his service, the pleasures of sin, as present; that they may be
had daily and without difficulty, and so secret too, as no mortal eye shall
take notice of you. Such sins, and sinful delights may you enjoy, and indulge
your selves in, and no body e're the wiser. You may be frequent and bold in
them, none can know it, or call you to an account for it: All which is
mavelous taking, hugely tempting. What, present pleasure and private too!
sweet delights and secret too! who would refuse them? And that he may be sure
not to fail of his end, he has yet a farther stratagem; that is, to plough
with your own Heifer, to join with the lusts of your own hearts (with which he
holds a secret correspondence) to propose such objects, and ways of sin, as
are desirable and suitable to your natural temper and inclination. He knows
it is the pleasure of sin you are betwitched with. As Eve of old was captivated
with the pleasantness of the forbidden fruit; so her children Genesis 3. 6.
and posterity are naturally taken with the same bait. This therefore is the
first commendation of his service, and first temptation to sin, the delight and
pleasure of it.

2. Now to resist and overcome this temptation, be prevailed with, to take into
your serious thoughts and remembrance what follows. That the pleasures of sin
(how full and fair soever Satan represents them) are really low, mean, empty,
thin and unsatisfying. Solomon gives you the sum and full of them in few
words, and that upon experience; Childhood and Youth Eccles. 11. 10.
are vanity; that is, the delights and pleasures of that age are vanity, yea
vanity of vanity. And can you be satisfied, with a bauble, with an ens fictum,
with the mere notion of a thing? nay they are not only empty and unsatisfying,
but sensual and brutish. And though these delights may a little gratify your
sensual appetite, yet they can never satisfy the rational part of man, his
soul. The Devil and lust may promise fair, and pretend full satisfaction to the
mind in the commission of such a sin, but ever fall short in the performance. I
ask the greatest Epicure, the most voluptuous person that is in the world (and
if he will be true to his own experience) let him tell me,

1. Whether he ever found that pleasure and satisfaction in any vice, that
Satan promised and he expected? Let the sin or vice be what it will, yet did it
ever yield that pleasure in commission, that it did in speculation?

2. Whether the choycest of his sinful pleasures has not in a little time
brought trouble and weariness to his spirits?

3. Whether this trouble and weariness is not more grievous and irksom, than
ever the sensual act was pleasant and delightful?

4. If amongst the choycest and chiefest of his delights, in which (as he
conceives) he finds most sweetness and pleasure, he should have but one delight
without variety and change, whether that delight would not soon lose its
nature, and become a very torment and burden to him? As suppose the Drunkard
were always bound night and day to his cups, the Glutton to his table, the
Sluggard to his Bed, the Miser to his Bags, or the lascivious Wanton to his
Minion, would not this be more irksom than delightful? and would not his former
contentment become a continual torment? Therefore these pleasures are
unsatisfying; the reasonable part of man, the soul, cannot sit down or rest
contented with them; nor with any thing else beneath God, by whom and for whom
it was created.

2. Though this temptation is of great force, yet before you strike the bargain
and engage your selves to the Tempter, sit down again, and consider a while the
shortness of these pleasures, and you will find them upon this account very
inconsiderable; They are but for a season. What Heb. 11. 25
the Apostle says of some meats, is true of all the pleasures of sin, they
perish in the Col. 2. 22.
using. Some perish in the enjoying; and those that are most durable quickly
flee away. Like a cloud or vapor, if not blown away by the wind of adversity,
they quickly vanish of their own accord. If the stormy wind of outward
affliction does not suddenly puff out the fancied blaze of the young man's joy,
yet the days of old age are drawing on, Eccles. 12. 1.
in which he shall say he finds no pleasure. Or to be sure, so soon as the hand
of death shall give the tree of life a shake, these fair blossoms fall all at
once. And there will be none of these delights in another world.

3. Before you make too firm a contract with this boasting Master, it is good to
know what Wages he gives. And that he may not decieve you, take it from a
better hand than his. The wages Romans 6. 21, 22.
of sin is death; death that is opposite to eternal life. Death that compriseth
all in it that is woeful and miserable; more sorrow than ever you had joy,
greater pain and torment than ever you found pleasure or contentment in the
ways of sin. Believe it (young men) sin in the temptation has a different
aspect to what it has in the reflection. In the former it looks pleasant and
fair, in the latter horrid and foul. For besides the stings and lashes that
sinners have in their secret retirements, when they are under affliction, or
under any danger or apprehension of death and judgment, there are many
intolerable and remediless horrors to follow in another world, as the proper
consequents and just wages of a sinful life; which miseries, if they were but
as obvious to the sense now, as the pleasures of sin are, they would be
infinitely more powerful, to take you off from sin, than all the temptations
of the Devil are, or could be, to draw you to it. And methinks men who call and
profess themselves Christians, should walk a little by Faith and not wholly by
sense; and believe future things as certain (upon the Divine assertion and
revelation) as if they really were, and and you already felt them. Which if you
really did, the Devil could never persuade you to forsake God, who rewards his
servants with a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, to serve 2 Cor.
4. 17.
him whose wages are present shame and sorrow, and hereafter a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of misery.

. 2. Next to this, he thinks it not amiss to recommend his service to you for
the Glory and Vtility of it.

1. As to the Glory of it; nothing (says Satan) gains men such repute and
honor in the world, as this. He has his cursed Angels and Agents to commend
vice with the highest Elogiums; and those that are most bold and daring, and
can arrive to the highest pitch and degree in sin, shall have the greatest
accumulations of honor, and highest acclamations of bravery of spirit. Who
bear greater sway, or obtain fairer plumes of honor in the world, than my
followers? A suggestion mightily taking with Young men; unless they shall
consider, That Sin has no repute, except it be among the vilest persons, the
Devils own servants and drudges; whose esteem of it renders it the more
abominable and odious. You never heard any commend swearing, drunkenness,
whoredom, covetousness, or any vice, but such as lived and allowed themselves
in the practice of it; whose commendation makes them and their sins the more
vile. And were there such real repute and credit in sin, what need is there to
put it under the mask of virtue to render it acceptable? why is this, but
because any vice appearing in its proper and native hue, and owning its right
name, seems monstrous and shameful? The holiness of God is his most glorious
perfection, and therefore sin (which is directly contrary thereto) can have no
real glory in it. And that is the glory of a man, wherein he resembles God, and
whereby he gains favor and esteem with God, and is this by sin? Does not God
behold sinners afar off, and hate all the workers of Iniquity? and does not all
the repute and glory men get by sin and impiety, end in the greatest shame and
ignominy? can that deserve the name of creditable and glorious, which dishonors
God, abolisheth his Image in man, defiles the soul, besots the reason, enslaves
the whole man to the prince of darkness, and inevitably brings upon all the
practicers of it eternal contempt and reproach in the day of the Lord Jesus?
Surely then Satan says more of his service, than the sinner can ever expect to
find.

2. Nor does it yield that Utility or profit, that the tempter boasts. Though
he sticks not to tell you, that such sins, as lying, cheating, defrauding,
oppressing, griping and overreaching, will afford you huge emolument and
advantage. You will find them greatly profitable and enriching. Hereby you may
in a short time command the world, live plentifully, and provide largely for
your Family. Thus joining with Covetousness and worldly-mindedness, and that
desire men have to uphold and maintain their lusts, he prevails with them to
become his servants. Josh. 7. 21.
Hereby it was that Achan was tempted to take the Silver and Gold and
Babylonish Garment, which God had expressly forbidden; Gehazi to receive the
talents and change of raiments of Naamans 2 King. 5. 20, 23.
servant, which his Master had refused; Ahab to consent to the Killing of
Naboth, for 1 King. 21. 4. 6.
his Vineyard. Judas to betray his Master for the Thirty pieces of Silver; and
Demas Matthew. 26. 15.
to forsake the truth, and cleave to this present world. Auri sacra fames; such
2 Timothy 4. 10.
is the sacred hunger of Gold, that men are drawn almost to any course of sin,
to gain it. Nay Satan does not urge only the convenience of his service in this
regard, but the necessity of it too. The necessity of such and such ways of
sinning, without which you can never thrive or get any thing considerable in
the world. And there is none of those, who profess themselves the strictest
followers of Christ (says he) but know these things are sometimes necessary,
and if they can have an advantage this way, will take it, and they must do it,
or they can never live in the world. So that I persuade you to nothing (says
Satan) but what is both convenient and necessary, and what those very Religious
men themselves will and must sometimes do for their gain and profit. And can
any thing be said against this? Yes, the Apostle says enough against it, to
conquer any temptation to it. Covetousness is the root of all evil, it pierces
through 1 Timothy 6. 8, 9, 10.
with many sorrows, it draws men into hurtful lusts, yea, it drowns them in
perdition and destuction. Weigh and consider these words of the Apostle, and
then tell me,

1. Whether there can be such Utility and advantage in the Devils service, as
he tells you there is? whether there be such convenience in unlawful gains, or
in any unlawful and indirect means and courses to get gain? Is it convenient to
be entangled in snares, and drowned in perdition and destruction? Is it
convenient to make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, to load your souls
with guilt, and to pierce your hearts through with many sorrows? Are these
things (which are the attendants on sin by this temptation) more gainful or
more hurtful? Is it convenient or profitable for a man to steal a Garment
infected with the Plague, which will bring death almost as soon as warmth to
him that wears it? Will it be advantageous to gain any thing with the wrath and
curse of God? No; wherein then lies the gainfulness of the Devils service? Nay
shall you not lose as well as get by it; or compared together, will not your
losses be greater than your gains? you may perhaps by such and such sins gain a
little earth, vanity, Gold that perishes, and Riches that take to themselves
wings and flee away; these are your utmost gains. But what are your losses by
sin? what think you of the favor of God, which is better than life; of peace
of conscience, which is a continual feast; of Heaven, which exceeds all the
Kingdoms of the Earth; and of your own souls, which are of more worth than the
world? what think you of grace here and glory hereafter, the choycest Math. 16.
26.
treasures, the fullest pleasures, being durable, inexhaustible and eternal?
These are the losses you are like to sustain. Now put them into the balance
together, and try whether your gains by sin will outweigh your losses by it: if
not, I hope you will not be tempted by Satan to your own loss. You will slight
that Chapman that bids you to your loss for any worldly Commodity; and why not
Satan who is so desirous to be trading with you for your souls; but bids you to
your loss, less than the commodity, infinitely less than your souls cost? And
though he proffers ready money, present gain (as he says, yet) what comfort
will this afford you, or what good will this do you, when you come at the end
of your lives, to cast up your Accounts, and find the Devil has cheated you,
you are infinite losers, and eternally undone by the bargain? These things
considered, you will find there is no such convenience in the Devils service,
no such utility or profit by it as he pretends.

2. Then as to his plea of Necessity, know, there can be no Necessity to sin,
though thereby you may get gain, worldly gain. Duty is necessary to all, but
sin can never be necessary to any. There is one thing necessary, says our
Savior, and what is that? to get the world over the Devils back? or to provide
for the body by unjust and sinful means? No, to provide for the soul, gain
Heaven, to seek after those things that are not seen, which are Eternal, and to
lay up such a foundation against the time to come, upon which you may build
that sure hope of future happiness as will never make you ashamed. This is
needful; but it can never be necessary or needful to live in a course of known
sin, thereby to make provision for the body. It were better to starve the body,
than damn the soul; better to be poor on Earth, than to be shut out of Heaven;
better to lose this life (if it were possible) a thousand times over, than fall
short of eternal life, though we were sure to gain the world by it. Because
this gain will in no wise countervail or recompense that loss. Upon a mature
deliberation therefore, and just judgment of things, you will find Satan as
great a deceiver in this proposal, as in any of the former. There can be no
necessity for sin, or the least utility or profit by his service.

. 3. Another Wile which Satan finds exceeding successful and winning with
young persons is, to lessen sin, to suggest the smallness of it. As Lot said of
Zoar, is it not a little one? so says Satan of this or that sin, is it not a
little one, a trick of youth, a small fault, next to none at all? If it were
blasphemy or murder, adultery, robbery, incest or any such heinous crime, there
might be just ground of scruple and fear; but an officious lie, a petty,
graceful oath, a light curse, or a little Levity now and then, this need not
fright you. Small matters, and not many, nor often neither, what need you
boggle at these? these can never hurt you, or injure you in the least. But
young men, the welfare of whose immortal Souls and Eternal good I earnestly
desire to promote and further in the Lord Jesus, beware of this assault and
Wile of Satan, and

1. Consider that no sin is little or small in its own nature. Some sins are
greater than others, but all are great, all are breaches of the just and holy
law of the mighty God of heaven and Earth; and that which has an infinite
object cannot be small. Eadem est rotunditatis ratio in nummulo exiguo, quae
est in magno: There is the same reason of roundness in a small piece of money
as is in the greatest. The same reason of sin, in the smallest sins, as in the
greatest; because committed against the same Law of the same God. St. James
says, Whosoever shall Jam. 2. 10, 11.
keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all, for he that
said, Do not commit adultery, said also, do not kill, etc. If you do refrain
from some sins, yet if you commit others; if you refrain swearing, but make no
conscience of lying; refrain stealing, but art guilty of cheating; refrain open
or actual murder, but yet art guilty of malice; you break and contemn the whole
Law of the same God; and you are equally liable to the wrath of God and curse
of the Law, with those that live in the practice of the most notorious crimes;
and without infinite mercy and an hearty repentance, these sins will damn thy
soul, and the greatest can do no more. Therefore there is no sin small in it
self, and if the Devil tell you there is, he is a liar. But suppose it true
that the sin you are tempted to, in comparison of some others, be small; yet
this in some respects aggravates the offense, if you shall yield to the
temptation. When a man will forfeit the favor of his Prince for a trifle, it
argues a great slighting of his favor. So the less the sin, the greater your
contempt of Gods love, which is thereby forfeited: Our Savior says, What
shall it profit a man to gain the world, and lose his soul? What shall it
profit you to lose Heaven and Happiness, to lose God, the chiefest good, for
the greatest sinful profit or pleasure? But when you shall lose and forfeit
all this for naught, for a small sin, a very trifle, for that which (as you
say) is not worth speaking of, this argues great folly, and is a mavelous
aggravation of your sin.

2. Though Satan seems so modest and fair at first, asking but little things,
yet he will not rest there; but if he finds you yielding, he will proceed
further, and prompt you on to the commission of greater. As the habits of grace
so the habits of sin are strengthened by degrees. Though the beginnings are
small, yet in a little time you will find a great increase. Rivers at first
arise from small springs, which by running increase to deep and irresistible
streams. So actual sins, (for I speak not of Original corruption, the fountain
whereby the former are fed) in their first beginning are but small, but by
daily practice increase and swell, carrying the sinner with a strong stream
toward the sea of divine wrath. If the Tempter finds you make no conscience of
smaller sins, his game is fair before him, and he knows right well how to play
it to his best advantage: For he will propose sin to your thoughts, and tell
you it is no great matter to think, thoughts are free. And if he can make you
dally with sin in your thoughts, then by delightful thoughts of sin he lays
siege to your wills, and tells you it is no great matter to desire, or wish, so
long as you do not act: And the chief fort of the will being gained, the lesser
forts of the affections quickly yield themselves. And having entertained and
lodged sin in your hearts, he tempts you to proceed further, to vent it with
your lips: Words are but wind, and your tongues are your own, you may and ought
to speak. And then, as there is opportunity, he prompts you to practice: Go on
a little further, the sin is sweet, try but once, put one step in the way, you
may return at pleasure if you like it not. And having yielded so far, it may be
with great reluctance and smitings of conscience, yet when these are off, he
comes again, and tells you it cannot be worse, try once more, till at length
you begin to commit sin with delight and ease, yea with greediness and
resolution, nay with hardness and obstinacy; and now you are fit for any
service Satan can require of you, or employ you in. Thus,

3. The Devil draws men on to the greatest sins, by tempting them at first to
smaller evils. Nemo repent fit turpissimus. No man arriveth to the highest
degrees of wickedness on a sudden; but is drilled on step by step, from one
degree to another, by the Devil and his own lusts, till by degrees the
reverence of God is lessened, the justice of God slighted, the will more
inclined, the heart more hardened, the conscience more seared, the habits of sin
more strengthened, the Devil more encouraged, and the sinner at length wholly
captivated.

4. And have we not daily too many sad instances of this proceeding and dealing
of Satan with men? How have some men by yielding now and then to the use of a
small Oath, so perfectly learned the Language of hell, that they can hardly
speak without swearing; so woeful is the gradation of sin, and the sly method
of Satan with the sinner, as St. James sets it forth, first tempted, Jam. 1.
14, 15.
then enticed, then drawn aside, then lust brings forth sin, and so proceeds to
finishing. How? Thus: Sin has its conception, that is delight; its formation,
that is design; its birth, that is action; its education, that is custom; its
perfection, that is a reprobate sense, and the next step is Hell. So you see
whither smaller sins will bring you in the end: Therefore, Obsta principiis,
etc. Excluditur facilius quam expellitur. Seneca. It Is easier to keep out vice,
than to turn it out when once entered: Easier to refrain sin at first, than to
reform it afterward. Small breaches at first are easily stopped; but let alone
till they become great, they often prove irrepairable. Weigh these things
aright, and the force of this temptation falls.

. 4. The last Temptation to sin, is the hopes of future Repentance. O, says
Satan, you are young, you may allow your selves some years of pleasure and
delight; and when you are old, then repent and make your peace with God, and
all is well. To resist and conquer this assault, I referr you to what went
before, page 29, to page 35. where you may see the great hazards you run by
continuing in sin upon this consideration: There being nothing more uncertain
than Life; nor any thing more groundless than hopes of future repentance, where
there are present purposes and resolves to sin.

CHAP. V. Wicked men join with Satan in this evil design to discourage young
persons from being Religious.
THat so few young ones follow Christ or mind Religion seriously, is partly
from wicked men, Satan's instruments and Agents, who (like their grand imployer
the Devil) vilify and reproach the professors and followers of Christ. Satan's
design now on foot is, if possible, to deride and scoff Religion out of the
world, by representing the professors and followers of it as a company of vile
and inconsiderable men. This I say is his design; and certainly, since the
Gospel was preached, he never had more to help it forward. It Is a thing too
common for any to be ignorant of it, to hear wicked men

. 1. Represent and decry the Religious party in the world, as illiterate, rude
and unlearned, avouching that Religion is regarded by none but such. When they
see a young person following of Christ, seeking after Heaven, or but that way
inclined, they presently cry out to him as the Scribes and Pharisees did to
those Soldiers that were sent to take Jesus, Are you also deceived? which of
the Rulers have believed on him? Do the wise and great men of the world walk in
this way? Certainly if this Gospel way, this following Christ, and being so
Religious and precise, were so needful or delightful, so desirable or
profitable, as the preachers talk, the wise and Learned men of the Age (who are
best able to judge of the true worth of things) would embrace it and follow it.
But alas they see no such excellency in it. And will you be deceived by a
company of ignorant, illiterate sots, that know not light from darkness, or
good from evil? We hope you are wiser than to make these your guides, or to
dance after their pipes. This is the language of Satan's Ambassadors, and
factors for Hell: In answer to whom you may easily reply,

1. That this way, which they so much vilify and decry, was first preached and
recommended to the the world by Jesus Christ, the great counselor (as Isaiah
calls him) the Wisdom of the Father; in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge; who had more wisdom and understnding than all the learned
Rabbis and profound Doctors in the world: He I say came down from Heaven to
reveal this way to the sons of men; and was the greatest Prophet that ever was
upon the face of the Earth: And his followers, the Apostles, though Fishermen
at first, and illiterate as to humane learning, yet they received from Christ
such extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, as made them skillful in all
languages, and imparted to them such measures of true wisdom and understanding,
as all the writings of men could never teach them: And that Doctrine which both
Christ and they preached to the world, was confirmed by many apparent and
undeniable Miracles, whereby it was manifest that it came from God, who is
Knowledge and Wisdom it self. Therefore Religion had not its rise and beginning
from illiterature or ignorance, as these men suggest; For God was the founder
and imposer of it, not man.

2. Then for the following Ages of the world, there have been as learned, as
wise and knowing men Religious and Zealous followers of Christ, as any that
were otherwise. The Ancient Fathers that lived near to the Apostles time, and
in the following centuries of the Church, they were the very Compendium and
living Library of all true learning: And these by their writings left behind
them, do give evidence to the world, they were zealous Professors and defenders
of the Christian Faith and Religion. Yea and at this day, there are persons as
knowing and deeply skilled in all learning and knowledge, who are sincere
followers of Christ, and hearty approvers of Religion, and the practice of
Godliness, as any that serve Satan and tread the paths of sin and
unrighteousness. And that there be any (as no doubt there are some) learned men
in the world profane, irreligious, atheistical, scoffers at Christ and
Religion, it is from a just judgment of God upon them, giving them over to
strong delusions to believe a lie, because they have employed their gifts and
parts not for, but against the Truth.

3. And for those sincere professors and followers of Christ, and practicers of
Religion, which are of an ordinary rank in the world, and so may want the
advantage of humane Learning; yet they are endowed with spiritual knowledge and
Divine understanding: Though they are not so well read in the writings of men
as others, yet they are better read in the writings of God, the holy
Scriptures; which are the well and fountain of all saving knowledge, and able to
make a man wise unto salvation; Though they are not taught by men the Mysteries
of Nature, yet they understand the Methods of Grace, and Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven; which is far better: Therefore it was the saying of a Father
(who wanted not humane St. Jerome.
Learning) that he preferred one plain saying of St. Paul, before all the
Eloquence and Rhetoric of the Schoolmen. Besides I might add, that it makes
for Gods Glory to choose such as are unlearned, and to work by these his great
designs and ends amongst men, who will give God the sole praise of whatever
they have, receive or do. Now can it be amiss to remember here, that in the
Judgment of Wisdom it self, there are none (how rich soever they may be for
humane Learning) so void of Wisdom and understanding, as the irreligious and
wicked man? Therefore are such so often styled Fools in Holy Writ. The
religious and the wise man; the wicked and the foolish man, are convertible
terms in the Logic of the Holy Ghost. Solomon puts this infamous title of Fool
upon the irreligious and ungodly above fifty times in his books of Proverbs and
Ecclesiastes. And you know what David records him to be, that says in heart,
There is no God. And what that Sensualist was in the judgment of Christ, who
took up his rest and felicity Luke 12. 20
in his worldly enjoyments, with the neglect of Heaven and Religion, the way to
it. On the contrary therefore, it must needs be an argument of the highest
reason and deepest understanding, to own a God, to love him superlatively, and
serve him faithfully, with a desire and design to enjoy him eternally; in the
fruition of whom the rational soul is fully satisfied and completely happy.
This may suffice in answer to this Cavil of ungodly men; That none regard
Religion but the ignorant and unwise. For whether he that serves God, or he
that serves him not; whether he that saves his own soul, or he that damns it
for ever, be the wiser person, judge ye.

. 2. The professors and Practicers of Religion are reproached and. cried down,
as proud, singular, self-conceited persons, who think themselves wiser than all
the world besides, affecting a needless and singular preciseness, making the
way to Heaven much narrower than it is; as if there was no way to Heaven, but
what they chalk out: And as if Religion consisted in demure looks, a set
countenance, and fancifull words and Phrases of their own coining; and in a
specious show of piety distinct from all their Neighbors: In a word, as if
there could be no real mirth or music to the soul, but by dancing after their
Pipes. This is the language of Satan's Emissaries, whereby they discourage and
prejudice young ones against the ways of God and Religion. Though (take the
whole, and) there never was any thing more truly a Cavil or slander than this:
for,

1. The sincere professors of Religion and followers of Christ are Humble
persons, and the more exact followers of him, the more humble still; who was
humble even to a miracle, and commands his Disciples to be like him, saying,
Learn of me, Math. 11. 29.
for I am meek and lowly in heart. Therefore his disciples must be humble; men
that have the highest esteem of God, and meanest of themselves: The least of
Saints, the chief of sinners, says the chosen Vessel. Indeed they have high,
very high aims and designs, are greatly ambitious and aspiring persons: With
Luther, they cannot be content with any portion God can give them in this
world: but as St. Paul, count all loss and Dung. They cannot satisfy
themselves with trash and vanity, with earthly riches or honors, with sensual
delight and pleasures, or such mean and inconsiderable nothings; but they must
be all Kings and Princes; they are ambitious of being made the Sons of God, and
so heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, and joint heirs with the King of Glory. And
Romans 8. 17.
if you call this pride and Ambition, it is such as is lawful and commendable,
yea necessary to every one that would be saved. But withal, they retain the
meanest and lowest thoughts of themselves, think themselves less than the least
of all that mercy and truth that God has shown them, unworthy of the smallest
favor from God; and not only unworthy of Heaven, but most worthy of Hell, if
they had the desert of their sin.

2. As to their singularity and preciseness, we must yield it, that the sincere
servants of God and Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, are the most precise or
exact men in the world: And it is because they must be so; See then that ye walk
(...) precisely, exactly. But they do not affect Ephesians. 2. 15.
more than is necessary, more than God commands. The way to Heaven is not of
their chalking out, but Gods; nor do they desire to make it narrower than God
has made it. Our Savior tells you what the way is, it is strait and narrow,
says he; Math. 7. 14.
and his followers dare not blot this out of their Bibles (as the loose world
would have it) lest God should blot their Names out of the book of life. They
dare not do as the most do, for fear of going to the same place of endless
misery, whither the most are hasting apace. They know they must be singular,
else they cannot be sincere; that they must be separated from the world, else
they cannot be joined to Christ; and that they must be circumspect, else they
cannot be saved; that they must walk in the narrow way, and enter in at the
strait gate, there being no other way to Heaven. Therefore their circumspection
and singularity is absolutely necessary.

3. Add to this, that these precise men, whom the wicked vilify and reproach
as singular and proud, are Gods peculiar people. For surely (young men) God
has a people somewhere in the world. The Devil has not got all, Christ did
not dye in vain. God has a peculiar people, a chosen generation, who love,
serve and honor him here, and shall live and reign with him hereafter: And
where are these to be found, if not amongst these circumspect walkers? The
servants of God, the heirs of Glory, are said in Scripture to be a peculiar
people, an holy Nation, an hearing, praying, watchful people; a people
painful, industrious, meek, merciful, patient and fruitful, and full of good
works; and all this in sincerity. Now where shall we look to find out this
people? Must we look into Stews and Brothels, rake the Kennels and Sinks of the
Earth for them? shall we cull out the ryotous and drunken, the swearers and
liars, the covetous and oppressors, the professed Atheists, profane Hectors,
and Debauchees of the world, and say, Here they be: Here be the men, that are
no Hypocrites, no precisians, no proud singularists or Phanaticks: These are
that royal priesthood, that holy Nation, that peculiar people, that show forth
Gods praise, and promote his honor in the world: These are the meek of the
Earth, the pure in heart, the Zealous followers of the Lamb, the sons of God
and the heirs of glory? I am persuaded, both your reason and conscience tell
you, these cannot be the men. Why then you must show further who or where they
are, or else acknowledge at the last, that if God has a people in the world,
they are amongst those whom Satan's Instruments so much reproach and decry, and
would have you shun as men infected. Wherefore let not their bawling prevail
with you to offend against reason and conscience both: Since you are convinced,
that the people whom they vilify, are the persons whom God loves, and that
sooner or later you must be of this number, or you can never be saved.

. 3. But besides all this, wicked men stick not to endeavor to Lessen your
esteem of and regard to Religion, by representing the Religious part of men as
factious, seditious, and disobedient to Magistrates, whom God has commanded
them to obey. Who are they (say they) that foment all the broyls and Rebellions
in States and Kingdoms, and make all the fatal rents and schisms in the Church,
but those persons who profess themselves the followers of Christ and favorers
of Religion, refusing subjection to Governors, whom God has set over them?
Surely, as there never was any calumny or aspersion more foul, so never any
more false than this. And I shall not stick to assert,

That none are, none can be more truly and conscientiously obedient to Civil
Magistrates, in all their lawful Injunctions and commands, than the servants
of Christ. The best Christian is the best Subject. None so treacherous and
disloyal to their King, as those men who are disloyal and treacherous to God
and their own Souls. It Is very hard for a wicked man to be a good Subject. I am
of St. Peter's opinion, that a man must fear God, before he can 1 Pet. 2. 17.
truly honor his King. You must learn the duties of the first Table, before
you can make conscience of the duties of the second: Learn your duty toward
God, before you can rightly perform your duty toward man; the former being the
ground of the latter. Now all the true children of God, and sincere followers
of Christ have learned thus much, to fear God and keep his commandments; and
know, that if in things lawful and honest they disobey man, they dishonor God
and break his commandments: Which are, That we obey every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake: Obey the powers that be; for the powers that be are ordained
Romans 13. 1, 2, etc.
of God; whosoever therefore resists the powers, resists the ordinance of
God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation: Therefore they
obey for conscience sake; whereas others may be subject for wrath or for
interest sake, they are subject for conscience sake. So that he who is most
faithful to the King of Heaven, will be most faithful and true to his
Vicegerent on Earth. Therefore this is but a calumny raised against the
Religious and righteous, and made use of by Satan's Instruments to bring
Religion into contempt. And it is no more than what their Lord and Master met
with, of whom it was said, that he forbad to pay Tribute to Caesar. And St Paul
was accused as a person disloyal, a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition.
It Is true, when men command any thing directly sinful or repugnant to the
divine command, they are bound to obey God rather than man: Rather to displease
man, than to dishonor God and wound their own consciences. Yet even then their
Religion teaches them (after the example of their blessed Lord) patiently to
suffer what the Governors shall think meet to inflict upon them, for their
supposed or imputed crimes; and whatever they suffer, not in any case to
rebel; for that were to seek relief, by that which they know to be sin. And
though some have been found great Rebels to Civil Magistrates, who were also
great professors; yet it is certain, they were no more than professors: For had
they been sincere Christians, and made real conscience of obeying the Gospel,
or following the example of Christ himself, they dare not have done it: Since
both our Saviors example and the Gospel he has left us, plainly tell us, we
must obey them that have the rule over us, and that upon no less penalty than
damnation. To close this reply therefore to his cavil, if you would be
Religious, shun the society of wicked men, who make it their business to
reproach Religion. Say to these as David, Depart from me ye evil doers, for I
will keep the commandments of my God. Wherein the Ps. 119. 115.
Psalmist plainly implies, and intimates, that evil doers discourage and impede
us in our devotion, obedience and duty toward God, hinder men from keeping
Gods commandments. And you must say to them, Depart, if you resolve to be
Religious and keep the commands of God.

CHAP. VI. The general corruption of the Times, together with the natural
corruption of our Hearts, are great Impediments to Religion in Youth.
. 1. THe general corruption of the Age does Satan make use of as an argument to
vice, and discouragement to Virtue and Religion. The most go the worst way, and
young men are apt to think, company is good, the more, the merrier; they shall
fare as well, as others; and going with the most, they shall have fewest to
blame and find fault with them. The force of which temptation would abate, if
you will but consider, that though the multitude, or generality of men (in the
times we live in) be vicious, and such as would Hector God and Religion out of
the world, and establish Atheism and profaneness in their room, if possible;
yet this is no argument for you to follow them, but the contrary rather: For
their multitude renders them suspicious. The Church of God and sincere
followers of Christ are but a little, little flock: And the greater part run on
in the broad way, that leads to destruction. Your danger is never the less
for your great company. He that sins with a multitude, shall suffer with a
multitude. 1 John 5. 19. Exo. 23. 2.
Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished. Multitude,
power, or greatness of men, will be no sufficient apology to God. For then the
sinners in the old world, Sodom and Gomorrah, had been excusable, for they were
by far the greater number. But their example is no warrant for your imitation.
For you and I and all Christians are to walk by the rule of Gods Word, and not
by the example of men, any further, than it conforms to the divine precept. St.
Paul, as good and holy a man as he was, durst not propound himself an Example
for others to imitate any otherwise than thus; Be ye followers of me, as I am
of Christ. And therefore if they be not followers of Christ, whatever their
number be, or greatness, or power be in the world, you are not to be followers
of them. No, remember what Solomon says, a companion of fools shall be
destroyed. You know who Pro. 13. 20
the wiseman means by Fools, and he does not say, if they be not so many, or
so great; but be they never so numerous or prosperous, a companion of them
shall be destroyed. Therefore do not bless your selves, that you walk in the
common road, in the broad way, wherein the most go, as if this were any
commendation or safety to you; for praest at solus sapere, quam cum aliis
insanire; It is better and safer to be good alone, than to be wicked with a
multitude. Elijah was better alone, than if he had joined with the Priests of
Baal. Luther better alone (though it is said of him, Vnus homo solus totius
Orbis impetum sustinuit; he was the man, that alone bore the violence of the
whole world) than if he had joined affinity with the pompous and numerous train
of Rome. And Athanasius was better alone, than if he had sided with the
numerous and blasphemous Arians. So you are better alone (if you could be so in
this way) following of Christ in the practice of Religion and holy obedience,
than if you should herd with the generality of men in the ways of sin and
unrighteousness. Therefore, there is no weight at all in this argument, the
Most do thus, therefore do you so too; unless you can be persuaded Jer. 17. 9.
to imagine and believe, it is better to be eternally miserable with a multitude,
than eternally happy with a smaller number.

. 2. Your own Hearts, which the Prophet tells you, are naturally very bad, very
corrupt and blind, not apt to see or be sensible of your need of Christ, and
misery without him; or to discern the beauty of holiness, the joy, peace,
comfort and satisfaction that is to be found in the serious practice of
Religion and service of God; nay, which are averse to, and have a natural
antipathy (enmity says St. Paul) against God and his holy commands. These
hearts, I say, are like so much tinder, ready to take every spark of prejudice
which Satan and wicked men strike against the ways of Christ: They cannot be
more ready to suggest evil, than your corrupt hearts are to receive it: which
made St. James Jam. 1. 13, 14.
say, Then men, when they are tempted, are drawn aside by their own lusts. His
meaning is, Satan may tempt, and wicked men may entice, but neither can compel
or force men to sin; but as they are drawn away by their own hearts lusts, and
voluntarily yield to the temptation. And therefore if you would conquer the
last and greatest enemy to Religion and your own Salvation, hearken not to the
exceptions and prejudices of your own evil and corrupt hearts, against an holy
and Religious life. Sometimes your hearts will tell you, Religion is only a fit
of melancholy; sometimes that the laws and commands of God are too strict, too
hard and difficult; and that the pattern propounded in the Gospel for your
imitation, the holy Jesus, it is impossible for you to imitate or follow: And
why should you ever think of impossibilities? Now if you suffer these or any
other prejudices to prevail, you quash all purposes and endeavors to be holy
at once. To prevent this therefore, search your hearts frequently, and watch
them narrowly. Often look home to thy heart, and examine its sincerity or
hypocrisy. Ask where its affections are, and if you find these attendants on
the soul roving, recall them; or that your heart harbors any evil guests, as
sinful thoughts, strange notions and apprehensions of God, Religion, or a
future state; expel them, suffer them not to lodge there. And doing this
daily, watch or keep your hearts with all Pro. 14. 23.
diligence, for from them are the issues of life or death. These are they, that
will make you friends or enemies to Religion; Therefore watch them carefully.
And thus discharging your part, earnestly beg of God to do his, to change and
renew your hearts: To take the stony heart out of your flesh, and to give you
hearts of flesh, Ezekiel. 11. 19.
Crave of him, humble, pure, understanding hearts, hearts inflamed with love to
Christ, and established in this resolution, to follow him to the utmost of your
power in an holy life, and so to continue steadfast to the death, whatever the
issue be. So shall you be religious in good earnest, account Gods service
perfect freedom, follow Christ with great delight, and finally enjoy him for
ever in his heavenly Kingdom.

CHAP. VII. Showing that Religion is Rational; and the ways of Religion, take
them at the worst, are better than the ways of sin, take them at the best:
that is, considered with their present Concomitants and future Consequents; or
present Delights and future Rewards.
THat this Essay may not swell to too great a bulk, I shall offer but two
things more to your thoughts, which may prove as strong shields against all the
temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and as powerful motives to
an holy and Religious life, as any before mentioned: Namely, the Reasonableness
of Gods Service, or of Religion, and its excellency above the ways of sin.

. 1. That Religion is Rational, or the service God requires of us, is highly
reasonable. This St. Paul affirms: I beseech you brethren by the mercies of
God, that ye Romans 12. 1.
present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is
your reasonable service. Where he exhorts his Romans to a Religious life,
becoming the Gospel, or to consecrate and devote themselves to Gods service, in
translated and borrowed speeches or words from the offering of Sacrifice: And
tells them, he would not have it seem to them an hard saying, or an
unreasonable request, that he enjoins them to be thus holy, and to serve God
with all the powers of their souls and bodies. For whatever they might think,
or Satan might be ready to suggest to the contrary; yet be you assured, the
offering up to God this willing, living, and holy Sacrifice, is but what is
just and right, and what in reason you ought to do; (...), it is but your
reasonable service. Now if you will show your selves men, this argument must
needs prevail with you: That Religion is Rational. Though some things in it be
above reason; yet there is nothing required in it, but what is highly
reasonable. Are not my ways equal, Ezekiel. 18. 25.
says the Lord? Why what is just and equal, must needs be reasonable. If ever
men do things rational and becoming themselves, it is upon serious thought and
due consideration; upon which David tells Psalm. 119. 59.
you, he betook himself to Gods service, and turned his feet unto Gods
testimonies. And is it not said of the Prodigal, that when he came to himself,
he returned to his Father? while he was hairbrain'd, mad and inconsiderate,
Luke 15. 17
beside himself (as it were) he went on in his riotous course after his
harlots; but when he came to reflect, to consult his reason, he quickly comes
to this resolution, I will return to my Father. Hence Religion in Scripture is
called Wisdom, and the Religious man the wise, the knowing and the prudent man.
And sin is styled Folly and Foolishness, and wicked men Fools and Unreasonable.
Now to make this more apparent, we shall consider 2 These. 3. 2.
the several parts of Religion, as the Credenda, Agenda and Speranda: those
things which Religion requires us to believe, do and hope for; all which are
highly rational, or agreeable to Reason.

. 2. To begin with the Credenda, or Credenda.
what Religion requires us to Believe.

1. As that there is a God; this is the first principle in Religion, the first
thing Religion requires our belief of. He that comes to God, must believe that
he is, says Heb. 11. 6.
the Apostle. And is not this highly rational, to believe a God, a first Being,
who gave being to all other things in Heaven and Earth? why did David style him
a Fool who said in his heart, there is no God; if it were not agreeable to
reason to believe there is one? If you consider the whole world and all the
parts of it, can any man in reason think they came together by Chance? if you
cast your eyes up toward the Heavens, and take a view of the compass of those
vast Bodies, consider the glory of the Sun, the light of the Moon and Stars,
the beauty, order and exact motion of them all, continuing some thousands of
years without error, diminution or interruption: Or if you look downward upon
the Earth, and consider how it is founded and fastened without prop or pillar,
and made to hang in the middle of the Air; how it is compassed with waters,
which swell above it; is interveined with Rivers, covered with grass and herbs;
enriched with sundry choice and virtuous Minerals; beautified with flowers, and
furnished with all manner of fruits, necessary for man and beast; is it
ratonial to think, that all this is by chance? Is it by chance that things in
their own nature most contrary, as hot and cold, moist and dry, fluid and firm,
shall all conspire to the advantage of the Creature, as to their common ends?
Is it by chance that the Springs do feed the Rivers, the Rivers the Sea, the
Sea the Clouds, the Clouds the Earth, the Earth the Beasts, and the Beasts Men?
Surely a man, when he sees a fair House or goodly Ship, which is made of many
pieces of timber, iron, stone, etc. which grew in several parts of the Earth,
may as reasonably conclude, that these several parts did of themselves meet
together by chance and make up that Building or Vessel, as believe that the
goodly frame of the Heavens and Earth, with all things that are therein, were
made and put into that order without the wisdom of a great Creator. This first
thing then to be believed, is highly rational, viz. That there is a God.

2. That this God, this first Being or Creator, is the chiefest good. And is it
not reasonable also to believe this? There is in every man an innate desire of
good. Who will show us any good? is the harmonious Psalm. 4.
inquest of all mankind. And that there is a chief good, the light of Nature
and Reason teaches us. The Heathen believed quod sit, though they could not
agree quid sit summum bonum. And our experience will tell us, this chief good
is not in any thing here below: It Is not in Riches, or Honors, or Pleasures,
because all these are both uncertain and unsatisfying: Therefore it is rational
to conclude, it can be nothing beneath or short of him who has made all things
both in Heaven and Earth; and has breathed into man this spark of desire after
good, which nothing can extinguish; nor any thing but himself fully satisfy.
Thus far then Religion is reasonable in what it requires us to believe, that
there is a God, and that this God is the chiefest good.

3. That this God has made all things in this lower world for some End. Is it
not rational to believe this? who is so irrational, as to think a wise man
should spend many years in contriving some Engine, or other excellent piece of
art, and be at vast cost to accomplish it, but he has some end in it? So
certainly, the great and eternal Wisdom has designed Man and all other
Creatures which he has made, to their particular Ends; as appears by that
propensity and appetite which he has imprinted in their natures toward that
end, as the main point and scope of their being. And what should this end be,
but (as Solomon tells us) his Prove. 16. 3.
own glory? This is also rational to believe, that God made all things for
himself, and more especially Man for his service; and all other things to be
useful and serviceable to man; and man to admire and adore his Maker, to serve
and worship him in a peculiar manner. That of the Prophet looks this way; I
have created him for my Glory. Here is both the Isa. 43. 1. 7.
Author and end of man's Creation. The Author God, I have Created him; the End,
for my Glory. And it is greatly reasonable to believe this. For how absurd is
it to think, that God should set up this admirable house of the visible world,
and put man in possession of all, and yet expect no Rent from this Inhabitant,
no fealty from this Tenant? To conceive that God should make a body so
curiously wrought in the lower parts of the Earth; Embroyder it with Nerves,
Veins, Arteries and variety of proportion and parts (miracles enough between
head and foot to fill a volume) and enliven this body with a spark of his own
fire, a ray of his own light, an Angelical, Heaven-born soul, endowed with all
faculties of Will, Memory, Understanding and Reason, and such high perfections,
besitting it for the service of its Creator, and send this Excellent Creature
into the world, making all things therein subject to him, merely to eat, drink,
sleep, buy, sell, and pursue sinful delights and pleasures? Certainly the wise
God had an higher and nobler end and design in framing and fashioning Man with
so much cost and care: Namely, the serving and glorifying himself, who has so
fearfully and wonderfully made him; and so plentifully and richly provided for
him. And therefore the Jewish Talmud propounding the Question, Why God made man
on the Sabbath-Eve? gives this answer, That he might presently enter upon
sanctifying the Sabbath; and so begin his life with the worship of God, which
was the chief end and reason of his creation. Whereas if God had not intended
man for an higher end than eating, drinking, sleeping or taking his pleasure,
which is the life of a Beast, then brutish principles had been sufficient for
such Brutish ends and practices. The soul of a Beast might have served his
turn: But since God has made man an intelligent Creature, and given him a
reasonable soul, which no other creature in this world has, it is reasonable to
believe he has made him for an higher end, than the other Creatures. And those
who will help the weak eyes of nature by the glass of Scripture, cannot but see
the Makers end in man's excellency. It is written in such broad letters, that
God made Man to serve him, and show forth his praise, that he that runs may
read it. Thus you see, that those things which Religion requires our belief of,
as that God is, is the chiefest good, and has made all things for some end,
and man especially for his service, are all argeeable to reason.

. 3. Then for the Agenda, the practick Agenda.
part of Religion, or those things, which Religion requires you to do, it is
all still but reasonable service. To convince you of this, consider it, as it
is set down in sundry places of Scripture, which contain the whole of Religion,
or whole duty of man in this particular. Begin with Solomon; Let us hear the
conclusion of the Eccles. 12. 13.
whole matter: Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty
of man. And is not all this your reasonable service or duty? that you should
fear and reverence, and have an awful dread upon your spirits of that God, that
has made all things and governs all things, that pondereth the goings of man,
and sees all the thoughts and imaginations of his heart? That God at whose
presence the mountains fall down, the Rocks rend, and the Earth trembles and
quakes; that God who (as the wise man speaks in the following words) will bring
every work into judgment, and bestow eternal rewards or inflict eternal
punishments upon men, according to their works done here in the flesh, is it
not reasonable you should fear him, and keep his Commandments, whose
Commandments are not grievous, but holy, just and good? Who has an absolute
sovereignty over you and all the world, to command what he pleases, and is
pleased to command nothing, but what the discharge or doing of, shall make for
your good, as well as his own glory? Who in his wisdom and mercy has so
interwoven his honor with our salvation, that we cannot seek the promotion of
the one, but we necessarily promote the other; to observe and do these commands
to the utmost of our power, is it any whit more than reasonable? Hear also what
the Prophet Micah says in this case: He has Mich. 6. 8.
showed thee, O man, what is good: and what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Here again is
the whole practice of piety; and surely nothing but reason in it. That men
should deal justly one with another, be kind, loving and merciful. That they
should walk humbly in the sight of God, between whom and us there is an
infinite disproportion: for God is in Heaven, we on Earth; God perfectly holy,
and we both originally and actually impure and unclean: and is not humility in
us toward this God a reasonable duty? Again; The grace of God that brings
salvation (says St. Paul) Tit. 2. 11. 12.
teaches us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and godly. Here is the sum of all Religion; and is it not
highly rational, that you should forsake those ways of unrighteousness, and
deny those wordly lusts, which deprave your natures, darken your
understandings, and besot your reason; as Whoredom, Drunkenness, Covetousness,
Intemperance, and the like, which make men very beasts, or in some sense worse
than beasts? Yea which destemper and disease the body, mar your health,
shorten your lives, and ruin and destroy your immortal Souls? And on the
contrary, that you should be sober, righteous and godly, which tends to the
refining and heightning of your natures, the health and happiness of your
bodies, and the eternal welfare of your souls in both worlds; can any thing be
offered or prescribed to man, more reasonable than this? To sum up all in the
words of our blessed Lord; Whatsoever you would that men Math. 7. 12.
should do unto you, that do ye unto them; for this is the Law and the
Prophets. Here our Savior tells you is all (as to practice) that God and
Religion requires of you; and is not this highly reasonable? Would you not that
others should dishonor, discredit, wrong, defraud you, or covet any thing that
is yours; is it not reasonable you do not these things to them? Or would you
have others kind, merciful, just and charitable to you; is it not reasonable
you should be so to them? One of the Heathen Emperors was so taken with this
saying of our Savior, that he caused it to be written in sundry places of his
Palace, and severely punished him that did not observe it: And so admired
Christ for it, that he would have built a Temple to him; but that he feared it
would have proved the ruin of those Temples dedicated to their Gods. And
certainly he must put off the use of reason, and disown the name of man, that
will not acknowledge this is reasonable, to do in all things as he would be done
unto. And this is the sum of all Religion. This (says Christ) is the Law and
the Prophets. Hitherto then all that God and Religion requires of you, is but
reasonable service.

. 4. As to the speranda or munera, the Speranda sive munera religionis.
reward of Religion, or which Religion promises and procures to her sincere
followers, as a peaceable conscience, a quiet mind, communion with God, the
sense of his favor and love, pardon of sin, and the adoption of sons here, and
eternal bliss hereafter: a Crown, a Kingdom, Coheirship with the Son of God,
yea such rewards as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the
heart of man to conceive. You must needs grant it is highly reasonable, a man
should prefer these before fading pleasures and sensual delights; and that he
should seek the attainment and enjoyment of them by all means, seeing the
present and future welfare of the whole man, soul and body, depends upon it.
And seeing there is no way or means by which you can secure these to your
selves, but by being truly holy and Religious, by following Christ in that
pattern of obedience and holiness he has set before us, the doing of this must
needs be our most reasonable service.

. 5. Henceforward then (whatever Satan may suggest, young men!) conclude all
Atheism and Irreligion to be irrational, which teaches men to dream and fancy
that there is no God, but that all things came by chance, and by chance
continue; that there is no future state, no future reward to be expected or
future punishment to be feared; that man lives only for himself, and when he
dies, is like the beasts that perish; that the thing called Religion is only an
invention to keep the lower spirit of the world in awe and order. Certainly an
Atheist is but a beast in the proportion and dress of a man; or a man bereft of
that quality which distinguishes him from a beast, Reason. For it is
impossible for a man to manifest more want of reason, than in denying God and
wandering from him, who is the fountain of his being, and Wellspring of all his
blessedness. And nothing does more evidence a man's reason, than to acknowledge a
Supreme Truth to be believed, a chief good to be embraced, a great and eternal
God to be adored and worshipped. And therefore though Philosophers difference
man from bruits by his chief natural quality, viz. Reason; yet some Divines
like rather to do it by his supernatural excellency viz. Religion. Partly
because Religion is the highest and truest reason, and therefore causes the
greatest essential distinction or difference: And partly because Religion is
the end and excellency of the rational creature, of which Bruits are wholly
incapable: Atheism therefore is most unreasonable. And how great will your
condemnation be, who profess to believe this, and yet refuse to serve God and
to give him that Sacrifice that is due to him, and which you confess is but
your reasonable service? what, will you act against your reason and conscience?
will not the sense of the worth of your immortal souls, nor the serious
consideration of the weight of an unchangeable estate in another world, nor the
convictions of Gods Spirit and your own consciences, that Religion is
reasonable, prevail with you to be religious in good earnest, and to serve God
with all the powers and faculties of your souls and bodies? Are you convinced
that the true and living God has made you for an higher end, than to gratify
your sensual appetite, follow your particular callings, and mind lying
vanities? why then do you not mind things of an higher nature and import, the
service of God and salvation of your own souls? why do you yet lay out your
money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which will never
satisfy; against the dictates of Reason and Convictions of your own
Consciences? Are you convinced, that God in all respects is the best Master,
and that Religion will bring you the greatest profit and surest gain in the
end; having the promise both of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come? Why then will you not serve God and become Religious? Do you not know
that sins against conscience will bring upon you the greatest Vengeance? Are
you not also convinced of this, that men when they come to dye wish they had
minded Religion more, and served God better? And do you not think that when
death seizes you, you shall be of the same mind, and say, O that I had more
regarded holiness and the practice of Religion, and dedicated and devoted my
self to God by an holy life, who made me, heaped many mercies upon me, and
promised infinite and eternal rewards to me? And will not the thoughts and
remembrances of your neglect of Religion and service of God now at death, be
more bitter than the practice of it could have been burdensome in your life?
Without doubt it will and must. Therefore if you would not be self-condemned at
death and judgment, resolve to become speedily and seriously Religious; to
redeem your time, to serve the true and Living God with the deepest humility,
the greatest fear, the hottest love, and highest faith; and the remainder of
your days to have your fruits unto holiness, that the end may be everlasting
life.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein is briefly set forth the excellency of the ways of
Religion above the ways of Sin.
. 1. AS a farther persuasive to the practice of Religion and an holy life,
consider that the way of holiness, the way to Heaven, take it at the very
worst, with all the miseries and afflictions that may attend it, is better than
the way of sin, the way to Hell, take it at the very best, with all the sensual
delights and pleasures that are to be found in it. The poorest, bitterest, most
despised way to rest and felicity, is infinitely more choosable, than the
richest, sweetest, fullest and fairest way to torment and misery. It is better
to go to Christ through a Dungeon in chains of iron, than to Satan through a
Paradise in chains of Gold. Look upon these two with a proper, real, and sound
estimation, and there is no comparison between the worst of Piety and the best
of Iniquity. One is called the way of darkness, the other the way of light, the
one the way of truth, the other the way of error: the way of holiness is called
the way of life; the way of sin, the way of death. The one ends in the highest
communion with God, the other in the fullest separation from God. The former
leads to the greatest supernatural blessedness, the other to the lowest and
most inconceivable destruction. Now that I may fully convince your judgments of
the truth of this point, I shall hint some scripture arguments to confirm it;
and such as carry with them the greatest force of reason to persuade the minds
of men to believe it. They are such as these,

. 2. Though there be more miserable evils in the way of the Godly, yet there
are more sinful evils in the way of the wicked: Divines distinguish of evils.
Sinful and sorrowful evils. Sorrowful or penal evils, which are these,
outward losses, abridgment, want, disquietness, pain, sickness, reproach, and
such like. There are indeed many of these evils in the way of the righteous.
And there are sinful evils, as wickedness of heart, profaneness of life, in
the way of the ungodly. Now consider all the sorrowful, miserable evils of this
life, and they are but minima in genere malorum, the least kind of evils. As
the good things of this life are the least kind of good things; therefore so
often heaped upon the wicked. And (as I said) these outward evils, which are
opposite to these outward good things, are but the least kind of evils. As
Poverty is opposite to Riches, imprisonment to liberty, sickness to health, and
want to fullness: But what is a sinful evil opposite to? It Is opposite to the
best, to the greatest good, that is God. Opposite to the Will of God, to the
nature, glory, presence and fruition of God. Some good may come by sorrowful
evils: a man may climb to Heaven by the cross, as the good Thief did. But no
good can come to a man by sinful evils; for they are all killing and damning.
Now what is a light affliction for a moment, to a destruction endless and
intolerable?

. 3. There be some crosses in the way of Holiness and Religion; but there be
many curses in the way of sin. Our Savior has said indeed, If any man will
come after me, let him take up his cross and follow me. Such must expect
trouble. But the advantage is, as the Christian is not exempted from the Cross,
so neither is the Cross divided from the Comfort. But as their sufferings
abound, so their consolation Cor. 2. 1. 5.
abounds much more by Christ. And a sweetened Cross, is better than an
imbittered Crown. It Is better that the meat lie in the preserving Brine, than
rot in the sweetest honey. But on the contrary, in the way of sin there are (it
may be not so many Crosses, but) more Curses. As the way of the wicked is
filled up with sins, so it is filled up all along with Curses. The Pro. 3. 33.
Curse of the Lord is in the House of the wicked, but he blesses the
habitation of the just. And in the 28th of Deuteronomy, see how Deuteronomy. 28. ad
finem cap.
thick Curses are sown in the way of the wicked. Cursed shall he be in the
Field; Cursed shall he be in the City; Cursed in his basket, in his store, etc.
And is not this a miserable way, that a man cannot set a step in it, but a
Curse attends him? Is not a Prison where the light of Gods countenance shines,
better than a Palace where the cloud of Gods wrath sets? Is it not better to
meet with unpleasant Physic, than to drink a delightful Cup of Poison? Is not
a Cross in the way and happiness in the end, better than pleasure in the way
and Cursedness in the end? Then the way of Religion is better than the way of
sin.

. 4. Though in the way of sin you may enjoy more of the Creature, yet in the
ways of holiness you shall enjoy more of God. Wicked men in Scripture are
called children of the night, good men children of the day. Now though in the
night there be more stars, yet in the day there is more Sun, and the Sunlight
is better than starlight. The ungodly possess more of this world, therefore
called the men of the world: whose bellies God is said to fill with this world,
as he did Dives his; but he had better been without it. And David speaking of
the wicked says, they Psa. 73. Job. 21.
have more than heart can wish. And Job sets forth the abundance that befalls
them: but all this is but the world, but the Creature. And as the Princes kiss
was more valuable than his cup of Gold; so the good we enjoy from God is more
than all we can enjoy from the Creature. In the way to destruction you may have
more riches; but in the way to Heaven you shall have more graces, which are
more precious than Gold, yea than fine Gold that perishes. In the way of sin
you may have the acclamation of men; but in the way of holiness you shall be
sure to have the approbation of God. A wicked man may say in his way, this
house is mine, this estate, these possessions mine; but the godly man may say,
this Heaven is mine, this Jesus is mine. All that the one can boast of, is,
that these Creatures are mine and these sins are mine; but the other may say,
God is mine, his love mine, his favor, his mercy, his promises, all mine for
evermore. Judge now, is it not better to enjoy a spring than a drop, the Sun
than a candle, the Substance than the shadow? Is not fullness better than
emptiness, the chiefest good, which is God, than the least good, which is the
Creature? Is it not better to possess glorious certainties, than specious,
seeming nothings and vanities? In a word is it not better to enjoy him, who
alone is all happiness, than all other things, which without him are but a
cipher? then the way of holiness is better than the way of sin.

. 5. The way of Religion has more liberty in it than the way of sin. I know
you will think this a strange assertion. It Is for this reason that wicked men
choose the way of sin, that they may have liberty. This is one main end of
their walking in this way, and main cause of their being so hardly brought off
from it, because it is wide and broad, and they may have room and liberty
enough. But they are deceived in their end, for there is more liberty in the
ways of God, than in the ways of sin. To make this good, know, there is a
threefold liberty.

1. An indifferent liberty, which is conversant about the lawful use of the
Creature: The way of Religion bars not this liberty at all, nor diminishes
it, but adds to it rather; adds some drams of sweetness to relish the Creature.
A Religious person may buy, sell, marry, eat and drink, and glad his heart in
the lawful use of Creature Comforts; though not dishonor God and defile his
own soul by the abuse of them, as the wicked do; who by their sin poison all
their lawful things. Drunkenness and Excess turns his meat and drink into
poison, pride makes his garments infectious; all his blessings become a curse,
and his very liberty in these things a perfect slavery, by his vile lusts. So
that a godly man enjoys more liberty about the use of lawful things, than any
wicked man upon Earth whatsoever.

2. There is a carnal liberty, which is nothing else but the licentiousness of
a man's lusts, the liberty of a corrupt, a base heart; a liberty for men to do
evil, to act as they list, and to live without all check or control. Our
tongues are our own, who shall be Lord over us? I confess Religion allows no
such liberty, which is falsely so called; and the way of Religion is not at all
the worse for denying men this liberty; but the better. As it is no defect, but
a perfection in God, that he cannot lie, or deny himself, so it is the
excellency of Religion that it allows not of a licentious liberty; which in
truth is a bondage, and wholly inconsistent with true liberty. The Holy Ghost
calls the service 2 Pet. 2. 19.
of sin, a bondage. And will you call this liberty, which God himself calls a
bondage, and the worst of bondage, spiritual bondage, to corruption, sin and
Satan? who works in wicked men effecttually, rules over their hearts, and
carries them captive at his will? is this liberty, to be held with the chain of
Hell? Is that man at liberty, who is at the command of every vile lust; if his
lusts bid him swear, he swears, lie, steal, commit adultery, do this or that
sinful action, and he does it? Is that man at liberty, who is now captivated to
one sin, then to another? One while a slave to prodigality, then to
covetousness; now a slave to presumption, then to despair; now to excessive
mirth and revelling, then to exceeding fears and horrors; while his lusts give
his soul no rest night or day, but tire him out from time to time with
importunity; and all he does, he does with a slavish spirit? Sometimes anxious
and careful how to commit sin; and then fearing lest those sins should be
discovered? First his evil heart sollicits him to sin, and he cannot withstand
it; and afterward his conscience (like Judas his) torments him for sin, that
he cannot endure it. And look how many lusts you have unmortified, so many
Lords, and worse than Egyptian taskmasters, you have over you. This is all the
liberty you have in the way of sin, wherein there lies Sergeants, Jaylors,
Fears, Attachments, and thy own Conscience both Witness, Judge, Prison and
Hell. But in the way of Religion and holiness, there is a spiritual liberty,
the highest attainable Joh. 8. 36. Romans 6. 14. Gal. 3. 13. Romans 8. 15. Romans 8.
1.
in this world; this is liberty from the dominion of sin, from the curse of the
Law, and from all condemnation. It is such a liberty as takes away the spirit
of bondage, and puts in the spirit of adoption, the spirit of love, making us
willing to serve God, whose service is perfect freedom. Here is a liberty to
plead for mercy at the throne of grace, and does never cease till it be
consummated in glory. Therefore if you are for true liberty, choose the way of
Religion: for the contrary is so far from liberty, that it is the greatest
slavery and bondage on this side Hell.

. 6. In the way of Religion and holiness, as you shall have Liberty, so all
things else that are needful to make the way easy and delightful to you: A
sufficient Guide, God: Thou shall guide me by thy counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory. Psalm. 73. 24.
A better Guide you cannot desire, and better counsel you cannot have; it is
sufficient to direct you in all dangers, fears, temptations and difficulties.
To every one that walks in this way, God gives the same assurance, that he did
to Jacob: I will be Genesis 28. 15.
with thee, and keep thee in all places whither thou go, and I will not
leave thee. When thou art weary, I will give thee rest: when thou fallest, I
will raise thee up: when thou wanderest, I will reduce thee: when thou art
fainting, I will strengthen thee: when thou dyest, I will save thee; I will
Heb. 13. 5.
never leave thee nor forsake thee. And as the omnipotent and omniscient God
will be your Guide in this way, so he will afford you all needful helps and
assistances, to help you forward, both inward and outward: Inward, his Spirit
and Grace, preventing, corroborating, renewing, preserving grace, which shall
daily increase in your souls: All outward aids and assistances; as the Word,
which is called a Staff to keep thee from falling, and a Light to keep thee
from straying; the Sacraments, which are as dew upon thy graces to increase
them, and seals to thy Faith to confirm it to the end: The help of all Gods
faithful servants, living and dead. The dead recorded in Scripture, help thee
by their Examples; the living by their Prayers. And above all thou have Christ
in Heaven, making continual intercession for thee. This very consideration
proclaims the way of Religion more excellent and more eligible, than the way of
sin.

. 7. Add to this, that the way of Religion though somewhat strict and
difficult, is the only way to glorify God and enrich your selves. The glory of
God is the principal end of your Creation and Redemption. All that you have and
are, your lives, estates, souls, bodies, parts, are all from God, and given for
God, and ought to be improved to his glory. You neither made your selves, nor
were made for your selves; neither is any thing given to you to serve your
lusts. Honors are not given to make men proud, nor Authority to make men
insolent, nor Riches to make men idle, nor parts to make men subtle in evil;
but all to make us good, and to render us more apt to glorify our Maker. And
as this way brings glory to God, so gain to your selves. As a man who walks on
in a way of sin, though he could gain the world must be a loser in the end,
because he loses his own soul: So if a Christian going on in the way of
righteousness and true holiness, should lose all he has in this world, if he
should never see a quiet day upon Earth, never feel a drop of joy in his heart,
never eat a morsel of bread but in a prison, nor ever do any service for God
but at a Stake; yet in the end, continuing faithful, he is a great gainer for
all this, because he saves his soul and gains Heaven: And because these light
afflictions, for a moment, shall end in a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory. And our blessed Savior says, He that forsakes Father, or Mother, or
houses or lands for my sake, shall receive an hundred fold in the life that now
is, and in the world to come everlasting life. Therefore if you have any desire
both to glorify God here, and secure to your selves eternal gain hereafter,
walk in the way of Holiness, Piety and Religion. And which is further and
greatly considerable, let me last of all mind you of this; that neither the way
of Religion, nor the strictness of it will last long: Your works, duties,
sufferings, afflictions and crosses shall not be for ever. Perhaps you may be
Religious, strict and holy in this Life a few years, or months, or days; and
then all thy hard duties, all thy crosses and afflictions, all thy combats and
conflicts with sin, Satan and the world; and all thy doubts, fears,
despondencies and griefs are at an end for ever, and thy felicity begins that
shall never end.

The Conclusion.
. 1. HAving offered some disswasives from Sin, and perswasives to Holiness; all
that yet remains is, my earnest and hearty entreaty, that you would sit down
and consider what you have read. For this little Essay (with the other greater
helps which God affords you) shall assuredly be a witness for or against you in
the day of Judgment. Books are like Physic, if they do n't do good, they do
hurt. And if any thing make it work kindly, it must be Consideration: Pondering
and weighing well in your minds, what you have read on both sides; for Piety,
and against Iniquity. Soul matters, spiritual and Heavenly things are of
eternal moment; therefore call for the greatest deliberation and seriousness.
But most men are rash and inconsiderate in these mighty affairs; therefore so
often in Scripture styled Fools; and in truth there is none so foolish as the
sinner. They consider not what they do. They are carried to their courses with
vain, not with serious thoughts; upon the fury of rash resolution, not upon the
stableness of advice and counsel. Whereas would they but take counsel of
themselves by a deliberate consideration, would they (as we say proverbially)
but look before they leap, they might shun many impieties, which they run
headlong into. For consideration takes an intimate view of matters, and rightly
ponders of the nature and full shape of things: it turns things over and over,
inside out; considers this and thinks of that, it sees the best and worst;
it compares nature with nature, kind with kind, cause with cause, occurrence
with occurrence, issue with issue, reason with reason, and end with end: It
asks where and how a thing begins, and when and how it ends. So that would you
take more consideration, which is in your power to do, you would not be so
foolish and mad in your choice for your selves, as the most are. Had the
Prodigal son, but well considered beforehand what would have been the issue and
end of leaving his Fathers house, for the company of Harlots, he would never
have been so hasty to be gone. Had Gehazi thought with himself, how dear he
must 2 King. 5. 27.
pay for his two Talents and suits of apparel, he would never have run so fast
to overtake Naaman, as he did. But generally men will not consider of the
matters of salvation and damnation. Delight, pleasure or profit make the sinner
quick and venturous, and will give no time willingly for consideration, which
would be a great wound to sin, and often crush that Cockatrice in the Egg, in
the first motions of it. But men little consider, that for every sinful profit
or pleasure the precious soul is laid to pawn, to answer for it. The Drunkard
will not consider he pawns his soul for his inebriating cups, the Unclean
person for his lascivious act, the miserable Worldling for his ill-gotten gain;
yea and the common Swearer for his rash Oaths: But feed greedily on the sweet
morsels, and suck liberally of the present pleasures of sin, not considering
what the Feast will cost, when the reckoning's paid. Therefore I say, let me
prevail with you to sit down and consider a while: And if your conscience tells
you, you are yet the servants of Satan, walking in known ways of sin, ask your
selves whether you have sufficient reasons for this your choice, such as will
afford you comfort, when death comes? What if you should once a day commune (as
David speaks) with your own hearts after this manner?

. 2. Were I this day to dye, what would my choice be then, would it be the same
that now it is, or hitherto has been? should I then choose the pleasures of
sin for a season, for a few days, and refuse the pleasures at Gods right hand
for evermore? Suppose I were now tumbling and trembling upon my dying bed,
under a cold sweat, my eyes set, my heart fainting, and my breath departing (as
it must and will be with me a few days hence) should I then choose Hell before
Heaven? should I say then, God damn me, Lord reject my soul for evermore; or
this rather, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Lord take me to thy self in glory?
would I then say, Lord never let me share in thy mercy, or Lord have mercy upon
me; Lord let me be a companion for the Devil and his Angels, in regions of
darkness and devouring burnings to all eternity; or, Lord let me enter into the
new Jerusalem, the City of the living God, the Church of the firstborn, to the
communion of Saints, and the spirits of just men made perfect? Which of these
states would you then choose?

. 3. Why (sinner) the former of these is that which you choose now, who choose
the ways of sin, and service of Satan. You choose wrath and damnation, the
company of Devils, exclusion from Heaven the place of bliss, and the fullest,
the furthest separation and distance from God, the chief good, and center of
all happiness. And is this the choice you will make in the end, when you come
to dye? No, God forbid: then reflect and consider a little, and be not rash but
serious, I beseech you, in these great things. If Heaven be better than Hell,
life sweeter than death, if glory be more desirable upon a dying bed than
misery, and mercy than wrath; why should not the way to mercy and glory, be
better than the way to destruction; the way to life more pleasant to you, than
the way to death? Why should you not choose the way of Religion and holiness
now, and enter upon it presently, this day before the next, since you are
convinced you must come into this way before you dye, or you can never be
saved? And since you purpose it hereafter, and talk of repentance and holiness
hereafter, why have you any such thoughts or purposes at all, but that you are
convinced it is the way to Heaven, and that you shall choose the end of this
way, when death comes? And why should you not refuse, shun, hate and avoid the
way of sin now, when you are convinced in your consciences, you shall be loath
to receive the fruit and end of that way, when you come to leave the world?
Certainly wicked men have no reason on their side. The Apostle says, Great is
the mystery of godliness; truly I may invert his words, and say, Great is the
mystery of wickedness. For I can see no reason, nor do I think any man upon
serious thoughts can render any good or solid reason, why he should choose the
way of the wicked, rather than the way of the upright, to follow the Devil
rather than Christ, and to walk in the paths of sin, rather than the way of
Religion. Only men will do it, so they are sinful and wicked, and will be for
ever miserable and wretched, because they will, fulfilling that of the Prophet;
their destruction is of themselves, it is wilful destruction, it is chosen
damnation.

. 4. Therefore, young men (for whose sake principally I undertook this little
work) take for a close that of the Prophet; Say unto the righteous it shall be
well with him, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings; Isa. 3. 10, 11
Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands
shall be given him. And sit down and consider it, till you have brought your
hearts to a firm belief of the truth of it. There are but two ways wherein all
the men in the world are traveling, the way of Sin and the way of
Righteousness: But two Leaders whom they all follow, Christ or the Devil: But
two places whither they all tend, Heaven or Hell. And know, this direction and
exhortation is from the Lord, though handed to you by his unworthy servant: and
if you deny me, you therein deny him; and if so, the time is coming and will
come, when he will deny you. And dare any of you deny the Lord? and say as
those wicked ones to the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 44. 16, 17.
As for the word which thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will
not hearken to it: We will not forsake our sins, we will not follow Christ, nor
be tied and bound to such circumspection and holiness, as his followers are,
and as his Word requires: But we will do whatsoever proceeds Jer. 18. 12.
ceedeth out of our own mouth, do our own devices, and walk every one after the
imagination of his own evil heart? And are you content and willing God should
take you at your words, and for ever give you over to your own hearts lusts, to
walk in your own ways and after your own counsels? Are you willing from
henceforth to give up all your hopes in Christ, your hope of Heaven, your hope
of Life, Salvation and eternal glory, and to be damned for ever in another
world? why this is the choice you are put to, either to live an holy life, or
to be for ever miserable after death; either to submit to the Yoke of Christ,
or never to receive benefit by the Cross of Christ; to kiss the Scepter of his
Mercy, or fall by the sword of his Justice; either to follow him in his Kingdom
of Grace, or to be eternally excluded his Kingdom of Glory. There is no other
way, but these two: One of these you must choose. The sum of all is, you must
repent or perish; and follow after Holiness, or never see the Lord. Religion is
the only way God has made to Heaven, and if you never walk in the way, you can
never come thither. And assure your selves, I can have no other end or interest
to aim at, in taking any pains to persuade you to be good, and to be sincere
followers of our Lord Jesus Christ, but this, His glory and your salvation;
which to aim at is doubtless your Interest, as much as mine; and if all that I
have written cannot convince you it is so, it is but a few days more, and Death
and Judgment shall.

Gloria Trinuni Deo sine Fine.
THE Young Man's Monitor: OR, A POETICAL PARAPHRASE Upon the XIIth Chapter of
ECCLESIASTES.
The PREFACE.
Eccles. XII. i. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.
YOung man, remember in thy youthful age
Thy Great Creator, and betimes engage
Thy Soul and body both, with all thy might
To do him Service, e're the sable night
Of frightfull death approach; or evil day
Of old decrepid age, wherein you will say,
There is no pleasure, nor a will to work:
Youth's sloth still in thy aged bones does lurk.
Wherefore before thy halting age does come,
Before thy Spirits suffer martyrdom,
Thy joints are feeble, and thy heart is faint,
And killing evils do thy body taint;
Before thy wit, thy health and strength decays,
Give God the prime and flower of thy days.
VERSE II.
While the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not darkened, or the
clouds return after the rain. BEfore the Sun and Moon withdraw their light,
And Stars be dark'ned by an aged night;
Thine eyelids drop down brinish tears amain,
Like dripping Clouds returning after rain;
PARAPHRASE.
ER'e wrink'led age, and Paleness does disgrace
The Serene luster of thy youthful face;
Thy comely cheeks do lose their Rosy hew,
And heat and vigor bid thy lips adieu;
Before thine eyes grow dark and dim, and do
Like Stars by day, at last extinguish too.
Or understand it thus, -- before the Sun
Quite through thy youthful Zodiac has run:
Or if not then, yet while the Light does last,
While yet thy stronger Manhood is not past.
Or if not then, before the Moon is gone,
Thy Manhood and thine Elder years are done;
At least, at last while Midnight Stars do shine,
Before thy dotage miseries combine,
Like Clouds, and threaten sorrows in a shower,
Even such as may dissolve thee every hour,
Remember thy Creator.
VERSE III.
In the day when the Keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men
shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because tbey are few, and those
that look out of the windows be darkened. BEfore the day approach, when those
that keep
Thy clayie cottage tumble; those that peep
Forth of the windows, do in have retreat:
Thy strong men bow, and grinders cease to eat.
PARAPHRSE.
THe wiseman means, before thy hands and arms
That kept thy body ( 2 Cor. 5. 1.
called an house) from harms
Shall cease their work, and (through thine abuse)
Shall by an Aged palsy lose their use;
Those wary watchmen, that did always stand
And keep a Sentinel at thy command,
Undaunted were, and ready to endure
The fiercest Onsets, thereby to secure
Their head and body; now alas they faint,
Base cowardice does now their courage taint.
Those painful Laborers, whose daily task
Was to administer what thou did ask,
Did first provide, and after feed thee too,
(As careful Nurses for their nurslings do)
Now stand in need of others to dispense
Convenient diet, for their Sustinence:
Their former work they cannot now engage,
But trembling stand through feebleness and age.
Thy Legs and Thighs, those men of strength to run,
Now bow themselves, and cry their Race is done.
Time was, they nimbly posted thee about,
That thou might find thine own inventions out;
When they did swiftly trace the ways of sin,
And would to the house of God as swift have been,
If thou had put them to 't, but now, alas!
Weakness is where their Youthful vigor was.
Their strength is gone, and they are tired so
With running heretofore, they scarce can go.
Thy useful Grinders that were once complete,
Now fail and cannot masticate their meat.
Thine Eyes, those window-peepers, that did show
Like brighter Stars within their Orbs below,
Like wasted Tapers lose their light, and blink,
And back into their hollow Sockets sink.
The Wisemans counsel is therefore, that you
Before these evils come, Remember now
Thy Great Creator:
VERSE IV.
And the doors shall be shut in the street, when the Sound of the grinding is
low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of
music shall be brought low. -- Er'e the doors be shut,
And to the Grinding Sound an end be put;
Before the Bird shall raise thee by her voice,
And all the Daughters cease their pleasant noise.
PARAPHRASE.
SOme lit'rally by Doors do understand
Those of the house wherein he lives, and
By which he ran (when young) into the street
His Friends and his Associates to meet:
And by which Doors, his Friends resorted thither
To laugh and quaffe, and pass the time together.
But now those doors are shut, and privacy
Old age likes better than their company.
Or by these Doors, we understand the Ear
Which now is shut, is deaf, and cannot. hear.
These are the Doors, by which you do receive
The sweet instructions that your Teachers give:
All counsel good and evil, is conveyed
By these unto the Soul, by which she is swayed
To this or that -- O open then the door
To Wisdom's saving counsel now, before
Old age has closed it, and thou then begin
To call advice, when none can enter in.
Perhaps the Wiseman does by Doors, intend
The Mouth and Nose, and whatsoever does send
Aid to the Intrails; and by Streets he may
The Pipes and Veins, and Arteries display,
Which in old age grow faint, and filthy too,
And cease their former Offices to do.
The Valves are closed, the tired blood now stops
Within it is veins, and circulates by drops:
The Doors are off the hinges, and it is hard
To open them, that rusting age has barred.
Before this be thy case, stir up thy strength
And set to work for Heaven, that at length,
When from this house of Clay thy Soul must put,
Thou may not find the Door of Heaven shut.
Before thy mouth, which now does grind and crump
It Is food with noise, it is food does softly mump.
Before such noise, as you never wont to hear,
At midnight wake and Startle you with fear:
The Birds sweet voice, which you were wont to love
Is harsh, and now to passion does you move.
Not only Thunder, or the noise of Drums,
Beating and rattling in your sleeping rooms,
Disturb your rest; -- but at the smallest din
You are awak'ned and must rise agin.
A Cock may not crow, or little Chicken peep;
Alas, Old age must ask them leave to sleep;
Before the Daughters Music shall be turned
To Low and harsher Notes; the bellows burned Jer. 6. 29.

That fed the Organs; or before thy Lungs,
Those bags of breath do fail thee, and thy tongue,
Time-keeper to the rest, shall falter quite;
Thy pipes are hoarse, and do so creak, 't would fright
Thy self to hear them now, which heretofore
Melodiously could sing, and chaunt and roar,
Keep time and tune too, and rise and fall,
Observe their stops, and quaver it withal:
Could play so sweetly, that they would often move
And ravish such as do wind-musick love.
But now these Daughters bid their mirth good night,
Their Musick's such, as cannot now delight:
They now afford (although they strain for it too)
No better music than Groat Fiddles do:
Or if you please (which yet is more forlorn)
No better sound than does a Gelders horn:
Therefore before thy Pleasant days are gone,
Young man! thy Great Creator think upon.
Remember thy Creator, etc.
VERSE V.
Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in
the way, and the Almond-tree shall flourish, and the Grasshopper shall be a
burden, and desire shall fail; because man goes to his long home, and the
mourners go about the streets. BEfore thou be afraid of what is high,
And causeless fears now in thy way do lie;
Before the blooming of the Almond tree,
And the Grasshopper shall a burden be,
Before desire fail; because man must
To his long home, that is, return to dust;
The Mourners fill the streets with hideous cries,
And make them echo their sad Elegyes.
PARAPHRASE.
BEfore thy Health and Strength are so far spent,
That thou shall tremble at the least ascent.
Time was, you could have over mountains run,
Climb pyramids, as if you would fetch the Sun
From his Celestial Orb; or meant to trace
Some other Planet in his nimble race:
But now it is otherwise; you stoop and bow,
Creep on all four, looking down below;
And if but one of all the four do stumble,
You tot'ring stand, and in a moment tumble.
And when thy crasie body's down, it lies
Looking for help, but has not strength to rise.
Hence it is, the smallest stone, or straw, or Hill
That Is in thy way, thy way with fears does fill.
The Almond Tree does flourish, gray hairs sit
Thick on thy head, as blossoms do on it.
Those Churchyard flowers make thy head as white,
As Mother Earth is in a snowy night.
The Grasshopper, the lightest burden tires
Thy old and crasie bones: -- All thy Desires
Of pomp and pleasure fail; the Mourners meet
And pensive walk together in the Street.
Because thine age does tell them, that the Grave
Has got one foot already, and must have
The other shortly; -- one step more and then
No tears or groans can call thee back ag'en.
Remember thy Creator, etc.
VERSE VI.
Or ever the Silver Cord be loosed; or the Golden bowl be broken, or the
Pitcher be broken at the Fountain, or the Wheel broken at the Cistern. BEfore
the Cord of Silver lose its strength,
The Bowl of Gold be broken, or at length
The Pitcher from the Fountain broken go,
Or Wheel be broken at the Cistern too.
PARAPHRASE.
BEfore the Pith or Marrow of thy back,
That heretofore could bend, and yet not crack,
Could burdens bear, and never complain or winch,
Be weak and loosed with an aged wrinch.
Before the Pericardium of thy brain,
Being broke and shattered thou turn child again,
While yet the Veins and Vessels do impart
The Spirits to the Fountain of thine Heart.
VERSE VII.
Then shall the dust return to the Earth, and the Spirit shall return to God
who gave it. FOr when these cease, thy Spirit takes it is flight
To God, and bids thy body now good night:
So thy day's ended; now thou must return
A lump of Ashes to thy lasting Urn.
The Conclusion.
VERSE VIII.
Vanity of vanities (says the Preacher) all is vanity. THus thou have (Reader)
in a rustic strain
The wisemans counsel. What does yet remain,
Are strong and well framed Arguments to prove
His counsel seasonable, and to move
Thee to the practice of it. -- One does lie
In the eighth verse, that all is Vanity.
This was the Preachers text when he Eccl. 1. 1.
began,
And now he has quite through his subject ran,
He re-asserts and does with vigor cry,
Sirs (I have proved it) All is Vanity.
Riches and Honors, and whatever the world Ver. 8.

Affords, are quickly into nothing hurled.
Its pomps and pleasures, sensual delight,
Like Vanity do vanish, when the night
Of death approaches; or the evil Time
Of aged darkness clouds thy youthful prime.
Nor does the wiseman speak at random, he
Had paid for counsel, e're he counseled thee.
He sought it out and after does dispense
This spirit'al physic on experience. Ver. 9.

By Physic rules his Physic is the best,
It has affixed a true probatum est;
And that is enough. -- For though he could have writ
No doubt whole Volumes on this Subject, yet
He gives the reason why he does forbear,
'Cause multitude of Books a burden are: Ver. 12.

A burden unto him to write, to you
To read a burden; -- Wherefore Young man, now.
Take all in brief; thy Maker, that is above, Ver. 13, 14.

Fear, honor, his Commandments keep and love.
The Motive to enforced, is this in Sum,
That thou must dye and unto Judgment come.
O aeterna Veritas,
and vera Charitas,
and chara Aeternitas,
tu es Deus meus*
ad te suspiro die and nocte!
August. Soli Deo Gloria Sine FINE.


A Plain and profitable Dialogue between a Sinner and Time.
Sinner. THough Time be bald, perhaps he is not dumb!
Would thou but stop, Old Time, I would have some
Discourse about thy Person, and thy Glass,
Thy Sithe and Foretop. -- Pray before thou pass,
Give me but leave, in a few words, to try
Whether thy self know what they signify.

Time. Ask what thou will, I Will answer as I walk;
But I never did, nor now can stand to talk.

Sinner. Why art thou bald Old Man? what have thou wore
All off with age, except that lock before?

Time. No, it is an Hierogliphick, that does teach,
If time's once past, in vain it is to reach
An hand out after him; that you must meet
Him as he comes, if past you cannot greet.
Your Goods may be confiscate, Money lent
To Hucksters, Houses burnt, Estates quite spent;
You may embrace a stinking Dunghill, then, Job 2. 8. Job 42. 10.

As Job once did, recover all again.
But men or Angels cannot once repay
To you the loss of one Month, Week or Day;
Nor can one minute past e're be recalled;
And that is the meaning of my being bald.

Sinner. But why do Eagles-wings adorn thy Glass?
To manifest how suddenly we pass
From birth to death? Or do they represent
Our Swifter flight from hence, the sand being spe^^*

Time. Yes, it is a lively Emblem, that does show
How swift man's few and sinful hours do go;
Not go, but run; run, that is too slow, they fly:
Well said the Wiseman then, a time to dye Eccl. 3. 2.

And to be born there is, but mentions none
For life; e're he could write it, that was gone.
When Hezekiah's Sun, and Moon it is said,
(And as some think) his Stars were retrograde
Full ten degrees; and Joshua's Sun did stand
Still in the Heavens; still the nimble sand
Of flying Time continued running; -- They
Who lived then, could not for that long day
Reckon themselves one day, or hour younger,
Nor did it make their lives one minute longer:
But as the Glass continues running 'till
The last sand drops; so passes Time, and will
Not step one minute back for high or low;
The Glass once run, ready or not, you go,
Where Time shall be no more; but swallowed be
Up in the Ocean of Eternity.
Thus, miserable man, you understand,
Why I this Glass do carry in my hand;
And though no Looking-glass, yet may thou see
By it, how short thy sinful days may be.

Sinner. What means thy crooked sweeping Sithe? have thou Taken the field of
the whole world to mow?


Time. Yes that I have, and will not let a Spire
Of withering grass live, grow one Cubit higher
Than is appointed by the God of Heaven,
At whose commanding word I lay all even.
My Sithe is keen, and it is impartial too,
For I never strike, until my God says, do.
Cedars and Shrubs, Rich, Poor, Good, Bad, do fall
When their Time's come, -- It Is I devour all.
More precious trees stand longer, 'till they are ripe;
But fruitless Cumber-grounds I often wipe
Sooner away, at his command, who says
The wicked shall not live out half their days. Psalm. 55. 23.

And though a long time I have picked and chose,
And still do so, yet all must in the close
Be hewed down. -- Some shall transplanted be
Into the heavenly Canaan, every tree
That here is fruitful -- Others that have bin
(Like the wild Olive) fruitful only in
The works of darkness, shall be hewed down,
And into everlasting fire thrown. Matthew. 3. 10.


Sinner. Once more, and I have done; fain would I know What is the reason Thou
do Naked go?


Time. In short, it is to put all men in mind, The Time is coming they must
leave behind

All worldly pomp, and as they naked come Job 1. 21.

Into the world, return as naked home.
Riches nor Honors, Robes nor ought they have
Shall descend after them into their grave.
But that is not all: -- My naked body show's
The Time is coming, when God shall disclose Mark 4. 22

All secrets, that lie hid, and naked lay
The hearts of all men at the Judgment day. Romans 2. 16.


Sinner. And yet once more (old Time) will thou declare
To me my future days, how short they are?
How many are to come; how many past,
That I may know how long my life shall last? Psalm. 39. 4.


Time. No, I may not; God has determined none
Shall know how long their lives are; nor how soon
Death may overtake them, that they always may
Be making of provision for that day.
And one would think Uncertainty should make
The Sinners flesh to tremble, heart to ache;
To fly mad mirth, all sin, and still be doing
Something for Heaven, who every hour's going
To Death and Judgment, and for ought he know's
This day may end his joys, begin his woes. Luke 12. 20.

To wind up all, there is a Latin Verse
Or two, which now I only shall rehearse
('It Is to the purpose, and a serious one)
I Will leav't with you to English, and have done.
Fleres si scires unum tua tempora mensem,
Rides, cum non sit forsitan una dies?

Englished. If thou did know thy life should last
One month and then expire,
Tho'uldst pass that month in Sorrow:
And do thou laugh, when this day past
Perhaps thou may retire
Into thy grave to morrow?
God grant I then may number So
My days, which yet remain,
That whensoe're Death calls to go,
I Glory may attain. Amen.

In illo die, O Jesu, esto mihi Jesus.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
SErmons on the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians; by M. I. Daille,
translated into English by E. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwin's, and Dr. I. Owen's
Epistles Recommendatory.

An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Matthew. 4. and Peter's Sermon to
Cornelius; and Circumspect Walking; by Dr. Tho. Tailor.

A practical Exposition on the 3d Chap. of the 1 Epistle of St. Paul to the
Corinthians, with the Godly Man's choice, on Psa. 4. 6, 7, 8. by Anthony
Burgess.

An Exposition on four select Psalms, viz.
Sermons.
The fourth Psalm in eight The forty second Psalm in ten The fifty first Psalm
in twenty The sixty third Psalm in seven



An Analytical Exposition of Genesis, and of 23 Chapters of Exodus; by G.
Hughes, D. D.

Books 4to.
Present State of New England.

The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration: by G. Swinnock, M. A.

An Antidote against Quakerism; by Steph. Scandert.

An Exposition of the 5 first Chapt. of Ezekiel. with useful observations
thereupon; by William Greenhill.

The Gospel Covenant opened: by P. Bulkley.

God's holy Mind touching matters Moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments:
Also an Exposition on the Lord's Prayer: by Edward Eston, B* D.

The Fiery Jesuit, or Historical Collections of the rise, increase, Doctrines
and Deeds of the Jesuits.

Horologiographia optica; Dyalling, universal and particular, speculative and
practical; together with a description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method;
by Sylvanus Morgan.

The Practical Divinity of the Papists discovered to be destructive to true
Religion, and men's Souls; by I. Clarkon.

The Creatures goodness as they came out of God's hand, and the good man's mercy
to the brute creatures: in two Sermons; by Tho. Hodges. B. D.

Certain Considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst Protestants.

Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the Scripture
offers concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion; of Election,
Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel, and Perfection.

The Saints triumph over the last enemy, in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr.
James Janeway; by Nath. Vincent.

The Vanity of Man in his best estate, in a discourse on Psalm. 39. 5. at the
Funeral of the Lady Susanna Keate; by Rich. Kidder, M. A.

Peaceable Disquisitions; by Jo. Humphreys.

56 Sermons of Providence; by Joh. Collings. D. D.

Sermons concerning Grace and Temptation; by Tho. Froysell.

The Morning Lecture against Popery, or the Principal Errors of the Church of
Rome detected and confuted in a Morning Lecture; preached by several Ministers
of the Gospel in or near London.

Four useful discourses: (1) The Art of improving a full and prosperous
condition for the glory of God; being an Appendix to the Art of Contenment in
three ^ermons, on Phil. 4. 12. (2) Christian submision, on 1 Samuel 3. 18. (3)
Christ a Christian life and death is gain. on Phil. 1. 21. (4) The Gospel of
Peace sent to the sons of Peace, in six Sermons, on Luke 10. 5, 6. by Jer.
Buroughs.

Dr. Wilds Letter of Thanks and Poems.

A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands.

The Saints privilege by dying; by Mr. Scot.

The Virtuous Daughter, a Funeral Sermon; by Mr. Brian.

The Miracle of Miracles, or Christ in our Nature; by Dr. Rich. Sibs.

The unity and essence of the Catholic Church visible; by Mr. Hudson.

View of Antiquity; by Mr. Jo. Hanmer.

The intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church; or the
particular Believing soul; in several Lectures on the whole second Chap. of
Cant. by John Collins, D. D.

Large Octavo.
Heart-Treasure; or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian with Soul-enriching treasure of truths, graces, experiences,
and comforts.

The sure mercies of David; or a second part of Heart-Treasure.

Closet-prayer a Christians duty. All three by O. Heyword.

Heaven or Hell here in a good or bad Conscience; by Nath. Vincent.


