THE RAPTURES OF A Flaming Spirit.

BEING A Directory, Wherein Methodically is contained the several Parts of
PRAYER.

With Select Expressions for the Performance of the DVTY.

As the Author uses to Express himself before and after his SERMONS.

By NICO. PEARSON. etc.

HOS. 14. 2. Take with you words, and turn to the LORD; say unto him, etc.
LONDON, Printed by Tho. James for the Author, and are to be sold by Robert
Clavel and Richard Jones, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, and the
White Horse in Little Britain. 1682.

THE PREFACE OR INTRODUCTION.
IT was uncharitably, ungratefully, and indeed enviously said of Eliab, David's
Eldest Brother, when he saw David so vigorous and zealous in the Lords Work;
That he came from home, to the Camp, in Pride, and Naughtiness of heart, to
exalt himself, leaving the Sheep under his charge, exposed to danger: Eliab not
knowing that the thing was of God, and not considering he was sent by his
Father; and not Vacuis Manibus, but brought a Present to their Captain and
Sustenance for himself and brethren. I am sure to meet with such
misinterpretation and suspect from my Anti-ingenious Brethren, of whom I say as
St. Paul said of Alexander the Copper Smith, altering the Deprecation not the
Complaint, God forgive them, for they have done me much harm. Envy that dark
Shadow, always waits upon Shining Merit; being an inseparable Attendant of
all good things: and where she cannot find a hole, will be sure to make one. I
am sure, in regard I venture to stand up in this Sycamore Tree, to be charged
with Pride, Presumption, and Arrogance. Calumny and Conjecture may abuse
Innocence her self: But if God justify me in this Matter (as I believe he
will) I fear not Man's Judgment. If I fall in with God, I care not who falls out
with me. David was obedient to his Father's Commands, and took a great deal of
pains to bring a Gift to the Captain to infavour his Brethren with him, and an
Ephah of Parched Corn and ten loaves for their subsistence: When he had quit
himself of that Burden, they laden him with another much harder to be born,
Cruel Censures and Contumelious Words. I fear not that my Obedience to God will
be in vain; but for my Care, Industry, and Kindness, to my Brethren, I shall
have Instead of Grapes, Thorns; and for Figgs, Thistles. I have here provided
and brought some Weapons which are not Carnal, not only to oppose the Enemies
that defy the Armies of the Living God, and exalt themselves against his
Kingdom; but such as are Instrumental for the gaining it for our selves and for
them that are under our charge: Matt. 11. 12. and also some Instructions how to
manage them. I am sure there is need enough, but the hearts of the needful I am
afraid are too proud to accept of assistance; but will be ready to ask as the
Captains that was with Jehu, did concerning he Prophet, Wherefore came this mad
fellow hither? 2 Kings 9. 11. I can find no better Answer for these Ingrato's
than David gave his Brother, What have I now done? Is there not a Cause? 1 Samuel
17. 29.

How many are they, and what is most lamentable, who have taken upon them the
Ministry, the Dispensation of God's Word and Sacraments, to be Agents between
God and his People, and to stand between the Porch and the Altar; who by
presuming to do what they are uncupable of, prostitute the Solemnity of this
Duty of Prayer; which being duly performed is the Sun of Spiritual Exercises,
the Center of Christian Religion, the Heart of Devotion, and the very Soul of
Piety; but hy an undue performance of it, and by trifling in it, they render it
inconsiderable and contemptible, either by making a Set Form according to their
weak apprehension of Things, or else, which is, more intolerable, to venture
to pray extempore not having the Gift, nor any tolerable Requisites or
Qualifications toward it.

This ensuing Work is principally intended for those that pray in public, and
are as it were the Mouth of all that join with them: Notwithstanding every one
may inform themselves for the performance of Private Devotion, by the following
Instructions.

I have observed two great defects in Public Extempore Prayer, the one Want of
Method, and the other the Want of apt and elegant Expressions; which even
forced me upon this adventure.

I own that the life of Prayer is from infusion from above, and is (...), the
Ministration of the Spirit. But Method is the Organ, and Rhetocal
Sweet-charming and Pathetical Expressions, are the Harmony; and where these all
combine together, there is a Heavenly Melody.

Its well known that the Spirit of God generally works in the Use of Means:
And when the Heart bath indicted a Good Matter, causes the Tongue to be like
unto the Pen of a Ready Writer. I have found that the Spirit is more assistant
in Method than otherwise, for Confusion in the Mind and Thoughts hinder the
Operation thereof: Method and Matter ought to be studi'd and observed, by all
Public Persons, as Ministers, Chaplains, Masters of Families, etc. because we
are to work upon the Affections of them that join with us: I shall first speak
to the Method of Prayer.

In want of Method there must necessarily be great Irregularity, and such a
Wandering and Wildering flat and baffle Devotion, and withal many times, as I
have observed, some of the Essential Parts of Prayer omitted; Yea by able
Ministers, and they who were accounted extraordinarly gifted for this
performance, for want of Method, have abruptly stepped out of one part of
Prayer into another, and presently hedged back again; and have been guilty of
Notorious Tautology, and sometimes being at Nonplus, rather than continue
silent, pronounce that which they would be ashamed to see in Writing: and in
this hurry and disorder forget the Confessing of Sin, Thanksgiving, or the
Afflicted, or some other Things, which ought not to he left out. These faults
and neglects are not so considerable in Private Devotion, nor intermission,
which is intolerable in Public. They say they pray by the Dictates of the
Spirit of God, and that Praying in Method is not much different from a Set
Form, and that Set Forms are dull, heartless, lifeless. For my part, I find no
Authority to condemn Set Forms of Prayer; neither will I judge or reproach any
that pray only by them; those that are not gifted must do as they can. But
Method and Form in my eye are two distinct Things, as in this my Design you
will find. My Hearers know I constantly keep a Method, although I take liberty to
vary Expressions every day, which I find much refreshing to them as well as to
my self. I am so far from being obliged or obliging to a Pack of Words, that I
would not have any to think me so vain, as to endeavor to bind any to keep to
my Expressions; far be it from me to reduce all that may be spoken in this Duty
to a proportion or scantling of my Conceiving: for I know, however the ignorant
and profane World scoff, the Product of Divine Inspiration, must be a great
Sum of Grace and Sanctity, which do not only ravish the hearts of them that
possess them, but expandeth to the inlightening of all about them. It was the
emptiness and insufficiency of too many, that caused me to offer this which I
call not a Form, but a Sample, Pattern, or Directory. I believe I shall many
times perform this Duty, and not use any of these Expressions, I bless God
there is enough from whence these came; yet I observe a Method, even this which
I show to the world. I begin with Adoration, then to Confession, from
Confession to Gratulation, and so to Petition in general; and afterward descend
to particulars, for the Church, for Governors, for the Ministers of the
Gospel, for a Blessing upon the Word preached, for Unregenerate Men, for
Wounded Consciences, for others in Affliction; and then conclude, rolling our
selves upon God and committing our selves unto his Protection, with some
Earnest Supplications for his guiding of us and care over us, etc. In the using
of this Method we shall not omit any part of Prayer. This is my way in my
Meditations for the preparation for the Duty and in performance of it, And my
grounds for it are that we ought to fill our Apprehensions and Understandings
with (...), the Great things of God, the Infiniteness of the Glory, Sovereignty
Wisdom, Power Justice, and Purity of God; this will bring a Dread and
Consternation upon us; Then come to consider his Grace, Goodness, Mercy, Truth,
Sufficiency, etc. this will temper the Consternation that the Consideration of
the more awful Attributes brought upon us: So there will be a Gracious Mixture
of Fear and Love. To have (...), right Opinions and Apprehensions of God, is
the Architectonicon, Basis, and Foundation of all Devotion. The Waiting upon
God with a due sense of the Nature, Attributes, and the Dispensation of his
Providence, raises our Minds, quickens our Affections, and causes us to
take all up the Hill to the Sacrifice. And when we have spent some time in this
Exercise, in Adoring, Praising and Glorifying God, then look we inward. I
believe in Divinity as well as in Philosophy, The Knowledge of one Contrary
brings in the Contrary or another: After we have considered that all the
Prodigies of Greatness and Goodness are in God, then to look upon and into our
Selves, and consider we are the Creatutes of the Most High, and what
Obligations he has laid upon us, and what kind of Returns we have made, what
Duties are incumbent upon us, and how we have performed them, etc. These things
done unfraudulently, will bring Confusion upon our Faces; this must humble us,
ay to the Earth. These things being truly considered, makes us sick of our
selves, and so to loath our selves, as to vomit up our Sin by Confession; then
we shall say in bitterness of Spirit (not in a Theatrical Manner, as the most
do) That we have left undone those things which we ought to have done: And That
we have done those things which we ought not to have done. We shall with deep
accents and resentments say we are miserable sinners, for the nearer we draw to
God the more light discovers it self; which will show that guilt and polution
in us that we were strangers to, in respect of the apprehension of it. Then it
necessarily follows that we shall fall upon the Admiring and Praising God's
Long-suffering, Mercy, and Goodness, that the effects of our Sins are not upon
us; and acknowledge our Selves the Living monuments of his Grace, and return
Hearty Thanks for all the Blessings We enjoy spiritual and temporal; knowing
our Selves to be utterly unworthy of them, and that it is merely Divine Bounty
that bestows them. Then Free Grace will appear more beautiful than the Sun.
Then the Lord Christ the great Minister thereof, will be the Chief of Ten
thousand: Then precious will the Promises and all the Means of Grace appear:
Certainly this is enough to make the Dumb to speak, and enlarge every strait
heart to give all possible thanks, and to study what they shall render unto the
Lord for all his benefits. And by this time we shall be so high, lifted out of
Worldly Darkness, that we shall see what Guilt even the best of us gather and
contract day by day; then shall we beg to be washed and purified: Also we shall
see our Frailty and Inability, and be earnest with God for such Graces and
Qualifications as shall enable us to run the Race that is set before us; and by
considering other Men's conditions by our own, we shall not fail to intercede
for them. This is the Method I constantly keep (I can say) with great benefit;
but in the words of the great Apostle, If any one can Show me a more excellent
Way, Noverint Universi, I am not of them that despise Instruction.

The Second Want that I observed in the performance of this Duty, is the not
having full and weighty Expressions, which is like the want of Wing-feathers to
a Bird, or of a Gale of Wind to a Ship under sail. We ought to use full and
significant Words in Prayer, not so much to mo^^ the Mind of God by Rhetorical
Insinuations, as by rehearsing and considering the Words, to stir up in our
selves Attention, Adoration, Contrition, Gratulation, Fervent Holy Desires,
etc. Sinewy pregnant powerful Expressions, are an Advertisement unto us, and
that Advertisement leads us unto a Consideration, and the Consideration
carries us to the Understanding. Rehearsing of Words are profitable, if
thereto the Mind give heed; then we pray with the Understanding, as St. Paul
mentions; 1 Cor. 14. 15. I have here provided many hundreds of Expressions
adapted and fitted for each part of Prayer, I could have placed them so that
they might have been more dependant and coherent, but my Intention is not to
teach Forms of Prayer. I have laid them open, that they who have not the Gift
of Prayer (for them this is chiefly intended) may take and choose where they
please, and with a little Industry so order their Affairs, that they may
express themselves with variety every time they are called to the performance
of this Duty, to the great inlightening and refreshment of themselves and
others. I much fear that some of those Raptures are so high and lofty, that
they be obscured in the Clouds of some Men's Ignorance; and to such will prove
invaluable: But I must, as they that show their Jewels openly, abide the
Curiosity and Censure of every Beholder: And surely by the Ignorant the Richest
shall be the least regarded, Judgments being apt to err where they pass upon
Things, they understand not. We take Unknown Coin, suspiciously, and where
there is no true Judgment, the heaivest Judgment comes. I observe the Poets
many times in their Prologues earnestly entreat to be understood, that is, that
the Auditors and Spectators may not Hiss, until they have well considered and
know a reason for it. One of them tells the people why he makes such an
Apological Defense.

Some Critic woudbe's they will rail at the Poet.

For speaking sense (poor souls) and they not know it.

I showed my Papers in Manuscript to diverse, who I presumed were Intelligent
and Learned, desiring them to try them, and pass Judgment, and execute them who
deserved not to live; To work they went, with Abbington Law: When I came to see
what condition my dear Issue was in, I found the chiefest of my Darlings under
Bars, being crossed out, sentenced, ready for Execution. I not having patience
to see the Innocent barbarously murdered before my face, Natural Affection (you
know will do much) forced me to arrest the Judgment, and by that means procured
another Trial for them: But they being Strangers, spoke in a Language that
their Judges were not acquainted with, they never having been in the High
Countries, where the supposed Criminals came from: But with much ado I procured
some Interpreters that understand both Languages, and causing some auxiliary
Lights to be brought in, by and by the Innocents appeared in great loveliness
and beauty; insomuch that their hasty inconsiderate Judges embraced them and
did them great Honor.

I am well acquainted with the baseness of the World, Pride and Ignorance,
those inseparable Companions go hand in hand next the Wall; and where ever they
meet Divine Wisdom and Humility (who never part) they kick them into the
Kennel. I have read of one kind of Serpent, that always hisses at the Light: I
know what sort of Men will use more Criticism than Ability, another sort that
know better things, will look upon my pains and endeavors, as tho they looked
through the wrong end of a Perspective, which makes things seem little,
inconsiderable, at great distance, and of little value: Others there are that
are so proud that they will rather sit in the dark than light their Candle at
their Neighbors, more I know that will not fail to throw dirt in my face, and
endeavor to persuade the World that its my Natural Complexion; and will strive
to blast my Fruits with their poisonous breath: O Tempora! O Mores! I have
twenty years together run the Gauntlet, many a blow and thrust I have had, yet
(for all) through mercy I am still on my Legs, and able to face them. We may know
when we see a Tree battered, and stones and sticks lying in the Boughs, that
good Fruit has grown there. Yet notwithstanding all the discouragments I have
had and am sure to meet with, I determine not to leave any thing undone that is
incumbent upon me. It was a humble, but a sweet and gracious Saying of a worthy
Divine, I am glad to bring one Pin toward the decking of the Lords Bride. What
ever is in my way that tends to Edification, or may in the least help the
Church of God, I resolve (by Gods help) to break through the throngs of
Opposition, to hand it to her; and if this be as kindly accepted as it is
humbly offered, it will vigorate me in the performance of that which is before
me.

Let no one think that I would have them to mutter over any of these
Expressions in Prayer without Understanding, as tho there were some Magical
force in them; I intend them not for such: God delights not in the Sacrifices
of Fools. Surely there is not any that oftener protests against heartless
performances than I do. I have often said, yet I find not any reason to recant
it, That God is more displeased with the unsincere Prayers of the Wicked, than
with any other of their Actions. It Is an old Saying, Simulata sanctitas est
duplex Iniquitas. It Is much better not to tread the Lords Courts at all, than
in vain. What a heavy Detestation God pronounces in the First of Isaiah
against Vain Oblations, and against their Hypocritical spreading forth their
hands. Heartless Operations are hearty Dissimulations. How the Amen, the
faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the Creation of God, loathed the
Church of Laodicea; Revel. 3. 14, 15, 16. because of her luke-warmness: He
wished she were either cold or hot; that is either to serve him in sincerity,
or not to pretend to it: but because she was lukewarm, he spewed her out of
his Mouth with strong demonstration of abhorrency: And how far it is from God
to return to his Vomit again: God will not be mocked, Good Words without the
heart are but Flattery, yea good Works without the Heart are but Hyprocrisie. I
confess Prayer is a Sacrifice, but abominable, except the Heart be the Altar,
whereon it is offered. A Heart without a Sacrifice is better than a Sacrifice
without a Heart. Deus magis delectat affectu quam effectu; is an Old but true
Maxim in Divinity. God calls for the heart, Pro. 23. 26. He that is all in
all to us, will have all in all in us; as the famous Carthaginian Captain was
Primus ingressus and ulitmus egressus; so our Hearts must be the first and last
in all our Performances.

It Is sad to consider that the Heathen should give real honor to counterfeit
gods, and that Christians should give a counterfeit honor to the True God. A
Sacrifice without a Heart was a sad and Ominous Presage in the Superstition of
the Roman Augurs. They that give but the Skin of Worship shall have but the
Shell of Comfort. He that accepts the Heart without any thing, will not
accept of any thing without the Heart. I have heard of a Gentleman's Servant,
that was such an Ignoramo, that when he heard that his Mother was offended with
his negligence in not sending of her a Letter, sent her a Letter that came for
his Master; thinking if it were a Letter it was well enough, what ever was in
it; which did not only discover his own folly but affront his Mother. Too many
such Ignoramo's have we, that hear God expects Sacrifices of Prayer and
Praise, and to hear daily from them; then they get some other Men's Letters,
such as others have made and directed to God, not considering the substance and
contents of them, but offer them at a venture, their hearts being strangers to
them: which does not only show their wretched Ignorance, but affronteth the
Majesty of God; as tho he were not acquainted with all our ways nor pondered
all our goings. Vain Prayers are Religiosum Scelus, which indeed are
Wickednesses of the First Magnitude.

Therefore in the words of the Wise man Iexhort thee, When thou prayest,
prepare thine Heart, and be not as one that tempts the Lord. He alludeth to
an Irreverent Fellow that rusheth inconsiderately into a Princes presence,
which tempts the Prince to order him to be punished. How many in this Kingdom
daily thus tempt God, by their inconsiderate entering into this Duty, being not
so much concerned as they who worship Idols. How lamentable it is to go into a
Church, when the Minister is at Prayer, and the People about him, scarce one of
them showing any Respect, Reverence, Affection, or Devotion, their eyes
wandering from one part of the Congregation to another, the Men adjusting of
their Hair or Peruque, and the other Sex, their Ornaments; some whispering,
others in intolerable Postures, yet will observe their times to give their
Responds, and speak to God when they do not think of him. These are they that
God complains of, That draw near unto him with their lips, when their hearts
are far from him. I plead not for outward Postures and Gestures, yet I am sure
if the heart be rightly affected, it commands the Body. When the Mind is
filled with what concerns us in the performance of this Duty, we are far from
notifying other Trifles: How many there are that think they have performed
their Duty of Prayer when they have rabbl'd over a many words, although they have
no more sense or knowledge of what they say, then Parrots have.

I have read of one Bolus, an Actor upon a Stage, in the Representation of
Grief, he feigned a Weeping, but at the very time, he remembered the death of
his only Daughter then he weep'd in earnest: I wish that our ordinary Actors,
when they say daily, We have left undone those things that we ought to have
done, and done those things which we ought not to have done, and that there is
no health in us, etc. The words are good, and above exception, as indeed in my
Judgment is all the Liturgy of the Church of England: I wish that they that
daily use it, did but feel the weight of the words, and that their
Understandings did go along with their Tongues, and remember what they speak is
true, they would be sorrowful indeed. When we say, We have left undone those
things that we ought to have done; We say in effect we have not paid that Fear,
Adoration, Reverence, Honor, Praise, Love, Obedience, etc. that is due from us
to God; nor that Love, Pity, Charity, and Mercy, that is due to our Neighbors.
And when we say, That we have done those things that we ought not to have done;
that is, we have made unto our selves other Gods; that we have imagined
Security in transitory things, profaned the Name of God, and his Saboths; that
our lives have been disorderly, in Disobedience, Cruelty, Incontinency, Rapine,
Perfidiousness, and Coveteousness: and when we say, There is no health in us;
We own that our Brain is the Forge of Wickedness, our Eyes full of Adultery,
our Tongues unruly Evils, full of deadly Poison; our Throats open Sepulchers,
our Hearts deceitful above measure, and desperately wicked; yea all our Members
the Instruments, of Iniquity: Now if our Consiciences were but as ready, as
active as Nathan was to David, and tell us, yea convince every one of us, that
thou art the Man, that has contracted all this guilt, and art so wretched; and
God darting in some beams of Divine light, as he commonly does when we wait
upon him in sincerity, this would make us turn our formalities into realities.
I must say, I have had many times a warm heart full of Devotion in reading the
Common Prayer, by fetching and binding my Understanding to the sense of the
words. I own their Zeal and Piety that were the Compilers of it, but think it is
impossible to persuade me, that they ever intended to blind and oblige Gifted
Men so to it, as not to exercise their Indowments. Neither do I find that the
Governors of our Church pretend to it.

It was a sweet Admonition of St. Paul to the Corinthians, Neither to give
offense to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God: God knows
my endeavors are for Love, Peace, and Unity. I have been very careful in my
Studies not to write any thing that could give just offense. If any thing in
this Epistle seem to be too severe, and that there are too many grating
Reflections, so far as I know my own heart, the Arrows I have shot, I sent them
with a good will, not for ruin, but remedy: Why shall I not meet with a Candid
Interpretation? But if otherwise, I determine to be purely passive, and receive
all the Scorn, Contempt, or what else can come, with an indeclinable
acquiescence in the Will of God, that will ever long discover the secrets of all
hearts. In the interim I doubt not but these my labors and endeavors, will be
a Guide and Assistance to many, that are hungering and thirsting after
Righteousness; that are inquiring, Where Christ feeds, and where his Flocks
rest at Noon day? That wait for Wisdom as they that watch for the Morning. But
let no one speak to God by mine or any other Directions, except the heart speak
the words, and the words the heart: And that you may so do, I Will but open one
Text of Scripture, and conclude this: It is in Joshua 15. 16. And Caleb said,
He that smites Kirjath-sepher, and takes it, to him will I give Achsach my
Daughter to Wife. This Kirjath-sepher was a City in Canaan, that held out after
that the Israelites had got possession of the Land; Caleb, seeing it to be very
desirable, and most necessary for them, propounds his Daughter Achsach, which
was very beautiful and worthy, as a Reward to any one that should take
Kirjath-sepher.

What chiefly concerns me to open to you, is, What this Kirjath-sepher and
Achsach, and how to apply them in a Spiritual Sense; Kirjath-sepher signifies
the Strong-hold of the Letter, and Achsach, the Rending of the Vail; so
whosoever smites and takes the Strong-hold of the Letter of the Scriptures,
or any other Divine Truths; shall have the Rending of the Vail: That is,
Whosoever shall find out the spiritual Meaning of the things written in
Scripture, or elsewhere, that are Divine; shall have the Vail rent that is
between us, and the things that are spiritually discerned, and we shall see
into the beauty of Holiness.

Reader, Consider the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life: Whoever
depends upon the External Performances of Outward Ordinances, or the Historical
Knowledge of Christ for their Salvation, will surely meet with such
disappointment that death instead of life will be their portion. Therefore
whatever thou do, gain Kirjath-sepher, there lies all the Treasure, then
Achsach will surely be thine, that Vail which covers thy Face whilst thou art
a Stranger to the Life of Grace, shall be rent, and thou will see that which
will make thee cry out, Psalm. 84. 1, 2, 10. How aimable are thy Tabernacles, O
Lord of Hosts, My Soul longs, yea, even faints for the Courts of the Lord.
One day in thy Courts, is better then a Thousand else where, etc. And the Vail
that covers thy Face, shall not only be rent, but the Vail that covers thy
Heart; thou will not only see of the Divine Excellencies that are in God, and a
Pisgah's Prospect, but thou will see that Den and Cave of Uncleaness, the deeps
of Filth that is in thy own Heart; which will cause Gods Mercy to be amazing,
and thee restless until thou be partaker of it: by thy gaining of Achsach thou will see the things that are spiritually discerned. Take one Word of Advice how
to go about this great Work, and God speed thee well. When thou read that
God is the Omnipotent Lord of all Glory and Majesty, make way through thy
Thoughts and Considerations, to thy Understanding, and entertain the Notion
there, and let it be an Inhabitant with thee, as Solomon says concerning the
Fear of God, I say of the Knowledge of him, Hold it fast, and grow old therein:
This will make thee reverence Him, his Name will be great in thy sight; and
when thou read, He Is the great Benefactor of Mankind, etc. Observe the
former Method in bringing the Notion home, this will exceedingly greaten thy
Respect and increase thy Love to him. And when thou read, That we have
profaned our Affections, which are due only to God, by setting them upon
unworthy things, and that our Adulteries are between our Breasts: Consider thou
art the Man that has promised to forsake the Devil, the World, and the Flesh,
and thy self only to thy great Lord, to love him with all thy Heart, and Mind,
and Soul; and finding thy self guilty, if thou have not an hardened Whore's
forehead, thou must blush, and be confoundedly ashamed, and acknowledge it
Justice to be put away. And when thou read, That we have continually lived
in contempt of God and in the transgression of his Commands; breaking his bands
in sunder, laying the Reins of our Loyalty upon the Neck of licentious liberty:
Consider then what it is for the so much obliged Creature to rebel against so
great and good Creator, Redeemer, Sustainer, and Preserver, and reckon thy self
in the throng of such Malefactors; then thou can not be keep'd from judging
and abhorring thy self; and thus apprehending of the Soul of the Letter, taking
Kirjathsepher, thou will find so much within the Word which is Divine, that
will rightly humble thee; when thou come to Gratulation, so much sweetness in
Mercy, and so much Comfort in Grace, that will take and hold thee; that as
Death is swallowed up in Victory, that thy Miserable Wretchedness is swallowd
up in Divine Bounty. And when thou have taken Kirjath-sepher, and obtained
Achsach, thou will find that every good and perfect Gift comes from the Father
of Lights, and that thou want nothing that he has not for thee; that he
delights himself in showing Mercy and doing Good: this will encourage thee to
lift up thy head upon the account of thy Redeemer, and with boldness ask
Relief. And when thou have taken Kirjath-sepher and enjoyed Achsach, thou will
see the State of the Church, her Ruins and Wants, and what is needful for her:
Also the Duty of Ministers, what Blessing we want upon the Word Preached; also
the Deplorable State of Unregenerate Men, and the Flashes of Hell Fire, that
irresistibly invade the Wounded Soul; and see others in outward Troubles,
bleeding by the Arrows of Gods Fury, and squeezed in the Press of Adversity,
then thou will as Elihu, feel thy self full of Matter, the Spirit within thee
will constrain thee. When thou art seriously and divinely concerned, forget not
thy Director,

NICO. PEARSON.

ON THE AUTHOR AND HIS Elaborate Work.
Whilst the dull clods of worse informed Earth
Stifle the Spirit in its very birth;
See here the more refined mould aspire
To Heaven which made it, in the Flaming fire
Of Ardent zeal, to Praise, and Pray to him,
That first endew'd the glorious Seraphim:
With Love like his he would not be alone,
But shows the way to others to that Throne
Whose Monarch blesses all: but yet commands,
His Creatures Prayers to force it from his hands:
And showed the piercing Author to dispense
Methods to take even Heaven by violence.
Which if by his Direction we attain,
He has the trouble, and we have the gain*
G. H.

THE RAPTURES OF A Flaming Spirit.
ADORATION.
ETernally Blessed, Incomprehensible, most Mighty and most Glorious Lord our
God.

The high and lofty One, who inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy; who
dwells in the high and holy Place.

The Almighty Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all Things Visible and
Invisible.

Heaven is thy Throne, Earth is thy Footstool.

Thou art incircled with Millions of Angels, clothed with Glory and Honor,
decked with Majesty and Excellency, and arrayed with Beauty and Splendour.

Before thee the glorious Angels cover their Faces, not being able to behold so
glorious a Majesty.

Thy Throne is Inestimable, thy Glory Incomprehensible, before thee the Host of
Angels stand with trembling.

The First Cause of Things, the Foundation of the Universe, the Infinite,
Invisible, and only Wise God.

Thou have no partner in thy Supreme Sovereignty.

Thou, even thou, art Lord alone.

Who dwell in the Splendors of that inaccessible Light, unto which no mortal
eye can approach.

Who with a powerful hand keep an undisturbed Order in all thy Affairs.

The Invisible Divinity, that cannot be comprehended within the scanty compass
of a Created Mind.

We thy poor Creatures with all Reverence desire to lift up our dim eyes to
discover some of the light of thy Perfections, to enkindle in our dull Souls
some Devotion.

Nothing can be added unto thee to make thee more excellent.

Thou art eternal and infinite in Being and Perfection, who consistest of thy
self alone, without participation from others; being absolute endless, and
without all limitation of Perfection; who derivest from thy own
incomprehensible Infiniteness, certain limited Natures and Perfections to
Creatures, which Natures and Perfections in Creatures, are nothing else but
little Particles and Participations of that Bottomless Sea of Infiniteness that
is in thy Self; whereunto they all are to be referred and reduced, as the Beam
to the Sun, or as the Brook to the Spring.

Thou art Alpha and Omega, and beside thee there is no God.

The Omnipotent Lord of all Glory and Majesty, more high than all that can be
imagined and conceived, and all that can be understood and considered, with any
Created Understanding. More, high and precious than all that can be beloved,
enjoyed, or desired; for the Infiniteness of thy Greatness does far pass and
exceed all this; for thou art to all Creatures Incomprehensible: no
Understanding can reach unto thee, nor Imagination nor Reason, nor any other
Virtue created can comprehend thee.

Thou have thy Existence from thy Self and not from another; such a Being, as
in comparison of thee nothing else has a being. Who have no Succession, always
the same.

Thou our God, art the Cause of Causes, and the Being of Beings; and in every
Degree unspeakable and incomprehensible.

How can we express thy Noble Acts, or speak out all thy Praise.

Thy Name alone is excellent.

Thou incomparably exceedest our best conceptions of thee.

Thou hold back the Face of thy Throne, and spreadest thy Cloud upon it.

When we endeavor to make Discoveries of thee, we strain our sight, thou
betakest thy self to thy heights.

Thy Glory can neither be manifested nor increased.

Who has seen thee, that he may tell us; and who can magnify thee as thou art?

As thou art of purer Eyes than to behold iniquity, so we are of impurer eyes
than to behold thy glory.

As the Heavens are above the Earth, so are thy thoughts above our thoughts,
and thy ways above our ways.

Thou art that fixed and unshaken Entity, that art without the least shadow of
variation.

All certainty flows from thee, from that Original Immutability that is in
thy Self.

Thou have an Independent, an Eternal Certainty, thou beholdest all Beings and
Motions of Beings, past, present, and to come.

Thou art the Reason and Order of all Things, that with everlasting Laws do
govern the World.

Thou from the beginning have commanded Times to run, according to their Order,
governing them by the Celestial Bodies, which thou have placed; obliging them
to observe an absolute Harmony and Decorum in all their Motions, to keep time
with thy Musical Laws.

Thou composed'st all their Lessons, and measured'st all their Dances.

Thou art most necessarily and eternally existing, exalted in thy own strength
above the highest reach of our imaginations.

In thee are all things, through thee are all things, and to thee are all
things; the beginning from which, and the end to which all things do tend.

Thou art Inexhaustible in thy Sufficiency, Infinite in thy Good Will, who
can supply all our Necessities, expecting no return, but is our benefit to
give.

Heaven and Earth, and all that in them is, depend upon thee, as the Beams
depend upon the Sun.

Unto thee the whole World is infinitely obliged.

Thou art that most Glorious and Super-essential Being of Beings, that
delightest thy self with scattering of Beams, and in filling all things with
the Expandings and Circumfusions of thy Goodness.

In thy Hand is the Soul of every Living Thing, and the Breath of all Mankind.

Thou art the Life of our Lives, and the Soul of our Souls.

Thy Love is always bubbling and springing out of thy self, and overflowing
out to all.

Thou fannest thy Favors forth, to the Refreshing and Delight of Heaven and
Earth.

Thou waterest the Hills from thy Chambers, and satisfiest the Earth with the
Fruit of thy Doings.

Thou crownest the year with thy Goodness, and thy Paths drop Fatness.

Thou art the Source of the Springs of Lebanus.

All things by a graduate Derivation, receive their life, light, and being from
thee.

There is no Water in our Cisterns but what comes from thy Fountain.

Thou art that high and infinite Spring, that always flows out and is not
impaired.

Thou art the Treasure of Heaven and Earth.

Thy overflowing Favors are not given one by one, but liberally bestowed with
an open hand.

There is not any thing that has any patrimony or being but what it has from
thee.

The Eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their Meat in due season.

There is nothing Infinite, Eternal, and Perfect, but thy Self, who art the
Perfection of all things.

Thou art that Essential and Infinite Goodness, Good not by Quality, but by
Essence; whose Nature is Goodness it self.

In thee are Oceans of Perfections, being the Perfection of Beings.

In thee all Perfections are concentered.

All Glory is hatched in the Bosom of God.

All the Beauty, all Excellencies that lie scattered about in the Creature, are
but drops of thy Ocean, beams of thy Sun, glympses of thy Beauty.

All the worth that is in the Creature, depends absolutely upon thee, the
highest End of all things whatsoever.

The Rays of thy Goodness inlivens all things.

Thou incompassest the World with thy outstretched Arms, and reachest
Perseverance, to the happiness of the Creation.

Thou fillest all things without enlarging thy self, thou passest through all
things without moving of thy self: Thou dwell in all things without
straitning thy self, thou createdst all things without any necessity, thou
governest all things without any travel, thou changest all things without any
change to thy self; thou judge without error, thou punishest without passion,
and give to all things continually, without exhausting thy Treasures.

There is nothing so little that declares not thy greatness, there is nothing
so great that must not acknowledge thy Sovereignty, there is nothing so low
that leads us not up to acknowledge thy Majesty, and nothing so high that
descends not down to teach us thy Verity.

Thou our God art every way as full in all Goodness as thou art excellent in
Glory.

Thou art not only to be worshipped and adored for the Excellencies that are in
thy self, but as the Benign Parent of all things, and the great Benefactor of
Mankind.

Every good and perfect Gift comes from thee the Father of Lights.

All causes of Love and whatsoever can excite Desire are in thee.

We cannot desire any thing that is Good that our God has not for us.

Thou that satisfiest the immense desires of the Angels, can answer all the
desires of our Souls in a most eminent manner unto all Perfection.

Thou art the most Soul-suitable and Soul-satisfying Good.

If we strain out the Quintessence of the Creature, or if we extract the most
Exquisite Spirit, it turns into froth; but in thee is unspeakable Satisfaction.

If we ask Bread of the World, it gives us a Stone; if we look for a Fish, we
shall have a Serpent; and when we wait for an Egg, we shall not fail of a
Scorpion: We come not only off with Vanities of Vanities, but with Vexation of
Spirit; but in thy Favor is Life. Thy Loving Kindness is better than Life it
self.

In thee is all possible Good whatsoever: All Good Things are in thee
originally, essentially, equally, purely, immutably, infinitely, and eternally.

Thou have All sufficiency in thy Self, for thy Self, and for all thy Creatures.

The Inexhaustible Fountain of all Consolations.

In thee are Oceans of Comfort, thou have Light to inlighten us, Wisdom to
counsel us, Power to support us, Mercy to pardon us, Glory to ravish us, and
Fullness to fill us.

When thou art absolutely considered, thou art immeasurably lovely. The most
attractive Objects of Insatiable Love and all Aimable Excellencies, are
eminentiy and transcendently triumphant in thee eternally.

There is no end of thy Goodness, no numbering of thy Wisdom, nor fathoming thy
Bounty.

Thou art the Spring of Being, the Root of Life, the Father of Wisdom, the
Fountain of Pleasure, and the Haven of Desire.

Thine is the Greatness, the Excellency, the Glory, and the Victory.

Thou art most worthy to be known, because thou art the highest Truth; most
worthy of our love, because thou art the chiefest Good; most worthy of our
fear, because thou art most powerful: most worthy of our obedience, because
thou art the most righteous Lawgiver, and most worthy of our trust and
confidence, because thou art immutably Faithful.

The Mountains shall depart, and the Hills shall be removed, but thy Kindness
shall not depart from thee; the Covenant of thy Peace shall not fail.

It is better to trust in God, than to have any confidence in Man. It is better
to trust in God than to have confidence in Princes.

Thy Faithfulness is well-known in the Congregation of Saints.

They that know thee, put their trust in thee, because thou forsakest not them
that seek thee.

Thou art the Hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in a time of trouble, the
Strength of their Heart, and their Portion for ever.

Thou art known for a Refuge in the Palaces of thy City, for thou art their
mighty Protection and strong Ground, a Succor from Stumbling, and a Help from
Falling.

Thou fulfillest the Desires of them that fear thee, thou hear their Cry,
and art a present Help in trouble.

Thou art the best Refuge in the midst of Storms, and the best Support to all
afflicted Spirits.

How excellent is thy loving kindness, O Lord, therefore thy people put their
trust under the shadow of thy Wings.

As the Heavens are above the Earth, so great is thy Love unto them that fear
thee: Thou art their God for ever and ever.

Who is God save the Lord? Who is a Rock save our God? Good and plenteous in
mercy to all them that call upon him.

Thou ridest upon the Heavens in thine Excellency for the help of thy people;
thou art their refuge, and underneath them are his everlasting Arms.

As the Mountains are about Jerusalem, so the Lord is about his people, even
for ever and ever.

Thy way O God is in the Sanctuary, who is so great a God as our God; thou art
a God that do Wonders; thou have declared thy Strength among tha people.

There is none like unto thee O Lord, whose Name is great in Might.

Thy Name alone is excellent.

The Lord is above all Gods, the only Potentate, King of Kings and Lord of
Lords; the absolute Monarch, who has a boundless and infinite Supremacy.

Thou deservest to receive from every Understanding Nature Never-ceasing
Praises, and perpetually to be worshipped with the most humble Prostrations.

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is like unto thee among the
Gods, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders?

Thou rulest by thy power for ever, of old thou have laid the Foundations of
the Earth. The Heavens are the Works of thy Hands, they shall perish but thou
shall endure; yea all of them shall wax old like a Garment; and as a Vesture
shall thou change them; they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy
years have no end.

Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom.

O Lord thou art worthy of all Honor, Glory, and Power; for thou have created
all things: and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

The glorious Productions of thine Omnipotency, they speak thee to be
infinitely Excellent. They are the Evidences and Demonstrations of thy Infinite
Wisdom, Power, and Providence.

Thou have garnished the excellent Works of thy Wisdom, and art from
everlasting to everlasting*

Thy Works praise thee, and are honorable and glorious, and are to be had in
remembrance to all generations.

They are thy Witnesses that thou art God.

The Heavens declare thy Glory, and the Firmament shows thy Handiwork.

The Operations of thy Hands are Testimonies of thy Glory, Glasses of thy
Beauty, Preachers of thy Wisdom, and Provokers of Love.

O Lord, how manifold are thy Works, in Wisdom have thou made them.

Thou formedst the Earth by thy Power, established the World by thy Wisdom, and
did spread forth the Heavens by thy Understanding.

By thy Word thou did hang the Earth upon the Waters.

Thou createst all things, thou bring out their Host by number by the
greatness of thy Might.

Thou tellest the number of the Stars, by thy Word they are established.

Thou have appointed the Moon for Seasons, and the Sun knows his going down.

Thou have builded thy Stories in the Heavens, and founded thy Troops upon
Earth.

Thou do greater things than these are, for we have seen but a few of thy
Works.

Thou do great things, unsearchable mavelous things without number.

With thee is Wisdom and Strength, Counsel and Understanding.

The Consideration of thy Works are Entertainments worthy of the best and most
raised Minds.

Honor and Majesty are bfore thee, Strength and Beauty are in thy Sanctuary.

Glory and Honor are in thy Presence, Strength and Gladness are in thy Place.

In thy presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures
for evermore.

Thou humblest thy Self when thou beholdest the things that are done in Heaven
and in Earth.

Even as the Clay is in the hand of the Potter, so all the Nations of the Earth
are at thy disposal.

The Kingdom is the Lords, thou art Governor among the Nations.

Thou art great in Wisdom and mighty in Power, and beholdest all things
continually.

Thou see from everlasting to everlasting, there is nothing that is wonderful
unto thee.

The great Orderer and Disposer of all Things.

There is nothing so high that is above thy Providence, there is nothing so low
that is beneath thy Providence.

There is nothing so large but it is bounded by thy Providence, there is
nothing so confused but thou can order it, there is nothing so contrived but
thou can disappoint it.

Thou keep every thing upon the right Wheel, for the managing of thy most
righteous Affairs both in Heaven and Earth.

Thou turnest the way of the Wicked upside down, the Deceiver and the Deceived
are thine.

The Lord brings the Counsel of the Wicked to naught, he makes the Devices
of the People of none effect.

Thou disappointest the Devices of the Crafty, so that they cannot perform
their Enterprise.

Thou take the Wise in their own Craftiness, the Counsel of the Froward thou
carry'st headlong.

Thou have power of Life and Death, thou leadest down to the gates of Hell and
bring up again.

Before thee the Nations are but as the Drop of a Bucket, or as the Small Dust
of the Balance.

Thou guidest the Stars, thou thunderest in the Clouds, and turnest the hearts
of Kings as Rivers of Water.

Thou treadest upon the Circle of the Earth, and all the Inhabitants are but as
Grasshoppers.

Thou stretchest out the Heavens like a Curtain, and foldest them up as a Tent
to dwell in.

Thy Blessed Will the power of man is not able to with-stand, the Eternal
Decrees no conspiracy is able to impair.

Thou increasest the Nations, and destroyest them; thou enlargest the Nations,
and straitens them again.

When thou stretchest out thy Hand who can restrain it.

Thou weakenest the strength of the mighty, thou powrest contempt upon Princes.

Thy Counsels stand sure, thou do all thy Pleasure.

The Lord has his way in the Whirlwind, the Storm and the Clouds are the Dust
of his Feet.

Thou do whatsoever thou please both in Heaven and in Earth.

Thy Will cannot go beyond thy Power, who can speak the World into nothing.

It Is God that brings down the high, and exalts the low.

That dries up the Green Tree, and that causes the Dry Tree to flourish.

God is Judge, he sets up one and pulls down another.

Thou art the great Rewarder and Punisher of Good and Evil.

Thou fillest Heaven and Earth with thy presence.

Thou art acquainted with all our ways, and ponderest all our goings.

Thou sit upon the Thrones in the Heavens, and from thence beholdest the
bottomless places.

There is not any Creature that is not manifest in thy sight.

All things are naked before thine Eyes with whom we have to do.

He that planted the Ear shall he not hear, and he that formed the Eye shall he
not see.

Thou discoverest Deep things out of Darkness, and brings to Light the Shadow
of Death.

Thou declarest the things that are past and for to come, and reveals the
steps of hidden things. No thought escapes thee, neither is any word hidden
from thee.

The ways of good men and the goodness of their ways, and the ways of evil men,
and the evil of their ways, are not hidden from thee.

The Lord is in his Holy Temple, the Lords Throne is in Heaven, his Eyes
behold, his Eye lids try the Children of Men.

Thou searchest the Heart, thou triest the Reins, that thou may give unto
every Man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.

Thou watchest over the Wicked to pluck them up and to destroy them; but thou
watchest over the Righteous to build them and to plant.

We own thy absolute Sovereignty over us, and although thou art girded with
Strength, and who can say, What do thou? Yet thou do nothing but what is
equal and right.

Thy ways are always full of righteousness, tho not always full of clearness to
mortals.

Thou art righteous in all thy Ways, and just in all thy Judgments.

As thou art known to be King of Nations by thy works of Providence abroad in
the World, so thou art known to be the King of Saints, because the Scepter of
thy Kingdom is a Scepter of Righteousness.

Thou love Righteousness and Judgment, and take pleasure in Uprightness.

All the Works of the Lord are good, he gives every one in season, and when
need is; so that a man need not say this is worse than that, for in due time
all thy doings will prove worthy of praise.

Our God one day will bring forth all the grounds of all his Dispensations
toward Man, and all the Proceedings with him, in such a demonstrative and
undeniable Consonancy, even to the very Reason of Man, that every Mouth shall
be stopped.

Its far from thee to do wickedness, its far from the Almighty to commit
iniquity.

Thy Counsels of old are Faithfulness and Truth.

Thou sit upon the Throne of Holiness.

To thee Cherubim and Seraphim continually do cry, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of
Sabbath.

Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitations of thy Throne.

Thou keep the Paths of Judgment.

According to thy Name, O Lord, so are thy praises to the ends of the Earth;
thy right hand is full of Righteousness.

Thou exercisest Loving Kindness, Righteousness, and Judgment in the Earth, for
thou excellest therein.

They that honor thee thou will honor, but they that despise thee, shall be
but lightly esteemed.

The righteousness of the Upright shall deliver them, but the Wicked shall be
caught in their own naughtiness.

The Lord loves the righteous, but the wicked and him that loves violence,
his Soul hates.

The Lord is known by the Judgment that he executes, the wicked is snared in
the work of his own hands.

The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all the workers of
iniquity.

He that will not bow to thy Scepter of Mercy, shall be crushed in pieces by
the Rod of thy Wrath.

With thee is terrible Majesty.

Thou can show thy strength at all times, and who may with-stand the power of
thine Arm.

At thy wrath the Earth shall tremble, the wicked shall not be able to abide
thine Indignation.

Thou who build'st the World, can easily destroy the wicked.

Thou art wise in heart and mighty in strength, who has hardened himself
against thee and prosper'd.

The Pillars of Heaven tremble and are astonished at thy reproof.

Through the greatness of thy power shall thy enemies submit unto thee.

We adore thy righteousness, O God, when thou punishest the wicked, because
they trample upon thy most righteous Edicts.

When thou judge, it is not out of Sovereignty but Justice.

Thou never did command Man to do any thing, but what was conducible to his
own happiness.

Thou made the World for Man, thou made Man to obey thee; and the reason
thou commanded'st Man to serve thee, was that thereby he might be eternally
blessed.

If we had walked in thy Counsels, they had before this time led us out from
under the Curse we are now laboring under.

One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand elsewhere. It Is better to be a
Doorkeeper in the House of God than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness.

We taste and relish the joys of Heaven, when we contemplate thy Attributes,
which are the Notifications of thy Nature, so far as is knowable.

The Demonstrations that thou have given of thy self in thy Attributes, is
sufficient, if we did but rightly consider, to make us both fear and love thee.

Thy Holiness, Justice, and Power, well considered, would put a Bridle in our
Jaws, to keep us from rushing into Sin as a Horse rusheth into the Battle.

And thy Mercy, Truth, Goodness, and Sufficiency well learned, is enough to
make us love thee, and to be a willing people in the day of thy Power.

Confession of Sin.
OUR Guilt flasheth in our Faces, woe unto us, for we have sinned.

We have not kept the way of the Lord, but perfidiously departed from our God.

In the greatness of our Folly we have gone astray.

We have Profaned our Affections, which are due only to God, by setting them
upon base and contemptible Objects.

The Spirit of Fornication is in the midst of us.

According to the multitude of the Fruit we have increased the Altars,
according to the goodness of our Land we have made the Images.

We have gone a Whoring after our own Inventions.

Sin like a strong Bias, has drawn our hearts from God.

We have run after other Lovers, our Adulteries are between our Breasts.

We have tempted Temptation to deceive us.

How hotly we have followed the Chase of our own Delusions.

We are guilty of the two Old Evils, we have snatched at the Shadow but let go
the Substance: We have forsaken the Fountains of Living Water, and have hewn
unto our selves broken Cisterns that hold no Water.

Instead of trusting in God that gives good things, we have trusted in the
good things that God has sent.

Instead of rejoicing in God that gives us Blessings, we rejoice in the
Blessings that God has given.

We have gazed upon the brightness, but considered not the britleness: We have
looked upon their glory, but forgot the frailty.

Wordly Lusts has abused our Sight, and cozened our Understanding.

The Earth is thy Footstool, we have made it our Throne; Heaven is thy Throne,
we have made it our Footstool.

We have been for this World as tho it would never have an ending, and for the
World to come as tho it would never have beginning.

Instead of laying up our Treasure in Heaven, we have laid up our Heaven in our
Treasure.

We have been gross Idolaters, in paying Adorations to earthy things.

We have pawned Heaven for a few trifles, and given infinite of years purchase
for them.

We have taken our Egyptian Jewels, those Temporal Blessings thou have so
plentifully cast amongst us, and have made a Golden Calf of them; adoring and
trusting it, and have fallen off from the Cause of Causes.

We have set up Idols in our Hearts that destroy our Happiness.

The Wise Man trusts in his Wisdom, the Strong Man in his Strength, and the
Rich Man in his Riches: Thus we have brought our selves under the Curse, by
trusting in the arm of Flesh.

The Balances of Deceit are in our hands.

We have wrought a deceitful Work.

We have walked in a Fool's Paradise, surveying the fading Flowers of Imaginary
Felicities, catching at the Apples of Sodom, that vanish away in Smoke.

We have been serious about Trifles, and trifl'd about Serious Things.

We have furied our selves in the pursuit of the fugitive Toys of this life,
which if they were put into the Balance, would prove altogether lighter than
Vanity.

We have spent our Money for that which is not Bread, and our Labor for that
which satisfies not.

We have wandr'd at random in the vast emptiness of the Creature.

What we find most perfect in this World, is rather merely Fictitious and
Imaginative, than Real and Substantial; the best Condition of this Life, being
but a Variety of Vanity.

We have wildr'd our selves in our own Mazes, and wearied our selves with mere
Vanity.

We have sold our selves for naught.

With Esau we have despised our Birthright.

With Cain we have gone out from the presence of the Lord.

With the Prodigal we have gone into a far Country.

Every step we have set forward in Sin, has been a step backward from thee.

Our Habitation has been in the midst of Deceit, it is through Deceit that we
refuse to know the Lord.

We have drawn the Worlds two Breasts Profit and Pleasure, and fallen asleep at
them, but have neglected the Things that concern our Everlasting Peace.

We have neither delighted in the Law of God, nor the God of the Law.

The Thefts and Wiles of Prosperity has not only stolen us away from our selves
but from God.

Our Desires and Affections have been journeying we know not where.

We have cause to be ashamed because of the Oaks that we desired, and the
Gardens that we have chosen.

We have trusted unanchor'd Hope in fleeting Streams.

We have pitched our thoughts and the restless desires of our Souls upon the
Creature, as tho there were nothing beyond the Creature.

We have stretched out our widen'd Arms beyond their Dimensions, and our Hands
have grasped beyond their Distance, to incompass this inferior Orb, but we are
forced to come off, not only with Vanity of Vanities but with Vexation of
Spirit.

We have sought the Living among the Dead, Happiness where it is not to be found.

We have sought Strength in Weakness, Riches in Poverty, Gloryin Shame, and
Life in Death; and in this course we have forsaken our own Mercy.

We find by woeful experience that all Wordly Enjoyments stand upon two lame
Legs, Insufficiency, Uncertainty.

The end of all our Earthly Comforts eats up the pleasure we had in them,
like Pharaoh's lean Kine.

We have sown the VVind to reap the VVhirl-wind.

The Magnetic Power of the World has drawn our Countenances downward, which
thou made erect for the Contemplation of Thee and thy Works; but now the
Curse of the Serpent is upon us, upon our Bellies do we creep, and Dust do we
eat all the days of our lives.

We are deeply sunk in the Worlds Quicksands.

The Earth has swallowed us up alive.

Our Affections the Feet of our Souls, have stuck fast in the mire and clay of
the World, so that we have been hindered from running the race that has been
set before us.

We have wearied our selves in the way of Wickedness, but the way of Truth we
have not known.

The bewitching of Worldly trifles have obscured and hid from us the good
things.

We have rather chosen to go astray, than to walk in the sweet Rules of thy
Commands.

Our Rest and our Lusts have shared our Time.

We are strangers to the life of Grace through the Ignorance that is in us.

We have taken bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter: What Poison or Gall so
bitter as Sin? Yet we have delighted our selves therein. What more sweet than
thy Testimony? More to be desired than gold, yea than much fine gold; sweeter
also then the honey and the honeycomb, yet we nauseated them.

Damned Satan with his Orphean Aires and dexterous VVarbles, with Masks and
Triumphs has enticed us along in the paths of Death.

Sin has betrayed us with a Kiss.

Pleasure merrieth our Senses for a while, but Horror follows after, and
vultereth our unconsuming Hearts.

Sin is sweet in the commission, but bitter in the recollection, in the Mouth
it is as sweet as honey, but in the Belly as bitter as gall.

Sinful Pleasures have been the Thieves that have trained us out of the way and
robbed us.

With Ahab we have sold our selves to work wickedness.

We have made have in the paths of Death.

We have not only woven the Spider's Web, but we have hatched the Cockatrice
Egg.

Our Actions have not only been vain and unprofitable, but dangerous.

We have not only not been for thee, but against thee.

We have not only not gathered, but scattered.

We have desp'rately invaded the most equal Rules of the Gospel.

We have broken thy Bonds in sunder, and cast away thy Cords from us.

We have laid the Reins of our Loyalty upon the Neck of Licentious Liberty.

We have proceeded from Evil to Evil, not considering thy Purity and Justice.

We have drawn Iniquity with the Cords of Vanity.

Every thought and imagination of our hearts have been evil, and that
continually.

The frame of our hearts have not only been evil continually, but our hearts
have framed that which has been evil continually.

Although thou hate iniquity with a perfect hatred, yet even as a Fountain
casts forth her water, so have we cast out our iniquities before thee.

Heaven and Earth testify against us that thou as an indulgent Father have
brought us up as dear Children, but we have rebelled against thee.

We have be-leaper'd our selves with Sin, and like drunken men have staggered
in our own vomit.

We have wrought abbomination before thee.

As a Mill-wheel is continually turned round, and ever drenched with a new
stream: so are we continually hurried with the Successions of our various Sins.

We have progress'd in the ways of Vice, and spacious fields of deadly Luxury,
and have been constant in nothing but perpetual offending.

We have offered violence to thy patience and long-suffering, extorting
severities from thee, by the audacious Importunities of our Notorious
Impieties; as tho we would wrestle a Fall or fight a Duel with the Almighty: We
have run upon him, even upon his Neck, upon the thick Bosses of his Buckler.

We have plowed iniquity and sowed wickedness.

We have continually lived in contempt of thy Majesty, and transgression of thy
Commands.

We have streamed out our days in Riot and Excess.

We have revell'd in a Shoreless Excess, in the ungirth'd Solaces of Sensual
Liberty.

Our longing for the Forbidden Fruit, shows us all to be the Children of Eve.

Oh how abominable and filthy is Man, that drinks up iniquity like water.

We have laid our hearts in Carnal Pleasures, forgetting what will be in the
end thereof.

We have swum down the temporizing Torrent of these last and lewdest days,
against the secret Wastes and Counter-blasts of Reclaiming Consciences.

We have gone in the common track, and waved with the wanton train of the
World.

Our Judgments have been bribed to misapprehension, and we seduced to bad
actions.

We have given to our will the reins, and have yielded to all that Sense
requires.

We have hood-winked our Souls with presumption.

Sin and Sin has gone hand in hand, and blood has touched blood.

Opportunity and our Nature, like two inordinate Lovers, they seldom meet, but
they sin together.

We have run carelessly in Sin, not being aware of the Stabbing Shams that await
us in a Killing Ambush; our own purblind sight leaving them undiscovered.

Charming pleasures sing us into Lethargies, while Damnation steals
insensibly upon us: they dandle us into Flames.

We have confronted thy unspeakable Kindness with unspeakable Unworthiness.

Atheism has possessed our Hearts, and luxurious Lewdness has polluted our
Bodies.

We have bathed our selves in the muddy Streams of Luxury and Riot.

Although we have known the way of the Lord and the Judgments of our God, yet we
have altogether broken the Yoke and burst the Bands.

Our Impieties are of the largest Dimensions, we have taken pains to make our
selves the heirs of Darkness.

We have prodigally contributed to our own ruin.

We have been as active in working out our Damnation, as we should have been to
work out our Salvation.

Instead of arming our selves against the day of wrath, we have armed the day
of wrath against our selves.

The Oil of Mercy has made us more active in the feats of Impiety.

We have looked upon all thy favors through the contracting Optics of
Ingratitude.

The fresh and green Pastures have made us fat and proud, and with Jesurun
spurn against our God.

Thou have filled our Cup, but through carelessness and an uneven hand we have
spilled most of it.

It Is a wonder thou have not shrunk thy descending favors.

We have fought against God with his own weapons: If thou had not been so
kind to us, we could not have been so unkind to thee.

The warmth of Prosperity hatcheth up Luxury.

We are the Wonders and Spectacles of Unthankfulness.

The worldly Blessings thou have so plentifully bestowed upon us, have been the
causes of our Pride, Riot, Tyranny, and Excess.

It Is pity that fair weather should do any harm.

Our Halcyonian days, our Health, our Peace, our Liberty, our Plenty, has
brought forth Spiders and Caterpillars; Pride and Profaneness: therefore we
provoke God to send showers of wrath to cleanse them away.

The cry of our Sins has invaded Heaven.

Our Impieties stare Heaven and Earth in the face, and beat the Air for
Vengeance.

Our Sins have ripened us for destruction.

From the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, there is nothing but
bruises and wounds and putrefying Sores.

Our Eyes being full of Adultery, our Tongues being unruly Evils, full of
deadly Poison, our Throats open Sepulchers, our Hearts deceitful above measure,
and desp'rately wicked; the Dens and Caves of Uncleanness: Our Hands full of
Mischief, our Feet ready in the Paths of the Destroyer. Yea, all our Members
are the Instruments of Unrighteousness.

We have every day raised Monuments to our own Shame.

If the Beasts could speak, they might say that Really that God spoke once
Ironically, Man is become as one of us: yea like all of us. For we have of the
Fox, the Wolf, the Tiger, the Swine, and the Dog, yea some of the evil of
every Beast.

Our wickedness is condemned by its own witness.

Our Sins testify against us.

The guilt of our own misguided Souls condemn us.

We have brambl'd our way to Virtue.

We have spun Cords of Iniquity out of our own bowels, and Satan bound us with
them; so that now we are under the Chains of an habituated course of Sin, and
except God help, those Chains will reserve us unto everlasting Chains.

We have fitted our selves for wrath, and are the Procurers and Artificers of
our own ruin.

We have enclosed our selves in a Den of Thraldoms.

We have laid wait for our own Blood, and lurked privily for our own
Destruction.

We have destined our selves to misery.

We have posted with precipitant and winged haste toward our own destruction.

Like Rivers we have run hastily to lose our selves.

Atheism and Infidelity has bewitched us with a desperate senslesness.

We are Children of Infidelity.

Our hearts have been the Habitations of Unbelief.

Our Incredulity have eclipsed Gods Sufficiency.

Wisdom has cried and Understanding has lift up her Voice.

Thou have set before us Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing. Yet we have been
like deaf Adders, not hearkening to the Voice of the Charmer charm he never so
wisely.

We have shut the Windows of our Souls against the Light of the Gospel.

The Foxes have holes, the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has
not where to lay his Head.

We have room enough for crafty and subtle Inventions and Contrivances, and
high and soaring Thoughts, but the Lord Christ is kept out.

We have hated Knowledge, we have contemned thy Counsels and despised thy
Reproofs.

A Frozen Stupidity has benumbed us, Plainness has not made us understand.

Serious piercing Warnings have not made us afraid, the greatest matters
wrought upon us, the sweetest things have not enticed us, the most dreadful
things have not terrified us, Truth and Sincerity have not convinced us. The
God that made us, the Christ that redeemed us, the Holy Ghost that would
sanctify us, prevail not with us.

Our Disobedience is rooted in Folly and Ingratitude.

Thou have pursued us with Sermons and followed us with close Convictions, yet
we are Pilgrims and Strangers in the Knowledge of God.

We have stopped the Organs of our Mind with Earthy Oppilations.

We have broke a thousand Bonds that should have kept us to our Duty.

Thou have given us the means of Grace, thy Word, thy Messengers, our
Consciences: Threatenings from Mount Ebal to stop us in our Career of Sin,
Promises from Mount Gerizzim to allure us into the paths of life. The Examples
of Holy Men to guide us, that we may follow the Footsteps of the Flock, and
thy Holy Spirit attending upon these and many other Assistances in our Course
to Heaven: but we hate to be reformed, and make all our Returns in Ingratitude.

Although thou have made out unto us thy Wisdom, Holiness, Greatness, and
Goodness, Mercy and Long Suffering, Power and Justice. And although thou have
proclaimed Free Grace unto all those that are a willing People in the day of
thy Power, but Tribulation and Wrath unto the Disobedient. And notwithstanding
the Divine Authority, that unlimited Supremacy that thou have over us; and
notwithstanding the Righteousness of thy Scepter, yet we have so degenerated
from Reason and apostatized from all Ingenuity, that we have not kept the way
of the Lord, but wickedly departed from our God.

We are like to the Wild Ass that snuffeth up the VVind at her pleasure, in her
occasion who can turn her away. In the height of our Prosperity we say with
Pharaoh; Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? but in her Month they will
find her. So Extremities and Deathbed Pangs will seize us, the time is coming,
that we must fall into the hands of the Living God.

Thou have given us space to repent, but we have not found the place of
Repentance.

We have had line upon line* precept upon precept.

Thou have hearkened and heard no man speak aright, saying, What have I done?
Every one turned to his course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle,
carelessly, fearlesly and desperately; the Stork of the Heavens knows her
appointed time, the Turtle, the Swallow and the Crane know the time of their
coming; but we have not known the Judgments of the Lord.

Those Irrational Creatures know by instinct of Nature to avoid such
intemperate Weather as would be destructive to them, yet we, notwithstanding
many Warnings, have not flown from the wrath to come.

We have wrestled with thy patience, and urged thee to swear in thy wrath, that
we shall never enter into thy rest.

Well may we be compared to Children sitting in the Marketplace, calling one
unto another and saying, We have piped unto ye but ye have not danced; we have
mourned unto ye, but ye have not wept.

We have been inflexible to Promises and Threatenings.

Neither th'acute Demonstrations of Terror, not the Ponderous Inductions of
Interest, have prevailed with us.

Thou have many times beat up for Volunteers amongst us, and have proclaimed
the Privileges, Prerogatives, Graces and Comforts that belong to thy
Followers, but we have turned our backs.

And thou have warned us to flee from the wrath to come, yet we have come in
the very face of that wrath which thou have warned us to flee.

The Trumpets have sounded, and the Lions have roared upon us, and yet we have
hardened our hearts.

We have made thee to serve with our sins, as tho thou were bound to endure our
abominations.

We have offered Violence to thy Law, and have made such large Breaches in our
Duty, as tho thou were forced to abide our Contempt.

We have been Professors of Piety, but Practisers of Iniquity.

How little have we advanced in Religion?

The Faith of Christians have been in our Mouths, but the works of Infidels in
our Hearts.

We have been mere Promisers of Obedience.

We have betrayed our Lord Jesus with a Kiss.

Our Actions Religious have been merely Theatrical, and done in Subornation to
some other Interest.

Our Goodness is but like the Morning Dew.

We have delighted more in the Theater than in the Closet.

We have often bound our selves unto thee, but we have forfeited our
Indentures.

That which we have verbally detested we have actually embraced.

We have looked Heavenward in our Profession, but Hell-ward in our
Conversation.

We have covenanted against Sin, yet we have sinned against Covenant.

We have been rather Superficial than Fundamental Christians.

The Heathen give real honor to counterfeit gods, but we give a counterfeit
honor to the true God.

Our Devotion to God our Love to our Brethren, it is a Measuring Cast, hard to
determine which is the Colder, but both ready to faint and fall down dead.

We have put on the Sheep's Coat upon the Wolfs Back; the Velvet Plaster of
Profession upon the Stinking Ulcer of Corruption.

Our Righteousness is so imperfect, that it can claim no Blessing; and our
Wickedness so great, that it deserves nothing but Cursing.

We have the Spots and Tokens of the Plague of Plagues; we sin and see it not,
therefore neither care nor fear, nor repent nor amend.

Our Spot is not the Spot of thy People.

We have hired thy Plagues as Israel did the King of Assure.

Our Sins are envenomed with many heinous and hellish Circumstances: We despise
thy Authority, we break righteous Laws, we contemn precious Promises, we give
more credence to Satanical suggestions, than we do to the Infallible Word of
God. We weave the Web of our own Woe, and spin the Cords of our own Thraldom;
and every Sin breaks the Sacred Covenant between Christ and our souls.

Thou may justly pronounce Lo-ruhamah against us.

We have been Traitors to our own Peace.

We have daily multiplied our own Calamities.

Our own Inventions have intwined us and bewrayed us into many troubles, and
enclosed us in a Den of Thraldoms.

We day by day alarm Divine Justice.

We have cause to fear there are many in Hell cursing our Examples.

We know not how many we have infected with the plague that is upon us.

If thou should lay Judgment to the Line and Righteousness to the
Plumb-line, thou may righteously make thy Wrath to smoke against us.

We have provoked thee to feed us with Wormwood, and to give us Gall to drink.

Our Sins have laid us most naked to thy Wrath.

We have ripened our selves for Vengeance.

Its unspeakable forbearance, that thy fury is not kindled and broke out into a
Flame against us.

That the Water-flood has not over-flown us, that the Deep has not swallowed
us up, that the Pit has not shut her mouth upon us.

GRATVLATION.
LEt our never ceasing Praises wait upon thee our God, because thy wrath is not
kindled and broke out into a Flame against us.

We are the Living Monuments of thy Mercy.

Thy Patience suspendeth Judgment.

If thou should withdraw thy Patience and Long-suffering, we should drop
into Hell.

Its unspeakable Mercy that we are not invelopp'd in the revenging Flames of
Hell.

Although thou have not looked upon our Sins approvingly yet patiently.

If thou had but the Patience of Men and Angels, we should spend it one day,
thou could not hold thy tongue and hands one hour.

The life of our Souls is wrapped up in the life of Grace.

All Sacrifice is too little for a sweet savor, all Fatness is too little for
a Burned Offering.

How low should we fall in adoration of thy Grace, and how high should we rise
in Thankful Praises?

Its great Condescension in thee to be content to be praised or beloved by such
miserable Creatures of uncircumcised hearts and lips.

Eternity it self is little enough to praise thee.

Blessed be the Majesty of Heaven for our Creation, and that we are Men and not
Beasts.

Blessed be God for our Immortal Souls that are capable of Communion with thy
own self for ever and ever.

Let our never-ceasing Praises wait upon thee for our Redemption, the great
Work which the Angels desire to look into.

Everlastingly praised be our God for the light of his Glory that shines in
the Face of Jesus Christ, to the praise and glory of his Grace.

Our Praises wait upon thee, for Free Grace that unlimited Treasury of the
highest Love and Bounty.

Thy precious Love is from Eternity to Eternity.

That has prevented the Lion from coming out of the Thicket, and has kept the
Destroyer out of sight.

That has stopped the Mouths of the Lions of thy Judgments, so as they have
not torn in pieces, when there was none to deliver us.

Our Praises wait upon our God for Free Grace, that Blessed Root out of which
springs all the pleasant and precious Mysteries of the Gospel.

The most Beautiful Womb out of which Christ Jesus with all his Heavenly
Treasures, the unspeakable Privileges, Prerogatives, Graces and Comforts that
are to be had in him and by him, do come forth.

The Blessed Cause that is sufficient to produce the Blessed Effects of the
Salvation of our Souls through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Blessed Fountain that continually sends forth Streams of Comfort, to
refresh the dejected, disconsolate, weary, and heavy laden ones.

The Bow thou have set in the Clouds of Spiritual Sorrow, to assure the
Contrite Ones that thy Wrath shall not overflow them.

Were it not for thy Grace, what should we do when our Sins testify against
us, but call for the Mountains to fall upon us, and the Hills to cover us from
the Presence of the Lord.

Thy Grace has kept many Thousands from following Judas into Despair.

When we know not what to do then we turn our Eyes toward thee, and find there
is yet hope for Israel.

It was Free Grace that our great Lord Christ lived and died to declare.

We adore the great Minister of Grace Jesus Christ our Lord, the Ark that
saves us from perishing in the Floods of our Iniquities.

Who was given for us, who was conceived and born for us, who lived and died
for us, who rose again for us, and who ever lives and makes Intercession for
us.

Who trod the Wine Press alone.

The Son of God became the Son of Man, that the Sons of Men might become the
Sons of God.

Who was made like unto all, that all might be made like unto him.

Who sought us in sharp ways and bought us with a dear price.

Who came from Heaven to Earth, that we may go from Earth to Heaven.

The Brightness of the Fathers Glory, and the Express Image of Person, paid the
Price of our Redemption, to discharge us Rebels who were in our Filthiness in
our Blood.

Our Jesus leaped into a Sea of Wrath to save us from perishing.

He waded through a Sea of Sufferings to procure a Pardon for our Transgressions.

Who made himself Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him.

He suffered our Cross, that we might wear his Crown.

He died our Death, that we might live his Life.

Who endured our Hell that we might enjoy his Heaven.

He bore our Griefs and carried our Sorrows.

He was wounded for our Transgressions and bruised for our Iniquities.

The Chastisement^ of our Peace was upon him, and by his Stripes we may be
healed.

We all like Sheep have gone astray, but on him was laid the Iniquities of us
all.

Adored be Christ Jesus, who has done what we ought to have done, and suffered
what we ought to have suffered.

This is the solid Basis of our Comfort.

The Lord of Life is the Way to escape Eternal Death.

Although we have turned our Backs on Grace, and with the Israelites loathed the
Manna, and has so little regarded what the Lord Christ has done and suffered
for us, and that Blessed Treasure that he at so dear a rate bought for us, and
has been daily offered unto us, yet he pleads for us, stops Judgment, and
stays Divine Vengeance.

Although the Earth was thought too good for him, he thinks not Heaven too good
for us.

Our Praises wait upon the Majesty of Heaven for the continuance of the Gospel,
the Wisdom of God, ordained before the World unto our Glory, the Power of God
unto Salvation, unto every one that believe. That mighty Efflux and Emanation
of Life and Spirit, freely issuing from an Omnipotent Source of Grace and Love:
That true God-like Vital Influence whereby Divinity derives it self into the
Souls of Men, inlivening and transforming them into its own likeness, and
strongly imprinting upon them a Copy of its own Beauty and Goodness.

Blessed be God that thy Precepts are yet our Heritage, in the House of our
Pilgrimage.

The Light, without which the whole World would be but a dark Chaos.

Our Praises wait upon our God, because we are within the sound of his Trumpets.

Because the Sun of the Gospel shines upon the Lot of our Inheritance.

Our Praises wait upon thee, because the Holy Spirit is still ready to bear
witness to our Spirits the Truth of thy Holy Word, which transcribeth thy Heart
and Mind unto us.

Thy Judgments thou have laid before us, and the Way of Truth, whereby we may
be kept from the Paths of the Destroyer.

Our Praises wait upon thee our God for all the faithful Dispencers of thy Word
and Sacraments.

Its great favor that thou have not removed them into Corners, and that their
Tongues do not cleave to the roofs of their Mouths.

Jonah was sent from Samaria to Nineveh, doubtless we have turned as deaf an
Ear as ever did Samaria.

Its unspeakable Mercy that thou have not commanded the Clouds that they rain
no more rain upon us.

That thou have not pronounced against us, They that are filthy let them be
filthy still, and they that are unrighteous, let them be unrighteous still.

Our Praises wait upon our God for all the great and precious Promises,
ratified by the Oath of God the Father, sealed by the Blood of God the Son,
testified by God the Holy Ghost; and delivered by the hand of Mercy.

Those Breathings of Divine Love.

The Breasts of the Gospel, out of which we draw forth so much Consolation.

Those firm Foundations to build upon.

Great and precious Promises.

To the Chief of Sinners.

To them that have been prodigalizing all their days, and spent all upon Lust.

To them that have all the day been standing idle in the Marketplace, even
until the Eleventh hour.

Although we have run so much upon the score, that if thou should arrest us, all
the Angels of Heaven could not bail us, yet whoever comes unto thee, thou will
in no wise cast off.

Tho our Sins be as Crimson, thou will make them as Snow; and tho they be as
Scarlet, thou will make them as Wool, if we are willing and obedient.

If we confess and forsake our sins, we shall find Mercy.

The Bruised Reed thou will not break, the smoking Flax thou will not quench.

Thou despisest not the desires of a Contrite Heart.

Our Sins shall be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord.

Blessed be God for our Seasons of Grace and Times of Repentance.

That the Door of Hope stands yet open in the Valley of Achor.

That the Lord is yet to be found, and that we have a time to seek him.

And as we praise our God for the Springs above, so we praise thee for our
Springs below; our Health, Wealth, Peace, and Liberty, with many other
Blessings of this Life.

We humbly and thankfully acknowledge, That we are capable of so much Mercy and
Favor only through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord.

That Name is above every name in which we hide our selves.

He ever lives to make Intercession for us.

Now when we look toward the Place where thine honor dwells, toward thy
Holy Habitation, that we hope our Lord will not suffer us to receive Denial, or
to come off without Favor and Grace.

Let us be in thy Sight as they that find Favor.

SVPPLICATION.
GIve ear unto our Prayers, attend unto the voice of our Supplications.

Suffer not the Sun of Mercy to set, lest the dark Night of Wrath over take us.

Give us not only Sparing Mercy but Saving Mercy.

Give us not only space to repent, but grace to repent.

In regard the Sun of Mercy shines so warm upon us, cause the fruits of Grace
to grow in us.

Cause thy Rich Attracts to gain the Obedience of our Hearts.

Bind us to the Good behavior with the Bands of thy Love, that they may charm
our Evil Spirits.

Shed abroad thy Love in our Hearts, that Love may beget Love; that thy
unspeakable Love unto us may beget in us some Love unto thee.

Fasten thy Goodness so upon us, that it may lead us to Repentance.

That we may not only be thankful for Mercy, but fruitful under Mercy.

Fill us with the Apprehension of thy Goodness, that the Sun of Divine Favor,
may be as the Manna that lies on the top of all our outward Blessings, that
our Souls may feed upon it.

That the glorious Productions of thine Omnipotency may charm our Hearts to
Reflect on the Cause of Causes and the Being of Beings.

God forbid that we should any longer suck poison out of the sweet Flowers of
thy Mercy and Goodness.

The Spider gathers Poison out of the same Flower where the Be gathers Honey.

Because Judgment is not executed speedily, therefore the Hearts of the
Children of Men are wholly set in them to do Evil.

But Long-suffering leads the Children of God to Repentance.

The same Heat that softens Wax hardens Dirt.

We are depraved and base by Degeneration, make us worthy by Regeneration.

We were shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did our Mothers conceive us.

The Root in which we were conceived and born; has put forth innumerable of
Branches; they are spread forth into many Actual Transgressions. We are
conceived, born, brought up, and grown to full Stature in Sin; so that now we
are under the Chains of an habituated Course of Sin, and without help from
Heaven, those Chains will reserve us to Eternal Chains.

O Lord break these Bonds in sunder, and cast away these Cords from us.

Separate Sin which thou so much hate from the Souls thou so much love.

Separate Sin from us, else it will separate us from thee.

Cause the Law of the Spirit of Life that is in Christ Jesus, to free us from
the Law of Sin and Death.

Deliver us from the Tyrannical Power of Sin, that we may turn unto thee from
whom we have deeply revolted.

Wash away our Filth and purge our Blood by the Spirit of Judgment and the
Spirit of Burning.

Thou who take away the Sins of the World, take away the World of our Sins.

Cast out the Bondwoman and her Seed.

Subdue our unruly Inclinations to do Evil.

Bridle our Unrestrained, Licencious, and Distempered Passions.

Cashier the Turbulent Rout of our Corrupt Affections.

We have cause with the Men of Jericho to complain of our Stinking Waters,
throw in Salt to heal them.

Sin is never kindlily cast out, but by the Introduction of Grace.

Sin reigns, cause Grace to step in and exauctorate and dethrone it.

Destroy the Weakness and the Moth, cause our Corruptions to flee into Hell,
ever to be forgotten, seal up the root of Evil.

We want a Touch of the Lord to heal our Bloody Issues.

Shut up the Womb and dry up the Breasts of Sin.

Melt down our Lusts, and cause them to wither at the Root.

Thou made Man upright, but he has found out many Inventions.

Create in us New Hearts, and renew right Spirits within us.

Frame our Hearts fit for thy own purpose, that we may will and do according to
thy own good pleasure.

We have all been Examples of Sin, make us all Examples of Reformation.

That Old Things may pass away, and all Things may become New.

Vassallize our Rebellious Affections.

Our Iniquities swallow us up alive.

O break the Bars of Death, conquer the Powers of Darkness, lead Captivity
Captive.

Deliver us from Sin that great Murderer that let Death into the World.

It brings innumerable of Evils to incompass us.

It keeps us fast bound in the dreadful Expectation of the Revelation of thy
insupportable Wrath and fiery Indignation, who art a Sin hating and Sin
avenging God.

Suffer not the God of this World to blind our Eyes, but give us a perfect
sight of Sin, as it is the deadly Enemy of our Eternal Peace.

That we may hate Sin more than ever we loved it.

That we may not only dislike Sin, but that our dislike may increase and swell
into a hatred of Sin.

That we may not only loath Sin, but leave Sin.

That we may sly from Sin, although robed in Successes and Triumphs.

That we may not only fall out with Sin, but fall off from Sin.

Secure us from the pernicious Effects of the Devils Malice, suffer him not to
add poison to our Lusts, nor paint to the Objects.

Suffer us not to be carried away by the heady Stream of any base Affection.

Strengthen us, that when we meet with temptations, we may quit our selves like
Men, and be strong in the Lord, and in the power of thy Might.

Put on thy Armor upon us, that we may be able to stand against the Wiles of
the Devil.

That our Loins may be girt about with Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, and our Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace,
and the Shield of Faith to quench the Fiery Darts of the Wicked with the Helmet
of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit in the Inner Man, then we shall be
more than Conquerors.

One Deep calls to another, the depth of our Weakness to the depth of thy
Strength, the depth of our Folly to the depth of thy Wisdom; the depth of our
Poverty to the depth of thy Riches, the depth of our Miseries to the depth of
thy Mercies.

Suffer not thy Displeasure to kindle and break out into a Flame against us.

Turn from us that Wrath that as a just recompense of our Provocations are due
unto us.

Spare us according to the multitude of thy Mercies.

Lord Jesus thou art the hope of Israel, with the Lord there is mercy, and with
thee there is plenteous redemption.

Let thy Obedience recompense our Obstinacy, thy Abstinence our Superfluity,
thy Meekness and Patience our Pride, Irefulness, and Enmity: Let thy Charity
recompense our Malice, thy Devotion our Dullness, Love our unkindness; thy holy
and precious Death our wretched and sinful Lives.

But forasmuch as thou resistest the Proud but give^^ Grace to the Humble, thou
fillest the Hungry with good things, but the Rich thou sendest empty away.

Therefore empty us of our Laodicean Riches, discover our Spiritual Poverty,
and set home to our Consciences the weight and danger of our Sins.

Suffer not our Consciences to let us be quiet until they have drawn us before
thee in all Humility and Brokenness of Spirit in Bitterness, as one is in
Bitterness for the loss of their Firstborn, and confessing our selves loathing
the Persons as well as the Actions: With Detestation and Self-abhorrency, and
with indeclinable Resolves of Amendment of Life.

In regard there must be a Resurrection of our Actions as well as of our
Persons, if our Sins rise not again in this World to bring us to shame and
confusion of face and unfeigned and sincere Repentance, they will rise again in
the World to come, and be as so many Ghosts and Devils, and torment us for ever
and ever. We had better judge our selves than put God to judge us.

Therefore, O God, by thy powerful voice raise our Sins that are graved in
oblivion, and set them in order before us, that we may break them down by
repentance.

Thou can teach us to gather Grapes of Thorns and Figgs of Thistles, because
all things are possible unto thee. There is no Evil so great, but thou can
bring good out of it.

We turn Gold into Dross, but thou can turn Dross into Gold again.

Therefore be entreated, thou Almighty One, that in regard we are such
miserable Sinners, that our Sins may make us humble, for humility is in the
sight of God of great price.

And in regard we are so evil, that we may be more charitable in judging of
others, let our own unworthiness hang so in our light, that we may not be too
busy in meddling with others.

And in regard we are such great Debtors to Divine Justice, that we may be more
charitable in forgiving others: That we may take heed of taking our Brother by
the Throat, lest thou call us to an account, and cast us into prison, until we
have paid the utmost farthing.

And in regard we are such notorious Criminals, that we may adore the light of
the glory of God that shines in the face of Jesus Christ, to the praise and
glory of his grace.

And in regard we have spent so much time in rebellion, and yet thou art ready
to show mercy, that therefore we may look upon our selves in future as persons
engaged to walk before thee in righteousness and holiness all our days.

Spiritualize our Affections every day more and more.

Irradiate our Souls with high apprehensions, and so elevate us unto thy self,
where true Riches are to be had.

We stand as poor Beggars without, but in consideration how thou feedest thy
people with delicacies, in the perfection of righteousness, peace, and joy.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our Fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou do in Heaven and Earth. O Lord arise, help and deliver
us for thine honor.

Bring us out of the Land of Egypt and out of the house of Bondage, that thou
may feed us with Manna from Heaven, and that we may offer unto God acceptable
Sacrifices.

Make out unto us that thou art our God and we thy peculiar people.

That we may live in absolute resignation, subjection, and love unto thee.

Discover unto us the things beyond the World, that our Affections may be taken
off from the World.

The wise man trusts in his wisdom, the strong man in his strength, and the
rich man in his riches.

The ship-wrack'd man catches hold on what is next him.

Adam ship-wrack'd us all, and we are floating in a Deluge of Calamity: Man is
born unto trouble, as the Sparks fly up ward; and in this wretcheduess we
naturally catch hold on something; Self-preservation being a clear Dictate of
Nature: But our ignorance and misapprehension make us to catch at deceitful
things, that fill every one that trust in them with disappointment: some on
Honor, some on Pleasure, some on Riches: And here they abide until God show
them a more excellent way. What ever the Objects of our Souls are, we shall not
desert them until better Objects be discovered unto us.

Although it be an unsatisfied satisfaction that we enjoy by any sublunary thing,
yet when we know of no better, we hold fast by what we have.

Therefore we pray for some Discoveries of that glory that shall afterward be
revealed; of those never-dying comforts for our never-dying souls.

It Is but an unquiet quiet and a restless rest, that we enjoy from the
Creature: We pray for the Contentment above the World, which is better than the
World without that Contentment.

Ever since thou dravest out the Man, we have been seeking rest, but have found
none.

As Noah's Dove could find no rest for the sole of her foot until she returned
into the Ark again, neither is there any rest for us until we return and center
in our God.

Now when we turn our faces toward thee, for we know not what to do, but our
Eyes are toward thee; take us into the Ark of the Covenant.

We are very much foiled with walking after the sight of our own eyes and
desires of our own hearts; take us into thy protection, that we may lay us down
in peace, for thou make thy people to dwell in safety.

Embrace us in the arms of thy mercy.

Hide us under the Covert of thy Wings, cover us with the Canopy of thy Love,
that we may feel thy Power supporting us, and thy Goodness supplying us.

That we may rejoice in thee as our Treasure, and rest in thee as our Center.

In this far Country we thought to have met with great matters, when we ran
away from thee; but we find nothing but Husks which Swine feed upon; and gladly
we would fill our Bellies with them, but cannot: Here is no soul-suitable nor
soul-satisfying good, therefore we find it absolutely necessary to return to
our Fathers House, where there is Bread enough and to spare; there being
infinite Treasures and Mansions at thy right hand. With thee is that River of
Pleasure, in which our Souls may bathe with infinite delight, even for ever and
ever.

Take us into Favor, and receive us with a Fatherly Affection.

When we cry unto the Lord with our voice, let him hear us out of his holy Hill.

Doubtless thou art our Father, thou art the Potter, we are the Clay; it is
thou that have made us, and not we our selves. We are thy people and sheep of
thy pasture.

Where is thy Zeal and the sounding of thy Bowels and of thy Mercies, are they
restrained? Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not. We
cannot have confidence in Saint or Angel, but thou art our God, in thy Word is
our hope, therefore we lift up our eyes to the Hills, from whence comes our
hope. Our help comes from the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth.

Cause thy Providence and thy Promises to meet together, and kiss each other,
in opening to us that knock, in being found of them that seek thee.

Lord separate us from the common condition of incapacity and indisposition.

Disband and loosen our Affections from all Terrene Beauties.

Convince us how good it is to draw nigh unto thee.

We err in our hearts, because we do not know thy ways.

We esteem not our God as we ought, because of the ignorance that is in us.

Lighten our eyes, lest that we sleep the sleep of death.

Purge our minds enough from the earthy dregs of Sense and Passion.

Bring thy Ark into our Hearts, that Dagon may fall down.

Cause Aaron's rod to swallow up the Egyptians Rods.

That the Stone cut out with hands may pound Nebuchadnezzar's Image to dust.

Cloth us with the Sun, and we shall tread the Moon under our Feet.

That the Privileges we may enjoy by our Lord Christ, our most blessed
Redeemer and Savior, may melt all our other Enjoyments into Nullities, and
implanr in us a disestimation of all the Endearments that we use to feed upon
here below.

We have lost thee by Pride, we hope to find thee in Humility; we have lost our
God in Luxury, we hope to find thee in Abstinence; we have lost thee by
Oppression, we will seek thee in Restitution.

Enlarge our Understandings, that the Diamond of Grace may hinder the Loadstone
of the World from drawing our hearts after it.

That we may be gained upon so much by Heavenly Things, that Earthy Things may
have no power on us.

That the Luster of the Pearl of Price may make the Worlds glory to disappear.

Open our Eyes, that we may see the Banner of the Gospel, that we may become
Volunteers, and run to Christ's Standard.

That we may account all things but loss and dross and dung, in comparison of
the Excellency of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Wean us from the World, that we may look toward our Maker, and have respect
to the Holy One of Israel.

Cloth us with a holy Indifferency and Neutrality in having or wanting Earthy
Things.

That we may have a steady composure and an uninterrupted serenity of mind,
through an unshaken submission to, acquiescence in, and conformity to the will of
God in all Occurrences, even in the greatest Storms to say Amen to God's Amen.

Instruct us and teach us what we should do, and guide us with thine Eye.

Be thou as the Dew unto us, that we may grow as the Lilly, and cast forth our
Roots as Lebanon, that our Branches may spread, and our Beauty as the Olive
Tree, and our smell as Lebanon, that we may say with Ephraim, What have we to
do any more with Idols? And that our Fruit may be found from thee. Make us all
Obedience, by an infallible Resignation without Exception, Reservation, or
Limitation.

That thy Will may be our Rule, thy Spirit our Guide, thy Precepts the Rule of
our Practices, and thy Decrees our Delight.

Our own Strength is never so untrusty as when it is most trusted, therefore
stay our steps in thy paths, that our feet slide not.

Fill our Resolutions with the hope of Glory, that we may press forward toward
the high price of our Calling with facility and alacrity.

Set open the Gates of thy Treasures and Favors to us.

Draw us with the Favors of thy good Ointments, for it is therefore the
Virgins love thee.

That we may be always in conjunction with God.

That we may every day learn a Virtue and damn a Vice.

Hide not thy Face from us, lest we be found amongst them that go down into the
Pit.

In regard that Christ our Lord is gone to prepare a place for us, that we may
prepare our selves for that place.

In regard that Jesus was crucified for our Sins sake; help us to mortify our
Sins for Jesus's sake.

Bestow some tastes of thy Divine Love upon us, the Earnest of the Spirit: Then
shall we be convinced that all the miseries of this life are not worthy to be
compared with that glory that shall afterward be revealed.

Enrich our Souls with all the Movables of Heaven.

Bestow upon us the Spirit of Obedience and Fidelity, too bey all the adored
Commands of our Amiable Redeemer, that we may answer all the inspiring Calls of
Piety.

Give unto us all those degrees of Grace and Sanctity; those Efficacious
Movements toward the Kingdom of Glory, that we may arrive at the unspeakable
Consolation of thy Eternal Vision, which is Essential Happiness, of such
Excellency and Super-eminent Perfection, containing all Wisdom, all Learning,
all Knowledge, all Beauty, all Fullness and Satisfaction, and all other Causes
of Love, Joy, and Contentation, wherein our Souls may rest for ever and ever.

Let our Virtues and Graces be acquainted with no other Season but a Spring,
and let nothing skreen us from those Beams that should ripen all our good
Desires into Enjoyments.

Father of Mercies do good unto all Mankind.

Oh the Bondage, the Burden, the Guilt, that the World has contracted!

The World lies in Wickedness, Vice has invaded the Commonwealth of Man.

The Giants of Sin are grown to full stature.

Oh how Iniquity has advanced her self in the hearts of Men.

The height of Iniquity is come to the top, the Fruit thereof is ripe and ready
to drop upon us.

Sin is rampant.

The World goes awry to damnation.

The paths of Sion do weep and wail for want of passengers.

What is become of Charity, Truth, Sincerity, Humility, and Piety: Oh they are
flown to Heaven, from whence they came, and have left the dangerous Successors
Falsehood, Cruelty, Pride, Hypocrisy, and Profaneness.

Religion is in its last Period, decaying by little and little, entering the
Cold Chillness of Dying Age.

Not one in Forty thousand in whose hand a Spear or Shield is found.

Even all are embarked in the Bold Adventure for Hell.

Pride, Oppression, and Profaneness ride in Prosperous Triumphs without
Control, and cover the face of the Earth.

Vice braves it with a bolden'd Face.

Sin is in its Power, Corruption is upon its Throne.

Take away the Covering that covers the face of all People.

For the CHVRCH.
WE have had a long Summer, but small Harvest.

Increase the precious Sons of Sion.

Call thy Sons from far, and thy Daughters from the ends of the Earth; that
they may be called by thy Name.

Let all the Nations of the Heathen become the Kingdom of the Lord Christ.

Take in the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the Utmost Parts of the Earth
forthy Possession.

Let all the People praise thee, O God, yea let all the People praise thee.

Cause all the Kindred of the Nations to worship before thee, and lead them in
the Paths of Righteousness for thy Names sake.

Cast thy Net into the Seas, and gather of all Kinds.

That the Sun of the Gospel may rise to such an Altitude, that it may inlighten
every Dark Corner of the Earth.

That the World that is gene^ally ruled by the Malicious Prince of Darkness,
may now receive and obey thy Holy Laws in the Beauty and Harmony of Holiness.

Search thy Sheep, and seek them out as a Shepard seeks out his Flock in the
Day that he is among his Sheep, and deliver them out of all places where they
have been scattered in the cloudy and dark Day.

Feed them upon Lebanon, by the Rivers, that they may lie them down in peace.

Seek that which is Lost, Bring again that which is Driven away, Bind up that
which is Broken, and strengthen that which is Sick.

Cause thy saving health to be known among all Nations.

Pull down the Strong Holds of Satan, build up the Walls of Jerusalem, and
gather together the Outcasts of Israel.

Lamentable are the breaches and ruins of thy Church, scarce one stone left
upon another.

Thou art the Owner thereof, and able enough, therefore repair it.

Thy Vineyard looks very wild, and instead of Grapes it brings forth Wild
Grapes; Oh prune it and fence it, cleanse away the Impurity, Sinfulness, and
Defilements of it.

Suffer no Root of Schism, Slip of Error, or Fruit of Disobedience, to grow in
thy Garden.

Cause the North Wind to arise, and the South Wind to blow, that the Spices may
flow out.

Adorn the Profession of Religion with an Accession of a Blessing.

That the Sun of Righteousness may inliven the Church to a higher pregnancy.

That the Innate Power of the Gospel may prove so Victorious, that Paganism,
Mahumatism, Judaism, Atheism, and Papism, may melt under the powerful
Influences of it.

Oh feed thy Flock and fold them.

Thou who command the Clouds from above, and openest the Windows of Heaven,
remember and refresh thine Inheritance with Showers of Divine Favor, least it
prove like a Heath in the Desert.

Open the Celestial Casements* and shower down Gospel Blessings*

If our Root be not Rottenness, Heavenly Waterings and Influences will make it
sprout forth into Fruits of Obedience.

Send down the spirit of Obedience, and Fidelity, that the adored Commands of
our aimiable Redeemer may be obeyed.

Reform those parts of thy Church that are dark'ned and defiled: Cast down that
Tyranny, Heresy, and Schism, which keeps out Truth, Holiness, and Peace;
that Truth may triumph over Error.

That the Streams of Truth, in the Banks of Unity, may make glad the City of
God.

That Right may be restored, Worth prized, Virtue honored, Vice degraded, and
Honesty and Godliness encouraged.

Set Bounds to our Passions by Reason, to our Errors by Truth, to our Seditions
by Laws, to our Schisms by Charity, that the Church may be as a City at Unity
in it self.

Cause the Fire of Divine Love to burn up and consume all Roughness, Hatred,
and Cruelty, that a Willing and Peaceful Obedience may be-calm the World.

That Ephraim may not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim.

Show thy Compassions unto them who are upon the Mountains of Gilboa, where
there are no Dews, and in Egypt, where there are no Showers: thou art
sufficient for them.

Show Pity and Favor unto them who are tossed to and fro upon the Main of
Ignorance, with every Wind of Doctrine.

Bring them under a powerful Spiritual Teaching, from the Heart to the Heart,
from the Conscience to the Conscience, from Experience to Experience.

Especially favor this Part of thy Church in this Kingdom, that it may be a
Paradise of Pleasure, the Garden of God; that the Valleys may be like Eden, the
Hills like Lebanon, the Springs like Pisgah, and the Rivers like Jordan, and
the Defense thereof the Lord Jehovah.

Cause thy Spirit as a mighty East Wind to disperse the Locusts.

That our Nation may be as a Field which the Lord has blessed.

For the KING.
IN a most Eminent Manner give Demonstrations of thy Favor unto our Most Dread
Sovereign Lord CHARLES, by thy Grace of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
King; Defender of the Faith: and in all Causes and over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, in these His Majesty's Realms and Dominions, Supreme
Head and Governor.

Let him be precious in thy Sight.

Watch over him for Good.

Cause all Designs that are against him to prove abortive.

Make his Enemies to be as Dagon was before the Ark, fallen down and broken in
pieces; having neither Heads to plot, nor Hands to fight against Him.

As thou have placed him on high above us, make thy Blessings suitable to his
Exaltation and Dignity.

Let not the Sun of his Prosperity decline, but when his Course is finished
here below, he may ascend into the Unchangeable Glory, and be clothed upon,
and be a Star of the First Magnitude; ever shining in the Heaven of Heavens.

For the Ministers of the GOSPEL.
PLace in every one of us an Overflowing Fountain, that we may not only be
constant, but abundant, in the Work of the Lord.

That we may be a Means to mollify their hard Hearts, and bespeak their Love
to God: Let us be more and more under the Influences and rich Pourings of thy
Spirit.

Make ut Masters of great Judgment and Experience in Soul Affairs.

That we may weild the Weapons of our Warfare, which are not Carnal, to the
beating down of every high and towering Imagination that shall exalt themselves
against the Kingdom of our Lord Christ.

That with sweet Insinuations and a holy Importunity, we may compel them to
come in, that thy House may be filled, and thy Feast furnished with Guests.

Inspire us with Zeal and Industry.

That we may partake of the Fountain of Wisdom, and drink of the River of
Knowledge, that in us may be the Vein of Understanding.

Impregnate us with Divine Notions in such abundance, that we may have teeming
Wombs to enrich the World.

Adorn and Beautify us with such a Brightness of Wisdom and Understanding,
that we may sparkle with ravishing heat of Love and Piety.

That the Divine Image may fairly be reflected on us, that it may shine
brightly in the Faces of Others.

Fill us with Prudence and Advice: Mould many and Wise Resolutions, Mature
Determinations, deep Notions holy and pious Counsels, for the Teaching and
Carrying on of thy Flock.

That we may be as precious Jewels to enrich the World.

Communicate unto us the Sublime Mysteries of Divine Revelation.

That our Lips may drop the Words of Life.

And that our Tongues may be as a Tree of Life, whose leaves are Medicinable.

Give unto us the Light of Divine Knowledge in the Purity of Divine Truth.

Enrich us in all Knowledge, in all Utterance, and in all Workman ship.

Inlighten our Eyes, that we may see quite through the Depths of Divinity.

Reveal unto us by thy Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea the
deep things of God.

Give us leave to plow with thy Heifer; and we shall find out the Riddls.

Great is the Mystrey of Godliness.

Who is sufficient for these things? Attract our Minds by thy Spirit, that our
Flight may be high, and we shall sing more sweetly.

Suffer not the Sun to go down over the Prophets, let it not be dark over their
Heads.

Fill us with the Spirit of God in Wisdom, in Understanding, in Knowledge, and
in Workmanship, that we may undeceive many.

Make us Pastors according to thy own Heart, that we may feed thy People with
Wisdom and Understanding.

Furnish us with all the Requisites that should belong to Gospel Ministers.

So qualify us with Ability and Integrity, that Envy her self may be forced to
confess that we are Workmen that need not be ashamed.

Suffer us not to be as Clouds without Rain, like empty Clouds that deceive
thirsty Souls.

Bless our Labors to great Meassures.

To whom has the Arm of the Lord been revealed?

Who has believed our Report?

Shall the Trumpet beblown, and the People not afraid? Shall the Lions roar,
and the Beasts of the Forest not tremble.

Cloth us with a great deal of Mind, that we may distill many wholesome Notions
and rectified Apprehensions into the Minds of Men.

That we may bring Truth which is so far absent, home into Men's Bosoms.

That we may use both the Harp and the Arrows, that our Speech be sweet and
piercing.

That we may feast the hungry Ears with Delicious Dainties.

Give unto us the Tongue of the Learned, that we may speak a Word in due season.

The Grace of God and the mighty Spirit of Jesus, work in us, that we may be
enabled to instruct the Weak, to confute the Obstinate, to reclaim the
Erroneous, to confirm the Faithful, and to comfort the Dejected and
Disconsolate.

Make us happy Instruments of much Glory unto thy Name, and of much good unto
thy People.

Suffer not the Fruits of our Understanding to fail: Give a Blessing to our
Endeavors; Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but thou only give the
Increase.

Except the Lord build the House, they labor but in vain that build it; except
the Lord keep the City, the Watchman watches but in vain.

Cause our Words which we speak from thee, to be as Goads and Nails fastened by
the Masters of the Assembly.

Suffer not our Knowledge to be without Zeal, nor our Zeal with out Knowledge.

Make us not only Voices crying but Lights shining.

That we may not only be Trees of Knowledge, but Trees of Life, in the Paradise
of our God.

Give unto us to know the Mysteries of of the Kingdom of God.

Teach us to find much of the Treasure hid in the Field.

Make us useful and successful.

That we may gather many under the Triumphing Wings of Jesus.

Enable us to unmask and unvail Heavenly Truths, that each eye may see their
Beauty.

That we may set such a lustrre upon the Pearl of Price, and so present
Divinity in her graceful Jewels, that every one may be enamored with her.

That we may lead Affection by the hand, and with a sweet facility slide some
Divine Truths into the Hearts of our Hearers.

Grant that in all things we may approve our selves as Ministers of God.

That our Lights may so shine before Men, that they may see our Good Works and
glorify thee our Father which art in Heaven.

Suffer us not to be Strangers to that Holiness We press upon others.

Make us feed by Doctrine and feed by Example.

Suffer not the Salt to lose its Savor.

Suffer not the Curse to come upon us, like Priest like People.

Suffer us not to pull down with one hand what we build with another, lest the
Sons of Levi cause the Offering of the Lord to be had in abomination.

Dead Files causes the Ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking
Savor, so does a little Folly he that is in reputation for Wisdom and Honor!
therefore stay our steps in thy Paths, that our feet slide not.

That the Purity of Divine Truths may be unfolded in our hearts and lives.

We have our Treasure in Earthen Vessels, purify and cleanse them, lest thy
Word have a tincture of our Uncleanness.

That we may not sound the Lords Trumpet with a Stinking Breath.

Cloth us with Righteousness the Garments of Praise, and the Saints shall
shout for joy.

Grant that we may Credit the Gospel, with Examplary Conversation.

That our Lives as well as Doctrine, may continually teach Lessons of Faith,
Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Brotherly Kindness, and Charity.

That there may be seen whatsoever things are true, lovely, pure, virtuous, or
praise worthy.

That every one of us may be as a Torch on a Hill to inlighten all about us.

Make us as Wise as Serpents, but as Innocent as Doves.

They who are called to the Work, give them Grace to work in their Callings,
that we may be true Servants and Friends of God.

That we may lay up and lay out.

O Lord help us that we may live above the Dependence and Gratuities of this
vain World.

That our Aim may be higher than the Eating of a Piece of Bread.

That we may be free from the Blood of all Men, give us Grace to warn all Men,
and to teach every Man in all Wisdom; that we may present our Flocks acceptable
before Christ.

Whilst our Tongues run at the service of the Altar, God forbid that our Eyes
should squint at the Fat of the Sacrifice.

Grant that we may not seek our selves but thee.

Let our Endeavors be rather for the profit than the pleasure of the People.

Strengthen us to live above Discouragements, yea above Encouragements.

That we may chiefly mind our Duty, and depend upon thee, as our only but our
sure Reward.

Give us a strong and clear sense of what we speak.

Let nothing come out of our Mouths, but what is to good purpose.

Suffer not the Stars of the Church to shed black and malignant Influences.

Suffer not our Trumpets to give an uncertain Sound, then who shall prepare
themselves for the Battle.

Make us all of one right mind, that we may speak the same thing, that there
may be no Divisions among us, that we may be perfectly joined together in the
same Mind and Judgment.

That we may all always be in Conjunction with Truth.

That we may all prove such Predominant Lights, that the People cannot but
choose us for Direction.

That we may be as Tutular Angels to our Flocks.

And that we may make all good to Heavens Eye that we show to the World.

For a Blessing upon the WORD preached.
O Lord cause thy Word to run, and be glorified.

Ingrave thy Counsels in our Hearts.

The fruitfulness of the Seed depends upon the Sun and the Rain.

Let us not only have the presence of Ordinances, but thy presence in the
Ordinances.

Let us feel the inward Sweetness and Deliciousness that truly are in Divine
Truths.

Confirm the Words of thy Servants, and perform the Counsel of thy Messengers.

Shall our Lips drop Honey, and they taste no Sweetness.

Cause the Entrance of thy Word to give Light and Understanding to the Simple,
that thy Statutes may be our Songs in the House of our Pilgrimage.

That the efflux of Life and Power from God may beget in us a true and lively
Faith.

The Law of the Lord being perfect, cause it to convert the Soul, the
Testimonies of the Lord being sure, that they may make Wise the Simple: that
the Testimonies of the Lord being right, may rejoice the Heart; and the
Commandments of the Lord being pure, may inlighten the Eyes.

Imprint thy Word in Living Characters upon the Vital Powers of our Souls.

Cause the blind to see out of Obscurity and out of Darkness.

Our Sins are fast rooted in us, the Branches are wide and large, lay the Axe
close to the Root of the Tree.

Let thy Call not only reach our Ears but our Hearts.

That our Ears may not only be tickled but our Hearts touched.

That thy Word may not only dwell with us, but in us.

That we may not only learn what to do, but do what we learn.

That we may not only talk like Christians, but walk like Christians.

A good Profession and a good Conversation, these two who God has joined
together, let no Man put assunder.

That we may be Companions of all them that fear thee and keep thy Commandments.

That we may not only be Verbalists but Realists.

That our Heads may not only be full of Notions, but our Hearts full of Graces.

That Christ Jesus may not only be the Subject of our Tongues but the Object
of our Hearts.

That we may make it our Business, yea our Meat and Drink, to do the Will of
our Lord.

Cause the Word to prevail among us, that we may meet with something that may
meet with us.

That the Word of Christ may dwell in us in all Wisdom, that his Testimonies
may be our Delight and our Counselors, that it may be unto us the Power of God
unto Salvation.

Suffer not the Word to return void, but that it may accomplish that which thou
please.

Quicken our Apprehensions, strengthen our Memories; let us not be like a Man,
beholding his Natural Face in a Glass, and goes away forgeting what manner of
Man he was: but grant that the Secret of the Lord may be with us, that we may
know his Covenant.

When the Watchmen sound the Lords Trumpet, that we may take alarm with stout
resolutions to follow the Lords Banner.

That the Words of thy Lips may keep us from the Paths of the Destroyer.

That the Gospel may not only come unto us in Word but in Power; in much
Assurance, and in the Holy Ghost.

Suffer not the Word to be entombed but inshrin'd in us.

That the Leaven may be hid within us, until the whole be leavened; that all
the powers of our Souls may relish of it.

That we may be abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of thy House, and that we
may drink of the Rivers of thy Pleasure.

Cause thy Word to be an Engine to effect our Repentance.

Cause it to be as a Fire to consume our Lusts, and as a Hammer to break our
hard Hearts upon the Cushion of thy Mercy.

Bore our Ears, that we may hear when thou speak in Mercy, otherwise thou will force us to hear when thou speak in Wrath.

That we may bow to thy Septer of Mercy, lest thou break us in pieces with the
Rod of thy Wrath.

Grant that our Eyes may be enlightened by tasting of the Honey of the Gospel.

Open our Eyes, that we may see the Worth and Excellency of the Pearls that are
cast before us, that we may gather them to enrich us, that we may be known by
the Bridegroom at his coming, by the Gold that we have bought, and the White
Raiment we have put on.

Cause the Word of Reconcilation to make such a Conjunction betwixt Christ and
our Souls, that they may never be separated.

Grant that we may hear in thy House of Instruction, lest thou bring us to thy
House of Correction.

That we may hear thy Word lest we bear the Rod.

That we may turn at thy Reproof, that thou may pour thy Spirit upon us, and
make known thy Words unto us, lest thou hedge up our Way with Thorns, and make a
Wall, that we cannot find our Paths.

Thou art the Lord that must teach us to profit, that must lead us the way that
we should go; for thy Commandments are a Lamp, and thy Law a Light, and
Reprooss of Instruction are the Way of Life.

Grant that the same Spirit that wrote the Word, may teach us to understand it.

That through thy Precepts we may get Understanding, and by Understanding hate
every false Way.

Open our Eyes, that we may see the wondrous Things that are in thy Law.

That we may follow the Star, until we find Jesus the Christ, to worship him.

When the Scriptures are opened to our Understandings, then open our
Understandings to the Scriptures.

That we may discern what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

Quicken us with thy Precepts, that we may never forget them.

That they may make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

That the light in the Golden Candle-sticks, may so illuminate us, that we may
walk in thy paths without stumbling.

Cause thy Word to take Root downward, that it may bear Fruit upward; that we
may have respect unto all thy Commandments.

Make the Word to be as a Remora to stay our Carnal Desires, which are
Voyaging in the Ocean of VVorldy and Sinful Pleasures.

Make us not only constant, but conscionable Hearers.

That thy Word may be in us, that Incorruptible Seed that lives and abides
for ever.

When we meet for the better make us better for the Meeting.

They that serve the Lord, let them be accepted with favor, that their Prayers
may reach unto the Clouds.

Let the Eye of the Lord be upon them that fear him, and that hope in his mercy.

Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.

That they may be satisfied with the goodness of thy House, even with the
goodness of thy Holy Temple.

Dart in some Beams of Irresistible Light into our Minds.

That the Word may be a savor of Life unto Life, and not of Death unto Death.

Cause that Word that offers Salvation to our Souls, be a means to bring our
Souls to Salvation.

Let the Word be transforming, that we may be assimulated into Christ's likeness

Cause our Affections to receive a Touch from the Word, that they may be
stirred up, kindled, and inflamed thereby.

That thy Message unto us may engage us to become a willing People in the day
of thy Power.

Cause the Word to be quick and powerful, quicker than a two-edged Sword; so
quick as to quicken us to every good duty: and so powerful to subdue the Old
Man of Sin. Make it of such force, as to make a Division between us and our
best beloved Sins.

That the Sword of the Spirit may cut us off from the Wild Olive of Nature.

That we may not only be acquainted with the Grace of Truth, but the Truth of
Grace.

Cause the Dew to fall with the Manna.

That the Dews of Hermon may fall upon the Hill of Sion.

That we may bring forth Fruits as the Vines of Engedi.

Cause thy Doctrine to drop as the Rain, to distill as the Dew, as the small
Rain upon the tender Herb, and as the Dew upon the Grass.

Drive the Birds from the Sacrifice.

When we draw nigh unto thee in Duty, draw nigh unto us in Mercy. Let not them
that wait upon thee be ashamed.

Open the Doors of our Hearts, that the King of Glory may enter.

Put a holy Fear into our Hearts that we may attend upon thee with Reverence.

That we may not receive it as the word of a sinful mortal Man, but as indeed
and in truth it is, the Word of an Immortal God.

Cause the Word to be as a Bank, to hinder the Inundation of our Sins.

Order our steps in thy Word, that Iniquity may not have Dominion over us.

Make the Word to be as a Flaming Sword, to keep us from the forbiden Fruit:
That it may be as a Curb to keep us from the stray of Offense.

That we may observe to do what the Lord commands us, not turning to the
right hand nor the left.

That it may be as a Rudder to steer us in our right Course.

Ingrave thy Counsels on the Frontispiece of our Hearts, and cause them to be
evermore in an applicative practice.

That we may grow by the sincere Milk of the Word.

That as the Be gathers the Flowers, and carries them home to the Hive, and
works them into Honey, and lives upon it in times of need; so help us, that
we may gather the precious Truths out of thy holy Word, and carry them home
unto the Hive of our Hearts, and work them into Grace, and live upon it in a
time of Trial.

Lay hold on our Hearts by thy Omnipotent Grace.

Cause the Influences of thy Grace irresistibly to engage us to do thy will.

That the manifestation of thy Grace, may be as Showers to parched Grass, that
our drooping Souls that hang their Wings, may revive and leap for joy.

That the Efflux of Life and power from God, may beget in us true and lively
Faith.

That Love may be enticed out of our selves to God.

Cause Heavenly Ordinances to leave Fruitful Influences.

That we may not only enjoy the Gospel of Peace, but the Peace of the Gospel.

We desire to sun our selves in the Light of thy Countenance.

Cause the Word, like the Sun Beams, not only to enlighten us, but heat and
inliven us.

Let it be Honey in the Mouth, Melody in the Ear, and a Jubilee in the Heart.

We see thy Footsteps in the Creatures, but we wait to see thy Face in the
Ordinances.

Ordinances are the Pool of Bethesda, that only heal when the Spirit moves
the Waters.

The Gospel is the Pen, but the Holy Ghost is the Guider of it.

Suffer not the Tree of Life to be too far from the Tree of Knowledge.

Cause Divine Truths to be manifested in the Purity of our Hearts and Lives.

That every Gale of Divinity may drive us nearer to the Haven of Felicity.

That we may not be all for Speculation, but Sensation, to taste how good the
Lord is.

Open the Passage between our Heads and our Hearts.

Convey some warm sprinklings of thy Benediction into our inward parts.

Suffer not any of us to be like Gideon's dry Fleece.

Let not the Thirsty Souls that wait for thee as the Rain, return like the
Troops of Tema, with their Heads covered.

For Unregenerate Men.
IN mercy remember the rebellious Children, that take counsel, but not of thee;
and cover, but not with the covering of thy Spirit, that they may add Sin unto
Sin.

Whose Hearts are hardened from thy Fear.

Sin at the first was the cause of Ignorance, now Ignorance is the cause of Sin.

In the greatness of their Folly they go astray.

Who never peeped out of the Bondage of Sensual Lust.

They rebel against the Light, they know not the ways thereof, neither will
they come into these Paths.

Who walk after the vanity of their Minds, having their Understanding darkened;
being alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their Hearts: who being past feeling, have given
themselves over to work all Uncleanness with greediness.

Their god is their Belly, their glory is their shame; who mind Earthy things.

There is a Bridle in their Jaws, which causes them to err.

Lord pity them, for they cannot pity themselves.

In provoking thee, they provoke their own damnation.

Thou Being of Beings, have mercy upon them.

Interrupt the Process of their Extravagances.

As they tread the paths of Death, let them see the drawn Sword of thy
Displeasure.

As they journey on in their Sins, cause a Light to shine from Heaven.

Amaze them with the apprehensions of their woeful and wretched Estate.

Suffer them not to breath quietly, until they find the Fountain opened for Sin
and for Uncleanness.

Set home unto their Consciences the weight and danger of their Sins.

That Conscience may be as a Scorpion in the Bosom.

Send the Fiery Serpents to sting and wound them, that they may look after the
Brazen Serpent.

A wake them out of their Mortal Lethargy.

Bring them out of the Womb of Natural Blindness, that they may be born again,
although they be Old.

Thou who at first caused Light to shine out of Darkness, say, Let there be
Light, and there shall be Light.

That the Dayspring from on high may visit them that sit in Darkness and in
the shadow of Death.

Cause the Day to dawn, and the Day Star to arise in their Hearts.

Turn the Shadow of Death into the Morning.

Let the Spirit of Conviction come upon them, and a wake them as a Man that is
a waked out of his Sleep.

Our corrupt Nature is the most inexpugnable Fort in the World.

Cause the Dead to hear thy Voice and live.

Of those Stones raise up Children to Abraham.

Mollify their hard Hearts, that are not penetrable, when the Arrows of
Conviction are shot against them.

Cause Hell to enter into them, that they may not enter into Hell.

That thy terrors may affright them from those evils which delight them.

Cause Sin to reign unto Death, that Grace may reign unto Eternal Life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Snatch them as Brands out of the Fire, lest they be swallowed up in their own
ruins.

Bring them out of their Spiritual Bondage with a mighty Hand and a
stretched-out Arm.

The pleasures of Sin, the power of Satan, and the source of Evil. Custom, this
threefold Cord is not easily broken.

Translate them out of the Kingdom of Satan into the glorious Liberty of the
Children of God.

Bring them from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God.

Glorify thy self by their salvation, and not by their damnation.

Turn their Vices into Virtues.

Although now they be afar off, make them nigh by the Blood of Christ.

Bring the Blind by a way they know not: Make Darkness Light unto them, and
Crooked Paths straight.

O that Christ may be formed in them.

That the Blind may see, the Deaf may hear, the Dumb may speak, the Lame walk,
and the Lepers may be cleansed.

We are all the Work of thy Hands, make us all the Sheep of thy Pasture.

We are all of one common Mold, make all of one common Salvation.

Purge them with Hysop, and they shall be clean.

Say unto the dry bones live.

Cause the Leopards to change their Spots, and the Ethiopians their Hue.

For the Broken hearted.
O God show thy Grace to them whose souls desire thee in the Night, that sigh
by reason of their bondage.

Who thou have broke in the place of Dragons, and covered with the shadow of
Death.

The Spirit of a Man is able to bear his infirmity, but a Wounded Spirit who
can bear.

The troubles of the Spirit are the Spirit of troubles.

Even as the Wind, when it gets into the Caverns of the Earth, causes it to
quake, so Guilt contracted and felt, makes the poor soul to tremble.

No Lion roars like that in a Man's bosom.

If a spark of thy Wrath be so terrible, when it flies into our Consciences;
what will thy comeing be, when thou come with Flaming Fire, to render
Vengance to thy Adversaries?

Their own Guilt has brought two Hells in their Hearts, Horror and Shame.

Oh sin is of a Toady Complexion.

After the strong Wind, the Earthquake and the Fire cause the Still Voice to
come.

Hear the Cries out of the Deeps.

Be thou their Pilot in the dark and dangerous Storm.

Thou healest the Broken in Heart, and bindest up their Wounds.

Let the sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, and relieve them according
to the greatness of thy Power.

Bring the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in Darkness from the
Prison House.

Say to the Prisoners, Go forth, to them in Darkness, Show your selves. Cause
them to ^eed in the ways, and their pastures to be in high places.

Pleasures of Sin merried their Senses for a while, but horror followed after,
and vultures their unconsuming Hearts, and those that carried the most pleasing
tastes, fit them with the largest reluctations.

Oh sympathize with the weary and heavy laden ones, how they long for the
Scapegoat to carry their Sins into oblivion.

They watch for him more than they that watch for the Morning.

That look through the Windows, and cry through the Latesses, Why is his Chariot so
long in coming? Why stay the wheels of his Chariot?

They who are sick with the sense of their misery, comfort them with the
sweetness of thy mercy.

They who see their miseries out of Christ, cause them to see the light of the
glory of God, that shines in the Face of Jesus Christ, to the praise and glory
of his Grace.

Loose off their Sackcloth, and gird them with gladness, that their glory may
sing praise.

Break their Bonds, and they shall sacrifice the sacrifice of praise.

Bind up the broken hearted, proclaim liberty to captives, open the prison to
them that are bound; comfort all that mourn, give them beauty for ashes, the
oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of
heavinness, that they may be called Trees of Righteousness.

That they may be of the ransomed of the Lord, that return and come to Sion
with Songs and everlasting joy upon their Heads.

Cause true joy and gladness to possess their souls, that sorrow and sighing
may fly away.

Even as the eye of the Servant waits upon the hand of his Master, or the
Maiden upon the hand of her Mistress, so they wait upon thee, until thou have
mercy on them.

Cause them that lift up their souls unto thee, to know the way wherein they
should walk.

Lead them to the door of hope opened in the valley of Achor.

Be a Leader and Commander unto them, instruct them and teach them what they
should do, and guide them with thine eye: Guide these prisoners of hope unto the
strong holds.

Remember them with the favor thou bear unto thy people, and visit them
with thy salvation.

They who are stung with the Fiery Serpents, give them a sight of the Brazen
Serpent.

The sting of Death is Sin, the strength of Sin is the Law; give them the
Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

That the great Physician of Souls may heal their Spiritual Distempers.

Where spiritual sorrow sinketh the heart, cause the pully of Faith to raise it.

They who look toward thee with contrition, consolate them with remission.

They who turn unto thee with humilation and repentance, turn unto them with
commiseration and forgiveness.

According to thy promise, be with them that are of contrite and humble
spirits, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
contrite ones.

Be nigh unto them that call upon thee, that call upon thee in truth.

Suffer not all their sighs to wander in fleeting Air.

Cause them that sow in tears to reap in joy.

Turn their mourning into dancing, loose off their sackcloth, and gird them
with gladness.

Cause thy Face to shine upon them, and they shall be saved.

They who are afflicted and tossed with tempest, and are not comforted, lay
their stones with fair Colors, and lay their Foundations with Saphirs: Make
their Windows of Agats, and their Gates of Carbuncles, and all their Borders of
pleasant Stones.

The Vapors of Sin are risen and engendered into a Cloud, which interposeth
between them and the Sun of Mercy: Grant for the present that some glances from
the edges of the interposed body may refresh them.

Where the stormy Clouds are risen, when the distressed ones expect to be
overwhelmed with the Deluge of thy Wrath, then set thy Bow in the Clouds.

A discovery of Free Grace will be precious.

Make them to hear joy and gladness, that the bones that thou have broken may
rejoice.

Bring them on Eagles Wings from Sinai to Sion.

Cause them that mourn to be exalted to safety.

Open the Conduits of Soul-supportation and Soul-consolation.

Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but when the desire comes, it is a Tree
of Life.

Sin has over-laid their hopes, O raise them from the dead.

Let down a beam of Comfort to temper their Despair.

Contend not for ever, be not always wroth, then the spirits will fail, and the
souls which thou have made.

Teach them to feed on the Promises, as Sampson did of the Honeycomb. Out of
the Eater came forth Meat, and out of the strong came forth Sweetness.

That they may be justified by Faith, and have peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Hang forth the White Flagg of Mercy, and lift up their Heads, that they may
see their redemption drawing near.

Display the Ensign of thy Compassions, then shall they run to thy Standard.

Help them that are under the pains and pangs of the New Birth, guide them in
the way that leads to Everlasting Life.

Open unto them the Gates of Righteousness, that they may go in and praise thy
Name.

Let the Lords Compassions reach to all that are wrestling with and tossed in
the Sea of their Corruption, and are violently carried on with temptations, and
overpowered by their licentious Affections in the Straits of Repentance, that
have much ado to keep off from the Rocks of Despair, and afraid to be swallowed
up in the Gulf of Perdition.

When they pass through the Waters, be thou with them. When they go through the
Rivers, suffer them not to overflow them. When they walk through the Fire, suffer
them not to be burned, nor the flame to kindle upon them.

Consider their trouble, for thou know their souls are in adversity.

Turn the Bruised Reed into a Golden Pillar, and the Smoking Flax into a
Triumphing Flame.

Be thou their Arm every morning, and their salvation in a time of trouble.

Bring them from the depths of Death.

Glorify thy self in their Deliverances.

Redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

Swallow up Death in Victory, Wipe away tears from their Faces, and take away
their Rebuke.

Let the times of refreshing come from the presence of the Lord.

Execute not the fierceness of thy Wrath, for thou art God and not Man.

Cast them not away from thy presence, but uphold them with thy free spirit.

Bind up the breach of thy servants, and heal the stroke of their wound.

For thy Names sake defer thine anger and for thy Praise refrain.

Guide them with thy Counsel, in order to their Reception into Glory.

And comfort just Lot, that is vexed with the unrighteous Conversation of the
Sodomites from day to day.

How the second Man the Lord from Heaven, the New Man, is plagued with the
Hittites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites.

The small beginnings of Grace are preserved by the powers from Heaven.

The Sojourner is opposed and despised, because of the contrariety between them.

Damned Satan, the World, and the Flesh, combine to extinguish that which thou
have kindled.

The Flesh Iusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; these
two are contrary the one to another.

Relieve thy Servants who are engaged in the Holy War.

When they walk through the midst of trouble, do thou revive them; stretch forth
thy hand against the wrath of thine enemies, that thy right hand may save them.

Support them with the Spirit of Power and the power of the Spirit.

Perfect that which concerns them, thy mercy O Lord endures for ever;
forsake not the Work of thine own hands.

It is the Lord that brings forth his People from their Enemies, and lifts
them up on high above them.

Corruption is always strong enough to keep Grace low: Grant (...) Grace may
prove strong enough to keep Corruption low.

Suffer not their Corruptions to worry and devour the Fruits of the Spirit.

Take the Foxes that spoil the Vines, for the Vines have tender Grapes.

Fill every one that hunger and thirst after Righteousness.

Deny not those ardent desires of the blissful fruition of thy Self, which the
lively sense of thy own Goodness has enkindled; those breathings and gaspings
for an eternal participation of thee.

The Soul is depressed with an unpassable thicket of hindrances, the frailties
of the Body, the current of the World, and the spiritual Enemies that
continually war against Goodness; they are ever checking the production of
those good motions she is pregnant with.

Oh send a spring of auxilliary Grace to actuate the dull habits of inherent
Grace.

Thou know their woe because they dwell in Mesech, and are constrained to
dwell in the Tents of Kedar.

Lead forth thy people whom thou have redeemed, and guide them with thy strength
to thy holy Habitation.

Open the Rivers in high places, and Fountains in the midst of the Valleys:
Make the Wilderness a Pool of Water, and the dry Land Springs of Water.

The whole World cannot satisfy their Spiritual Longings, give them
Soul-suitable Returns.

The Good that they would do, that do they not, the Evil that they would not
do, that do they; because of the Law of the Members that war against the Law of
the Mind.

They would gladly be with thee, but they cannot get near because of the Crowd.

Their Souls thirst upon the Cross, but Gall and Vinegar is their Drink.

Shall not the good Angel minister unto them.

Help them who are troubled with vexing Scruples, and reduced to dark
Perplexities.

When they go forward thou art not there, and when they go backward they cannot
perceive thee: Oh manifest thy self unto them.

Cause thy Grace to guide their slippery steps.

And unto them who thou have in some measure given Victory to, make the
Habitation of their Righteousness prosperous.

Cause the Righteous to hold on his Way, and he that has clean Hands to be
stronger and stronger.

That they may grow in Grace, and from one degree of Grace unto another.

Cause the Light of the Righteous to shine more and more unto perfect Day.

Suffer not Pharaoh and his Host to over-take them.

Suffer them not to look back to Egypt, nor to long after the Garlic and the
Onions.

That they may rather think of the burden and bondage, and the woeful
circumstances and consequents of Sin, than the vain pleasures of it.

Suffer them not to be plagued with Satan's return or any fresh invasions or
revolutions of their old Sins.

Thou who set them up, and make them holy, keep them up, and make them
steady.

Keep them from lapses and prevarications.

Let them not want the Pillar of a Cloud by Day, nor the Pillar of Fire by
Night.

Let the Blessed Spirit, which was the Pre-operator, be the Co-operator; lest
they return to the borders of Egypt.

Fight their battles and supply their wants.

Give them a clear sight of the Crown of Immortality that the joys of that
which is set before the eyes of their Faith, may still refresh them, that they
may endure unto the End.

Give them a Sample of what they are pressing toward, and sometimes a Taste of
the Fruits of Canaan, that they may resolve to fight with the Sons of Anack.

Fraught them so with hope that they may venture into any storm.

That they may be satisfied that all the miseries of this life is not worthy to
be compared with that glory that shall afterward be revealed.

That all the thoughts of misery may be drowned in the precious deeps of
Eternity.

For the Afflicted.
O Lord be Gracious to all them that are under the Wring of Sorrow and in the
Press of Adversity.

That are Wounded with the Weapons of thy Indignation, and cast down with the
Evidences of thy Displeasure.

That are sunk into Inconsolable Afflictions, captivated and fettered in the
Darksom Prison of Discontentedness, and hurried upon the Shelves and Rocks of
Infelicity.

We humbly own thou might justly have made us Examples unto them, our sins
was in the Cry that brought down Vengeance.

We are not spared because we are more righteous, but because to us thou art
more gracious.

Thou dealest with us as with Princes Children, others are beaten for our
faults, but it is intended for our amendment.

Thou have distributed sorrows in thine anger, and have broken them with breach
upon breach.

Thou reapest that glory in their calamity, that they robbed thee of in their
prosperity.

Thou have builded against them and encompassed them with Gall and Travel.

Thou have filled them with Bitterness, and made them drunken with Wormwood.

Thou have spoken against them in thy Wrath, and vexed them with thy sore
displeasure.

Thy Wrath lies hard upon them, thou have afflicted them with many waves.

Thou have spread thy Net upon them, and have brought them down as the Fowls of
Heaven.

Terrors are turned upon them* they pursue their Souls like the Wind, the days
of affliction have taken hold upon them.

With thy strong hand thou opposest thy self against them.

Thou have lifted them up to the Wind.

Thou have wrote bitter things against them, and caused them possess the Sins
of their Youth.

Thou have sealed up their transgressions in a Bagg.

Their Foundation is over-flown with a Flood.

Black Clouds have darkened their day, Gall and Wormwood has bitter'd their
Cup.

Afflictions are Stinging Serpents.

We humbly own Sin is both the Mother and the Nurse of all Calamity.

There Is some of the Golden Calf in all our Suffering.

They have betrayed themselves into the Hands of Sorrow.

Afflictions spring not out of the dust nor trouble out of the ground.

They have largely contributed to their own ruin.

They have made Wings for thy Judgments, which made them come so swiftly upon
them.

Their Sins have been sure Pullies to draw on unexpected Wrath.

Sin is the Venomous Root out of which springs all Calamities.

Vengeance like a Blood-hound, hunteth and finds out the Guilty.

Their Life spends in Grief, and their days in sighing; their Strength
fails because of their Iniquity.

They have trodden the Paths of Death, else they had not met with the Drawn
Sword of thy Displeasure.

They have necessitated thee to chastise them.

Their Sin has burned hot, and has set on fire the Train of Gods Wrath.

They have strung Gods Bow with the Cords of Iniquity.

Their own Wickedness has corrected them, and their own Backslidings have cast
them down, as Trees and Garments are eaten up with Moths and Worms which they
breed themselves.

The Vapors of Sin have ascended, that have made such thundering in the Clouds.

Like Thunderbolts and such fearful Meteors, that fall upon the Earth from
whence they had their original.

Their Iniquities are gone over their Heads like a heavy Burden.

The Deluge of Impiety drowned the Old World.

The Fire of Lust fetched fire from Heaven upon Sodom.

The Stinking Coruption of Manners breed the Plague.

They have broken the Hedge, therefore the Serpent has bit them.

They have eaten the forbidden Fruit, therefore the Curse is upon them.

Their Quails are sauced with thy Wrath.

Sin has been the Herald that has gone before, therefore Afflictions are the
Attendants that follow after.

They have made paths in Sin, therefore thou have made paths in Judgment.

They are eating the Fruit of their own Ways, and are entangled in their own
Devices.

They have rewarded Evil unto themselves.

The Steps of their Strength are straightened, their own Counsels have cast them
down.

The Effects of their Transgressions are heavy upon them.

Is not their Condition heavier than their Complaint, and their Stroke heavier
than their Groanings?

O Lord our God their Sores are not so great but thou can salve them.

The Lord upholdeth all them that fall, and raises up them who are bowed down.

In regard that Sin has been a means to bring them into Suffering, grant that
Suffering may be a means to bring them out of Sin.

Write their Sin legible in their Sorrows.

Cause their Chastisements to be remedies not ruins to them.

Cause the Arrows of Vengeance to wound the Old Man of Sin.

Let the Rod beat out the Moths.

Cause the rough File to take away the Rust.

Make the bitter Pills, take away the peccant Humors.

Let their be no worse consequences of their Afflictions than the purging away
their Iniquity and the taking away their Sin.

That the Waters of Affliction may so season their Earthen Vessels, that they
may be freed from all tincture of Sin and Corruption.

The more Correction the less Corruption we beseech thee.

If the Furnace be seven times hotter, cause it to make them seven times better.

In regard thou do bring them through the Fire, refine them as Silver is
refined, and try them as Gold is tried.

That they may learn Obedience by the things that they suffer.

Cause the pollishing of those Stones to make them fit for the Building of the
Temple.

That their Chast'ning may yield unto them the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness.

Open their Ears to Discipline.

That all the Black Lines of Affliction may lead to the true Center of
Happiness.

That thy Rods may become Sermons.

That they may hear the Rod and who has appointed it.

Put Wisdom into their Inward Parts, and Undestanding into their Hearts.

Add Instruction to Correction, that they may be corrigible by the Rod, lest
thou send thy Axe.

That they may learn by Correction, lest thou bring them to Destruction.

That they may be as Sea-marks unto them, that they in future beware of the
dangerous Rocks that lie hid under the smooth Waters of Sin.

Cause them to feel the weight of their Sin, as well as the weight of their
Punishment.

^ake them to know their Trans^^^^^^on and their Sin, that they (...) be truly
humbled, that thou, ^^^vest put an end to all their Tra^^dies and turn away
thine Anger and comfort them.

Deliver them that are big with Grief.

Tho they have lain among the Pots, that they may be as the Wings of a Dove
covered with Silver, and his Feathers of Yellow Gold.

Cause the Night of Sorrow to vanish by the appearance of the Sun of Mercy,
like the Sun of Righteousness with Healing in his Wings.

That their Afflictions may be Preparatives for future Blessings, and better
Hearts to enjoy them.

That thou may make them glad according to the days wherein thou have
afflicted them, or the years wherein they have seen Evil.

Thou have watehed over them to break them down, to root them out, and to
destroy them; now watch over them to build and to plant.

In the interim help them to take up their Contentment in they Appointment.

That they may say Amen to Gods Amen.

If they cannot read Love in the Hands and Face of God, by reason of Frowns and
Strokes, teach them to draw by the Vail, and read Love in the Heart of God; and
cry out the Thoughts of God are Thoughts of Love and Peace

That they may trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon their God.

They 'ave lost the Comforts which they could not keep, give them to keep the
Comforts which they cannot lose.

In regard their Cisterns are broken, lead them to the Fountain.

Remember thy Footstool in the day of thine Anger.

Oh set bounds to those Seas.

Don't always Chide, keep not thine Anger for ever.

Don't triumph in farther Executions.

Let thy Compassions say, It is enough.

Plow not all the day to Sow.

Their strength is not as the strength of Stones.

Neither is their Flesh of Brass.

Thou know their Frame, remember they are but Dust.

If thou should be extreme in marking what is done amiss, who is able to
abide thy Wrath.

Let it not be long before thou heal the Stroke of their Wound.

Regard their Affliction when thou hear their Cry.

Does the Wild Ass bray when he has Grass, or loweth the Ox over his Fodder?

Deep calls unto Deep at the noise of thy Water-spouts, thy Waves and thy
Billows are gone over them.

Will thou break a Leaf driven with the Wind? Will thou pursue the dry Stubble?

Remember them in their low estate, for thy mercies endure for ever.

Tho thou Chasten them sore, give thm not over unto Death.

Tho thou take Vengeance of their Inventions, yet forgive them: Psalm. 99. 8.

Be their Defense and Refuge in ^he day of their Trouble, that they may sing of
thy Power.

Give Power unto the Faint and them that have no Might.

Break the Yoke from their Neck, burst their Bonds, command De^iverance for
them.

Let not the Needy always be forgotten, let not the Expectation of the Poor
perish for ever.

Raise the Poor out of the Dust, and the Needy out of the Dunghill.

Set them high from Affliction and make them Families like a Flock.

Bring back their Souls from the Pit, and enlighten them with the Light of the
Living.

The Conclusion.
GRant that all thy Dispensations to us may be a means to further us in that
great Work; in making our Calling and Election sure.

That in this our day we may improve our Talents, get Oil in our Lamps, Grace
in our Hearts; that we may be owned by the Bridegroom at his coming.

Make us live Spiritually before we die Naturally.

That the Temple of Grace may be raised before the Tabernacle of Nature be
taken down.

That our Souls may be fit to be taken into Heaven, before our Bodies be fit to
be put into the Earth.

That the second Birth may have place in us, least the second Death have power
over us.

Let our Prayers be as Incense and the Lifting up our Hands as an acceptable
Sacrifice.

Lord kindle our Sacrifice from Heaven.

That our Prayers may be as a Key to unlock the Bowels of Mercy.

Return Answers of Peaec into our own Bosoms.

That the Trade we drive in Prayer may increase our Stock of Grace.

We depend upon thee, for we of our selves can do nothing.

Our Strength is never so un trusty, as when it is most trusted.

Thou know what we have to do and suffer before our course be finished.

All Futurities are treasured up in God.

Thou know Sin has cut the Lock where our Strength lay.

We have lost the Rudder of Free Will.

Oh whither will the turbulen^ Waves of our Corrupt Affections carry us, if
thou do not come to us and help us, and stay the rageing of the Sea, and
command ^ Calm?

If thy Presence go along with us we shall have Rest.

Let thy everlasting Arms be under us.

Put thy Left Hand under our Head, and let thy Right Hand embrace us.

If thou do not provide us a Pillar of a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire
by Night: If thou do not fight our Battles and make our Way plain before us,
we shall never reach Canaan.

Cover thou our Heads in a day of Battle, and teach our Hands to War and our
Fingers to Fight.

Our Souls have broke their Wings, thou only can restore us, therefore enable
us that we may mount up with Wings as Eagles, that we may run and not be weary,
that we may walk and not faint.

If the Heavenly Bodies did not move, there would be no Motion here below.

When thou did not lead Israel on they took up their Standings.

Enlarge our Steps under us, that our Feet do not slide.

Gird us with Strength, for thou art our Rock, our Fortress, our Deliverer, the
Strength in whom we will trust, our Buckler, the Horn of our Salvation and high
Tower.

If the Face of the Sun be intercepted, the Moon loses her Light; when thou
hidest thy Face we are in Darkness.

Because thou art our Strength we will wait upon thee, for God is our Defense.

Unto thee our Strength will we sing, for God is our Defense, the God of our
Mercy.

Stir up thy Strength and come and save us.

That the Place of our Defense may be Munition of Rocks, that Bread may be
given unto us, that our Waters may be sure.

Advance and confirm all our Resolutions for doing Good, give a Prevailing
Issue to all our Endeavors, and cause Blessed Success to attend all our good
Enterprises.

If there be any good Desires in us, thou have begun them; perform them until
the day of Jesus Christ.

Send Auxiliary Graces to actuate the dull Habits of Inherent Graces.

That the Buds of our Good Desires may blossom into Resolutions, and that those
Blossoms may come to such perfection as to produce the Fruit of good Actions.

That we may not only purpose to be religious, but religious to purpose.

That we may not only desire but endeavor, and give thou that blessing to our
Endeavors, that they may be successful, that we may do that which is well
pleasing unto thee.

When we press forward toward the high Price of our Calling, suffer not any
discouragment to fasten upon us.

Suffer us not to unbend our Resolutions for Heaven.

Suffer not the Earth to put out the Fire.

Let not the things of the World choke our Zeal, nor stifle the Motions of the
Spirit.

Tho all the Instruments sound, suffer us not to fall down to the Image that
Nebuchadnezzar has set up.

Suffer not Secular Proviso's to blunt the edge of our Zeal, nor the things of
the World to eat out the Heart of Religion.

Suffer not the Worlds Silver Trumpet to sound a Retreat, to call us off from
the Pursuit of Heaven.

Let not the Music of the World charm us asleep.

Keep Satan from cuting the Sinews of our Endeavors.

Suffer not the Darts of Temptation to pierce through the Armor of our Resolution.

Suffer not our good Resolutions to be vanquished by the Impetuousness of our
base sensual Affections.

Go thou along with us through the Crowd of Opposition.

Keep us from being worried with the power of Sin.

Although we cannot be kept altogether from falling, keep us from falling
altogether.

Keep us from being carried into any ways that shall dishonor the Gospel.

Hold us by the Right Hand, thou art the Lord our God, therefore encourage us
and help us.

Direct us in this Maze of Life and in the Buffle of the World.

Let the Spirit of Truth guide us in all Truth.

Give us a Safe Conduct through all Casualty, hide our lives with Christ in God.

Keep us by thy Power through Faith unto Salvation.

In large our Hearts, that we may run in the Way of thy Commandments.

Suffer us not to truck our Faith for our Liberty.

Confirm us unto the end, that we may be blameless in the Day of our Lord Jesus.

In regard our Impatient and Immoderate Desires after Carnal Pleasures always
return laden with an Intolerable Burden of Grief and Sorrow, and that Sin
loses what Repentance gains, therefore Caution us.

Put thy Fear in our Hearts, that we may not depart from thy Statutes.

Sins Gilded Pills are the Forerunners of Bitter Potions, therefore work in us
a dislike of them.

Keep us from catching at the Bait of Pleasure, lest we hang upon the Hook of
perpetual Perdition.

Order our Steps, and uphold us with thy Free Spirit.

Cause Faith and Fear to go hand in hand, that Faith may keep us cheerful, and
that Fear may keep us serious; that Faith may keep us from sinking in Despair,
and that Fear may keep us from floating in Presumption.

Why should we despair, God can help us? Why should we presume, God can cross
us?

That a holy Alacrity may be tempered with a gracious Humility.

Keep our Feet from falling, that we may walk before thee in the Light of the
Living.

Let us hear the Still Voice behind us, when we turn to the Right hand or the
Left.

The Lord is our Shepherd.

The Shepherd when he sees his Sheep straying out of their Bounds, he calls out
unto them.

Our Shepherd is the Living Lord, who is acquainted with all our Ways, and
pondereth all our Goings.

When thou O Lord feast us Wandering out of our Gospel Rules, lift up thy
Voice; either the voice of thy Word or the voice of thy Messengers, or the
Voice of our Consciences; or the Voice of thy Spirit: That we may return to the
green pastures and to the still waters.

Give Light unto our Understandings, Order in our Affections, Pliableness in
our Will, that we may be exemplary in our Lives.

Deliver us not only from the Sins of the Times; but from the Times of Sin.

That we may be found always moving in the Orb of Obedience.

Make us so Honorable as to be born of thee, so Wise as to know thee, so
Beautiful that we may bear thy Image, so Rich as to be rich in Faith, so
Victorious as to overcome the World, so happy as to enjoy thy self, so blessed
with peace as to have the peace of God, which passes all understanding; then
we shall be sure of true joy, the joy of the Holy Ghost.

Work our Names in the Frame of thine own Glory.

Make us blessed in this Life, happy in Death, and glorious after Death.

Make out unto us that thy Mercy is ours to pardon us, that thy Blood is ours
to cleanse us, thy Merits ours to justify us, thy Righteousness ours to cloth
us, thy Spirit ours to lead us, thy Grace ours to enrich us, and thy Glory ours
to crown us.

Make us Masters of so much Consideration, that we are swimming down the Stream
of Time, and it will not belong before we lanch into the Ocean of Eternity.

Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom.

That we may live in thy fear and die in thy favor, rest in thy peace, arise
by thy power, and remain in thy glory for ever and ever.

This and whatsoever else we should ask for our selves or any other, let it be
granted unto us and to them, upon the alone account of our great Lord and ever
blessed Redeemer, who was given for us, who was made a Curse for us, who
inexpressibly suffered for us, who satisfied Divine Justice for us, who was
made reconciliation for us, who died and rose again for us: Who prepared glory
for us, and ever makes Intercession for us. For him we give all praises, in
him we ever desire to be found, rendering unto the most glorious Majesty of
Heaven, as we for ever will acknowledge most due, all Honor, Glory, Power,
Might, Reverence, Fear, and Obedience, World without end. Amen.

The Blessing with which the Author used to dismiss his Congregation.
THe Almighty Power of God the Father vanquish and overcome whatsoever may
hinder you from him, and give you strength to do his acceptable Will in all
things: The most Bright Wisdom of God the Son inlighten you and lead you to all
things which may bring you forward to him. The Unspeakable and Super-abounding
Love of God the Holy Ghost pierce through all the Oppositions in you, kindle and
unite your love to him with a most ardent and pleasing turning, all your Powers
and Strength, that you may follow his sweet Calling and most amorous drawing:
Whereunto the more than Most Glorious Trinity has called you: Namely, From the
Love of this Deceitful World to the Enjoyment of God and his Riches, and
Unspeakable Blessedness; so that by Grace you may be that which you are not nor
can be by Nature. To whom be all Honor, Praise, Obedience, and Reverence. Amen.

FINIS.

