A PLAIN INTRODUCTION TO THE Art of Physic. CONTAINING The Fundamentals, And
Necessary Preliminaries to Practice.

Whereby the Reading of Practical Authors will be rendered easy and
intelligible to the Young Student.

To which is added, The Materia Medica contracted.

And Alphabetical Tables of the Virtues of Roots, Barks, Woods, Herbs, Flowers,
Seeds, Fruits, Juices and Gums, of Animals and things taken from them, of
Minerals, etc.

Also a Collection of choice Medicines Chemical and Galenical.

Together with A different way of making the most celebrated Compositions in
the Apothecaries Shops.

By J. PECHEY of the Col. of Physicians in London.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1697.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Treatise, being an Introduction to the Art of Physic, I have,
in the first Part, collected from the best Institutions, the Fundamentals of
Physic, and have spoken briefly of Elements, Temperaments, Qualities, Sexes,
Ages, and the various Temperaments of them, and of native Heat, and of Humors,
viz. Blood, Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy, Chyle: Also of natural excrementitious
Humors, as Milk, Seed, menstruous Blood, yellow Choler, Serum, the Humor of
the Stomach, Spittle, pancreatic Juice, Lympha, and Slime of the Guts; also of
Parts in general, of a Faculty in general, of Action in general, of the
internal and external Senses, of animal Motion, of the Pulse, Circulation of
the Blood, Respiration, Chylification, Sanguification, the peristaltick Motion
of the Guts, Generation, Nutrition, of things non-natural in general, as of
Air, and the like. But I have treated more largely of Meat and Drink, because
they are of great Importance with respect to the Preservation of Health. I have
also treated briefly of Sleep and Watching, of Motion and Rest, and of the
Non-naturals, and of things contrary to Nature, of Signs, a Crisis, and of
Urine. And to conclude this Part, I have treated of Glisters, Vomits, Purges,
Bleeding, Leeches, Baths, Frictions, Ligatures, actual and potential Cauteries,
Cupping-Glasses, and Issues; of Physical Weights and Measures, and the way of
composing the various Forms of Medicines.

The second Part, which I call, Materia Medica contracted, was chiefly
collected from Etmuller and Marggravius.

Lastly, I have added, Marggrav's Shop-Compositions, and a Collection of such
Chemical Medicines as I judge most useful.

J. PECHEY.
From the Angel and Crown in Basing-Lane, London, June 24, 1697.
THE INDEX.
A
AGES page 6 Adolescency ibid. Anger p. 10, 92 Action in general p. 43
Attraction p. 57 Air d. 60 Aliment p. 62 Asparagus p. 69 Artichoaks p. 70
Apples ibid. Apricocks p. 71 Ancurism p. 140 Alexipharmicks p. 156
Alexipharmicks thick p. 161 Apozem p. 182 Asses Blood p. 192 Asses Ear ibid.
Asses Milk p. 200 Asses Dung ibid. Asses Reins ibid. Album Grecum p. 204 Ants
p. 224 Ants, their Oil and Spirit ibid. Amethist p. 227 Adamant ibid. Alabaster
p. 228 Armenian ibid. Aurum potabile p. 229 Aurum fulminans ibid. Antimony p.
232 Arsenick p. 233 Allom p. 237 Allom purified ibid. Ambar-grease p. 240
Animals p. 272 Aqua vitae p. 283 Aqua fortis p. 364 Ambar, its volatile Salts
p. 387 Antimony, its Cinnabar ibid. Antimony diaphoretick p. 389
B
BAldness p. 7 Blood ibid. Blood menstruous p. 20 Bread p. 62 Beer p. 69 Beans
ibid. Beef p. 74 Bran ibid. Bacon p. 75 Butter ibid. Birds in general p. 76
Black-birds p. 77 Barbels p. 80 Bowling p. 87 Bleeding p. 139 Blood, its
Quantity p. 141 Blisters p. 151 Bandage of Issues p. 154 Baths p. 155 Bolus p.
186 Boars Tooth p. 199 Boars Stones ibid. Boars Dung ibid. Boars Urine ibid.
Bulls Horns p. 200 Bulls Gall ibid. Bulls Pisle p. 203 Bone of a Stags Heart p.
207 Badgers Fat p. 217 Bears Grease ibid. Bees p. 222 Bole-armenick p. 226 Bath
Waters p. 227 Boodstone p. 228 Bole ibid. Bismuth p. 230 Barks p. 248
Brimstone, its Decoction p. 290 Benedictum Laxativum p. 306 Balsoms p. 345
Apoplectick ibid. Hypnotick p. 346 Stomachick ibid. Vterine ibid. For breeding
Teeth p. 347 For the Hands ibid. Balsom of Sulphur p. 366
C
CArtilage p. 4 Childhood p. 6 Choler p. 7 Chyle ibid. Courses p. 20, 91 Calf
p. 34 Childbed p. 36 Circulation of the Blood p. 46 Chylification p. 49 Capers
p. 70 Cabbage ibid. Carrots ibid. Cucumbers p. 72 Cheese p. 75 Capon p. 76
Carps p. 79 Crabs ibid. Cavyaro p. 80 Cod-fish ibid. Catching-cold p. 87 Cause
procatar tick p. 99 Cause antecedent ibid. Cause containing p. 100 Cacochymy
ibid. Crisis p. 106 Crisis, its cause ibid. Children p. 141 Cupping-glasses p.
149 Cupping-glasses, their Use ibid. Cautery actual p. 150 Cautery potential
ibid. Cordials p. 156 Cordial saline p. 157 Cataplasm p. 191 Consultation p.
192 Clymacteric Years p. 198 Conjunctions of the Moon p. 199 Cow's Marrow p.
201 Cow's Dung ibid. Cow's Milk p. 202 Castor p. 205 Castor, its Use ibid. Cats
Fat p. 206 Civet p. 207 Crabs p. 219 Crab's-eyes p. 220 Carps Gall p. 221
Cocle-shells ibid. Cutle-bone ibid. Cantharides p. 223 Chalk p. 226 Coral p.
227 Copper p. 230 Cobaltum p. 241 Chalcitis ibid. Cadmia ibid. Com. Decoction
for a Glister p. 289 Candied things p. 304 Candied Roots of Acorus ibid.
Candied Roots of Succory ibid. Candied Roots of Elecampane ib. Candied Roots of
Eringo ibid. Candied Roots of Satyrion ibid. Candied Roots of Scorsonera ibid.
Candied Roots of Comfry ibid. Candied Ginger ibid. Candied Orange Peel ibid.
Candied Bark of Citron ibid. Candied Stalks of Lettice ibid. Candied Orange
Flowers ibid. Candied Citron Flowers ibid. Candied Berberries ibid. Candied
Cherries ibid. Candied Walnuts ibid. Candied Nutmegs p. 305 Candied Currants
ibid. Candied Quinces ibid. Conserves of the Flow of Bettony p. 305 Conserves
of Borrage ibid. Conserves of Marygold Flowers ibid. Conserves of Succoory
ibid. Conserves of Eyebright ibid. Conserves of Mallows ibid. Conserves of
water Lillies ibid. Conserves of Peony ibid. Conserves of pale Roses ibid.
Conserves of Rosmary Flowers ibid. Conserves of Sage ibid. Conserves of Violets
p. 306 of the Herbs Wormwood ibid. of the Herbs Fumitory ibid. of the Herbs
Balm ibid. of the Herbs Mint ibid. of the Herbs Wood Sorrel ibid. Confectio
Hamech p. 307 Caryocostinum p. 308 Confection of Alkermes p. 314 Confection of
Hyacinth ibid. Cerat of Sanders p. 359 Cerat of Galen ibid. Chemistry p. 362
Cinnamon, its Oil p. 375 Camphir, its Oil p. 380 Crocus Metallorum p. 383
D
DIseases p. 2 Death p. 7 Diverse p. 48 Digestion p. 49 Drink p. 61 Deer p. 74
Duck p. 76 Despair p. 93 Disease simular p. 96 Disease organick ibid. Disease
universal p. 97 Disease particular ibid. Disease contagious ibid. Diseases
pandemii ibid. Diseases epidemick ibid. Disease endemick ibid. Diseases
sporadic ibid. Disease acute ibid. Disease benign ibid. Disease malign ibid.
Disease great p. 98 Disease small ibid. Disease simple ibid. Disease compound
ibid. Disease primary ibid. Disease secundary ibid. Disease idiopathic ibid.
Disease hereditary ibid. Declination of a Disease ibid. Days called indices p.
106. Days called contemplabiles ibid. Days void ibid. Dog Days p. 142
Diaphoreticks p. 162 Diet-drink sudorifick p. 165 Diuretics p. 167 Diuretics,
their Use p. 171 Decoction p. 182 Diseases counterfeited p. 194 Diet to be
varied p. 197 Dogs p. 204 Dogs Grease ibid. Dogs Brain p. 205 Deers Suet ibid.
Ducks Blood p. 217 Dew p. 227 Diamoron p. 302 Diacarthamum p. 308 Diacatholicon
ibid. Diaphenicon ibid. Diascordium p. 313 Diasenna p 315 Diaturbith with
Rhubarb ibid.
E
ELements p. 2 Eunuchs p. 18 Eggs p. 19, 77 Experiments static p. 56 Eels p. 79
Exercise p. 86 Emulsion p. 186 Emperical Physicians p. 197 Elk Horns p. 199
Elks Hoof ibid. Eels Fat p. 219 Eagle Stone p. 227 Elixir proprietatis p. 285
Electuary solutive of Prunes p. 309 Electuary lenitive p. 310 Electuary of the
Juice of Roses p. 311 Extract catholic p. 333 Ens veneris p. 362
F
FErmentation p. 8 Phlegm p. 11 Faculty in general p. 42 Faculty animal ibid.
Faculty natural p. 43 Filberts p. 71 Flesh in general p. 72 Fish in general p.
78 Fishing p. 86 Fowling ibid. Frictions ibid. Fear p. 93 Falling Sickness p.
109 French Pox ibid. Fillet for bleeding p. 147 Fainting ibid. Frogs p. 213
Foxes Fat p. 217 Flowers p. 256 Fruits p. 264
G
GEneration p. 57 Garlic p. 70 Geese p. 77 Gudgeons p. 80 Glisters p. 136
Glisters of Oil of sweet Almonds p. 137 Glister of Tobacco ibid. Gargarisms p.
190 Goats Horn p. 205 Goats Milk ibid. Goose Fat p. 218 Goose Tongue ibid.
Granat p. 227 Glister sharp p. 289 Glister carminative ibid.
H
HYgene p. 2 Hoariness p. 7 Humors b. 10 Humor excrementitious p. 13 Humor
digestive p. 25 Hemorrhoidal Blood p. 36 Hunger p. 48 Hares p. 75 Hens p. 76
Honey p. 81 Hatred p. 93 Hope ibid. Hartshorn p. 161 Hopes of Recovery p. 196
Harts-born calcined p. 207 Horse-dung p. 208 Horse Stones ibid. Horse Hoofs p.
209 Hedg-hog ibid Hares Down p. 211 Hares Eyes p. 212 Hares Blood ibid. Hares
Brains ibid. Hogs Gall p. 214 Hogs Lard ibid Hogs Dung p. 215 Honey p. 222
Hyacinth p. 227 Herbs p. 250 Honey of Mercury p. 301 of Rosmary ibid. of Roses
solutive p. 302 Hiera with Coloquintida p. 310 Hiera picra ibid. Hiera simple
p. 316 Hungary Water p. 377 Hartshorn, its Spirit p. 382
J.
JVvenility p. 6 Joy p. 10 Increase of a Disease p. 98 Itch p. 139 Issues p.
151 Issues, their Use ibid. Julep p. 184 Juvantia p. 198 Ivory p. 208 Jasper p.
227 Iron p. 230 Juices liquid p. 268 Juices thickened ibid. Julep of Roses p.
291 Jalap, its Rosin p. 373
K
KId p. 74
L
LIgaments p. 4 Lympha p. 28 Lettice p. 70 Leeks ibid. Lemons p. 71 Lamb p. 74
Larks p. 77 Lampreys p. 79 Lobsters p. 80 Love p. 92 Leprosy p. 139 Leeches p.
148 Ligatures p. 150 Leaf Gold p. 161 Linctus p. 186 Laedentia p. 198 Lungs of
a Lamb p. 199 Lampreys Liver p. 221 Lemnian Earth p. 226 Lapis Calaminaris p.
228 Lapis Judaicus ibid. Lapis Lazuli ibid. Lead p. 230 Litharge p. 332
Laudanum opiatum p. 334 Liquor stiptic p. 363
M
MIxture p. 2 Motion peristaltick p. 53 Manner of eating p. 63 Melons p. 72
Mutton p. 74 Milk p. 75 Motion p. 86 Mirth p. 92 Melancholy p. 139 Men old p.
145 Medicines acid p. 157 Measures p. 180 Medicinal Wines p. 188 Medicines not
to be discovered p. 194 Milk, its Use in general p. 202 Mares Milk p. 208 Man's
Breath p. 209 Man's Spittle ibid. Man's Urine p. 210 Man's Bones p. 211 Moss on
dead Men's Sculls ibid. Membrane p. 4 Melancholy p. 11 Milk p. 14 Motion Animal
p. 44 Meat p. 61 Mouse Dung p. 212 Mole calcined p. 215 Millepedes p. 223 Marl
p. 226 Mineral Waters ibid. Metallic Recrements p. 241 Mysy ibid. Meals p. 266
Minerals p. 274 Mithridat p. 322 Magistery of Coral p. 398 Mercurius dulcis p.
369 -- Precipitate white p. 370 -- Precipitate red ibid.
N
NAtive Heat p. 8 Nervous Juice p 17 Nutrition p. 54 Nature, its Strength p.
193 Nephritick Stone p. 227 Niter p. 235 -- its sweet Spirit p. 384
O
OEsophagus p. 25 Onions p. 70 Oranges p. 71 Olives p. 72 Oisters p. 79 Oil of
Olives p. 81 Oil of sweet Almonds ibid. Orifice large p. 146 Opiats p. 172
Office of a Physician p. 192 Oppositions of the Moon p. 199 Oker p. 226
Osteocolla p. 228 Oxymel simple p. 302 of Squills ibid. Opiat quieting p. 315
Oils prepared by Expression of sweet Almonds p. 340 Oils prepared by Expression
of the Seeds of Lettice ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of the Seeds of
Henbane ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Laurel ibid. Oils prepared by
Expression of Mace ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Walnuts ibid. Oils
prepared by Expression of Eggs ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of ripe Olives
ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of unripe Olive ibid. Oils prepared by
Expression of Palm ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Roses p. 341 Oils
prepared by Expression of Flax ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Nigella
ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Peppies ibid. Oils prepared by Expression
of Wormwood ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of the Flowers of Dill ibid. Oils
prepared by Expression of the Flowers of Camomile ibid. Oils prepared by
Expression of Quinces ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of the Flowers of St.
John's-wort ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Jasmin ibid. Oils prepared by
Expression of Wall-flowers ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Lilly of the
Valleys ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Marjoram ibid. Oils prepared by
Expression of crisped Mint ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Nep ibid. Oils
prepared by Expression of the Flowers of water Lillies ibid. Oils prepared by
Expression of Roses complete p 342 Oils prepared by Expression of Roses
omphacine ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Rue ibid. Oils prepared by
Expression of Scorpions ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Almonds ibid. Oils
prepared by Expression of Nightshade ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of
Trefoyl ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of the Flowers of Violets ibid. Oils
prepared by Expression of Mullein ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Capers
ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Castor ibid. Oils prepared by Expression
of Saffron p. 343 Oils prepared by Expression of Euphorbium ibid. Oils prepared
by Expression of Orris ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Earth Worms ibid.
Oils prepared by Expression of Mastich p. 344 Oils prepared by Expression of
the Mucilages ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Myrtles ibid. Oils prepared
by Expression Nard ibid. Oils prepared by Expression of Foxes p. 345 Ointments
p. 348 astringent ibid. Aegyptiac ibid. Agrippae p. 349 of Camphor ibid. of
Marshmallows simple ibid. of Marshmallows compound ibid. of the Apostles
ibid. Arthanita p. 350 Golden ibid. Basilicon p. 351 of Lime ibid.
Diapompholigos ibid. Elecampane with Mercury ibid. Martiatum ibid. Nerve p. 352
for the Eyes ibid. Nutritum ibid. Pectoral p. 353 Pomatum ibid. Populeon ibid.
Potable ibid.
P.
Physic p. 1 Physiology p. 2 Pathology ibid. Parts of the Body p. 4 Puberty p.
6 Pericardium p. 24 Pancreas p. 27 Pancreatick Juice ibid. People rustic p. 30
Parts in general p. 38 Parts solid p. 39 Parts fluid p. 40 Parts organick ibid.
Parts inorganick ibid. Parts principal ibid. Parts ministering ibid. Parts
simular p. 41 Parts dissimular ibid. Parts animal p. 42 Parts natural ibid.
Parts vital ibid. Pulse p. 45 Pease p. 69 Parsley p. 70 Parsnips ibid. Pears p.
71 Peaches ibid. Plumbs p. 72 Pork p. 75 Pidgeon p. 76 Pheasants ibid. Plovers
p. 77 Peacocks ibid. Partridges ibid. Pikes p. 79 Plaice p. 80 Perch p. 80,
221 Passions of the Mind p. 92 Preservation of Health p. 95. Paroxism p. 99
Period of a Disease ibid. Plethora p. 100 Pulse p. 107 Pulse of Children p. 108
Piss Lecture p. 114 Purges p. 138 Palsy p. 139 Plague p. 141 Pains in the Loins
p. 153 Potion p. 185 Pills p. 187 Pessary p. 190 Pultis p. 192 Physician p. 193
Patients Errors p. 194 Pisle of a Horse p. 209 Peacocks Dung p. 218 Pikes Jaw
p. 221 Pearls p. 227 Pumex Stone p. 228 Plumbago p. 242 Pompholix ibid.
Petroleum ibid. Petrolius's purging Vinegar p. 288 Philonium Mesues p. 314
Powders Aromatic of Roses p. 316 Powders of Calaminth ibid. Powders of Galingal
p. 317 Powders of Lacca ibid. Powders of Orris ibid. Powders Diamargarit frigid
p. 318 Powders Diambra ibid. Powders Dianthos ibid. Powders Diarhodon abbatis
p. 319 Powders Diatragacanth frigid ibid. Powders of the three Sanders ibid.
Powders Pulvis liberans p. 320 Powders Nephritick p. 321 Powders for the Bite
of a mad Dog ibid. Powders of Vipers ibid. Powders for a Dentrifice p. 322
Powders for the same ibid. Powders for the Head ibid. Powders for the Worms p.
323 Powders digestive ibid. Powders against Miscarriage ibid. Powders to hasten
Delivery p. 324 Powders Hysteric ibid. Powders for the Bloody Flux ibid.
Powders against Hemorhagies p. 325 Powders to provoke sneezing ibid. Pills
Aleophagine p. 331 Pills Agarick ibid. Pills Golden p. 332 Pills Cochiae ibid.
Pills of Hounds-tongue with Castor ibid. Pills Foetid p. 333 Pills Hydropick p.
334 Pills Hier a with Agarick p. 334 Pills Iliack p. 334 Pills Lapis Lazuli
ibid. Pills Mastich p. 335 Pills Niter ibid. Pills Pestilential ibid. Pills
Sine quibus p. 336 Pills of Tartar ibid. Pills of Ammoniacum ibid. Pills
Hysteric p. 337 Pills Mesenterick ibid. Pills Mercury ibid. Pills for a
Gonorrhea ibid. Pills for a virulent Gonorrhea p. 338 Pills of boiled
Turpentine ibid. Pills for the Cholick ibid. Pills Poterius's Catholic ibid
Plasters p. 355 of Bettony ibid. Ceruss ibid. Diapalma ibid. Diachylon simple
356 Diachylon with Gums ibid. Grysaeum ibid. of Melilot ibid. of Red Lead p.
357 of Mucilages ibid. Oxycroceum ibid. of Frogs with Mercury p. 358 for
Ruptures ibid. Stiptic p. 359 of Sulphur p. 360 of Tobacco ibid. Magnetic ibid.
for Issues p. 361
Q
QVality p. 3 Quantity of Meats p. 64 Quinces p. 70 Quails p. 78 Questions to
be asked the sick p. 196 Quicksilver p. 231
R
REspiration p. 47 Regions p. 60 Rice p. 69 Radishes p. 70 Rabits p. 75 Rubbing
p. 87 Rest superfluous p. 89 Relapse p. 99 Rhinoceros p. 213 Ruby p. 227 Roots
p. 244 Rose Vinegar p. 287 Rob of Acacia p. 303 of Berberries ibid. Rob simple
ibid. Raisins purging p. 305
S
SPinal Marrow p. 4 Signs p. 5 Sexes p. 6 Summer p. 9 Shaking ibid. Sleep ibid.
Sweat p. 10, 29 Seed p. 17 Stones p. 18 Serum p. 24 Spittle p. 25 Slime of the
Guts p. 29 Smiths p. 30 Snot p. 35 Spirit p. 36 Sense external p. 43 Sense
internal ibid. Sanguification p. 52 Samphire p. 70 Strawberries p. 72 Sparrows
p. 77 Stares p. 78 Sturgeon p. 79 Sprats p. 80 Salmon ibid. Soles ibid. Salt p.
81 Sleep p. 82 Sleep superfluous p. 83 Sleep after Dinner p. 84 Shooting p. 87
Sorrow p. 92 Shame p. 93 Solution of the Continuum p. 96 State of a Disease p.
98 Symptom p. 100 Sign diagnostick p. 101 Sign prognostic ibid. Sign
commemorative ibid. Sign healthy ibid. Sign unhealthy ibid. Sign pathognomonick
ibid. Signs of a Plethora p. 103 Signs of Cacochymy ibid. Signs of Wind ibid.
Sign critcal p. 105 Stone, its Sign p. 113 Stone p. 139 Scurvy ibid. Swooning
p. 147 Seton p. 151 Scarifications p. 155 Stones precious p. 161 Spirit
sulphurous ibid. Spirits volatile, urinous ibid. Spirits acid ibid. Serum p.
166 Suppository p. 190 Stone in a Cows Stomach p. 201 Stag p. 207 Stags Pisle
ibid. Snails ibid. Sheeps Lungs p. 212 Spiders p. 222 Spiders Web ibid. Spiders
Oil ibid. Saphyr p. 227 Smaragd ibid. Silver p. 229 Stone infernal ibid. Steel
p. 230 Sal Ammoniac p. 235 Sulphur p. 238 Sorry p. 241 Spodium p. 242 Sperma
Caeti ibid. Seeds p. 260 Sea things p. 276 Spirit of Vinegar p. 287 Syrup of
Vinegar p. 290 of the Juice of Sorrel ibid. of unripe Grapes ibid. of
Scurvy Grass p. 291 of Violets ibid. Wormwood p. 292 of Marshmallows ibid. of
Mugwort ibid. of Bettony p. 293 of the Oak of Jerusalem ibid. Bizantine simple
p. 294 of Maidenhair ibid. of Cloves ibid. of Cinnamon ibid. of Coral ibid. of
Succory with Rhubarb p. 295 Diacnicu ibid. of Fumitory p. 296 of Liquorish
ibid. of Hyssop p. 297 of Jujubes ibid. of Mint ibid. of Myrtles p. 298 of
Poppies ibid. of red Poppies ibid. of Purslain p. 299 of the five opening Roots
ibid. of dried Roses ibid. of Roses solutive ibid. of Roses solutive with Sena
p. 300 of Staechas ibid. of Comfry ibid. of Violets compound p. 301 Sugar
pearled p. 306 Sugar of Marshmallows ibid. Sparadrap p. 359 Spirit of Tartar
p. 367 Salt of Tartar ibid. Salt of Coral ibid. Saffron of Mars opening p. 371
Saffron of Mars astringent ibid. Salt of Mars p. 372 Sal Armoniack volatile
ibid. Salt, its sweet Spirit p. 385 Sal Prunella ibid.
T
THerapeutice p. 2 Temperament p. 3 Tendon p. 4 Thoracick Duct p. 15 Thymus p.
24 Thirst p. 26, 49 Tears p. 34 Things non-natural p. 59 Turkey p. 77 Thrushes
p. 78 Turtles ibid. Tench p. 80, 221 Turbit ibid. Trouts p. 80, 221 Things to
be evacuated p. 90 Transpiration insensible p. 91 Things contrary to Nature p.
95 Type p. 99 Toad p. 203 Toads, their Use p. 204 Talk p. 228 Tin p. 229
Tincture of Cinnamon p. 284 Tincture of Gujacum ibid. Tincture of Castor ibid.
Tincture of Saffron ibid. Tincture of Opium p. 286 Tincture of Steel ibid.
Treacle Vinegar p. 288 Theriaca Messues p. 313 Troches of Agarick p. 325
Troches White of Rhasis p. 326 Troches of Alhandal ibid. Troches of Winter
Cherries ibid. Troches white Pectoral p. 327 Troches of Capers ibid. Troches
Cypheos for Methridat ibid. Troches Hidecroi for Treacle p. 328 Troches Aliptae
moschatae ibid. Troches Gallia moschata p. 329 Troches of Myrh ibid. Troches of
Rhubarb ibid. Troches for a Gonorrhea ibid. Troches of Squill p. 330 Troches
Sealed Earth ibid. Troches of Vipers ibid. Tincture of Sulphur p. 365 Tincture
of Salt of Tartar p. 366 Tartar, its Oil p. 367 Tincture of Coral p. 368
Turbith Mineral p. 371
V
VIrility p. 6 Urine p. 31, 109 Vrinary Passages p. 32 Veal p. 74 Vinegar p. 80
Venery p 92 Urine white p. 111 Urine yellow ibid. Urine red ibid. Urine black
p. 112 Urine, its Smell ibid. Urine, its Taste ibid. Urine, its Consistence p.
313 Urine gross ibid. Urine thin ibid. Vomits, their Use p. 137, 187 Veins p.
140 Veins Jugular p. 142 Visits p. 196 Vipers p. 213 Unicorns Horn p. 217
Vitriol p. 236 Vitriol red p. 237 Vinegar of Squills p. 288 Venice Treacle p.
311 Vipers distilled p. 381 Vitriol, its Oil p. 362 Vitriol, its Spirit ibid.
W
WInter p. 9 Women hysteric p. 48 Winds p. 60 Water p. 64 Wine p. 66 Walnuts
p. 71 Whey p. 75, 203 Watchings p. 82 Walking p. 88 Weights p. 180 Water of all
Flowers p. 201 Woman's Milk p. 209 Woman's Secundine ibid. Wolfs Tooth p. 212
Wolfs Guts ibid. Worms p. 224 Worms, their Decoction ibid. Worm Water p. 226
Woods p. 250 Water of Sorrel p. 271 Water of Bettony ibid. Water of Holly
Leaves ibid. Water of Carduus ibid. Water of Centaury p. 278 Water of Celandine
ibid. Water of Succory ibid. Water of Scurvy Grass ibid. Water of Eyebright
ibid. Water of Fennel ibid. Water of Bean Flowers ibid. Water of
Strawberrics ibid. Water of Lavender Flowers ibid. Water of the Flowers of
Lilly of the Valleys ibid. Water of Roses ibid. Water of Elder Flowers ibid.
Water of Lime Flowers p. 279 Water of Oak Leaves ibid. Water of Fumitory
ibid. Water of Grass ibid. Water of Hyssop ibid. Water of Lettice ibid.
Water of Mallow Flowers ibid. Water of Balm ibid. Water of Honey ibid.
Water of Mint ibid. Water of red Poppies ibid. Water of Parsley ibid. Water
of Purslain ibid. Water of Penyroyal ibid. Water of Nightshade ibid. Water
of Frogs Spawn ibid. Water of unripe Walnuts p. 290 Water epileptio ibid.
Water antinephritic p. 281 Water for the Palsy ibid. Water hysteric p. 282
Water of Treacle ibid. Wormwood Wine p. 289 Wine, its Spirit p. 377
A Plain and Short INTRODUCTION TO THE Art of Physic. CONTAINING The
Fundamentals, And Necessary Preliminaries to Practice.
CHAP. I. Of Medicine in general.
Physic, both upon the account of its object, and the necessity of it, is a
most Noble Art.

It wholly consists of Practice; for all the parts of it are directed to
Healing: And therefore it is an Art, and not a Science; the end whereof is
Contemplation: And consequently, Treatises that are made up of Hypotheses, or
Suppositions, belong rather to Philosophy than Physic.

But it must be acknowledged, that there are some Diseases incurable, therefore
out of the reach of Physic; yet it is necessary to treat of them, that they
may be known as such, and foretold, that the Art may not be disgraced.

It Is said to be Conjectural only, by reason of him that exercises it, who can
only guess at Diseases and their Causes, the Quantity and Virtue of Medicines,
and the particular Proprieties of the Body; for it has as much certainty in it
as many other Arts; and to speak the Truth, what Certainty is there, besides
the first Truths, and Matters of Faith.

It is commonly divided into five parts, viz. Physiology, that Treats of
Natural Things: Hygiene, that Treats of Things non-natural, or Things necessary
for the preservation of Health; but yet sometimes hurting it: Pathology, that
Treats of Things contrary to Nature: Semeiotice, that shows the Signs of Things
contrary to Nature: Therapeutice, that Treats of the general way of Cure, by
Chyrurgery, Pharmacy, and Diet.

But Physiology does not properly belong to Physic, and therefore ought not to
be accounted a part of it; yet because it is usually proposed in Treatises of
this kind, I will briefly do so.

Things that are called Natural are seven, viz. Elements, Temperaments,
Humors, Spirits, Parts, Faculties, Actions; and among these, are to be
reckoned some other things which are treated of in Physiology, as Age, Sex, and
the like.

Elements are the most Simple Bodies, of which all other Bodies are first
composed, and at last dissolved. The union or conjunction of the Elements in
the Body is called mixture; and a Body made up of the Elements, is called mixed.

The Elements are Four, viz. Earth, Water, Air and Fire. The Chemists add Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, though improperly; for in some Bodies, for instance, Gold,
burnt Talc, Glass, you cannot find either of the three; and in other mixed
Bodies you may find more, as in the Humane Blood, Phlegm, Salt, Oil, Spirit and
Earth; and if we should allow that Salt, Sulphur and Mercury may be drawn from
some Bodies by the force of the Fire, it does not therefore follow, that they
were in them before as first Principles; for perhaps they were produced in them
by the Fire: Moreover, they are not perfectly Simple Bodies.

Temperament in general, is a convenient proportion of the Elements among
themselves, or is a symetrical proportion of the Qualities.

A Quality is a certain disposition of insensible Particles, constituting
sensible Parts; it is divided into First and Second. These Four are called the
first, Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness; and that which exceeds the rest,
denominates the Temperament.

The first Quality among Physicians is termed Actual and Potential; Actual,
which is perceived immediately by touching, as Heat in Fire, Coldness in Water,
and the like. It Is said Potential, when it is not immediately perceived by
touching, as Heat in Pepper, Coldness in Lettice.

The second Qualities are Colors, Sounds, Smells, Tastes, Gravity, Levity,
Hardness, Softness, Smoothness, Roughness, Rarity, Density, and the like.

An equal Temperament with respect to weight, consists in an exact mixture of
all the first Qualities. An equal Temperament with respect to Justice, as they
term it, is improperly called equal; for it is such a proportion of the first
Qualities as the Nature of the Mixture requires, whether they are in an equal
degree or not.

Temperament is divided into Partial and Total. A Partial Temperament is that
which is allotted to every part; as the temperament of the Brain, Heart, or the
like. A Temperament that is called Total is ascribed to the whole Mixture, and
is made up of such as are partial, as the Temperament of this or that Man.

Temperament is also divided into innate and acquired. The innate Temperament
is that which naturally belongs to a Man; the acquired is that which comes in
the course of years, by reason of things non-natural, or contrary to Nature.

All the Parts of the Body, according to themselves are hot and moist; yet with
respect one to another, some are said to be hot, cold, moist and dry. The
Heart, Blood, Spirits, Arteries, Veins, Lungs, Spleen, Liver, are counted hot;
but the Heart is reckoned the hottest.

Parts that are counted Cold, are the Bones, Cartilages, Tendons, Membranes,
Ligaments, Spinal Marrow, and the like.

The moist parts, are the Blood and other Humors, the Brain, and Spinal Marrow.

The dry parts are the Bones, the Cartilages, Tendons, Ligaments, Heart, Lungs,
Nails, Hair.

The signs of a hot and dry Temperament of the whole, are a quick and hard
Pulse, a dry habit of the Body, a brown Complexion, crisped Hair, of a brown or
black Color; for Heat feeds on the moisture of the Body, melts the Fat, and
drys up the Humors. The Appetite and Digestion are small, there is a proneness
to Anger, the Sleep is short and disturbed by reason of the heat of the
Spirits; Venery is excessive, by reason of the Acrimony of the Seed; the Wit is
Sharp, and the Body Active, because the Spirits are pure. The Italians and
Spaniards are so Constituted.

The signs of an hot and moist Temperament, are a large Pulse, but not frequent
nor hard; a Fat habit of the Body, but not very Fat; because that proceeds from
Frigidity and Moisture. The Complexion is florid and clear; the Hairs are
sometimes curled, and sometimes not, and not very Black; the Appetite and
Digestion are pretty good; the Sleep moderate and quiet, the Mind cheerful; and
Venery moderate.

The signs of a Cold and Moist Temperament are, a small and soft Pulse, a white
and smooth Skin, a soft and fat habit of Body, the Hair Yellow, and most
commonly strait, the Appetite great, and the Digestion good; the Sleep very
much, a drowsy Disposition, Wit small, an unfitness for Motion, Venery small.
And this is the Temperament of most of the Northern People.

The signs of a Cold and Dry Temperament are, a small Pulse, and somewhat hard;
the Skin somewhat rough, the habit of the Body dry, the Hair thin, Appetite and
Digestion small, Sleep shorter than in the Cold and Moist Temperament, little
or no inclination to Venery.

But it is to be noted, that you must not expect all these signs precisely in
these four Temperaments, yet there ought to be most of them; and according to
the number of them, you must judge of the excess in this or that Quality.

CHAP. II. Of the Sexes, Ages, and the various Temperaments of them.
ACcording to the diversity of Sex and Age, the Temperament is also diverse.

Sexes differ according to the different Conformation and Temper of the Genital
Parts.

Sex is twofold, Masculine and Feminine. The former is most commonly hotter
than the latter; which appears caeteris paribus, by the Pulse, that are larger
and more frequent, by the habit of the Body, which is dryer, by the greater
firmness of the Parts, by the Actions that are stronger and more perfect, by a
greater disposition to a Fever, and a less quantity of Crudities; all which, as
they proceed from a greater heat, so they vindicate it. Nor does Women's growing
sooner, contradict what has bin said, because this is rather to be ascribed to
the softness and ductility of the Parts, than to Heat: Nor would it make any
thing against us, if we should grant they have more Blood than Men; for if it
should be so, it would not follow that they generate more Blood; but that they
do not consume so much. They being more salacious, and more prone to Anger,
proves nothing; for one may come from their Pride, and the other from the
weakness of their Minds; though we confess that some Viragoes may be hotter than
Men.

Age is the various seasons of Humane Life, wherein some notable change is
observed. They are eight: Infancy, which continues to the third year.
Childhood, from the third to the tenth. Puberty, from the tenth to the
eighteenth year. Adolescency, from the eightteenth to the twenty fifth.
Juvenility, from the twenty fifth to the thirty fifth. Virility, from the
thirty fifth to the fiftieth. Old Age, from the fiftieth to the sixty fifth:
Decrepid Age takes up all the rest of the time of Life.

The Causes of Ages is the diverse proportion of the Native Heat, at this or
that time of Life, by reason of natural things, or things preternatural; so
that the Ages in all are not circumscribed within the said terms of years; but
they happen in some sooner, in some later; and some grow Old sooner than others.

Infancy is the most Moist of all, which appears plainly from the flexibility
and softness of the Members; all other Ages, the farther they recede from
Infancy, the dryer they are. But it is not the hotest of all; for the greatest
heat would not suit with moisture; for it would either dissipate it, or
extinguish it. Heat therefore increases till Virility, and then it is at its
height; for the habit of the Body, by continual action of the Heat, is dried,
and presses the mouths of the Arteries, and makes them narrower; so that on
this account the thicker part of the Blood is kept from the Parts which it
ought to moisten; the Serosities are not purged off, but are daily kept up more
and more in the Vessels, they suppress the Fire of the Heart, and at last
extinguish it. The abundance of this unconcocted Humidity is the cause of
Hoariness in Old Men; and their Baldness arises from the defect of the matter
of Hairs; which is a fat Vapor, or at least, because such a Vapor does not
come to the Hairs, by reason of a constriction of the Pores. But in the mean
while, we must not infer, that Old Men are moistest; for their Blood does not
penetrate and moisten the parts of the Body, tho upon the account of the
Excrements that are put off upon certain parts of the Body, as the Nostrils,
Eyes, and the like, they may seem most moist.

From what has bin said it appears, that the next cause of Death in Old Men, is
too great a Serosity of the Blood; but the dryness of the Body is the remoter
Cause, and want of Heat the most remote; and therefore Old Men are best
preserved by hot and dry things, as with Wine, and the Spirits of it, and the
like; which revive the languid Heat, and dry up the Serosities.

CHAP. III. Of the Native Heat.
IT may not be incongruous to add something concerning the Natural Heat to the
Temperaments; according to the variation whereof, the Temperament varies much.

The Natural Heat is nothing else but a quick and confused Motion of a subtle
Matter, or certain Fire that is not Lucid, such as we perceive in Lime when it
is sprinkled with Water, in several Chemical Fermentations, in Horse-dung, and
in Herbs heapt up together and putrefying; yet is it hot, and differs only from
our common Fire in degree. This motion arises hence, viz. because a subtle
Matter insinuating it self into the Blood, cannot move freely in it, and
therefore is forced to exert its power upon the Particles of the Blood, and to
agitate them confusedly; so that it has the same Causes with Fermentation, and
therefore we may well think it proceeds from it.

Fermentation is an intestine Motion among the heterogeneous Parts of any Body,
whereby that in some sort, is rarefied and fired. It is effected in this
manner, viz. A subtle Matter passing through some humid and fluid Bodies,
meets with rigid Particles which are not very flexible, which swim in them, and
because they cannot accommodate themselves to the Pores, occasion a Confusion;
so that then the subtle Matter insinuates it self in a large quantity to fill
the Pores, and so it rarifies the said Bodies; as more Men, for instance, can
be contained in a Room, when they are quiet and lie still, than when they move
disorderly; this is every where seen in humid Bodies, as Wine that is quiet all
the Winter, will Ferment so much in the Spring, as to break the Vessel if there
be no Vent, the subtle Matter being put into a motion by the approach of the
Sun. But all Rarefaction of a Liquor is not properly Fermentation, but only
that which is from an intestine Principle, or an Heterogeneity of Parts, and a
diversity of the Pores, by reason whereof the passage for the subtle Matter is
rendered more difficult, and consequently there is no Fermentation in Water, or
in another Liquor more homogeneous, rarifying over a Fire; for it boils up only
by being forced by a great quantity of subtle Matter from abroad, and not from
any internal Cause.

The Natural Heat, or subtle Matter, resides in the Ventricles of the Heart,
especially in the Left, and rarifies the Blood as it passes by. It is kept up
by a subtle Matter, which is continually brought to the Heart, from the
Nourishment, Chyle, and Blood.

We are hotter in Summer than in Winter; for our Pulse are then quicker and
stronger; our Thirst is greater, and we then more desire Cold Things, and
Digest them without offense, and are injured by Hot Things, and are prone to
Fevers; and we perceive no shaking or shivering after Meals, as in the Winter.
We are Colder in the Winter, because a serous Humor abounds then in the Blood,
by reason Transpiration is less, and the Fire of the Heart is lessened by the
Cold Air that is breathed in; but the Digestion is best in Winter, and we grow
fatter then, by reason of the moderate Heat; for great Heat dissolves Fat, and
dissipates the Ferment of the Stomach; and therefore in Fevers, and in Summer,
we grow Lean, and have but small Appetites.

Moreover, in Sleep our inner-parts are not hotter than when we are awake, yea
they are not so hot, as appears by the Pulse, that are then more languid and
less, and by the paleness; and this is agreeable to Reason; for the Blood does
not then pass so frequently through the Heart, and consequently does not heat
so much; and our Sweating a Nights does not contradict what has bin said, for
that proceeds chiefly from Vapors retained by the Coverings, and condensed
upon the Body.

The Natural Heat is sometimes suddenly raised, as by Anger, or Joy, the
Animal Spirits on this account flowing oftener into the Fibers of the Heart,
move the Blood oftener, and increase the Fire of the Heart: This Heat is also
increased by the motion of the Body, and by the use of Spices and Wind.

It is destroyed chiefly three ways, viz. by suffocation, dissipation, and want
of repair; it is suffocated by too much Blood; as a small Fire by too much
Wood, or by the Viscosity of the Blood, or the Coagulation of it by Cold or
Poison. It is dissipated by too great Labor, or violent Sweats. It cannot be
repaired when there is want of Meat and Drink, or when the Aliment is weak, or
by reason of a compression of the Vessels, or the thickness or viscidity of the
Blood. In Old Men the Natural Heat dies, partly because it is oppressed with
Serum, and partly because in a long tract of Time it is dissipated.

CHAP. IV. Of an Humor.
AN Humor is a liquid Substance in the Body of an Animal, bred according to
Nature, by Meat and Drink; it is twofold, Nutritious and Excrementitious.

Nutritious Humors, are Humors apt to be turned into our Substance. They are
innumerable; but the chief of them are these four, viz. Blood strictly taken,
Phlegmatic Blood, or Phlegm; Choleric Blood, or Choler; Melancholy Blood, or
Melancholy.

Blood strictly taken, is the redder and more temperate Portion of the Mass of
Blood; they that have abundance of it are cheerful, and comely.

Phlegm is the whiter and cruder Portion of the Mass of Blood, of a Cold and
Moist Temperament. Those that abound with it, are Slow, Sleepy, Pale and Fat.

Choler is the thinner Portion of the Mass of Blood, of an hot and dry
Temperament: They that have it in abundance, are Angry, Agile, Witty and Lean.

Melancholy is the earthy and gross Portion of the Mass of Blood, of a cold and
dry Temperament. They that abound with this Humor, are Sad, Fearful, and Black.

Chyle is a liquid Mass bred in the Stomach and Guts from Meat and Drink; I say
in the Stomach and Bowels, because some Chylification is made in these, though
chiefly in the Stomach; but we shall speak more particularly of Chylification
among Natural Actions.

The Chyle is expelled from the Stomach partly by the Muscles that contract the
Belly, and partly by the impulse of the Liver; and partly by the Peristaltic
motion of the annular Fibers of the Stomach, successively contracted from the
upper Orifice to the lower. The Chyle being thrust from the Stomach into the
Guts, is further elaborated there, by the ferment of the Stomach which it
brings with it, and by the Bile and pancreatic Juice, which entering into the
Duodenum, and mixed with the Chyle, are fermented together; and together with
the Chyle, pass into the lacteal Veins, which are innumerable small Vessels, so
very small that they cannot be seen, unless they are full of Chyle; they come
out of every part of the Intestines and Mesentery. Caspar Asellius found them
out in the year 1622. in dissecting a live Dog well fed. Presently after their
rise, they aim at the nearest part of the Mesentery, whereunto the intestine
from which they arise is knit; then they go the readiest way to such glandules
of the Mesentery as are nearest to them; but in their passage sometimes, many
little Branches meeting, grow into one great Trunk, viz. before they insinuate
themselves into the gland, to which we said they were going; but in their very
entrance into the glands, or a little before, this Trunk separates again into
new Branches, more, and smaller than the other, which are obliterated in the
very substance of the gland: Out of the gland there spring again new capillary
Veins, which by and by meeting together, make one Trunk again as before; which
being carried toward the beginning of the Mesentery, in their march join to
themselves, others of the same kind meeting them, and so grow larger and
larger, and at last very many enter into the great or middle gland of the
Mesentery, in the same manner they entered the smaller, and some pass over its
Superficies, and by and by they all empty themselves into the common receptacle
of the Chyle, that lies under the said gland. This receptacle is seated under
the Celiac Artery, and emulgents at the Vertebrae of the Loins, whence there
springs a Duct, that presently enters the Diaphragm, with the Arteria magna,
where it begins to be called Ductus Thoracicus. This Duct having passed the
Midriff, it marches further up under the great Artery, till about the fifth or
sixth Vertebra of the Thorax, where it turns a little aside from the great
Artery to the Left Hand, and so below the intercostal Arteries and Veins, under
the pleura and gland thymus, it ascends to the left subclavian Vein, into whose
lower side it opens, just there where the left jugular Vein enters into it on
the upper side, so that their Mouths face one another; but it opens not into
this Vein with any large Orifice, but by six or seven little ones, being all
covered together in the interior Cavity of the Subclavia, with one broad Valve
looking toward the Cava from the Shoulder, whereby here is granted to the
Chyle and Lympha a free passage out of the Ductus Chyliferus into the
Subclavia; but their return, or of Blood with them out of the Vein into the
Duct is prevented. This Duct ending thus in the subclavian Vein, the Chyle that
it conveys into it, passes with the Blood, returning by the Cava into the right
Ventricle of the Heart.

The Chyle in the Stomach and Guts keeps in some sort, the Color of what is
eaten: So Cows and Sheep, because they feed on Grass, have a greenish Chyle.
The Chyle of a Man is most commonly of an Ash Color; but in the lacteal Veins,
and the Thoraic Duct, it is quite White.

An excrementitious Humor, is an Humor that is not fit to be converted into
our substance: It Is divided into Natural and Preternatural; the Preternatural
belongs to Pathology.

The Natural excrementitious Humor, is that which has not an inimical quality.

Excrementitious Humors are partly generated in the Blood, because our
Nourishment has some Particles which are apt to become Excrementitious, but
partly because the Blood loses much of its subtle Parts, by being often
rarefied in the Heart, and by nourishing our Vital Fire; and on this account,
many of its Parts are rendered unfit for use, and do hurt, unless they are
eliminated from the Mass of Blood, for the Phlegm stops the passages: The Earth,
or the Caput mortuum, coagulates; the Water hinders the inflammability of the
Blood; and the Sulphur by adustion, becomes bitter and acrid.

Moreover, diverse excrementitious Humors are evacuated in diverse places; and
merely according to their diversity, as to magnitude or figure, in this or that
emunctory, and in the particles of this or that Humor, without the help of any
fictitious Faculty: And this will not seem strange to any one, who sees that
merely by a diversity of the Pores and Parts, a wholesome and unwholesome Herb
grow near together in the same Ground; and one sort of Juice slows in the Tree,
another in the Bark, and another in the Leaves and Fruits.

A Natural excrementitious Humor, is divided into useful and unuseful; a
Natural excrementitious Humor is useful, when of it self it is some way
serviceable to the Body, as Milk, Seed, Menstruous Blood, the Mothers Blood,
yellow Choler, Melancholy, Serum, the Humor of the Pericardium, the acid
Humor of the Stomach, Spittle, Pancreatic Juice, Lympha, and the slime of the
Guts.

The Natural excrementitious Humor is unuseful, when of it self it is no way
serviceable to the Body wherein it is bred; as Urine, Sweat, Tears, Snot, the
Blood of a Woman in Labor, the Blood of the Hemorrhoids, and the Wax of the
Ears.

Milk is a portion of the Chyle, separated by the glands, into the milky Tubes,
for the nourishment of the Infant.

The milky Tubes are Vessels properly belonging to the Breasts, and they come
from their innumerable Glands, and terminate in the Paps with many holes; they
are encompassed here and there with Nervous Fibers from the small rope of the
Arm-pit, that these being inslated, they may be contracted to press out the
Milk.

The Matter of Milk is Chyle, and not Blood, as many heretofore have thought,
and that it was turned White in the Breasts; but it does not stay there long
enough to be elaborated; and beside, the Parts are not formed for such an use.
Moreover, a piece of Succory eaten before, has bin drawn out with it, and also
the Bran of Bread eaten before: A Purging Medicine taken by the Nurse, is
presently mixed with the Milk, and Purges the Child; and sometimes when it does
not the Nurse, Saffron and Burnt Wine, and other things taken by the Nurse,
communicate the taste and smell to the Milk in the space of half an hour, or
less; and the Nurse presently after drinking a large draught, finds a chillness
and fullness in her Breasts; which could not be if Blood were the Matter of
Milk: Besides, a Woman would consume away if Blood were the Matter of Milk;
considering, that a Woman in Health affords daily a Quart of Milk. Moreover,
Fat Women have more Milk than Lean, and yet the Lean Women have most Blood, and
their sanguiferous Vessels are larger: But you will say, that Blood is
sometimes sucked out of the Breasts, and that in Women that give Suck, the
Veins of the Breasts are more Turgid than at other times; and therefore Blood
is the Matter of Milk. To the first I answer, That Blood is not sucked without
Violence; and therefore this does not prove that it is the Matter of Milk.
Secondly, The greater distension of the Veins of the Breast prove nothing also,
because this is to be imputed to the greater motion of the Blood upwards, by
reason of the compression of the lower Arteries by the Womb.

I suppose the Thoracic Duct is the passage of the Chyle to the Breasts, from
whence some small branches are reflected about the Calvicles, toward the
Breasts.

Women with Child have Milk in their Breasts, and especially in a few days
before Delivery, not because the menstruous Blood regurgitates from the Womb
through the Epigastric Vessels to the Breasts, for these do not at all
communicate one with another; and Circulation refutes this: Besides, some
Virgins have Milk, yea Men and Children; and many Animals which have not the
Courses; but the reason is, for that in Women with Child, the Child growing
big, the Womb is wonderfully expanded, and so the sanguiferous Vessels of the
lower Belly are pressed; and therefore the Blood regurgitates upwards, and
thereby its quantity and heat, opens the Pores of the Glands of the Breasts,
and causes the lacteal Tubes to expand more; and for the same reason, the
receptacles of the Chyle are more pressed, and the Chyle is more forceably
driven upwards, and so opens more the glands and passages of the Breasts, and
the lacteal Tubes.

The Milk after Delivery flows more freely; for the Chyle that used to be
carried to the Womb for the Nourishment of the Child, regurgitates upwards, the
passages of the Womb being stopped: Besides, the Infant sucks; and how much that
conduces to the production of Milk, none will wonder that reads in History,
that Milk has bin drawn to the Breasts of Virgins, by continual Suction alone.

The Milk at length ceases, either because the Child is weaned, or because the
Nurse is with Child, and then the Chyle begins to return to the Womb, for
nourishment of the Foetus; and continues this course till the Womb being more
distended, toward the end of gravidation, presses the Vessels of the Chyle.

The cause that Children newly born, Old Women, and Men, have Milk in their
Breasts, are the largeness of the passages of the Breasts, the laxity of the
Glands, and the abundance of Chyle.

Seed is a whitish Humor turgid with Spirits, bred in the Stones, and
Prostatae, and further elaborated for Generation in the carrying Vessels, and
the small Seminal Bladders. The Matter of it is Blood carried on both Sides,
from the Trunk of the Aorta, in a strait Passage by the Arteries to the Stones,
and there put off through the small Glands that are only visible by a Microscope
upon the tubulous Substance of the Stones; this is confirmed by the artificial
Division and Dispersion of the Arteries in the Stones, and Prostata, and by the
Straitness of them, together with the Wreathing of the corresponding Veins, and
the Multitude of Valves, for these are so framed, that the Blood may pass
quicker to the Stones, than from them, and that the nobler Part of the Blood
may the easier sweat throught to the tubulous Substance of the Stones from the
small Glands and Arteries every where joined to it, for the making of Seed.
Moreover, it appears hence, viz. because those that are of a Sanguine
Complexion abound most with Seed,

But some will have the nervous Juice to be the Matter of it, for these
Reasons, because they perceive many Nerves in the Testicles, and that the
taking away of a great Quantity of Blood, does not so much weaken a Man, as the
Loss of a little Seed, and that after Coition, the Head aches, and that such as
are given to Venery, are subject to Distillations from the Brain on the Spinal
Marrow. And lastly, because the Testicles are white, not red* To the first I
answer, that the nervous Juice is either Animal Spirit condensated, or another
Humor: But the Nature of a Spirit which has Particles that quickly fly away,
cannot condensate into a Seminal Humor, and the nervous Juice can be no other
Humor, for if it were, it would stop the Passage of the Nerves. To the second
I answer, this is manifest to Sense, and they convey a great many Spirits,
which ought to be in the Seed, without which the Blood could not pass through
those innumerable and narrow Tubes which are in the Testicles, nor be changed
into prolific Seed, which ought to be made by the various Motion of the
Spirits, and the Particles of it, and the working of them among themselves. To
the third, fourth, and fifth, I answer, that it may be easily understood that
this happens only by the Loss of Animal Spirits; for the Testicles being
emptied, the Nerves proportionably, at least those which are near, are also
emptied, and then by Reason of the greater Facility of the Motion toward them,
Spirits flow more abundantly into them, and so the other Parts, and also the
Brain are robbed, and upon this Account the Fibers are disordered, and the
Brain becoming cold, condenses the Vapors, and puts them off on the Spine. To
the sixth I answer, that all the Parts and the Testicles also are nourished
with Blood, and yet all are somewhat white.

Seed begins to be generated about Puberty, because the Heat of the Glands of
the Testicles being then greater, opens more the Arteries and small Vessels,
and drives the Blood better through them, and the Nerves are readier to carry
Spirits.

The Seed is of an Ashy Color in the Tubes of the Testicles, but whiter in the
Head of the Epydidimidis, it is made in the Testicles and Prostatae, and is
conveyed by the carrying Vessels by a very small and winding Duct to the
Seminal Bladders, wherein it is kept, and further elaborated, till by
Titillation the Nerves and Fibers about the Sides of them, being much inflated,
press out the Seed, which is then very turgid with Spirit, into the Urethra,
through the Holes of the Gland that stops the Seminal Bladders.

The Stones are the Shop of the Seed, and therefore Eunuchs have not Seed, but
some Titillation they have, by reason of a certain Humor that drops from the
Prostatae into the Urethra, but this is not true Seed. And yet Eunuchs may have
Seed in the Seminal Vessels sufficient for Copulation once or twice, and may
impregnate a Woman.

Those which do not indulge themselves in Venery, and live chastely, do not
generate much Seed, for the Passages are narrowed by degrees, and the Seminal
Matter turns back, and nourishes and makes fat the Loins and other Parts.

Women have prolifick Seed, if by that you understand the Eggs whereof their
Testicles are full, which being made fruitful, and expanded by the Man's
Seminal Air, break out of the Cups wherein they are chiefly contained, into the
Fallopian Tubes, and from thence into the Cavity of the Womb.

That Humor which Women emit in Copulation, is not true Seed, because that is
ejected without, about the Clytoris and Orifice of the Privities, and never
into the Womb; this is manifest in big-bellied Women, the Orifice of whose Womb
is always close shut, and covered with a yellow Mucilage. And besides, many
Women conceive, and yet, as they say, have not emitted that Humor: Moreover,
it has seldom the Consistence of Seed, nor is it Spirituous, because Whores
copulating often in a Day, are not weakened by the Excretion of it, nor is it
elaborated as Seed, for it is not generated in the Organs of it, but in the
Glands.

The Furrows of the Womb emit this Humor, or certain Ducts opening into the
Sheath from the Prostatae or other Glands of the Womb, by Reason of
Titillation, and the Constriction of the Fibers of the Womb, which happens in
Coition.

And yet this Humor is profitable, because it perpetually moistens the Sheath,
and perhaps it conduces to the Elevation of the Man's Seminal Spirit or Air
from the Sheath to the Cavity of the Womb, and from thence to the Eggs to make
them fruitful.

Menstruous Blood, is Blood abounding in the Body, which is evacuated by the
Womb Monthly.

The chief Cause is the abounding of the Blood at a certain Time, Heat and the
easy Dilatation of the Womb also help. That a Plenitude is the Cause may be
proved, for that they that have most Blood, evacuate most this way, and then
rustic Women, that consume much Blood by Labor, have little or no menstruous
Flux, and those who have lost much Blood by Venefaction, have few or no Courses
at all: Men also who do not abound with Blood, by Reason of Labor and more
Heat, have no such Flux. But there are some Women who Monthly evacuate Blood by
the Nostrils, Hemorrhoids, or other Parts. Those Women that are hot have the
Courses sooner, but in a less Quantity, and not so long as those that are cold.

Some say the Cause of the Courses is a certain Saline Ferment of the Womb,
being gradually deposited on the Substance of it, whereby the Womb collecting
much Fire in it self, is turgid, rarefied, and dilated, grows hot, and
evacuates the more fluid Blood, until that Ferment is carried off, and this
Ferment they say is manifest from those things which move the Courses, for they
consist of much volatile Salt.

According to these Causes the Courses begin to slow about the fourteenth Year,
because the Body then having in a manner its due Magnitude, the Blood begins to
abound, and to be luxuriant in the Womb and other Parts, and hence the Breasts
grow big, the Womb is less wrinkled, and does not press its Arteries so much,
and a greater Heat exagitates the Blood more violently, dilates the Arteries,
and opens them.

The Courses ordinarily stop about the fiftieth Year, partly by the Defect of
Blood and Heat, and partly upon the Account of the Narrowness and Dryness of
its Passages.

The menstruous Blood is brought first to the Sheath of the Womb, and not to
the Bottom of it, for it sometimes flows in Women with Child, and if it should
drop from the Bottom, it would putrify, and injure the Child and its
Nourishment, and so occasion Abortion.

The menstruous Blood does not stagnate in the Vessels of the Womb, but
circulates as the other Bood does, for otherwise it would become venomous, but
it is thinner and hotter than the other Blood, and therefore being taken
inwardly it forces the Courses.

About the Time of the coming of the Courses, Pain and Tension and Heat are
felt about the Spine and Hypogaster, because the Blood cannot at first break
through the Arteries. This menstruous Blood is Arterial, for only Arteries lead
to the Womb; when it cannot be expelled by the Womb, it is sometimes ejected by
the Lungs, Gums, Nostrils, or the like. It seldom slows in a Woman with Child,
because it does not abound in them, partly because it is spent for the Increase
of the Womb, and partly because Part of the Mothers Chyle goes to the Child.

Yellow or natural excrementitious Choler is a yellow and bitter Humor,
secreted from the Mass of Blood into the Gaul Bladder, or Porus Bilarius, it is
separated by the Impulse of the Blood of the Vena porta, into the Glands of the
Liver, which it passes through, by reason of the special Conformity of them,
with its Particles, as to Magnitude and Figure, and it enters the Branches of
the Gaul Bladder, and of the Porus bilarius, dispersed among the Branches of
the Vena porta, which absorb the Choler from the Extremities and Pores of the
said Gland. But Choler may come partly to the Gaul Bladder by the cystick
Arteries, being strained through the small Glands placed betwixt the Tunics of
the Bladder. From the Gaul Bladder and Porus Bilarius, it is driven by a
Constriction of the Fibers, into the Ductus Cholidochus, inserted obliquely
into the Duodenum.

The Choler which comes from the Porus bilarius, is thicker, more feculent, and
paler, than that which is in the Gaul Bladder, and the Choler in the Gaul
Bladder; by reason of its Thinness, sweats through, and tinctures the
neighboring Parts.

Particles of the Chyle and Blood that are Salinosulphureous, are the Matter of
the Choler, being nearly joined with the Serum, and by the further Coction in
the Heart rendered acrid, and turned to Choler; which, by reason of their small
Quantity, are not bitter, till they are separated, and for this reason fat
things increase Choler, and such as are hottest are most choleric.

The Use of it, according to the Opinion of some, is to dilute the Chyle, as
well in the Intestines, that it may the easier pass the Mouths of the lacteal
Veins, as in the thoracic Duct, and they say, that the thinner and sweeter Part
of it accompanies and heats the Chyle, lest coming too cold to the Heart, it
should stop the Rarefaction in it: And they say, that the grosser Part of it is
evacuated with the Excrements, which it tinges and dilutes, but it may be well
doubted whether Choler can accompany the Chyle in the Thoracic Duct, and
whether all of it should not rather be expelled with the Excrements by Stool,
for the Chyle in the thoracic Duct, and in the other lacteal Vessels is sweet
like Milk: And on the contrary, a great Quantity of Milk will grow bitter with
a few Drops of Choler, yet it is certain that Choler does continually drop from
the Ductus Cholidochus into the Duodenum.

But it is supposed that the chief Use of Choler, is to ferment the Chyle that
passes from the Stomach, the pancreatic Juice being mixed with it in the
Duodenum, that the Dissolution of the Chyle, which was imperfect in the
Stomach, may be perfected in the Intestines; and it appears to Sight, that
Choler dropped upon Dough, ferments it: Moreover, it melts and cleanses Crudities
from the Guts, it heats them when they are chilled by things taken in, it
drives away Putrefaction from this Sink of the Body, and kills Worms, and
expells them; and is also the Cause of the peristaltic Motion, whereby the
Chyle is moved through the Intestines, and the Excrements are evacuated, as it
continually irritates and provokes the Spirits from the Brain to the Fibers of
the Guts, as we see in diverse other Cases, for the Intestines, Heart, Veins,
Arteries, Urinary Bladder, Stomach, Gaul Bladder, the Membranes of the Brain,
and the like, have a certain proper Perception, whereby their Fibers are
successively stimulated to contract and dilate, and so we see the Guts of an
Animal dissected, and yet warm, creep within themselves; and the Heart cut up,
beats; and the Muscles of a dead Beast, touched with an acrid and pungent
Liquor, contract.

Natural excrementitious Melancholy, is that Part of the Humors that is so
terrestrial, that it cannot nourish; it is commonly defined, a black and acid
Humor, separated from the Blood in the Spleen, proper to contract the Stomach,
and to excite Appetite; but there is no such black acid Humor in the Stomach,
nor in the Spleen; and perhaps the Capillary Arteries cannot admit of so gross
an Humor; the Spleen of a living Dog has been cut out, and yet his Appetite
has not been lessened, and he has grown fat: Moreover, the Spleen sends nothing
to the Stomach, for this ought to be done by the short veiny Vessel, which is a
Vein, viz. of the Spleen Vein; but the Valves hinder, as appears by Inflation;
and it is repugnant to Circulation, for no Vein brings to any Part, except the
Vena Porta, and the Vein of the Lungs.

The Serum is the most watery Humor of the Blood, when it is separated, it has
other Particles mixed with it, as saline, acid, and others, according to the
Diversity whereof, it is called Lympha, Spittle, or is otherwise named, and so
it is never pure. It serves as a Vehicle for the Blood and other Humors, to
nourish the innermost Parts, by entering, expanding, and loosening the Pores.
There is great Quantity of this Humor in the Body, by reason of the great
Quantity of Liquids that we daily take in.

The Humor of the Pericardium, is a serous Humor contained in the
Pericardium, the Matter of it is Serum, mixed sometimes with a little thin Blood
that it brings with it, and is therefore somewhat like the Water, wherein Flesh
has been washed, and sometimes it is like a Gelly, some nutritious Particles
being mixed with it: From whence this Humor comes is disputed; some say it is a
Vapor, which exhales from the Heart, and is cooled and condensed in the
Pericardium. Some will have it come from the Glands of the Thymus that hang
from the Throat to the Pericardium, but it comes both Ways, but especially by
the Lymphatick Vessels; it does not come only from the Thymus, because the
Thymus in Infants is proportionably the greatest, and in Progress of Years, is
so lessened, that at the Time of Virility, and in the following Ages you can
scarce find any thing besides Vessels and Nerves: The Use of this Humor is to
cool and moisten the Heart, that it should not be dried up by its continual
Motion, it cools the Heart, as Water contained in a Pot does the Bottom of it,
viz: by taking from it the Particles of Fire which easily pass through the
strait Pores of it.

As the Humor of the Pericardium is always renewed, so in like manner it is
evaporated from the Pericardium, and is received into the Lungs, or Veins of
the Throat, or Thymus.

Spittle is a serous Humor, that drops from the salivary Ducts, these Ducts
are Vessels of their Kind, four of them are most noted, the two uppermost that
take their Origin with various Branches from the parotid Glands, and at the
Jaws run under the Skin with a manifest Orifice into the Mouth. The lowermost
also proceed with diverse Branches from maxillary Glands, whereof one that is
greater, before it reaches the common Trunk, is carried under the digastric
Muscle of the Jaws. The lower End on both sides under the Tip of the Tongue,
near the Fore-Teeth, where are some Teats placed. The Matter of the Spittle is
carried to these Glands by the Arteries: It distills, moreover, in all the
Mouth, as from the Glands under the Tongue, and from the Almonds which have two
clear Bladders placed near them, that receive the Serum, from the Glands, and
pour it out into the Mouth: There is also, on both sides, a common large oval
Sinus, that opens into the Mouth, which contains in its Fringe, two greater
Sinus's, and several others, that are less, with other Glands, each whereof
has a small perforated Sinus in the Middle.

By moistening the Tongue, Mouth, Palate, Oesophagus, and Aspera Arteria, it
quenches Thirst, helps swallowing, and begins Chylification in the Mouth, for
it participates of the Nature of the acid Humor of the Stomach; that is, it
has some saline acid Particles incorporated with Serum, and therefore a Bolus
of chewed Bread exposed to the Sun, turns to Chyle, and Pieces of Flesh
sticking in the Teeth, grow white, yet Spittle alone is not sufficient for
Chylification: It extracts a Tincture from Meats, and carries it to the Organ
of tasting, and therefore without Spittle there would be no Taste.

The Spittle returns continually, with or without Chyle, to the Heart by the
lacteal Veins.

When we smell or see any thing that is pleasant, or greedily long for any
thing, the Spittle waters the Mouth more plentifully, because the Nerves of the
wandering Pair, do not only send Branches to the Ducts and salivary Glands, but
also some to the olfactory and optic Nerves; upon which account a great Influx
into these, affects also the Nerves of the wandering Pair, and so by a
Contraction of the small Fibers, the Salivary Ducts are narrowed, and the
Spittle is ejected.

The rouling about of a Bullet, or the like, in the Mouth, quenches Thirst,
because by moving the Tongue, we narrow the Ducts, and so press out the Spittle.

Just as we are about to vomit, Spittle flows more abundantly from the Mouth,
because the Stomach participates with the Maxillary Glands by the Branches of
the Nerve of the sixth Pair, and its inner Tunick is continued to the Jaws and
Palate, and so they are contracted by Sympathy, and cast forth their Humidity,
and in the same manner vomiting is provoked by irritating the Membrane at the
Beginning of the Oesophagus.

The acid or digestive Humor of the Stomach, is an acid Humor, that distills
continually from the Tunics of the Stomach; it may be proved there is such a
thing, because it is often found in the Stomachs of Dogs that have been
dissected, after they have fasted a while; and sometimes we belch it up in a
Morning, though we are well, and after due Chylification, and the Teeth are
often set on Edge in vomiting by this mixed with the Meat, and by taking Acids
Chylification is furthered, and therefore there is an Acid in the Stomach,
which is the Cause of Chylification. But you will say that I have only proved
that there is an acid Juice in the Stomach, and not that it is natural; it may
proceed from Chylification vitiated, as we often see it happens in a Morning
after Surfeiting. Moreover, an Acid is the Cause of Obstructions and
Coagulations in the Body, and it irritates the Nerves, and the like: And
consequently it is not naturally in the Stomach. I answer, it is certain that
some acid Humor must be generated in the Stomach, because there is scarce any
Aliment that does not contain some Acid, and therefore the Generation of it is
natural, though sometimes this Juice is too acid, or there is too great a
Quantity of it, and then it much injures the Body: So Choler, though it be
natural, if it be too much heightened, or abound too much, occasions Diseases.

And it is probable that such a Juice sweats continually into the Intestines
through their glandulous Tunic.

The Matter of it is a serous Humor, mixed with acid Particles, but it is not
natural excrementitious Melancholy, as was wont to be said; for it is thicker
than that. Those acid Particles are made by the like in Aliments taken in, and
therefore Acids eaten increase the Acid of the Stomach.

The pancreatic Juice is a serous Humor that is poured out of the Pancreas
into the Intestine.

The Pancreas is a certain Body of many Glands, covered with a common membrane
of Vessels and Nerves, the branches of them being fastened among themselves; it
is transversly placed under the Stomach: One of the extremities of it is
extended to the Spleen, the other is bound to the intestinum duodenum, and
descends a little with it. The Pancreas has an excretory Vessel proper to it,
consisting of many Branches, each whereof has annexed to it, the Glands of the
Pancreas; yea, it does in some sort receive them: It is commonly called the
pancreatic Duct, and it is wont to be inserted in the same mouth with the
ductus choliclochus, obliquely into the intestinum duodenum, or the beginning
of the Jejunum.

The Blood being carried by the Arteries, and force upon the Glands of the
Pancreas, conveys the pancreatic Juice through the pores of them into the
branches of the Duct; and from these branches it distills into the greater
Duct, and thence into the Intestine, in a small quantity; for it can scarce be
seen, when the Duct is bound in a living Dog. It has a sub-acid Taste, by reason
its acid saline Particles are diluted with Serum; and when the Choler is poured
on it, it occasions a Fermentation. The use of it is to ferment the Chyle with
the Choler in the Intestine: Moreover, it attemperates the Choler, that it
should not hurt the Intestine; and it dilutes the Chyle.

Lympha is a lympid serous Humor, contained in the Lymphatic Vessels. These
Lymphatic Vessels are very small and pellucid, and they arise almost from every
part of the Body, and absorb the Liquor of them; and that they may pass the
safer, they here and there encircle the greater Vessels (as may be seen in the
Limbs and Vena Porta near the Liver) like Ivy.

As far as we can learn by the Constitution of the Valves, and by Ligature and
Inflation, the Lymphatic Vessels that are below the Diaphragm, chiesly end in
the common receptacle of the Chyle, the rest above the Diaphragm, are inserted
at the concourse of the Jugular with the Axillary, into the upper part of the
thoracie Duct, and Pericardium; and there they discharge their Lympha by
manifest passages, defended with a Valve; here and there they cannot be seen,
because on the account of Tenuity, the parts under appear through those
Vessels, and we cannot easily distinguish them, especially if the parts are
white; but sometimes the Lympha is a little red or yellowish, and then they
appear the better, and also after the Death of a Creature; for then the Vessels
are more distended, by reason the motion of the Lympha is slow.

The use of the Lympha is to dilute the Chyle in the Receptacle, that it may
the easier ascend through the thoracic Duct; and in the Jugular Vein, it
renders the venous Blood that is deprived of its own Serum more fluxile, that
it may the easier rarifie in the Heart; and it restores the humor of the
Pericardium.

The slime of the Guts is a viscid and glutinous Matter that covers the Guts
within; the Stomach has some of it, but it is most in the Guts. The Matter of
it is a phlegmatic Humor, carried by the Arteries to the glandulous Tunick of
the Intestines; and being separated through it from the Blood, sweats into the
Cavity of the Intestines.

The use of this Slime is to defend the Nervous Tunic against the acrimony and
roughness of the Choler, and of things taken in; and probably because it
partakes of Acidity it conduces to Chylification.

When Choler, or a purging Medicine is very Acrid, the Slime is melted or
rubbed off, to the great prejudice of the Patient; for Gripes and the bloody
Flux are occasioned thereby.

Sweat is a serous Humor breaking through the sudorisic Vessels of the Skin,
in form of Water. These Vessels are small Tubes in the Pores running out to the
Cuticle, and each of them has a Gland under, through which the Serum, the
Matter of Sweat is separated, they may be seen with a Microscope.

Sweat by reason of salt Particles mixed with it, is Salt. The efficient cause
of natural Sweat is Heat, viz. Of the Sun, of the Fire, Exercise, Coverings,
and the like, whereby the Blood is more agitated and diffused through the habit
of the Body; and the mouths of the Arteries near the Skin are more opened, and
the serous Particles that are more flexile, and that stick less to others, run
out of them; and if there be any Humidity in the Skin, they carry it off with
them through the Pores of the Skin; but because they do not pass free enough,
and quick enough, many of their particles being heapt together, are condensed
into drops for otherwise they would pass by insensible Transpiration, as always
some thin part does in Sweating. From what has bin said, it appears that plenty
of Serum, and a moderate apertion of the Pores, conduce much to Sweat; but that
too great an apertion of the Pores, because it does not at all hinder the Flux
of the Serum, conduces most to insensible Transpiration, and too great a
Constriction of the Pores hinders Sweating; but when it is once begun, it much
increases it: And hence Sweat occasioned in Winter by Exercise, is much more
than in Summer.

We Sweat more sometimes after cleansing the Face, because the Pores are freed
from the Sweat that obstructs them. Sweat is suppressed by sitting near the
Fire, because the Pores are thereby enlarged, and the Vapors fly away
insensibly; and this is also the reason why Sweat sooner goes off when we sit
still in the Sun, than under the Shade of a Tree; and also why he Sweats more
that runs in the Shade, than he that runs in the Sun.

We Sweat most in the Armpits and Groins, because those parts being most
covered, the Vapors are more retained. We Sweat when we Sleep, because then we
are either oppressed with Clothes, or at least, covered with them all over; and
because the animal Spirits in Sleep do not sufficiently flow to the outer Parts
and Muscles, and so the Vapors stay about the Skin, or by reason of the
covering do not sufficiently fly away.

Smiths and Rustic People seldom Sweat, because by their Filth the Pores are
shut. Our Hands and Feet Sweat most, because in them the Arteries are carried
straiter to the Skin, and their Mouths are more open there, that the Blood may
return to the Veins, and on this account the Serum is put off there more
plentifully. It has bin observed, that a person Drinking plentifully of Spanish
Wine, has rendered his Sweat like it; but this proceeded from too great a
quantity, whereby the heat of the Heart being almost suffocated, could scarce
change it.

Our blessed Savior in the Garden Sweat Blood, partly out of Love to us, and
his most holy Father; his Blood did so Ferment that it could not be contained
in the Arteries, and partly by reason of Sorrow unto Death, there was so great
Horror and Collision of the Parts, that Blood was violently pressed out of the
Pores.

But ordinarily Blood does not Sweat out of the Pores, because it is too
ramous; but yet sometimes naturally, some small particles of Blood do accompany
Sweat, and then the Sweat discolours the Linen, especially in the Armpits.

Urine is a serous Humor strained in the Reins, which comes with the Blood
(which it diluted) to the Reins by the Arteries of the Kidneys, but is
separated from it as superstuous, and that continually, as part of the Blood is
continually driven to the Reins to nourish them. It is strein'd in the Reins in
the following manner; the Blood mixed with the Serum forces upon the glandulous
substance of the Reins, and by this impulse, presently some thin particles are
separated through the Pores of it into many small Tubes, whereof chiefly
consists the inner substance of the Reins; and from these ending for the most
part in eight or nine papillary Caruncles, they pass into the Pelvis, and
thence into the Ureters and Bladder; the rest which came to the Reins, returns
partly to the Vena Cava by the emulgent Veins, and dilutes, and carries the
Blood as before.

Besides, the Serum of the Blood Choler is mixed with the Urine, and tinctures
it of a yellowish Color, and also other particles from the Mass of Blood: For
itstance, some nutritive particles of Blood rubbed off or melted, Sulphurous,
Saline, fixed, incorporated with terrestrial Particles, and the like, which by
washing the parts it carries off.

Some say, that part of the potulent Matter, or of another Liquor taken in, is
the Matter of Urine; and they say, it does not come by the Arteries, but by
some nearer way: For instance, presently from the Stomach or Bowels, by some
special Ducts running to the Ureters or Bladder, and they tely on these
reasons, viz. We presently make Water after drinking, especially of the
Spaw-Waters, and the Urine has sometimes the color and taste of what we take
in, These Reasons indeed are probable, but they do not prove the thing for
which they are used; for first, such passages have not hitherto been found out
by Anatomists; and the making of Water so soon after Drinking, may be
understood without the supposition of such passages; and in this manner,
because a potulent Liquor drank plentifully, presently increases the flux of
the Scrum to the Reins, partly because flowing presently from the Stomach to
the Intestines, and from thence to the lacteal Veins, it thrusts forwards the
Chyle, previously existing as well in them as in the thoracic Duct, and so the
Serum is increased in the Mass of Blood; partly because large Drinking distends
the Stomach and Bowels, and so presses the sanguiferous Vessels of the Bowels,
and so the Blood, with its Serum, abounds in other Vessels; and therefore to
make free passage for it self, it puts off its Serum, which by reason of its
tenuity, easily passes the Reins; and indeed, though the Drink must pass before
it be evacuated through the Stomach, Guts, lacteal Veins, thoracic Duct, and
other parts, that it may come with the Blood to the Reins, yet it may be easily
understood how it comes to pass, that we make Water so soon after Drinking. For
first, that which we void by Urine presently after Drinking, is not the Drink;
for if it were, it would retain the Smell and Taste, especially when some
odoriferous and tincturing thing is taken in; and it would appear crude and
unconcocted, as that we evacuate by Urine the second or third time after
Drinking. But that which was before in the Thoracic Duct, or in the Veins or
Arteries is thrust forward by it: And then the potulent Matter runs its Course
soon enough; and it is very probable that the Blood in any healthy Man, finishes
its Course in a Quarter of an Hours time, so that it is no such strange thing
that we make Water so soon after Drinking, yet it is not so very soon as is
said, unless the Bladder were distended with Urine before. As to the Smell and
Color, which sometimes the Urine has from things that are taken in, as we see
when Asparagus or Madder are eat, these are not also sufficient Proofs for
particular Passages, for this may be because things taken in do not continue
long enough in the Blood, so as to wholly put off their Qualities in it; and
this is so much the more, by how much the said things that are odoriferous, and
that give a Tincture, are more aperitive: Moreover, some Historians relate,
that a Person, after drinking a large Quantity of Spanish Wine, has sweat it
out in Color and Taste as before, and therefore it may be as reasonably
expected that we should show particular Passages in this Case, as for the
Urine, when it has the Qualities of the Liquor taken in, and yet there are
hitherto no such Passages found out for the Sweat.

But I would not be so understood, as that I would wholly reject particular
Passages, for that there are such is very plausible, and I hope they will be
found out at one time or another, by the Industry of the modern Anatomists.

The Urine falling continually from the Reins through the Ureters to the
Bladder, is retained in it, until by the Quantity or Quality, it stimulates to
Excretion. It is evacuated by a Contraction of the Muscles of the Belly, and of
the Fibers of the Bladder, whilst they being irritated, the Spirits flow more
plentifully into them; and how great the Contraction of the Bladder is, may be
seen in the Dissection of a Beast; which, when it is vastly expanded, after
Evacuation of the Urine, sinks into a very small Compass: Lest the Urine should
flow out when we are sleeping, or involuntarily, a great round Muscle is placed
before the Neck of the Bladder, called Sphincter; such an one a is at the End
of the right Gut, for retaining the Excrement; and therefore to make Water, we
contract the Belly and Bladder so much, as to somewhat overcome the Action of
the Sphincter, which is perpetua Contraction.

The Urine cannot return again from the Bladder to the Ureters, because they
are obliquely inserted within the Membranes of the Bladder, and so when it lies
up on them it shuts their Passages.

In a Calf, and the like, all the time they are in the Womb, the Urine is
evacuated through the upper Part of the Bladder, but not so in an Humane
Foetus, which either voids it into the Womb, or it is kept it the Bladder all
the time the Child is in the Womb.

We make more Water in the Winter than in the Summer, and so being placed in
cold Water, because by the Stoppage of the Pores insensible Transpiration is
hindered, and the Serum is diverted to the inner Parts.

Tears are a serous Humor, flowing from the Eye of those that weep: The Matter
of them is a Vapor; and salt Serum, continually brought through the Arteries
with the Blood, to the weeping Glands, to lubricate and moisten the Eye, and
through them sequestered into the weeping Ducts, which are very numerous in the
Eyelids.

Serum flowing in too great a Quantity to the Eye: Also Collyria sometimes
running through the Nostrils and Palate, through the weeping Gland, placed in
the greater Angle of the Eye, that is very spongy, and through three or four
Holes of the Bone of the Nose, are tasted in the Mouth; through these Holes the
Rays of the Sun enter partly the Nostils, when looking on the Sun we sneeze.

Our Eyes water upon the account of a Moat, Ash, Smoke, Onions, Garlic, and the
like; because by reason of these, Pain being occasioned in the Eye, there is a
greater Flux of Blood than is usual, and a proportionable Separation of Serum;
or because, by reiterated Contractions of the Belly, then intervening, the
Bowels press more the Aorta, and the Blood, with its Serum, is more moved
upwards, and for the same reason in other Pains; in Trumpeting, Coughing,
sneezing, drinking, and the like, our Eyes water.

In Sorrow Tears flow, partly because by reason of a lesser Influx of the
Spirits, the Pores of the Eye fall down, and the Vapors gather together;
partly, because now and then, by reason of interluding Love or Joy, without
which there is no Sorrow, the Blood being driven generously through the Body,
puts off its Serum more largely on the weeping Ducts.

Snot is a clammy and viscid Humor sticking to the Nostrils; the Matter of it
comes from the internal Arteries of the Nostrils; or it may be a flegmatic
Humor poured out of the Arteries upon the Brain, and may pass from thence
through the Os Cribrosum into the Nostrils, and grow thick there by the Cold,
or by alternate Expiration and Inspiration of the Air, whereby its thin
Particles are dried up; for the Mamillary Processes are hollow to the
Ventricles that are before: And part of it may be also a Vapor condensed in
the Nostrils; but it does not come, as is said, through the Hole of the Bone of
the Skull to the Palate, for here are no Passages for it, but all the Humor
coming from the Ventricles to the Infundibulum, and pituitary Gland, is
refunded through the Membrane under the Gland that is pervious with many small
Holes, into the jugular Veins that are placed on each side of the Cella turcica.

If we expire, or inspire strongly, the Mouth being shut, the Snot is carried
with the Air to the Nostrils from the Palate; and so on the contrary.

The Blood of a Woman in Childbed, is Blood whereby the Woman is purged in her
lying in. Childbed is the Time from Delivery, to the Purification of the Woman.

The Water of a Woman in Delivery, is that which flows from the Womb at the
Time of Delivery: The Matter of it is the Urine, Sweat, and superfluous Chyle
of the Child contained in the Amnion, it flows out when the Child, by kicking,
breaks the Membranes, and sometimes a long while before the Child is born; but
it is better not to break so, for by lubricating the Passages, it facilitates
the Birth.

The hemorrhoidal Blood is a Portion of Blood abounding, which is carried off
by the hemorrhoidal Arteries, and it serves in Men as the Courses in Women.

A Spirit is the thinnest and most agile Part of the Body; the Matter of it is
the finest, that is, the most sulphurous Part of the Blood: That there is such
a thing as Spirit, may be proved; because, if you bind or cut off the Nerve of
any Part, so as that the Spirit cannot come to it, the Motion and Sense of it
presently perish.

Spirit is commonly divided into animal, vital, and natural; but I suppose
there is but one Spirit; which, because it performs animal Actions, is animal;
which moves when it flows into the medullary Part of the Nerve, which serves
for Motion; it gives Sense when it flows upon the Membrane which serves for
Sense, and it is vital as it performs vital Actions, and natural as it performs
natural Actions; and so the rest without any specific Distinction. Animal
Spirit is generated in the Head only, by Separation from the Blood when it
forces through the Branches of the carotid Arteries, upon the external Substance
of the Brain and Cerebellum, that is more lax than the rest; presently the
finest Particles recede from it into the Pores of the Brain and Cerebellum.

The Spirit makes its Excursions from the Brain three ways: First, By the
Command of the Mind. Secondly, it is expelled by the Contraction of the Heart,
that forces the Blood upon the Brain and Cerebellum; and new Spirits being
presently separated from it, force by the wole Diastole of the Brain, and
partly by the Systole, the animal Spirits previously existing in the Brain,
into the Beginning of the Nerves; and this Motion of the Spirits is moderate
and slow, and thereby the Tension of all the Muscles is equal; and hence it is
manifest, why by every Pulse there is a Concussion of the whole Body, tho this
may also proceed from the Blood continually thrust into the Arteries. It Is
manifest also, why one Arm being cut off, the other grows strong thereupon, and
why to one of two antagonist Muscles the other is convulsively drawn, and which
way it is drawn, it carries the Part with it: viz. because then the said Parts
are puffed up and extended with a greater Quantity of Spirits. Thirdly, The
Spirit flows from the Brain when any Part is irritated; for then, by the Motion
of the small Fibers of the Nerves, the Pores in the Brain are opened; and so in
Respiration, in the Motion of the Heart, in the peristaltic Motion, and the
like; wherein there is a certain natural Irritation, and so it flows when some
Member being tickled or irritated, is sometimes otherwise drawn, but then the
Irritation is preternatural. But by reason of such an Apertion of the Pores of
the Brain, this Efflux of Spirits is such, that it does not only fall upon the
Nerves of the Part irritated, but also upon the neighboring Nerves; and this
is the chief Cause of Sympathy, which is observed in diverse Parts; for
Instance, betwixt the Reins and Stomach, by reason whereof, those being
irritated, vomiting is occasioned; and so betwixt the Colon and the Stomach, as
when that is affected the Patient vomits.

The Spirits serving involuntary Actions, come chiefly from the Cerebellum, and
the medullary Furrows from the Cerebellum, to the Nerves of the wandering Pair,
show this; and this is the Reason why, in an Apoplexy, the Pulse and
Respiration do not quite cease, which is partly performed by those Nerves.

The Spirits, in their natural State, being about to cause Motion, are not
fired like Gunpowder in the Brain, or exploded thence: For if so, Motion could
not be restrained at any Time when we would.

The Spirit conduces somewhat to the Nutrition of the Parts, by separating
their Fibers, and the Sides of the Pores from one another, and so by making way
for the Blood.

CHAP. V. Of Parts in general.
A Part is a Body cohering to the Whole, fitted for the Function and Use of it;
I do not add, joined by the common Life, as some do, that they may exclude the
Hair, Nails, Humors, and Spirits, which are all truly Parts; for as to the
Hairs and Nails, they show Life as other Parts do which are nourished, and they
grow with all Dimensions, according as other Parts do, by receiving Nourishment
inwardly, and by applying it to Parts that are deficient, and not only by
placing it at the Root, for the Nails have small Arteries, and the Hairs are
hollow, and for the most part triangular, as the Microscope shows, and in the
plica polonica they sweat out Blood: It matters not that the Hairs grow upon
tabid People, and on such as are dead, for in them there is a Dissolution or
Colliquation of the Body, which makes the Hairs grow most, by yielding an
agreeable Nourishment, viz. a sat Vapor exhaling from the Body, as appears
from the Inflammability, the fat Fume, and Odor of them; also from that oily
and clammy Matter that sticks to the Hairs, if they are not frequently
cleans'd. Lastly, They are profitable; for, by keeping the Pores of the Skin
open, they conduce to the Expulsion of a sooty Excrement, as when a Stick is
fixed in the Earth, the Earth about it is dryer. On the Eyelids, they defend
the Eyes, and those on the Head defend it, and the like. The Nails are to
strengthen the Fingers, and render them capable to apprehend small things.

But the Humors and Spirits do not grow, do not live, nor increase vitally,
but only by the Apposition of new Matter, as Rainwater is increased in a Tub,
and yet notwithstanding the Humors are Parts; and indeed, the most noble and
most necessary, as well as the watery Humor of the Eye, which almost all allow
to be a Part, tho it is not nourished and grows.

All the solid Parts are of themselves white, as appears by the washing and
Maceration of them in Water, whereby they put off the Tincture of the Blood,
with which they are all nourished.

First, Parts are divided into fluid and solid; the fluid are the Blood and
Spirits, the solid all that are distinct from them.

Secondly, They are divided into organic, and inorganic.

An organic Part is a Part which requires a special Conformation, for
performing the Action it is peculiarly designed, as the Eye, Ear, Nose, and the
like.

An inorganic Part is a Part which does not require a special Conformation for
performing the Action it is peculiarly designed, as simple Flesh, a Membrane. I
say, the Action for which it is peculiarly designed, because, as to the common
Actions, in all the Parts, for instance Nutrition, no determinate Conformation
is required.

Thirdly, A Part is divided into Principal and Ministering: The principal Part
is that which bestows something on the whole Body, that is absolutely necessary
to Life. The ministering Part is that which does not bestow any thing on the
whole Body that is absolutely necessary to Life.

The principal Parts (at least among the Solids, for among the Fluids, Blood
and Spirits are such) are the Brain, which bestows Spirits on the whole Body,
and the Heart, which bestows Blood on the whole Body; for if the Heart should
not give Blood, the Brain would presently suffer an Eclipse of all its Actions,
and other Parts could not live without this; and if the Brain should not supply
the Heart with Spirits, whereby it is successively constringed, Death would
soon follow. The other Parts minister, especially those which carry, for
instance, the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves: The Stomach, Liver, Lungs, and
Stones, are falsely accounted by some, principal Parts, for they do not supply
any thing that is absolutely necessary to Life; for we live many Days fasting,
or only with nourishing Glysters, and diverse know how to stop their Breath a
great while, and the Liver supplies no more than other Parts, and the
Testicles, tho they make Life more perfect, yet are not absolutely necessary to
Life, as is evident in Eunuchs and Geldings.

Fourthly, A Part is wont to be divided by the Schools, into similar and
dissimilar. A similar is such an one whereof all the Parts appear, at first
View, of the same Substance. A dissimilar is such an one whereof all the Parts
do not appear, at first View, of the same Substance. I say, at first View,
because otherwise, many that are wont to be reckoned similar, are not such, for
there are very few wherein you shall not observe a diverse Substance.

A Bone, a Cartilage, a Fiber, a Membrane, the Cuticle, Skin, Hair, Flesh, a
Tendon, a Gland, Fat, a Nerve, an Artery, a Vein, lymphatic Vessels, the
lacteal Veins, and the like, are counted similar Parts.

Fifthly, a Part is divided into spermatic, sanguine, and mixed; a spermatic
Part is wont to be defined a Part, whose Matter is wholly, in its first
Formation, Seed. A sanguineous Part is a Part, whose Matter is wholly, in its
first Formation, Blood. A mixed Part is a Part, which is made, in its first
Formation, of an equal Portion of Blood and Seed. I say, in its first
Formation, because it is certain, that in the adult they chiefly consist of
Blood, wherewith they are all nourished.

A Bone, a Cartilage, a Nerve, a Fiber, a Tendon, a Membrane, an Artery, a
Vein, the Marrow of the Brain, the Hairs, Nails, and the like, are counted
spermatic: Also the fourfold Flesh, viz. the Flesh of the Muscles, which is
generated of Blood, lightly concreted, and is red and fibrous: The Flesh, or
Parenchyma of the Viscera, which is the proper Substance of each of them, as of
the Reins, Spleen, Liver, and Lungs; the Vessels whereof it strengthens, and
fills up their void Spaces, the particular Flesh of every membranous Part, as
that of the Stomach, Intestines, Womb, Bladder, and the like. Lastly, the
glandulous Flesh, which constitutes the Glands. The Flesh is counted mixed, but
whether all the Parts of it are such, so as that some of them are only
compounded of Seed, and others only of Blood, and others of equal Parts of
both, I much doubt.

Sixthly, A Part is wont to be divided, from its Office, into animal, vital,
and natural: An animal Part is a Part that is principally designed for the
performing animal Functions, such are the animal Spirit, the Brain, spinal
Marrow, Nerves, Eye, Ear, Nose, Tongue, with the Palate, the membranous, and
nervous Parts, and the like, which conduce to animal Actions.

A vital Part is a Part principally contrived for vital Functions; such are the
Heart and Lungs.

A natural Part is a Part principally contrived for natural Functions; Such are
the Stomach, Guts, Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, Genital Parts, and the like.

CHAP. VI. Of a Faculty in general, and of the Species of it.
A Faculty in general, is an internal Principle that formally produces Actions.

Three more general are commonly allowed, viz. The animal Faculty, the vital
Faculty, and the natural Faculty; but I allow only two of them, viz. the animal
Faculty, and the natural, as every Action that is not animal, is truly natural.

An animal Faculty is a Faculty producing animal Actions: This is wont to be
subdivided, as the animal Action, into the sensitive, appetitive, and motive
Faculty; and the sensitive again into external and internal: But all these do
not differ really among themselves, and a part rei, are the very Soul,
considered as the Efficient of this or that Operation.

The natural Faculty is a Faculty producing natural Actions: It is as various
as natural Actions are, and is a part rei, Blood and Spirits, and other
Dispositions of the Parts, as to Magnitude, Figure, and the like, as they
produce natural Actions.

CHAP. VII. Of Action in general, and its Species, but especially of the
internal and external Senses.
ACtion in general is a certain Operation, which is produced in us, either by
the Mind or Body: It is divided into animal and natural. An animal Action is an
Action that is produced by the Soul, and is fivefold, viz. the Understanding,
the Will, Sense, sensitive Appetite, and animal Motion.

Sense is twofold, external and internal. Internal is threefold, viz. common
Sense, Fancy, and Memory. External is fivefold, viz. Sight, Hearing, Tasting,
Smelling, and Touching.

All these animal Actions are not really distinguished from the Soul, nor
consequently among themselves; for the Understanding is the Soul, as it
independently, from the Body, produces certain Thoughts; and the Will is the
Soul, as without Dependence on the Body, it exercises those Affections, which
we call the Operations of Will; and the Sense is the Soul, as it knows some
things by means of a corporeal Organ; and it is internal, if the Organ of it is
the Brain, and external if any other Part be the Organ: It is Sight, if the
Organ of it be the Eye; and Hearing, if the Organ of it be the Ear: It is the
common Sense, as in the Brain, but especially in the middle Part of the Medulla
oblongata, it perceives whatever moves the Organs of the external Senses; this
is only conversant about things present. It is Fancy or Imagination, as it
perceives sensible Objects at a Time wherein they are not perceived by the
external Senses, and forms Images and Representations of them, otherwise called
Phantasms. It is Memory, as by the Footsteps of the Spirits impressed upon the
Brain, it is determined for Remembrance. Lastly, The sensitive Appetite is the
Soul, as upon occasion of a certain Motion of the animal Spirits in the Brain,
it is disposed to have these Affections we call Passions, for instance, Love,
Desire, Hope, Fear, Hatred, and the like: The Action also, whereby the Soul
moves the Spirits, is really the Soul it self.

CHAP. VIII. Of animal Motion, and of the Species of natural Action.
ANimal motion is a motion performed by the Will, whereby the animal Spirits
which always run about the Brain are in readiness for an influx, and presently
flow into the beginnings of the Nerves, and there protrude the Spirits
previously existing to the Muscle, which blow up the Fibers of it, and so make
it shorter and more compact; and so the Member into which it is inserted is
moved.

Natural Actions are various: The chief are the motion of the Heart, the Pulse,
the Circulation of the Blood, Respiration, Hunger, and Thirst, Chylification,
Sanguification, the peristaltic Motion, Nutrition, Accretion, and Generation.

The motion of the Heart is Muscular; for it is constringed on every part by
the duct of the Fibers, it is lessened and grows hard in its motion, in the
same manner other Muscles do. It is twofold, viz. Dilatation or Diastole, in
respect of which the Heart is merely passive; and Contraction or Systole, which
is the action of the Heart.

Both the Auricles of the Heart together, as the Ventricles of it, have their
Systole and Diastole; but the Systole of them is the Diastole of the
Ventricles; and so on the contrary. The Diastole of the Auricles does not so
much depend on the rarefaction of the Blood, as the quantity of it; for the
Blood is forced into them by great Veins. The Diastole was before the Systole,
or otherwise there would have been no Systole; and it partly depends upon the
quantity of the Blood, and partly upon the fermentation and rarefaction of it
by some subtle matter in the Heart, whereby the sides of the Heart are
expanded. The Systole of the Heart is made by the influx of the Animal Spirits.

The Pulse is an alternate dilatation and constriction of the Artery, by reason
of the Bloods being forced into the Arteries. There are at least two Thousand
Pulses in an hours time, in every healthy Man, as any one may find by numbering
them; but they are much altered by the Passions of the Mind: They are quick in
People that are angry, and in those that are cheerful; and when we are
laboring and running: They are slower in such as are sorrowful fearful, and
the like. In Children the Pulse is quick, because the Heart is tender, and soon
irritated, and their Arteries are easily dilated, and their Blood is thin, and
soon rarifies.

The Circulation of the Blood is a motion whereby the Blood continually flows
through the Arteries from the Heart, and returns to it again by the Veins. This
Circulation of the Blood is so obvious, that none needs doubt of it; for in
bleeding in the Arm, a Quart of Blood, yea, the whole Mass may be drawn away,
and it cannot be supposed that so much Blood was contained in the Arm.
Circulation also is manifest from the Valves of the Veins, which are so
disposed as to remit the Blood to the Heart, but not on the contrary.

The manner of Circulation is as follows; the Blood is carried from the Vena
cava, ascending and descending, to the right Auricle of the Heart, and thence
to the right Ventricle of the Heart, and after it has been rarefied in this
Ventricle, it is conveyed into the Artery of the Lungs, and from thence into
the Vein of the Lungs, and the left Auricle of the Heart, and so into the left
Ventricle of the Heart, and then, after another Rarefaction of it there, it is
driven into the Arteria Aorta ascending, and descending, and dispersed through
the whole Body; and from thence again it is carried as before, through the
corresponding Branches of the Vena cava, into the right Auricle of the Heart
immediately, by Inosculation of the Branches, and Transudation from the Artery,
into the adjoining Vein, or mediately through the middle Flesh, betwixt the veiny
and arterial Branches, and through the Sinus's and their Branches in the Brain,
where the Blood is absorbed from the Carotide and vertebral Arteries; and from
these it is carried to the Juguiars.

It is manifest that the Blood circulates through the Flesh, because, when it is
pressed, it grows white, the Blood then flying away; but when that returns, it
looks red as before. Moreover, in blushing, the Face looks red, the Blood
flying to it. The Blood enters the Flesh by the fine simple and porous Tunics
of the capillary Arteries, or through the Extremities of them.

In a Foetus the Blood is otherwise circulated; namely, in part, from the Vena
cava, through the foramen ovale, it passes into the Vein of the Lungs, nor does
all pass through the right Ventricle of the Heart, but enters from the Artery of
the Lungs into the Aorta, a membranaceous Tube being stretched from that to
this, and so it does not pass again through the left Ventricle of the Heart.
Another part goes the ordinary way. This other Motion of the Blood is rather in
a Foetus than those that are born; in whom, after some Days, the said Passages
are shut.

The End of Circulation is the Nutrition of the Parts, the heating of the Body,
and the Generation of the vital and animal Spirits, and to preserve the Blood
from Coagulation.

A certain Time cannot be set for the Circulation of the Blood, for it is less
in hot People than in cold; because in these, by reason of a quicker
Rarefaction of the Blood, the Heart is sooner irritated to constriction,
whereby the Blood is driven out. The Time is also less in such as are in
Motion, than in those that are quiet; because in such, by a Contraction of the
Muscles, the Vessels are, by turns, more straightened, and the Blood flows
quicker. Lower thinks the Blood circulates in an Hour. The Quickness of the
Circulation of the Blood appears hence, viz. if one of the Carotide Arteries be
only cut, all the Blood will flow out in the 12th. Part of an Hour, and if so,
how soon would it run out if the Aorta were cut?

Respiration is a Motion, whereby the Air is alternately drawn into the Lungs,
and expelled out: It consists of Inspiration and Expiration. Inspiration is
partly made by the Dilatation of the Breast, and partly by the elastick Force
of the Air, and partly by the Pressure which it has from the Weight of the
incumbent Atmosphere. The Breast is dilated chiefly by the internal and
external intercostal Muscles. Expiration is made by the Constriction of the
Breast and Lungs, also by the Heat and Rarefaction of the Air in the Lungs.

Respiration is a spontaneous Action, because it is performed when we know
nothing of it, but it is it some sort voluntary, because we can quicken or
retard it as we will.

The chief End of Respiration is Voice; to perform which there is need of Air:
Besides, by this means some fuliginous and adust Particles are carried off.
Those whose Lungs do not move freely, as crooked People, and the like, are
subject to Consumptions; because their Lungs not being sufficiently dilated and
contracted, cannot well free themselves from the fuliginous Vapors of the
Blood, and other acrid and gross Particles, upon which account they are subject
to Obstructions, and at length to Corruption.

Diverse can continue under Water a notable while without breathing, because
they know how to fill themselves with Air before, and because they are less
hot; but some say that they have a way of putting their Hands to their Mouth,
and so to separate the Air from the Water.

Hysteric Women are said to live a long while without breathing, yet I suppose
they do breath, tho the Standers by do not perceive it, or at least, the Air
passes of its own accord, into their Lungs, and out again, and this perhaps may
suffice for them.

The Motion of the Brain is the constant Motion of it made alternately by the
Systole and Diastole, according to its Substance, and independent from the
Meninges.

Hunger is a troublesome Sense of Vellication in the Stomach, whereby we are
disposed to crave for some solid thing to take it off. This Vellication
proceeds from an Acid in the Stomach.

We are more hungry in the Winter than in the Summer; because then the Ferment
of the Stomach is more acrid, and, by reason of less Transpiration, more
plentiful.

That an Acid is the Cause of Hunger is proved, because Acids increase it, and
restore it when it is lost, and those things take it away, which destroy or
attemperate an Acid; for instance, Crab's-eyes, Hartshorn calcined, Pear's, fat
things, Spirit of Wine, and the like: If Hunger be continued long, it at length
lessens of its own accord, because the Acid is dried up, or overwhelmed by
other Humors drawn from the Stomach.

Some think that Hunger is occasioned by Suction, whereby the Veins suck from
the Liver, the Liver from the Guts, the Guts from the Stomach; but this is so
vain, that it is scarce worth refuting, for there is no Suction in the Parts,
much less such a continual one.

Thirst is a troublesome Sense of Vellication in the Mouth and Jaws, whereby we
are disposed to crave for some liquid thing to take it off; the Cause is
Siccity, or a salt Humor or Vapor.

We sometimes put off Thirst by holding in our Mouths a leaden Bullet, or the
like, not because Humidity flows from these, but because, by the Motion of them
and the Tongue, the salivary Ducts are more opened, and the Spittle flows out.

Liquid things take off Thirst, by moistening and diluting the saline Particles.

Spirit of Wine quenches the Thirst of Travelers at the Beginning, by opening
the salivary Ducts, and by helping the Propulsion of Moisture, but it
afterward increases it.

Chilification is the Conversion of Meat and Drink into Chile; it is chiefly
made in the Stomach and Guts, but it begins in the Mouth.

The efficient Cause of Chilification is partly Spittle, but especially some
acid Humor. It is made in the following manner: Hard Meat is first chewed by
the Teeth, and often turned about in the Mouth by the Motion of the Tongue, and
by the Jaws and Lips, and is moistened with Spittle, and then is conveyed to
the Stomach, partly by the Weight of it, and partly by the Contraction of the
annular Fibers of the Oefophagus. If the Meat is solid, it is slowly dissolved
in the Stomach; but if it is liquid, it is soon digested. The Stomach presently
embraces the Meat on every side with its Fibers, and both its Orifices, at
least the upper, is somewhat contracted, but both of them are somewhat shut,
even when the Stomach is empty, lest any thing should regurgitate from the Guts
to the Mouth, or the indigested Meat should fall into the Guts. This Closure is
made by many carnous and nervous Fibers, wherewith both Orifices are composed
in the manner of a nervous and carnous Ring, the Meat being included in the
Stomach, is impregnated with Spittle, and the acid Humor that sweats out of
the Sides of the Stomach, and sometime after it is bedewed with the Spittle and
an acid Humor, it becomes spongy and porous in the Stomach, because now its
Parts are fermented by subtle Matter; afterward it appears torn into small
Pieces, and at length the whole is reduced to the Consistence of Cream, and
then Chylification is finished in the Stomach: But all Meat, and every Part of
it does not turn to Chyle in the Stomach altogether: but the softer and finer,
a little and well chewed is turned to Chyle soonest, Caeteris paribus; and
therefore that which is eaten first may not be first digested, because it may
be grosser and more viscid. Things boiled, Caeteris paribus, are sooner
digested than roasted things, and such things as are not smoaked, sooner than
such as are: Milk or Broth is digested in the Space of an Hour, and in a great
measure distributed: Bread is pretty soon dissolved, so are Pot Herbs and
Pulse; but Fish and Flesh require longer Time: That Meat which is dissolved,
does not stay in the Stomach till all be so, but that which is first dissolved
is first conveyed to the lower Orifice, and transmitted through it. That this is
so, the opening of many Dogs after eating, makes appear, and we judge that it
is so in Men; but seeing Chylification is so various it cannot be limited to a
certain Time, for some Peoples Stomachs are so strong, that the Chyle is
perfected in in three, four, or five Hours at most; whereas on the contrary,
the Stomach of some is so weak, that eight, ten, or thirteen Hours are required
to perfect Chylification: But generally speaking, seven Hours are sufficient:
But the certain Sign of Chylification is the craving after more Meat.

A further Chylification and Fermentation are made in the Guts; for first, the
Chyle carries to the Guts from the Stomach, the digestive Humor well mixed
with it, and new Spittle, and an acid Humor, continually slow to the Stomach,
and so a new ferment of it is continually generated, and passes from the
Stomach to the Chyle expelled; yea, it is probable, that some acid Humor
continually flows from the Meseraick Arteries, as in the Stomach, upon all the
Guts that are near it.

Digestion is better made in the Night when we sleep than in the Day when we
are awake, at least the Assumption being equal, and other things alike; for in
Sleep, the Blood and Spirits, being not so much carried to the external Parts
of the Body, the Stomach receives more Acid and Heat, and is the more nearly
contracted, and so the better embraces the Meat; and consequently the Supper,
which is contrary to Custom now adays, ought to be a fuller Meal than the
Dinner; and though the Time betwixt Dinner and Supper, is less than betwixt the
Supper and the next Days Dinner, yet you must know, that that which is eaten at
a large Dinner, is often not fully digested before Supper, and so the Stomach
has a double Task.

Chylification is also better in Winter than in Summer, and therefore we are
sooner hungry in Winter, we eat more, and grow fat; and this Reason confirms,
because in Winter the Acid of the Stomach being less resolved, abounds more.

Sanguification is the Conversion of Chyle into Blood; this is done in the
whole Body, but especially in the Heart, and in the left Ventricle of it,
wherein the Particles of Chyle are much rarefied and agitated with the
Particles of the Blood.

The Cause of Sanguification is our Heat or natural Fire, which remaining after
the foregoing Fermentation of the Blood in the Heart, insinuates it self
presently into the Pores of the other Blood coming into the Heart, mixed with
the Chyle, in the Passage whereof, when it meets with some Particles that
disagree with it, Fermentation arises among the Particles of the Chyle, and
with the Blood in the Heart and Arteries, whereby they are lessened by degrees,
rendered flexible, and disposed to Redness.

That Heat is the Cause of Redness, and consequently, the Author of
Sanguification, none will deny, who sees Quinces, that before were white, Beer,
and other things, to grow red by boiling, and that some chemical Liquors poured
upon one another ferment and become red.

But there are some, notwithstanding, will not have Sanguification to be made
by any Fermentation in the Heart, denying that the Blood is so rarefied and
agitated in the Heart by a subtle Matter, for these Reasons; First, because in
this case so great a Quantity of Blood would fall upon the Ventricles of the
Heart, as would endanger the breaking of them. Secondly, Because the Blood does
not stay a sufficient Time in the Heart for such a Rarefaction, and if it were
put upon a Fire, it would not rarifie so soon. Thirdly, that the Heart being
pricked, the Blood comes out frothy. To the first I answer, that so much Blood
does not enter into the Ventricles, as to fill them with its Quantity; for the
Auricles, which are as it were the Measures of the Ventricles, are not so
great; besides, the fleshy Walls of them have their Expansibility, to which,
when they are extended, the Heart is irritated, and presently contracts, and so
there is no Danger of a Rupture. To the second I answer, that it ought not to
continue long, because the Blood is in a manner previously endued with
sufficient Heat, as we see Milk rarefied, being removed from the Fire, subsides
a little, and being put on again, presently rarifies more; and the reason why
Blood does not rarifie so soon on the Fire as in the Heart, is because the
subtle Matter, whereby it is very apt to rarifie, is lost, when the Blood is
drawn out. To the third I answer, that this may be, because so soon as it comes
out of the Heart, much of the subtle Matter flies away; and therefore, upon the
whole, we suppose, that Sanguification is perfected in us by Fermentation.

The peristaltick Motion of the Guts is a Motion whereby the Stomach and Guts
are continually and successively straightened from the Beginning to the End,
and creep amongst themselves like Worms. This is proved by our constantly
seeing it in the Dissection of living Animals. Perhaps some will say, that this
is a Convulsion and preternatural, but I think this ought not to be suspected,
because it also appears in a Dog, a very small Apertion of the Belly being only
made, which may be done by less Pain than will cause a Convulsion, especially
if the Dog be young. Besides, those annular and carnous Fibers in the Tunicks
of the Intestines, that have so many Nerves, show the same; also the Protrusion
of the Chyle and Faeces through the Guts, which would be otherwise very
difficult, by reason of so many Turnings and Windings, and so be the Cause of
Putrefaction, and slow Nutrition.

This Motion is made by a successive Inflation, and Contraction of the annular
Fibers, by the animal Spirits, and also by the Retraction of the right Fibers.

Nutrition is the Conversion of the Aliment into the Substance of the living
Body, whereby the living Body, according to all its integral Parts, keeps
proportionably the same Quantity; and therefore the Restoration ought to be
precisely as much, as the Diminution is.

Nutrition is necessary to all Animals, not only in respect of the Augmentation
of their Parts, while they are little Embryo's, but also in respect of their
Conservation after, during Life; because their Bodies being in a natural
Consumption, or Exhaustion, would inevitably be soon resolved into their first
Elements, unless the Providence of Nature had ordained a continual Renovation
or Reparation of Parts, by Substitution, and Assimulation of fresh Matter in
the room of those Particles dispersed and consumed.

The efficient Cause of the perpetual Consumption of our Bodies, seems to be
what all Philosophers unanimously hold it to be, the vital Heat of the Blood,
therein first kindled, by the plastic Spirit continually renewed by the vital
Spirit, and by the Arteries diffused to all Parts of the Body, that they may
thereby be warmed, cherished, and enlivened. This vital Heat continually
glowing within us, and principally in the Ventricles of the Heart, consisting
in a certain Motion of the various Particles of the Blood, and in some Degree,
analogous to Fire or Flame, I cannot conceive how it is possible for it to
subsist or continue, for so much as one Moment of Time, unless it be maintained
by convenient Fuel, which is thereby uncessantly fed upon, and by degrees
consumed, for it is of the Nature of all Fire, how gentle, or mild soever, to
generate and conserve it self, only by preying upon, and destroying the Matter
wherein it is generated. This vital Heat therefore, without Intermission,
agitating, dissolving, and consuming the minute and most easily exsoluble
Particles of the Body, must be the efficient Cause of the perpetual Consumption
of our Bodies; so that in truth we have one and the same Cause both of our
Life, and of our Death; and to speak more properly, our very Life is nothing
but a continual Death, and we live because we die; for we live so long, as
while this internal vestal Heat is kept glowing in the Blood, and when it
ceases to glow, either for want of convenient Sustenance, or by violent
Suffocation, the Life is instantly extinguished.

The Matter consumed, I humbly conceive to be, for the greatest part, the fluid
Parts of the Body, chiefly the Blood and Spirits which are most easily
exsoluble, and somewhat, though but little of the Substance also of the solid
Parts; for Experience teaches, that diverse Animals, Bears, Dormice, Swallows,
and the like, sleep the whole Winter, without receiving any Supply of Aliment,
and yet have all the solid Parts of their Bodies as large and firm, when they
awake again in the Spring, as when they first betook themselves to their Dens
and Dormitories, and the reason hereof seems to be this, that their vital Heat
being all that time calm and gentle, consumes their Blood and Spirits but
slowly, and very little of their solid Parts, as a Lamp burns long, when the
Oil that seeds it is much, and the Flame but little and calm. We have Examples
also of Leucophlegmatic Virgins; who, from a gradual Decay of Appetite, have
fallen at length into an absolute Aversion from all Food, and endured long
Abstinence without either Miracle or Imposture, and yet notwithstanding, have
not been emaciated in Proportion to the Time of their fasting; whence it is
probable, that in our Bodies there is not so rapid and profuse an Expense, or
Exhaustion of the Substance of the solid Parts, as heretofore many learned
Physicians have imagined to be made by the Activity of the vital Heat.

It is difficult, if not impossible, to make an accurate Computation of the
daily Expenses of this vital Heat; for so great is the Difference among Men, in
respect of Temperament, Diet, Age, Exercise, the Season of the Year, and
various other Circumstances, that a definite Calculation cannot be made of this
Dispense, no not in those who keep to the strictest Rules of an ascetic Life,
weighing themselves and their Meat and Drink, as Cornaro is repored to have
done daily. We may indeed conjecture, from the static Experiments of
Sanctorius, that the Expense is great, for instance, if forty Pounds of Meat
and Drink be supposed sufficient to maintain a Man of middle Stature, sober and
of good Health, for ten Days, and about twenty Pounds be assigned to the
Excrements voided by Stool and Urine in that Time, the other twenty Pounds may
be reasonably ascribed to insensible Transpiration; but still this is mere
Conjecture.

As to the Restoration, the efficient Principle is certainly the very same
with the generant or formative; because Generation cannot be effected without
Augmentation, and Augmentation is Nutrition: And I conceive, that Life consists
in, and depends upon a continual Generation of the vital Spirits out of the
most subtle, active, and volatile Parts of the Blood, and that Nutrition
consists in Reparation of what is consumed by Apposition and Assimulation of
consimular and congenerous Matter. The material or constituent Principle I take
to be a certain mild, sweet, and balsamic Liquor, analogous to the White of an
Egg, and they are mistaken, who think that the Parts of the Body, being in
Substance diverse, the Parts of the Aliment also ought to be equally diverse,
as if Nutrition were really nothing but Selection, and simular Attraction of
convenient Aliment, and that there were not required in every single Part, a
Concoction, Assimulation, Apposition, and Transmutation of one Matter common to
all; for first, it is a difficult Question, whether there be in Nature any such
thing as Attraction or not, and to prove simular Attraction is yet more
difficult, so that the very Foundation of this Opinion is merely precarious.
Moreover, it is evident, that the Aliment common to all the Parts, is simular,
not heterogeneous, it being the proper Work of the plastic Power still
remaining in every Animal, as to form all the various Parts out of the same
homogeneous Matter at first, so to augment and repair them all during Life, out
of like Matter, by transforming that into the Substance of every Part, which is
indeed potentially all Parts, but actually none, as out of the same Rainwater
all sorts of Plants receive their Nourishment.

As to the manner how this homogeneous Matter is by the plastic Power
accommodated to the Refection of all the various Parts of the Body; most
probable it is, that this admirable Work is gradually done by Distribution,
Apposition, Affixion, or Agglutination, and Assimulation, or Transmutation; all
which Acts must be successively performed, before the Operation can be
complete; for the Succus nutritious being prepared first in the Stomach and
Guts, and then in other Parts, to that end ordained, must be distributed,
brought home, and apponed to all Parts, that need Refection; then from
Contiguity by Apposition, it must be advanced to Continuity by Affiction or
Agglutination, and in fine, made of the same Substance with each Part by
Assimulation or Transmutation, which is the Perfection, or ultimate Term of
Nutrition.

Generation is a Production of Nature, whereby one living Creature is formed in
the Similitude of another.

Generation is performed in the following manner, the virile Seed is injected
into the Sheath of the Womb, and from thence is elevated a certain seminal Air
or Spirit, which flies through the inner Mouth of the Womb, to the Bottom of it,
and thence to the Fallopian Tubes, and so to the Testicles or Ovaria of the
Woman. Some think that the most spirituous Portion of the Seed is imbibed by
the Substance of the Womb, and so conveyed with the Blood, to the Ovaria, to
fecundate them: But our way is the easier and shorter, at the same time the
Woman, by reason of Pleasure and Titulation, is wont to emit a certain serous
Humor, which may conduce to Conception, though it be not Seed, by diluting and
rarifying the virile Seed, and by rendering the Separation of the seminal Spirit
more easy, and by elevating it to the Ovaria, and so the seminal Air being
raised from the virile Seed, that which is gross remains in the Sheath, is
dissipated and slides out; and that we are generated by this seminal Air, and
not by gross Seed, may be proved by Superfoetation, or new Conception in those
that are with Child; for in such the Mouth of the Womb is close shut, so that
nothing but a Spirit can pass. Moreover, this may be proved by some that
generate, tho by reason of the Brevity and Debility of the Penis, never cast
their Seed into the Bottom of the Womb, which certainly could not be, if the
Air alone of it were not sufficient for Generation; and do we not see that a
Cock generates without the Ejection of Seed, and merely, as I may say, by
touching the Fundament of the Hen with a moistened Penis, and yet this Place is
far distant from the Ovaria in a Hen; what therefore can conduce to the
breeding of Eggs, may consequentto the Generation of Men? This seminal Air
therefore being conveyed from the Bottom of the Womb through the Fallopian Tubes,
into the Ovaria, there insinuates it self into one Egg or more, as they are
nearer to its Entrance, or more disposed to receive and nourish it; and hence
it is, why all the Eggs are not fecundated at once, and ordinarily but a few;
and why not always at the first Congress. The Eggs are best fecundated, when a
Woman is nearest the Time of her Courses, by reason of the greater Porosity of
her Womb and Testicles, whereby the seminal Air is the easier received into the
Eggs. The Eggs are contained in membranous Cups like Acorns, and indeed very
loosly, so that they may be expelled out of them by the Breath only. The
fecundated Egg being turgid and rarefied by the seminal Spirit, can no longer
contain it self in its Cup, but falls from it of its own accord into the
Fallopian Tube, and from thence, by a successive Constriction of all the
Fibers, it is forced into the Bottom of the Womb.

CHAP. IX. Of things nonnatural in general.
THings nonnatural are things necessary for the Preservation of Health, but
hurt it when ill applied; such are the ambient Air, Meat and Drink, Sleep and
Watching, Motion and Rest, things to be evacuated and retained. These things
indifferently do good or Hurt, as they are well or ill applied: But we must
understand, that what is good for one, may be hurtful for another, according to
the Nature and Custom in diverse People, whereunto much is to be attributed in
the Use of nonnatural things; yea, the same thing may do good at one time, and
hurt at another.

We do not consider Air here simply and by it self, but as it encompasses us,
that is, as it has various Corpuscles mixed with it, and as it can affect us
with them: But it generally affects our Bodies, either extrinsically, that is,
by insinuating it self into the Pores of the Skin, or intrinsically being
breathed in; and either way variously, as it is by it self diverse, or by being
mixed with other things, so if there is much Water mixed with it, it may
moisten us much, and if it be very subtle, it may heat us much, and if it be
mixed with narcotic things, as in some places it is, it may make us drowsy,
yea, induce a deadly Sleep: If it be infected with a pestilential Contagion, or
with any other ill thing, it may occasion the Plague, or some other Disease.

It is disputed by some, whether Air or Aliment affects us most; but because
the manner of both is diverse, it cannot be so exactly judged of, yet it is
certain, we are much affected by both, and indeed more contitinually by the
Air, than Aliment; for we can scarce continue a Moment without Air, for unless
it attemperate the Heat of the Blood, it will be soon choked; but we are more
sensibly and vehemently affected with Aliment, by reason of the Grossness and
Density of it.

If you ask what Air is most proper for the Preservation of Health, I say, a
pure and limpid Air, that is ventilated with wholesome Winds, and free from
nasty Exhalations, from Carcases. and Sinks, and the like; and such an one I
judge proper for any healthy Man: But when any Quality exceeds its contrary, it
requires an Air that is excessive in the contrary, so a hot Air is proper for a
Man that is very cold, and cold Air for one that is very hot, and for Diversity
of Ages, Diversity of Air is proper, for with them the Temperament is changed,
and therefore with the virile Age, which is most temperate and perfect, a
temperate Air best agrees.

To the Air are to be reduced Winds, Regions, and Stats, for by these the State
of the Air is much changed. The Wind is nothing else than the Air, togegether
with Exhalations and Vapors adhering to it, agitated about the Earth, the Wind
is useful in moving the Air about, and thereby preserving it from Putrefaction,
and it dissipates Filth that is mixed with the Air. Sailers reckon twenty four
Winds, some twelve, others 16; but the chief of them are those four which are
called Cardinal, namely, the North, which is cold and dry, the South, which is
hot and moist, the East, which is hot and dry, the West, which is cold and
moist. The South Wind is the most unwholesome, because it occasions a Dullness
of the Senses, and burdens all the Actions and Parts. The North is also bad,
next to that the West, but the best of all is the East, especially breathing in
a Morning, for then it is purer, because it breaths from a Place where the Sun
is. The West is also good, if it blow in the Evening.

A Region is a Part of Earth, where there is a great Difference in the first
Qualities, by reason of a more right or oblique Motion of the Sunbeams.
Regions are chiefly five, viz. the Aequinoctial placed under the Zodiac, the
North lying in a Space betwixt the Circle of Cancer and the Arctick Pole, the
Meridian in the Space betwixt Capricorn and the Antarctick Pole, the Oriental
and the Occidental.

CHAP. X. Of Meat and Drink.
MEat is a solid and gross Aliment, that chiefly takes off Hunger; it is said
chiefly, because the thinner Part of it may quench Thirst, as thick Drink may
appease Hunger. How great the Necessity of both is, and how easily we are hurt
by them, every one knows.

All Aliment is either taken from Plants or Animals, but that nourishes less
than this, because this has a Matter more agreeable to ours; namely, of almost
the same Aliment and Chyle, and more agreeable to our Parts and Pores; and
therefore easier adheres to them. Minerals do not nourish, because they have
Parts too much disagreeable to ours, and cannot adhere to them, by reason of
their Rigidity; but indeed, Chemists say, that aurum potabile protracts Life;
but if this be true, it does it upon another account, and not by nonrishing;
namely, by strengthening the Blood, and discussing its superfluous Humidity,
and by raising the languid Heat in old Men.

Some Meat is of good Juice, that is, nourishes much; some of ill Juice; some
is easily digested, some more difficultly; and some is easily corrupted in the
Stomach, other not, and of those which are easily digested, and of those which
are not easily digested, some are of good Juice, some not: All Meat that soon
dissolves, soon nourishes; but all of it does not nourish much, because it may
be of an improper Juice; for such things as nourish much, ought to participate
of Grosness and Viscosity, which, Caeteris paribus, are slower dissolved.

Meat of the best Juice, of easy Digestion, and of the fewest Excrements, is
best, and the contrary worst.

Bread is made of various Corn, but the best of good Wheat well fermented
before, whereof the finest is called White-bread, made of the finest Meal, the
purest, softest, and lightest, and freed from all the Bran, and this is most
nourishing. The next Degree is not free from all the Bran, but only from the
grosser. Household Bread has all the Bran and Flower mixed together confusedly.
There is also a sort of Bread that is courser, which consists more of Bran than
of Flower, and this nourishes laest. Among all these Kinds, the Houshold-bread
is the most wholesome; because, by reason of the Bran joined with it, it does
not obstruct so much, and loosens the Belly, and moderately nourishes; but the
finest, and the next Sort, cause Obstructions by their Viscidity, the coursest
nourishes least, but more or less, according to the Bran: This is most used by
poor People, and so is Rye-bread, which is harder, black, and offends the
Stomach.

Of the Flesh of four-footed Beasts, Veal is the best, next to that Mutton and
Kid; of Fowl, Chicken, Capons, Pigeons, Patridges; of Sea Fish, Cod-fish; of
River Fish, a Perch, a Gudgeon, a Pike. Of those things that come from
Animals, Eggs and Milk are the best; of Fruits, Raisins and Figs: But these
that are said to be the best and most healthful, are not good for every body,
nor does any agree with every body; but every one must find out what best
agrees with him: For those that have a good Stomach, or labor much, as
Countrymen, Soldiers, and Sailers, Beef and Pork is best, because they want a
solid and gross Blood, which nourishes much, and does not so soon wast.

Fish are suspected by many, but undeservedly; for they make good Blood of a
moderate Consistence, and are easily digested.

The manner in eating ought to be such, that the gross ought to be eat first;
for though I suppose that there is a Confusion of all things taken into the
Stomach, and that the Order of Assumption does not continue long, yet the
grosser being taken first, may be sooner worked upon by the Acid of the
Stomach. We ought to eat when we are hungry, and when the Stomach is empty; but
some are hungry when their Stomachs are full, by reason of too great Quantity
of the Acid, and in this Case the Hunger must not be taken off by Meats,
because it is not natural.

I cannot say in general how often we ought to eat in a Day, for such as are
choleric may eat three or four times a Day moderately; such as are phlegmatic
may eat once a Day, because they bear Hunger better, and do not consume so much
Blood. Such as are melancholy may eat twice or thrice a Day. We ought to eat so
much at a time as will take off Hunger without burthening the Stomach, or so
much as the Stomach can concoct without leaving Crudities behind it; the
Quantity of the Meat is to be varied according to the Constitution, Strength,
and Age; so one Quantity is proper for Youth, another for Age, another for a
weak Man, another for a strong Man, another for a healthy Man, another for a
sick Man, another for a choleric Man, another for a flegmatic Man, and such a
Quantity for one that exercises his Body, and less for one that exercises his
Mind: But it is better to eat somewhat too much than too little; and therefore
it is better to indulge the Appetite somewhat, for so the Stomach will be
accustomed to bear sometimes small Excesses, and to concoct something more.

And as the Quantity of Meats ought to be adapted to the Constitutions, so the
Quality ought to be so too, according to the Diversity of Tempers, Age, Time,
and Custom; so those that are hot and dry ought to use cooling and moistening
Diet, so Children require more tender Diet than Youths or Men, and a cooler
Diet ought to be used in Summer than in Winter. Meats boiled sooner turn to
Chyle than roasted Meat; but roasted Meat nourishes more, because it more abounds
with nutritive Juice, as may be seen by cutting it with a Knife; for the hard
Crust without keeps in the Gravey, which is dispersed in the Broth of boiled
Meat; therefore roasted Meat is most proper for Laborers, and boiled Meat for
those that live a sedentary Life.

Drink is a thin and liquid Aliment, chiefly used to quench Thirst. The
chiefest kind of Drinks are Water, Wine, and Beer. It is disputed concerning
Water, whether it nourishes; but I say it nourishes; for it is not a simple
Element, and many Men live pretty well that drink only Water, and seem to be
refreshed by it; and we see that Water alone nourishes a long while, and that
Fish increase, being kept in Troughs; and so Plants and Fruits are nourished by
Water. There are many Species of Water, there is Rainwater, Well-water,
Fountain Water, Lake-water, Snow-water, and Ice-water. The best Water is that
which is limpid and Sweet, or rather without any Taste or Color, so that the
Goodness of Water is to be judged of by the Absence of Color, Taste, and
Smell. Some think that the lightest Water is best, but this is not to be judged
of by the Scale; for often ill Water weighs less than good; but the meaning is,
it sits lighter upon the Stomach and Bowels. Fountain Water is the best, if it
be strained through good Earth; next to it Rainwater, which is lighter, thinner,
and clearer, but is worse, by reason of diverse Vapors and Exhalations, which
are mixed with it. Well-water is very unwholesome, because it is counted to
stagnate, and is not agitated by the Rays of the Sun, and if the Well be
covered, it is much worse That which is taken out of the midst of a River is
better, if it be clear, and if the Stream be rapid. The Water of a Lake is very
ill, by reason of the Stagnation. Worst of all is Ice or Snow-Water; for it is
very impure and crude. In short, the best is the pure, clear, and subtle Water;
which being set on the Fire, soon heats, and taken thence, is soon cool. Let
the Fountain be situate toward the East, and run to the North. The Water which
runs on pure Earth is better than such as runs upon Stones.

It is good for hot, fat, and fleshy Men, and mixed with Wine for such as use
much Labor and Exercise: And though it does not nourish much, yet it refreshes,
and is a Vehicle for the Food; it excites Appetite, and opportunely given in
burning Fevers, it does good; for it is very contrary to the Nature of a Fever,
for it refreshes and moistens the Body; but it is bad for such as have weak
Stomachs, and that are troubled with Convulsions. Ill Water is corrected by
beaten Pepper, or with Anise-seeds, and for sick Men boil therewith Cinnamon,
and the like. Honey-Water or Metheglin has great Virtues, it takes away Thirst,
cures cold Infirmities of the Brain, Nerves, and Joints. It is good against
Coughs, cuts and expells gross Phlegm, moves the Body, and purges the Passages
of the Urine.

Wine is expressed from the Grape. There are various Differences of it
according to the Color, Smell, Grossness, Tenuity, and Age. Wine is hot and
dry; the best Wine is that which tastes rough, and sweetish. Sweet Wine
nourishes much, is a Friend to the Breast, but soon increases Choler: Rough
Wine, on the contrary, is injurious to the Breast, and binds much: Fragrant
Wine refreshes the Spirits much, but afterward it disorders the Head. Yellow
Wine is hotter than white; it is aperitive, and forces Urine. Red Wine
strengthens the Stomach, and other Parts, and makes laudable Blood; but if it
be gross, it breeds gross Blood, nourishes more, and causes Obstructions. That
which is thin is more aperitive than that which is gross, it sooner passes, and
does not nourish so much. New Wine is not so hot as old, but generates Wind,
unless it loosen the Belly. Old Wine disturbs the Head: Rhenish Wine, by reason
of its great Tenuity and Crudity, stirs up the Humors into a Flux, and
separates them from the Mass, and occasions the Gout.

Of all the Liquors we drink, Wine may justly claim the Superiority; for it is
more wholesome, and by reason of its subtle and penetrating Substance, it mixes
better with the Mass than Water and other Drinks: Besides, it is very pleasant
and grateful to the Palate, it restores the radical Moisture, and chears the
Heart, and is the most certain Prop and Maintenance of our Life; and therefore
our Forefathers called the Vine Vitis, quasi vita, as if it were the Tree of
Life: But the Use thereof is to be regulated by these 12 following
Instructions; 1st. When the Wine is strong and full of Spirit, we must always
mix Water therewith; 2dly. Never drink Wine after Dinner nor Supper, till the
Concoction of the Food be ended; for then it helps Nourishment, penetrating
more easily the Body; whereas at first it will hinder Digestion. 3dly. You must
have a care that you do not drink Wine cooled with Snow or Ice-Water, for it is
very pernicious to the Brain, Sinews, Breast, Stomach, Kidneys, and Bladder.
4thly. You must avoid drinking Wine fasting, because it troubles the
Understanding, occasions the Cramp, and is exceeding hurtful to the Brain and
Nerves. 5thly. It is not convenient to drink a large Quantity of thin Wine
after moist Fruit. 6thly. If at the same Table both strong and small Wine are
used, begin with the small, reserving the strong for the last, which comforts
the Mouth of the Stomach, and helps Digestion. 7thly. By how much the Food is
more cold and gross, by so much the more need is there of strong Wine: But when
the Food is more subtle, hot, and digestable, let the Wine be weak; and
therefore such as feed on Beef and Fish are to drink stronger Wine than such as
feed on Pullets, and the like. 8thly. Such as use much Wine, ought not to eat
much, for Wine serves instead of Meat and Drink; and therefore Nature cannot
easily digest them both. 9thly. Wine that is weakened with Water is wholesomer
than that which is naturally weak; for the later more easily putrifies. 10thly.
Such as have a weak Brain and hot Stomach, and dwell in sultry Countries, ought
to drink a little Wine, mixing Water therewith: But if cold, more Wine and less
Water will not be amiss. 11thly. You must observe the Season of the Year, for
in Winter drink very sparingly, but strong Wine; in Summer more largely, but
small and mixed with Water. 12thly. You must consider the Age, for as Wine is
very bad for Children, so it is most proper for old Men, seeing that it
qualifies and allays their cold Complexion; and therefore Plato denies Wine to
Children, gives young Men leave to drink it moderately, and allows old Men a
more plentiful Use thereof, saying, that young Men, before they are twenty two
Years old ought not to drink any Wine, because that will add Fire to their Fire.

Good Wine ought to be clean, pure, and clear; it must be of an excellent
Odor, for such Wines increase the subtle Spirits, nourish excellently, and
breed good Blood; it must taste pleasantly, but most not be sharp nor sweet;
for if sweet, it inflames, obstructs, and fills the Head; if sharp or sour, it
hurts the Nerves and Stomach, and begets Crudities.

Wine, if used discreetly and moderately, does communicate innumerable
Benefits, both to Body and Mind; for as to the Mind, it is rendered more secure
and calm, the Spirits are strengthened, and dilate themselves, Joy and Gladness
are augmented, sad and unpleasant Thoughts are banished; it clears the
Understanding, excites the Wit, takes away Melancholy, incourages the Spirits,
and enlivens them; it is very nourishing, resists Putrefaction, helps
Digestion, and breeds good Blood, cuts Phlegm, expels Wind, provokes Sleep,
excites Appetite, fattens healthy Men, opens Obstructions, concocts crude
Humors, and is the Theriaca magna of the Ancients.

New Wine is of difficult Digestion, offends the Bowels, causes Wind and the
Bloody Flux.

Old Wine is hot and dry, and the older it is, the more Heat it acquires. The
best is odoriferous and full of Spirits: It is naught for Copulation, because
it dries up the Seed. It is naught for young Men and choleric Persons; but
good for old Men, especially in the Winter.

Beer and Ale are common and familiar Drinks in England, and no doubt it is
profitable and wholesome, as Experience shows: But the different Preparations,
or Brewing thereof, make no small Difference in the Drink. The Difference of
Waters also, whereof it is made, is greatly to be considered; therefore,
according to their Natures, you must judge of the Drink; also the Difference of
the Corn or Grain is to be considered; as Drinks made of Wheat-malt nourish
most. Some People mix Wheat and Barley together: Others mix some Oats with Barley
for Malt: Generally in Ale are used no Hops, or less Hops than in Beer;
therefore Ale is more nourishing, and loosens the Belly.

Cider is a cold Liquor, it is very pleasant indeed, but is windy; it is said
to be good for the Scurvy. Because Meat and Drink are of so great Importance
with respect to the Preservation of Health, and Cure of Diseases, as well as
for Sustenance, I shall here particularly, tho briefly, discourse of the
various Sorts of Meats, Fruits, and Herbs, which are generally used for Diet.

Beans Cleanse and fatten, but are windy, therefore occasion Cholick Pains, and
disturb the Head. The French is the best and least windy.

Pease are not so windy as Beans, Green Pease are very pleasant to the Taste,
provoke Appetite, are good for Coughs and an Asthma; but they are injurious to
many, by reason of their Windiness.

Rice binds the Body, cures Fluxes, Pains in the Stomach, and Griping in the
Guts, but being used too long, causes Obstructions and Wind.

Asparagus is quickly boiled, nourishes more than all other Herbs, is good for
the Stomach, purges the Breast, provokes Urine, and cleanses the Kidneys from
Gravel.

Capers excite Appetite, remove Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, kill
Worms, and are good for phlegmatic and melancholy People.

Artichokes are pleasant to the Taste, provoke Urine, and make it stink, as
Asparagus does; but they are windy, and injure the Head and Stomach.

Cabbage loosens the Belly, is good for Stoppage of Urine and other
Obstructions: but it is windy, and causes a stinking Breath, and increases
Melancholy.

Sampier beink pickled, preserves the Stomach, and is good for the Reins.

Lettice is easily digested, breeds Milk, and provokes Sleep.

Parsley provokes Urine, the Courses, cleanses the Reins, and removes
Obstructions and Wind, but is bad for the Head and Eyesight.

Garlic is good against Poison, the Worms, provokes Urine, and is good for a
Dropsy and Shortness of Breath; but is injurious to the Head and Eyesight.

Carrots breed Milk, provoke the Courses and Urine, and open Obstructions; but
they are windy.

Onions increase Appetite, attenuate the Humors, make a good Color, and
increase Seed; but they are bad for the Head and Eyes.

Parsnips provoke the Courses and Urine, and remove Obstructions; but they are
windy, provoke Venery, occasion the Itch, and breed bad Blood.

Leeks provoke Urine and the Courses, and expel Wind, they are good for the
Lungs and Stomach, but they offend the Head.

Radishes provoke Urine, expel Gravel, and increase Milk; but they cause
stinking Belshes and Wind.

Quinces help Digestion, stop Fluxes and vomiting, and strengthen the Stomach.

Apples comfort the Heart, open the Breast, and are pectoral.

Pears provoke Appetite, and strengthen the Stomach, and loosen the Belly: But
Bergamots are the most wholesome, but being eaten before Meals they breed Wind
and occasion the Cholick.

Oranges that are sweet, eaten before Meals, are good for the Stomach. Sour
Oranges quench the Thirst, and excite Appetite; but sour, or Sevil Oranges
bind the Body, cool the Stomach, and contract the Breast, and the sweet
increase Choler.

Lemons excite Appetite, stop vomiting, cut gross Humors, are good in
malignant Fevers, and kill Worms. An Ounce of the Juice drank in Wine expells
Gravel: But they cool the Stomach, occasion the Cholick, and cause Leanness,
and breed melancholy Humors.

Filberts eaten at the Beginning of Dinner are good against Gravel; but they
are hardly digested, cause Wind, and Pains in the Head.

Walnuts fasten loose Teeth, they preserve against Poison and the Plague; but
they must be eaten at Breakfast, and are good after Fish; they kill Worms, and
being preserved, they loosen the Belly, and are pectoral: But they hurt the
Throat, cause Coughs, when they are dry, and cause the Headache. The Shade of a
Nut-Tree is very injurious; for it sends out ill Vapors that offend the Head.

Apricocks quench Thirst, excite Appetite, and provoke Urine; the Kernels kill
Worms, and are excellent for the Heart-burning; but they cause Fluxes of the
Belly, and putrify quickly, and breed gross and viscous Phlegm.

Peaches are good for the Stomach, and loosen the Belly. The best are those
that are odoriferous, wellcoloured, and fully ripe, so that they come clear
from the Stone; they must be eaten before Dinner, and good Wine must be drank
after them; but they soon corrupt, occasion Wind and ill Humors.

Olives cleanse the Stomach from Phlegm, and excite Appetite, and stop vomiting,
the Pickle is good to wash the Mouth; for it fastens loose Teeth, and
strengthens the Gums.

Plums purge Choler, extinguish Heat, take away Thirst in severish People, but
they injure a cold and weak Stomach, are bad for phlegmatic Persons, and such
as are troubled with the Cholick.

Cucumbers are very cooling and refreshing in the Summer, they provoke Urine,
and are good for the Reins and Bladder, and a hot Stomach; but they are apt to
corrupt, and to breed ill Humors, if they are not quickly concocted by the
Stomach.

Strawberries extinguish Heat, take away Thirst, provoke Urine and the
Appetite: But they soon corrupt in the Stomach, and are very injurious to
paralytic People, to such as are troubled with Convulsions, and those that eat
many of them are often seized with malignant Fevers.

Melons are very refreshing, they cleanse the Body, provoke Urine, quench
Thirst, and excite Appetite, and are excellent for the Gravel and Stone: But
they occasion Wind and Gripes, and being corrupted, malignant Fevers.

Flesh is more nourishing than all other Food, for it is easily turned into
Blood, and affords great Nourishment. You must always take notice, that Flesh,
Herbs, Fruits and Corn are to be chosen in high Places, such as are refreshed
with wholesome Winds, and recreated with the warm Beams of the Sun, where there
are no Ponds, Lakes, and standing Waters; for in such Places they are quickly
corrupted. The Flesh of all those Creatures which live in Fens and standing
Pools are to be avoided, as Ducks and Geese. The Flesh of Creatures too old are
naught, hard, dry, sinewy, and of small Nourishment, and hard to be digested;
and on the contrary, such as are too young overabound with Moisture, and are
full of Superfluities, though easily concocted in the Stomach.

Salted Flesh occasions gross and melancholy Humors, and bad Juice; for it
dries much, and nourishes little. Fat Meat is easily digested, but breeds many
Superfluities, and therefore is of small Nourishment; it takes away the
Appetite, and hinders Digestion. The leaner nourishes better, and generates
fewer Superfluities; and therefore the midling betwixt both is most wholesome.

The Flesh of Birds is lighter, dryer, and easier digested than that of
four-footed Beasts, and therefore more agreeable to those that exercise the
Mind more than the Body, for they are digested more easily, and breed Blood
that is clear, clean, and full of Spirits, and fit for the Exercise of the Mind.

The Flesh of wild Creatures, and such as frequent the Woods is better than
that of tame, and the Blood which is bred by eating them, will have fewer
Superfluities, by reason of much running and Exercise, which they are
accustomed to; and because they live in a more dry Air, especially such as
frequent the Mountains, and their Flesh will keep longer uncorrupted; for they
have less Fat; and therefore generate fewer Superfluities, nourish better, and
breed a more sound Blood; but tame Creatures are more moist than wild, by
reason of their little Motion, and the Moistness of the Air they live in.

In moist Times and Complexions, the Flesh that inclines to Dryness is most
proper; and so on the contrary.

The Flesh of gelded Creatures is best, because it is most temperate; for it is
more hot than the Female, and colder than the Male.

The Flesh of black Creatures is lighter and sweeter than that of white.

The Flesh that sticks to the Bone is of best Nourishment; and Flesh of the
right Side is better than that of the left, and the fore Part is to be
preferred to the hinder; because the fore Part is hotter and of easier
Digestion, but the hinder Part is more cold and more gross; the Flesh near the
Heart is better than that which is farther off; for being strengthened by the
Heat of the Heart, it is more fit to nourish.

That Flesh which is dry must be boiled, the moist roasted.

The Flesh which is roasted is fatter, of greater Nourishment, though more hard
of Digestion than boiled, which though of less, yet is of better Nourishment; and
therefore more wholesome. At Dinner boiled Meats are best, at Supper roasted.
Fried and broyled Meats generate nauseous Humors and Crudities in the Stomach,
and are of difficult Digestion, tho very nourishing.

Lamb breeds good Nourishment, is easy to be digested, and is good against
melancholy Humors, and is proper in hot weather and in hot Countries.

Beef affords great Nourishment to those that labor much, and breeds much
Blood.

Veal nourishes much, and generates good Blood, and is easily digested.

Kid is an excellent Nourishment, and very easy to be digested.

Deer are of great and good Nourishment, and are good against the Palsy and
Cholick, and make such lean as are too fat.

Mutton breeds good Blood, makes good Nourishment, and is easily digested.

Brawn made of the Flesh of tame young Bores is a delicate Meat, having not so
much excrementitious Moisture, as Bacon or Pork, but the hard or horny Part is
difficultly concocted.

Rabits are a good Nourishment, they consume the superfluous Moisture, and
Phlegm in the Stomach. The Flesh is whiter, and not so dry as that of a Hare;
and therefore nourishes better, and is easier digested.

Young Hares are very sweet and pleasant to the Stomach, they are good for such
as are too fat, and cause a good Color and Beauty in the Face. The Blood of a
Hare fried and eaten is good against the Bloodyflux, inward Imposthumes, and
the Gravel in the Kidneys. The Brains of a roasted Hare cures the trembling of
the Members, and facilitates the Breeding of Teeth in Children.

Bacon and Pork yield a good Nourishment, but is injurious to such as live
easy; they cause the Gout, especially the Flesh of a sucking Pig, and it
causes the Cholick, and the Stone in the Kidneys.

Amongst the Parts of Birds and Beasts, some are better than others; for all
the Extremities, as the Head, the Neck, the Feet, the Tail, in respect of the
rest, are hard, of little and gross Nourishment, and hard to be digested: But
better and more savory are the Parts about the Wings, Back, and Breast.

Butter is good for the Lungs, and nourishes well.

Cheese that is new, fattens, tastes pleasantly, and is not injurious to the
Stomach. Cream Cheese is most wholesome; but it must be eaten the same Day it
is made in. Cheese is only to be eaten to shut up and close the Mouth of the
Stomach, and we must beware we eat not too much of it, especially of old
Cheese; for it occasions Thirst, inflames the Blood, and causes the Stone.

Milk is good for the hectic Fever, takes off the Heat of Urine, cures Coughs,
and opens the Breast, but it is naught for those that are troubled with the
Cholick, and the Stone.

Whey is good for such as are of a hot Constitution, it quenches Thirst, and
provokes Sleep.

The different Nature of Birds is discerned by the Time, the Age, the Food, the
Place, and the Air; because at such Time as Birds couple, as well domestic as
wild Fowl, they thereby grow lean, and feed little. Some Birds are best in the
Summer, at which time they eat Corn; others in Autumn, because they eat Grapes,
Figs, Apples, Berries, and the like. Other Birds are best in the Winter, as
Thrushes, Blackbirds, wild Geese, Cranes, and all water Fowl.

Some live on Worms; but most eat Corn, as Pigeons, Doves, and the like: In
short, some are nourished on Land, others in Rivers, some in Lakes, and others
in Sea, and a great many Birds feed on Herbs; and it is observable, that the
Flesh of wild Fowl has always the Taste of such things as the Birds feed on, as
of Ants, Worms, Fish, Slime, and Mud.

Mountain Fowl are always to be preferred before the rest; besides gelding or
cutting a Fowl makes it fat and sweet, as appears in the Flesh of Capons.

The Flesh of young Birds is always better than that of old.

A Duck is the hottest of all tame Fowl; the VVings and Liver are the best; but
of hard Digestion and gross Nourishment; but is good in cold weather for hot
Stomachs, and such as labor much.

Capon nourishes better than all other Fowl, and generates good Blood.

Pigeons afford good Nourishment, breed excellent Blood, and are good for old
and flegmatic Men. They strengthen the Legs, and cure the Palsy; but they are
not good for hot Constitutions.

Pheasants are very agreeable to humane Nature, comfort and strengthen the
Stomach, yield great Nourishment, and fatten exceedingly.

Hens nourish the Body wonderfully, are easily digested, and breed good Blood:
But old Hens are of hard Digestion. The Flesh of a Cock is dryer, hot, and
sulphurous.

Turkey is a good Nourishment, the Flesh is whitest and best, and excells all
others in VVholesomness; for it is easily digested, and breeds good Blood.

I arks, if they are fat, nourish well, and are easily digested, they are best
in Autumn, and in VVinter.

Blackbirds nourish sufficiently, when they are fat and young; but they are of
hard Digestion.

Geese; the best Parts of them are the VVings and Liver; the Flesh of young
Geese affords good Nourishment, and fattens those that are lean. If you feed
Geese with Milk, their Liver is much more pleasant, and digests and nourishes
well enough; but their Flesh is of hard Digestion.

Plovers are an excellent and wholesome Food, and afford good Nourishment; only
they are of a melancholy Juice.

Eggs of a fat Hen fed with Corn, and trod by the Cock, and fresh laid, are the
best; next to these is a Pheasants Egg; but those of a Goose or Duck are
naught, because they have a strong Smell, and are of hard Digestion; and
therefore a young Hens Egg is beyond all. Let it be small, long, and fresh.
Eggs are of a copious Nourishment, they are good for old Men, excite Venery,
and open the Breast. Potched are best.

Young Sparrows afford good Nourishment, excite Venery. Mountain Sparrows have
a wonderful Virtue against the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder; but are of
difficult Digestion, and cause Melancholy.

Peacocks; the best are bred in good Air, young and tender, they nourish
enough, but are of hard and slow Digestion, and breed melancholy Blood.

Partridges breed good and slender Nourishment, and easily digest, they fatten
and dry up the Moisture of the Stomach, and contribute much to the Preservation
of the Health, and the Flesh is better than that of a Hen. It is said, they
cure the Pox and the Falling Sickness, being eaten a whole Year together; but
old Partridges are of a very hard Substance, and of a very bad Taste, and
injure Melancholy People, and bind the Body.

Stares nourish well, and as they say, cure the Pox, continuing to eat every
Day throughout the Year, one Stare and no more. But old Stares are of hard
Digestion.

Quails are good for melancholy Men, are very nourishing and pleasaing to the
Taste: But some say, they cause Fevers, the Cramp, and Falling Sickness,
wherewith they say this Bird is troubled.

Thrushes nourish very well, and are easily digested, the Mountain Thrushes are
the best.

Turtles nourish excellently, and are easily digested; they strengthen the
Stomach, and quicken the Wit; roasted with Cloves and Juice of Oranges are
very good in the Bloody Flux, and for all other Fluxes.

Fish, in respect of Flesh, are of less Nourishment, are gross, flegmatic,
cold, and full of Superfluities. The old nourish more than the young, and those
that live amongst Stones and Rocks are the best. Fish are of hard Digestion,
and the sign of their Indigestion is Thirst; seeing they all cause Thirst if
they remain long in the Stomach; nay, sometimes they corrupt. Concerning Fish,
you may observe these following Rules: 1st. That all Fish should be eaten hot.
2dly. You must eat less of Fish than of Flesh. 3dly. You must not eat them too
often. 4thly. You must not eat Fish after great Labor and Exercise; for then
they easily corrupt; nor must they be eaten after other other Food. 5thly. Fish
and Milk are not proper together, nor are Eggs to be used with it. 6thly. Great
and slimy Fish pickled are better than fresh. 7thly. You must observe, that the
clearer and deeper the Water is, the better are the Fish that are nourished
therein. 8thly. Sea Fish are wholesomer than freshwater Fish, hotter, and not
so moist, and their Nourishment comes near that of Flesh. 9thly. Amongst the
Sea and River Fish, those are best which live in rocky Places, next to these in
sandy Places, in sweet, clear, and running Water, where there is no Filth: But
those Fish are naught which live in Pools, Lakes, Marshes, and in any still and
muddy Water. 10thly. Amongst all the Fish both in Sea and Rivers, those which
are not too big are the best, and which have not a hard and dry Flesh, that
taste and smell well, are crisp and tender, and have many Fins and Scales.
11thly. Fish are cold and moist; and therefore naught for cold Constitutions,
but good for choleric Men. 12thly. The best way of dressing Fish is to broyl
it, to boil it is the next way, to fry it is the worst.

Eels are of a delicate Taste and good Nourishment, but offend the Stomach, and
are of hard Digestion, and being used too often, breed the Stone in the Kidneys
and Bladder, and occasion the Gout and Convulsions. In short, whoever eats much
of them indangers his Life.

Carps are the most noble of all Fish, and of a very pleasant and grateful
Taste, and nourish well, in what manner soever they are eaten.

Crabs are good for consumptive People, they nourish very much, provoke Urine,
and cleanse the Kidneys; but they are of hard Digestion.

Lampreys are of excellent Nourishment, excite Venery, and are of a most
delicious Taste; but they are of hard Digestion, bad for gouty People, and for
such as are troubled with Convulsions.

Pikes nourish very much; but are of hard Digestion.

Oysters provoke Appetite, and they are a very proper Diet in many Cases.

Sturgeon nourishes well, and excites Venery; but is of hard Digestion. Of the
Spawn or Row of this Fish Salted is made Cavyare, which provokes Appetite, and
makes the Drink relish.

Lobsters fatten and nourish much, and their Broth cures Shortness of Breath;
but they are cold and flegmatic, and of a hard Digestion.

Sprats being boiled as soon as they are taken, yield good Nourishment and
taste pleasantly; but they occasion VVind.

Tench are very nourishing, but of hard Digestion.

Salmon is pleasant to the Palate, easily digested, and affords good Juice.

Soles, Plaice, and Turbet are highly commended amongst Sea Fish; for they have
a delicate Flesh, they yield good Nourishment, are not easily corrupted, and
are easily digested.

Gudgeons are the best of all small Fish, wholesome Aliment, easily digested,
and may be safely given to sick Persons.

Perch have soft, moist, and tender Flesh, but they nourish little, and are
full of excrementitious Juice.

Cod-fish, if fresh, is of good Juice, and easily concocted; but when it is
dry, it is of hard Digestion, and of gross Nourishment.

Barbels: The little ones are better than the great, and such as are caught in
stony Places, and not in muddy Ponds; they are very pleasant to the Palate; but
their Flesh is hard and not easily digested.

Trouts: The biggest are best, and such as are bred in sweet Waters. The River
Trout nourishes well, good for young and choleric, but naught for decrepid and
phlegmatic Men.

Vinegar: The best is that which is made of the best Wine. It is cutting,
digestive, and openining. It is very good to extinguish the Heat of Choler and
Thirst. It strengthens the Gums, excites the Appetite, removes Obstructions,
helps Digestion, and is good for hot and moist Stomachs, and resists
Putrefaction; therefore is good in the Plague time: But it breeds melancholy
Humors, injures the Nerves, makes lean, offends the Breast, and being used too
much, makes Men look old and withered.

Honey is abstersive and opening, provokes Urine, and cleanses its Passages. It
is good for old and phlegmatic Men of a cold Constitution, and is pectoral.
Democritus being asked how a Man might keep himself in Health; Answered, by Oil
without, and Honey within. It heats the Stomach, moves the Body, resists
Corruption, and turns to good Blood; but it occasions VVind and the Gripes.

Oil of Olives is very sweet, and agreeable to Nature. When it is two Years
old it is best, it ought to be made of ripe Olives.

Oil of sweet Almonds is next to it in Goodness. Oil fattens, and a good
Quantity of it is excellent to bring up Poison by Vomit; but if it be eaten too
often, it lessens the Appetite.

Salt, of all Sawces, is best; without which no Food is good. It is put into
Victuals for three Reasons: 1st. That thereby the Food may descend easier into
the Stomach. 2dly. To make it more savoury. 3dly. Because it resists
Putrefaction; consuming, by its Dryness, that Moisture, whereby Putrefaction
might have been occasioned. It excites the Appetite, and digestive Faculty, and
prevents nauseating. It dissolves, attenuates, and dries up the superfluous
Moisture, provokes the Bowels to evacuate the Excrements, and is therefore used
in Glisters and Suppositories; but things too much salted generate Melancholy
and Vapors, breed ill Nourishment, dry up the Blood, cause Scabbiness and
Itch, Ring-worms, and other such Humors and Breakings out in the Face and
Body, and stops the Passages of the Urine.

CHAP. XI. Of Sleep and Watching.
SLeep is the Cessation of the external Senses from Operation; the Cause of
Sleep is the Remission and Subsidence of the Fibers, wherewith the Brain is
chiefly formed, so that the Motions imprinted upon the Organs of the five
external Senses cannot be duly propagated to the Seat of the Soul, and be known
there, as we see that a Motion upon a slack String of a Violin is not so
readily promoted, as when it is wond up hard. The said Remission of the Fibers
in the Brain arises from a Defect or Dullness, so that the animal Spirits do
not sufficiently expand those Tubes; and so after Labor we are inclined to
Sleep, by reason of a Defect of the Spirits. In like manner, after the taking
of Opium or other Narcoticks, we are disposed to sleep, because they seize the
Spirits by their volatile Oleosity. Lastly, we are inclined to sleep after
eating or drinking; because then the Humidity of the Brain relaxes the Fibers,
and perhaps, because the Vapors somewhat hinder the Spirits: But some, when
they drink much, cannot sleep; because the Spirits are thereby heated and
enraged.

All Creatures, by long Fatigues and Watchings, waste and consume themselves;
and therefore stand in need of Rest and Sleep, the Advantage and Good whereof
is, that it reheats and corroborates the Members, concocts the Humors,
augments the natural Heat, fattens the Body, heals the Infirmities of the Mind,
and mitigates and allays Troubles and Sorrows: For whilst we sleep, the
Faculties of the Mind repose themselves. Sleep also facilitates the Digestion
of the Food which lies in the Stomach, and not only concocts it there, but also
distributes it through the Parts of the Body; for the natural Heat concenters in
the inward Parts, whereby the Food is better concocted. Lastly, Sleep removes
all Lassitude and VVeariness, caused by overmuch watching; and therefore it is
called a Rest from all Labor.

But we must avoid long and superfluous Sleep, which is no less pernicious than
the other is good; for it chills the Body, weakens the natural Heat, and breeds
flegmatic Humors, whence afterward proceeds much Sloth and Laziness, and
sends many Vapors to the Head, which are oftentimes the immediate Cause of
Rheums and Catarrhs, and is very destructive to gross and fat Bodies. In brief,
it is neither good for the Body nor the Mind, nor for Business. He who sleeps
too much is but half a Man, Sleep rendering him in all Points like a dead Man
except his Digestion of the Food; for he neither sees, hears, speaks, or
understands, and is absolutely deprived of all Reason; which, for the Time, is
a perfect Death. Superfluous Sleep moreover, both in sound and firm Bodies
generates Shortness of Breath, and is a constant Forerunner, and Preparative to
an Apoplexy, Lethargy, Palsy, and Numness, and it hinders the seasonable
Evacuation of the Excrements, causing them to remain longer in the Vessels and
Guts. Sleep ought to be taken at such a Time as the Stomach is free from all
smoaky Food, the Vapors whereof arriving at the Brain, are congealed and made
heavy, and then falling down, they obstruct the Members.

But on the contrary, too much watching, and want of Sleep generate over much
Heat in the Brain, cause Anguish of Mind, and a bad Digestion; for by watching,
the natural Heat is weakened, which occasions Crudities.

Sleep is good for flegmatic Persons; because it concocts the crude Humors,
whence afterward is generated good Blood, whereby a Man becomes more warm, the
natural Heat being increased by the Plenty of Blood. Sleep moreover is very
useful in choleric Persons, both to quiet the Mind, and to correct the
Constitution of the Body: But it is most of all requisite in melancholy Men;
for by Sleep they acquire a competent Stock of Heat and Moisture, things very
contrary to their Constitution.

Sleep, in the Day time, and after Dinner, is not to be allowed, unless a Man
has accustomed himself to it, or has not rested well the Night before, or
perceives a kind of Lassitude or VVeariness through all his Limbs; in these Cases
he may sleep after Dinner, especially if his Stomach be weak and cannot digest
the Food: But post-meridian Sleep ought to be taken in a Chair, and not to be
above an Hour long.

In long Days Sleep may be taken in a Chair, if the Strength be decayed. Some
indeed forbid sleeping adays, especially after Dinner: But I think it is not
injurious; for so the Spirits, weakened by Labor and Cares, are refreshed; and
I cannot indeed see why it is worse than nocturnal Sleep, only it hinders Sleep
anights, and makes the Nights seem long and tedious. The ordinary Time for
Sleep is seven Hours; for that Time seems sufficient for perfecting Digestion,
and refreshing the Spirits: But some require more Sleep, some less; so Children
require more, and old People, choleric, and dry; because it moistens and
restores the Spirits: But fat and flegmatic People should not sleep much. Such
as labor much ought to sleep long. It signifies little on what side you lie at
first going to sleep. It is injurious to sleep with an empty Stomach. Sleeping
on the Back hurts the Reins, and hinders Breathing, and furthers Diseases of
the Nerves.

The Signs of sufficient Sleep are a Lightness and Agility, which spreads its
self over all the Body, and chiefly the Brain, whereas Heaviness of the Body,
and unsavory Belchings, signify that more Sleep is required. To conclude,
moderate Sleep restores the animal Faculties, helps concoction of the Victuals,
and crude Humors, causes a Forgetfulness of Labor, and of all sorrowful
Thoughts, mitigates the Grief of the Mind, moistens all the Members of the
Body, restores all the wasted Faculties, augments the natural Heat, increases
radical Moisture, clarisies and strengthens the Sight, takes away Weariness,
refreshing the tired Body, and stops Fluxes and Rheums: But if immoderate, it
makes the Head heavy, troubles the Mind, weakens the Memory, and all the animal
Faculties, makes the Body cold, multiplies Phlegm, extinguishes the natural
Heat, induces a nauseating, makes the Face pale, and is hurtful to all
slegmatic Diseases.

Waking is an Intension, or rather an Extension of the Soul and Faculties
thereof, to all the Parts of the Body; which, when it is moderate, stirs up and
excites all the Senses, disposes and orders the vital Faculties to their
Operations, expelling and driving forth all the superfluous Humors from the
Body; but if immoderate and excessive, it generates Diseases of the Head,
corrupts the Temperature of the Brain, causes Madness, kindles the Humors,
excites sharp and acrimonious Infirmities, makes Men look pale and lean, and
weakens the concoctive Faculty, dissolves the Spirits, fills the Head with
Vapors, makes the Eyes hollow, increases Heat, causes Crudities in the
Stomach; therefore let Sleep and Waking be always moderate, and if a Man cannot
sleep, let him take at least some Repose with his Eyes shut, which in some sort
may supply the place of Sleep.

CHAP. XII. Of Motion and Rest.
MOtion is here Labor and Exercise, as walking, playing at Ball, running,
riding; they excite natural Heat, and consume all the Crudities of the Body.

Some Exercises are strong and wearisome, and others moderate and gentle; the
temperate Exercise is that which contributes much to the Health; for it
corroborates the natural Health, wastes the Superfluities, enlivens Youth,
chears old Age, and hinders Fullness, fortifies the Senses, renders the Body
light and agile, strengthens the Nerves and all the Joints; for by Exercise all
the Parts become more robust; it consolidates the Members, helps Digestion,
keeps the Passages of the Body clear and open, so that the smoaky Vapors of
the Spirits may find a better and more free Issue.

The gentle Exercises are fishing, fowling, and such like Divertisements, which
clear the Mind: And, as moderate and temperate Exercise does wonderfully
contribute to Health, so overmuch Idleness is very pernicious.

Frictions are also exceeding useful; for they hinder the Humors from falling
into the Joints, and being used in the right Time, that is, when the
Superfluities shall be evaporated from the inward Parts, they help Digestion,
recreate the Body, and open the Pores, whereby the moist Humors, and Vapors
of the Body obtain an easier Passage; also draw the Blood to the outward Parts,
and confirm the natural Heat.

Exercise is to be used so long as the Body can bear it, without growing too
weary, that is, till you wax hot, having a fresh Color, and begin to sweat,
which, as soon as you perceive, change your Clothes, and dry well all the
Members, and put on other Clothes, and if it be necessary, lie a little in Bed
and rest your self, till you shall be refreshed, and recover new Strength.

Shooting with a Bow is counted a proper Exercise for the Breast and Lungs;
bowling for the Back and Reins: But riding on Horeback is the best Exercise of
all, and may serve instead of all.

The Time for Exercise is before Meals, having first evacuated the Excrements
of the Belly and Bladder; for it is usually very bad and destructive to
exercise the Body presently after Meals, and this is the Source of diverse
Infirmities; but Laborers and Country People, by continual Custom, labor
without Injury, as soon as the Meat is out of their Mouths.

After violent Exercise, one ought to beware of catching cold; for the Motion
and Exercise having opened the Pores of the Body, the cold easily enters
therein, bringing along with it Catarrhs, and diverse other Infirmities.

Friction or rubbing is to be used in the Morning, after having been at Stool,
which must be performed on the extreme Parts of the Body; begin at the Knees,
and proceed to the Feet, then the Thighs, then from upper Ribs to the lower,
then from the Shoulders down the Back, and lastly, from the Arms to the Hands.
You must use a Napkin or Towel, gently rubbing your Body, till the Skin wax
something red. In old Men the Motion of the superior Members, as the Arms and
the Shoulders, is most necessary, because it diverts and prohibits the Humors
from falling into the lower Parts.

It is proper for every Person to pull off his Shoes and Stockings himself,
without the Help of a Servant; for this is some sort of Exercise, and stirs up
the Heat and Spirits. By the by, the binding the Stockings hard with Garters
causes several Pains, and hinders the Heat, Blood, and Spirits from circulating
and descending into the Joints, upon which account they are weakened, and apt
to receive diverse Distempers.

In the Morning, as soon as you are up, rub well your Head, and comb it with an
Ivory Comb, from the Forehead upwards to the Crown, then with a rough Cloth or
Sponge rub your Head,; for hereby the Superfluities which are lodged there will
be expelled, and the Spirits rarefied, and the Passages of the Head opened, and
the Memory and other Faculties of the Mind corroborated, and the Sight
strengthened. It is also good to shave the Beard often, because it chears the
Man; so does the washing of the Face and Hands; the Eyes are also to be washed
with fresh Water, and the putting the Eyes into cool fresh Water, open,
wonderfully clears and purifies the Sight; afterward dry them very well with a
clean Towel. Take care also that your Teeth be very clean, which for want of
well rubbing and cleansing, causes a naughty and stinking Breath, and the Filth
of the Teeth mixed with the Food, breeds Corruption, and renders it putrified:
Besides, rotten Teeth send to the Brain an infectious Vapor. It is good
sometimes to wash the Mouth with Wine.

No Exercise is proper after Dinner, but a quiet Composure and Stillness of the
Body is most requisite, especially for an Hour after Dinner, after which a
little walking is not amiss to digest and jog down the Victuals to the Bottom
of the Stomach. Lastly, Those Exercises are best which are performed in the
open Air, rather than in Houses, in the Sun rather than in the Shade.

Those that by some Accident or other cannot walk, let them ride, or be carried
in a Horse-litter, so that they may in some manner exercise themselves before
Meals; for by Idleness, and over much Rest, all the Faculties of Body and Mind
are enervated, and Crudities, Obstructions, and infinite Numbers of Diseases
are occasioned; and Idleness is reckoned the chief Cause of cold Diseases, it
makes Men negligent, sloathful, ignorant, and makes the Body fat, lazy, weak,
and causes a pale Complexion, extinguishes the natural Heat, increases Phlegm,
and fills the Body with Superfluities; it occasions the Gout, Catarrhs,
Obstructions, and the falling Sickness; therefore when at any time you are
necessitated to be in Idleness, or by some Business or Encumbrance are forced
to abstain from all manner of Exercise, you must, instead thereof, observe a
slender Diet, and use that Food which is of most easy Digestion, and Broaths,
which, without any Trouble or Difficulty, are digested and distributed through
all the Body, and cause a Slipperyness of the Belly.

Superfluous Rest being therefore so very injurious, and Sloth and Laziness
the Cause of so many grievous Diseases, as we see those in Prisons always fall
into Diseases, it behooves us to use moderate Exercise, whereby Superfluities
may be removed, the Causes of so many Diseases. Moreover, we ought not to
neglect the Exercise of the Mind, for as the Body with Exercise is rendered
strong and robust, so the Mind is nourished by Studies, and acquires fresh
Vigor; and many, by a continual Exercise of the Mind, have freed their Bodies
from great Diseases. The Exercises of the Mind are Speculation, singing with
musical Instruments, the Study of History, Divinity, and the like; for these
things delighting the Mind, feed it in such sort that all the Virtues become
more strong, and better enabled to resist and overcome Infirmities; and these
Exercises performed at due Times, that is, after a perfect Concoction of your
Victuals, both nourish and corroborate the Mind, and render the Memory quick
and lasting. But if these Exercises of the Mind are used out of season, they
hinder Digestion, and heap up and contract many Superfluities, and occasion
various Obstructions, and putrid Fevers.

To conclude, Hippocrates affirms, that moderate Exercise is above all things
most necessary for phlegmatic People, and for such as are of a cold and moist
Constitution, and that for hot and choleric Persons, Rest is very fit and
commodious. Moreover, all learned Physicians agree, that both Exercise and
Rest, if moderate, are a special means to preserve Health, and prolong Life.

CHAP. XIII. Of things to be evacuated.
THings to be evacuated and retained are the Excrements of the Belly, Urine,
insensible Transpiration, the Courses, and the Seed; for these evacuated in due
Time, and in due Quantity, conduce much to the Preservation of Health,
otherwise they injure the Health. The Excrements of the Belly not evacuated in
due Time, occasion cholic Pains, and cause stinking Vapors in the Stomach and
Mouth. These Excrements, in their natural Estate, are somewhat soft, and stick
together, the Color is brownish, and they do not stink very much.

The Urine, when it is right, is of a yellow Color, of a moderate Thickness,
with or without a Sediment. When there is a Sediment it is white, light, and
equal, and the Quantity is equal to the Liquors taken in. When it is retained
too long, either by the Fault of the Reins, or of the Bladder, or because the
Matter of it is not sufficiently separated, it occasions a Dropsy, Fainting,
sleepy Diseases, a Palsy, and the like.

If insensible Transpiration be hindered, the Skin becomes filthy, the Itch is
occasioned, a Dropsy, a Fe^er, and the like. Insensible Transpiration is made
through the Pores of the Skin and Mouth. It is manifest by the inspection of the
Breath in Wintertime, when it condenses, when it comes out, that very much is
emitted by insensible Transpiration. It also appears by the many drops it
makes; also if we touch with the Finger any polished Metal, it will presently
be considerably moistened; and if so much be done by so little a part, and in
so short a time, how much do we think is evaporated by the whole Body in the
space of one day? Yet it does not seem so great, as Sanctorius affirms he has
found by the Static Art; for he would make us believe, that insensible
Transpiration alone is greater than all Evacuations taken together; for if the
Meat and Drink of one day weigh eight pound, he says, that about five of them
flies away insensibly. He says also, that the Urine of one Night is wont to be
half a Pint, and the Excrements of the Belly four Ounces; and that forty Ounces
at least, are evacuated by insensible Transpiration; so that as much is
evacuated by insensible Transpiration in one day, as is carried off by Stool in
fifteen.

The Courses ought to flow in Women at Fourteen Years of Age, and in such as
are not past Fifty, unless they are with Child, or give Suck; in which cases
the cause of the Courses cease; and they ought to flow every Month; and the
quantity of them ought to be proportioned to the quantity and heat of the
Blood: For a certain quantity generally speaking, cannot be limited; for some
have a great many, and some but a few, nor do they continue upon all alike; for
some have them two days, some three, some four, some six or eight days. They
that have them too much are weakened, are subject to Faintings, and waste.
Those in whom they are suppressed become Hysteric, breath difficultly, look
Pale, and lose their Appetites

Venery, if it be duly used, conduces to Health, but when it is immoderate, it
emaciates, and weakens the Nerves, Head, and whole Body, dissipates the
Spirits, and wonderfully shortens the Life. It is most conveniently used by
such as are sanguine, and of a full Habit of Body, in the Morning after Sleep;
for then the Seed is more elaborated, and abounds more, Digestion being
perfected, and a Distribution being made.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Passions of the Mind.
THE chief Passions of the Mind are Mirth, Sadness, Anger, Love, Hatred, Shame,
Hope, Despair.

Mirth is a Delight arising from some Good, we suppose we have obtained. This
above all the rest conduces to Health, at least if it be moderate; for in it
the Spirits pass pleasantly in the Brain, and in all the Nerves: But immoderate
Mirth is injurious, and sometimes deadly.

Sorrow is a Pain arising from the Apprehension of Ill befalling us. In it the
Spirits in the Brain and Nerves move very weakly, and sometimes a Weight in the
Breast, Suffocation, and Death it self are occasioned by it.

Anger is the Desire of Revenge, upon the Apprehension of some Injury offered
us. In Anger the Spirits are wont to be violently moved in the Brain.

Love is the Desire of an Object which we apprehend to be good and convenient.
In Love both the Blood and Spirits, within and without the Brain are moved
pleasantly.

Hatred is the Apprehension of an Object, which we judge hurtful or
inconvenient. Hatred is Sorrow for the Good, and Mirth for the Ill of another.

Fear is a sinking of the Mind by reason of the Apprehension of some imminent
Ill.

Shame is a great Opinion, or Apprehension of Scandal.

Hope is a Desire of some future Good that seems difficult to be obtained; but
yet possible.

Despair is an Affection of the Mind arising from the Apprehension of Good,
which we judge impossible to be obtained.

The Passions of the Mind have great Power, and do much contribute to the
changing of the Body; because they make a Stirring and Motion in the Humors,
and in the Spirits. And these immoderate and sudden Motions are raised from the
Center of the Body to the Circumference, as Anger, Joy, and the like, or from
the Circumference to the Center, as Fear, and the like, from whence proceed
great Motions of the Spirits; and therefore we ought carefully to avoid such
Passions, seeing they dry the Body, and alter it too much, troubling it and
changing it from its natural Constitution; and therefore Plato called these the
Infirmities of the Mind, viz. Anger, Joy, Sorrow, Melancholy, Anxiety, or
Anguish, Exclamation, Fury, Violence, Brawling, Contention, Hatred, Envy,
Perplexity, Fear, Shame, unpleasant Thoughts, unbridled Desires, Boldness,
Incontinence, Importunity, Ambition, Distrust, Hope, Despair, and the like; all
which Passions, besides the great Hurt they do to the Body, do also very much
offend the Mind; for Anger and overmuch Sorrow afflict the Spirits, dry the
Bones, extenuate the Flesh, inflame and burn the Body, putting it into
Confusion, out of its natural Estate, whence afterward proceed many Evils, as
Catarrhs and Fluxes in the Joints, and the like: But these Passions, when they
are moderate, are sometimes good for Men, and do not a little contribute to
their Health: For Example, Anger excites and increases the natural Heat, and
oftentimes it is good to be angry, to repair that natural Heat, and therefore,
in cold Diseases, it is to be stirred up: as on the contrary, in hot, it is to
be avoided. Joy and Gladness strengthens the Digestion, and this is the chief
and truest reason why Men, more than all other Creatures, are exposed to
Crudities: Because the Beasts, and irrational Animals, though they eat to
Satiety, nevertheless do not hinder the natural Virtue which concocts the Food.
But Men, by diverse Thoughts, and Perturbations of Mind, divert the Virtue of
its Operation, and though they eat moderately, yet they fall into Crudities,
whence proceed many Diseases; and therefore a Man, by all possible means, ought
to avoid sad Thoughts, and dolorous Subjects, and all other things which may
any ways disturb the Mind; for to have a cheerful Mind is good in all Diseases.
You must keep your self also from frequent weeping, from great Fury, and from
an Appetite or Desire of Revenge; for these things weaken the Brain, and hinder
the Digestion, and alter the natural State of the Body; for Fear withdraws the
Spirits and the Blood, attracting them inwardly to the Heart, whence the
Members grow cold, the Body pale, causing Tremblings, the Voice is interrupted,
and the whole Force of the Body is deficient. Many have perished by overmuch
Fear and Sorrow.

Rutilius being denied the Consulship, which he earnestly sought after,
suddenly expired. Marcus Lepidus also died for Grief, and many have died by
Excess of Joy; but none of Anger, and some have died of Shame. For which Cause
these Passions of the Mind ought always to be used with Moderation, and chiefly
Joy. In short, nothing is more necessary for the Preservation of Health, than
to live merrily, nor to trouble ones self, or be angry. That Man therefore that
loves Health, let him delight in Gardens, frequent green and pleasant Places,
let him converse with merry and jocund Friends, with Music and Songs; for by
these things the Spirits are restored, and as the Strength of a Man is
increased by good Victuals, Wine, sweet Smells, so by Tranquillity, by avoiding
of Cares and troublesome Affairs, which render a Man sad, and by frequenting
merry Companions the Man is refreshed. Likewise it is good to hear and read
pleasant Discourses and delightful Subjects. No less pleasant and wholesome it
is to enjoy a sweet and clear Air, to walk sometimes in the Fields, to rise
betimes in the Morning, than which there is nothing in the World that chears
and glads the Heart of Man more, and does also wonderfully contribute to
Health. To conclude, in Trouble and Adversity, let a Man defend himself from
Dejection of Mind, and in Prosperity from extreme Joy.

CHAP. XV. Of things contrary to Nature.
THings contrary to Nature, or preternatural, are things opposite to the
natural Constitution of a living Body. They are three, a Disease, the Cause of
a Disease, and the Symptom; under which every thing contrary to Nature is
comprehended.

A Disease is a Constitution contrary to the nature of a living Body, whereby
all the actions are not rightly performed. This Constitution proceeds from an
undue temper, conformation or union of the Parts, whereby some action is
performed ill, or at least not rightly modified, and hereby we are rendered
incapable to perform all the actions aright. It is said, whereby all the
Actions are not performed aright; because an obstruction of all the actions is
not required to a Disease; but it is said to be a Disease, if any one of them
be hurt.

When we say a Disease is a Constitution contrary to Nature, it does not
include the Constitution of old Men and Children, tho in it the actions are not
rightly performed; because such Ages are agreeable to the course of Nature.

The living Body, and the solid and fluid parts of it are the subjects of a
Disease.

A Disease is divided essentially into three species; into a Disease from an
undue temper, or similar; into a Disease from an ill formation, or organick;
and into a Disease occasioned from the solution of the Continuum. It is also
otherwise variously divided according to its accidental differences, into
universal, particular, contagious, not contagious, epidemic, endemic, long,
short, acute, not acute, benign, malignant, great, small, simple, compound,
primary, secundary, symptomatic, hereditary.

A Similar Disease, or a Disease proceeding from an undue temper, arises from
an inconvenient temper of the first qualities, as a Disease from a hot or cold
intemperies of the Brain or Stomach, or the like.

An Organick Disease is a Disease arising from an ill Formation of the Part. It
is fourfold, arising from an undue Figure, magnitude, number, and Situation of
the Part.

A Disease proceeding from a solution of the Continuum is a hurt of the
Function of a Similar, or Organick Part. It is fourfold, viz. a Contusion, a
Wound, a Fracture, and an Ulcer.

An universal Disease is that which affects the whole Body, as Cachexy,
Anasarca, and the like.

A particular Disease is that which affects only part of the Body, as a
Pleurifie, and the like.

A contagious Disease is that which is conveyed to another by some Effluvia.

Diseases called Pandemij, are Diseases of the same Species, which invade many
at the same time, and in the same Region.

An Epidemic or Popular Disease, is a Disease arising from some common Cause,
and seizes many at one time and place, but is not restrained to one Region, as
the Plague, Quinsie, Pleurisy.

An Endemic Disease is a Disease arising from some common cause, that is proper
to some Region or Regions, as the Scurvy to Holland, Denmark, Swedeland,
Norway; the French Pox to India, the Bronchochele to the Alps, the Plicae
Poloniae, and the like.

Sporadic Diseases are Diseases of different kinds, which invade many at the
same time, and in the same Region, as a Pleurisy, and Ophthalmia.

From the Time Diseases are short or long. A Disease is short that soon comes
to its end; as a Diary, a burning Fever, and the like. A Disease is long, when
it does not come to its end in a short time, as a Dropsy, Palsy, and the like.

A Disease is Acute, when it comes to its end in a short time with danger. An
extreme Acute Disease ends in three or four days at farthest; as a Pestilential
Fever, or the like. It is said to be peracute, when it lasts seven days.

A benign Disease is that which has its wonted symptoms, as a Tertian Ague; or
a burning Fever, that has its ordinary symptoms.

A Disease is malignant, when the symptoms are worse than is usual.

From Magnitude a Disease is said to be great or small. The Magnitude of a
Disease may be two ways considered. First, with comparison to the Person
affected; and so a Disease small in it self may be accounted great, in a weak
Man or a Child. Secondly, Disease is called great which soon dejects the
strength, and kills; and the greatness of it may arise from the nobleness, or
great use of the part afflicted.

A simple Disease is an Obstruction of some Vein or Wound, or a cold
Intemperies of the Stomach, or the like. A compound Disease is similar, with
organit, similar with common: For instance an hot Intemperies with a Wound.
Organic with common; for instance, the Magnitude of the Foot increased with a
Wound. Similar with organic and common, as a Wound of the Hand with a great and
hot swelling.

A Primary Disease is a Disease produced by some Cause, which is not a Disease
in the same Body.

A secundary Disease is a Disease produced by some Cause in the same Body, as
the cold Intemperies of the Brain occasioned by a cold Intemperies of the
Stomach.

An idiopathic Disease is a Disease proceeding from the proper Vice of the
Part, as an Obstruction of the Reins by a Stone.

An hereditary Disease is a Disease imparted to the Child by the Parents,
obnoxious to such a kind of Disease, upon account of the Fault of the Seed, or
of the Nutriment of the Child. I say obnoxious, for it is not necessary the
Parents should actually have the Disease, or that they should ever have it.
Perhaps it is prevented by a contrary Course of Diet, or the like, it is enough
if there be such a Disposition.

The Time of the Disease is the Time wherein some notable Change of the Disease
is observed. The universal Time is that which distinguishes the Course of the
whole Disease. It is fourfold, the Beginning, Increase, State, and Declination;
these four Times are absolutely accounted in every Disease, whether it tends to
Life or Death, whether it be cured by Medicines, or not: But these Times are
went to be very unequal; because one Disease runs its Course much sooner than
another, and consequently passes all the Seasons sooner.

No one dies in the universal Declination of a Disease, at least of that
Disease, whereof that is the Declination; for the Cause of the Disease is
expelled and overcome, yet he may die in the Declination by some other Disease
joined with it, or coming upon it, or by Defect, or Want of things requisite to
Life.

The particular Time of the Disease is that which distinguishes the Course of
the Paroxysm. The Paroxysm is the Exacerbation coming by turns in Diseases. The
Period is the Time of Exacerbation and Remission in some Diseases. The Type is
the Order of Intension and Remission: But every Disease has not a Type or
Period, as an Atrophy, Palsy, Eliphantiasis, and the like; for they continually
afflict.

A Relapse is the Return of a Disease cured, after a short time.

The Cause of a Disease with Physicians, is a thing contrary to Nature,
effecting a Disease. It is divided into procatarctic, antecedent, and
continent. The procatarctic Cause is the Cause that is evident to any one. It
is twofold, internal and external. The internal are all the Passions of the
Mind, Anger, Sorrow, Mirth, Pain, and the like. The external are a Stone, a
Sword, a Knife, a Stick, Air, Meat and Drink, and the like.

The antecedent Cause is a Cause not evident to every one, which being taken
off, the Disease does not presently cease, such is the Abundance of Blood,
which causes an Inflammation in some Part; being removed by bleeding, the
Inflammation does not presently cease.

The containing Cause is that which being taken of the Disease presently ceases.

A Plethora is too great a Quantity of Blood.

A Cacochymy is an ill Quality of the Blood.

A Symptom is an Effect of a Disease, as Thirst of a Fever: A Symptom ought to
follow a Disease as its Cause; either nearly or remotely. A Disease may be also
a Symptom, so is a Fever following an Inflammation.

A Symptom is divided into three general Species, viz. The Action Hurt, the
Fault of things evacuated and retained, and the Quality of the Blood changed.

The Action is hurt when it is not as it should be. There are three Kinds of
Action hurt, viz. abolished, diminished, and depraved. The Fault of things
ercreted and retained is fivefold, viz. of the Substance, of the Quantity, of
the Quality, of the manner of Excretion, and of the Time of Excretion.

The Quality of the Body changed, is a Quality contrary to Nature, in the solid
Parts of the Body, flowing from a Disease: It is sensible and insensible.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Signs in general, and of some of the Species of them.
ASign, among Physicians, is a manifest thing that leads us to the Knowledge of
something that is hidden. It is divided into diagnostic, prognostic, and
commemorative; and these are subdivided into healthy and unhealthy. I do not
add neutral; because I think there is no such thing as a neutral Constitution;
because every one is either sick or well.

A diagnostic Sign is moreover inseparable and proper, and also inseparable and
proper together. The diagnostic is that which signifies something present. The
prognostic is that which signifies something that is future. The commemorative
Sign is that which signifies something that is past. The healthy Sign is that
which signifies Health present, future, or past. An unhealthy Sign is that
which signifies a Disease present, past, or to come. An inseparable diagnostic
Sign is that which signifies some Constitution, and cannot be separated from
it. A proper diagnostic Sign is that which agrees only to one. This Sign is
truly pathognomonic; for it signifies the proper Nature and Essence of the
Disease from whence it flows: But it is ordinarily not one simple Sign, but a
Heap of many together; for instance, a pricking Pain in the Side, with a Cough,
and Difficulty of Breathing, a Fever, and a a strong Pulse, of a Pleurisy.

An healthy diagnostic Sign is a natural Pulse, and a natural Urine. An healthy
Prognostic is the Concoction of the Excrements in Diseases. An healthy
Commemorative Prognostic is a Firmness of all the Actions; for that signifies
present Health. An unhealthy Diagnostic is an Hurt of the Action, as a Swelling
with Redness, and a beating Pain, of an Inslammation. An unhealthy Prognostic
is spontaneous Lassitude. An unhealthy commemorative Sign is a Cicatrix; also
the Weakness of those that recover.

Signs are generally taken from the Causes, as the Fountain, or from the
Effects; that is, from all those things which any way follow Health, the
Disease, or the Causes of it. Some will have the Essence of a thing to be added
here, and so they say that a Piece of the Lungs being cast up, an Ulcer of them
is bred, or Part of the thick Guts being cast out by Stool in a Disentery, they
say they know the gross Guts are affected: But in the Cases mentioned, the Sign
is not taken from the very Essence of the thing, as distinct from the Causes
and Effects, but merely from the Effects.

The prognostic Sign, both healthy and unhealthy, serves much for the Honor of
the Physician; for a successful Prognostication gives him great Authority, and
makes the sick better trust him: But he must be careful that he be not too free
or rash in his Prognostication, lest he get Disgrace.

A Disease may be known by four Signs: First, By the Species of what is
excreted, so a Disentery is known by the small Parts of the Intestines
evacuated by Stool, a stony Constitution by a sandy Urine. Secondly, By the
Nature of the Place, so a Disease or ill Constitution from Worms is known by
Pains torturing the Belly. Thirdly, from the Propriety of the Pain, so an
Inflammation is known by a beating Pain. Fourthly, By proper Accidents, so a
burning Fever is known by a violent Heat of the whole Body, and by the
Blackness of the Tongue, and a great Thirst; a Pleurisy by difficult
breathing, with a Cough and Fever. There are also besides three more Signs that
are less principal, viz. a Proclivity of the sick to a certain Disease; so an
hysteric Passion is known in some Women by their Disposition that way. The
evident Cause foregoing the Disease, so a hot Disease is known in those that
use a hot Diet, those things that do Good or Hurt; so a hot Disease is known,
by being exasperated by hot Medicines, and mitigated by cold.

The Cause of the Disease is known chiefly by seven Signs: First, By the
Temperament, and so by a hot Temperament we may know the Cause of the Disease
is hot. Secondly, By the Color of the Skin, so by the yellow Color of the
Skin, you may know that Bile is the Cause. Thirdly, By the Age, so by Old Age
you may know the Cause is cold; by Youth you may know it is hot. Fourthly, By
the Species of the Pain; so Bile is known by a burning Pain. Fifthly, By the
evident Cause, so by high and plentiful feeding, and a sedentary Life, you may
know that too great a Quantity of Blood is the Cause, so by a cooling Remedy
doing good, you may know that the Cause is hot.

The Signs of a Plethora are, a tumid Habit of the Body, an Expansion and
Tension of the Veins, a red Color of the whole Body, especially of the Face, a
full Pulse, an Unfitness for Motion, a spontaneous and tensive Lassitude in the
whole Body, a voluptuous Life, Suppression of usual Evacuations, and the like.

The Signs of Cacochymy are diverse, as the Species of it are diverse, the
chief whereof are choleric, melancholy, flegmatic, sanguine, and serous, and
they are in the whole Body, or only in Part of it. The Signs of a bilious
Cacochymy, are a yellow Color of the Skin, especially of the Face, an high
colored Urine, quick Palse, choleric Excrements, choleric Pustles, a Pricking
in the Habit of the Body, an hot and dry Diet, Relief by cold and moist things,
and the like. The Signs of a phlegmatic Cacochymy are, a white Color of the
Skin, a soft and tumid Habit of the Body, flegmatic Excretions, a pale Urine,
much Sleep, Relief by hot and dry things, a cold and moist Diet.

The Signs of Wind are, a Tension and Tumor without Gravity, which does not
pit upon pressing with the Finger, a wandering Pain, an Eruption, or belshing
of Wind, a flatulent Diet, and the like.

The Part affected is known by five Signs. First, By the Action hurt, so a
Disorder of the Ear is known by Deasness. Secondly, By the Situation of the
Disease, so you may know the Spleen is affected by a hard swe^ling on the left
Side. Thirdly, by the Propriety of the Pain, so you may know a Membrane is
affected by a pungent Pain; you may know a Parenchyma is affected by a heavy
Pain. Fourthly, By proper Accidents, so by Anxiety you may know the Stomach is
affected, and by fainting you may know the Heart is affected. Fifthly, by
things that are evacuated, as you may know the Lungs are affected by small
Particles of the spongy Flesh cast up by coughing; you may also know the Bowels
are affected by the Excrements coming out of a Wound of the Belly, so that
things evacuated are not here to be understood only of those things which come
from the Substance of the Part affected, but also things contained in it.
Moreover, as to things evacuated, three things are further to be considered,
which do most distinctly show the affected Part, viz. the Propriety of the
Substance excreted, and so by Froth cast up, we may know the Lungs are
affected. 2dly. By the Magnitude of the Substance excreted, so a grosser Tunic
of the Guts being voided by Stool, we may know a gross Gut is affected. Lastly,
By the Manner of Evacuation, so an Artery hurt is known by the impetuous Efflux
of the Blood.

A Symptom that is manifest is known by it self, but that which is obscure is
best known by some more manifest Symptom of the same Disease; and remotely and
obscurely by the Disease, and the Cause of it, so by the wasting of the Body,
as by the most remarkable Symptom, we know that Nutrition is lessened, and so a
Fault of Sanguification by an ill Color of the Body, and a weak Constriction
of the Heart, by a weak Pulse.

By four Signs especially you may know whether the Disease will be cured, or
will kill, viz. By the Species of it, the Magnitude of it, with a respect to
the Strength of the sick, by the Motion of it, and the Manner of it, so for
instance, a Disease that is known to be deadly by its Species, is a
Consumption, a Wound of the Heart, the Plague, a Cancer, and the like: A
Disease on the contrary, which is known by its Species to be curable, is an
Ephemeral Fever, and the like: A Disease which is known to be deadly by its
Magnitude, is either great in its self, or comparatively so; because it is to
last long, especially if it be also malignant. A Disease is known to be deadly
by the worst and most grievous Symptoms. Lastly, a deadly Disease is known by
its Motion, for instance, if it be long, though only moderate, it is dangerous
and great; for such an one wastes the Strength by degrees, and at length kills.

As to the Length and Shortness of a Disease, they may be known chiefly by
three things. First, By the Species of the Disease, so an Apoplexy, Plague, an
ephemeral Fever, are known to be short; a quartan Ague, Palsy, and the like,
are known to be long. Secondly, By the Magnitude of the Disease, so you know a
Disease in it self great, or comparatively so, does not last long. Thirdly,
From the manner of the Disease, so you may know a Disease will not last long,
that has unusual and violent Symptoms. The Prognostics taken from these Signs
are not a little confirmed by the Season of the Year, so Diseases in the Autumn
and Winter are wont to be longer than Diseases in the Spring and Summer, by
reason of the Tenuity of the Matter, and the greater Apertion of the Body.

A critical Sign is that which signifies a Crisis. It is wont to be reckoned
threefold, demonstrative, prognostic, and commemorative.

A critical demonstrative Sign is a great Looseness, or a large Hemorrhage at
the Nose, as they make some Change in the Disease. A critical prognostic Sign
is a great Pain of the Head, Redness of the Face, as they signify a Hemorrhage
of the Nose. A commemorative critical Sign is the better Disposition of the
sick, after the Crisis is made.

A Crisis is the sudden Change of a Disease, either for Life or Death, it is
divided into good and bad, also into perfect and imperfect. A good Crisis is
for Life, a bad Crisis for Death. A Crisis that is perfect, perfectly carries
off the Disease.

A Crisis is not perfect in our Country, because our Region is cold, and the
Humors are cold, but the chief reason is, because the Practice in these Parts
is such, as does not commit much to Nature; but we do at the Beginning carry
off, or at least lessen the Cause of the Disease, by bleeding, or gentle
purging, or by Medicines that move Urine or Sweat, or the like. Yet,
notwithstanding, a Crisis does sometimes happen here; for sometimes we see,
that Fevers are sometime carried off by Sweat, a Looseness, or bleeding at the
Nose.

The Cause of a Crisis is a violent Influx of the animal Spirits into the
Fibers of some Part, whereby the Part contracting it self, expels the Cause of
the Disease, or our Heat, or the Motion of the Blood, whereof the Cause of the
Disease consists, is detruded to certain Parts; and if this or that Protrusion
of the morbisic Matter be such, that thereby it be wholly eliminated from the
Body, the Crisis is perfect. The Ancients assigned certain Days for a good and
perfect Crisis, and so much depended on them, that they did not fear a Relapse,
when the Crisis happened on any of these Days; and some of these Days they
called Indices, or Contemplabiles, because then they were to see whether the
Signs of Concoction did appear in the Excrements, and so promise a good Crisis:
Others they called Interdicentes, in which no Crisis was made; but there was a
Provocation of Nature to a Crisis. Lastly, Of these they called some void Days,
wherein no Crisis was made, nor was there any Provocation of Nature to it.
These they also called medicinal, because they counted it lawful to give
Medicines at this Time. But seeing it appears from their Writings, that a good
Crisis has been made of any Day, and because there is no reason why those Days
should be only critical, we attribute no more to them, than we do to climateric
Years, that so much terrify rich and covetous Men, and to bissextile Years,
that frighten Women with Child.

There are such great Differences of the Pulse among Authors, that it is
impossible to distinguish them; wherefore I shall only set down those that are
useful in Practice, and these Differences are four, great and small, strong and
weak, equal and unequal, frequent and rare. A great Pulse is when the Artery
beats much, long, broad, and deep, a small Pulse is, when the Artery does not
beat much, nor long, broad, and deep; you must always understand proportionable
to the Body; for the Pulse of the Body may be great with respect to it, though it
be really less than in a Man. The Cause of a great Pulse is a great Quantity of
Blood, or a great Rarefaction of it in the Arteries. A great Pulse, as to it
self, fignifies Strength, and is a good Sign, and on the contrary, a small
Pulse signifies Weakness, Death, or at least a long Continuance of the Disease:
But you must not think that a great Pulse is always best; for it is to be
suspected sometimes, as in those that are plethoric; for the great Constriction
of the Heart oftener proceeds from too great an Irritation of it, than from the
Strength of the Faculty; wherefore a moderate Pulse is best.

The Pulse is strong when the Artery strikes the Finger hard upon touching. The
Pulse is weak, when the Artery strikes the Finger weakly. A strong Pulse
proceeds from a strong Constriction of the Heart, and from a strong Course of
the Blood into the Arteries; and therefore is a good Sign; namely, it shows
Strength, and a brisk Influx of the animal Spirits into the Heart, it shows
also the Shortness of the Disease; for where such a Pulse is, the Body the
easier cleanses it self from the morbific Matter. An equal Pulse is when the
Pulse equally strikes the Finger touching it. A frequent Pulse is when it
frequently strikes the Finger touching it. The Causes of a frequent Pulse are a
Disposition of the Blood to rarifie presently in the Heart, the Tenuity of it,
and the previous Rarity. A rare Pulse flows from contrary Causes, it is ill in
Youth, common in Age, but worst, when it is weak as well as rare.

A Pulse proper to a hot Temperament, is wont to be great and frequent, and
often strong. A Pulse proper to a cold Temperament is small, slow, and weak: A
Pulse proper to a dry Temperament is rate and somewhat hard. A Pulse proper to
a moist Temperament is somewhat great, rare, and soft. From what has been said,
it is easy to judge of Pulses proper to compounded Temperaments, as hot and
dry, hot and moist, cold and dry, cold and moist.

Childrens Pulse are very quick, and somewhat soft; for their Blood is very
thin, and their Heart is very tender. In Youths and Men, the Pulse is very
great, and very strong, in Women the Pulse is quick and soft, sometimes great,
but most commonly small, for their Heat is weak. Old People have a rare and
weak Pulse, by reason their Heat is languid. In the Spring the Pulse is wont to
be strong, great, and moderately quick, for the Blood abounds by reason of the
foregoing Winter, and the Heat is moderate. In the Summer the Pulse is quick,
somewhat great, and strong, because the Blood rarifies better, and the Heat is
more. In Autumn the Pulse is inconstant and weak, because the Heat is lessened,
and by reason of the frequent Variation of the State of the Air. In the Winter
the Pulse is small, weak, and rare, for in Winter the Heat languishes by reason
of Serosity, and is lessened by the Air. In Sleep the Pulse is languid, rare,
and small, for the Heat is then small: But when any one awakes, the Pulse is
increased, and is very unequal, because the Spirits rush from the Brain into
the Nerves of the Heart. In Anger the Pulse is great, strong, and frequent;
because the Spirits are carried plentifully and violently into the Heart. In
Sorrow the Pulse is small, weak, and rare, because the Spirits languish in the
Brain. In Mirth the Pulse is moderately great, strong, and equal. The Pulse
proper for Love is more difficultly known; for it is compounded of several
Pulses, of diverse Affections of the Mind; yet any one may know Love by the
Pulse, if Signs of Diseases being absent, the Pulse is very unequal and
inordinate; for the Spirits are wont to move very irregularly both in the Brain
and out of it; for sometimes they are merry, and sometimes sad, sometimes they
fear, and sometimes they hope well.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Urine as a Sign, of the Indication, the Indicant, and the
thing indicated.
WE treat only here of the Urine, as an Effect, showing its Cause in the Body,
and so taken, it shows the Temper of the Body, or something particular about
the Parts of it, through which the Serum continually flows; for by them it is
varied in Substance or Quality; but the Inspection of the Urine is best after
Chylification is perfectly made, and therefore it is best to see it after Sleep
in a Morning. You must put it into a clear and thin Glass, that is round at
Bottom; but it must not be viewed after Coition, Watching, Purging, or after
Use of Medicines that affect the Urine, and it must not be viewed as soon as
voided, nor too long after; but as soon as it is cold, and has a Sediment. You
ought to view it in a clear Air.

If any one shall bring to a Physician, with Design to deceive him, the Urine
of a Brute, or any thing else, instead of Man's Water, the Cheat is best
discovered by the Smell.

Every Disease cannot be known by the Urine, though Piss-prophets pretend they
are able to know all by it; for a Giddiness of the Head, a Wound of a certain
Part, a Palsy, Luxation, and many other Diseases cannot be known by it, though
something may be brought to the Reins and Bladder from every Part: But the
Constitutions, Good or Ill of those Parts, wherein the Urine is perfected,
generated, or somewhat altered, are chiefly known by the Urine, as of the
Viscera serving for Concoction of the Blood, Heart, Ureters, and Reins;
therefore I say that Urine is a very general diagnostic Sign, and more general
than the Pulse, because it often discovers the Disease, the Cause of it, and
the Part affected; but the Pulse does not so; for by the Urine we know
Diseases, as Ulcers, Wounds, Obstructions, and the Intemperies of the inner
Parts; by the Urine we know the Causes, as Viscidity, Crudity, Choler, Stones,
Sand, Clods of Blood, and the like. By the Urine we know the Part affected, as
the Bladder affected by Scales or fetid Pus mixed with the Urine. We know the
Reins are affected by Caruncles, Blood and Pus coming away with the Urine. We
know that the Bladder of the Gaul is affected by the Urine being pale for a
long while: But none of these are found by the Pulse, yet the Pulse is a more
certain Sign of Life or Death, for it shows the primary Causes of Life, whether
they are well or ill, as the Influx of the animal Spirits from the Brain to the
Heart, the Temper of the Heart, Blood, and the Concomitants of them.

Urine also often shows Death, as an Ischury by the Defect of it in a
Leucophlegmatia, by the Aquosity of it; in an Ulcer of the Bladder, by Pus
mixed with it, in the Plague, by the Blackness of it, and its variegated
Color, and the like: But we must not prognosticate any thing rashly by the
Inspection of the Urine: For sometimes, in the most dangerous Diseases, and
when the Pulse are ill, the Urine appears good, and yet the Patient dies
notwithstanding; wherefore it is very fallacious.

The chief Colors which are observed in Urine, are these four, white, red,
yellow, black. The general Causes of Colors in Urine are the Heat continually
boiling, and working upon the Aliment, the Stomach, and Guts, and upon the
Chyle mixed with the Blood. That Heat is the Cause of the Color in Urine is
very manifest from Fevers, the Heat of the Air, Labor, long Retention of it in
the Body, and the like; and we see that by Heat Beer grows redder, and that
Rhenish Wine carried into Spain looks more yellow, and Urine boiled over the
Fire grows very red.

White Urine is twofold, one thin, called watery, the other thick, called
milky. The Cause of a watery Urine is weak Heat, as in such as are cachectical,
and hydropical, large Drinking, too short a Continuance of it in the Body by
reason of the Laxity of the Pasages; for so such a due Chylification and
Sanguification cannot be made, as to tincture the Urine. An Obstruction of the
Passages, as we see in a Stone of the Kidneys. Lastly, Choler, by reason it is
carried to the Head by being thin and light, as we see it is sometimes very
suddenly in Fevers, and then it betokens a Delirium. The Cause of a milky Urine
is the Mixture of some white Humor with it, as Phlegm, Seed, Pus, and the like.

A yellow Urine is caused by a due Concoction of the Chyle with the Blood. A
red Urine is made by the Mixture of Blood with it, or by a greater Coction.
Blood is mixed with the Urine, either upon the account of the Tenuity of it, or
by reason of a Rupture of a Vessel in the Reins, or Bladder, or the like. A
black Urine, and other Species of it, signify the Adusse on or Corruption of
the Humors in the Body. The Urine often changes Color, and so when it is
voided red, being exposed to the Air, it sometimes, a little after, turns brown
or yellow, and this comes to pass by the diverse Reflection of the Light.

The Urine never smells pleasantly unless some odoriferous thing be taken in,
as Musk or the like, yet the natural Smell is not very stinking tho strong and
sulphurous, and if it be without, it argues Debility of Heat, or that the
Urine has not continued long enough in the Body. If the Urine stink much
(unless stinking things have been taken in, as putrid Cheese, Garlic, or the
like) it signifies the Corruption of some Humor, or the Ulceration of some
Part, especially if Pus be mixed with it. But Urine that has Pus mixed with it,
does not necessarily stink, for often Pus it self, coming from an Impostume,
scarce smells, and much less when it is mixed with Urine. But it is manifest
from Experience, that Matter made in the Reins or Bladder, stinks much, and is
gross and viscid.

The Taste of the Urine is salt and nitrous, as is the Serum whereof it is
chiefly constituted, if it has any other Taste, it proceeds from the Mixture of
another Humor, and signifies that such an Humor abounds in the Body. But you
will say, it is below a Physician to taste: Urine I answer, the Physician need
not taste the Urine, for the Patient himself may do it.

The Quantity of the Urine is either the Abundance or Paucity of it. The
Quantity in the natural State, is proportionable to the liquid Matter taken in,
yet somewhat less, perhaps about a third, for some Part of it continually
passes into Nourishment, and some Part is evacuated insensibly, or by Sweat, or
by Spittle, and some ought to remain in the Blood to dilute it, or to be a
Vehicle for it.

a great Quantity of Urine, unless it be occasioned by Cold obstructing
insensible Transpiration, or by reason of taking Diuretics, Dropsy,
Rheumatism, or by the Crisis of a Fever, whereby the Cause of the Disease is
carried off, signifies a Debility of the urinary Passages, and the Laxity of
them, and as the Effect, the future wasting of the Body, as in a Diabetes. A
small Quantity of Urine, unless it proceeds from a Defect of liquid things
taken in, signifies great Heat dissipating the Serum, by insensible
Transpiration, Sweat, or the like, and is often seen in Fevers; or it signifies
an Obstruction of the urinary Passages, a Dropsy of some Part, a Rheumatism,
Catarrh, or the like.

The natural Consistence of Urine is like that of Beer, moderately and duly
boiled and fermented.

A gross Urine arises from a Defect of Serosity, or by some thick thing mixed
with it, as it happens sometimes at the Beginning of Fevers, and in Children
that eat too much.

A thin Urine proceeds from an Obstruction of the Urinary Passages, and so by
reason of the Stone in the Kidneys it is thin, or by reason of the Weakness of
the natural Heat.

That which is contained in the Urine is that Body which is observable in the
Substance of the Urine. It is universally threefold, the Hypostasis, which
subsides to the Bottom; the Eneorema which is suspended in the Middle, and the
Nubecula which is on the Top: Of these none ought to be in the Urine of a well
Person, but the Hypostasis, which signifies that Concoction is made, and if it
be of a whitish, and of a round Figure, and equal, it is best.

That which is particularly contained in the Urine is either a Stone, Sand,
Matter, Blood, Caruncles, Fat, or a brawny Sediment; and most of these signify
a Disposition to the Stone in the Kidneys, or in the Bladder. Fat signifies a
wasting of the Body, and is often seen upon the Top of the Urine of consumptive
People. As to the Sand, it is not as some think always Fragments of a greater
Stone, but a certain Concrete of Salt in the Urine.

Because the ordinary People, and some of the better Sort have been a long
while, and are still much abused by Quacks, Empericks, and some methodical
Phisicians, who pretend to the Knowledge of all Diseases, by the Inspection of
the Urine, I shall here make appear, that there is no certain Knowledge of many
Diseases to be gathered from the Urine alone, and that it is better for the
Physician to see his Patient once, than to view his Urine twenty times: And
several learned Physicians have likewise written diverse Tracts therein,
discovering the Dangers of taking Physic prescribed only by the Sight of the
Urine, to the end that they might dispossess Men of that fond Opinion of a
Physician's discerning Diseases by it, wherewith they have been so long time
deluded; and one of these, in showing the Falsehood and uncertain Judgment of
Diseases by the Urine, has set down the ingenious Confession of a dying
Physician, made to him, being then present with him some three or four Days
before his Departure, who being requested to leave to Posterity that Skill
whereby he had been so much admired and esteemed for judging Women to be with
Child by their Urine, made this Answer; I have, said he, with great Applause,
exercised it, and found, by much Experience, that it is a great Cheat; and
therefore not worthy to be counted an Art, and unfit to be communicated to
Posterity. Another of them makes also this fair Confession. Says he, I have
been so fortunate herein, that I have seldom failed in my Predictions of
determining a Woman to be with Child by the Urine, as I have made them believe,
when the Messenger has been able to certify me of the State of the Woman's
Body, and could answer me to certain other Questions touching other Signs of
Conception. Above all the rest, I was once magnified by a Counselors Wife,
for this cunning Cheat; she meeting with two other Doctors, she told them to
their Faces, that I was the cunningest Doctor in all the Town; for I had told
her, by her Water, that she was with Child, and just how long it was since she
conceived of it: But had the Woman that brought the Urine, showed me no more
than the Urine did, I should scarce have ventured to have pronounced her to
have been with Child: But I, said he, am more to be blamed for my juggling, than
she for her Credulity.

Notwithstanding what has been said, the vulgar Sort are so strongly
prepossessed by reason of their Ignorance, that Physicians can discern, by the
Urine, the Disease, the Conception, the Sex, the Parties Age, with many other
such Absurdities, that I fear it will be a hard Matter to dispossess them of
that Opinion; and Physicians, the more to blame they, have intimated and
pretended so much to this Knowledge, that they will hardly acknowledge their
Errors, and relinquish this Cheat: But when it shall appear that the Urine is
deceitful, and the Physician that pretends Knowledge of Diseases thereby, and
gives his Judgment by such Fallacies and Juggling, as shall be showed in the
ensuing Discourse, let the ignorant choose whether he will believe his lying
Oracle or no, and let the Physician choose whether he will be honester than to
use such Deceit. Yet I hope the one will blush to have been so deluded, and the
other to have his conjecturing discovered, the Urine giving no certain
Knowledge of most Diseases.

Diseases are either acute or chronical,; acute are a Pleurisy, Peripneumonia,
Frenzy, Iliac Passion, Fever, Small Pox, Pestilence, and the like. Chronical
Diseases are such as proceed from the ill Temperature of the Humors, and
Disposition of the Constitution of the Body, such are a Consumption, Dropsy,
Melancholy, Gout, Palsy, Falling Sickness, Cachexy, and the like; but for the
most part, the common fort of People come or send their Water to Physicians for
acute Diseases, and acute Diseases have always a hot and burning Fever joined
with them, and the Urine, for the most part, in a burning Fever, is of a high
red Color, and such an Urine being brought to the Physician to cast, as they
call it, and being of a red high Color, he presently conceives it to be a
sharp and violent Disease, and then knows for certain that there is a Fever
joined with it, and so he is quickly prepared to give his Judgment of it, and
needs now do no more but give a Description of a Fever to make the Messenger
believe that he perceives a Disease in the Water, ye he comes to the true
Knowledge of the Disease by some such Parley and Expostulation with the
Messenger, as shows the Symptoms and Affects of the sick Party. Now the
Description of a Fever, and indeed one Description will serve for any Fever,
and for all sharp and violent Diseases, is to reckon up the Symptoms and Signs
of a Fever, which he knows before he looks upon the Water: They are these,
Oppression of the Stomach, Want of Appetite, a great Pain in the Head and Back,
and the like. Now the saying so makes the Messenger think that the Doctor
perceives by the Urine that the Party is so affected, yet it is no such Matter;
for a high colored Urine is not always the infallible Sign of a Fever; but
suppose it were, yet the Symptoms and Companions of a Fever, as Heat, Thirst,
Pain in the Head, and Want of Sleep, Oppression of the Stomach, Want of
Appetite, and the like, are not to be seen in the Water.

These things being premised, I hope thou will be the better able to judge of
that which follows, and perceive how easy a thing it is to give Judgment of
Diseases by the Urine, though it be not there to be seen, and will perceive the
Fallacies that uphold this Custom, and so learn to distinguish betwixt an
honest, learned, plain-dealing Physician, and a chearing Caster of Water.

The Messenger, whether Man or Woman, you must note, is one who is as it were
made out of Wax, and the Physician can mould him into any Form that shall fit
his Purpose best, and make him, by impertinent Questions, as he thinks, to tell
him any thing concerning the sick Party, that he shall desire to know.

The Urine, if brought out of the Country, is for the most part in a Glass
Bottle: But if ones in the City, it is brought in an Urinal or Viol, it is red
and high colored; and therefore the Piss-prophet rips up all the Symptoms of a
Fever, as before, and the Messenger presently answers that the Party is just so
affected, as I said: But as yet he has not named the Disease, and perhaps
omitted something, which is expected he should have named, and the Messenger is
ready then to ask him, if he perceived nothing else in the Water; to whom he
answers, yes, if you will give me leave to tell you; and perhaps the Messenger
asks if he do not perceive a Stitch, then the Piss-pot Lecturer answers,
looking upon the Water, as if it were there to be perceived, yes, I well
perceive the Stitch, and some Cough too, and he says, when the Cough take; the
Party, the Party is much pained in the Side; and because he did not first name
the Stitch, he tells the Messenger, that we first use to declare the Cause of
the Disease, before we come to every Passion, or Effect of the Disease, or
before we name it. He further adds, that he was not come to speak of the
Stitch, because he had named the Oppression of the Stomach, and the Obstruction
of the Spleen and Mesentery, and that the Stitch was nothing else, but a
slatulous and windy Humor proceeding thence to the Part affected. And now
having been so happy in his Predictions of the Disease, and rightly determined
it to be a Pleurisy, so now he proceeds to the Prescription of such Remedies
as may cure this Pleurisy, and yet here he is as far to seek, though he know the
Disease to be a Pleurisy, as if he knew not the Disease at all, nor had seen
the Urine, because he does not therein perceive the Scope and Grounds of
prescribing fit Remedies, in every Respect, proper to the Disease, according to
the Rules of Art, the which Scope and Grounds are these, namely, the Parties
Age, the Sex, the Constitution of the Body, and the Strength of it at this
Time, with diverse other Accidents, as whether the Party be bound in his Body,
or have a Flux, or the like; all which, nor any one of them can be discerned by
the Urine, and so he must needs err in his Prescription, if the Messenger
refuse, or be unable to give him a full account of the Case; for if not knowing
the Age of the Party, he should order such a Quantity of Blood to be taken away
from a Youth, suppose Ten or Twelve Ounces, in a Pleurisy, the Disease in
Hand, as should be taken from a Man in his full Strength, the Party might
perish thereby: Or if he should take but four or five Ounces of Blood from a
lusty young Man in this Disease, he would do him no good, and so he might
perish on the other hand. He may likewise err in the Dose, by proscribing more
or less than is proportionable to the Party's Age. He may likewise err as much
by not knowing the Sex, if he should in the forenamed Disease prescribe
Blood-letting to a Woman, when she has her natural Courses upon her; for
thereby there may be a Solution of the Disease without bleeding. He may
likewise err, if not knowing the Sex, he should prescribe purging Physic for a
Woman with Child; he may also err upon the Account of the Constitution of the
Patient, and Time of the Disease. Many Ways more may be shown how he may err,
and how most Physicians do err, that prescribe Physic by the View of the Urine
only.

In the next place I shall show how many Ways these false Prophets have to
deceive the People, and to make them believe that they discern all things by
the Urine, namely, the Disease, the Parties Age, Sex, Strength, Constitution of
the Body, and the like. Suppose the next Messenger to be some Nurse, or Tender
of sick Persons; who is commonly versed, and accustomed to carry sick Persons
Urines to Physicians; and as the Piss-lecturer is taking the Urinal out of the
Case, he asks the Nurse how long the Party has been sick; and she, out of
Modesty and good Manners, can do no less than answer him to this Question; for
she thinks this Question to be Words of course, and that he can gather nothing
from hence touching the Parties Disease; so she answers him, a Week, a
Fortnight, two or three Days, more or less, and hence he collects and has a
strong Presumption, that it is an acute Disease. Having asked this Question, and
looked upon the Urine, he says this Party has a great Oppression of the Stomach,
has no Appetite, a great Obstruction of the Liver and Spleen, is very hot and
thirsty, and has a great Pain in the Head, and can take no Rest, and was seized
in the manner of an Ague, first cold, then hor, as he said in giving his
Judgment on the last Urine; and indeed, this Description will serve for any
acute Disease, whether it be the Pleurisy, the Smallpox, Measles, a Fit of
the Stone in the Kidneys, Quinsy, Frenzy, the Iliac Passion, or any other acute
Disease, wherewith a Fever is always complicated; or whether it be a simple
Fever, which is primarily the Disease it self; but yet he will not always use
the same Description; because diverse Messengers may come to a Physician, and
may stay, for Companies sake, to go away together, and may fall to questioning
each other, what the Doctor said to them, and so may think, if he should use
the same Description to them all, that he could say nothing else; therefore he
sometimes varies his Description, and sometimes is shorter in the same; and
then, if he find, by an Expostulation with the Messenger, that he has omitted
any thing that he should have spoken to, he says, it proceeded from such a
Cause as he had already named, and that he should have come to speak of that
anon. He is sometimes likewise larger in his Description, as herein relating
how the Party is affected, from whom this Nurse comes, and she is as ready to
take him up for the same, and says, it is true indeed, that the Party can take
no Rest, has no Appetite to Meat, and was seized in the manner of an Ague, but
complains not of his Stomach at all, but cries out, my Head, my Head, and
complains altogether for want of Rest; he replies, that the Pain of the Head is
the chief of the Passions that the Party is affected with, but yet that it
proceeded from the Obstruction of the Stomach, and Oppilation of the Liver and
Spleen, which send choleric Fumes to the Brain, which inflame the animal
Spirits, and cause this Pain that hinders Rest, and that if Rest be not
obtained, the Party will rave and be frantic. Thus, having answered this
Objection, he now begins to touch the Urinal, to see if it be settled: But
finding it not settled enough to his purpose, to show those things he must find
out of it, he sets it down again very tenderly, saying, it must yet settle a
little better, and then he falls to question the Nurse concerning something
that may show the Sex, for he must find out that by the Water too, and
therefore he asks her what the Party used to do in the Time of Health, and this
is a Question that may, she thinks, as well be answered without giving him any
Light of the Sex, as the former Question, which was how long the Party had been
sick, of giving him any Light of the Disease. But you shall hear what he
collects from thence; she answers, he demanding what the Party uses to do, that
the Party uses to do little, save only to go up and down the House, to work
about the House, to walk up and down abroad, to keep a Shop, to labor, or the
like; and from all these he makes several Observations; for if she say that the
Party uses to do little, save only to go up and down the House, he presumes
that it is the Mistress of the House, or one of her Daughters, or some
Gentlewoman in the House; for certain it is a Woman's Water; for they should,
and commonly do keep their House, and their Work is to walk up and down the
House. But if she say the Party uses to do such Work as is to be done in or
about the House, it is most likely that it is a Maid Servant; but if she say to
walk abroad, he then presumes it is a Man's Water, and that it may be the
Master of the House, or his Son, or some other Gentleman's, whose EMployment is
only to walk abroad and take his Pleasure. But if she say to keep a Shop, he
supposes it to be the Mistress thereof, or the Apprentices; or if she say that
the Party uses to labor, he imagins it to be a Manservant; so by her Answer
to this Question, namely, what the Party uses to do in time of Health, he
discerns the Sex, and now taking the Urinal again in his Hand, for by this time
it has stood long enough to settle, he says that it is a Woman's Water, if the
Answer to the Question, what the Party used to do in Time of Health did infer
as much; that she has a burning Fever, and is so dangerously sick, that will
hardly recover, unless such and such speedy Means be used; and this Danger he
always pretends in every violent Disease, though there be no deadly Sign at all,
but not to the sick Parties; for that they cannot endure to hear of, but
secretly to the Messenger, or some near Friend or By-stander, if he be present
with them; and then, if the Party live, his Judgment will not be so much as
questioned for saying the Party will dye; but be magnified for that he has
recovered her of a dangerous Disease; nay, to be sure, be happy in his
Predictions and Prognostics concerning Life and Death of the Patient; for they
must always have a Hint of that, though the Thoughts of Death be unwelcome; but
he always says if such and such Means be used, she may happily recover; and now
he has performed his Part well enough to the Nurse in his Prognostics
concerning the Event of the Woman's Sickness, from whom she is come. He has
told her how the Woman is affected, what the Disease is, and what will be the
Event, and the Nurse is reasonably well satisfied herewith: But yet he has
omitted something that she will be sure to tell him of; for since she has
undertaken the Matter, she will not go without her Errand; and therefore asks
him if he perceives nothing else by the Water? And he imagines well enough what
it is else that he should perceive in the Water; for when that Question is
propounded, it is to know whether the Woman be with Child or no: He answers,
that there are many more things to be perceived by the Water, but not at all
times, as whether a Woman be with Child or not, which is that you look for; but
it is not now to be seen in this Water; because her Body is all out of Temper,
and her Water troubled and discolored, yet he thinks her with Child, and well
he may, if she her self think so: But he further tells her, that he could have
certainly told if she had brought her Water in the Time of her Health; and so
she is satisfied for that Matter, and confesses that she is with Child indeed.
Having thus satisfied her in all these things, told her that it is a Woman's
Water, in what manner she was sick, what was her Disease, that it was likely
she was with Child, which proves true, and that she would scarce recover: He
asks her whose Water it is; but she will not tell that by any means; for she
was forbid to discover it, and indeed she was sent only to hear his Opinion of
the Water, the which if she like, he may perhaps hear further from the Party;
but if not, she is ordered to go to another Doctor, and so if she like not his
Opinion neither, from him to another, until she comes to him that hits the
Disease rightest, as she conceives by the Water, and it is a great chance if he
be not the greatest Fool and Knave of all the three. This is the Man that must
be made choice of to cure the Woman, and this is thought great Policy in making
Choice of an able Physician; it therefore behooves him to be a Crafts Master in
this Art; fore else you see here, he is like to be choused of his Patient, and
to have his Skill called in question; for if he cannot find the Disease by the
Water, they soon conclude he does not know how to cure it; the Nurse tells him
indeed, that she came to hear his Opinion of the Water, and that the sick Party
would send to him again, when she had heard (she should have said if she liked
it) what was his Opinion, and I think he has fitted her; and now he tells the
Nurse, that she should make haste home, and bids her be sure to deliver his
Opinion as he told her, and to tell some of her near Friends how dangerously
sick she is, and that he would, if she think good to make use of him, use the
best Means that Art affords to recover her, and now he bids her make all the
Haste that may be; but yet before he lets her go, he thus bespeaks her; really
Nurse I commend thee that thou will do thy Errand handsomely, and make a
Physician find the Disease out by the Water, and not be gulled to tell how the
Party was affected, as many a Fool would have done: But I hope I have showed
thee truly, how the Party is affected, and what is her Disease, and given thee
such Satisfaction as will content them that sent thee, here is for thy Pains,
because thou have put me to it so handsomely, and so gives her (fearing lest he
should have erred, that she may maintain his Credit, and in hopes of receiving
a better Fee for being sent for) the Groat or Sixpence; nay, if it chance to
be a Sixpence, indeed she shall have it all, and so he shall be sure to have
his Message well done, and perhaps she will tell him that which she denied
before, if not, she will magnify him for his Skill, and he shall be sure to
hear further from the Party, and have the casting of all the Waters she can
bring him. So now he sends her away, and laughs at her, and the Devil at them
both: He laughs at her, because he has cozened her, and the Devil that he has
cozened them both, by making her to believe that he discerns all those things
by the Water that he told her, and making him to back his pretended Knowledge
with such horrid Cheats.

In the next place I shall discover the great Simplicity of such as send their
Urine unto a Physician without any Instructions how the Party is affected, and
the desperate Hazard that they put their Lives in, who adventure to take
Physic prescribed only by the Sight of the Urine.

Sometimes a Messenger is sent, and has no Knowledge of the Disease, nor of the
Party that is sick; and now the Piss-prophet must show his Skill or never. He
takes the Water to examine it, and thinks to question with the Messenger, as
with the former, how long the Party has been sick, whose Water it is, and to
put in such other Questions as may show such Circumstances as will discover the
Disease, and guide him in prescribing fit Remedies for the same: But the
Messenger cannot tell whose Water it is, much loss the Constitution of the
Body, the present Strength at this Time, or whether the Party be bound or loose
in his Body, with diverse other such Circumstances, all which are so necessary
for him to know, as that without the Knowledge thereof he cannot safely
prescribe any Physic; and yet this Messenger cannot tell him one Word, for he
says he was not told, but was only hired to bring him the Water, and to bid him
send something to help the Party, and all that he can say is, that such a Man's
Servant came to him to get him to come, but does not tell him whose Water it
was, nor how long the Party had been sick, and now in God's Name, what shall he
do in this Case? For it is presumed that he knows the Disease by the Water, and
all the Circumstances belonging to the same, which are requisite to guide him
in prescribing fit Remedies; and this base Fellow has pretended as much, and
endeavored to nurse up Folks in this Folly, as much as other Physicians have
done before him, and has given his Judgment of Diseases by the Sight of the
Urine, and backed his pretended Knowledge by such Fallacies as I have spoken of,
without which neither he, nor any Physician in the World can give any Judgment
of a Disease; nor come to the Knowledge of such Circumstances, unless the
Messenger tells them, as may guide them in the prescribing of safe Medicines
every way proper for the Disease. However it be, something must be done, though
at random, and therefore, looking upon the Water, he perceives it to be very
gross, thick, and turbid, in all Places alike, of an intense, high, dark, red
Color, and from thence he conceives, according to the foppish Piss-maxims, and
Rules of our great Piss-prognosticators, there is a great Commixture of
superabundant Humors, which the Substance of it, as they say, being gross,
thick, and turbid, shows, and that Nature is not yet able to concoct these
Humors; for then there would be some Separation in the Urine, and it would not
be in all Places alike, but would have a Sediment in the Bottom, and be
transparent in the upper Part. He conceives also, that the Patient has a great
Fever, for that the Color shows, being red and high, and that there is great
Danger; for it is of an high dark red Color, tending to Blackness: But yet he
cannot tell what manner of Fever it is; for he cannot discern by the Urine, as
common People suppose the Passions, and Affects of the sick Party, that
determine the Disease, and should guide him in prescribing fit Remedies; and
therefore he cannot tell whether it be best to bleed, to purge, or to give a
Glister, or whether the Body will bear any of these, or whether he had best
give an Anodyne, or some cooling Julep, or some cordial Antidote, to expel
noxious Humors from the vital Parts. Now which of these Methods he had best
use he knows not. But however the Matter is not great; for the Patient ventures
but his Life, and why should not he venture his Skill? He now therefore
pronounces the Party to be lick of a bastard Pleurisy, or a Fever, and that he
would hardly recover; further adding, that he should have been blooded a Week
ago, and that he feared it should now be too late, yet he orders it to be done;
for if any thing in the World recover him, it must be that; if that do it, it
is but habnab: But yet however, he must put it in Practice; so now he hastes
away the Messenger to get a Surgeon, and tells him where, and in what Quantity
the Blood must be taken away. And now, it is a Question whether the Disease, or
the Life be let out by this Blood letting. But perhaps, instead of bleeding he
prescribes some purging Potion, and so sets the Disease and the Medicine
together by the Ears, and leaves the Success to Fortune, and now whether the
Party lives or dies he cares not; for if he dies he has taught them to blame
their own Negligence in not sending any sooner. But if Nature be of such Force,
that she is able to withstand the Conflicts between the Disease and the
Antidote, and stand up and take part with the Medicine, so that the Party
recover, he shall receive more Praise, as being the only Cause of the Patient's
Recovery, than Almighty God, who in his Providence has been pleased, by the
Work of Nature, more than by any Skill of his, to spare and recover him. And
thus the People overvalue the Means, whereby as they suppose, they have been
recovered, though used so desperately, as has been described above.

And now I hope you perceive, by these few Instances, how a Man may deceive the
wisest Messenger that you can send to a Physician with the Water, and show you
the Disease by the same, although it be not there to be found; and how great
Danger they put their Lives in, that adventure to take Physic prescribed by
the Sight of the Urine only; and so I have done with all acute and violent
Diseases, and am now coming to speak of chronical, lingering, and Diseases of
Continuance, wherein I mean to show how these Piss-prophets give Judgment of
them by the Water, though in these Diseases it shows less than in acute and
violent Diseases. But before I come to examine some few Urines, to show how
they give Judgment of chronical Diseases, I must let you understand, that in
chronical Diseases, such are the Dropsy, Gout, Palsy, Falling Sickness,
Scurvy, French Pox, Green Sickness, Coughs, Headache, the Urine is no way
faulty, but represents the Urine of the healthful, and yet the Physician, such
an Urine being brought to him, must sentence the Party that made it to be sick,
upon no other Proof, but only this lying Strumpet and false Witness, the Urine
suborned by the beguiled, and self-conceited Vulgar, and connived at by the
Piss-justice or Judge, before whom it is brought, who is corrupted for a
Testar, and is contented to accept of her Evidence for Truth, when he knows it
to be a palpable Lie that she comes to affirm.

And as in these chronical Diseases, the Water, for the most part, seems not to
import any Disease at all, yet the Party may be irrecoverably sick; so likewise
the Urine is oftentimes of a high red Color, and seems to import a high Fever,
when the Party is not sick at all. It may be also of a good Color and
Consistence in a violent Disease, for the Confirmation whereof many Instances
may be brought.

Now I come to show how they come to know certainly whether it be a chronical
Diseases or no, though the Urine show no such thing, namely, by the same Question
that was propounded in giving Judgment upon Urines in acute and violent
Diseases; and the Question was this, the Piss-monger asks the Messenger how
long the Party has been sick; by Answer whereunto he is certified whether the
Disease be chronical or violent, for if the Piss post says a Week or less, then
he presumes it is a violent Disease: But if he say that the Party has not been
very well a good while, which is commonly their Answer in chronical Diseases,
he is confirmed the Disease is chronical, and when he has once received this
Answer to the forenamed Question, let the Water be what Color soever it will,
he knows how to give an Answer that shall please the Messenger, and will find
the Disease.

As Soon as the Piss-prophet hears a knocking at his his Door, he trudges in
Haste to see what is the matter, and looking sharp, as if he had greater
Business than to examine a Piss-pot, he finds there three or four
Piss-Messengers at once with their Urinals under their Aprons, whom he ushers
into the Hall, and looks very sternly upon them, and asks them very hastily (to
the end he might dash them so far out of Countenance, that they may not be
capable of conceiving whether he err or no in giving Judgment on their Waters;
and to make them the more ready to tell him whatsoever he shall demand of them)
what they would have with him, where they live, whose Water it is that they
bring, and the like, and they are all ready to present their Waters, looking
who shall be dispatched first: But before he takes any of their Urinals, he
sounds them, to know how far he shall be puzzled with them, dispatching those
first, that he finds he shall be least troubled with. To the first therefore he
says, where live you? And she answers, in such a Place, naming it. He further
asks her whose Water it is, he asks her also who is her Mistress; to which she
answers very orderly, and is now ready to put forth her Urinal unto him; but he
does not take it, nor does he ask her any more Questions, for she will be ready
to tell him whatsoever he shall demand; he comes therefore to the second, and
asks her where she dwells, and she having told him, he likewise asks her whose
Water it is that she has brought, and she says, a Gentlewoman's, who desired
her to bring it unto him, and she is ready to give it him; but he refuses it:
He goes now to the third, and asks her where she dwells, and that she is
contented to tell him; but when he asks whose Water it is, she pauses here, and
makes a Doubt whether she had best tell him or not, therefore answers, that it
is her Friend's; then he asks her what Friend it is, and whether it be a Man's
or a Woman's Water, and she tells him that he should perceive that by the Water
when he looks upon it, and holds forth her Urinal, in Hope that he will
dispatch her first; but he refuses to take it, for he is like to be more
puzzled with her, and it will require more Time and Art to answer her than both
the other, and therefore she shall tarry to be the last answered for that
Trick; he now therefore takes the Urinal of her that told him it was her
Mistresses Water, and singles her out from her Fellows, bids her follow him
into another Room; for he must not let several Messengers hear what he says to
each other; because he may chance to stop two Gaps with one Bush, and to give
the same Answer and Description of the Disease; and indeed one Description will
as well serve for all chronical Diseases, as a Description of a Fever for all
violent Diseases; he having therefore took the Maid into another Room, bids her
come to the Light, and as he is taking the Urinal out of the Case, perceiving
it to be of a subcitrine, or pale Color, which seems not to import any
Disease, he presently says, Maid, thy Mistress goes up and down; and she
answers, yes Sir, and imagins no less now, but that I perceive the Idea or
Shape of her Mistress in the Water, and thinks that I can tell any thing else
by the same, so that I shall not now need to trouble my self in asking her any
more Questions; for she tells me that her Mistress goes up and down indeed, and
that I had said very right, and tells him that her Mistress desired that he
would certify her whether she were with Child or no, so now he sets down the
Urinal in the Window, and tells her it must stand so a little while and settle,
and then he will tell her presently. In the mean Time he falls to parley with
the Maid, and asks her whether her Mistress has had any Child or no, and how
long, if she has, it is since she had one, and she says, a Year, a Year and an
Half, or almost two Years, and indeed most childing Women go a Year, or near
upon, and many a Year and Half, and some two Years, before they conceive with
Child again, especially if they nurse their Children themselves. He likewise
asks her, if she can tell if her Mistress has her natural Courses Monthly or
no, or when she had them; to which she answers, that her Mistress bids her tell
him that she has not had them this ten Weeks, and therefore says she thinks
she is with Child, but would desire him to resolve her, and he may quickly do
it, without any more looking upon the Water; for the Tale that the Wench has
told, shows plainly that she is with Child, and the sudden stopping of the
Courses in a married Woman that enjoyed them Monthly before, is the most
certain Token in the World that a Woman is with Child. It is likewise the
aptest Time for a Woman to conceive immediately after she has had them, nor
can he, nor any other Physician tell, but by this Token agreeing with other
Signs of Conception, which the Water shows not, whether the Woman be with Child
or no, and yet for Fashions Sake, he takes the Urinal in his Hand again, and
falls to p^ering into it, as though he looked for some little Child (...) and says
now to the Maid, that her Mistress is not very well in her Stomach, has no
Appetite to Meat, is ill in her Stomach in a Morning, and apt to vomit a^ Meat,
and says, that she is a quarter gone with Child, as the Maid told him; he
further says, that she is with Child of a Boy, and to say so he has an even
Lay, yet, lest it should prove false, he says, looking upon the Water very
earnestly, that if it had been brought when it had been warm, or when she had
been quick with Child, he could have told her certainly whether she were with
Child of a Boy or Girl; but he verily thinks it will be a Boy. So now, if it
chance to be a Boy indeed, it will be granted that he knew for certain that it
would be a Boy, and he shall be accounted one of the rarest Doctors in the
Town; but if it chance to be a Girl, the Flam that he gave the Maid, and the
Truth of his Predictions in determining the Gentlewoman to be with Child, and
telling her how long she was gone with Child will help to bear up the other; so
that be shall not have his Shill one jot abated thereby. He now therefore tells
the Maid, as if she were but just come in, that her Mistress is not very well
in her Stomach, has no Appetite to her Meat, is inclined to vomit after her
Meat, and is a quarter gone with Child, and he thinks of a Boy, and that it is
very convenient for her to take some corroborating Electuary to strengthen and
settle her Stomach, though she be with Child; nay, he says, that it would be
good, not only for her self, but for her Child also; and he bids her tell her
Mistress that it will make her Child prosper the better within her, and make it
the more lively, so that it will help it self, and make her Delivery the more
easy, and will also make the Child wise and understanding. So now he is sure
to get a Fee for himself, and a Feeling for his Apothecary; for what Woman
would not have her Child prosper within her, and be easily delivered of a wise
Child? He therefore, upon the second Application, prescribes an Electuary of
Marmalade, or some other Confection of Quinces, with some Species or Conserves
to disguise it, though Marmalade alone would have done as well, and is indeed
proper to stop vomiting, and strengthen the Stomach; but whether it will make a
wise Child I know not.

Having dispatched this Maid, he calls in the second Messenger, and says to
her, come good Woman, give give me thy Urinal, and tells her (the Urine being
of such a Color as imports not an acute Disease, that is, of a high red
Color) that this Gentlewoman walks up and down, has a crude Stomach, no
Appetite to Meat, and is, if she feed liberally, ill after it; and by reason of
the ill Disposition of her Stomach, is often pained in the Head; and here the
Woman stops him before he run any further (for otherwise he may chance to
reckon up most of the Symptoms that accompany chronical Diseases, till he hit
upon that which the Messenger looked for) and says, she is troubled with a great
Pain in the Head indeed, but does not much complain of her Stomach; and then he
replies, that the Pain of the Head proceeds from the Stomach, and that the
Stomach is always accessory to the Diseases of the Head, and that he named the
Illness of her Stomach first, because it was the Cause of her Disease, and
having once given a Description of the Disease, he will be sure to make it
good, whether it be true or false; for if he had said that she had been
troubled with an Obstruction of the Liver, and Pain in the Head, the Messenger
should say, no Master Doctor, she is troubled with an Illness and Pain in the
Stomach, he will say it is very true indeed, and I should have told you so, had
you not interrupted me, for it comes from the Head; for the Stomach and Head do
mutually offend each other, and what can she say to the contrary? And if, when
he has given a Description of the Disease, she says, Sir, she is much as you
have said; but do you not perceive she has a very weak Back? to which he
answer, yes marry has she, and something else too, which I shall tell you
presently: And then he takes the Urine and looks upon it, and shakes it
together, and sets it down in the Window to settle, pretending it will show him
something else anon; in the mean Time he gathers, by Conference with the
Messenger, whether it be a married Woman's or a Maiden's Water, and then he
takes the Urinal and says, if it be a married Woman's, that she has a very weak
Back indeed, and that she is troubled with the Whites, which is a Disease that
very many Women are troubled with that complain of weak Backs. But if the Water
chance to be a Maiden Gentlewoman's Water, who is either troubled with a Pain
or Heat in her Back, and the Messenger asking if she be not troubled with one
of them, he presently conjures them both in the Water.

But as to the Gentlewoman that is married, he says, that she has a very weak
Back, is troubled with the Whites, and that this Disease has hindered her being
with Child; for the Messenger has told him before, that the Gentlewoman has not
had a Child within three or four Years, and that she will have no more
Children, unless she were freed of them; and now he must think upon something
to cure this Gentlewoman, for he is sure she will send to him again to help her
to another Child: And now he is ready for the third Messenger, that said, she
came from a Friend of hers. He has made this Gossip tarry till the last;
because he was afraid she would prove a cross Piece of Flesh to deal with; and
therefore he handles her gently; for the wildest Colts are often tamed by
gentle Means. He says, Mistress, I have made you tarry, but you shall not
altogether lose your Labor, I pray you follow me, and so be conducts her into
his Parlour, where his Man is waiting for him, with a Tankard of Ale and a Tossed
with Nutmeg and Sugar for his Mornings Draught; then he sits down in his Chair,
and says, here good Woman, I drink to you, and then bids her drink a hearty
Draught; then he bids her mend her Draught, and tells her, that Nutmeg and
Sugar in Beer in a Morning will make her Water sweet, and thus are the perverse
Dispositions of cross Messengers better corrected, than the Malignity of
Scamony with Anis-Seeds, or Rhubarb with Spike; besides, he having drunk his
Mornings Draught, which will much enable him to see clear, he now says, come
good Woman, how long has your Friend been sick? she says, he has not been very
well a good while, and so offers him the Urinal: But he refuses to take it, and
says, because I have made you stay so long, I will show your Friend's Disease
by the Urinal Case, and never look upon the Water at all, and yet I will tell
you the Disease as well as he that shall pore and peep into the Water a Month.
He now therefore takes the Urinal Case of her, and looks as wistly upon it as
if it were the Urinal, and the Water in it, and presently pronounces that the
Party goes up and down, is not Heart sick, but is faint in the Body, has a bad
Stomach, lingers and pines as it were, is joyless and melancholy, and takes no
Pleasure in any thing; and now the Woman wonders to hear him say so, by looking
only upon the Urinal Case, and yet what he says is as true as if he had looked
in the Urine. And thus the Messenger is soon caught, for he asked her before he
took the Urinal Case of her, how long her Friend had been sick, and she told
him that he had not been very well a good while; from which Answer I shall show
both the Sex and the Disease; for this Word, he, shows him the Sex, and these
Words, has not been very well a good while, show him that it is a chronical
Disease, and how the Party is affected. The latter Part of her Answer, viz. A
good while, shows that it is a Chronical Disease, and the former Part of the
Words, namely, has not been very well, does imply, lies not by it; and that
therefore he goes up and down; he has no Appetite to Meat, is faint in his
Body, lingers and pines as it were, is joyless and melancholy, and takes no
Pleasure in any thing, as he told her before, and so are all they that have not
been very well for a good while. But the Woman never dreams that he gathers all
this from her Answer; because he looks upon the Urinal Case; but thinks rather
that the Urinal infected the Case, or else that he can conjure. But he will
make her wonder more anon; and now he adds, that it is a Man's Water, to which
she answers, it is indeed. He further asks her how old the Party is, and
according to her Answer, as the Parties Age shall agree with hers, he says that
it is her Husband's Water, at which she marvels more than at all the rest, and
says, it is indeed. And now she is ready to put Finger in Eye, and asks him if
he be not in a Consumption, and tells him, for he did not name it, that he has
a very great Cough, and asks him if he did not perceive it, then he tells her,
that this Cough proceeds from an ill Stomach, which he had ^ed, that sends a
Rheum into his Head, which descends thence upon the Lungs, and causes the same,
and now he comes nearer to the Matter, and tells her her Husband is inclined to
a Consumption, but yet that he hopes he may be recovered, and savs, he will use
the best Means that may be to restore him; he also asks her why she so long
deferred the coming to a Physician? and she says, that her Husband had thought
to have wore it out, as they all think to do. And now he bethinks himself of
aurum potabile, some Liquor of Life of a great Price, some Consumption Powder
of twenty or thirty Shillings an Ounce, or some such Receipt, which no body has
but himself, than which there is no greater Secret in the World.

And by these Fallacies and deceitful Juglings, and far worse Shifts than I
have here set down, has this base Custom of giving Judgment of Diseases by the
Sight of the Urine, been underpropt and supported, or else it had long ago been
abrogated and fallen to the Ground; for there is no Knowledge of any Disease to
be gathered by the Urine, sufficient to guide the Physician in prescribing
Medicines to cure the same; and yet such a base Custom has been upholden and
encouraged by our best Physicians.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Glisters, Vomits, Purges, Bleeding, Leeches, Baths, Frictions,
Ligatures, actual and potential Cauteries, Cupping-glasses, and Issues.
A Glister is of good Use in Physic, and it serves to mollify the Excrements,
to discuss Wind, and to cleanse the Bowels from viscid Humors, though their
Virtue, as most suppose, reaches no farther than the Guts, yet a Woman has been
disordered in her Head by a Glister of Wine injected. Some say, that Opium in
Glisters procures Sleep, and Sennertus advises, in his Chapter of a Frenzy,
when the Patient is very weak, to mix Opiates with Glisters. The Quantity of
the Glister is commonly prescribed to fifteen or eighteen Ounces, which is
often too much, when the Guts are filled with Excrements or Wind, or when the
Patient is short of Stature.

Glisters, according to Galen, may be substituted for purging Medicines. When
Purges do not their Office, Physicians commonly inject a Glister; but some
think that a Suppository made of Honey and half a Dram of Salt is better in
this Case.

Glisters made of Oil of sweet Almonds are counted very effectual in the
Cholick. A Glister of Tobacco is very proper to empty the Bowels. Let two Pipes
be filled with Tobacco after the usual Manner, then light them, and turn the
Mouths of their Heads one upon the other, then put the smaller End of one up
the Fundament, and holding the small End of the other in your Mouth, you may
blow the Smoke up into the Guts.

A Vomit works by moving inordinately the Fibers of the Nerves of the Stomach.
A Vomit does not only evacuate from the Stomach, but also from the small Guts,
the Ductus Cholidochus, and from the pancreatic Duct. But all do not equally
bear Vomits; those who are narrow breasted, that are subject to an Asthma,
spitting of Blood, vomit with great Danger: But they are of excellent Use when
the Appetite is languid, and when the Stomach nauseates and when the antecedent
Cause lurks in the Stomach; nor is vomiting so very dangerous a Remedy, as is
commonly thought; for Reason and daily Experience shows the contrary. But
frequent and difficult vomiting loosens the Tone of the Stomach, weakens the
Bowels, and hurts the Head.

No purging Medicine purges electively, or is destined for evacuating some
particular Humor, but works upon all the Humors, and therefore it is vain to
think that Cholagogs purge only Choler, Phlegmagogs only Phlegm, Melanagogs only
Melancholy, Hydragogs only Water. It is also vain to think that a Purge is
appropriated to the Head only, or to the Liver or Spleen only, or the like; for
every Purge circulates with the Blood, and is carried to every Part, and works
upon it.

Purging is proper for a Cacochymy, to carry off the ill Humous. The Strength
ought to be good, which may be known by the Pulse; the Age, the Sex, the
Temperament, the Habit of Body, the Custom, and the like; the middle Age bears
purging best. Infants and Old Age are purged difficulty. If Children are to be
purged, the Cathartic must be given to the Nurse, for so it is sucked in with
the Milk, and works more kindly. Men bear purging better than Women: But some
Women, especially such as have a Stoppage of their Courses, bear strong Purges.
In the purging of Women you must take notice, that they must not be purged when
they have their Courses upon them, and big bellied Women are not to be purged
rashly; for there is Danger of Abortion. The safest Time of purging them is
from the fourth Month to the seventh; but now adays big bellied Women are
purged at any Time with gentle Purges.

An hot and moist Temperament, and a fleshy Habit of Body bear Purges best.

We must take notice in prescribing a Purge, whether the Body be much bound,
and if so, it is best to give a Glister first.

Some say that the Humors must not be purged till they are concocted or
prepared by previous Medicines: But our modern Practice is contrary to this.
The Dose of a purging Medicine is to be found out by Experience, for the
Propriety and Condition of Bodies are various; we must therefore ask the
Patient whether he has taken a Purge at any Time when he was sick, and whether
it wrought enough, and according to Desire or not; if you understand that the
Patient is easy to work upon, then use the more gentle means, or a smaller
Dose.

Some add Narcotics with Cathartics, and it has been found by Experience, that
after a gentle Sleep, a most successful Exclusion of Humors has followed. For
a Pain in the Stomach, or the Cholic, the following Pills are very proper.

Take of the best Aloes one Dram, of Laudanum opiatum four Grains, of
Diagrydium six Grains, mix them, and make Pills to be given at a convenient
Time. They allay the Pain in an Hour, and afterward evacuate the Humors.

Pills are the longest in working, Powders next, then Electuaries; but the
quickest of all are Potions.

Melancholy and mad People require strong Purges.

It is ill to feed freely after a Purge has done working, and it was usual
with the Ancients to omit their Dinner on the Day they took a Purge.

If a Purge work not in four or five Hours, advise stirring about, and if there
be no Fever, give two or three Pills of Aloes, hot Broth, half an Ounce of
white Tartar finely powdered in Broth, or a common Glister.

Those who have been subject to the Falling Sickness, Palsy, Stone,
Hypochondriac Melancholy, such as have had the French Pox, inveterate Itch,
Scabs, Leprosy, or Scurvy, and those that have some usual Evacuation stopped, as
the Terms, Hemorrhoids, an old Ulcer, or a wonted Flux, or have a considerable
Member cut off; these and such like, if they will consult for their own Safety
and Life, ought to purge while they are in Health, to prevent Diseases.

It is very proper after Purges, especially in hysteric and hypochondriac
Cases, in the Cholic and the like, to give an Anodyne at Bedtime.

Bleeding is a very ancient Remedy, used by all Nations, and there are few
Diseases wherein it is not indicated, if the Strength be sufficient; but
especially when the Quantity of it is too great, or when it is extravasated
upon some Part, or coagulated. The Ancients were wont to reckon three Sorts of
bleeding, one for Evacuation, another for Revulsion, and the third for
Derivation: But I admit but of one, and that is of Evacuation, and that does
all; for when Part of it is evacuated, the rest is better contained in the
Vessels, and circulates better, so that Fluxion is prevented, and an
Inflammation, and the Veins being emptied, that Blood which is extravasated is
the easier recalled, as in a Quinsy, Peripneumonia, Pleurisy, and other
Inflammations.

Some reckon there is a great Difference about the Veins that are to be opened;
for they think that some above others do evacuate a certain Part, and therefore
they have called some Veins Cephalic, some Hepatic, some Ischiadiac, and the
like: But one would think these neither understand Anatomy nor Circulation; for
otherwise they would know that the Veins communicate with the Arteries, and
like so many Rivulets, take their Rise from the same Fountain; and therefore it
is no matter of which side the Vein is opened, or which it is, only that which
is largest and the most commodiously opened is to be chosen: But in an
Obstruction of the Courses, a Vein of the Foot must be opened; because thereby
the Flux of them is promoted, and such Obstructions are often turned this way.

The Veins which are wont to be opened in the Head are the Jugular, the
Temporal, the Vein of the Forehead, and that under the Tongue; in the Arm, the
Cephalic, Middle, and Basilic; in the Hand, the Salvatella and Cephalic; in the
Foot, the Ischiadiac.

In opening these Veins, Care must be taken that the Nerve or Tendon lying
under be not hurt, lest Convulsions, and other grievous Accidents, or Death
should follow. Care should be also taken that the Artery lying under be not
hurt, for so an Aneurism will be occasioned, and in closing the Wound you must
not leave any Blood in the Lips of it, lest an Inflammation should arise; but
you must wash it well out, and bind it up. Care must be also taken that a Vein
be not opened rashly in the Plague, Smallpox, Petechial, and Malignant Fevers,
lest the Malignity should strike in and kill the Patient, nor in the State of
Fevers, nor in the cold Fit of Agues, nor in great bellied Women, especially at
the Beginning or End of their going with Child. Moreover, Women with Child must
not be blooded in the Foot, in the Arm there is less Danger; and now many Women
are wont to bleed when they are with Child, thinking that it is good for the
Child's Health, and indeed it often succeeds very well.

Too much Blood must not be taken away at a time. You never ought to take away
above a Pound at one time, nor so much but in extraordinary Cases. The common
Quantities are seven, eight, nine or ten Ounces, and it is better to repeat
bleeding, than to take away too much at a time.

You ought not to bleed till the Blood turns to a better Color, as the Custom
of some is; for sometimes that which come out first is red, and that which
follows is of another Color, and if you would continue bleeding till the
Color change better, the Patient's Life will be endangered; and you ought
never to bleed till the Patient faints, as is the Custom of some. It is best to
receive the Blood in Porringers, that the exact Quantity of it may be known.

Old Men and Children do not bear bleeding well, yet sometimes they must be
blooded in a Quinsey, Pleurisy, or the like.

More Blood may be taken away from fleshy People than from fat; also from such
as are thin, if they have not been rendered so by a spare Diet and much Labor,
for such have most Blood.

Some Physicians give a Glister before bleeding, but it is not necessary.

Many will not bleed in the Dog Days, as if there were something special then
that opposed it: But the Heat of that Time, and the Dissipation of the Strength
thereby are the only things to be minded, for if the Weather be then temperate,
or if Necessity urge, you may bleed.

The Jugular Veins may be safely opened notwithstanding the Prejudice of the
common People, because the Veins are large, and there is neither Nerve nor
Artery under them.

It is thought proper to sleep an Hour or two after bleeding, to recover the
Strength, though it has been formerly reckoned hazardous.

It is certain that bleeding is profitable against a Plethora, whether already
complete, or but a beginning; for the Mischiefs of a Plethora cannot be better
taken awak or prevented by any other Remedy; yet we should avoid this
Evacuation as much as we may, because the Blood thereby becomes more
sulphurous, and less salt, and therefore almost all Persons are apt thereupon
to fall into Fevers, and to grow fat. Moreover, bleeding being a great Remedy,
if it be prostituted to every little Occasion, it will become less profitable
when there is need to use it for great Diseases, to which this may be added,
that according to the vulgar Observation, the more familiarly any one uses
bleeding, the oftener he shall need it, because Blood being often let to avoid a
Plethora, the rest of the Mass will the sooner rise again to a Plethora, far
otherwise than some think, who fear lest the Store of the Blood should be
wasted by bleeding, seeing on the contrary by this means its Quantity becomes
larger, tho its Crasis be worse; for thus the Blood being spoiled of its
balsamic Salt, and of its Salt that preserves it from Putrefaction, is instead
thereof saturated with a fatening Sulphur.

Galen says, that Old Age does not forbid bleeding; you shall open a Vein in
Men of seventy, says he, if the Disease require it; for there are some even of
this Age that have much Blood, and are brisk, wherefore you ought not only to
have regard to the Number of Years, which some do, but also to the Habit of the
Body, for there are some that cannot endure bleeding at sixty, whereas there
are others that can bear it at seventy; however less Blood must be taken from
these than from young People. If therefore a brisk old Man be afflicted with a
Pleurisy, Peripneumony, a burning Fever, or the like, there is no doubt but he
may and ought to be let blood, seeing without that Remedy, such Diseases can
hardly ever be cured, and if they are not able to endure the Remedy, they must
necessarily perish. An old Man of seventy three Years of Age has been let blood
sour times in three Days, and lost thirty Ounces of Blood; and though the
Ancients thought Infancy and Old Age could not bear this kind of Remedy, yet it
matters not what the Age is, but what the Strength is; therefore if a young Man
be weak, it is bad to let him blood, but a lusty Boy, and a hearty brisk old
Man do safely admit of bleeding; a Child seven Weeks old was taken with a cruel
Pleurisy, the Signs whereof were a violent Cough, an acute Fever, and when he
was laid down in his Cradle, or held in Arms, if he were touched never so
lightly on the right Side, after having coughed a little, he would cry very
vehemently, with Difficulty of breathing; in this case two Leeches were applied
to the bending of the right Arm, and two Ounces of Blood were taken away, which
Remedy was of that Efficacy, that the Child was quite cured the same Day of
this dangerous Disease.

An Idiosyncrasy, or the singular Property of each ones Nature, makes some to
endure any bleeding well, and others neither that which is large nor
indifferent; yea, some are afraid and discouraged at the very mentioning of it,
and swoon as soon as they are pricked.

He that would determine the Quantity of Blood that is to be let, ought to
consider the Country, the Strength and Plenitude of the Body. In hot Countries
that are near to the Meridian, large bleeding is not so well born as in the
middle Climates. The French, especially in Paris, bleed very largely; but
colder Countries that are nearer the North, seem not to bear such large
Evacuations of the Blood so well, whether the Fevers be acute, continual, or
intermittent.

Letting of blood may breed a Custom; thus the Aethiopians, who use often to
scarisie their Foreheads, their Forehead itches, and Blood is redundant; as
likewise does the Shoulder Blade and Arm in those who have been used to be
scarified or bleed in those Parts; for the emptied Part draws from the whole,
and Nature endeavors to unburthen her self by that Part which uses to be
opened.

If in the Middle of a Disease, or at the Beginning, Blood begins to flow out
of the Womb, Physicians lay so great Stress upon the Benefit of that Region,
that though it slows out at an usual Time, merely symptomatically, they dare not
use any other Evacuation which may stay that Fluxion, whence it comes to pass,
that in the Cure of acute Diseases, they often incur great Danger by such
Scruple, as when in the Beginning of a Pleurisy, or Peripneumony, or burning
Fever, the Terms begin to flow, there are few who do not let slip the
Opportunity of letting blood, or if in any acute Disease they dare do it, they
do it in the Foot, induced, as I suppose, by the Benefits of that Region, and
being affrighted by the Dangers that are wont to happen, upon the Suppression
of the Terms; but it does not become Artists to receive any Matter so
indistinctly: That Evacuation of Blood by the Womb which is natural, is indeed
profitable unto Women upon many Accounts, and is generally suppressed with
great Prejudice; yet that Evacuation is not always made with a like Benefit;
and therefore it is neither stopped always with the same Danger; but the like
happens commonly in this, as in other Evacuations; we must therefore consider
not only from whence the Blood flows, but whether it flows seasonably, that is,
whether at that time, when there may be made a Crisis of the Disease, and when
the Terms use to flow, or whether at neither of these times, but while the
Disease is yet crude, and the Month is not yet quite come about, or whether it
be come about, but the Disease is not ripe for a Crisis, or whether it be ripe
for a Crisis, but the Month is not yet come about; for if the first happens,
you may esteem the Evacuation to be very seasonable, and that the menstrual
Evacuation of the Body, and the Solution of the Disease have happily jumpt upon
the same time; you shall therefore give way to such an Evacuation, if it be
made entirely, if not, you must help it by all means; therefore you shall open
no Vein, or if you do, it must be in the Leg. But if the Evacuation be
seasonable upon neither Account, then matter it not, but let blood where, and
as much as the Disease requires, abating only so much of the Quantity as you
think may be supplied by the Fluxion that casually happens; therefore if it be
a Pleurisy, let blood in the Arm, not mattering though it flow out of the Womb,
if the Evacuation come before the usual Day of the Month, and yet happen fitly
for a Crisis of the Disease, the Rule of a seasonable Crisis shall be observed
to let it alone if the Flux be large enough, if not you must help it; but you
must not hinder or divert it upon any Account, nor must you attempt another
Evacuation, and if it be unseasonable for the Disease, but comes at a due Time
of the Month, if so be the Disease be indifferent to upper or lower
Evacuations, as suppose the Stone in the Kidneys, or be without a certain Seat,
as a Fever, Blood shall be let out of the Leg, if there be need to let it: But
if the Disease require Evacuation by the upper Parts, and be urgent, the
Physician may bleed alternately above and below.

Bleeding by a large Orifice helps more than bleeding by a straight, when the
Quantity of the Blood that is let is equal, because it has made a more sudden
Change in the Body, when the Blood is poured out by a large Hole.

Some esteem so much the first time one is let blood, that they will not use it
but in great Cases; because they think, that like an unusual and first Remedy,
it may cure a Man of great Diseases, and this vulgar Opinion seems to be
justified by what Hippocrates writes of the first Eruption of the Terms, and
the first Copulation; and Celsus says, if any Kind of Disease happens in
Infancy, and ends neither when a Man comes to Maturity, nor upon the first
Coition, nor in a Woman upon the first flowing of her Terms, the same is
generally of long Continuance.

It is discussed by some later Physicians, how long we must abstain from Meat
after bleeding. Galen, after having bled a young Man sick of a Synochus without
Putrefaction, gave some Food two Hours after. Others have said that we may
allow Victuals one Hour or two after bleeding, tho not much: But this is a
thing for the Physician to guess at, according to the Quantity of Blood that is
let, and the Strength of the Patient's Faculties; for Galen stayed two Hours,
because he let blood very plentifully, whereby his Strength and Spirits were
weakened, so that he fainted away. But we that bleed far more sparingly, and do
not so much diminish the Heat, Spirits, and Strength, have no reason to tarry
so long.

In the Diseases of Children, and of Women with Child, the Physician consults
well for himself, and his Patients, if he be present when they are to be bled;
for those who are entrusted with that Operation, being too bold, do suffer the
Blood to issue out too largely, and if any unfortunate thing happen, it is
presently ascribed to the Physician.

When a Fillet is tied about any Member, and the Vein that uses to be found in
that Part does not appear, but something that is round is felt deep under the
Skin, of which you doubt whether it be a Vein or not, presently loosen the
Fillet, if it be a Vein, it also growing lax, will fall down, and be no longer
perceived by your Finger till you bind the Member again: but if, when the
Fillet is loosened, that which you touched feels as it did before it was tied,
then use not your Lancet, for it is not a Vein but a Tendon, or the Head of a
Muscle, or something beside a Vein, and the Arteries beat where they are,
whereby both their Situation and Depth become manifest, even to a meanly
experienced Artist.

If when you have occasion to bleed, the Vein do not appear, a large
Cupping-glass, with much Flame is to be fixed upon the Part, and that will make
the Vein show it self.

In bleeding there often happens a swooning or fainting away, which uses to
cause greater Fear in those who are present, yea, in Physicians that are young
Practitioners, than Harm to the Patient: This happens not through the Fault of
the Artist, but the Softness of the Patient's Mind, which too readily disturbs
the Spirits; but this may be easily prevented, if the Patient lie along, and
hold some Water or Wine in his Mouth whilst the Vein is cut and the Blood flows
out; if he faint notwithstanding, stop the Blood by laying your Thumb upon the
Orifice, and sprinkle his Face presently with cold Water. If the fainting
continue, pinch his Nose also, and when the fainting is over, taking off your
Thumb, let as much Blood be taken as seems good to the prudent Artist, and
cease not to bleed as the over-fearful use often to do.

We use Leeches where Bleeding and Cupping-glasses cannot be applied, as to the
Nose, Lips, Fingers, and Toes, Womb, Anus, and the like; also to Children and
others from whom but a little Blood ought to be taken.

The best Leeches are in clear Water, of moderate Bigness, and of a liver
Color, the Belly reddish, the Back greenish with golden Streaks; the rest are
venomous, especially those that are brown, thick-headed, and that live in
impure Waters. These little Animals have little sharp Teeth, whereby they bite
and stick to the Skin of Men and other Animals. That they may suck the
greedier, anoint the Part with a Drop of Pigeons Blood, or of the Blood of a
Chick, or rob the Part gently, or prick it a little, and hold them with a Rag,
and not with the naked Hand. When they stick, if you design to bleed freely,
you must cut off their Tails, for so the Blood will drop from them; you must
take care that none of their Teeth remain in the Part, for so the VVound is
made incurable, and Death often follows; it is therefore better to let them
suck till they are satiated, and till they fall off of themselves, or you may
sprinkle Salt upon their Heads to hasten their falling off, and instead of them
you may apply others to evacuate a sufficient Quantity of Blood.

Our Surgeons and Apothecaries provide Yearly a great Stock of them, and keep
them in Glasses, casting in a little Sugar sometimes to nourish them. But it
may be doubted whether they are made better by this means, perhaps they become
more virulent, and worse hereby. It is false, that being applied to the Anus,
they suck away melancholy Blood from the external or internal hemorrhoidal
Veins; for first, that Vein has not more melancholy Blood in it than any other,
neither do they carry it from the Spleen, as the Ancients thought; yea, the
Spleen is not the Receptacle of Melancholy, as the Ancients thought.

If Leeches are to be applied to the hemorrhoidal Veins, first let the
Fundament be fomented with a Decoction of Mallows, or the like.

Cupping-glasses are made of Glass or Horn, or the like; they are to be applied
to carnous Parts, and stick close to them: They must not be applied upon
Tendons or Arteries. They are to be applied after the Part is well rubbed with
a linen Rag. Those that work without Fire are either made of Horn or Wood, and
a Hole is in the End of them, through which the Air is drawn, when they are
placed upon the Part. Those which are applied with Fire have a little Flax in
them, which is to be fired just as they are about to be put on: But lest the
Flax should burn the Flesh, it is fastened to the Bottom of the Cupping-glass
with a little Wax or Turpentine. Those which are without Scarification draw out
only the Blood and Humors from the neighboring Parts, so as that they may the
better transpire through the Skin: But such as are applied with Scarification
sensibly evacuate many Ounces of Blood and Humors, and much more if a
Cupping-glass be applied before the Scarification. The Use of Cupping-glasses
is very effectual in many Cases, especially to draw out any malignant thing
from the Body: But they are more painful than bleeding.

Frictions are made with hot Clothes, with and without Pain, and till the Skin
is red. The Ancients used them for Revulsion, supposing that so the Blood and
other Humors about to flow to the Head might be drawn to another Part, suppose
the Back or Arm; but Frictions do not operate so powerfully in this Case, as to
hinder the Flux of any Humor to the Head, or if they do any such thing, it is
of so little Duration and Efficacy that it does not deserve the Name of
Revulsion; therefore I think Frictions serve chiefly to make the Blood flow
more plentifully to the Skin, and to carry off any ill thing mixed with it
through the Pores of the Skin: They also ease small Pains of the Head, and
assuage an Epileptic Fit; such as are strong and painful are proper for sleepy
Diseases.

Frictions are also very proper for old Men; they hinder the Humors from
falling upon the Joints, and help Digestion, and if performed in due Time, that
is, having eased the Body of its Excrements, they cheer the Body, and
corroborate the natural Heat, and excite the vital Faculties; whence the
Distribution and Concoction of the Food is more easy and ready. They are very
proper for old Men in the Summer and in the Autumn, having first voided the
Excrements of the Belly and Bladder.

The Use of Ligatures is rare now adays, for they do not that which many
expect from them, they are sometimes used in violent Hemorrhagies, so the
common People are wont to bind the Fingers of a Woman that has too many of her
Courses with Silk, and the Arms and Legs for bleeding at the Nose.

An actual Cautery is a red hot Iron of a certain Figure to burn some Part of
the Body; it is used to stop hurt Arteries, and a Flux of Blood. It is also
used for a Caries of the Bones, and to make Issues: But this is counted a cruel
Remedy, and is therefore seldom used, especially seeing the thing can be done
by a potential Cautery.

A potential Cautery, or an Eschareotic is of great Use in Physic for opening
the Breast, Imposthumes, and for taking off proud Flesh; but Care must be taken
of the Nerves, Tendons, and great Vessels. Care must be also taken that the
Caustic do not lie long, or dissolve so much as to corrode the neighboring
Parts. To prevent this, Plasters with Holes in them are first to be applied to
the Part for a Defensive, and the Caustic is put into the Hole, or it is kept
close by half a Nut-shell bound hard on.

Blisters are also of the Nature of a Caustic, and work much after the same
manner, only they are weaker. They are of great Use in malignant Fevers and
sleepy Diseases, and in other Diseases, when we would evacuate some acrid
Humor from the Blood: But in the Application of them care must be taken of the
Tendons and Nerves.

Issues are certain small Ulcers mady by Art in diverse Parts, they are made
either by an actual or potential Cautery, or they are cut. They are frequently
made in the Limbs, and sometimes, tho rarely, in the Neck. In making of them
have a care of the Beginning of the Muscle, choose the Middle or the End of it,
but always let the Place be betwixt two Muscles, as in the Arm betwixt the
Deltois and Biceps; in the Thigh in the Inside the Distance of two transverse
Fingers above the Knee.

Issues evacuate noxious and superfluous Humors, whilst they distill betwixt
the Muscles, or are carried about them with the Arterial Blood; therefore they
are of great Use, and prevent Diseases.

A Seton is a silken Thread, or a Skein of Silk waxed, and with a Needle,
conveyed through the Flesh. It is made in the Neck, betwixt the first Vertebra
and the fifth, also in the Legs and Arm; at the Beginning you must provide
against an Inflammation; therefore apply Digestives. The Skein must be daily
moved till the Disease ceases; it works more powerfully than an Issue, but is
much more troublesome, and therefore is seldom ordered till that has been found
ineffectual.

The general Ends of Issues is the Evacuation of Matter offending and daily
accruing.

Issues as well as Blisters drain out whatsoever Humors are fixed within the
Skin, and anticipate morbific Humors that are wont to be carried to other
Parts that were before weak and long afflicted, and so free sometimes one Part,
sometimes another, and like a Bullwark defend them from the Enemy; hence the
Matter, whether arthritic or nephritic, or colical, yea sometimes the paralitic
or the scorbutic Matter as it passes out of its Fountains to its Nests, or
diseased Parts is often intercepted, and so is carried out. Issues also, like
VVater-furrows, made to drain the Ouziness of the Earth do by little and little
drain out the Humors that are settled in any Part or Region of the Body, and
are there doing Harm, and so they either prevent or cure a morbific Disposition.

From these various ways of helping, whereby Issues are wont in general to
profit, it is easily gathered for what Diseases they are chiefly requisite; for
tho there be almost no Disease to which this Remedy is either hurtful or
unprofitable, yet it seems more necessary in some Cases than in others, it is
commonly prescribed for almost all Diseases of the Head both internal and
external, for the convulsive Motions of Infants and Children, for their
Ophthalmy and strumous Humors; nor is this Remedy in less Repute for Diseases
of the Breast, as also for those of the lower Belly: But however profitable and
benign it be of it self, it is not agreeable for all; for there are two Sorts
of Men, who tho they are diseased, may not have Issues, namely, because it
evacuates too much in some, and in others less than it ought, and in the mean
time is very painful. First, it is not convenient when it evacuates too much,
or spends the Moisture of the Spirits. It has been observed in some, that an
Issue made in any Part of the Body pours out an Ichor immoderate in Quantity,
and vicious in Quality, which is thin and stinking, and often colors the Pease
and Coverings black, and by the too great Flux thereof, the Strength and Flesh
are wasted; for the corruptive Teint of the Issue being communicated to the
Blood, does in some sort deprave the whole Mass, whereby it is rendered less
nutritious. Secondly, Issues are forbidden, some on another, and indeed, on a
different Account, namely, because when they evacuate little or nothing, they
vex and pain very much the Part wherein they are made; for such as are of a
choleric and hot Temper have the their Mass of Blood thicker, and less diluted
with Serum than it should be, and the Frame of it too strict; and such a
Solution of Continuity being made and continued for the Issue, the Blood it
self sticks in the Passage, and so being extravasated, causes a very painful
Inflammation, and in the mean while, seeing such an Issue pours out but very
little Ichor, it is as unprofitable as troublesome.

For Diseases of the Breast Issues between the Shoulder-blades, as also in the
Arm or Leg are good to evacuate and anticipate the Humors that are flowing
toward the Lungs, as also to call out those that are already deposited there.

We know by Experience how an Issue made in the Thorax it self, between the
Rips, does sometimes more immediately derive the tabific Matter from the Lungs.
Aquapent orders the making two Issues in the Hollow under the Middle of the
Collar Bones against Distillations upon the Breast.

By an Issue in the Groin is sometimes happily cured, a great Lumbago or Pain
in the Loins, when it would yield to no other Remedy, also an inveterate
Sciatica; for the glandulous Emunctories that are in that Place imbibe very
many Recrements of the Blood and nervous Liquor, which if they be forthwith and
continually sent from them by a fit Emissary, must needs contribute much to
free the neighboring Parts from any morbific Minerals. Such have Issues made
in the Groin as are not married, and such as are well in Years. They are
approved for the Cholic and Pains of the Bladder, for the Gout, and a stubborn
Itch.

Some in England are of Opinion that an Issue disposes to Barrenness, on which
Account married Women, and such as design Children, are strictly forbid the Use
of them, and certain barren Women that had Issues are alleged; it were easy
to mention many more barren Women that have no Issues, and many fruitful Women
that have.

Let the Bandage of the Issue be moderately tied, for a loose Bandage keeps not
the Pea in the Issue, and a too strict one presses out all the Moisture, and
causes the Issue to become quite dry. A Lady wore an Issue in her left Arm for
many Years with very great Benefit, but by a too strict Bandage the Place of
the Issue was so compressed, that there seemed to be nothing but Skin and Bone,
and upon leaving the Fillet off, and by applying only a strengthening Plaster,
the Issue ran very well.

Before an Issue is dried up, you must consider the Age, the Constitution of
the Body, the Matter offending, the Part sending, and the Part receiving. If an
Infant being troubled with the Falling Sickness, for instance, an Issue be made
in the Nape of the Neck, and a regular Diet withal be prescribed the Nurse,
and fitting Medicines given, whereby the Fuel of the Disease may be
subtracted, and the Head strengthened, so that there be no Suspicion of the
Return of the Malady for a Year together, the Issue may be safely closed up;
for if it should be continued any longer, the good Juices may flow out as well
as the bad, and the Part may be debilitated. In a Man of middle Age, his
present State is to be compared with the former, which if it be become better,
and while the Issue has ran he has not suffered a Relapse, it may by little and
little be obliterated in the Nape of the Neck, or in the fore Part of the Head,
by lessening the Pea by degrees, and a new one may be made in the Arm for
Security, which also for a while may be dried up. But let old Men wear them to
the last, namely, those whose natural Heat is weak, and in whom there flows out
Plenty of Matter. We must consider also in Women with Child, whether the
innate Heat be so brisk, as altogether to consume the morbific Matter, or
whether the offending Matter find some other Way. From all which we may infer
that there is no definite Time of wearing an Issue, and that Death does not
always follow closing them up.

The Ancients practiced Scarification far more confidently and frequently than
we now adays, who use it in no other Cases than in the Application of
Cupping-glasses, and in the Cure of Gangreens: But it is of wonderful Efficacy
to ease all Pains that invade the outward Part of the Body: One being afflicted
Night and Day for many Months together with venereal Pains in his Leg, and
could be eased by no Medicines, was cured by the Help of Scarification.

The Egyptians use to scarifie the Skin in very many Places.

Baths, as they are very profitable used aright, so they are dangerous used
amiss: For some are to be bathed gently, some more strongly. The Ancients were
wont in Baths to use hard Scrapers made of Stone, or of some Metal, or of the
hardest Woods, to cleanse off the Filth from the Skin: But those who are to be
used more gently, must dry their Bodies only with wiping them with Sponges or
linen Clothes.

Bathing wears off Lassitudes, for it supples the Joints, and loosens the Skin;
wherefore whether a Man be troubled with spontaneous or nonspontaneous
Lassitudes, he can use nothing better than a Bath, unless there be either such
a Fullness or Badness of Humors, that it is fitting to bleed or purge first.
Bathing after a long Journey takes off Weariness.

CHAP. XIX. Of Alexipharmics, Cordials, Diaphoretics, Diuretics, and Anodynes.
THose are reckoned for Cordials that assist the Heart laboring in any kind;
wherefore one is said by Authors notably to strengthen the Heart, another to
keep it unhurt by any Putrefaction, others to relieve a weak oppressed Heart,
to cure its Tremor or Fainting, and to preserve it from Corruption. Moreover,
because in the Plague, Smallpox, and malignant Fevers, the Heart is believed
to be seized or beset with Poison or Malignity; therefore the Remedies that are
wont to help in these Diseases are not called simply Cordials, but Alexiteries,
and Alexipharmics. This Opinion concerning both Cordial and Alexiterial
Medicines seems to rise from hence, in as much as the Heart is commonly
believed to be the Beginning of all Life and Heat, and that therefore our
Health and Death depend on its immediate Affection, hence what things soever
recreate the Soul are supposed to do it, as they are benign and friendly to the
Heart.

As to Cordials, by which the too strait Frame of the effervescing Blood is
loosened and opened for the setting at Liberty the febrile Matter, and other
Recrements, those are of Affinity with some Diuretics and Diaphoretics, yea,
sometimes they are of common or reciprocal Use, in as much as the vitiated
Crasis of the Blood sometimes cannot be relieved, unless its Frame being first
unlocked, there lie open an Exit for discharging the Serum by the Reins, or the
Pores of the Skin. Saline Medicines do chiefly execute all these Intentions of
Cure; for the opening of any Body, whether liquid or solid, is hardly performed
but by a saline Key; for commonly all Concretion or Compaction is from a Salt
of one Sort, and the Dissolution from some of another Sort that snatches into
its Embraces the first Salt; therefore we reckon Salines among Cordials, no
less than among Diuretics and Diaphoretics; because there is the same Reason in
all. In the first Rank Cordials endued with a volatile Salt offer themselves,
and are justly preferrable to all the rest, as Spirit of Hartshorn, of Blood,
of Sal-armoniac, the Spirit of Sculls, the Salt of Vipers, and the Powder of
Toads; such Remedies as these have recalled many from the very Jaws of Death.

The second Place among Saline Cordials is of Right owing to Remedies endued
with an Alcalizat Salt; for these are commonly reputed notable Cordials; of
this Sort are the Bezoar Stone, Pearls, Corals, the Bone of a Stag's Heart, the
Horn of the same, the Powder of Ivory, the Eyes and Claws of Crabs, and other
Powders of Stones and Shells, which common Experience witnesses to be often
given with Benefit. To this Classis of Cordials are Bole-armenic, Lemnian, and
sealed Earths, and other chalky Medicines deservedly referred, but not upon the
Account that they succor the laboring Heart, but because they destroy the
predominancies of an acid or fixed Salt, either in the Bowels or in the Mass of
Blood, and correct the Enormities produced thereby.

Acid Medicines, or such as are endued with a fluid Salt are to be reckoned in
the List of Cordials, for these are esteemed by most to be notable Alexiteries
against the Pestilence, wherefore in the Cure of malignant Fevers, Treacle and
Bezoartic Vinegars are highly cried up, yea, Vinegar or acid things are usual
Ingredients in Waters distilled for the same Use: For the same Reason Spirit of
Vitriol, the Juice of Citron, Sorrel, Pomgranates, and the like, are reckoned
for Cordials, and Alexiteries, and that indeed justly; because these do
excellently dissolve the Combinations of fixed Salts with adust Sulphur; and
therefore, by such Remedies as these, the Coagulations and Extravasations of
the Blood that use to happen in malignant Fevers are often prevented or cured.
For the same Reasons for which the foresaid saline Medicines are reckoned for
Cordials, others also, whose Basis is a fixed Salt, are reputed such, or are put
into their Compositions; for seeing Salts of diverse Sorts are bred in our Body,
and they commonly pass from one State to another, hence not one Kind of Salt,
but Salts of different Kinds ought to be given according as the Intention is. A
nitrous Salt is also justly numbered amongst Cordials, and is accounted a famous
Antipuretic, in that it takes away Thirst, and bridles the febrile Heat.

Moreover, some Medicines have the Name of Cordials, because they exert their
Virtues upon the Spirits, and more immediately than upon the Blood. These
Medicines are fitly enough reduced to two Heads, and as they are gentle or
rugged, attain the same Scope, namely, they either erect and confirm the animal
Spirits by cherishing, and as it were, gently and softly stroaking of them, or
else by vexing, and as it were, spurring of them, they drive them into quicker,
and sometimes more regular Motions. The Cordials of the first Sort, as soon as
they are swallowed, nay sometimes, being but tasted, exert their Virtue, and by
a grateful Appulse, recruit the Spirits that reside in the first Ways; then by
the Continuity of these, the same Ovation being communicated successively to
the other Spirits, shortly undulates through the whole Frame of the sensitive
Soul, so that both the Brain, and also the Praecordia being irritated with a
fuller influx of the Spirits, exulting as it were, they perform their Functions
more briskly and cheerfully. For this purpose serve the Waters commonly called
Cordial; also the preparations of Musk and Amber, and the Aromatic Powders that
are mixed with them. Such things as have a grateful Savor or Smell, or are
pleasant to look upon, inasmuch as they recreate the Animal Spirits, are
reckoned also among Cordials. In the mean time, other Cordials of this Classis,
the first ways and mass of Blood being almost untouched, seem to operate first
of all in the Brain; of which sort are some Cephalics, as Sage, Betony,
Rosemary, Vervain, and the like. There are another sort of Cordials that
operate in a different manner, and help wholly on another Account: These do not
gently cherish the Animal Spirits, and cause them to be expanded equally, but
rather irritate them, and make them run and be carried this way and that way;
and being thereby rouzed, they leave their former Disorders, and of their own
accord return into regular Order. Thus it is usual in Swooning, Fainting,
Oppression, or Spasm of the Heart; and in almost any other failings, languors,
or irregularities of the Spirits, to give inwardly Spirits of Hartshorn, of
Soot, of Sal Ammoniac, or Tincture of Castor, or Assa Fatida, with other
Liquors: Or to hold to the Nose these and the like, as especially Volatile
Salts, and Empyreumatical Chemical Oils. Besides, it may be sometimes good in
sudden defections of the Soul, to sprinkle Cold Water on the Face, to pinch
the Nose, to shake the Body very much, and sometimes to strike a Box on the
Ear: Such Administrations as these give help, inasmuch as they Rouse up the
Animal Spirits, being oppressed or distracted, or employed other ways than they
should, and Command them to their former Offices.

Great Caution is needful, that Men indulge not themselves too much in the use
of Cordials; for many eminent Men and Women, from the more frequent use of
these, fall into this sad Custom, that it has become necessary to take a
Draught often in a Day, either of some generous Wine or Spirit, or some strong
Water; yea moreover, Nature being a little accustomed to extraordinaries,
remains not long content with the same, and therefore they increase them daily,
and repeat them oftener; so that at length the Stomach can bear, or digest
nothing moderate, but still desires stronger and hotter; and the other Viscera,
especially the Liver, are so dried and parched thereby, that the Blood being
lessened as to its quantity, and depraved as to its Crasis, Diseases and Death
supervene. There are sundry occasions that bring Men into this bad Custom of
sipping Cordial Liquors; as sudden Faintings, which are perhaps occasioned by
Grief, toilsome Labor, vast Sweats, or acute Pain; also when one has eaten
something that agrees not with his Stomach, and causes a weight and
nauseousness, or when a Swooning, or Stupor, seems to be impendent through a
spasmodic disposition, yea for many other causes it is usual to guzzle vinous
Spirits; and then after that, such Cordials being taken sometime, begin to be
agreeable, and delight, the Mass of Blood being a little more freely expanded,
and kindled by every taste of them, the whole Hypostasis of the Soul is thereby
amplified, and excited into a kind of Ovation; which subsiding again, the Soul
remembering that Complacence, and being not content with her present State,
affects the same again, and craves after more; wherefore upon every trouble of
Body and Mind, as soon as the Spirits sink a little, a Cordial Draught is
presently desired to raise them again; and so the Fabric of the Body is
shattered: Nor does this evil Custom prevail only among Drunken Companions, but
sometimes learned Men, and fine and ingenious Women, that they may the more
improve and exhilerate their Genius, sip often hot Spirits and Waters, or Aqua
Vita, though it is improperly called so, and thereby undermine their Health.

When the Stomach languishes, thick Alexipharmics are more commended than
Liquid, that they may stay there the longer. When the Heart is affected, Liquid
are better, because they penetrate more speedily.

In Hypochondriac Cases, Cordials are sometimes to be used.

The Ancients used Leaf Gold with many Medicines, but to what purpose, unless
to please the Eye, I know not; for its substance is too solid and compact to be
resolved and brought to act by our Heat.

No great trust is to be had to Bezoar Stone; for if the Faculties that are
ascribed to it, are granted to be true, yet because its dearness makes many
that sell it endeavor to counterfeit it, we can hardly have any but what is
adulterated; for the Writers of Indian Affairs say that it is very rare, and
dearer among the Indians, than with us.

Hartshorn is not much worse than the Bezoar Stone, or Unicorns Horn, against
Poisons, and poisonous Diseases; for it defends the Heart from malignant
Vapors, it cuts the toughness of Humors, it opens obstructions of the inward
Viscera; and by its penetrating quality resists the putrefaction of the Humors.

Treacle is also a great Cordial, and very proper against Poison. Many that
have been subject to Swoonings, without evident cause, have bin cured by it.

Many doubt whether precious Stones have any Cordial Virtue.

Among Alexipharmics, Tormentil and Bole are worst for those that have a dry
Belly; for they cause Obstructions.

Sulphurous Spirits kindle the Sulphur of the Blood; Volatile Urinous ones
rarifie it, and acid Spirits tame, dull, or blunt it. All these used inwardly,
restore the heat and motion of the Blood, increase and invigorate its Balsamic
Oleous Parts, whence Apoplectic, Hysteric, Cordial Spirits, and the like,
revive the Spirits, remove Fainting, and recall the languishing Faculties: But
seeing both these, and the rest, are very active, they are all of them to be
given warily; for being given unseasonably, they fill the Head, and intoxicate,
they deject the Appetite, and make Men Pthysical and Hydropical.

Diaphoretics, as to the way of their working and operations, have great
Affinity with most Cardiacs, commonly so called, insomuch that many of both
kinds are of a common or reciprocal use; and seeing they differ chiefly, only
as to their greater or lesser efficacy, when we are bound to pass from one
Genus to the other, generally we need only increase or lessen the Dose, and
choose the fittest time for administering them.

As to the various kinds, and preparations of the Matter, whereof Sudorific
Medicines are made, they are generally either the integral, or elementary Parts
of some mixed Body, viz. Either natural Concretes are given in their whole
Substance, either simple or extracted, as when the Leaves, Roots, or Seeds of
Carduus, Contrayerva, Angelica, or the like, are taken in Powder, Decoction,
Conserve or Magistery; or Diaphoretics consist of the Particles of this or that
Element, viz. spirituous, sulphurous, or saline, either simple, or some
prevailing over other: As if a Salt, Spirit, or Oil be extracted from Carduus,
or other vegetable, mineral, or animal Body, and be reduced into the Form of a
Medicine, either by it self, or with other Preparations.

We will briefly run over all, or at least the chief Species of them. First,
Diaphoretics, whose Virtue consists in the Integral Particles of the whole
Concrete, being unequally mixed, seem to be endued with some one Element more
eminent than the rest, viz. a Saline, and to owe their Virtue chiefly to it.
Now that Salt upon which the hydrotic Virtue depends, comes under a double
State; for in some Concretes it is volatile and acrimonious, or bitter; in
others alcalizate and fixed in a sort; first, in the former Rank are most
Vegetables esteemed Antidotes by the Ancients, such are the Leaves of Scordium,
Carduus, Scabious, Perwinkle, the Flowers of Marygold, Camomile, the Roots of
Burdock, Zedoary, Galingal, and the like; also the Confections of Mithridate,
Treacle, Diascordium, the Decoctions of Guiacum, Box, and the like, are
reckoned among these. Secondly, The other sort of Diaphoretics which, while
they consist of the integral Parts, of the mixed, have an alcali Salt
predominant, as Stones, and the bony or shelly Parts of Animals and Vegetables,
as Bezoar, Pearls, the Eyes and Claws of Crabs, and the like, whose Diaphoretic
Virtue proceeds chiefly from an alcali Salt. Hydrotic Medicines also, which
after a spagyrical Analysis, owe their Virtue to this or that sort of
elementary Particles, being framed out of diverse Subjects, and with a different
Preparation, are chiefly either spirituous or saline, or both together combined
one with another, or with some sulphurous Particles; for such as are wholly,
or for the greatest Part sulphurous, are less proper for this Intention. To
the spirituous we refer hot Waters, and all sorts of Liquors endued with a
vinous Spirit, such as are commonly distilled by Chimistry out of the Fruits or
Juices of Vegetables, or ripened by Fermentation, or resolved by Putrefaction,
as the Spirits of Wine, of the Berries of Juniper and Elder, of black Cherries,
and the like. Such vinous Liquors as these being taken inwardly, procure Sweat.

Saline Preparations also of diverse kinds, and different States are prescribed
successfully for the procuring Sweat.

To Diaphoretics, whose Basis are Spirits, with the other elementary Particles
combined (as for example, a Dram of Mixtura Simplex in a convenient Vehicle)
are referred those which consist of a Spirit; a fixed Salt or Sulphur combined;
of which sort are the Tincture of Salt of Tartar and Antimony, the Dose whereof
is from one Scruple to two in some Liquor. Moreover, distilled Waters, wherein
the spirituous Particles are diluted with the watery, use to be given with
Success for provoking Sweat; the Doses of the foresaid Waters may be actuated
by the Addition of chemical Liquors or Salts. Medicines of this sort being
endued with a vinous Spirit are chiefly, and almost solely profitable for old
Men, and for such as are endued with a cold Temperament, or are subject to the
Palsy or Dropsy. But in a hot Constitution, and where there is a Heat of the
Viscera, or a febrile Effervescence of the Blood, they use to do more Hurt than
Good, in as much as they rarifie the former, and accend the latter too much.
The Diaphoretics which have a saline Basis, as they are of a various Nature,
viz. accordingly, as it is a volatile, fixed, acetous, or nitrous Salt, so they
are of a different Use and Operation, whence in some Cases one sort is better,
and in others another, or another. A fixed and volatile Salt are best for those
whose Blood is very full of a serous Humor: Besides, if the Liquor that waters
the Viscera and Genus Nervosum do at any time wax eager, as it uses to do in
Dropsies and Cacochymies, and in those who are subject to spasmodic Diseases;
these Medicines are more profitably administered for procuring Sweat.
Diaphoretics also which have a nitrous Salt for their Basis, seem to help in
the same Cases, almost as the former, consisting of a fixed and volatile Salt.
Diaphoretics, whose Basis is an acid Salt, are chiefly profitable against the
Predominancies of a fixed Salt or Sulphur.

Some Medicines that are wholly, or for the greatest part sulphurous, are
commonly reckoned in the Number of Diaphoretics, as some natural Balsoms, and
some factitious ones, also chemical Oils, especially those of Guiacum, Box,
Camphor, Hartshorn, and Soot; likewise the resinous Extracts of heavy Woods,
with many others, which tho of themselves they conduce little toward the
provoking of Sweat, yet being joined with other saline things, they are not
altogether unprofitable, in as much as in a colder and too phlegmatic
Constitution, sulphurous saline Remedies do rarifie the over-watry Blood, and
dispose it to a freer Evaporation, no less than spirtuous things.

The Basis of a sudorific Diet-drink are the Decoctions of Liquors for the
curing of the Pox, and some other chronical Diseases deeply rooted in the Blood
and Humors; for very intense and frequent sweating, daily for a long time, is
requisite for the Cure of some Diseases, viz. not only that the Impurities and
Corruptions of the Viscera and Humors may be carried off, but also, that the
morbific Tinctures that are deeply imprinted thereupon may be wholly destroyed:
For this purpose it will not be enough to give some sudorific Powder or Bolus
now and then, but an entire Diet ought to be ordered for this Intention;
wherefore let all the Drink be a sudorific Decoction, after one Dose whereof
taken in the Morning, let plentiful sweating be provoked, making use besides of
the Heat of a Bath or Hot-house. Moreover, seeing by this means both the Pores
of the Skin are unlockt, and Nature also is inclined to sweating all the Day
after, the Recrements of the Blood and nervous Juice will evaporate by
Perspiration continued all along by the Use of the same Drink. By this Method,
not only the French Pox is safely, and for the most part very certainly cured,
but also some other stubborn herculean Diseases are sometimes happily remedied.

All Humors are not profitably lessened and evacuated by Sweat, but only some;
not Blood nor Choler, but all sorts of Phlegm, and all Serum, as well the watery
as the salt Muriatic, the acid and sour. But glutinous Phlegm, seeing it is not
so fit for Motion, ought first, or at the same time, to be incided, attenuated,
and made fluid, that it may the more easily be driven forth by or with Sweat.
An acid sour Humor ought also to be prepared for its Expulsion by Sweat. That
the mentioned Humors are driven and expelled by the Pores of the Skin, and so
by Sweat, appears by the Sweat it self, which sometimes comes forth glutinous,
often watery and insipid, sometimes muriatic or brine-like, sometimes also
somewhat acid or sour.

There are but few true sudorific Medicines, and among these Opium is the
chief; for the reason why Treacle or Mithridate cause Sweat, is wholly from the
Opium that is mixed with them: For these two Electuaries prepared without Opium
do not provoke Sweat at all.

The most convenient Time for sweating is the Morning, and that on an empty
Stomach; for then the Sweat comes out more easily and plentifully. Note, that
after sweating Decoctions, purging is necessary to carry off the gross
Excrements.

The Origins of many Diseases happen for want of a due Separation of the Serum;
but as to this Separation, seeing there are Faults of diverse Kinds, the Offense
is for the most part either in Defect or in Excess; for sometimes the Serum
does too pertinaciously adhere to the Blood, and on the contrary, sometimes it
parts too soon from it, and in this regard the Blood being not able to contain
the Serum, does spue it out of the Mouths of the Arteries in many Places, and
almost every where, and so depositing it in the Viscera or Habit of the Body,
occasions an Ascites or Anasarca; and sometimes, sending it off immoderately to
the Kidneys, it causes a Diabetes, when the Blood is too tenacious of the
Serum; for the most part it is either over-hot through a Fever, having its
Frame too strict, and the thicker Particles so incorporated with it, that the
thinner cannot easily get therefrom; or being filled with scorbutic Salt and
Sulphur, it becomes very clammy and tenacious, so that the Serosities
difficultly separate from the rest. And seeing the Departure of the Serum from
the Blood is hindered or perverted so many ways, diuretic Medicines also are of
a different Nature and Operation, which yet may be distinguished, first, as to
the End, according to which they respect the Mass of Blood, or the Kidneys, or
both together. Secondly, as to the matter, in which respect they are either
sulphurous or saline; and these again are various, according as the saline
Particles are in a State of Fixity, Fluor, or volatility; or are moreover
nitrous or alcalizate. Thirdly, As to the Form; these Medicines are of diverse
Kinds, viz. Drinks, Powders, and the like.

When the Blood, through an Incorporation, and mutual Combination of the fixed
Salt with the Sulphur and Earth becomes so thick and tenacious, that the Watery
Particles do not easily part from the rest, the Diuretics, which may loosen its
Frame, and fuse the Serum, must be of such a Sort as are endued with a volatile
or acid Salt; for such Particles do chiefly dissolve the Combination that the
fixed Salt has entered into. And seeing this Disposition is common, both to the
Fever and Scurvy; in the former the most proper Dinreties are both the
temperate Acids of Vegetables, and also the Salt of Nitre, the Spirit of
Sea Salt, of Vitriol, and the like; likewise those endued with a volatile Salt,
as the Spirit of Hartshorn, of Sal Ammoniac, the Salt of the Juice of Vipers.
In a scorbutical Disposition, when the Urine is both little and thick, the
Juices of Herbs and acrimonious and acid Preparations are of notable Use, also
the Salt and Spirit of Urine, of Sal Ammoniac, of Tartar, and the like.

Sometimes the Blood keeps not its Serum long enough within its Compages, but
being subject to Fluxions, or rather Coagulations, it deposites the Serum here
and there in great Plenty: It raises Catarrhs or Humors in diverse Places, or
the Blood being habitually weak, and inclining to Sowrness, is apt to coagulate
as to its thicker Particles, so that in the Circulation, the thinner being
thrown off every where, and falling upon the weaker Parts, cause sometimes
cephalic or thoracic Distempers; sometimes an Ascites, or Anasarca, and from a
like Cause we think a Diabetes also springs; for many dangerous Diseases, which
are erroneously ascribed to the Discrasies of the Viscera, arise from this
Cause; namely, in as much as the Blood, being of an evil Temper, and liable to
Coagulation, cannot continue the Thread of the Circulation entire, but in diverse
Places deposites the Serum that is too apt to depart from it. The Diuretics to
be administered in this Case are such as do not fuse the Blood, but take away
its Coagulations, as are those endued with a fixed, volatile, and also an
alcalizate Salt. Moreover, those that strengthen and restore the Ferment of the
Kidneys for these Purposes are sulphurous, and mixed Diuretics, the lixivial
Salts of Herbs, Shell-powders, the Salt and Spirit of Urine, and the like;
Hog-lice, the Roots of Horseradish, the Seeds of Smallage, Nutmeg, Turpentine,
and its Preparations, and the Spirit of Wine: The Virtue of all which is not to
fuse the Blood, and to precipitate the Serosities out of its Mass, but to
dissolve the Coagulations of the Blood, so that its Compages recovering an
entire Mixture, and being circulated more quickly through the Vessels, it
resorbs the Serum that was every where extravasated and deposited, and at
length delivers it to the Kidneys to be sent off.

Among the Diuretics endued with an acid Salt, are the Spirits of Salt or
Nitre, also the Juice of Lemons and Sorrel; white Rhenish Wine and Cider are of
greatest Note with the Vulgar, for these alone fuse the Blood, and precipitate
it into its Serosities, as when an Acid is poured into boiling Milk: But this
happens not alike to all. In an healthful Constitution the Salt of the Blood is
partly fixed, partly nitrous, and partly volatile; also in some scorbutical and
dropsical People, it becomes commonly fixed; wherefore in all these Cases,
Diuretics endued with an acid Salt are given with Success: But in catarrhous
Distempers, and in some dropsical and scorbutic, when the saline fixed Particles
of the Blood are promoted to a State of Fluor, and the volatile are depressed,
as often happens, acetous Remedies use to do more Hurt than Good, in as much as
they yet more pervert the Blood that is already degenerated from its right
Crasis, so that Medicines endued with a fixed or volatile Salt will be more
profitable for these: As for example, Take of choice white Tartar, of
Sal-prunella, each a Dram and an half, of Crab's-eyes one Dram, make a Powder;
the Dose whereof is from half a Dram to two Scruples, in a fit Vehicle, once in
six or eight Hours.

That Medicines endued with a fixed or lixivial Salt provoke Urine, appears
plainly enough from the vulgar and empirical Remedy, that is wont to be given
for the Cure of Dropsies, viz. it is usual in an Anasarca, and sometimes in an
Ascites, when the Bowels or Flesh swell very much, by a Collection of Water, to
give to drink a Ly made of the Ashes of Wormwood, Broom, or Bean-stalks infused
in White Wind, whereupon it often happens that there follows a plentiful
Evacuation of Urine, and the Disease is cured. Yet it has been observed, that
in some, that Remedy has not proved diuretic, and has rather increased than
cured the dropsical Disposition. The Reason whereof appears from what has been
said above, viz. that lixivial Salts do not fuse or precipitate either Milk or
Blood, and therefore are not Diuretics in their proper Nature. Nevertheless
that Effect sometimes follows, in as much as a fixed Salt being taken
plentifully, destroys the Energy of an Acid and coagulative Salt prevailing in
the Blood, so that the Blood being before too apt to be fused, and not able to
retain its Serum, but throwing it off in every Place, does by the Advent of a
fixed Salt, recover its due Crasis, and therefore resorbing the extravasated
Serum, and conveying it continually to the Kidneys, causes a plentiful
Evacuation of Urine. As for example, Take of the Salt of Tartar or Wormwood two
Drams, of Coral calcined to Whiteness a Dram and an half, of Nutmeg half a
Dram; make a Powder. The Dose is two Scruples.

For the same reason a fixed Salt is given with Success for provoking Urine. A
Volatile is also given too, in an acetous Discrasy of the Blood.

It is known that Shell-powders, and some Stones being endued with an alcalizat
Salt, do sometimes provoke Urine; for in great Stoppages of Urine, the Powder
of Egg-shells, of Crabs-claws or Eyes, has been a present Remedy to some. Some
sulphurous and spirituous Medicines are also reckoned Diuretics. Most
Medicines derived from the Pine or Larch-tree, especially Turpentine and its
Preparations, the distilled Oils of Juniper, of Nutmeg, of Wax, and other far
things taken inwardly, cause in most a plentiful Urine, and that endued with a
Smell like a Violet. In some hydropical and scorbutical Persons, the Spirit of
Wine and strong Waters, yea, generous Wine it self being drunk largely has
promoted the Evacuation of Urine. It is to be noted therefore that Diuretics
are not indifferently convenient in any Distemper or Humor for the benefiting
of the sick, but one should be used in one Disease or offending Humor, and
another in another; some indeed are good for evacuating Choler, and others
Phlegm: Proper for Choler are the Juice of Citron, the Emulsion of Barley,
Strawberries, the Spirit of Salt, the Salt of Tartar vitriolated, and the like;
and for Phlegm amongst chimical Medicines, the volatile Salt of Urine, and all
volatile Salts, the distilled Oils of Juniper Berries, of Amber, and the like;
yea, and also the Acids commended just now for Choler, because they no less
alter Phlegm (yea, Acids drive it forth by Urine) than do Aromatics, and such as
consist of a volatile Salt, as Experience teaches; yet the latter are for the
most part observed to be the better, and fitter for restoring Health, seeing
they not only correct Phlegm, but also preserve the Choler in its natural State;
but Acids, though they incide Phlegm, and promote its passing out by Urine, yet
they do withal infringe Choler, and carry it from its natural State, and in
that respect hurt.

Diuretics are most proper in those Diseases that are firmly rooted, and have
their Foundation in a tartareous saline Dross, in which it is profitable to
evacuate by little and little the occasional Cause of the Disease by the
urinary Passages; thus in hypochondriac and scorbutic Diseases, we empty out of
the Body those tartareous Humors.

Such Diuretics may be safely given to Infants, Children, Women with Child, as
consist of an abstersive Virtue; from an Alcali, and from their kindly
acrimony, they incide and purge out the Filth of the urinary Passages, such are
the Stones of Peaches, Crabs Eyes, Lapis Judaicus, Nephriticus, the Stones of
Fruits, and their Ashes. Hot and dry Bodies are not long, nor vehemently to be
forced to purge by Urine, by hot diuretic Decoctions; seeing by their Use an
Inflammation of the Liver, a Fever, and an Extenuation of the whole Body may
follow; on the contrary, the fat, the cold, and such as have a soft and loose
Skin, and abound with watery Humors, and thin Juices, are very fit to be purged
by Urine.

We must never use Diuretics, especially such as are vehement, in Diseases of
the Reins and Bladder, nor in Women that are with Child, lest they cause
Abortion.

You must note, concerning cold Seeds, that their diuretic Virtue resides most
in their Husks.

Concerning the right Use of opiate Medicines, these four things following are
to be observed, viz. before we give a narcotic Medicine, we must first consider
the Constitution of the Patient. Secondly, the Disease that he is ill of.
Thirdly, in what State the animal Spirits are in respect to both animal and
vital Functions. Fourthly and lastly, in what Condition the Blood and other
Humors are. As to the first, when an Hypnotic is indicated, see that the
Temperament of the Patient, the Habit or Indisposition of his Body, his Custom,
or Manner of Life do not contraindicate; as for example, those who are endued
with an indifferent Stature, a firm and well-set Body, hot Blood, a lively or
sharp Aspect, bear this Medicine best; but they take it more securely, if they
have moreover been formerly used to it: But on the contrary, it is not so
convenient, yea, sometimes it does a great deal of hurt to them who are
over-fat or lean, as likewise to those who being either of a rare Texture, have
their Spirits easily dissipable, or of a cold Temperament, and have soft and
flaggy Flesh, and are of a sluggish indocible Disposition, and dull and drowsy
of themselves: To which Hindrances or Scruples this may be added, and increases
the Weight of the rest, viz. if they have never taken this Medicine before.

The Nature of the Disease is sometimes of great moment, for or against
Opiates; in slighter Distempers it is the part of a flattering Physician,
according to Septalius, to use them. Moreover, in some great ones, their Use is
either forbidden, or is held very suspected, in the Palsy, Vertigo, Nightmare,
Apoplexy, also in the Orthopnea, or Difficulty of breathing, in a Dropsy of the
Breast, or Abdomen, in Numness, or Trembling of the Joints, in very malignant
Fevers, and in Fits of Agues, or in the Crisis of other Fevers, Narcotics are
very often forbid. Moreover, in a Cough, with much and thick Phlegm, in an
Asthma, and in whatsoever other Distempers of the Breast with Oppression of the
Lungs, and in hysterical Fits, and other convulsive ones, they are but seldom
to be given, and not without Caution, and the Advice of a skilful Physician:
But in a cruel Headache, Catarrhs, Cholick, Pleurisy, ordinary Fevers,
vomiting, Dysentery, Fits of the Stone, or Gout, and in all Pains whatsoever,
Opiates are not only allowed, but we have Recourse to them, as to divine
Panaceas.

And as often as we intend to make Use of them, we must also consider in what
Tenor the animal Spirits are; for if being fewer, or oppressed, they already
flag, and do not spread their Sails enough, certainly, they ought not to be
further lessened, and cast down by Opiates; wherefore if so be the animal
Faculties be not vigorous, both as to Sense and Discourse, or do not exert
themselves brisk enough, or when the Pulse and Respiration have the Turns of
their Reciprocations, weak or flower than usual; And lastly, if a Numness with
Enervation shall seize upon the Members, with an unwonted Languor, we must
wholly refrain from any hypnotic Medicine; but we shall not stick to use them,
if they are indicated in great Diseases, and if withal, the animal Spirits be
strong enough in these and other respects, or become too much expanded, or
immoderately fierce and outrageous.

The State of the Blood and Humors is not to be neglected, because sometimes
their ill Condition does wholly forbid Opiates, or suffers them not to be used,
unless sparingly, and with some Restriction. The Blood does contraindicate
their Use, when it offends, either in Quantity or Quality, or Crasis: As to the
former, it either abounds or is defective, and in both respects it hinders
narcotic Remedies. Nor is there less Fear of Mischief from Narcotics, as often
as they are given in Defect or Penury of the Blood; as after great Hemorrhages,
long Fasting, or long continued Sickness.

Their daily and too frequent Use is to be avoided, lest the Concoction of the
Stomach be lessened; they must not be given at the Beginning of a Fit, nor
presently after bleeding.

The Dose of Opium is ordinary or extraordinary, the ordinary Dose is
threefold, low, middle, and high, and it varies much according to the
Preparation of the Opium; for the Dose is to be considered as the Opium is
mixed and compounded with other things, or as it is simple; for if it be given
alone, the Dose must be less; for instance, in grown People, the lowest Dose is
ordinarily a quarter or half a Grain, or one Grain, the middle two Grains, or
three, the highest is four or five Grains. In a Composition you must consider
how much Opium is contained. Two or three Grains may be given, but four or five
must not, unless the preceding Doses were used without Effect.

It is to be noted, that in Practice Opium is prescribed to ease Pain, to take
off Watchings, and violent Symptoms, to strengthen the Tone of the Parts, and
to thicken the Blood when it is too thin, it is also mixed with Cephalics,
Hysterics, and other specific Medicines, and sometimes with Purges.

The Dose is often extraordinarily increased upon the account of Custom, the
Violence of a Disease, and the Diversity of Temperaments. It is well known that
the Turks, Persians, and other oriental People, take a Dram at a time, and they
are so used to it, that they cannot abstain from it without hazarding their
Lives, and incurring grievous Symptoms. But the Europeans use it only in
Medicine, and in a less Dose; for if they take it freely, great Danger is
occasioned. A Person, by taking two and twenty Grains in a bastard Tertian,
lost his Life; but Charas says, that he took six Grains, and slept no more than
he used to do, and he was so far from being weakened thereby, that on the
contrary, he found himself wonderfully strengthened; he says moreover, that he
knew some weakly Men that took thirty six Grains, and were not at all injured
thereby. Some People that have been afflicted with violent pocky Pains in the
Joints, have taken Laudanum Opiatum in Pills, beginning at five Grains, and
rising to half a Dram; and Authors relate, that some have taken above ten Drams
daily, and yet have kept their Senses very well, so much can Custom do; and a
French Ambassador in England took four Ounces of it to make him sleep when he
was sick. Schenckius solemnly declared to his Scholars, that he often took a
Scruple of Laudanum Opiatum to restrain the Motion of his Blood, for he was
often troubled with a spitting of Blood and acrid Defluxions, and he said he
was not much stupefied by it. And I, says Wedelius, have often given in violent
Diarrheas and Dysenteries, and for violent Pains, and in other Cases, ten
Grains. But such a high Dose must be gradually ascended to, and you must first
try what a less will do.

For taking off Pain, Opium is the chief Medicine, and for causing Sleep, in
doing of which it is of great Use; for immoderate Watchings weaken the Body,
occasion Crudities, and weaken the Faculties of the Mind; though it must be
confessed that it does not always cause Sleep, for some it always keeps awake,
and sometimes it takes off Pain, though the Patient does not sleep.

It sometimes occasions vomiting in the Morning, in weakly and hysteric Women;
but this may be prevented by their keeping their Bed long the next Morning.

But whether Opium be proper in intermitting Fevers is a Dispute among Authors;
if we consult the Ancients, it is certain they used Opiates to take off the
Fits of Fevers; so Hippocrates commends the Seeds of Henbane and Mandrakes, and
Galen on the same account every where commends Treacle: But concerning
continual and malignant Fevers, there is yet a greater Controversy. The
Ancients allowed that Opium was alexipharmic; but if Caution be to be used in
this matter in any Disease, certainly in these; for there are many and frequent
Instances of the ill Effect of Opium in burning and malignant Fevers. Some
distinguish betwixt the Times of Fevers, and they say, that Opiates are not
proper in the Beginning or State; for by them the Humors are more disturbed,
and rendered crude, and retarded, and on this Account the Concoction and Crisis
hindered, but in the Declination they are so far from being injurious, that
being prudently given, they do a great deal of good, by quieting all things,
and by restoring the Strength, and the Tone of the Blood. But when violent
Pains and Evacuations are joined with Fevers, as Catarrhs, Coughs, Vomiting,
Looseness, and the like, it is necessary to give Opiates.

They are also used in the Plague, and are properly mixed with Antidotes, and
Medicines against Foyson: They are also of great Use in the Smallpox and
Measles; in a Phrensy they appease the raging Spirits. But Sydenham says, that
when the Fever is high, they do no Good in a Phrensy; but that being given
opportunely in the Declination of the Disease, they are very successful.

For Diseases of the Head, they are very proper, especially for the Pains of
it, and an Hemicrany. An hypochondriac Man being amongst other Symptoms,
afflicted with a great Vertigo, was happily cured with Laudanum Opiatum mixed
with Chalybeats. But it is supposed that mad People are rendered worse by
Opiates; for they rave more after them.

For Catarrhs and tickling Coughs they are very proper: But when the Matter
that lies in the Lungs is thick, and difficultly expectorated, they are
injurious. The Use of them is suspected in an Asthma, and in a Pleurisy
narcotick Opiates must be avoided. In a Consumption they are very proper, if
the Disease proceed from a Flux of acrid Humors, or from spitting of Blood.
But when there is an Ulcer in the Lungs, they stop Expectoration, and therefore
are consequently hurtful; for the sick is often suffocated thereby, and
therefore in such a Case Respect must be always had to ease Expectoration; for
as long as it proceeds well, the Life of the sick is lengthened.

For Diseases of the lower Belly, Stomach, and Hypochonders, Opiates are of
Use. They are proper for the Cholera Morbus. But if the vomiting is
unseasonably stopped, great Mischiefs arise; therefore the Evacuation of the
acrid and corrupt Humors must be a while permitted. For a Cardialgia Opiates
are proper, and for the Hicopps they are of excellent Use. For an Appetitus
Caninus they are of good Use. They are also proper for the Cholick mixed with
Purges. For the Iliac Passion, the Bloody Flux, and the Piles, they are also
very proper; so are they for the Stone, for violent Pains in the Gout, for
hysteric Diseases, and an immoderate Flux of the Courses.

Opium is used outwardly for various Kinds of Pains, to assuage violent Pains
of the Head, of the Teeth, and the like. Plasters applied to the Temples made
of Opium, are good for Watchings, Pains of the Head, and Pains of the Teeth.
Horstius says, that he knew a violent bleeding, by reason an Artery was
wounded, presently and wonderfully stopped, when other things could do no good,
by the Application of the Magistery of Opium to the wounded Artery. Crollius
relates a desperate Hemorrhage of the Nose was cured by stopping the Nostrils
with two Pills made of sixteen Grains of Laudanum.

A Person fell into a violent Hemorrhage by drawing of a Tooth, and was cured,
when other Means would not do, by Opium.

Opium is also good for Ulcers in the Womb, when Pain is joined with them, for
a Pain in the Teeth, a Pill of Laudanum put into the hollow Tooth, eases the
Pain.

Take of the best Laudanum Opiatum one Scruple, of Oil of Camphor and Cloves,
each five Drops; mingle them, and with Cotton apply it to the hollow Tooth. The
Heads and Seeds of white Poppies, whereof Diacodium, also Decoctions,
Emulsions, and other hypnotic Preparations are made, are far less endued with a
narcotic Sulphur, than the concrete Juice of Opium, and what thereof is in
these, is far more pure and harmless; wherefore we do oftener, and more
securely give Remedies made up of these; for it is not good to ascend to
Laudanum, unless, when through the Vehemence of Symptoms, Diacodiats will not
do.

The Ancients, who thought that Opium hurt by its excessive Coldness, used
altogether hot Medicines to correct it, such as Pepper, Pyrethrum, Saffron,
Castor, Euphorbium, and the like. But they were induced to correct Opium in
that manner, by a false Hypothesis, and they made no good Preparation of their
Medicines, to speak only of Philonjum Romanum, heretofore a sufficiently
frequent Medicine: Experience has taught, that by the Mixture of so many hot
Ingredients, it can hardly be swallowed, but it will burn the Throat, and cause
an Heat therein; and being mixed in Glisters, but even to half a Dram, it has,
in some, caused a great Heat in the lower Belly and strait Gut.

Opiates, tho they are divine Medicines, and tho they do a great deal of good
in many Diseases, yet an imprudent and unseasonable Use of them has been the
Death of some. It is commonly known that the principal Functions of the Soul
are much hurt by Narcotics; some have been made dull and stupid, and others
mad, and the reason why Opium is devoured by the Turks in great Quantity,
without any Harm, or however without any Danger of Life, is, because its
Particles, by frequent Use, become agreeable and familiar; as we observe
concerning the Smoke of Tabaco taken in a Pipe; for whereas at the first it
uses to cause Giddiness, and often vomiting or purging, cold Sweats, trembling,
and often fainting; yet after a while, we take it without Disturbance, yea,
with great Delight; and the reason why a large Dose of Opium adds Courage, and
notable Boldness to them, so that they can enter upon a Fight without Fear, I
say, the reason seems to be, because this Medicine, by somewhat stupifying the
Spirits, makes them amazed, so that they can undauntedly endure the Approaches
of sensible things howsoever terrible they are.

When Narcotics are given with Purgers, the Quantity of the Purgers is to be
increased, because the narcotic Virtue blunts them, as if half a Dram of Pil.
Coch. minor is enough otherwise, let two Scruples, or two and an half be given
with a Narcotic, and let Narcotics be given with Purges, that have Digridium or
Coloquintida in them, whereby Nature may be solicited to Expurgation: And if
the Purge stop, let it be called out by an acrimonious and provoking Glister.
Observe this carefully, when you give Narcotics with Cathartics.

Let Narcotics be never taken on the Day before purging or bleeding, because
they dull the Spirits, and hinder the Blood from flowing freely; and if they
are taken by the Mouth, or injected by Glisters, they hinder the Operation of
the Purge.

To conclude, note, that Narcotics do most Good, when Evacuations have went
before. Note likewise, that it is best to begin with a small Dose, and to
increase it as there is occasion.

Children do not bear Narcotics so well as the adult.

CHAP. XX. Of Weights and Measures used in Physic.
DRY things are generally weighed. A Grain is the Foundation of Weight. A
Scruple contains twenty Grains; a Dram three Scruples; an Ounce eight Drams. A
Pound is twelve Ounces. Liquid things are measured.

The Quantity of Medicines in Magnitude is prescribed by Handfulls, Armfulls,
or Pugils. A Handful is that Quantity which may be held in the Hand,
answerable to half an Ounce. A Pugil is either greater or less. The greater is
as much as may be taken in all the five Fingers: The lesser as much as may be
taken in three Fingers. The greater is in Weight a whole Dram, the lesser half
a Dram.

In Number also the Quantity of Medicines is considered, and that either
equally or unequally; for instance, three or four Lupins.

Roots, Barks, and Woods are weighed: Leaves are measured by Handfulls; if they
are prescribed for Baths, by Armfulls. The Doses of Seeds are for the most part
expressed; yet Barley and Rice are measured by the Pugil. Flowers are measured
by the Pugil. Small Fruits are weighed, great are numbered. Aromatics, Gums, and
Rosins are weighed. Precious Liquors and distilled Oils are prescribed by Drops.

The Notes of Weights used by Physicians.
Gr. -- A Grain. ss. -- Half a Scruple. j. -- One Scruple. ss. -- Half a Dram.
j. -- One Dram. j. -- One Ounce. ss. -- Half an Ounce. lb j. -- One Pound.
lbss. -- Half a Pound. Mj. -- A Handful. Mss. -- Half a Handful. P. -- A
Pugil. Quart. -- Three Ounces. Ana. -- Equal. Q. S. -- A sufficient Quantity.
The five greater opening Roots, Parsley, Fennel, Assparagus, Parsley, Butchers
Broom.

The five emollient Herbs, Marshmallows, Beets, Mallows, Mercury, Violets.

The five capillary Herbs, black Maidenhair, white Maidenhair, Ceterach,
Hart's-tongue, Polytrichum.

The four cordial Flowers, Borrage, Bugloss, Roses, Violets.

The four greater carminative Seeds, Caraways, Anise, Cummin, Fennel.

The four lesser hot Seeds, Bishops Weed, Amomum, Smallage, Daucus.

The four greater cold Seeds, Citruls, Cucumbers, Melons, Gourds.

The four lesser cold Seeds, Succory, Endive, Lettice, Purslain.

The Fragments of the five precious Stones, Granates, Hyacinth, Sapphyr,
Sardus, Smaragd.

An Apozem or Decoction is a liquid Form of a Medicine, made of diverse
Ingredients, and sweetened with Honey or Sugar, and prepared in sufficient
Quantity for four or five Doses, to purge or alter: That is called an altering
Apozem which has a Virtue to alter the Body, and things contained in it,
especially the Humors, without that visible Evacuation, which is usually
called purging.

In the Composition of it six things are diligently to be considered; first,
The Matter out of which the Virtues are to be drawn; secondly, The Liquor into
which it is to be conveyed; thirdly, The Decoction; fourthly, What things are
to dissolved in it; fifthly, The clarifying of it; sixthly, The aromatizing it.
In the Matter these three things are to be regarded, the Quantity, the Quality,
and the Order of Prescription. Concerning the Quality, the Ingredients are
chiefly Roots, Barks, Woods, Leaves, Seeds, Fruits, Flowers, Spices. The
Quantity or Dose is as follows. Roots are not to exceed four Ounces, or six at
the most. Barks one Ounce, or two Ounces at most, Woods in the same Quantity.
Leaves not above eight large Handfulls. Seeds to one Ounce, or an Ounce and an
half. Fruits are either the lesser Sort, and they are prescribed from one Ounce
to two Ounces; or in Number, and that usually by Pairs.

If they are large Fruits they are prescribed only in Number, either even or
odd: If they be of the greatest Sort, as Apples, and the like, they are
prescribed by one, two, three, or the like; but if they are less, as Figs, by
Pairs. Flowers from four Pugils to six. Spices are best added in the seasoning.
Concerning the Order of the Prescription, they are to be prepared by the
Apothecary, as they are prescribed by the Physician, viz. first Roots, then
Barks and Woods, if any be added; secondly, Leaves; thirdly, Seeds; fourthly,
Fruits; fifthly, Flowers, and with them the Spices last of all. The Quality of
the Liquor is to be varyed, according to the Intention of the Physician; but
generally Fountain Water; the Quantity is seldom prescribed any other way than
by Q. S. and is ordered to be boiled to one Pint and an half for Apozems, I
usually intend it for four Doses. You must not prescribe above twenty Ounces;
for they are apt to corrupt. The Quantity of things to be dissolved differs
according to the Nature of them. Sweetners are usually dissolved from four
Ounces to six at most, so that every Dose of the Apozem may have between an
Ounce, and an Ounce and an half in every Dose: But where Syrup and Sugar are
mixed together, the Quantity of the Syrup is most commonly about three Ounces,
and the Sugar prescribed only with a Q. S. Juices and other strong Liquors, as
Vinegar, Aqua Vitae, and the like, are prescribed from one Ounce to two Ounces
at the most. In the aromatizing, or spicing, two things are to be considered,
the Quality and the Quantity of the Spices: As to the Quality, it is either
Spice, yellow or red Sanders, Cinnamon, Ginger, or Saffron: As to the Quantity,
one Dram, or a Dram and an half is sufficient.

In a purging Apozem three things are to be considered, the Composition, the
Use, and Profit In the Composition two things are to be regarded, first, The
Ingredients; secondly, those things that are to be dissolved in it: The
Ingredients are simple Purgers with their Correctives: In these, three things
are to be regarded, the Quantity, Quality, and Order of Prescription. In
relation to the Quantity, note, that those purging Simples which are only
boiled are these; Sena, Polypody, Carthamus, Turbith, Hermodactils, Agarick,
Epithymum, Hellebore, Spurge, and the Seeds of Dwarf Elder. Those which are to
be infused or but very little boiled, are Rhubarb, Myrobolans, Tamarinds, and
sometimes Cassia. As to the Quantity, it ought to be double to the Quantity
they are given in Substance, if they are the stronger Sort; or treble, or
quadruple, if they are of the milder Sort, more especially, the three following
are to be chosen, for the Fundamentals of almost every purging Apozem.

Take of the Leaves of oriental Sena, the Pith of the Seed of Carthamus,
Polypody of the Oak new gathered, each two Ounces and an half; you may add,
upon occasion, half an Ounce of Gummy Turbith, or half an Ounce of
Hermodactyls, or half an Ounce of Agaric trochiscated, or half an Ounce of
Rhubarb tied up in a Rag, or six Drams of Epithymum, or two Drams of the Roots
of black Hellebore, or an Ounce and an half of Tamarinds, or half an Ounce of
the Bark of Citron, Myrobalans, or an Ounce of common Orris Roots. Things to be
dissolved in the strained Decoction are Syrups or Electuaries, viz. Syrups to
four Ounces or six Ounces, Electuaries to two or three Drams, and so let an
Apozem be made for four Doses.

A Julep is a fluid Medicine composed of an appropriate Liquor, and Syrup, or
Sugar mixed together without boiling, for four or five Doses, either to
prepare, or alter the Humors, or to strengthen the Body. In the composition
two things are to be minded, first a proper Liquor, of which it is to be made;
Secondly, what things are to be dissolved in it. In the Liquor two things are
to be regarded, the quality and quantity: As to the quality, either there is
prescribed a single distilled Water, respecting the Disease, and the diseased
Part, or else a distilled Water, and a Juice together, or else a Decoction: The
quantity ought to be about eight Ounces.

Things to be dissolved are considered with respect to their quantity or
quality: As to the quality, either Sugar, some proper Syrup, or Cordial
Confection, Pearl, Ivory, or Coral is mixed with it: As to the quantity of
Sweetness, one Ounce, or an Ounce and an half. Confections and Powders are
prescribed from one Scruple to two.

A Potion is a liquid form of Medicine, made of things proper for Purging, or
Cordials; but now a days by a Potion is meant a Purging Potion. The difference
of Purging Potions are taken from the difference of Humors they Purge; hence
some are Cholagogues, some Phlegmagogues, others Hydragogues, others
Melanagogues; and others, composed of all these Properties, are called
Panchymagogues. In general three things are to be considered in them; in
composition two things are to be regarded, a proper Liquor whereof it is made,
and such things as are to be dissolved in it. The Liquor that is fit to
dissolve your Medicine for a Purging Potion is to be considered, as to its
quality and quantity: In respect of the quality, there is prescribed either a
Decoction or Infusion, or some other Liquor serving the intention of the
Physician. A Decoction of Sena is generally used, or a Decoction of other
Cathartics may be made, according to the diversity of the Humors, sufficient
only for one Dose; and if you dissolve nothing in it, the quantity must be the
larger. Things to be dissolved are considered either in quantity or quality.
Manna and Cassia are used to Purge Choler gently; Rhubarb for Fluxes; Syrups
and Electuaries are also dissolved in it, Syrup of Roses solutive, or
Diaprunum, or the like. As to the quantity, half an Ounce, or an Ounce of Syrup
is usually added, a Dram or two Drams of an Electuary, an Ounce of Manna. A
Purging Potion is very useful for those that cannot take Pills or Bolus's.

An Emulsion is an altering Medicine used to assuage Pain. In it are to be
considered the Matter, the Liquor, and the things to be dissolved in it. The
Matter in relation to its quality, are sweet Almonds blanched, the four greater
cold Seeds, or white Poppy Seeds, or the like; an Ounce, or an Ounce and an
half, or two Ounces of the Matter are generally prescribed. The Liquor is
either fair Water, or a Decoction of Barley, or the like. As to the quantity, a
Pint, or thereabout, is prescribed; for it will not keep long. An Ounce, or an
Ounce and an half of Syrup of Violets, or Maidenhair, is usually mixed with
it; sometimes to make it more pleasant, a little Rose Water is added to it.
Three or four Ounces of it is a Dose.

A Bolus is a form of Medicine, almost of the consistence of Honey, or somewhat
thicker. As to the quality of the Matter in general, it is composed of Purgers,
both simple and compound. As to the quantity in general, a Bolus ought not to
exceed six Drams; Cassia, or the Pulp of Tamarinds is generally the Matter of
it.

A Linctus is a Medicine of the thickness of Honey, compounded of pectoral
Simples, and is used for Diseases of the Lungs and Breast: it is usually made
of Syrups, Oil, and Sugar. As take of the Syrups of Jujubes, and Maidenhair,
each one Ounce and an half, of Oil of sweet Almonds fresh drawn one Ounce, of
Sugarcandy two Drams, mix them, by beating them well in a Glass Mortar till
they are White.

A Linctus is commonly prescribed to be lickt with a Liquorish Stick. Powders
are also sometimes used in a Linctus; as to their quantity, they are prescribed
to an Ounce with four times the quantity of the Liquor.

Vomits are said to be Medicines which evacuate Choler and Phlegm, and sometimes
Poisons from the Stomach and neighboring Parts. Antimonial Medicines eject
Choler, Mercurial Phlegm; Asarabacca, and all things made of it evacuate Choler
and Phlegm.

Some Forms of Vomits.
Take of Oxymel of Squills one Ounce and an half, Wine of Squills two Ounces,
mingle them, make a Vomit. Take of the fresh Leaves of Asarabacca, number six
or eight, beat them, and pour upon them three Ounces of White Wine, press out
the Liquor, and let it be taken with Regimen. Take of Salt of Vitriol one
Scruple, two Scruples, or one Dram, let it be taken in a draught of Posset
Drink. Take of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum half an Ounce, one Ounce, or
one Ounce and an half; take it in a Draught of Posset Drink with Regimen. Take
of Sulphur of Antimony grains six or eight, Cream of Tartar one Scruple, mingle
them, give it in the Pap of a roasted Apple. Take of Mercurius Vitae grains
three or six, take it in the Pap of a roasted Apple.


Chemical Vomits made of Vitriol, Antimony, and Mercury are most esteemed.

Salt of Vitriol is much valued, because it seldom causes any disturbance
beyond the Stomach, whereas Stybiats sometimes occasion Convulsions of the
Bowels, and Faintings, yet it works dully, and sometimes not at all; wherefore
upon taking of Salt of Vitriol, great quantities of Posset Drink must be taken,
and it must be forced up with a Feather. Pills are a solid form of Medicine,
and round, made of Powders, and sometimes Gums, Juices, tempered with some
Clammy Liquor, chiefly prepared to Purge withal. The most usual are, the
Stomach Pill, Rudius's Pill, Agaric, Cochiae, Aloephangin. foetid. The Matter
is generally Aloes, as the Basis; the Liquor is a Mucilage, or some proper
Syrup. The Dose of strong Pills is a Scruple; of moderate, two Scruples, or a
Dram; of the gentle one or two Drams.

The Liquor of a Purging Glister is the common Decoction. The Liquor of an
altering Glister is made of mollifying things, heating or cooling, according to
the intention. As to the quantity of the Liquor, it varies according to the Age
of the Party very much; for three Ounces will serve for a Child of Four or Five
Months old. A Pint is commonly prescribed for the Adult. Great Men will receive
a Pint and an half; but it is to be noted, that for Women with Child, and those
that have a Dropsy, or are troubled with Wind; and for Old Folks, three
quarters of a Pint will be sufficient, when we would have the Glyster long kept
in the Body: The things to be dissolved are either Alterers or Purgers; the
Alterers which are generally dissolved, are Honey, Sugar, and Oil. Salt is
sometimes added, when we design to make the Glyster more provocative. The
Purgers are Electuaries, either Lenifying or Purging, according to the variety
of the Humor to be Purged, and the Constitution of the Body.

A Medicinal Wine, is Wine impregnated with the Virtues of diverse Simples
infused in it to alter the Humors, or Purge: In the composition three things
are to be observed, the Wine, the Things to be infused in it, and the Things
that are sometimes dissolved in it. A Purging Medicinal Wine is impregnated
with the Virtues of diverse Purging Simples. As to the quality of the Wine, it
is either new and uncleansed, or else Wine cleansed from the Lees; in relation
to the quantity, that must be limited with respect to the Use and Dose. But I
usually define the quantity of Wine, and Things to be infused in it thus: A
Purging Wine that is to be prescribed is to be used twelve days, either
together, or every other day, wherein you must be sure to have twelve several
Doses of the Purgers with their Correctors, and if it be needful, sit Alterers;
then must you compute the quantity of them all. For instance, suppose them
eight Ounces: Now if you would have the Dose of the Wine to be about an Ounce
and an half, or two Ounces, prescribe it to three times their weight, and so
for other quantities as you please; by the same way, you may proceed as you see
fit. But if the Wine be purely Purging, made of the gentler sort of Cathartics,
it is to be taken four, five, or six times, at due distances. The things to be
infused, in respect of their quality, are either Purges only with their
Correctors, or else with them are also infused diverse Alterers dried, as Woods,
Roots, Barks, Leaves, Seeds, Flowers, Spices.

In relation to the quantity, the number of Doses for which the Wine is
Prepared, shall direct you. For instance, a Wine of Sena is desired for twenty
Doses. Now the Dose of Sena in infusion is half an Ounce, or six Drams,
therefore ten Ounces, or fifteen of it, is to be prescribed. If the Wine be
prepared of many Purgers, both gentle and strong, and also Alterers joined with
them; this proportion is for the most part to be generally observed. Of the
gentle sort let there be one part, of the stronger sort a quarter so much; of
Correctors a quarter so much as of Purgers; Alterers should be half so much as
the Purgers. Things that are to be dissolved in respect of their quality, are
either Sugar, or Spices. As to their quantity, for every Pint of Purging Wine,
you may add three or four Ounces of Sugar, and two Drams of Cinnamon.

Medicinal Wines are usually prescribed for long, and cold Diseases, especially
in the Wintertime.

Medicinal altering Wines are used with respect to certain parts, as Sage Wine
for cold Affections of the Brain, Hyssop and Elecampane Wine for the Breast,
Wormwood Wine for the Stomach.

Medicinal Wines are also prescribed against the Stone, to provoke Urine and
the Courses. The composition is the same with that of the Purging Wine.

A Gargarism is a liquid Medicine prescribed for Diseases of the Mouth, Gums
and Throat. It is compounded of Waters, and proper things to be dissolved in
it. As to the quantity, a Pint, or a Pint and an half of Water is prescribed.
Of the things to be dissolved in it, namely Syrups, 3 or 4 Ounces; of Honey 1
Ounce and an half, or 2 Ounces; of Vinegar 2 or 3 Ounces.

A Pessary is a Medicine to be put up a Woman's Privities in many Diseases of
the Womb. It is composed of an Ounce and an half, or two Ounces of some
loosening Opiat. Two are always prescribed, that when one is taken out, the
other should be put in: It is corporated with some Juice.

Note, that some Powders may be added to the Opiat, either sharp hysterical
opening Powders to a Dram and an half, or two Drams, or else Powders of Purgers
simple, or compound, to two Drams.

A Suppository is a topical Medicine used to the Fundament, or Anus, three or
four Inches in length, slender and round; it is either simple or compound. The
simple is made either of the stalk or root of Beets, Colewort, or Marshmallows;
the outward Peel being taken off, to which is added sometimes Salt, (to augment
the provocative Virtue) rubbed on the outside, smoothen'd over with Oil; also
the stalk of a Leek anointed with Butter; or white Soap sharpened like a
Suppository; also Honey alone boiled to a hard consistence, for so it becomes
more sharp.

The Compound is made of Honey as the Basis, boiled till it will not stick to
the Fingers, then adding Powders to it near to this proportion: As to one Ounce
you may add one Dram, or four Scruples of Powder at most, according as the
Powder is lighter in weight, or stronger in operation; which quantity will
serve for two or three Suppositories.

A Cataplasm is a sost Topic; it is compounded variously, either, which is
most usual of the Mucilage of diverse parts of Plants, to which are after added,
either Oils alone, or with Powders. Let there be of Mucilage ten Ounces, or a
Pound; of Powders, one, two, or three Ounces; Oil or things equivalent, three
or four Ounces; or else you may express only the quantity of the equivalent
things, and set down of Oil Q. S. so that the whole Cataplasm do not exceed one
Pound and an half; it may be much less, according to the bigness of the part,
and use. As to the Mucilage, it is made in respect of the quality of boiled
Roots, as Marshmallows, Lillies, or the like. The Powders in relation to their
quality are Flower of Barley, Beans, Linseed, Fenugreek Seed; or to discuss,
Orris, Cumin, Camomile Flowers, and the like; or sometimes Fruits, ripe, or
unripe, as Apples, Prunes, Quinces, and the like, roasted under the Embers, or
boiled in a fit Liquor, and bruised, adding fit Powders in the quantity
aforesaid; as in the Flux of the Belly, and Dysentery, it is made of the Pulp
of Quinces and astringent Powders; or sometimes in Fluxes of the Belly,
Vomiting, and to strengthen the Stomach, a slice of Bread steeped in Wine, and
toasted hot, is prescribed, being sprinkled with one or two Ounces of an
astringent strengthening Powder, to be applied to the Stomach.

A Cataplasm for Pain is made of Crumbs of White Bread steeped in half a Pint of
Milk; to which is added two Yolks of Eggs, half an Ounce of Saffron, and q. s.
of Oil fit for the purpose. Cataplasms are applied chiefly to ease Pain, to
soften hard Swellings, to ripen Tumors, and to dissolve the Cause of
Inflammations. They are usually prescribed of astringent Things, to stop
Fluxes, and are profitably made to provoke Urine; of Pellitory of the Wall, and
Oil of Scorpions, applied to the bottom of the Belly; for they relax, mollify,
and empty powerfully.

A Pultiss differs from a Cataplasm in nothing else, saving that that is
prepared of the Mucilage of Things boiled to Pap, and this is usually made of
the flowery part of Things boiled to the consistence of a Pultiss. It is either
compounded of the Flower of Pulse, four Ounces being boiled in a convenient
Liquor, to which afterward are added Oils, or three or four Ounces of Grease,
or some other thing equivalent to Oil, if the case so requires, or of the Crumbs
of White Bread to ease Pain, and ripen; or of a convenient Mucilage and
Powders, and Oils. But this is rather a Cataplasm.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Office of a Physician.
THere is no part of a Physician's Office more illustrious than Consultation;
because by it alone unlearned Physicians are distinguished from the learned;
and there is nothing that brings greater advantage to the Sick; but Care must
be taken that Differences do not arise out of Hatred, or private Interest. We
may indeed sometimes oppose other Men's Opinions, if they seem not good, but
respect must be always had to the Laws of Reason and Experience, and we must
submit always to the Judgment of the most experienced, and to Plurality. These
Consultations must be held apart from the Patients, to the end every Man may
more freely discover his Fears or Hopes; for Fear is not easily removed out of
the Patient's Head, when he is once possessed with it. Besides, if any one of
the Physicians have a Spark of Vainglory in him, he will be apt to magnify
himself before the Patient.

A faithful and true Account of the Diseases, their Causes and Symptoms must be
required of the Patient; for Celsus says, that many die through their own Fault,
especially Women, when their Modesty will not allow them to reveal the secret
Diseases of their Bodies.

We must not utterly deny a Patient all Remedies, how desperate soever his Case
is; for the Strength of Nature is admirable, and she often rallies against the
triumphant Enemy, and sometimes in a fresh Combat becomes victorious. Now,
since it is so, and since oftentimes such unexpected Events have convinced us,
that as long as there is Life there may be Hopes, we ought to be doing
something: Hippocrates himself acknowledges that Predictions of Life and Death
are not always certain.

Let the Physician be doubtful in his Prognostic, unless there be most certain,
and infallible Signs of Death; Let him be moderate in his Promises, yet let him
give always Hopes rather of Health, than foretell certain Death; for when the
Patient is given over by the Physician, if he recover afterward (as he often
does, which occasioned the Proverb, viz. that it is better to be condemned
twice by the Physician, than once by the Judge) the Physician incurs Infamy.

In some Diseases, great regard must be had to Men's way of living, otherwise
they will be hardly cured; and so many good and admirable Cures have been
performed.

Let neither the Physician, nor the Apothecary declare what their Medicines
are, either to the Patient or to the Bystanders; let them only signify, that
they intend to give a Purge, a Vomit, or a Glister, and conceal what these are
made of, both because otherwise they may be improperly taken, without the
Advice of a Physician, or because when things are known, they are contemned.

Hippocrates bids us observe all the Patient's Errors, whether about Meat or
Drink, or about Medicines, or external things; for if through their own Faults
they grow worse, the Blame is laid upon the Phsician.

We must not use Medicines, but upon urgent Necessity; for sometimes we must
rest a while, and do nothing but order a good Diet.

It is not unbecoming a Physician, who is skilled in the manual Operation, to
breath a Vein, when there is no Surgeon to do it, or to set a Limb that is
broken or out of joint; for a Surgeon's Work is one of the three Parts of
Physic; nor is it disgraceful to make up Medicines: And indeed it were well if
Physicians applied themselves more to Pharmacy than they do.

Let the Physician never prescribe two Medicines at once, and leave the Patient
to his Choice, because then he is at a Loss, and can trust neither of them, but
blames his Physician for Inconstancy.

A Physician ought not always to contemn the Medicines of the common People.
Let no Man, says Hippocrates, be ashamed, if he be never so learned, to learn
something that conduces to the Perfection of his Art, tho from an old Woman.

A Physician must not mix those things which destroy one another by a manifest
Contrariety; for example, vitriolated things must not be mixed with nitrous
ones, nor aluminous things with Alcalies, and the like.

Some counterfeit Diseases, whose Deceit it belongs to a prudent Physician to
detect; now the Diseases that are counterfeited, are usually Swooning,
Apoplexy, Fits of the Mother. Some tie their Arms so strait, that the Pulse can
scarce, if at all be felt; when they are called on aloud, they do not answer;
if they be pricked a little, or their Ears pulled, or their Fingers bent, they
bear it patiently. The Cheat is discovered by asking, whether any Want of Food
has preceded, Loss of Blood, a Looseness, Vomiting, or immoderate Sweating, or
any Disease; or whether he has been in a hot Place, or where Coals have been
kindled in a close Room, or whether he has been put in some great Passion. But
if the extreme Parts are cold, and if a cold Sweat burst out, especially about
the Head, Face, and Neck; if the Pulse cannot be felt, or are creeping; if the
Breathing be little and cold, if the Color of the Face be gone, and if he void
his Excrements, these signify that the Diseases are not feigned: But if there
be no such Signs, and if the Cheater shuts his Eyes, and looks as if he were in
a Swoon, the Physician must mention some strong Medicines, he must order
burning, bending of the Fingers, and pricking of the Body with Needles; for by
this means the Cheat may be discovered. Some raise Blisters, Swellings, and
Ulcers, by washing the Skin with the Juice of Spurge, or with a Decoction of
Spanish Flies, or Wasps, in Water, or by applying scorching Fennel, or Turbith,
or Powder of Rue: It is usual with Beggars to move Compassion, but the Cheat
may be easily discovered, by applying Populeon Ointment, or the like; because
Blisters and Swellings occasioned by such Applications may be easily cured
thereby. Some counterfeit Madness; but you may discover them by their Habit,
and by the Absence of the Signs of Madness, or Melancholy. Vlisses's feigned
Madness was discovered by throwing his Son before the Plow; for he lifted the
Plow over him. Some, with the Steem of Brimstone, or with some such thing,
discolor the Face; Saffron or Rhubarb does the same. Those that counterfeit
Pains may be easily discovered, for they bear it better, and do not change
Postures, as those do that are in violent Pain. Besides, they that are very ill
of a Disease are willing to admit of any Remedy voluntarily, send for
Physicians, and do whatever they prescribe. But if they be but a little sick,
or not at all, they refuse such Remedies. Sometimes it happens that a wounded
Man, either out of Hatred to him that wounded him, or to get some Money out of
him, feigns that some Limb is hurt: In this Case you must touch that Hand or
Limb unawares.

When a Physician is first called to a Patient, after he has put the Patient in
Hopes of Recovery, let him order something presently, that he may not be
thought to practice Physic by Books, especially when he is called after other
Physicians; for then all expect something more than others have done before;
therefore when you are informed what they have done, begin some other Method,
yet such as you think is more effectual, lest if you should repeat the same
things, they should think you were called to no purpose. If the Disease be such
as may be cured by Diet alone, yet you must prescribe some Physic, which may
do no Hurt, or something like Diet, which may do Good, lest they should say you
were ignorant, and affirm that Nature cured the Disease. This must be
especially done when the Patient never thinks himself safe or well, but when he
is taking Physic; and if you do not trifle with him in this manner, he will
find others that will tamper with him and spoil him.

A Physician should never visit the sick, unless he be sent for, and his Visits
ought not to be too frequent, when he is entertained.

There are some principal things, concerning which Patients should be
interrogated, first, what it is that ails him, and how his Head and Stomach,
and other principal Parts do; how many Days he has been ill; what made him ill,
what Diet he kept; whether he be loose or costive; whether he used naturally to
breed bad Humors; whether any natural Evacuation be stopped; whether he be used
to labor, or a sedentary Life.

Patients must not always be severely denied what Nature earnestly craves for,
for we see that several do not recover till their Appetites are gratified.

You must vary the Course of Diet and Medicines, according to the
Constitutions, Climates, Situation of Countries.

There are many things in this Art, wherein for Urgency's Sake, it is a piece
of Art to depart from Art; for tho there be many good Precepts and Rules, yet
none are perpetual, and he that reckons any for perpetual and inviolable, may
be a Methodist, but not at all rational; for a rational Physician proceeds not
so much by Book as by Experience; for in Cases there is a wonderful Variety.

When the Physician judges some generous Remedy requisite, and the Ratient or
Bystanders are against it, he ought to acquaint them with the present Danger,
the Mischief of deferring it, and the Damage that will follow; thus they that
will not yield to Persuasions, will sometimes obey for Fear of future Evil.

It is much better to be an empirical Physician, that is, one who practices
according to Experience, than a theorical one, who practices according to his
own Reasonings and Figments; for Experience has long since informed all
accurate Observers of things, which happen in our Art, that Empiricks are more
succesful in their Practice than Theorists, and such as are Physicians from
Books, or their own Speculations: These are so much more miserable in their
Folly, because they make others miserable with themselves; but the World will
be bubled with cramp Words, and great Brags.

It is unbecoming a Physician to harangue to the Bystanders; for it gives the
Patient a Suspicion that he would cure indeed, but that he is not able, and
therefore he would supply in Talk what he cannot perform by his Skill.

It is the Part of a Physician, not only to use Medicines, and to order the
Meat and Drink, but also to take care of all things that must be done or said
before the Patient, and of the Chamber, House and Bed, and of all external
things, and to dispose of them all, so as they may be most for the Benefit of
the Patient.

When the Nature of the Disease is obscure, yet as for the Cure, an Indication
is left us, to be taken from the Juvantia and Laedentia, by means whereof,
trying the way by degrees, we may conduct the Patient, provided we make not too
much Haste, than which nothing is more destructive. I am not ashamed, says
Sydenham, to confess, that when I was not satisfied what I ought to do, I
provided best for my Patient and my self by doing nothing; for while I waited
for an Opportunity, the Disease either went off of it self, or put on such a
Type, as I knew well enough how to manage. And indeed, more should be left to
Nature than is now the Custom to do; for he is much mistaken, who thinks Nature
always needs the Help of Art; for if it were so, she has not taken that Care of
Human Kind, which the Conservation of the Species requires, seeing there has
been no Proportion between the Frequency of Diseases that invade Man, and their
Faculties which Men have to drive them away, even in these Ages, when Physic
flourished most, and when most Men practiced it.

It is found by Experience, that every seven or nine Years a Man undergoes some
great Alteration; these are called Climacteric, because they are Steps or
Ladders, whereby we climb up to old Age: In these Years therefore no great
Medicines must be used, and because then Nature uses to do some great thing,
the Physician must be quiet.

Many Physicians avoid all Days of Oppositions and Conjunctions of the Moon,
unnecessarily; for all the Physician has to do, is to observe the Alterations
of the Air.

CHAP. XXII. Of Animals that are of Medicinal Use.
THE Lungs of a Lamb, as well as those of a Fox, are commended for
Consumptions, and Diseases of the Lungs. The coagulated Milk of a Sheep or Goat
is excellent for dissolving Women's coagulated Milk.

The Horns and Hoof of an Elk are in Use, and both are accounted Specifics for
an Epilepsie, Convulsions, Tremblings of the Limbs, Giddiness, Palpitation of
the Heart, and hysteric Fits.

The Tooth of a Boar is reckoned a Specific in Pleurisies and Quinsies; half a
Dram or a Dram of it prepared, being given in a Decoction of the Flowers of red
Poppies, or in a Decoction of Carduus Benedictus. Some give a Dram of the
Raspings of it, mixed with Oil of Almonds and Sugarcandy: But the Raspings of
it mixed with a Decoction is best; for it yields a kind of a Gelly. The Stones
are a Specific for Barrenness in Women, and an Essence is prepared of them,
which is counted good for Impotents, and it is used also to promote and
stimulate Venery. The Dung is reckoned an excellent Specific to stop Blood. The
Urine is good for the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder.

Of the Blood of an Ass is prepared an Essence, which is reckoned good for the
Falling Sickness. The Filth of an Asses Ear promotes Sleep, being applied to
the Temples, and is excellent in malignant Fevers, but you must not anoint the
Temples with it too often, lest it make the Patient sleep too much. Asses Milk
nourishes much, loosens the Belly, and provokes Urine, and is much commended
for a Consumption, the Stone in the Bladder, and in the Kidneys; and is better
in these Cases than any other sort of Milk whatever, three Quarters of a Pint
of it being drank five or six Mornings, sweetened with an Ounce of Sugarcandy,
and the Patient must fast three Hours after; he must also take the same
Quantity three Hours before Supper: But in this Course he must abstain from all
acid Meats. Asses Milk is also good for the Gout.

Asses Dung gathered in May, is good for bleeding at the Nose, or for Blood
flowing from any other Part, a Dram being taken at a time. The Fume of the Dung
is also good for bleeding at the Nose, and for too great a Flux of the Courses.
Or, Take of Plantain Water one Ounce, of Syrup of Myrtles, and of the Juice of
Asses Dung, each half a Dram; mix them: This Potion taken in the Morning, and
continued for some Days, is an approved Remedy for all Fluxes of the Womb,
whether white or red, Vniversals going before.

The Reins of an Ass powdered, and mixed with Honey, and drank in Beer, are an
excellent Remedy for the Strangury. The hard Flesh growing about the Knees of
an Ass is reckoned as a great Secret for the making Hair to grow.

The Horns of a Bull rasped is reckoned good for Impotents, especially if it be
rasped off in the Time of Coition; so is also the Brain of a Sparrow killed in
Coition. Bull's Gaul is the most acrid and volatile of all the Gauls of
Animals, and is reckoned very proper to take off Spots or Clouds from the Eye;
the Tincture of it is reckoned an excellent Cosmetic, and the Gaul (...) ^d is
of great Use in Glisters to provoke the Belly, a Dram being mixed with a
Glister. A Plaster or Ointment made of Aloes, Cow's Gaul, Myrrh, and Oil of
Coloquintida, and applied to the Navel, is much commended to expel Worms in
grown People, and in Children. The Gaul of all Sorts of Animals is much
commended for Diseases of the Ears, to quiet the Noise, to remove Deafness and
Dullness of hearing, being put into the Ear with Cotton. The Spleen of a Cow is
much commended for Diseases of the Spleen, viz. the Hardness, Inflation, Pain,
and Swelling of it. It is also good for Obstructions of the Courses, and for
the Cachexy of Virgins arising thence, for which it is much commended.

Cow's Marrow is frequently used for Diseases of the Nerves; Cow's Dung is
frequently used for Burns, in the manner of a Cataplasm, and for Inflammations,
and being applied to the Belly, it is an excellent Remedy for the Cholick, and
to expel Wind. It is also applied to the Belly in Dropsies, to lessen the
Swelling, and to discuss the Water. It is also used for phlegmatic Swellings of
the Parts. It stops Inflammations, and prevents Gangrens. The Water of the
Dung, called the Water of all the Flowers, is an excellent Cosmetic, and takes
off Spots from the Face. It is also much commended for provoking Urine, and
expelling Gravel. Some ordinary People press out the Juice of the Dung, and
drink it for the Cholick and Pleurisy, and it is counted a present Remedy.

There is often found in the Stomach of a Cow or Bull, a Stone, which is
sometimes pretty large, and sometimes a Stone in the Gaul-bladder, the Powder
whereof, especially of that Stone in the Gaul-Bladder, is counted an excellent
Remedy for the Jaundice, and to expel Gravel; it also expels Poisons by Sweat,
and drives away the Fits of the Falling Sickness. The Powder of the Stone is
also an excellent Errhine, but it is best used by being mixed with the Juice of
Beets, and applied to the Nostrils, for it presently causes sneezing.

The Milk of a Cow, as all other Milk does, consists of three Substances, Whey,
Butter, and Cheese; it is an excellent Nourishment, and partakes much of the
Nature of the Herb the Beasts feed on; and so if they feed on Water-cress,
Brook-lime, Scurvy Grass, Money-wort, and the like, the Milk will be good for
the Scurvy; and if they eat Ground Ivy, and the like, the Milk will be proper
for a Consumption, and Ulcers in the inner Parts.

In the Use of Milk, you must observe to drink it warm from the Cow, for it is
soon altered by the Air, and turns sour, and is very apt to contract
Contagion, in a pestilential Time, and turns of a Sky Color or livid.

Milk in general is proper to nourish the Parts; therefore it is very proper
for such as have a hectic Fever, or the like. It is also good to correct the
Acrimony of the Humors, and is also an excellent Remedy for the Scurvy. It is
also very proper for Diseases of the Urinary Passages, namely, bloody Urine,
Heat of Urine, and the Strangury. It is also good for the Bloody Flux,
especially if Steel be often quenched in it. In this Case it is to be taken by
the Mouth, and to be injected in Form of a Glister. But in the Use of it, acid
things must be avoided, and to hinder its Coagulation, it is convenient to mix
a little Sugar with it; for Sugar powerfully hinders the Coagulation, and if a
little of it be mixed with it, Butter or Cheese can never be made.

But Milk is naught for such as have continual or intermitting Fevers. It is
also naught for those that are troubled with Headaches, Giddiness, the
Fallingsickness, and the like: It is naught for Nauseousness, Vomiting, a
Looseness, and the Cholera Morbus. It must not be used in Swellings of the
Liver and Spleen, or in Obstructions of the Mesentery.

Outwardly used, it is an excellent Anodyne. It eases Pain. Flowers of Elder
boiled with Milk is reckoned an excellent Medicine to take off Inflammations,
and cures an Erisypelas.

Whey moderately loosens the Belly, cools and asswages the Effervescence of the
Blood, and is therefore proper in malignant and burning Fevers, either taken by
it self, or mixed with the Juice of Citron. And tho Milk be injurious to
hypochondriac People, and to those whose Viscera are not firm, yet Whey is very
proper for them, for it qualifies the Acid, and opens Obstructions of the
Bowels. It provokes Urine, and is conveniently used in Summer Mornings to
attemperate the Acrimony of the Blood and Diuretics; and things that purge and
open may be mixed with it.

A Decoction of Fumitory being mixed with it, or Fumitory boiled with it,
purifies the Blood, cures the Itch, a Heat of Urine, and spitting of Blood.

But Whey is not proper for old Men.

The Pizle of a Bull reduced to Powder, and a Dram of it being taken at a time,
is good for a Disentery, and a Pleurisy; and this is one of Helmont's
Antipleuretic Secrets.

A Toad is an Animal well known, upon the Account of the Antipathy that is
betwixt it and the Spider, against which it defends its self, by the Use of
Plantain. The Poison of Toads is removed by River Crabs, Humane Spittle,
Hartshorn, sealed Earth, and Smaragd: But Toads are of good Use internally,
and externally. Those that are taken in July are best. As to their internal
Use, they are dried, powdered, and taken inwardly to provoke Urine in a Dropsy.

Take Toads dried in the Shade, cut off the Heads, and take out the Guts, make
of the rest a fine Powder; the Dose is ten or fifteen Grains, with so much
Sugar. It may be taken three or four times: But three or four Days must be
betwixt each Dose; for it is a powerful Remedy. This has had wonderful Success.
Some take live Toads, and kill them in Spirit of Wine, or Malago Sack;
afterward they take them out and distill them in a Retort: But the Spirit of
Wine it self, or the Wine wherein they are killed, is an excellent and approved
Alexipharmic, taken inwardly. Externally Toads are of excellent Use in the
Plague. for Preservation and Cure. The whole Toad may be worn for an Amulet in
the Plague, or they may be applied to the pestilential Bubo's; for they are
said to draw out all the Venom, and so cure the Sick. The little Bone of the
Leg is also said to cure the Toothach, being outwardly applied; also the
Falling Sickness and Agues, being applied to the Pulse; and if a dried Toad be
held in the Hand, put under the Armpits, or upon the Heart, it certainly cures
any Hemorrhage. The Powder of a Toad calcined sprinkled upon an ulcerated
Cancer does much good. The Oil of Toads is used successfully for the
King's Evil.

A live Dog applied to the Belly, eases the Pain of the Colic.

Dogs Grease is preferred before all other. Some roast a Dog, and use the
Dripping in a Consumption with excellent Success: But the white Dung, called
Album Graecum, is most commonly used in Physic; and that it should be more
effectual, the Dog should be fed only with Bones, and should scarce ever drink.
This Dung is of excellent Use for a Dysentery and Colic. It is also used
inwardly for a Quinsey, and other Inflammations of the Jaws; and it breaks the
Abscess in a Quinsey, being mixed with Honey, and the Part anointed therewith.
The Virtue of it is most effectual, when it is taken in July, and it is thought
to be of so great Use in a Quinsey, that there is no Ointment or Plaster made
for it without Album Graecum or Swallows Nest.

The Brain of a Dog is commended for Madness.

Goats Horns are commonly used for Fumes in Hysteric Fits, and for Fits of the
Falling Sickness. Goats Blood is reckoned a Specific in a Pleurisy, and for
nephritic Pains, and the Gravel, and it powerfully expels Gravel. It is also
good in Falls, Bruises, and Wounds.

Deers Suet is good in Glisters for Bloody-Fluxes; for it purifies and heals
Ulcers of the Bowels, especially if it be dissolved in a vulnerary Decoction,
and injected for a Glister. If the Navel be anointed with Deers Suet, a
Strangury will be soon and certainly cured.

Goats Milk is preferred in Physic, especially for the Cure of the Scurvy and
the Gout. The Urine of a Goat is a Specific for the Stone in the Kidneys, and
for Preservation from it. The Bladder is said to be a certain Cure for
Incontinence of Urine.

Castor is an amphibeous Animal, which lives partly upon the Water and partly
upon the Earth. The Fat of it is excellent in Diseases of the Head and Womb,
paralytick Limbs are anointed with it, and also the Belly, in the uterine
Suffocation, and for After-pains.

The Castor is reckoned by some to be the Stones of the Beast; but this is a
vulgar Error, for the Castor is collected in hairy Bags placed near the
Testicles; and therefore that Castor wherein the Testicles and Reins are found,
is adulterate: It has a stong and fetid Smell, it powerfully discusses Wind,
and is excellent for the Colic and hysteric Fits. It promotes the Courses, and
expels the dead Child, and the Lochia: But all Women cannot bear the Smell of
Castor.

Castor is also used in sleepy Diseases, in the Apoplexy, Lethargy, Coma, and
the like, and it corrects the Virulency of Opium.

An old Man of fifty five Years of Age fell into a dangerous Lethargy, upon
traveling in a very cold Season; and when many things had been used to no
purpose, he was happily cured with the following Medicine.

Take of Castor, two Scruples, Scammony, one Scruple; mingle them with Oxymel
for two Doses. It is also good in a Lethargy to apply to the Nostrils, a Sponge
dipped in Tincture of Castor, and also when People are sleepy by reason of
narcotic Vapors, arising from Coals, Wine and Beer Cellars, and the like.

Castor and the Extract of it is usually prescribed in Glisters, for Apoplexies
and the Falling Sickness, when very strong Glisters are prescribed. The
Tincture of Castor is also prescribed for Apoplexies and Epilepsies mixed with
Waters of Lilly of the Valleys, Lavender and Sage.

For a Noise in the Ear, and the like Diseases of the Ear, Castor is an
excellent Remedy; Castor being mixed with Cotton, and put into the Ear, or
Cotton dipped in the Tincture may be applied to the Ear; but it succeeds better,
if the Spirit of Ants be mixed with it; for so it wonderfully cures Diseases of
the Ears, and removes a Noise in them; for Spirit of Ants is of it self a
Specific for Diseases of the Ears.

The Oil of Castor is frequently used to anoint paralytic and trembling
Members, and being dropped upon the Tongue, it succeeds well in the Loss of
Speech from a Palsy. The Extract of Castor is conveniently used in Glisters,
for hysteric Diseases. The Tincture of Castor is counted good by way of
Preservation from the Smallpox. The Spine of the Back being anointed with Oil
of Castor in the Fits of quartan Agues, the cold fit is thereby lessened.

The Fat of a Cat is counted good to anoint the Navel of those that have the
Falling Sickness, and some cut off the third Part of the Tail, and give three
Drops of the Blood hot in the Water of Lime Flowers, to those that have Fits of
the Falling Sickness upon them.

Civet is reckoned a Specific in the Colic, the Navel being anointed with it;
and it is also used by Women for hysteric Fits, the privy Parts being anointed
with it.

All the Stag is Alexipharmic, and all things prepared from it have the same
Alexipharmic and Sudorific Virtues. The volatile Spirit of the Horn is
frequently used for malignant Diseases, and for an Epilepsy. The Horn has most
Virtue in it when it is ripe and falls off of it self.

Calcined Hartshorn is very proper for a Looseness and the Worms. A Gelly is
also made of Hartshorn, and is used in malignant Diseases to resist and expel
the Malignity. Half an Ounce, or an Ounce of it may be dissolved in Broth, or
in a Draught of Beer. It is also used to strengthen.

Spirit of Hartshorn, with a little Camphor in it, is an excellent Medicine in
malignant Fevers.

The Bone of a Stags Heart is nothing else but the Artery hardened; and
Anatomists say that such Bones have been found in old Men's Hearts. This is
commonly reckoned very good for the Heart. It is counted a Specific against
Miscarriage, given with Grains of Kermes, in a convenient Vehicle.

The Pizle of a Stag is an approved Remedy for the Bloody Flux and a Pleurisy;
a Dram of it powdered may be given in Plantain Water for the Bloody Flux, in
Coltsfoot Water, or in the Water of Carduus Benedictus for a Pleurisy; or a
Decoction may be made of the Raspings of it; it is moreover proper for the Colic
and hysteric Fits.

Snails are much commended for the hectic Fever, and a Consumption. Amatus
Lusitanus cured a certain hectic Person with a Chicken fed with Snails, and
with Asses Milk. They are proper for the Gout and such kind of Pains. The
Shells are good for a Dropsy, by forcing Urine; as much of the Powder being
taken as will lie on the Point of a Knife, Morning and Evening, in some
convenient Vehicle. The Water that drops from the Shells, being strained is
counted a good Cosmetic. Live Snails applied, are good for the Falling of the
Anus, and for the Swelling and Pain of the Piles.

Ivory is good in Fevers, and to correct an acid Humor, and for the Whites,
and to prevent Miscarriage. It is alexipharmic, kills Worms, and is good for
hysteric Fits.

Mares Milk is commended for a Consumption. The Dung of Horses is frequently
and succesfully used in Physic. It is used outwardly and inwardly to stop
bleeding. It is also good for the Colic.

Take the Juice of fresh Dung, and drink it in a Draught of Wine or Beer, it
cures the Colic and a Plurisy. It is also used for a Quinsey. It is outwardly
used for Inflammations of the Jaws, and it is commonly used for a Strangury,
and it is reckoned a present Remedy for the uterine Suffocation: But Women with
Child must not use it, because it causes Abortion. The Warts that grow to the
Feet of Horses are much commended for hysteric Fits, taken inwardly in the Form
of Powder, or used outwardly.

Take of the Warts of a Horse, one Ounce, Assa Foetida, half a Dram, the Hoof
of a Goat, two Drams; make a Powder, and let a Scruple of it be burnt, so as
that the Fume may be conveyed through a Tunnel to the Vterus.

The Testicles of a Horse are excellent to expel the Secundine, or dead Child,
and to provoke the Lochia.

Take of the Testicles of a Horse, one Dram; of Borax, half a Dram; of Saffron,
one Scruple; with a sufficient Quantity of White-Lilly-Water, make a Mixture.
They are also much commended for the Colic.

The Hoofs of Horses are used for hysteric Fits.

The Pizle of a Seahorse is good for the Stone and Cramp.

The Powder of a Hedg-hog is reckoned an excellent Remedy for involuntary
Urine, half a Dram, or a Dram of it being taken.

The Breath of a Man clears the Eyesight, and is good for Inflammations of the
Eyes, especially if Fennel Seeds have been chewed in the Mouth before. The
Nails infused in Wine or Drink, purge and vomit much.

The Spittle of a Man fasting is good for the biting of Serpents, and of other
venomous Creatures, and is cosmetic. The Wax of the Ears is good for the Colic,
and is very vulnerary.

Woman's Milk is much commended for a Consumption, especially if the consumptive
Person sucks the Woman. Forestus mentions an Observation of a very consumptive
young Man, who was so far restored by sucking a Woman, that at length he got
her with Child. An Epithem made of Woman's Milk and Poppy Seeds boiled in it
provokes Sleep. A menstruous Cloth applied to a gouty Foot eases the Pain, and
cures an Erisypelas. The Secundine of a Woman is excellent for expelling the
Afterbirth, and the dead Child, and there is no better Remedy to cause
Abortion, and it is of excellent Use in difficult Labor. A Spirit exracted
from the Secundine cures the Falling Sickness, and takes off Spots, the Child
being presently besmeared as soon as it is born. The way of preparing the true
Spirit of the Secundine is as follows.

Take the Secundine of a healthy Woman, if it can be of her first Child, being
a Son, with all the Vessels and Appurtenances; put them into a Bolt-head, set
on the Receiver, and lute them well; place them in a gentle Digestion to
purify, and so by internal Fermentation the whole Secundine will be turned
into a Liquor, but they ought to stand about half a Year in Digestion;
afterward, by Distillation, a very volatile Spirit will come forth, of
excellent Virtue for Women's Diseases, to hasten Delivery, and to provoke Urine
and the Courses. The Dose is a Spoonful or two. With this Medicine a Woman was
cured that had a Stoppage of her Courses for six Years; and with the same
Spirit the King of Poland was cured of the Falling Sickness. But you must take
notice, in making the Spirit, before you begin the Operation you must take off
the Cuticle of the Secundine. Man's Urine expels the Venom of Vipers, and there
are some Observations in Zacutus Lusitanus, of Men that have bin Cured of the
Biting of Vipers, by taking some Ounces of Urine. It eases the Pain of the
Gout. The Drinking Ones own Urine is a preservation against the Plague, and is
of great use in Curing the Jaundice, the Dropsy, Cachexy, and a Scirrhus of
the Spleen. A Woman's drinking her Husband's Water renders her Labor more
easy. A Glister made of a Boy's Urine is reckoned a Specific for the Timpany:
It may be given alone, or with carminative Plants boiled in it. The Seeds of
Daucus, Fennel, and Cummin boiled in Urine, and drunk, is also very good for a
Timpany. It Cures Ulcerations of the Ears. The Spirit of Urine is an excellent
Medicine; it opens Obstructions, forces Urine, and expels Gravel, provokes
Sweat powerfully, and is a Catholic Medicine for intermitting Fevers, before
the Fit, Universals being first used. It is excellent for the Scurvy,
especially if it be mingled with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass prepared by
Fermentation, which is also excellent for Hypochondriac Diseases, and for the
Cachexy of Virgins, a Vomit being first used. Three Virgins have bin lately
Cured by this method. Being outwardly applied it Cures Colic Pains arising
from an acid. For an Epilepsy and sleepy Diseases, it is applied to the
Nostrils, and taken inwardly, and is of good use.

Man's Excrement is excellent for Inflammations. It eases Pain, mollifies, and
discusses. Being applied to Carbuncles and Pestilential Bubo's, it eases the
Pain, draws out the Venom, and ripens presently. This has bin approved of in a
raging Plague. It is good for the biting of Venomons Creatures; so says Zacutus
Lusitanus, Matthiolus, Dioscorides, and Riverius. There is a Serpent in the
East Indies, the Biting whereof is certain Death, unless Man's Dung be applied
to it within eight hours. The distilled Water of Man's Excrement is good for
Diseases of the Eyes, the Stone, Dropsy, and Epilepsy; and being taken
inwardly, it Cures the Biting of Mad Dogs, Whitlows, and Carbuncles.

Blood taken inwardly stops Bleeding. Blood distilled yields a Volatile Spirit,
which is proper for an Epilepsy, being given at the New and Full Moon.

Man's Bones are used for the Bloody Flux, and Palsy: But the Skull is most
frequently used, especially of a Man that dies a violent Death. That which has
bin whitened by lying long abroad, has much more Virtue than one dug out of a
Grave. The Raspings of it taken inwardly are very good for the Falling
Sickness. I knew, says Etmuller, a Countryman that cured many, both Young and
Old, of the Falling Sickness, with this very Remedy.

The Moss that grows on dead Men's Skulls stops Bleeding in any part of the
Body, being applied to it.

The Ashes of Hares Down burnt, and taken inwardly, expels Gravel. The Eye of a
Hare hastens Delivery. The Blood of a Hare is an excellent Remedy for the
bloody Flux: A Rag dipped in the Blood of a Hare, and applied to an Erysipelas,
Cures it; so says Helmont. The Brains of an Hare are used to the Gums to render
the bringing out of Teeth easy. The Heart dried and powdered, is a certain
Cure for a Quartain Ague, a fourth part of it being taken before every Fit. The
Womb of a Hare dried is much commended for a Dropsy of the Womb, and
Barrenness. The Fat of a Hare is very good to draw out Thorns, and other Things
that stick in the Flesh. It is also used for Ruptures, the Spine of the Back
being anointed with it. The Hairs are used with other Things, to stop Bleeding,
and is an ingredient in Galen's famous Ointment, which is made of equal parts
of Aloes, Myrrh, Frankincense, and the Down of a Hare burnt; this is much used
for Bleeding, and for the stopping Arterial Blood.

The Tooth of a Wolf is used to rub the Gums of Children, to facilitate the
Eruption of the Teeth. The Liver of a Wolf is commended for a Scirrhus of the
Spleen, a Dram of it being taken in some proper water. The Guts and Dung of a
Wolf are much commended by universal consent of all Authors, for the Colic, a
Dram of the Guts or Dung being taken at a time: Some make Girdles of the Guts,
and wear it for the Colic. The Skin is also commended for the same.

Mouse Dung is commended for involuntary Urine. The Heads of Mice calcined, and
mixed with Honey cure Baldness. The Dung Purges, and is mixed with
Suppositories. One or two of the Rolls of Dung powdered, and mixed with the
Child's Pap, Purges neatly.

The Lungs of a Sheep applied hot to the Head, is good for a Frenzy. Amatus
Lusitanus says, that the Cawl of a Sheep applied hot to the Belly, is an
approved Remedy for the Colic, and Bloody Flux. The Dung is commended for a
Quinzy, and the Jaundice; and indeed all Dungs Cure the Jaundice, especially
Goose Dung. A Dram of the Bladder of a Sheep dried, is commended for
involuntary Urine.

Frogs in general, are used in Physic; but the Green are best, and such as
live in wholesome and clear Waters. Frogs powdered and taken inwardly, are good
to stop Blood; and they are outwardly used for malignant Ulcers, and ulcerated
Cancers. Some commend them roasted, for a Hectic Fever and Consumption. The
distilled Water, and the Powder of them, is good for malignant and inflamed
Ulcers; and others commend a green Frog calcined, to prevent Fits in Children;
as much of the Powder as will lie on the point of a Knife being given to the
Child as soon as it is Born, before it has sucked or taken any other thing.

A Rhinoceros is a vast Animal; the Horn in the Nostril is much commended for
malignant Diseases: The Dose of it is from half a Scruple to a Scruple. Some
make drinking Cups of it, and think they will preserve from Poison, and prevent
Drunkenness.

A Serpent, or Viper, is not Venomous unless it be enraged. There are many
great Serpents which are not Venomous, and cannot be provoked to Anger by any
means. The best time to take them is in the Spring. The whole Serpent is
Alexipharmic. The Powder of them is called Bezoardicum animale, and the Spirit
of them, and of Vipers, is very proper for malignant Diseases. When there is
any suspicion of malignity, you may give a Scruple, or half a Dram of the
Powder. It is also of use in malignant Fevers, the Spotted Fever, and the
Plague, and provokes Sweat. And Serpents and Vipers are very proper for the
French Disease, in whatever Form they are used. They confirm Health, and
prolong Life. The Duke of Bavaria fed Fowl with Serpents, and afterward eat
them, and so came to have Children; and they are commended by others for
Barrenness. The Skins which they put off in the Spring are very proper to
hasten the Birth, an Ointment being made of them, or they being worn in the
manner of a Girdle. They are also much commended to make the Hair grow; the
Powder of the Skin mixed with the Powder of River Crabs is very good for the
Wounds of the Nerves and Tendons. The same Powder is much commended for Wounds
of the Eyes, and for fresh Wounds; a Decoction of the Skins is much commended
for the Lowsy Disease. The Serpentine Stone is of a stony, or rather bony
substance; it is found about the Head of a Serpent in the East Indies. This
Stone being applied to a Venomous Bite sticks, till it draw out the Poison;
when it falls off, they put it into Milk, that it may cast forth the Poison
into the Milk; afterward they take it out again, and apply it to the Bite, and
if any Venom remain, it sticks to the Wound, if not, it falls off of its own
accord. A Dog bit by a Viper was lately Cured by this Stone, and the Milk, into
which it was cast after the Application, being given to another Dog, killed
him. The Powder is good for all cutaneous Diseases.

As the Conformation of the internal and external parts of a Hog, is much like
that of a Man, so the Blood and Flesh is much like the Blood and Flesh of a
Man. The Gall of a Hog is good for Diseases of the Eyes and Ears. The Lard is
much used to mollify Humors, and ease Swellings; for which purpose it is
often put into Cataplasms, and outwardly applied.

The following Remedy is commended for a violent Cough, especially that which
is most troublesome in the Night.

Take three heads of Garlic, and with a sufficient quantity of Lard make an
Ointment, wherewith anoint the Soles of the Feet in the Evening, when the Sick
is going to Bed, and when he is in Bed anoint the Spine of the Back with it;
and if you use this Ointment in the same manner, it will Cure the most violent
Cough. Hogs Dung is excellent to stop any sort of Bleeding, especially of the
Nostrils. The Juice of the fresh Dung being pressed out, and taken inwardly, or
applied to the Forehead and Nostrils, or with Sugar you may make a Syrup of the
Juice, or the dry Dung may be used with some proper Water inwardly, or
outwardly, or the hot Dung may be applied to the Forehead and Temples, just as
it is evacuated, or the Sick may smell to it, or the dried Dung may be put up
the Nostrils: But which way soever it is used, it does Wonders in this case:
Take of the Powder of Hogs Dung dried, three Drams; of the Powder of Roses half
a Dram, to correct the Stink; mix them with the Juice of Plantain, and put it
up the Nostrils with Cotton; but the Juice of Nettles is better than the Juice
of Plantain in this case.

The Matrix of a Sow dried in the Smoke, and half a Dram of it being given, is
an excellent Remedy for the Epilepsy. The distilled Water of Pork is much
commended for the Hectic Fever and Consumption.

A calcined Mole is used for a Leprosy. The Wine wherein a Mole has bin boiled
is excellent for the Kings Evil, and a calcined Mole is much commended for
cancerous, and scorbutic Ulcers. The Blood of a Mole Cures Baldness, and is
counted good for a Gangreen, a Paper being dipped in it and dried, and afterward
moistened in some proper Water. The Teeth taken out of a live Mole are said to
be good for a Gangreen of the Paps, and for the Toothache, and for breeding
Teeth. The Blood and Skin of a Mole is a certain Cure for Whitlows.

Vipers are very proper for malignant and venomous Diseases, and for the Pox,
and Leprosy. Galen mentions an observation of a desperate Leprosy that was
cured by the Wine wherein Vipers were killed. Vipers are also very good for a
malignant Itch, and for Barrenness. Helidaeus Paduanus in his Observations,
mentions a rare Case of a leprous and barren Woman that was cured of her
Leprosy and Barrenness by a Decoction of Vipers. Moreover, Vipers are an
excellent Cosmetic, being used inwardly; and therefore the Italian Women drink
Viper Wine to beautify the Face; and there is no better Medicine than Vipers
used inwardly and outwardly for the King's Evil. The Fat and Oil of Vipers are
commonly used; the Hearts and Livers are reckoned a Specific for the Cure of an
Epidemic Dysentery. For the Cure of the Bite of a Viper, there is no better
Remedy than a red hot Iron applied so near as to heat, and not to burn. The Fat
is excellent to take off Wrinkles from the Face. The best way of preparing
Vipers is to take out their Bowels, and to dry them with the Fume of Juniper
Berries; when they are dried, powder them, to three Parts of the Powder add
Flowers of Sulphur and Myrrh powdered, each one Part, sprinkle upon them some
Drops of the Oils of Cinnamon and Rhodium, and you will have an excellent
Animal Bezoardic Powder. Or.

Take Vipers, wash them well in Malago Wine, mix them with Sal Prunella, dry
them in a hot Place, so as they may be reduced to Powder; but first wipe off
the Sal Prunella. Add to this Powder the Hearts and Livers powdered, sprinkle
them with Spirit of Wine, and keep them for Use. Those that desire more
Compositions may consult Zwelfer. The Troches of Vipers is now disliked,
because there is so great a Mass of Bread mixed with a small Quantity of the
Vipers, and therefore the Moderns, in the Composition of Treacle, use instead
of the Troches, the Animal Bezoardic Powder.

The Fat of Badgers is more penetrating than other Fats, and therefore applied
to the Reins in nephritic Diseases, with Ointment of Marshmallows, when we
design to ease Pain, or the Oil of Scorpions when we intend to force Urine or
the Stone.

The Unicorns Horn, which is more properly the Tooth of a Fish in Greenland, is
frequently used for malignant and pestilential Fevers, the Smallpox, Measles.
The Dose is from half a Scruple to one Scruple, or half a Dram. It provokes
Sweat. A Gelly may be made of it by boiling.

Bears Grease mixed with the Ashes of Mice is an excellent Remedy for Baldness.
It Is used to discuss and dissolve Tumors, and is much commended for Ruptures,
the Loins being anointed with it about the Spine of the Back, after the Gut is
put up, for it prevents the falling again. Some commend the Grease washed in
Frogs Span-Water to ease the Gout: But it is to be feared it repels the Matter.
It is also a very good Cosmetic.

The Fat of Foxes is much in Use for Diseases of the Nerves, Tremblings, and a
Palsy. The Oil of Foxes discusses powerfully, is anodyne, and is proper for the
Contraction and Induration of the Nerves and Tendons, they being anointed with
it. The Lungs are much commended for Diseases of the Lungs, especially for
Wounds and Ulcers of them. The Lohoch of Fox-Lungs is is commended for and
Asthma and a Cough. The Blood of a Duck is alexipharmic; and the more Ducks
feed on Toads, the more alexipharmic the Blood is. If you apply a living Duck,
the Feathers being pulled off behind, to the Stomach, it will ease the Pain of
the Cholick; and it is wonderful, how the Podex of a Bird applied to
pestilential Bubo's and Carbuncles, especially of a Hen, does draw out the
Poison, as also from venomous Bites: But the Fowl dies after the Application.

Goose Fat is much used in Physic, and is more penetrating than Lard, and
therefore is used in paralytic Diseases, and Convulsions of the Nerves. The
People of Westphalia use the Vapor of the Fat to cure the scorbutic Palsy,
wherewith they are often seized. They boil it in Water, and receive the Vapor
upon the paralytic Member. The Grease taken with a roasted Apple, mollifies the
Belly when it is bound. The Feet and Hands being anointed with it are defended
against the Inclemency of the Cold. An excellent Liniment for a Palsy is made
of a Goose in the following manner.

Take a Goose draw it, and fill the Belly with nervine Plants and Ointments;
roast it, and the Fat which drips in roasting is an excellent Remedy for
paralytic Members. The Dung is very salt, and very penetrating, and frequently
used as a specific for the Jaundice, a Dram of it being taken at a time; and it
will be more effectual if the Goose be fed with Celandine, wherewith Geese are
much delighted: It is also a great Specific for the Scurvy, being taken in the
Form of a Powder or Decoction. The curious Opthalmic Water of Maximilian the
Emperor is made of fresh Goose Dung.

Take the Dung of young Geese collected in April or May; distill it, and drop
the Water into the Eyes. It clarifies the Sight, discusses Suffusions, and
cures an Inflammation.

The Tongue of a Goose cures the Strangury, being first dried; and if it be
eaten fresh, it cures involuntary Urine.

Peacocks Dung is a Specific for the Falling Sickness, and Giddiness. A Dram of
the Powder may be taken at a time, or it may be infused in Wine. It is also
given in Glisters; half an Ounce, or an Ounce may be mixed with a Glister. It
stimulates much, if the Epilepsy proceed from a Consent of the inferior Parts,
from the Pancreas or Mesentery. Some say that Men ought to take Peacock Dung,
and that Women should ^ake the Dung of the Peahen.

Take of the Dung, one Handful; pour upon it a sufficient Quantity of Wine;
strain it through a linen Rag, and divide it into three Doses, each to be taken
before the Fit of Giddiness, and let the sick be well covered up, that he may
sweat. This is reckoned an excellent Remedy for Giddiness. The Fat of an Eel
breeds Hair, and the Skin is reckoned good for the Falling of the Womb, the
Fume of ^t being received into the Womb.

Crabs are very proper for those that have a hectic sever and are consumptive,
and for those that have Ulcers in the Lungs and Reins; and indeed the whole
Crab is vulnerary. A Crab is outwardly of much Use, being bruised and applied
in the Form of a Cataplasm; or the Juice may be used for a Fomentation, and so
the Juice pressed out is an excellent Remedy for the deadach in malignant
Fevers, especially if there be fear of a Delirium or Phrenzy.

Take of Frog-span Water, eight Ounces; of the Juice of River Crabs, two
Ounces; of Saffron, one Ounce; of Opium corrected with Vinegar, half a Dram; of
Camphor, one Scruple; mingle them for an Epithem. This is an excellent Remedy
for Phrensies, and Headaches arising from malignant Fevers; it is also proper
for Pains and Heats in the Reins occasioned by nephritic Diseases, and the
Stone; and Crabs and the Juice of them outwardly applied are proper for all
Sorts of Inflammations; and for a Quinsey there is no better Remedy than the
Juice of Crabs mixed with the Juice of Housleek; and the Juice newly pressed
out is good for Burns. The Juice mixed with the Juice of Tobacco is good for
sorbid Ulcers and Fistula's. And because the Crab is wholly vulnerary, it is
conveniently mixed with vulnerary Decoctions. The following Decoction is much
commended.

Take of Crabs, Number twenty; of round Birthworth, half an Ounce; of Comfry
half an Ounce; of the Leaves of Bugle, Ladies Mantle, Sanicle, Agrimony,
Bettony; each one Handful; boil them in a sufficient Quantity of common Water
and Wine, and make a Decoction.

It is applied outwardly to Wounds with Pledgets dipped in it, and taken inwardly
twice a Day, six Ounces at a time, four Hours before eating; an Ounce of Syrup
of Maidenhair may be added to it; or if the sick be thirsty, an ounce of Syrup
of Lemons. Poterius wonderfully commends the Virtue of this Decoction taken
inwardly, or used outwardly for Ulcers and Cuts of the Nerves and Tendons. Upon
which account he says, it ought to be well noted. The Ashes of these Crabs are
much commended by the Ancients, and Galen, for the Bite of a mad Dog, with the
Root of Gentian.

Take River Crabs gathered at full Moon, put them into an earthen Vessel not
glazed, and dry them by degrees at the Mouth of an Oven, but take care they be
not burnt; afterward powder them in a stone Mortar. This Powder is counted
extraordinary good for Ulcers of the Reins and Bladder. Crabs are also reckoned
very good to prevent Abortion; the Woman may take the Juice mixed with Wine, or
eat them being bruised in Chicken Broth.

Crabs Stones are commonly called Crabs Eyes, but falsely; for the Crabs Eyes
are black, and that which is called Crabs Eyes is nothing else but a slimy
Humor coagulated in the Stomach of Crabs. The Crabs Eyes consist of abundance
of Alcali. They are good to correct acid Humors, and for the Collic and
hysteric Fits, and suchlike Diseases arising from an Acid. They are vulnerary,
and cure Ulcers, and are very proper for Falls, and a Pleurisy. They provoke
Urine, and expel Gravel. They take off the Effervescences of the Blood, and
cure intermitting Fevers.

The Gaul of a Carp is commended for Diseases of the Eyes, especially when they
are to be cleansed from Clouds, the Stone that is to be found in a Carps Head
is good to stop Bleeding, and for the Falling Sickness, and force Urine and
expel Gravel. There are small Stones also placed above the Eyes of a Carp,
which are better than that in the Head for an Epilepsy.

Cocle-shells are commended for intermitting Fevers; the Flesh of them are
commended for a Consumption and a hectic Fever.

The Jaw of a Pike is counted a Specific for a Pleurisy and Quinsy. The Fat is
good for Childrens Coughs, their Feet being anointed with it in the Evening.

The Liver of a Lamprey being hanged in the gentle Heat of the Sun, turns into
an Oily Liquor, which is an excellent Specific for Dullness and Weakness of
Sight. Forestus mentions an Observation of one, that being wholly deprived of
Sight, by reason of sharp Humors, was cured by this Liquor applied to the
Eyelids. The Dutch frequently use it successfully in this Case.

The Stone that is found in the Head of a Perch is counted an excellent Remedy
to force Urine, to expel Gravel, and to cleanse the Reins, a Scruple or half a
Dram of it being taken at a time.

Cutle Bone drys and cleanses much; it is a Specific for a Gonorrhea. The Dose
of it is a Scruple, or half a Dram mixed with Conserve of Roses. The Bone
calcined is mixed with Dentifrices, or it may be made into a Liniment, and
being sprinkled with the Juice of Scurvy Grass, or the Spirit of it, it cures
the Scurvy in the Mouth, and is good for Diseases of the Eyes.

A Tench is much commended for curing the Jaundice, being outwardly applied.
Some apply it to the Navel till it dies; others to the Soles of the Feet; and
some others to the Region of the Spleen; but it is best to apply it to the
Liver; for being kept to it a Night, the next Morning that Part which is
applied to the Flesh appears yellow and swelled, and then they say the Jaundice
is certainly cured.

The Fat of a Trout is much commended for Chaps in any Part of the Body,
especially of the Fundament. Some burn Trouts Teeth, and give the Powder in
Parsley Water for the Stone: A Dram or two may be taken in Winter-cherry-water.

Bees dried and powdered, and mixed with Honey, are counted good for Baldness,
the Part being anointed with it. Honey is the Essence of Plants, which the Bees
suck from Flowers, and when it ferments in their Stomachs, they vomit it up in
the Comb; the thicker Part of it makes Wax. Honey cleanses, being taken
inwardly, or outwardly applied. It cures Wounds and Ulcers, and is good for
Diseases of the Lungs, and is frequently mixed with digestive Ointments.

Honey is good for old Men, but naught for such as are choleric, melancholy,
and for Children: but is counted very good for Diseases of the Reins.

Honey differs much according to the Variety of Plants from whence it is
gathered. Wax is the grosser Part of Honey, and in it the Honey is contained.
It is an excellent Diuretic, being used inwardly, and it penetrates, incides,
and opens. Outwardly used it is much commended for hard and scirrhous Tumors,
and is commonly an Ingredient in Plasters.

Spiders are much commended for the Cure of intermitting Fevers. Some apply
them to the Wrists, others put them alive into Nut-shells, and put them about
the Neck, especially for Quartan Agues. A Country Man used to give a Scruple,
or half a Dram of powdered Spiders with good Success, for Fevers. A Spiders Web
is commonly used to stop bleeding, and to heal new Cuts, being mixed with Crumbs
of Bread chewed. The simple Oil of Spiders by Infusion is used to soften
Plasters and Ointments that are applied to pestilential Bubo's, and malignant
and ill-conditioned Ulcers; and it is also used to anoint the Pulse, and the
Region of the Heart, in spotted and pestilential Fevers, being mixed with
compound Oil of Scorpions, or Oil of Ambar.

Millepedes, though they are contemptible Insects, are of much use in Physic.
They abound with Volatile Salt, and are very Diuretic, and a Specific for
preventing and Curing the Stone, being infused in Beer. They are also good for
Diseases of the Spleen and Hypochondres, and for an Asthma, and Obruction of
the Lungs. They are very Vulnerary, and are used inwardly for malignant Ulcers,
and Cancers. They are also said to be good for the Scorbutic Gout, and for
Convulsions.

Cantharides used inwardly, force Urine more than any thing else; but they
corrode the Bladder, and cause a Bloody Urine, and therefore it is not safe to
use them. They are most commonly used to raise Blisters, their Wings and Heads
being plucked off. Some mix five or six with an Ounce, or an Ounce and an half
of Leaven, and half an Ounce of the Pulp of Figs; others take a Dram and an
half, or two Drams of Cantharides, and mix them with the Crum of Rye Bread, and
moisten it with some proper Water; when you would have a more powerful
Blistring Plaster, mix Mustard Seed with them. Some think that Vinegar, or
Leaven, lessens the Virtue of the Cantharides, but I have observed the
contrary. Some prepare indolent Vesicatories with Cantharides, Myrrh, and
Mastick. Some prepare Cantharides with a sufficient quantity of Wine, and use
them inwardly for the Gout. Wenches use them to cause Abortion, but not without
great danger. An Old Man that married a young Wife, took Cantharides to make
him Vigorous, but he died the next day after his Marriage. The Oil of
Cantharides is used to provoke Venery, the Penis and Testicles being anointed
with it.

The greater and lesser Ants are used in Physic; but those are chiefly to be
chosen that have Wings; and they are found near Birch Trees. A Spirit is made
of them, which is very proper to strengthen the Body, and is also good for an
Apoplexy, Giddiness, and Catarrh: It is Diuretic, and stimulates Venery. You
may make the Spirit in the following manner: Put a piece of Cheese into a Cucur
bit, and thrust the Cucurbit into a Hill of Ants, and they will be allured by
the Cheese to run in; when you have got enough, take out the Cheese, and pour
in Spirit of Wine three Fingers above them, distill it, and add new Ants to the
Wine, and so by cohobating often, you will have a good Spirit.

The Oil and Spirit outwardly used is much commended to help Hearing. Tincture
of Castor mixed with the Spirit, and put into the Ear with Cotton, is very good
to strengthen and help the Hearing. The Spirit of Ants, and Spirit of Worms,
are much commended for the Gout and Diseases of the Joints, and for ischidiack
Pains, and the Palsy, the Parts being anointed with them. Ants Eggs bruised,
and an Oil prepared of them, are much commended for dullness of hearing: But
the Eggs are not to be taken inwardly, for they generate abundance of Wind. A
heap of Ants boiled in Water, is an excellent Bath for Diseases of the Nerves
and Muscles, and for a Palsy, and the Gout. It also cures Barrenness and the
Hip-Gout. The Oil of Ants made by Infusion provokes Venery, the Penis,
Testicles, and the Muscles that erect the Penis, being anointed.

Earthworms creep forth plentifully in an Evening after Rain. Those are more
especially commended, which have red Rings about their Neck, and these are much
used in Physic. They provoke Urine, and are good for all Diseases that proceed
from an Acid, for the Scurvy, the Scorbutical Gout, and Scorbutical
Convulsions, the Spirit of them being used inwardly, or the Worms outwardly
applied in the form of a Cataplasm, or the live Worms may be applied to the
part affected, or the part affected may be anointed with the Spirit of
Earthworms mixed with the Spirit of Ants, The Spirit of Worms is best made in
the following manner.

Put washed Worms into a Cucurbit so well stopped, that nothing can exhale.
Place the Cucurbit to digest, either in Balneo Mariae, or in the Heat of the
Sun, that the Worms may putrify and ferment; and this Fermentation is sometimes
so very great, that it breaks the Glass. The Fermentation being over, the
Earthy Part sinks to the bottom, and the Skins swim on the top, the spirituous
Liquor is in the middle. Separate this, and distill it, and it will yield a
Spirit; this Spirit is an excellent Diuretic.

The Decoction of Worms is much commended by Sennertus, for the bloody Flux.
The Powder of Worms is good for the Jaundice, so is the Decoction of
Earthworms, with the greater Celandine, especially if some Juniper Berries be
added to it. Earthworms boiled with Aperitive Plants, are very good in many
Diseases, by reason of their penetrating, opening, and Diuretic Faculty; and
are therefore very good for Diseases of the Spleen, and the Dropsy. The Powder
of Worms is very good to increase Milk, a Dram of it being taken at a time
alone, or with Fennelseed. The Oil of Worms is very good for Wounds and Bruises
of the Nerves. The following Ointment is very good for Wounds or Punctures of
the Nerves.

Take of the Flowers of St. John's Wort one handful, of common Oil three
Quarts, Turpentine one Pound, Earthworms powdered three Ounces, Saffron a
little, infuse them together, and make an Ointment. The Water of Earthworms is
good for a Dropsy, but the Spirit is much more effectual, and is also good to
provoke the Courses, and open Obstructions of the Womb.

I come next to treat of Minerals.

Lemnian Earth is brought from the Island of Lemnos, and has bin very much
commended ever since Galen's time, for expelling Poison.

Bole-Armenick is a pale red Earth, that is brought from Armenia; it
participates of Iron, and being dissolved by an Acid, it appears Green like a
solution of Steel. It is astringent, and stops Catarrhs; it stops Bleeding at
the Nose, being applied like a Cataplasm to the Forehead, mixed with Vinegar.

Chalk is counted astringent, and a Dram of it taken in Wine or Goats-milk, is
commended for killing of Worms.

Marle is good to increase Milk, and for the bloody Flux, and outwardly used,
it cleanses Ulcers, and cures Wounds.

Oker is Impregnated with Iron. It is used outwardly in Plasters, and
Cataplasms, to bind and conglutinate.

Mineral Waters called Acidulae, are such, as passing through the secret passages
of the Earth, are impregnated with a sub-acid Salt, the Water corroding the
Iron. Those that drink them void their Excrements blackish, because the Iron
which is drunk with the Waters is separated in the Body, and joined with the
acid Humors of the Body. These Waters are good for Cachexies, Obstructions,
the Scurvy, and Hypochondriack Diseases, and the like. In drinking of them, the
Patient must begin with a small Dose, and increase daily; but they must not be
used before the Body has bin well cleansed, and the passages are open, and they
ought to be drunk at the Fountain Head; for by carrying far, or keeping long,
the Iron sinks to the bottom.

Bath Waters arise from Sulphurous Metals. They are much used for Diseases of
the Nerves, the Palsy, and trembling of the Limbs, for cutaneous Diseases, and
Barrenness.

Dew is more penetrating and subtle than any other Water; but the Dew in May is
the best. It is supposed to partake of the Virtue of the Plants it is collected
from; for that which is taken from Eyebright and Fennel is reckoned excellent
for Diseases of the Eyes.

An Amethyst is counted good to prevent Drunkenness

An Adamant sinely powdered Cures the bloody Flux.

A Granat is good for Diseases of the Heart.

An Hyacinth applied to the Breast expels Poison, and the Confection of it is
used for malignant Diseases.

A Jaspar Stone that has Blood Spots, stops bleeding at the Nose, the Stone
being held in the hand of the side the Blood flows from. It is also good for a
great Flux of the Courses.

The Nephritick Stone is of a dark green Color, and the Superficies of it
always seems Oily. It is used inwardly and outwardly to expel Gravel.

A Ruby is supposed good for malignant and venomous Diseases.

A Sapphire is much commended for pestilential Diseases, and the Small Pox.

A Smaragd is supposed to be good for Convulsions, and the Bloody Flux.

Coral is good for a Diarrhea, and Dysentery, and for malignant and burning
Fevers.

Pearls absorb Acids, and are counted by some very Cardiack.

The Eagles Stone rattles when you shake it. Being bound to a Woman's Arm, it
hinders Abortion; but if it be hanged to the Thigh, it hastens Delivery. The
Powder of it being taken inwardly expels the Lochia, and they say increases
Milk, if it be taken in Wine or Broth. It is also recommended for pestilential
and malignant Diseases.

Alabastar is seldom used, an Ointment is only made of it, which is to cause
Sleep, and to ease Pain.

The Armenian Stone, so called because it was formerly brought out of Armenia;
Purges powerfully upwards and downwards, and is therefore used for Melancholy,
and Madness.

Lapis Calaminaris is used outwardly in Surgery, either in the form of a
Powder, or mixed with Ointments, to heal Wounds, and to incarn.

The Blood Stone, it has its Name from its Color, and from its Virtue to stop
Bleeding at the Nose; and Fluxes of Blood from the Womb.

Lapis Judaicus, so called, because it is found in Judea. It is used for
Nephritick Pains, and for the Stone in the Bladder and Reins.

Lapis Lazuli is used for Diseases of the Head, and has much the same Virtues
with the Armenian Stone.

Ostiocolla, so called because it conglutinates broken Bones.

Pumex Stone is brought from Germany. The Powder of it is commonly sprinkled
upon Wounds; and is an excellent Dentifrice.

Talk is a stony substance composed of many Scales; it is used as a Cosmetic.

I come in the next place to speak of Metals.

Gold is the most Noble of all Metals, and is called the King of Metals. It is
found in several places, both in Europe, and in other Parts of the World. It is
commonly attended with Water, and hard Stones, such as are extreme hard to dig.
There are likewise several Stones that contain Particles of Gold, such as are
called golden Marcassits, the Lapis Lazuli, and the Lapis Armenus.

The Aurum potabile, which is much praised, and sold at so dear a rate, is
commonly nothing else but the Tincture of some Vegetable, or Mineral, whose
color comes near to that of Gold. Gold is a good Remedy for those that have
taken too much Mercury. Being taken inwardly it is thought to be a most potent
Cordial, because Astrologers tell us, it receives its influence from the Sun.

Aurum fulminans, called Saffron of Gold, causes Sweat, and drives out ill
Humors by Transpiration. It may be given in the Small Pox, from two to six
Grains, in a Lozenge, or Electuary. It stops Vomiting, and is also good to
moderate the activity of Mercury.

Silver has the second place among Metals. It is a very compact Body, more
smooth and polished by Nature than Gold, and its Pores are more even upon the
Surface. Cristals of Silver are made in the following manner.

Dissolve one or two Ounces of coppel Silver in three times as much Spirit of
Niter. Pour forth your Dissolution into a Glass Cucurbit, set it in a gentle
Sand Fire, evaporate about the fourth part of the moisture, and so let the rest
cool without stirring it, it will turn into Cristals, which you must separate
from the Liquor, and after you have dried them, keep them in a Viol well stopped.
You may again fall to evaporating half the remaining Liquor, and set it a
Cristalizing as before. You may repeat these Evaporations, and Cristalizations,
till all your Silver is turned into Cristals.

They are used to make an Escar, by touching the Part with it. It is also given
inwardly for Dropsies, and for Diseases of the Head, from two to six Grains in
some specific Water. It purges gently.

The infernal Stone is Silver rendered Caustic, by the Salts of the Spirit of
Niter. The Tincture of Silver is a dissolution of some of the more rarefied
parts of Silver made in Spirit of Wine, whetted by alcaly Salts. This Tincture
is used for the Falling Sickness, Palsy, Apoplexy, and other Diseases of the
Head. It is also used in malignant Fevers, and all other Diseases, wherein it
is requisite to drive out the Humor by Perspiration. The Dose is from six to
sixteen Drops, in some convenient Vehicle.

Tin is a Metal that comes near unto Silver in Color; the Salt of Tin is
desiccative, and may serve to Cure Tetters.

Bismuth is a Sulphurous Marcassite, that is found in the Mines. The Magistery
of Bismuth is an excellent Cosmetic.

Lead is a Metal filled with Sulphur. Those who work upon Lead are subject to
Collicks, and the Palsy. Salt of Lead is commonly used in Physic, in Pomatums
for Tetters, and Inflammations; and being taken inwardly is counted very good
for the Quinsey, and to stop the Flux of the Courses, and Hemorrhoids, and for
the bloody Flux. The Dose is from two Grains to four, in Knot-grass, or
Plantain Water.

Copper is a Metal that abounds with Vitriol, and Sulphur. Some attribute to it
the virtue of increasing Seed, and Curing the Diseases of those Parts that
serve for Generation; but because it contains in it a corrosive quality, it
ought not to be used inwardly.

Iron is a very porous Metal, compounded of a Vitriolic Salt, Sulphur and Earth
ill digested together; wherefore a Dissolution of its Parts is very easily
performed. It is found in many Mines of Europe in the Form of a Stone that much
resembles the Lodestone. The Loadstone is also found in Mines of Iron, and may
be reduced to Iron by a strong Fire. Iron is turned into Steel by means of
Horns or Nails of Animals, with which it is stratified, and so calcined.

Steel is better than Iron for making Utensils, but for Remedies Iron is better
beyond Comparison. Iron opens Obstructions of the Courses, is good for the
Scurvy, Cachexies, and hypochondriac Melancholy.

Quicksilver is a Prodigy among Metals, for it is fluid like Water, and tho it
be a very heavy Body, yet it easily flies away, when set over the Fire. It is
much used in Physic, and is one of the greatest Remedies we have, when it is
used as it should be; but it is full as dangerous, when it is ignorantly used
upon all Occasions, and for all Sorts of Diseases. Those who draw it out of
Mines, or work much with it, do fall into the Palsy, by reason of Sulphurs that
continually flow from it. It is given in the Iliack Passion unto two or three
Pounds, and is voided again by Stool to the same Weight. It is better to take a
great deal of it than a little, because a small Quantity might be apt to stop
in the Circumvolutions of the Guts, and if some acid Humors should happen to
join with it, a sublimate Corrosive would be there made: But when a large
Quantity of it is taken, there is no need of fearing this Accident, because it
passes quickly through by its own Weight.

All Ointments, Pomatums, and Plasters, whereof it is an Ingredient, are good
against the Itch and Tetters, and dissolve cold Humors.

There has been no Remedy yet found out, so certain for the Cure of Venereal
Diseases as Mercury; wherefore its greatest Enemies have been forced to fly to
it, after they have tried a long time to no purpose, to drive out the Poison by
other Remedies.

Mercurius dulcis is frequently used in Physic, and is an excellent Remedy. It
is used for all Sorts of Venereal Diseases, to open Obstructions, and kill
Worms. The Dose is from ten to thirty Grains. White Precipitate is a Mercury
dissolved by Spirit of Niter, and precipitated by Salt into a white Powder. It
is used to raise a Flux; and the Dose is from six to fifteen Grains. It is also
used in Pomatums for Tetters and the Itch, from half a Dram to two Drams in one
OUnce of Pomatum.

Red Precipitate is a Mercury impregnated with Spirit of Niter, and calcined by
Fire. It is a good Escharotick. It eats proud Flesh, and is used for laying
Chancers, mixed with burnt Allom, and Aegyptiacum. Some give it inwardly to
four Grains, to raise a Flux, but this is dangerous, unless rectified Spirit of
Wine be burnt upon it two or three times.

Turbith Mineral is a Mercury impregnated with the Acidity of Oil of Vitriol.
It purges strongly both by Vomit and Stool, and is an excellent Remedy in
venereal Diseases. The Dose is from two Grains to six.

Antimony is a Mineral consisting of a Sulphur, like unto common Sulphur. It is
found in many Places in Transylvania, Hungary, France, and Germany. You must
choose that which is in long shining Needles, and not expect to find it of a
reddish Color, as many Authors advise; for in an hundred Weight of this
Mineral, you will hardly find one Piece of this Kind. Crude Antimony is used in
sudorific Decoctions, when we would dissipate a Tumor by Transpiration: But
great care must be had that no Acid enter into the Decoction; for then it would
open its Body, and make it emetic. It is also dangerous to take it in
Substance, because it may be apt to meet with an Acid in the Stomach, that
would open its Body, and thereby cause a vomiting.

Glass of Antimony is a Regulus of Antimony vitrified by long Fusion. It is a
strong Vomit, and one of the most violent that is made of Antimony.

An emetic Syrup is prepared with the Glass of Antimony infused in the Juice of
Quinces, or Lemons and Sugar.

Liver of Antimony is Antimony opened by Saltpeter and by Fire, which have
made it half Glass, and given it a Liver Color. To make the emetic Wine, you
must infuse an Ounce of this Liver of Antimony powdered in a Quart of
White Wind, twenty four Hours, and so let it settle. The Dose of this Wine is
from half an Ounce to three Ounces.

Diaphoretic Antimony is an Antimony whose Sulphurs are fixed by Saltpeter,
and are thereby hindered from working otherwise than by Sweat.

This Preparation is esteemed good to procure Sweat, and to resist Poison, and
consequently is good in malignant Fevers, the Smallpox, the Plague, and other
contagious Diseases. The Dose is from six Grains to thirty in some proper
Liquor.

Bezoar Mineral is an Antimony fixed by Spirit of Niter, and rendered sudorific.
It serves for the same Uses as Diaphoretic Antimony. The Dose is from six to
twenty Grains in some proper Liquor.

Arsenick is a Mineral Body, consisting of much Sulphur, and some caustic
Salts. There are three Sorts of it, the white, that keeps the Name of Arsenick,
the yellow, called Auripigmentum, and the red called Sandaracha. The white is
the strongest of all: But none of them must be given inwardly, although several
Persons that have ventured to use the white, pretend to have cured with it
diverse Diseases, and among others the Quartan Ague. They venture to give four
Grains of it in a great deal of Water, and after that manner it will vomit like
Antimony. But it is a dangerous Medicine, and therefore I think it ought not to
be used inwardly. People sometimes cover the Corns of their Feet with Arsenick
in Powder, and it eats them to the Root without any Pain: But they must be sure
to cover the adjacent Flesh with a Plaster of Diapalma, after the same manner
as when Causticks are applied.

Quicklime is a Stone whose Moisture the Fire has quite dried up, and brought
into its Place a great many igneous Bodies. These little Bodies cause the
Ebullition, when Water has opened the Matter that kept them enclosed, and this
Ebullition lasts until all the Parts of the Lime are dilated, and the fiery
Particles set at Liberty. These little igneous Bodies render the Lime
corrosive, for the Stone is not at all so of it self.

Phagadenick Water is made of Sublimate and Lime Water. Put a Pound of quick
Lime into a large Earthen Pan, and quench it with seven or eight Pints of hot
Water. After the Lime has infused five or six Hours, and is sunk to the Bottom,
pour off the Water by Inclination, and filtrate it. To each Pint of this Water
are added fifteen or twenty Grains of Sublimate Corrosive in Powder, and the
Water presently turns yellow. They are stirred together a good while in a Glass
or Marble Mortar; and this Water is used for cleansing old Ulcers. It eats
proud Flesh, and is used for a Gangren, Spirit of Wine being added to it. Lime
Water is used for a Diabetes, and often is applied outwardly to dry up Tumors.

Flints, as all other Stones, are made by different Salts, or by acid Liquors,
which do penetrate and incorporate with Earth, which is an Alcaly, so that from
their Mixture there does result a Coagulum, which by little and little hardens
by means of the subterranean Heat, or petrifie by the Cold. The Tincture of
Flints is said to be a good Remedy to open Obstructions, and for the Scurvy,
and Hypochondriac Diseases. The Dose is from ten to thirty Drops in some proper
Liquor.

Of common Salt there are three Sorts; the fossile Salt, the fountain Salt, and
the sea Salt; the first is called Sal Gommae, by reason of its Transparency and
Smoothness, like to a precious Stone: Whole Mountains are found full of it in
Poland and other Places. The second is drawn by the Evaporation of Waters of
some Fountains; and the last from Sea Water by Cristallization or Evaporation.
Spirit of Salt is used in Juleps for such as are subject to Gravel; it likewise
cleanses the Teeth.

Niter is a Salt impregnated with Abundance of Spirits out of the Air, which
render it volatile: It is taken from among the Stones and Earth of old ruined
buildings, and in Cellars. Sal Prunellae is commonly used in Physic, and is
counted better than purified Saltpeter, because the Sulphur is thought to have
corrected it. It is given to cool, and to work by Urine in burning Fevers,
Quinsies, Gonorrhea's, and other Diseases that proceed from Heat and
Obstructions. The Dose is from ten Grains to a Dram in Broth, or some other
Liquor proper for the Disease. Spirit of Niter dulcified is good for the
Colic and nephritick Pains, for hysteric Diseases, and for all Obstructions.
Its Dose is from four to eight Drops in Broth or some other convenient Liquor.

Sal Ammoniac is either natural or artificial. The natural is found in very hot
Countries, as in many Parts of Africa, near the torrid Zone. It is found upon
the Earth that has imbibed the Urine of Animals. The artificial Sal Ammoniac is
made at Venice and diverse other Places, with five Parts of Urine, one Part of
Sea Salt, and half a Part of Chimney Soot. These three are boiled together, and
reduced into a Mass, which being put into subliming Pots over a gradual Fire,
sublimes into Salt, in the Form we commonly see Sal Ammoniac. If you would
purify Sal Ammoniac, you must dissolve it in a sufficient Quantity of Water;
filtrate the Dissolution, and evaporate it, until it is dry, in a Glass Vessel,
you will have a white Salt, which may be given from six to four and twenty
Grains, in some convenient Liquor. It is an excellent Sudorific and Diuretic.
It is good in malignant Fevers, and in quartan Agues, and to provoke the
Courses of Women; and is used in Waters for the Eyes.

The volatile Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, is a volatile Salt raised from Sal
Ammoniac, by the means of Quick Lime, and dissolved into a Liquor. This Spirit
is an excellent Remedy for all Diseases that proceed from Obstructions, and
Corruption of Humors, such as Malignant Fevers, the Falling Sickness, Palsy,
Plague, Smallpox, and the like: It drives by Perspiration or by Urine. The
Dose is from six Drops to twenty, in Balm or Carduus Water.

Volatile Spirit of Sal Ammoniac dulcified is a good Medicine for a Lethargy,
the Palsy, the Scurvy, malignant Fevers, and hysteric Maladies. It may be given
instead of Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, and is not so disagreeable to the Taste: It
works by Sweat, or insensible Transpiration. The Dose is from twelve Drops to
fifty in some proper Liquor. It is likewise good outwardly applied for the
Palsy, and for cold Pains.

Vitriol is a Mineral compounded of an acid Salt, and sulphurous Earth. There
are four Sorts of it, the blew, the white, the green, and the red. The blew is
found near the Mines of Copper in Hungary, and the Isle of Cyprus, from whence
it is brought to us in fair Cristals, which keep the Name of the Country, and
are called Vitriol of Hungary or Cyprus. It partakes very much of the Nature of
Copper, which renders it a little caustic. It is never used but in outward
Applications, such as Collyriums, or Waters for the Eyes, and to consume proud
Flesh. White Vitriol is found near Fountains: It is most of all depurated from
a Metallic Mixture. It may be taken inwardly to give a Vomit. It is likewise
used in Collyriums. There are three Sorts of green Vitriol, the German, the
English, and the Roman: That of Germany draws near unto the blew, and contains
a little Copper; it is better than the rest for the Preparation of Aqua Fortis.
That of England partakes of Iron, and is proper to make the Spirit of Vitriol.
The Roman is much like the English Vitriol, excepting that it is not so easy to
dissolve.

Red Vitriol was brought amongst us a few Years ago out of Germany. It is
called natural Colcothar, and is esteemed to be a green Vitriol calcined by
some subterranean Heat. It is the least common of them all. It stops Blood,
being applied to Hemorrhagies.

If you dissolve a little white or green Vitriol in Water, and write with the
Dissolution, the writing will not be seen; but if you rub the Paper with a
little Cotton dipped in the Decoction of Gauls, it will appear legible; then if
you wet a little more Cotton dipped in Spirit of Vitriol, and pass it gently over
the Paper, the Ink will disappear again: And yet at last, if you rub the Place
with a little more Cotton dipped in Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, it will again
appear legible, but of a yellowish Color. The Spirit of Vitriol is used for
continual Fevers, and other Diseases that are accompanied with a violent Heat.
It is also mixed with Gargarisms. Salt of Vitriol is used to give a Vomit. The
Dose is from ten to thirty Grains. This is a very safe Vomit for Children and
weakly Persons.

Roch Allom is a very styptic Mineral Salt, found in the Veins of the Earth, in
many Places of Europe. It is taken up in great transparent Pieces. The best is
that which is reddish, for the white contains fewer Spirits.

Allom is purified after the same manner as Vitriol. It is used to cleanse the
Teeth: It is a good Diuretic: A Dram of it is dissolved in a Quart of Water,
and a Glass of it is given now and then. The Distillation of Allom is used for
Fevers and tertian Agues. The Dose of the Spirit is from four to eight Drops.
It is likewise good to cure the Aphthae or little Chancres in the Mouth. Burnt
Allom is used to eat carnous Excrescences, or proud Flesh. If a Dram of Allom
be dissolved in six Ounces of the Phlegm of the Distillation, you make an
excellent Allom Water to cleanse Wounds and Ulcers with. Surgeons are wont to
calcine Allom in a Drying Pan, but the Iron dulls the greatest Part of its
Virtue, absorbing its Spirits, wherein consists the Corrosion of Allom.

Sulphur is a kind of Bitumen that is found in many Places in Italy and Spain.
There is brought amongst us both a natural and an artificial. The natural is
grayish, and called Sulphur vivum. The other is yellow, and is nothing but the
natural melted, purified from its grosser Earth, and formed into Rolls, which
we commonly use. Some think that Sulphur is a Vitriol sublimed in the Earth,
because these Mixts are very often found near one another. That there is a
great deal of Sulphur in the Mass of Mineral Vitriol, and that the acid Spirits
which are drawn from both are wholly alike. The Flower of Sulphur is used in
Diseases of the Lungs and Breast. The Dose is from ten to thirty Grains, in
Lozenges, or in an Electuary. It is also used in Ointments for the Itch.

Magistery of Sulphur is also thought good for all Diseases of the Lungs and
Breast. The Dose is from six to sixteen Grains, in some convenient Liquor.
Balsom of Sulphur is excellent for Ulcers of the Lungs and Breast. The Dose is
from one Drop to six in some proper Liquor. This Balsom may be reduced to the
Consistence of an Ointment, by evaporating some Part of it, and it is thus used
to cleanse Wounds and Ulcers. A Balsom of Sulphur may be made with Oil of
Linseed, for Wounds. Spirit of Sulphur, which is the acid Part of Sulphur
turned into a Liquor with Fire, is put into Juleps to give them an agreeable
Acidity, to qualify the Heat of continual Fevers, and is a good Diuretic. Some
prescribe it for Diseases of the Breast. But because Acids are apt to cause a
Cough, it may therefore do more Hurt than Good to that Part; for the Spirit is
deprived of the Fat and Sulphurous Part of the Sulphur, and so has lost the
Virtue that accompanies Sulphur.

The Salt of Sulphur is a good Medicine to open Obstructions, and to work by
Urine, and sometimes it works also by Stool. The Dose is from ten Grains to two
Scruples in Broth. It is dissolved from half a Dram to Drams, in a Quart of
Water, for a Drink in Fevers, and it is indeed good in continual Fevers, and in
Tertians, and on all Occasions, where there is need of calming too great a
Motion of the Humors; because the Acid serves to fix the volatile Salts or
Sulphurs, which are most commonly the principal Cause of these Diseases.

There is found in small Currents, near the Baltic Sea, in the Duchy of
Prussia, a certain coagulated Bitumen, which is called Ambar. This Bitumen
being soft and viscous, several little Animals, such as Flies and Ants, do
stick to it, and are buried in it. Ambar is of different Colors, white,
yellow, and black. The white is most esteemed, though it be no better than the
yellow. The black has the least Virtue of all. Ambar serves to stop spitting of
Blood, the Bloody Flux, the immoderate Flux of the Hemorrhoids, the Courses,
and a Gonorrhea. The Dose is from ten Grains to half a Dram. It is likewise
used to stop a little the Violence of Catarrhs, by receiving the Fume of it at
the Nose. Tincture of Ambar is good for the Apoplexy, Palsy, Epilepsy, and for
hysteric Women. The Dose is from ten Drops to a Dram in some proper Liquor. The
white Oil of Ambar, which swims above the Spirit and Phlegm, after Distillation
is given inwardly in hysteric Distempers, for the Palsy, Apoplexy, and
Epilepsy. The Dose is from one Drop to four in some proper Liquor. It may be
mixed with a little Yolk of an Egg, to dissolve it easily in Water or Broth.
The Water and Spirit remain mixed confusedly, after Distillation; now to
separate them, you must pour this Mixture into an Earthen or Glass Dish, and
evaporate over a very gentle Fire two Thirds of it; that which remains is the
Spirit of Ambar. Keep it in a Viol well stopped. It is an excellent Aperitive,
and is given in the Jaundice, Stoppage of Urine, Ulcers of the Neck of the
Bladder, and the Scurvy. The Dose is from ten to four and twenty Drops in some
proper Liquor. The black Oil is used to chafe the Nose and VVrists of Women in
hysteric Fits. The volatile Salt of Ambar is a very good Aperitive, and may be
given from eight Grains to sixteen, in some opening Liquor, for the Jaundice,
for Ischuries, Ulcers in the Bladder, the Scurvy, Fits of the Mother; and upon
all Occasions, where there is any need of removing Obstructions, and opening by
way of Urine.

Ambar-grease is a Bitumen found in many Places on the Sea Shore, but
especially in the Indies. It grows hard in the Sunbeams. The best is that
which is very gray and dry.

When it is wet, it appears blackish. Men have thought that it is found no
where else but in the oriental Seas, though some of it has been known to be found
on the English Coast, and in several other Places in Europe. Most of it is
brought from the Coast of Melinda. Ambar-grease is an excellent Corroborative,
it is given in some Liquor, or in an Electuary to increase Seed. The Dose is
from one Grain to four. The Essence of Ambar-Grease is an Extract of the more
Oily Parts of Ambar-grease, Musk, and Civet in Spirit of Wine.

Take two Drams of good Ambar-grease, so much Sugarcandy, half a Dram of Musk,
and two Grains of Civet; beat them small together, and put the Mixture into a
Viol, pour upon it four Ounces of Wine well alcoholized, stop the Viol close,
and set it in Digestion in Horse-Dung four Days; then taking it out, separate
that which is clear while it is warm; for it will congeal when cold. This
Essence works more strongly than Amber-grease in Substance. The Dose is from
six to twelve Drops in some convenient Liquour. Ambar-grease alone has scarce
any Smell at all, but when its Parts are put in Motion by Fermentation,
Sulphurs rise from it, which tickle the Sense of Smelling with a great deal of
Pleasure. The Addition of Musk and Civet have a good Effect. As for the
Sugarcandy, it serves only to separate the rest, that they may be the more
easily powdered, and dissolved; for this Tincture is only a Dissolution of
these Sulphurous Matters in Spirit of Wine.

Metallic Recrements are so called, because they are not perfect Metals, but
participate of the Nature and Matter of Metals, and are separated by
Fermentation in the Generation of Meals, from other perfect Metals.

Cobaltum is a Caustic, and is very volatile, and much mixed with a corrosive
Arsenick, and therefore is counted poisonous. A Sky-colour is made of it. Some
think a Medicine may be made of it for the Epilepsy; but the Use of it is very
dangerous, by reason of the Arsenick.

Chalcitis, Misy, and Sorry are Metallic Recrements, and belong to the Kinds of
Vitriols, and may be properly called crude and impure Vitriol. Chalcitis is
made of Sorry, and Misy of Chalcitis. Misy is used for dying.

Cadmia Factitia is nothing else but the Soot of Brass, which sticks to the
Furnace in the Fusion of the Metal. It is chiefly used in Surgery, for old and
ill conditioned Ulcers; for being sprinkled upon them, it drys much, and
destroys the corrupt Ferment of Ulcers, and so it incarns and cicatrizes.
Cadmia being prepared by Fire, and extinguished, is called prepared Tutty,
which is very good for Diseases of the Eyes, the Powder of it being blown into
the Eyes, for Inflammations and Ulcers. An Ointment is commonly made of it, and
used for the Eyes: But it is very proper to mix with it a Grain or two of
Camphor, or Saffron, or the like.

Litharge is nothing else but the Lead, whereby Gold, in Fusion, is depurated,
which absorbs all the vile Metals, when the Gold is in Fusion. There are two
Sorts of Litharge, viz. of Gold and of Silver. The Litharge of Gold is the most
pure.

Plumbago is the impure Mine of Lead.

Pompholix is the finest Sparkles which sticks to the uppermost Part of the
Furnace in the Fusion of Brass.

Spodium is burnt Ivory.

Pompholix is much used in Surgery, and is much commended for Diseases of the
Eyes. The Ointment called Diapompholigos is much commended for the Itch, and
Pustles in the Skin; and also for Inflammations in the Eyes.

Sperma Caeti is vulgarly reckoned amongst Bitumens, but it is certainly taken
out of the Heads of Whales in Greenland. It is an excellent Remedy for
dissolving coagulated Blood. It is used in Pleurisies, Peripneumonia's,
Bruises, and the like, to take off Inflammations, and the like. It is also
excellent for Inflammations and Swellings of the Papes, and for the Gripes in
Children, and the Colic in grown People, being dissolved in some proper
Water. It is also used for Diseases in the Breast, and for a suffocative
Catarrh.

Petreolum is a Fat and bituminous Matter flowing by degrees from Rocks and
Stones. Some think that Petreolum or Oil of Peter is a Liquor drawn from Ambar,
by the means of subterranean Fires, which make a Destillation of it, and that
Jet and Coals are the Remainders of it. This Opinion would have Probability
enough in it; if the Places from whence this Sort of Drug comes, were not so
far asunder, the one from the other; for Petreolum is not commonly found any
where, but in Italy, Sicily, and Provence: It is excellent for Diseases of the
Nerves, the Palsy, and Convulsions, either alone or with Oil of Ambar, and is
excellent for cold Diseases of the Nerves. Ten or fifteen Drops of it being
taken in Wine is a certain Cure for Obstructions of the Courses.

To conclude, Metals are counted seven, viz. Gold, Silver, Iron, Tin, Copper,
Lead, and Quicksilver. This last is not malleable of it self, as all the others
are, but is so being mingled with others. And because this is thought to be the
Seed of Metals, it is numbered with the rest. Astrologers have conceited, that
there was so great an Affinity and Correspondence between the seven Metals
before named, and the seven Planets, that nothing happened to the one, but the
other shared in it; and therefore they have given these seven Metals the Names
of the seven Planets, each accordingly as they are governed, and so have called
Gold the Sun, Silver the Moon, Iron, Mars, Quicksilver Mercury, Tin Jupiter,
Copper Venus, and Lead Saturn. They have likewise fancied that each of these
Planets has his Day apart to distribute liberally his Insluence on our
Hemisphere, and so they tell us, if we work upon Silver on Monday, Iron on
Tuesday, and so of the rest, we shall attain our End much better than on other
Days.

As to Minerals, whatsoever is found petrified in the Earth, or upon the Earth
is called Mineral.

Petrification is made by a Coagulation of acid or salt Waters that are found
in the Pores of the Earth. This Petrification differs according to the diverse
Dispositions, or different Nature of the Earth, and according to the Time that
Nature uses in its Perfection.

The Qualities of Roots.
Name. 1 Qual. 3 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Acorns hot, dry attenuate, incide
forces Urine stomachick, splen. cephal. Alexi. Angelica hot, dry opens,
attenuates Sudorific, diuretic uterine, card. thorac. Alexi. Asara Bacca hot,
dry attenuates, incides purges Choler, Phlegm good for Liver, Spleen Asparagus
hot, dry opens diuretic Avens hot, dry discusses opens Obstructions g. for
head, heart, stom. Alexi. Agarick. hot, dry attenuates, incides purges Phlegm
go. for jaundice, dropsy Birthwort long, round hot, dry cleanses forces
Lochia, Urine, Courses uterine, thoracick Burdock hot, dry cleanses expels
Stone good for the Lungs Bistort cold, dry astringent Sudorific, kills Worms
Alexi. White Briony hot, dry attenuates, incides purges Serum, Phlegm is uterine
Butterbur hot, dry attenuates, opens forces Urine, Sweat, Courses good for the
breast Alexi. Carline hot, dry attenuates Sudorific Cardiack Alexi. China hot,
dry astringent Diaphoretic, Diuretic stomachic, cephalic Comfry dryes thickens
is vulnerary, stops blood pectoral Contra-yerva hot, dry attenuates Sudorific,
kills Worms Alexi. Costus bitter, sweet hot, dry attenuates, opens fo. Courses,
Urine, ki. Worms stomachic, hepatic Alexi. Wild Cucumber hot, dry attenuates
moves the Courses Cyperus long, round hot, dry opens, attenuates moves the
Courses, Urine good for reins, breast Alexi. Celtic Spike hot, dry attenuates
forces Urine cephalic Coltsfoot mollifies pectoral good for the lungs Alexi.
Roman Doronicum hot, dry discusses Zedoary is used instead of it Dwarf Elder
hot, dry digests purges Water Sharp-pointed Dock astringent cures the Itch
Eryngo hot, dry opens, discusses good for Diseases of the Reins is stomachic
Alexi. Elecampane hot, dry cleansing, opening forces Urine, Courses, Sweat good
for stomach, lungs Alexi. Fern hot, dry opens kills Worms splenetick
Filipendula hot, dry cleanses, opens diuretic, good for the Jaundice g.f.
reins, bladder, womb Fennel hot, dry discusses Diuretic cephalic Rock-Fennel
hot, dry opens, attenuates kills Worms cephalic, uterine Alexi. Fraxinella hot,
dry attenuates, opens forces Urine, Gravel good for lungs, spleen Garlic hot,
dry attenuates, digests g. for Cholic, Stone, Worms, Cough, Plague Alexi.
Gentian hot, dry opens, attenuates (...) cures the Bite of a mad Dog is
hepatic, splenetic Alexi. Grass cold, dry opens forces Urine, kills Worms good
for Bladder, Spleen Five-leav'd Grass astringent Vulnerary hepatic, splenetic
Ginger hot, dry opens, incides resists Putrefaction stomachic, thoracic
Galingal lesser hot, dry incides, opens cephalic, stomachic Hounds-tongue cold,
moist thickens is narcotic Horse-tail cold, dry cleanses g. for an old Cough,
difficulty of breathing, dis. of the reins forces Urine Hellebore white hot,
dry cleanses kills Mice errhine Hellebore black hot, dry opens, discusses
purges Melancholy, forces Courses a d Hemorrhoids Hermodactils hot, dry
cleanses purges Phlegm Jalap hot, dry purges serum Panacea for a Dropsy
Jews-ear cold, dry g. for dis. of the Eyes, purges Serum diuretic Kneeholm hot,
dry incides, attenuates expels Gravel g. for the lun. live. blad. Liquorish
moist mollifies, smoothens forces Urine, Courses hepatic, splenetic Alexi.
Lovage hot, dry incides, opens good for Burns White Lillies hot, dry attenuates
stops uterine Fluxes Water Lillies cold, dry astringent thoracic Alexi. Marsh
mallows hot, dry mollifies, loosens forces Sweat, Courses, Urine cephal.
stomach. thora. Alexi. Masterwort hot, dry attenuates, opens narcotic Mandrake
cold, dry mollifies purges Phlegm, Choler, Serum Mechoacan hot, dry forces
Urine, Courses cephalic, hepatic Alexi. Meu hot, dry attenuates, opens forces
Urine, Courses Madder hot, dry opens, discusses forces Courses, Urine pectoral
Alexi. Florentine Orris hot, dry incides, attenuates forces Urine, Courses,
Sweat Alexi. Onions hot, dry incides, cleanses splenetic Osmund Royal hot, dry
opens stops Courses Yellow wild Orris hot, dry astringent good for Convulsions
uterine, cephalic Peony hot, dry subastringent diuretic hepatic, Parsley hot,
dry attenuates, opens forces Urine, Sweat, Courses hepatic, splen, uterine
Alexi. Phis hot, dry attenuates, opens purges Melancholy good for the Gout
Polipody of the Oak hot, dry incides, digests sudorific, errhine good for the
Lungs Pellitory of Spain hot, dry attenuates, incides diuretic, lithontriptic
good for Reins and Blad. Restharrow hot, dry astringent, inciding Rhodia Radix
hot, dry attenuates, opens moves the Courses. is cephalic Radish hot, dry
cleanses, opens forces Urine hepatic, splenetic Rhubarb hot, dry toasted is
astringent purges Choler, Courses, Urine Rhaphonticum hot, dry astringent
stomachic, splenetic Smallage hot, dry opens breaks the Stone hepatic, uterine,
splenetic Alexi. Succory cold, dry cleanses qualifies Choler stomachic, hepatic
Sow-Bread hot, dry incides, opens errhin, expels the dead Child Spurge greater
and lesser hot, dry cleanses purges Phlegm, Choler Burnet Saxifrage hot, dry
attenuates, opens move Cou. Urine, lithontriptic g. for lungs, liver, reins
Alexi. Saxifrage hot, dry opens forces Urine, Courses, Gravel good for the
Bladder Spanish Scorzonera hot, moist opens Obstructions g. for the biting of a
mad Dog Alexi. Squills hot, dry attenuates, incides diuretic g. for the Lun.
hep. spten. Solomon's Seal cleanses cures Ulcers good for the Face Spikenard
hot, dry, attenuates moves Urine, Courses nephritic, stomachic. Alexi.
Sarsa-parilla hot, dry attenuates sudorific good for the Pox. Turmerick hot,
dry cleanses forces Urine, Courses uterine Tormentil cold, dry astringent
vulnerary Alexi. Turbith hot, dry purges Phlegm Vincetoxicum hot, dry
attenuates, opens forces Sweat, Courses Alexi. Wake-Robin hot, dry incides good
for an Asthma thoracic Alexi. Winter-green cold, dry astringent vulnerary good
for the Lungs Zedoary hot, dry incides, discusses cures venomous Bites Alexi.

Barks.
Name. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Ash cold, dry attenuates diuretic,
lithontriptic g. for the Spleen and Pox Acorn Cups cold, dry astringent Woody
Cassia hot, dry opens, discusses hastens Delivery cephalic Alexi. Cinnamon hot,
dry attenuates, opens resists Putrefaction cephalic, cardiac, uterine Alexi.
Citron hot, dry opens, attenuates diaphoretic cardiac Alexi. Chestnut cold, dry
astringent stops the Belly Roots of Capers hot, dry opens, incides splenetic
the Inner of Elder hot, dry attenuates, discusses moves the Courses, Urine,
Belly Mace hot, dry subastringent cephalic, uterine Oranges hot, dry attenuate,
open good for the Cholic cardiac, cephalic Alexi. Oak cold, dry astringent good
for the Toothach Pomgranats cold, dry astringent Tamarisk. hot, dry attenuates,
opens diuretic splenetic

Woods.
Names. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Aloes hot, dry astringent kills
Worms cardiac, uterine Alexi. Aspalathum hot, dry astringent good for spitting
Blood Colubrinum hot, dry cleansing purges Choler, Phlegm good for Fevers Alexi.
Guiacum hot, dry opens g. for Dropsy, Pally, sudorific g. for the
Falling-sickn. Juniper hot, dry attenuates sudorific Misletoe hot, dry
mollifies good for the Epilepsy Nephriticum hot, dry opens forces Urine good
for the Reins Rhodium hot, dry attenuates cardiac, cephalic the three Sanders
dry open cures a hectic Fever cardiac, hepatic Sassafras hot, dry attenuates,
opens sud. neph. g. for an Asthma

Herbs.
Names. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. Agrimony hot, dry opens g. for a
Cachexy and Wounds splenetic, hepatic Water Agrimony hot, dry opens vulnerary,
forces Urine, Cour. hepatic, splenatic Assara-bacca hot, dry attenuates
diuretic expels Cour. dead Child Arsmart hot, dry vulnerary Bect hot, dry
cleanses purges Head and Belly Bettony hot, dry attenuates, opens vulnerary,
diuretic cephalic, splenetic, uterine Red Blite cold, moist loosens good for
the Head Bears-Breech moist mollifies good for Burns Balm hot, dry attenuates,
incides forces the Courses cephalic, cardiac Basil hot, dry discusses forces
Urine, Courses Burnet hot, dry attenuates sudorific, lithontriptic Male
Brooklime hot, dry cleanses vulnerary g for the bit. of a m. Dog Caleminth hot,
dry cleanses powerfully g. for the womb and nerves Carduus Benedictus hot, dry
opens, attenuates sudorific, diuretic cardiack Alexi. Lesser Centory hot, dry
cleanses vulnerary hepatic, splenetie Chervile hot, dry attenuates cure the
Chol. forces Cour. diu. cures the Lientery Camomile hot, dry mollifies diuretic
greater Celandine hot, dry opens, penetrates good for the Eyes lesser Celandine
hot, dry cleanses g. for the Scurvy, K. Evil, Piles Clary hot, dry cleanses,
attenuates narcotic g. for the Breast and Eyes Coltsfoot mollifies pectoral
Tops of Dill hot, dry ripens breeds Milk Dodder hot, dry cleanses much
splenetic, hepatic Cretick Dittany hot, dry attenuates, cleanses hastens
Delivery uterine, anodyne Alexi. Dodder of Thyme hot, dry purges Melancholy
Endive cold, dry opens diuretic Eyebright hot, dry binding good for the Eyes
Elder Leaves hot, dry mollifies pro. Sweat, eva. Serum, forc. C. Fennel hot,
dry attenuates moves Urine, Courses g. for the Stom. Eyes and Br. Fumitory hot,
dry attenuates purges Serum, Choler splenetic, hepatic Feverfew hot, dry
attenuates, incides purges Choler, Phlegm uterine Germander hot, dry incides,
attenuates sudo. diur. g. for the Dropsy splen. hep. g. for the Gout Ground
Pine hot, dry incides, opens diuretic, moves the Courses g. for the Nerves,
Gout Goats Rue cures the bit. of Vip. kills Worcester. cures Epilepsy, Plague
Groundsel cold, dry digests, consolidates forces Urine, vulnerary Golden-Rod
hot, dry astringent vulnerary, lithontriptic good for a Dropsy Horse-tail cold,
dry astringent g. for an old Coug. pro. Vri. vul. Hemlock cold, moist mollifies
of a poisonous Quality Hysop hot, dry opens, attenuates pectoral, good for a
Pleurisy hepatic Hops hot, dry attenuates, discusses anodyne Horehound hot,
dry opens, cleanses provokes Courses g. for Jaundice, Eyes, Br. Hart's-tongue
cold, dry attenuates vulnerary spleneric, hepatic Ground Ivy hot, dry
attenuates, opens forces Gravel, Courses pectoral Ivy cold, dry astringent
anodyne Knot-grass cold, dry binds vulnerary Ladies Mantle astringent vulnerary
Ladies-bed-straw dry cleanses vulnerary, cures spitting Blood Lettice cold,
moist thickens provokes Sleep stomachic Laurel hot, dry mollifies, discusses
forces the Courses, Gravel cephalic Alexi. Lentisk hot, dry astringent stops
Blood, Belly, Womb Lovage hot, dry attenuates forces Urine, Courses White Lilly
hot, dry attenuates good for Burns Lungwort cold, dry astringent stops spitting
of Blood g. for the Lun. Brain, He. Marshmallows hot, dry mollify, loosen
anodyne g. for the Bladder, Breast White Maidenhair dry digests, discusses g.
for the Lungs, Reins Mugwort hot, dry cleanses forces Courses, Lochia uterine
Maidenhair cleanses pectoral Hedge Mustard hot, dry attenuates good for
Hoarsness pectoral Marjoram hot, dry attenuates Errhine cephalic Mallows
mollifies good for Burns, Cholic anodyne Melilot mollifies anodyne good for the
Eyes horse, garden, water Mint hot, dry attenuates move the Cou. dissol. coag.
Milk uterine Mercury hot, dry cleanses moves Belly, Courses errhine Millfoil
hot, dry astringent stops Fluxes Myrtle cold, dry astringent diuretic Mouse-ear
hot, dry binding cures Heart-burning cure Fluxes of the Bell. Co. Mullin hot,
dry mollifies anodyne thoracic Nep hot, dry attenuates move the Courses uterine
Orach cold, moist discusses loosens the Belly good for the Jaundice. Oak of
Jerusalem hot, dry attenuates resists Putrefaction pectoral Oak Moss cold, dry
astringent Oak Leaves cold, dry astringent stops the Courses Pell^tory of the
Wall cold, moist mollifies, cleanses forces Urine, Gravel nephritic Parslly
hot, dry attenuates forces Courses, Urine Purslain cold, dry thickening stops
Fluxes good for the Reins Plantain cold, dry thickens cures uterine Fluxes
Mountain Poly hot, dry attenuates forces Urine Penny Royal hot, dry attenuates,
incides moves the Courses Periwinkle hot, dry astringent vulnerary Rosemary
hot, dry incides good for the Jaundice cephalic Alexi. Rue hot, dry attenuates,
incides moves Courses, Urine cephalic Alexi. Male-Sothernwood hot, dry
cleanses, opens kills Worms, forces Urine uterine Sorrel cold, moist astringent
good for choleric Fevers Alexi. Shepherds-purse cold, dry astringent vulnerary
Scurvy Grass hot, dry opens diaphoretic, antiscorbutic splenetic Succory cold,
dry opens diuretic Strawberry cold, dry astringent forces Urine, Courses heals
Ulcers St. John's-wort hot, dry attentates diuretic, vulnerary Self-heal hot,
dry cleanses consolidates Savine hot, dry attenuates, incides expels Child,
Courses Sage hot, dry astringent diuretic, moves Courses cephalic Alexi.
Sanicle hot, dry astringent vulnerary Savory hot, dry opens, attenuates
cephalic Alexi. Scabious hot, dry cleanses sudorific good for the Lungs Alexi.
Seal of the blessed Virgin hot, dry incides for. Vri. Cour. Gravel, Thorac.
Scolopendrium hot, dry cleanses breaks the Stone splenetic, cephalic Scordium
hot, dry attenuates moves Sweat, Urine, Courses Sena hot, dry cleanses purges
Melancholy Soldanella hot, dry opens purges Water upwards and down. Speedwell
hot, dry astringent vulnerary, sudorific pectoral Mary's Thistle hot, dry
incides forces Urine, Courses, Sweat Toads Flax hot, dry cleanses moves the
Belly Tobacco hot, dry cleanses, incides moves the Belly Thyme hot, dry incides
moves sneezing, narcotic good for the Head Mother Thyme hot, dry attenuates,
opens moves Urine cephalic Violets cold, moist emollient forces Urine, Courses
cephalic, uterine, stomac. Vervain hot, dry astringent cardiac com. and roman
Wormwood hot, dry resolves vulnerary, lithontriptic hepatic, splenetic
Winter-green cold, dry astringent kills Worms stomachic, hepatic Willow Leaves
cold, dry astringent vulnerary disposes to Sleep

Flowers.
Name. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Balaustins cold, dry astringent
Bettony hot, dry attenuates, opens vulnerary cephalic Borage hot, moist
emollient prepares Choler cardiac Alexi. Bugloss hot, moist emollient prepares
Choler cardiac Blew-bottle hot, dry opens good for Dropsy, Jaundice cardiac
Broom hot, dry opens expels Gravel, Worms, Urine good for liver, Spleen Capers
hot, dry resists Putrefaction forces courses, urine splenetic, hepatic Camomile
hot, dry emollient g. for fainted palp. of the heart g. for head, heart, nerves
Alexi. greater Celendine hot, dry attenuates, incides purges Choler good for
the Eyes Coltsfoot emollient Elder hot, moist emollient sudorific, anodyne
Gilly-flowers hot, dry emollient Hops hot, dry incides cures Itch, Jaundice
Lavender hot, dry attenuates, incides forces Urine, Courses cephalic, nervine
White Lillies hot, dry attenuates hastens Delivery Lilly of the Valleys hot,
dry attenuates good for fainting cephalic White water Lillies cold, moist
emollient stops a Flux Lime hot, dry discusses good for the Epilepsy cephalic
Marygolds hot, dry opens, discusses exp. courses, small pox, measles cardiac
Alexi. Tree Mallows cold, moist emollient Mellilot hot, dry emollient Mullin
hot, dry emollient Peony hot, dry subastringent good for Epilepsy, Nightmare
uterine, cephalic Red Poppy cold, moist emollient hypnotic Black Poplar hot,
dry cleansing anodyne Primrose hot, dry incides anodyne, g. for Apoplexy,
Epile. palsy Rosemary hot, dry incides good for the Apoplexy cephalic Roses
white and red cold, dry astringent cephalic Damask Roses hot, dry loosen purge
Choler Saffron hot, dry opens, mollifies anodyne, hastens delivery cardiac,
pectoral Alexi. Sage hot, dry subastringent diuretic cephalic Schenanth hot,
dry discusses cephalic Staechas hot, dry cleanses, attenuates forces urine,
courses cephalic, nervine Violets cold, moist emollient good for the Epilepsy
cardiac Wall-flowers hot, dry cleanses, attenuates expels dead child, courses
cardiac, uterine

Seeds.
Name. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5. Q. Anise hot, dry attenuates,
discusses diuretic, breeds milk and seed pectoral Alexi. Asparagus hot, dry
opens diuretic Ash hot, dry attenuates forces urine, water stimulates venery
Bishops-weed hot, dry incides good for the Cholic uterine Burdock cold, dry
cleanses expels Gravel Berberries cold, dry astringent Broom hot, dry
attenuates, opens expels Gravel, loosens the Belly good for spleen, Reins whole
and cleans'd Barley cold, dry opens, cleanses diuretic Basil hot, dry digests,
resolves moves the courses cephalic Chaste Tree hot, dry attenuates, discusses
forces urine, courses Alexi. Columbine hot, dry cu. ulc. of the mouth, jaund.
hastens delivery Cabbage hot, dry loosens kills Worms Cardemoms lesser hot, dry
attenuates helps concoction g. for a cough. good for Head stomach Alexi.
Carduus benedictus hot, dry incides, opens sudorific cardiac Alexi. Caraways
hot, dry attenuates, discusses diuretic stomachic Citron hot, dry attenuates,
cleanses kills worms Alexi. Citruls cold, moist opens diuretic go. for the
reins, bladder Coriander hot, dry astringent kills worms stomachic Cubebs hot,
dry attenuates, discusses comforts the Memory cephalic, pectoral Cucumber cold,
moist cleanses, opens forces urine, gravel Cummin hot, dry attenuates, digests
carminative stops hemorrhoids Cherrie Kernels cold, dry Breaks the Stone Alexi.
Dill hot, dry ripens, digests increases Milk, Seed good for stone, womb Date
Stones cold, dry forces Gravel Alexi. critic and common Daucus hot, dry opens,
incides diuretic, hastens Delivery good for the womb Endive cold, dry cleansing
diuretic Elder hot, dry purges Serum common and sweet Fennel hot, dry discusses
diuretic, forces courses g. for stom. breast, Eyes Alexi. Fenugreek hot, dry
emollient, digests Fumitory hot, dry attenuates prepares Melancholy Flax hot,
dry mollifies, cleanses anodyne, Gourds cold, moist emollient Grains of
Paradise hot, dry attenuate good for Concoction, Cholic cephalic, pectoral
Garden Cresses hot, dry open, cleanse force urine good for the spleen white
Henbane cold, dry emollient anodyne, good for spitting blood Hemp cold, dry
lessen Seed St. John's-wort hot, dry digests diuretic, forces courses vulnerary
Knecholm hot, dry attenuates diuretic Lettice cold, dry thickens disposes to
sleep good for stomach, urine Lentile loosening good for the plague, smallpox
Lovage hot, dry opens, incides forces urine, courses, sweat hepatic, splenetic
Lupins hot, dry cleanse, open expel urine, cour. Birth, worms Marshmallows
hot, dry emollient good for bladder, breast Mallows hot, moist emollient
hepatic Melons cold, moist open, cleanse Medlars hot, dry astringent diuretic,
lithontriptic Millfoyl hot, dry cleanses expels urine, gravel, birth common
Millfoyl cold, dry astringent moves urine, sweat Mustard hot, dry incides,
attenuates forces urine, courses Nettle hot, dry incides, opens diuretic,
lithontriptic thoracic Nigeda hot, dry attenuates, opens breeds milk, forces
urine uterine Orach cold, moist loosens, discusses purges upwards and downwards
good for the Jaundice Peach Kernels hot, dry cleanse lithontriptic, diuretic
Pine Kernels moist emollient g. for consumption, strangury good for stomach,
breast Peoney hot, dry subastringent good for the Epilepsy uterine, cephalic
white and black Poppys cold, moist thicken Macedonian and com. Parsley hot, dry
attenuates, opens forces urine, courses g. for liver, spleen, reins Plantain
cold, dry thickens, cleanses vulnerary Purslain cold, dry astringent kills
worms Quinces cold, moist emollient good for burns Rocket hot, dry cleanses
diuretic, breeds milk, seed Rhadish hot, dry incides, attenuates vomits Rue
hot, dry incides forces urine, courses, birth cephalic Alexi. Sorrel cold, dry
opens resists Putrefaction Alexi. Smallage hot, dry opens diuretic Saxifrage
hot, dry opens diuretic Staves acre hot, dry cleanses moves the Belly,
masticatory Sumach cold, dry astringent Bastard Saffron hot, dry incides,
attenuates purges Serum good for dropsy, cholic Tansy hot, dry attenuates moves
urine kills Worms Thlaspy hot, dry cleanses forces urine Red Vetch. hot, dry
emollient, cleansing diuretic, go. for the Jaundice malignant ulcers Alexi.

Fruits.
Name. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Almonds bitter hot, dry cleanse,
attenuate diuretic Almonds sweet emollient anodyne Anacardiums hot, dry quicken
memory cephalic Acorns cold, dry astringent Berberries cold, dry astringent
good for a looseness good for stomach, liver Buckthorn Berries hot, dry cleanse
purge viscid Phlegm Winter Cherries cold, dry diuretic, lithontriptic good for
reins, bladder Watery Cherries cold, moist emollient loosen the Belly sweet
Cherries hot, moist mollify good for apoplexy, epilepsy acid Cherries cold, dry
astringent quench thirst stomachic rough Cherries cold, dry astringent
corroborate preserved Cherries cold, dry astringent g. for Fevers,
Green Sickness Chestnut hot, dry thickens stops vomiting, looseness Cloves hot,
dry discuss good for fainting cephalic, cardi. stomac. Alexi. Cassia Fistula
hot, moist emollient, lenitive purges choler, serum g. for bre. lungs, rei.
blad. Coloquintida hot, dry purges phlegm, serum, melanchol. good for a Dropsy
Currants cold, dry attenuate, incide cool in a Fever Dates hot, dry astringent
stops fluxes of the belly good for reins, bladder Elder Berries hot, dry
emollient sudorific Alexi. Figs hot, moist emollient ripen, purge the reins g.
for lungs, smallpox Alexi. Galls cold, dry astringent stop a Gonorrhea Ivy
Berries hot, dry purge upward and downward Juniper berries hot, dry discuss,
incide move urine, sweat ischidiac Alexi. Jujubes cold, moist emollent g. for a
pleurisy, quinsy, cough good for the lungs Kerms hot, dry astringent cardiac
Laurel Berries hot, dry emollient move the Courses cephalic Mezereon Berries
hot, dry draw purge choler, g. for a Dropsy visic atory, caustic Myrtle Berries
cold, dry astringent unripe Medlars cold, dry astringent good for the stone
heals wounds Bellyrick Myrobalans cold, dry astringent in substance purge phlegm
Chebulae Myrobalans cold, dry astringent in substance purge phlegm in infusion
Emblicae Myrobalans cold, dry astringent in substance purge phlegm in infusion
Cytron Myrobalans cold, dry astringent in substance purge choler in infusion
Indian Myrobalans cold, dry astringent in substance purge melancholy Cyprus
Nuts hot, dry astringent g. for rupture, to breed callus Nutmegs hot, dry
astringent g. for palpitat. of heart, hickops cephal. stomach. uterine Pistach
Nuts hot, moist attenuate, open pectoral Poppy Heads cold, moist thicken
hypnotic Pomgranates acid cold, dry astringent purge choler Pomgranates sweet
cold, dry digest good for a cough vinous Pomgranates cold, dry attenuate
cephalic Pepper white, black, long hot, dry attenuates, resolves good for the
cholic stomachic Pruns rough, acid cold, dry astringent Pruns sweet cold, moist
emollient loosens the belly hurt the stomach Quinces cold, dry emollient good
for stomach, lungs, liver Raisins hot, moist emollient good for the liver
Strawberries cold, moist splenetic, nephritic Sebestins moist emollient loosen
the belly, kill worms purge the reins Tamarinds cold, dry astringent purge
choler Alexi. Fresh Wallnuts hot, dry emollient cures ulcers of the mouth

Meals.
Name. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Barley cold, dry cleanses ripens
Beans cold, dry cleanses clears the face from spots greater Comfry thickens
Fenugreek hot, dry emollient ripens Flax Seeds cleanse, mollify ripen Lupins
hot, dry open, cleanse Marsh-Mallow Roots hot, moist emollient Wheat hot, moist
emollient suppurates, anodyne

Liquid Juices.
Name. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Berberries cold, moist astringent
provokes Appetite good for stomach, liver Fumitory hot, dry attenuates purges
Serum, Choler good for liver spleen unripe Grapes cold, dry attenuates provokes
Appetite Lemons cold, dry attenuate diuretic cardiac Alexi. fresh Oil hot,
moist emollient anodyne old Oil hot, dry digests, cleanses washed Oil cold, dry
astringent omphac^ Oil cold, dry astringent Oil of pale Roses hot, dry Oil of
Pomgranates cold, dry astringent purges choler Qainces cold, moist astringent

Thickened Juices.
Name. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. true Acacia cold, dry thickening
emplastic Alexi. Aloes, hepat. succotrine hot, dry astringent, cleansing pur.
choler, heals wounds, ulcers Ammoniacum hot, dry emollient, attenuates loosens
the belly good for the spleen Assa fetida hot, dry incides good for hysteric
fits Water Agrimony hot, dry attenuates, opens vulnerary Amber, white, red hot,
dry astringent Amber liquid hot, moist resolvent, emollient anodyne, forces
Courses good for stomach, brain Peruvian Balsom white, black hot, dry
discusses, mollifies vulnerary, provokes courses g. for stomach, bladder Balsom
Copiei hot, dry emollient vulnerary good for reins, bladder Bdellium hot, dry
digests, attenuates forces urine, courses, sweat Alexi. Benzien hot, dry
incides, attenuates good for the lungs Judaic Bitumen hot, dry dissipates
Camphor cold, dry dissipates extinguishes Venery Colophony hot, dry emollient
Dragons blood cold, dry astringent stops bleeding Elaterium hot, dry incides
purges ser. courses powerfully Euphorbium hot, dry caustic purges phlegm
Frankincense hot, dry astringent vulnerary, anodyne Galbanum hot, dry
emollient, resolvent anodyne, forces courses hastens delivery Gum Got hot, dry
purges upwards, downwards salt, serum Gum animae hot, moist attenuates,
resolves cephalic, stomachic Gum Arabic hot, moist thickens Gum Caranna hot,
dry mollifies powerfully good for nerves, swelling Gum Elemy emollient cephalic
Juice of Hypocistis cold, dry astringent vulnerary Liquorish moist mollifies,
lenient anodyne g. for lungs, reins, bladder Lacca hot, dry attenuates, opens
diuretic, antiscorbutic good for the spleen Labdanum hot, dry emollient good
for quinsey, cough Manna cleanses purges choler, forces courses Mastich hot,
dry emollient good for the stomach Myrrh cold, dry opens, attenuates resists
Putrefaction Opium hot, dry dissipates narcotic Opobalsamum hot, dry opens,
resolves moves courses Opopanax hot, dry discusses purges phlegm, forc. courses,
uri. dry Pitch hot, dry emollient Rosine of Fir hot, dry emollient good for the
Toothache Rosine of the Larix hot, dry attenuates moves the belly, forces urine
Rosin of the Pine hot, dry mollifies, digests Rosin Copal (white, brown hot,
moist emollient, resolves anodyne, suppurates good for the head Sugar fine,
brown, candy hot, moist emollient, incides good for breast, stomach Sagapenum
hot, dry attenuates, opens purges phlegm, resolves tumors g. for breast, nerves
Sandarach, Gum Junip. hot, dry discusses stops bleeding good for nerves, head
Sarcocol hot, dry astringent vnlnerary, emplastic Scammony hot, dry purges
Choler, Serum Storax hot, dry emollient moves the Courses cephalic, uterine
Tachamahaca hot, dry astringent anodyne, ripens good for the gout, swellin.
Turpentine hot, dry mollifies, cleanses moves the belly, forces urine thoracic
Tartar white cold, dry attenuates, incides moves the belly Tragacanth cold,
moist thickens emplastic, anodyne common Wormwood hot, dry cleanses procures
appetite

Of Animals and things taken from them.
Name. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Butter hot, moist lenient anodyne,
loosens the belly Oriental Bezoar hot, dry attenuates anodyne cardiac Alexi.
Occidental Bezoar hot, dry attenuates Sudorific cardiac Alexi. Flesh of Crabs
g.f. a hect. f c.cu. the by. of q m.d. Crabs Eyes cold, dry cleansing good for
the stone Cantharides hot, dry raises Blisters Castor hot, dry attenuates
anodyne good for the nerves, head Cuttle Bone cold, dry cleanses stops a
Gonorrhea Civet hot, moist attenuates anodyne cardiac Deer's Marrow hot, dry
resolves, mollifies anodyne Earth Worms hot, moist discusses diuretic, narcotic
good for Nerves, lungs Elk's Hoof good for an Epilepsy Duck's Fat hot, moist
emollient anodyne good for limbs, nerves Goose Fat hot, moist opens cures a
noise of the Ears Dog's Fat hot, dry cleanses consolidates Deer's Fat hot,
moist emollient anodyne Cat's Fat hot, moist emollient good for the limbs Hen's
Fat hot, moist lenient, resolving anodyne, good for chap'd lips Man's Fat hot,
moist discusses anodyne Sow's Fat hot, moist lenient, resolvent anodyne
Badger's Fat hot, moist emollient anodyne Bear's Fat hot, moist emollient
hinders baldness Goat's Blood hot, dry opens Obstructions resolves concreted
blood Goat's Suet hot, moist discusses good for a Strangury Hart's Horn hot,
dry attenuates sudorific Honey hot, dry cleansing, opening forces Urine good for
heart, brain Ivory cold, dry astringent kills Worms Isinglas cold, dry
astringent Lard hot, moist emollient anodyne Leeches suck blood are narcotic
Man's Skull cold, dry astringent good for the falling sickness Musk hot, dry
attenuates refreshes the vital Spirits Mummy hot, dry attenuates resolves
Oesypus hot emollient anodyne Pikes Jaw cold, dry cleansing good for a pleurisy
Stone of the Bladder sudorific Venice Soap cleanses anodyne Sclnke excites
venery Scorpion dried lithontriptic Alexi. Sperma Ceti hot, moist resolves
anodyne Spodium of Ivory cold, dry astringent Viper's Flesh cold, dry sudorific
Alexi. Unicorn sudorific cardiac Alexi. Wax white, yellow hot, dry thickens
ripens

Of Minerals.
Names. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Antimony cold, dry astringent
Allom roch, burnt cold, dry astringent Arsnick white hot, dry corrosive poison
Auripigmentum hot, dry poison Armenian Stone corroborates Glass of Antimony
purges upward, downward Burnt Brass cold, dry astringent cure old ulcers Alexi.
Bole Armenick cold, dry astringent sudorific Common Bole cold, dry astringent
purges Melancholy White Bole cold, dry astringent Borax for. Courses, hastens
Delivery Boodstone cold, dry astringent good for spitting blood Cerus cold,
dry astringent Chalcitis hot, dry escharotic Mineral Cinnaba hot, dry cleanses
cures malig. ulcers, french. pox Crystal hot, dry astringent breeds Milk, go.
for the stone Lemnian Earth cold, dry astringent sudorific Alexi. Granate cold,
dry attenuates, binds good for palpit. of the heart cardiac Alexi. Leaf-Gold
diaphoretic, g. for melancholy cardiac Hyacinth cold, dry astringent
corroborates Alexi. Quicklime hot, dry escarotic Lapis Caliminaris cold, dry
cleanses cures Ulcers Lapis Lazuli purges melancholy Litharge of Gold, Silver
cold, dry astringent breeds Flesh Lodestone cold, dry astringent purges
Melancholy Red Lead cold, dry astringent Burnt Lead cold, dry astringent
Osteocolla joins bones Pomphalix cold, dry astringent cures ulcers Ruby cold,
dry Leaf Silver cold, moist expels sorrow g. agai. poison Quick Silver cold,
moist strengthens good for the head Steel cold, dry astringent on account of
the earthy Part kills Worms, cures Itch salivates Sal Armoniack hot, dry
attenuates, resolves aperitive on the account of salt Sal Gemma hot, dry opens
Diaphoretic Salt Peter cold, dry incides, resolves good for the cholic Saphyr
cold, dry astringent resists putref. cures inward ul. Sardus cold, dry
astringent cardiac resists poison Smaradg cold, dry astringent stops bleeding
cardiac Sublimate hot, dry cleansing stops all Fluxes good for the memory
g.ag.p. Sulphur open, incide diaphoretic very corrosive Poys. Topaz cold, dry
pectoral Alexi. Tutty cold, dry cleansing stops bleeding cardiac Verdigrease
hot, dry cleanses consolidates Vatriol hangaric White, Roman hot, dry cleanses
draws corrodes provokes vomiting

Sea things.
Name. 1 Qual. 2 Qual. 3 Qual. 4 Qual. 5 Q. Amber-grease hot, dry opens,
resolves corroborates the vital spirits cardiac, cephalic, nervine Coral white,
red cold, dry astringent cardiac Coralline cold, dry thickens kills worms Lapis
Nephriticus cures the stone Pearls cold, dry astringent chears the Soul cardiac
Alexi. Judaic Stone expels gravel Pumex Stone cold, dry attenuates cicatrizes,
breaks the stone the Fire Stone heats, drys digests, discusses it is mixed with
Plasters

A Collection of Medicines, and the Virtues and Uses of them.
I Begin first with simple Waters in Use.

Sorrel Water cools and dries, and is used in alexipharmic Potions for a
Vehicle.

Bettony Water heats, dries, attenuates, is diuretic and cephalic.

The Water of Holly Leaves heats, dries, cleanses, is diuretic and splenetic.

Carduus Water heats, dries, is sudorific, and alexipharmic.

The Water of the lesser Centaury heats, dries, cures Fevers, and kills Worms.

The Water of the greater Celandine heats, dries, cleanses, clears the Eye when
there is a Cataract.

Succory Water cools and dries, it is cephalic, cardiac, uterine, and stomachic.

The Water of Scurvy Grass heats and dries, is antiscorbutic and splenetic

Eyebright Water heats, dries, is astringent, and stops Fluxions on the Eyes.

Fennel Water heats, attenuates, discusses, and is sudorific, and clears the
Sight

Bean-flower Water cleanses, provokes Urine, and beautifies the Face.

Strawberry Water cleanses the Face and Skin, and asswages an Erysipalas.

The Water of Lavender Flowers heats, dries, and is cephalic.

The Water of the Flowers of Lillies of the Valleys heats and dries, is
cephalic, cures an Apoplexy, Epilepsy, and Giddiness.

Rose Water cools and dries, is cardiac and cephalic.

Elder-flower Water mollifies resolves, and is good for an Erysipelas, taken
inwardly, or outwardly applied.

Lime-flower Water cures the Falling Sickness, and expels Wind in Children,
being sweetened with Sugar.

The Water of Oak Leaves cools and dries, and cures the Bloody Flux and
Hemorrhages.

Fumitory Water prepares Bile and Melancholy.

The Water of Grass is diuretic and lithontriptic, and stops a Flux of Blood.

Hysop Water heats, dries, attenuates, and cuts gross Humors contained in the
Lungs.

Lettice Water cools, moistens, and provokes Sleep.

Mallow-flower Water heats, moistens, mollifies, and is good for Diseases of
the Lungs, Reins, and Bladder, and for Heat of Urine.

Balm Water heats, dries, is cardiac, and good against Melancholy.

Water of Honey heats, moistens, is diuretic, lithontriptic, breeds Hair, and
cures a Suffusion of the Eyes.

Mint Water heats, dries, is good for the Stomach and the Head.

Red Poppy Water cools, promotes Sleep, and is good for a Pleurisy.

Parsley Water heats, dries, is diuretic, lithontriptic, and opens Obstructions.

Purslain Water cools, moistens, and takes away Heat of Urine.

Pennyroyal Water heats, dries, is hysteric, and is good to force the Courses
and Secundine.

Nightshade Water dries, cools, and cures an Erysipelas, and Cancers of the
Papes.

Frog-spawn Water cools and dries, and cures Inflammations and Burns, and stops
the Flux of the Hemorrhoids, and cures a red Face.

Of Compound Waters.
The Water of unripe Wallnuts, or the Amsterdam Alexipharmic.
TAke of unripe Wallnuts with their outward green Shells, gathered in May, and
bruised, two Pound; of the Herbs, Carduus Benedictus, Balm, Rue, Scabius,
Scordium, each two Ounces; Cut them, and pour upon them of Wine Vinegar as much
as will rise some Fingers above the Matter. Distill it in Glass as long as any
Liquor will drop. Keep it in a Glass for Use.

This is much commended by Practitioners. It attenuates, incides, penetrates,
cleanses, resists Putrefaction, is good in Malignant Fevers, and the Plague.
The Dose is half an Ounce, or an Ounce.

The Amsterdam Epileptick Water.
Take of the Roots of Male Peony dried, half a Pound, of the Roots of Angelica
and Fraxinella, of the Leaves of cretic Marjoram, Rue, and Sage, each one
Ounce; of the Flowers of Male Peony, Bettony, Lilly of the Valleys, Lime-tree
dried, of the Seeds of oriental Bishops-weed, Nigella, each half an Ounce; of
Peony two Ounces; of woody Cassia, Cloves, the lesser Cardamoms, Nutmeg, each
two Drams; powder them grossly, and pour upon them five Quarts of French Wine,
or Rhenish Wine, of common Water a Quart. Digest them four and twenty Hours,
then distill them in Sand, and draw off about four Quarts. Keep it in a Glass
well stopped.

This is excellent for many Diseases. It sweetens the Mass of Blood, and causes
Sweat, is good for all cold Diseases, and for such as proceed from an acid
Ferment. It resolves, attenuates, incides, cleanses, is stomachic, cephalic,
diuretic, good for the Apoplexy, and the Falling Sickness. The Dose is from two
Drams to six in Balm Water.

The Antinephritic Water of Amsterdam.
Take of Horseradish Root, four Ounces; of Liquorish, the Roots of Restharrow,
Parsley, and Burnet, each two Ounces; of nephritic Wood and Sassafras, each
three Ounces; of the Leaves of Ground Ivy, Bettony, Chervil, Strawberries, each
two Handfuls; of the Seeds of Fennel and Nettles, and of the Berries of Winter
Cherries, each two Ounces; of Juniper Berries one Ounce; cut and beat them, and
infuse them in a sufficient Quantity of Ground Ivy and Wine, three Days and
Nights; then distill them in a Cucurbit in Balneo Mariae to Siccity.

This opens, attenuates, resolves, forces Urine and Sweat, and is a Specific
for the Stone in the Reins and Bladder. The Dose is from half an Ounce to one
Ounce.

The Palsy Water.
Take of the Roots of Sarsa-parilla, of the Wood of Guiacum, each one Pound and
an half, of Sassafras four Ounces, of the Herbs Bettony, Mountain Calaminth,
Germander, Ground Pine, Hysop, Marjoram, Origanum, black Horehound, Primrose,
Pennyroyal, Rosemary, Sage, wild Thym, Thym, the Flowers of Marygolds, and
Staechas, each one Handful, Juniper Berries one Ounce: Cut them and beat them,
and infuse them in a sufficient Quantity of Spirit of Wine for three Days and
Nights, then distill them in Balneo Mariae; to the distilled Water add of the
Roots of bitter Costus, Pyrethrum, Ginger, the Seeds of white Mustard,
Cinnamon, Storax, Calamite, Castor, each one Dram. Digest them some Days and
Nights, then filtrate them through a Linen Cloth, and keep the Liquor for Use.

It heats, dries, attenuates, opens, resolves, is stomachic, cephalic, and
uterine, used inwardly or outwardly.

The Hysteric Water.
Take of the Roots of Briony dried, of ripe Elder Berries, dried by a gentle
Fire, and cleansed from the Stalks, each two Ounces, of the Leaves of Mugwort,
Dittany, of Creet, Mother-wort, Nep, Basil, Pennyroyal, Rue, Savin dried in the
Shade, each half an Ounce, the yellow Peel of Oranges, one Ounce and an half;
powder them and infuse them for eight Days in three Quarts of Spirit of Wine,
and one Quart of common Water; distill them in Balneo Mariae, and draw off four
or five Pints, wherein infuse of Myrrh and Castor, each half an Ounce, of
English Saffron three Drams; digest them for some Days, then strain the
Tincture through a Cloth, and keep it for Use.

It heats and dries powerfully, penetrates, resolves, opens Obstructions,
forces Urine, Sweat, the Courses, and cures a great many cold Diseases. The
Dose is from two Drams to half an Ounce.

Treacle Water.
Take of the yellow Bark of Citrons dried, of the Roots of Butter-bur,
Liquorish, Burnet, Tormentil, each two Ounces; white Dittany, Gentian,
Masterwort, Periwinkle, Zedoary, the Leaves of Carduus Benedictus, Rue,
Scabius, Scordium dried, each one Ounce; the Seeds of Sorrel and Carduus
Benedictus, each half an Ounce; powder them all grossly, and infuse them in six
Quarts of the best Spirit of Wine, and in three Pints of common Water: Digest
them twenty four Hours, then distill them in Sand or Balneo Mariae, and draw off
three Parts of four. Add to the Spirit drawn off, three Drams of English
Saffron, three Ounces of Venice Treacle, and half an Ounce of Oil of Sulphur by
the Bell. Digest them for three Days and Nights, then strain it through a Sive,
and keep it in a Glass well stopped.

It heats, dries, evacuates by Urine and Sweat, it corrects acid Ferments that
are too acrid, and restores a due Texture to the Mass of Blood. The Dose is
from two Drams to half an Ounce.

Compound Aqua Vitae.
Take of sharp Cinnamon three Ounces, of all the Sanders six Drams, of the
Roots of Avens, Galingal, Ginger, and the outward Bark of Oranges and Citrons
dried, each two Drams and an half, of Nutmeg, the lesser Cardamoms and Mace,
each three Drams; of the Seeds of Anise, cretick Daucus, sweet Fennel, and
Basil, each one Dram and an half; of Gillyflowers, red Roses, and the Flowers
of Rosemary, each two Drams; make of all a gross Powder, and pour upon it of
the best Spirit of Wine six Quarts, of common Water one Quart, digest them a
Night and a Day, and then distill them in Balneo Mariae, or in Sand, and draw
off two Thirds of the Liquor: In the Spirit drawn off infuse of the Powder
Diamargarit frigid, and Diambra, each three Drams, of Amber-grease and Musk
tied up in a Rag, each ten Grains; digest them three Nights and Days; to the
straining add of Julep of Roses half a Pint, mingle them, and keep it for Use.

It heats, dries, is stomachic, cardiac, cephalic, and alexipharmic: It is good
for all cold Diseases, and for the Palsy, Apoplexy, and Epilepsy: The Dose is
half an Ounce.

Tincture of Cinnamon.
Take of sharp Cinnamon grossly powdered, two Ounces, Spirit of Wine rectified
eight Ounces; put the Cinnamon into a long Viol, and afterward pour upon it
the Spirit of Wine; lute well to the Top of the Viol another Viol, and place
it upon hot Sand for eight Days, then gently pour off the Tincture and keep it
for Use.

It heats, dries, is stomachic, uterine, cardiac, and cephalic: The Dose is
from two Drams to half an Ounce.

Tincture of Guiacum.
Take of the Shavings of Guiacum six Ounces, Spirit of Wine rectified, twelve
Ounces, mingle them and digest them in a long Viol with another well luted to
the Mouth of it for eight Days and Nights, then decant the Tincture, and strain
it gently through a linen Cloth, and keep it for Use.

It heats, dries, is stomachic, cures Catarrhs, and is of a pleasant Smell and
Taste: The Dose is from half an Ounce to one Ounce.

Tincture of Castor.
Take of Castor grossly powdered, half an Ounce; put it into a long Viol, and
pour upon it three Ounces of rectified Spirit of Wine; digest it eight Nights
and Days, pour off the Tincture, and strain it through a linen Cloth, and
keep it for Use.

It heats, dries, is hysteric, good for the Falling Sickness and the Palsy: The
Dose is from six Drops to twenty.

Tincture of Saffron.
Take of English Saffron one Ounce, put it into a log Viol, and pour upon it
six Ounces of Spirit of Wine; digest it for eight Days, then pour off the
Tincture and keep it for Use.

It heats, dries, is sudorific, anodyne, stomachic, and forces the Courses: The
Dose is from six Drops to ten.

Elixir Proprietatis.
Take of Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, each half an Ounce, of Spirit of Wine
rectified, ten Ounces, of Spirit of Sulphur by the Bell, half an Ounce; extract
first with the Spirit of Wine, a Tincture from the Saffron, by digesting it
six or eight Days; afterward pour this Tincture with the Spirit of Sulphur
upon the Myrrh and Aloes beat small; digest them for a Month in a long Viol
well stopped, and shake the Glass now and then, decant the black Tincture gently
from the Faeces, and then either fling away the Faeces, or extract another
Tincture from it, with Spirit of Wine as before: After the Elixir has stood
without shaking a Night, decant it again, and afterward let it stand a Night
without shaking, and so decant it again till you find no Faeces at the Bottom,
which you will find in the space of few Days: This is commonly called Elixir,
or Alexiterium Proprietatis.

This Tincture is hot and dry, stomachic, anodyne, uterine, alexipharmic, it
loosens the Belly, two Drams of it being taken at a time, and cures Tertian
Agues, and is an universal Medicine; it agrees with all Ages and both Sexes: It
alters, evacuates, and strengthens; and, according to the Opinion of an
excellent Physician, every Practitioner ought to have it in Readiness: The Dose
is from six Drops to twelve, unless you design to purge, then you must give two
Drams in Wine or Beer.

Tincture of Opium.
Take of crude Opium sliced and toasted on iron Plates, one Ounce, of the
Spirit of wine Vinegar, six Ounces: Mix them in a Glass Cucurbit, and digest
them three Days and Nights, then strain the black Tincture through a linen
Cloth, and keep it for Use.

It is hypnotic, anodyne, narcotic, and may be used instead of Laudanum
Opiatum, in Potions, and other Liquors: Being applied outwardly to the Temples
with a Rag dipped in it, it eases Pain, and promotes Sweat, it also asswages
Pains of the Gout: The Dose is two or three Drops.

Tincture of Steel.
Take of the Filings of Steel, one Ounce, of Rhenish Wine ten Ounces; infuse
them in a close Glass eight Nights and Days, then decant the red Wine and keep
it for Use.

It opens, cleanses, corrects a muriatick Salt, and the acid, when it is too
acrid. It opens Obstructions, loosens the Belly, and is good for a Cachexy: The
Dose is half an Ounce two or three times a Day. The same way is prepared
Tincture of Strawberries, infused in rectified Spirit of Wine, new
Strawberries being added till the Tincture is made. This Tincture is
lithontriptic. The Tincture of Lacca is made the same way, which is hysteric,
antiscorbutic, and hypochondriack; and so is the Tincture of Scordium made,
which is alexipharmic.

Spirit of Vinegar.
Take of the sharpest Wine Vinegar, fourscore Ounces; distill it in a low Glass
Cucurbit, in Balneo Mariae, till that which remains in the Cucurbit is of a
pitchy Consistence. All the Liquour that comes forth is called distilled
Vinegar, or Spirit of Vinegar.

It cools, dries, binds, restrains luxuriant Sulphur; but joined with Alcalies,
it opens, cleanses, and forces Urine, and moves the Belly, as may be seen, when
it is topulated with Crab's-eyes, Coral, or Steel. It also provokes Sweat, by
reason of the Volatility, and different Parts whereof it consists; namely, the
subtle volatile Alcaly, which coagulates upon Lead, and tastes as sweet as
Sugar, but turns to an insipid Fat upon Salt of Tartar, or fixed Nitre: The
Dose is from half an Ounce to an Ounce.

Rose Vinegar.
Take of red Roses, one Pound, of wine Vinegar, six Quarts; put them into a
large Glass with a narrow Neck, stop it well, and tie it over with a Leather,
and expose it to the Heat of the Sun for forty Days in the Summer; then press
out the Vinegar through a Cloth, and keep it for Use; or if you please, you
may put in new Roses, and place it in the Sun again, as before.

It cools powerfully, dries and binds. It is cephalic and alexipharmic: The
Dose is half an Ounce. The same way are prepared the following Vinegars;
Vinegar of Marygolds, which is cardiac and cephalic; Vinegar of Rosemary
Flowers, which is cephalic and cardiac; Vinegar of Lavender Flowers, which is
cephalic; Vinegar of Elder Flowers, which is sudorific and alexipharmic.

Treacle Vinegar.
Take of the Species of the Treacle Water above described, except the Oil of
Sulphur by the Bell, the Saffron and the Treacle: Cut them, or beat them
grossly, and pour upon them fifteen Pints of Wine Vinegar; set them in the Sun
for forty Days, or digest them eight Days in Balneo Mariae; then press out the
Vinegar through a Cloth, and keep it for Use.

It is an excellent Preservative against the Plague: I took a Spoonful of this,
says Marggrave, Morning, Noon, and Night, and nothing else, when the Plague
raged violently at Leyden, in the Year 1664, and visited the People infected
with the Plague every Day, and was preserved safe and sound, when fifteen
Physicians dyed of the Plague that Summer.

Vinegar of Squills.
Take of the Roots of Squills sliced and hanged up by a Thread thrust through
them, forty Days, and dried in the open Air, where the Sun or Rain does not
come, one Pound; of Wine Vinegar four Quarts; put them into the Sun, as
before, then strain it. It attenuates, incides, and is thoracic: The Dose is
half an Ounce.

Praevotius his purging Vinegar.
Take of crude Tartar one Dram, or instead of it, of Cream of Tartar, half an
Ounce, of the Leaves of Sena cleansed, three Drams, of Cinnamon and the Seeds
of Anise, each half a Dram, of the sharpest Wine Vinegar one Pint; infuse them
twenty four Hours, then strain out the Vinegar, and keep it for Use. It loosens
the Belly, attenuates, and incides, and is used in Sauces.

Simple Wormwood Wine.
Take of Wormwood dried one Handful, of Wine fifty Quarts; put it into a
Vessel well stopped, and leave it in Infusion till all the Wine is drunk. It
attenuates, incides, is stomachic, and quickens the Appetite. The same way is
prepared the lesser Centaury Wine, which is hepatic and a Febrifuge. And so is
made the Wine of black Cherries, which is cardiac, and good for malignant
Fevers. And so is made Rosmary Flower Wine, which is cephalic and cardiac. So
is made Eyebright Wine which is good for the Head and Eyes.

The common Decoction for a Glister.
Take of the Leaves of Mallows, Pellitory, Beet, Violets, Mercury, the Flowers
of Camomile, each one Handful, the Seeds of Anise and sweet Fennel, each two
Drams; boil them in a sufficient Quantity of Water to a Pint. It mollifies the
Faeces contained in the great Guts, and expels Wind, and is anodyne.

A sharp Glister.
Take of the lesser Centaury, Hyssop, and Rue, each one Handful and an half, of
the Seeds of Carawys, Fennel, and Cummin, each three Drams, of Agaric tied up
in a Rag, two Drams, of the Pulp of Coloquintida, one Dram: Boil them in
Fountain Water to a Pint; to the strained Liquor add of the Electuary of Hiera
Picra one Ounce, mingle them, make a Glister. It powerfully attenuates,
incides, causes a Revulsion, is good in sleepy Diseases, and for other Diseases
of the upper Parts.

The Carminative Decoction for a Glister.
Take of the Seeds of Anise, Fennel, and Cummin, each half an Ounce, of Laurel
Berries bruised, three Drams, of the Flowers of Camomile and Dill, each half an
Handful; boil them in common Water till half is consumed. It incides,
attenuates, and consumes Wind sticking in the Guts.

The Decoction of Brimstone.
Take of crude Sulphur powdered, half a Pound, of Fountain Water five Quarts;
boil it till half is consumed; keep the strained Liquor for Use. Being taken
inwardly, it cools the Blood in Fevers; outwardly applied, it cures the Itch,
and Inflammations, and Redness in the Face.

Syrup of Vinegar.
Take of clarified Sugar, boiled to the Consistence of Tablets, four Pound;
pour upon it in an carthen Pot a sufficient Quantity of White Wind vinegar, so
as to make a Syrup without boiling, only stir it about till it comes to a
Syrup. It cools, attenuates, incides, and quenches Thirst.

Syrup of the Juice of Sorrel.
Take of clarified Sugar, boiled to the Consistence of Tablets, four Pound;
pour upon it in an earthen Vessel, the Juice of Sorrel clarified by settling,
and strained, a sufficient Quantity, so as that a Syrup may be made without
boiling, only stir it about. It cools, thickens, is good for malignant Fevers,
and the Plague.

Syrup of unripe Grapes.
Take of clarified Sugar, boiled to the Consistence of Tablets, four Pound;
pour upon it in an earthen Pot, a sufficient Quantity of the Juice of unripe
Grapes, stir it about, and make a Syrup without boiling. It cools, binds, stops
vomiting and a Looseness, and takes off Thirst and Heat. The same way is made
Syrup of Quinces, which binds and strengthens the Stomach, and stops vomiting
and a Looseness, spitting of Blood, a Flux of the Hemorrhoids and Courses, the
Bloodyflux, and the Coeliac Disease. The same way is made Syrup of Pomgranates,
which cools, moistens, resists Putrefaction, and stops vomiting and Looseness,
and is cardiac. The same way is made Syrup of Lemons, which cools, incides,
comforts the Heart, cures pestilential and continual Fevers, and the
Heart-burning.

Syrup of Scurvygrass.
Take of clarified Sugar, boiled to the Consistence of Tablets, four Pound, of
Scurvygrass Water, a sufficient Quantity, to make a Syrup without boiling. It
heats, drys, qualifies an Acid, and is antiscorbutic.

Julep of Roses.
Take of clarified Sugar, boiled to the Consistence of Tablets, two Pound; pour
upon it a sufficient Quantity of Rose Water, to make a thin Syrup without
boiling. It cools, dries, is cardiac, thoracic, and stomachic.

Syrup of Violets.
Take of Sugar, boiled to the Consistence of Tablets, two Pound; pour upon it
of the Infusion of the fresh Flowers of Violets, a sufficient Quantity; make a
Syrup without boiling. It cools moistens, corrects the Acrimony of Bile, and is
thoracic and cardiac.

Compound Syrup of Wormwood.
Take of Roman Wormwood dried, six Ounces, of red Roses two Ounces, of Indian
Spiknard, three Drams; bruise them, and infuse them twenty four Hours in old
odoriferous White Wind, and clarified Juice of Quinces, each three Pints, boil
them over a gentle Fire till half is consumed, then strain them; to the
strained Liquor clarified, add of clarified Honey, boiled to a Consistence, and
white Sugar, each one Pound; afterward boil them to the Consistence of a
Syrup. It heats moderately, binds, expels Wind, is stomachic, and forces Urine.

Fernelius's Syrup of Marshmallows.
Take of the Roots of Marshmallows two Ounces, red Vetches one Ounce, of the
Roots of Asparagus, Liquorish rasped, Grass, Raisins of the Sun stoned, each
half an Ounce, of the Tops of Marshmallows, of the Herbs Mallows, both the
Maiden-hairs, Pellitory of the Wall, Burnet, and Plantain, each one Handful, of
the four greater and lesser cold Seeds bruised each three Drams; boil them in a
sufficient Quantity of Water to the Consumption of the third Part, strain the
Liquor out, and boil it to a Syrup with four Pound of white Sugar. It is
temperate, loosens, mollifies, cleanses the Reins from Filth and Gravel, and
takes off the Heat of Urine.

Fernelius's Syrup of Mugwort.
Take of the Roots of Fennel, Elicampane, Orris, Lovage, Peony, and Madder,
each half an Ounce, of the Herbs Mugwort two Handfuls, Bettony, Calaminth,
Germander, Ground Pine, Hysop, St. John's-wort, Featherfew, Balm, Nep,
Origanum, black Horehound, Pennyroyal, Savin, each one Handful, the Seeds of
Anise, Daucus, Fennel, Nigella, Basl, Parsley, Rue, each three Drams: Beat them
and cut them, and infuse them twenty four Hours in a sufficient Quantity of
small Hydromel; boil them according to Art, and with five Pound of Sugar, boil
it to a Syrup, aromatize it with an Ounce of Cinnamon, and three Drams of
Spiknard. It heats, opens, incides, moves the Courses, and is good for hysteric
Diseases.

Simple Syrup of the Juice of Bettony.
Take of the Juice of Bettony clarified three Pints, of white Sugar one Pound
and an half; boil them to the Consistence of a Syrup. It heats, opens,
cleanses, is cephalic and uterine, and gently moves the Courses. The same way
is prepared the Syrup of Borrage, which moistens, and is good for Melancholy,
Fainting, and Palpitation of the Heart. So is made Syrup of Carduus Benedictus,
which heats, moves Sweat, is alexipharmic, good in a Pleurisy, and to kill
Worms. Simple Syrup of Succory is also made in the same way. It cools, opens,
and is hepatic. So is also made Syrup of Scabius, which heats, cleanses
Imposthumes, is thoracic, and is good in a Pleurisy, and for malignant Fevers.

Syrup of the Oak of Jerusalem.
Take of the Herb called Oak of Jerusalem, three Handfuls, of Hedge Mustard,
Nettles, each two Handfuls, of red Colwort and Coltsfoot, each one Handful and
an half: Boil them in a sufficient Quantity of Water; to the strained Liquor
add two Pound and an half of white Sugar; clarify and boil it to a Syrup. It
heats, cleanses, and is thoracic.

Simple Bizantine Syrup.
Take of the Juice of Smallage and Garden Succory, each a Quart, of Bugloss and
Hops, each a Pint; boil them till they are clear, and afterward boil them to a
Syrup with three Pound of Sugar. It is temperate, it opens, incides, is good
for the Jaundice, and to force the Courses.

Simple Syrup of Maidenhair.
Take of fresh Maidenhair a little cut, five Ounces, of the Roots of Liquorish
rasped two Ounces; infuse them twenty four Hours in a sufficient Quantity of
hot Water, then boil them according to Art; to five Pints of the clarified
Liquor strained, add four Pound of Sugar; boil it to a Syrup. It is temperate,
incides, attenuates, and opens.

Syrup of Cloves.
Take of the Water of aromatic Cloves, white like Milk, four Ounces; dissolve
in it as much Sugar as will make it a Syrup without boiling. It heats, dries,
attenuates, is cardiac, stomachic, uterine, and cephalic.

Syrup of Cinnamon.
Take of the best Cinnamon Water white like Milk a sufficient Quantity; make a
Syrup of it with a sufficient Quantity of Sugar without Fire. It heats, dries,
is cardiac, uterine, and cephalic.

Syrup of Coral.
Take of red Coral powdered half an Ounce, of sweet Spirit of Niter three
Ounces; mingle them in a long Viol, and digest them twenty four Hours in a hot
Place, then filtrate through Paper, and make a Syrup of the strained Liquor
with a sufficient Quantity of Sugar without Fire. It cools, dries, cleanses,
opens, forces Urine, is good for hypochondriac Diseases, and stops violent
Fluxes of the Belly.

Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb.
Take of the Roots of Smallage, Asparagus, Fennel, all fresh, each two Ounces,
of the Herbs Succory, Garden Endive, Dandelyon, each two Handfuls, of Fumitory,
Liver-wort, Lettice, Hops, Sowthistle, each one Handful, Maidenhair, old
Barley, each one Ounce and an half, Winter Cherries, Liquorish rasped, each six
Drams; boil them in a sufficientt Quantity of Water to the Consumption of a
third Part; then strain it, and add four Pound of white Sugar, when it is
clarified boil it to a Syrup: In the mean while infuse in a sufficient Quantity
of the Decoction above prescribed, of choice Rhubarb four Ounces, of Indian
Spiknard two Drams; after a gentle boiling, strain out the Liquor, and mingle
it with the Syrup toward the End of boiling. It cools, opens, purges Choler,
and agrees with every Age and both Sexes: The Dose is one Ounce and an half, or
more.

Syrup called Diacnicu.
Take of the Roots of Angelica, Smallage, Asparagus, and Fennel, all fresh, of
Polypody of the Oak, each one Ounce and an Half, of the bark of Tamarisk, half
an Ounce, of the Herbs Maidenhair, Bugloss, Germander, Ground Pine, Hyssop,
Origanum, Scolopendrium, Thym, each half an Handful, Dodder, Winter Cherries,
each half an Ounce, Raisins of the Sun cleansed from the Stones two Ounces, of
the Seeds of Bastard Saffron bruised four Ounces and an half, of the Seeds of
Anise, Bishops-weed, Daucus, and Fennel, each one Ounce; boil them in a
sufficient Quantity of Water to the Consumption of a third Part; to the
strained Liquor add of white Sugar clarified two Pound; boil it to the
Consistence of a Syrup; in the mean while take of the Leaves of Sena cleansed
four Ounces, of choice Rhubarb, one Ounce and an half, of Agaric trochiscated
half an Ounce, of Ginger one Dram; infuse them hot for a Night in a sufficient
Quantity of the Decoction prescribed; the next Day boil them gently, afterward
strain the Liquor out, and mix it with the Syrup toward the End of boiling. It
purges gently Phlegm and watery Humors by Stool, and it incides and cleanses;
the Dose is two Ounces.

Syrup of Fumitory.
Take of the Roots of Polypody of the Oak two Ounces, of the Herbs Roman
Wormwood, Dodder, Endive, Scolopendrium, Hops, each one Handful, Dodder of Thym
one Ounce and an half; boil them in a sufficient Quantity of Water till half is
consumed; to the strained Liquor add of the Juice of Fumitory one Pint and an
half, of the Juice of Borrage and Bugloss, each half a Pint, of white Sugar
four Pound; boil them to a Syrup. It purges gently by Stool, and opens, and is
good for Diseases of the Skin, and for Diseases proceeding from salt Humors.

Syrup of Liquorish.
Take of Liquorish rasped two Ounces, of the Herbs Coltsfoot four Handfuls,
Maiden hair one Ounce, Hyssop half an Ounce; infuse them twenty four Hours in a
sufficient quantity of Water, then boil them to the Consumption of half; to the
strained Liquor add of the best Honey clarified, and of white Sugar, each one
Pound; boil them to a Syrup. It heats, moistens, incides, cleanses, is
thoracic, helps Expectoration, and thickens the Humors flowing upon the Lungs.

Syrup of Hyssop.
Take of the Herbs Hyssop dried one Ounce and an half, of Maidenhair six
Drams, of the Roots of Smallage, Fennel, and Parsley, all fresh, of Liquorish
rasped, each ten Drams, of Jujubes and Sebestines, each thirty, of fat Figs,
and fat Dates, each ten, of Raisins of the Sun stoned one Ounce and an half, of
cleansed Barley half an Ounce, of the Seeds of Quinces and Mallow each three
Drams; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water; to the strained Liquor add
of the whitest Sugar three Pound; clarify it, and boil it to a Syrup. It
heats, attenuates, incides, cleanses the Reins and Bladder, is thoracic, good
for an Asthma, a Cough, and to provoke the Courses.

Syrup of Jujubes.
Take of Jujubes, Number sixty, of Barley cleansed, of Liquorish rasped, and of
Maidenhair, each one Ounce, of the Flowers of Violets, and of the Seeds of
Mallows, each five Drams, of the Seeds of Quinces, Lettice, Melons, and white
Poppies, each three Drams; boil them in a sufficient Quantity of Water to the
Consumption of half; to the strained Liquor add two Pound of clarified Sugar;
boil it to a Syrup. It cools, thickens thin Humors, takes off Hoarsness and a
Cough, cures a Pleurisy, and helps Expectoration.

Syrup of Mint.
Take of the Juice of Mint one Pint, of the Juices of Quinces, and of sharp
Pomgranats clarified, and of the Infusion of red Roses, each half a Pint, of
white Sugar and clarified Honey, each one Pound and an half; boil them to a
Syrup according to Art, and at the End of boiling aromatize it with half an
Ounce of the Powder Diarrhodon Abbatis tied up in a Rag. It is temperate,
astringent, stomachie, stops vomiting, the Hickops, and a Looseness.

Syrup of Myrtles.
Take of Myrtle Berries two Ounces and an half, of unripe Medlars half a Pound,
of the Seeds of Berberries, Sumach, Balaustins, red Roses, white and red
Sanders, each one Ounce and an half; bruise and boil them in a sufficient
Quantity of Water, to the Consumption of a third Part; to the strained Liquor
add five Pound of clarified Sugar, boil them again to a thicker Consistence;
toward the End add of the Juices of Quinces, and of acid Pomgranates clarified,
each a Quart; make a Syrup according to Art. It cools, dries, is astringent and
thoracic, it stops a Looseness, a Flux of Blood, and strengthens the Stomach.

Simple Syrup of Poppies.
Take of the Heads of white Poppies ripe and dried ten Ounces, boil them in a
sufficient Quantity of Water till half is consumed; add to the strained Liquor
two Pounds and an half of white Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup. It cools,
moistens, qualisies Choler, extinguishes Thirst, is thoracic and hypnotic. The
same way is prepared the simple Syrup of Citron Bark, which heats, dries, is
stomachic, cardiac, cephalic, and alexipharmic.

Syrup of red Poppies.
Take of the fresh Flowers of red Poppies three Pound, boil them according to
Art in a sufficient Quantity of Water; to the Liquor strongly pressed out add
three Pound of white Sugar clarified, and boil up your Syrup. It cools, is
astringent and thickening, and is proper for burning Fevers, a Pleurisy and
Peripneumonia; it is also pectoral and hypnotic: The Dose is one Ounce and an
half.

Syrup of Purslain.
Take of the Juice of Purslain one Pint, of the Juices of Daisies,
Strawberries, Lettice, Plantain, the middle Houseleek, and Violets, all
clarified, each two Ounces, of the Seeds of Quinces two Drams, of white Sugar
two Pound; boil them to a Syrup. It powerfully cools, softens, thickens, and
kills Worms.

Syrup of the five opening Roots.
Take of the Roots of Smallage, Asparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Kneeholm, all fresh,
each four Ounces; boil them in a sufficient Quantity of Water, to the strained
Liquor add four Pound of white Sugar, clarify it and boil it to a Syrup. It
heats, dries, attenuates, cuts thick Humors, forces Urine, moves the Courses,
expels Gravel, and is good for the Jaundice.

Syrup of dried Roses.
Take of red Roses dried one Pound, infuse them twenty four Hours in a
sufficient quantity of warm Water; to the strained Liquor add four Pound of
white Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup. It binds, stops Fluxes of the Belly and
Womb, and vomiting, and cleanses Ulcers, and heals them.

Simple Syrup of Roses solutive.
Take of the Infusion of pale Roses, the fresh Roses being put into it nine
times, five Pints, of clarified Sugar four Pound; boil it to a Syrup. It purges
Choler and watery Humors by Stool; the highest Dose is three Ounces. Syrup of
Gillyslowers is made the same way. It heats, dries, is cardiac and alexipharmic.

Syrup of Roses solutive with Sena.
Take of the Leaves of Sena cleansed eight Ounces, of the Seeds of Anise and
sweet Fennel, each half an Ounce; infuse them two Days in a sufficient quantity
of the Infusion of pale Roses above described; to the strained Liquor add two
Pounds of white Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup. It purges Choler, Melancholy,
and serous Humors: The Dose is two Ounces.

Syrup of Staechas.
Take of the Flowers of Staechas four Ounces, of the Herbs Bettony, Calaminth,
Origanum, each one Ounce and an half, of Sage, and the Flowers of Rosmary, each
half an Ounce, of the Seeds of Fennel, Peony, and Rue, each three Drams; boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Water till half is consumed; to the strained
Liquor add of Sugar and the best Honey, each two Pound, clarify the Liquor,
and boil it to a Syrup. It heats, attenuates, is cephalic, good for the
Falling Sickness, Convulsions, trembling of the Members, and all cold Diseases.

The Syrup of Comfry of Fernelius.
Take of the Roots and Tops of the greater Comfry, of all the Herb Daisy, each
three Parts, of the Herb Bettony, Burnet, Plantain, Knotgrass, Scabius,
Coltsfoot, and the Flowers of red Roses, each two Parts; bruise them when they
are green, and press out the Juice, boil it, and take off the Scum; to three
Pints of it add two Pounds and an half of white Sugar, boil it to a Syrup. It
is temperate, cleanses gently, is vulnerary, and good for Consumptions.

Compound Syrup of Violets.
Take of the green Leaves of Violets five Handfuls, of the Seeds of Quinces and
Mallows, each seven Drams, of Jujubes and Sebestins, each Number twenty; boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Barley Water; to the strained Liquor add one
Pound and an half of white Sugar; boil it to a Syrup. It cools, moistens,
mollifies, is good for a Pleurisy, a Cough, Heat of Urine, and nephritic Pains.

Honey Medicines and Robs.
Honey of Mercury.
TAke of the Juice of Mercury clarified three Pints, of the best Honey
clarified four Pound; boil them over a gentle Fire to the Consistence of a
Syrup. It loosens, cleanses, and is only used in Glisters.

Honey of Rosmary.
Take of the Tops of Rosmary with the Flowers dried in the Shade one Pound,
infuse them a little in a sufficient quantity of Water, then with three Pound
of the best Honey clarified, boil them over a gentle Fire, and while they are
hot strain them through a Cloth. It heats, dries, expels Wind, prepares Phlegm,
and is good for the Brain and Nerves. It is used in sharp Glisters. The same
way is made Honey of Centaury, which cleanses and purges Choler. The same way
is also made the simple Honey of Roses, which cleanses, strengthens the
Stomach, and stops hot Fluxions.

Solutive Honey of Roses.
Take of the Infusion of pale Roses, fresh Roses being put into it nine times,
three Pints, of clarified Honey four Pound; boil them to the Consistence of a
Syrup. It purges Choler and Serum: The Dose is three Ounces.

Simple Oxymel.
Take of clarified Honey what quantity you please, dissolve it over hot Ashes
in an Earthen Pot, and add a sufficient quantity of White Wind Vinegar; bring
it to the Consistence of a Syrup without boiling. It attenuates, cuts gross
Humors, opens Obstructions, cleanses, expectorates, renders Respiration easy,
and is in a manner temperate.

Oxymel of Squills.
Take the best Honey clarified, what Quantity you please, dissolve it as was
said before, and add to it a sufficient quantity of Squill Vinegar, and bring
it to the Consistence of a Syrup without boiling. It powerfully cuts gross
Humors, and is good for the Falling Sickness, Giddiness, and an Hemicrania.

Diamoron of Nicholaus.
Take of the Juice of unripe Mulberries and Brambleberries, each one Pint and
an half, of the best Honey clarified one Pound and an half, boil them according
to Art to a thick Syrup. It cools, repels, is astringent, good for
Inflammations of the Throat and Almonds, the Quinsey, and Ulcers of the Mouth.

Rob of Acacia.
Take of the unripe Fruit of Bullace Tree, a sufficient quantity, boil them
till they are soft, and pulp them through a Sive; to one Pound of Pulp add two
Pound of fine Sugar, and boil them to the Consistence of a Rob. It cools,
binds, and is good for the Bloody Flux and a Loosenss.

Rob of Berberries.
Take of the Juice of Berberries a quart, of white Sugar one Pound; boil them
to the Consistence of a Rob. It cools, binds, qualifies Choler, is good for the
Cholera Morbus, the Bloody Flux, and a Looseness.

Sapa, or simple Rob. It is called by the Greeks, Siraeum.
Take of Wine just pressed out of white generous ripe Grapes six quarts, boil
it over an open Fire to the Consumption of two Thirds, namely, that two quarts
may remain, of the Consistence of Honey, then keep it for Use. It binds,
cleanses, digests, nourishes, is good for a Cough, and Diseases of the Mouth.
Rob of acid Cherries is made the same way of the Juice pressed out and
thickened, namely, the Cherries are boiled by themselves, and pulped through a
Sive, and with, or without Sugar, are brought to a Thickness. It cools, dries,
is cardiac, and alexipharmic.

The Rob of Dwarf Elder and Elder, purge Watery Humors, force Sweat, and is
good for hydropick Persons. The Rob of Quinces is astringent, strengthens the
Stomach, is good for the Cholera Morbus, and a Looseness. Rob of the Juice of
Raspherries cools and binds.

Of things candied.
THE way of candying is not always the same; for Roots, Barks, Stalks, hard
Fruits must be first boiled to a Softness, and some must be often infused for
some Days, and afterward boiled, and so candied with Water and Sugar,
clarified with the White of an Egg, and boiled to the Consistence of a Syrup;
but Flowers and soft Fruits with clarified Sugar boiled with Water almost to
the Consistence of a Syrup; afterward the Syrup being removed about half an
Hour from the Fire, the Flowers and Fruits are put in, and afterward it is
boiled to the full Consistence of a Syrup.

The candied Roots of Acorus heat, dry, and are stomachic. The candied Roots of
Succory, cool, dry, and qualify Choler. The candied Roots of Elecampane, heat,
dry, are thoracic, stomachic, and alexipharmic. Eryngo Roots candied, open,
stimulate Venery, and provoke Urine, and purge the Reins and Bladder. The Roots
of Satyrion candied, heat, moisten, and provoke Venery. The Roots of Scorzonera
candied, heat, and are alexipharmic, are good for Melancholy, the
Falling Sickness, and Mother-fits The Roots of Comfry candied, stop bleeding,
and heal Wounds. Ginger candied, heats, dries, is stomachic, and thoracic. The
candied Orange Peel heats and dries, expels Wind, and is good for the Plague.
The candied Bark of Citron is good for the same. Stalks of Lettice cool,
moisten, and quench Thirst. Orange Flowers candied, and Citron Flowers candied,
heat, dry, attenuate, are cardiac, cephalic, diaphoretic, and alexipharmic. The
Fruit of the Berberry Tree cools and moistens; sweet Cherries candied moisten,
are cephalic, and resist Malignity. Myrobalans candied are stomachic, they
qualify Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy. Walnuts candied are stomachic, force
the Courses, expel Wind, and are good for Cholic Pains. Nutmegs candied, heat,
dry, stop vomiting, and are stomachic. Currants candied, cool and moisten.
Quinces candied, cool, dry, are astringent and stomachic.

Purging Raisins.
Take of the Leaves of Sena cleansed eight Ounces, of the Seeds of sweet Fennel
one Ounce; infuse them a whole Night in a sufficient Quantity of the Infusion
of pale Roses, fresh Roses being put in nine times, in the Morning boil them
gently; to one Pint and an half of the strained Liquor, add one Pound and an
half of white Sugar clarified, Corinthian Raisins cleansed one Pound; boil them
to a thick Syrup. They purge gently by Stool, and are used for tender People
and Children. The Dose is three Ounces.

Of Conserves.
COnserves of the Flowers of Bettony heats, dries, is cephalic and stomachic.
Conserve of Borrage cures Melancholy and is Cardiac. Conserve of Marygolds
heats, dries, is cardiac, alexipharmic, and moves the Courses. Conserve of
Succory cools, dries, attenuates, and is hepatic. Conserve of Eyebright heats,
dries, is cephalic, and good for the Eyes. Conserve of Mallows is good for the
Stone and Breast. Conserve of Water Lillies cools, moistens, and disposes to
Sleep. Conserve of Peony heats, dries, is cephalic, and good for the
Falling Sickness. Conserve of pale Roses purges Choler; the Dose is five
Ounces. Conserve of red Roses dries, is astringent, cephalic, and cardiac.
Conserve of Rosemary Flowers heats, dries, is cephalic and cardiac. Conserve of
Sage heats, dries, is cephalic and uterine. Conserve of Comfry heats, dries, is
thoracic and vulnerary. Conserve of Violets cools, moistens, is cardiac and
thoracie. All the Conserves above mentioned, must be made of the Flowers of the
Herbs. Conserve of the Herb Wormwood heats, dries, attenuates, opens, is
hepatic, stomachic, and splenetic. Conserve of Fumitory is hot and dry, it
opens Obstructions. Conserve of Balm is hot, dry, cardiac, cephalic, and
stomachic. Conserve of Mint heats, dries, is astringent, cephalic, stomachic.
Conserve of Wood Sorrel cools, dries, is astringent, stomachic, and cephalic.
Note, that those things that are dry must have three Pound of Sugar to every
Pound of the Herb or Flower, and those that are moist must have two Pound of
Sugar to every Pound of the Herb or Flower.

Pearled Sugar.
Take of the whitest Sugar one Pound, of the Water of pale Roses a sufficient
quantity; boil it to the Consistence of Tablets: Toward the End of boiling,
mingle with it of prepared Pearl half an Ounce; form it into Tablets upon a
Marble Stone. It cools, is astringent, cardiac, and cephalic.

Sugar of Marshmallows.
Take of the Pulp of the Root of Marshmallows three Pound, of the whitest
Sugar sinely powdered one Pound, with a sufficient quantity of Rosewater; make
Tablets according to Art. It heats, moistens, and is thoracic.

Of solutive Electuaries, or purging Opiats.
Benedictum Laxativum.
TAke of the Roots of Gummy Turbith, and of Spurge prepared, each ten Drams; of
Hermodactiles, Scammony prepared, Flowers of red Roses, each five Drams; of the
Roots of Acorus, Galingal, Indian Spike, Ginger, Saffron, Mace, Cloves, long
Pepper, the Seeds of Smallage, Asparagus, the lesser Cardamoms, Caraways,
Fennel, Milium Solis, Kneeholm, Sal Gemmae, each one Dram; with thrice the
quantity of the best Honey clarified; make an Electuary according to Art. It
incides, attenuates, opens, purges Phlegm, Choler, and Serum. The Dose is from
half an Ounce to six Drams.

Confectio Hamech.
Take of the Leaves of Sena cleansed, of the Roots of Polypody of the Oak, of
choice Rhubarb, of white Agarick, of the Pulp of Coloquintida tied up in a Rag,
of the Flowers of Violets, of the Herbs Dodder of Thym, each two Ounces; of
common Wormwood and Thym, each one Ounce; of the Seeds of Anise, Fennel, and of
red Roses, each half an Ounce; infuse them, and boil them according to Art, in
a sufficient quantity of Whey; to the strained Liquor add of the Juice of
Fumitory clarified, and of Sugar, each one Pound and an half; boil them to the
Consistence of Honey, and strain them, and add of the Pulps of Cassia, Prunes,
Tamarinds, and Manna, each one Ounce and an half: When they are brought to a
due Consistence, sprinkle into them, the Leaves of Sena cleansed, and choice
Rhubarb, each one Ounce; of Scammony prepared, one Ounce and an half; of the
Seeds of Fumitory, Anise, and Indian Spike, each three Drams; make an Electuary
according to Art. It purges Melancholy, Choler, and salt Phlegm, and is
therefore good for the Itch, Madness, and a Cancer. The Dose is from three
Drams to six.

Diacarthamum.
Take of the Marrow of the Seeds of bastard Saffron, of Gummy Turbith, each one
Ounce; of Hermodactiles, Scammony prepared, Liquorish rasped, each half an
Ounce; of Ginger and Cinnamon, each two Drams; of choice Manna, and Honey of
Roses, each one Ounce; of white Sugar dissolved in the Juice of Quinces one
Pound; make an Electuary according to Art. It purges Phlegm powerfully. The Dose
is from five Drams to an Ounce. Pills are frequently made of the Species of
this Electuary, an Extract of them being made with Spirit of Wine rectified;
but Scammony is added to the Extract. The Dose is one Dram.

Caryo Costinum.
Take of bitter Costus, of the Seeds of Cummin, white Ginger, and Cloves, each
one Dram; of Diagrydium and white Hermodactiles, the outward Bark being taken
off, each two Drams; of clarified Honey, and odoriferous Wine, each three
Ounces; make an Electuary according to Art. It purges serous Humors; but it is
chiefly used for the Gout. The Dose is from two Drams to half an Ounce.

Diacatholicon.
Take of the Roots of Polypody of the Oak, four Ounces; of the Seeds of Fennel
six Drams; boil them according to Art in a sufficient Quantity of Water: To the
strained Liquor add of white Sugar two Pound; boil them to a Syrup, wherein
dissolve of the Pulp of Cassia, and of Tamarinds, each two Ounces; of the
Leaves of Sena cleansed, two Ounces; of choice Rhubarb and Mechoacan, each one
Ounce; of the Seeds of Anise half an Ounce, of the four greater cold Seeds, of
Liquorish rasped, and of the Flowers of Violets, each two Drams; make an
Electuary according to Art. It purges all Humors. The Dose is from half an
Ounce to one Ounce.

Diaphenicon.
Take of the Pulp of Dates cleansed, and infused in Vinegar, and pulped through
a Sive, and well evaporated, one Pound; of sweet Almonds blanched, three
Ounces; bruise them, and mix them, and add to them two Pound of clarified
Honey; let them boil a little, and then sprinkle in the following Powders, of
Turbith finely powdered four Ounces, of Scammony prepared one Ounce and an
half, Ginger, Galingal, Wood of Aloes, Cinnamon, Mace, the Leaves of Rue dried,
Pepper, the Seeds of Fennel and Daucus, each two Drams; make an Electuary
according to Art. It purges Phlegm and Choler. The Dose is from half an Ounce to
one Ounce.

The solutive Electuary of Prunes.
Take of the Pulp of Prunes that are acid and sweet, thickened, one Pound; of
the Pulp of Tamarinds and Cassia dissolved in the Decoction of Prunes, each two
Ounces; of clarified Sugar two Pound; boil them to a Thickness, and then
sprinkle in the following Powders. Take of Scammony prepared two Ounces, of
Rhubarb one Ounce, of Cinnamon half an Ounce, of the Flowers of Violets and red
Roses, of the Seeds of Cucumber and Purslain, and of the Juice of Liquorish,
each two Drams, of yellow Sanders and Tragacanth, each one Dram; make an
Electuary according to Art. It purges only Choler. The Dose is from three Drams
to six.

Hiera with Coloquintida.
Take of the Pulp of Coloquintida, Agarick, Germander, Horehound, Arabian
Staechas, each ten Drams; Opopanax, Sagapenum, round Birthwort, the Seeds of
Parsley and white Pepper, each five Drams; Cinnamon, Indian Spiknard, Polium,
Saffron, Myrrh, each four Drams; of clarisied Honey three Pound; make an
Electuary according to Art. It purges Phlegm. The Dose is from half an Ounce to
six Drams.

Hiera Picra.
Take of lucid Soccotrine Aloes one Pound and an half; an Ounce of Cinnamon,
Wood of Aloes, the Roots of Asarabacca, Indian Spicknard, Saffron, Mastich,
each six Drams; of clarified Honey three times the Quantity, make an Electuary
according to Art. It purges Choler and Phlegm, incides, attenuates, and purges
the remote Parts of the Body. An Ounce of it with a Scruple of Saffron was
Haelideus's Experiment for an obstinate Obstruction of the Courses.

Lenitive Electuary.
Take of Raisins of the Sun stoned two Ounces; of the Herbs Mercury three
Handfuls; of fresh Maidenhair, of the Flowers of Violets, of cleansed Barley,
each one Handful; of Liquorish rasped, of the Seeds of Fennel, each half an
Ounce; of Jujubes, Sebestins, each Number twenty; of Prunes, Tamarinds, each
one Ounce; of fresh Roots of Polypody, of the Leaves of Sena cleansed, each two
Ounces; boil them according to Art in a sufficient quantity of Water; to the
strained Liquor add of the Pulps of Cassia, Tamarinds, and Prunes, each four
Ounces, of white Sugar one Pound, of the best Honey half a Pound, of the Leaves
of Sena cleansed three Ounces and an half, of the Seeds of Anise three Drams;
make an Electuary according to Art. It purges Phlegm, Serum, Choler, Melancholy,
and is good for the Diseases of the Breast, and a Pleurisy. The Dose is half an
Ounce or an Ounce.

Electuary of the Juice of Roses.
Take of the Juice of fresh pale Roses clarified, of white Sugar, each one
Pound and an half; boil them acccording to Art; toward the End, sprinkle in of
Scammony prepared one Ounce and an half; of all the Sanders, and Cinnamon well
powdered, each two Drams; make an Electuary according to Art. It purges Choler
and serous Humors. The Dose is from half an Ounce to six Drams.

Venice Treacle.
Take of the Troches of Squills six Ounces; of the Troches of Vipers, Magma
Hedychroy, prepared Opium, long Pepper, each three Ounces; the Roots of
Florentine Orris, of white and light Agarick, of Cinnamon, cretick Scordium,
red Roses, the Seeds of Napi, Oil of Nutmegs by Expression, the Juice of
Liquorish, each one Ounce and an half; of the Roots of sweet Costus, five
leaved Grass, Rhaponticum, or instead of it, Rhubarb, Indian Spiknard, Ginger,
woody Cassia, the Leaves of cretick Dittany, Mountain Calaminth, Horehound,
Schaenanthum, Arabian Staechas, English Saffron, white and black Pepper, the
Seeds of true Macedonian Parsley, Myrrh, Masculine Frankincense, Cyprian
Turpentine, each six Drams; the Roots of Acorus, Gentian, Meum Athamanticum,
Valerian, celtick Spike, the Leaves of Germander, Ground Pine, the Leaves of
Malabathrum, Mountain Poly, fresh Juniper Berries, the Seeds of Bishop's-weed,
Anise, the lesser Cardamoms, St. John's-wort, Scsely, Thlaspi, the Cloves of
Pliny; for Amomum, true bole Armenick, for Terra Lemnia, Chalcitis toasted till
it come to an Ash Color, Gum arabic, Sagapenum, Storax Calamite, the Juice of
Hypocistis, and of true Acacia, each half an Ounce; the Roots of small
Birthwort, the Flowers of the lesser Centaury, of the Seeds of cretick Daucus,
of Opoponax, Galbanum; Castor, Judaic Bitumen, each two Drams; a sufficient
quantity of generous Canary Wine to melt the Gums and Juices, of Narbon Honey
thrice the quantity of all: Make an Opiate according to Art. It heats, dries,
attenuates, kills Worms, expels Gravel; being taken in Parsley Water, it forces
the Courses, helps Concoction in the Stomach, and is an excellent
Alexipharmick; it is called the Mother of Medicines, as Mithridate is the
Father. The Dose is from half a Dram to three Drams. An Ounce of it is seldom
given, except when Poison has been taken, and then it ought not to be given if
the Patient be under seven Years of Age. The older this Medicine is, the better
it is.

Mithridate.
Take of English Saffron, Myrrh, male Frankincense, Ginger, white and light
Agarick, Indian Spiknard, Cinnamon, the Seeds of Thlaspi, each ten Drams; of
the Seeds of Sesely, of sweet Costus, of the Leaves of Laurel, for Malabathrum,
of Scaenanth, Arabian Staechas, long Pepper, true Storax Calamite, Galbanum,
Opoponax, the Juice of Hypocistis, Cyprian Turpentine, Oil of Nutmeg by
Expression, for Opobalsamum, each eight Drams; of woody Cassia, white Poly
Mountain, cretick Scordium, white Pepper, Juniper Berries, the Seeds of cretick
Daucus, Bdellium, Troches Cypheos, each seven Drams; the Roots of Gentian and
of Celtick Spike, cretick Dittany, the Seeds of true Macedonian Parsley, the
lesser Cardamoms, Fennel, red Roses, Gumarabick, Opium prepared, each sive
Drams; the Roots of true Acorus, Asara Bacca, Valerian, the Seeds of Anise,
Sagapenum, each three Drams; Meum Athamanticum, the Seeds of St. John's-wort,
true Acacia, the Belly of a Schinck, each two Drams and an half; a sufficient
quantity of generous Canary Wine to melt the Gums and Juices, of Narbon Honey
thrice the quantity of all: Make an Opiate according to Art. It heats, dries,
forces the Courses, expels Gravel, forces Sweat, and is alexipharmic. The Dose
is from one Scruple to two Drams.

Fracastorius's Diascordium.
Take of the Leaves of Scordium dried, of red Roses, each one Ounce; of true
Bole Armenick two Ounces; of the Roots of Bistort, Gentian, Tormentil, woody
Cassia, Cinnamon, Cretick Dittany, of the Seeds of Sorrel, of Storax Calamite,
Galbanum, Gumarabick, each half an Ounce; of prepared Opium, Ginger, long
Pepper, each two Drams; of clarified Honey three Pound; of generous Canary Wine
a sufficient quantity; make an Opiate according to Art. It moderately heats and
dries, is astringent, stops vomiting, forces Sweat, and is good for the Plague,
and big-bellied Women who cannot bear Treacle: It is also an excellent Remedy
for Hickops. The Dose is from one Dram to three.

Theriaca Diatesseron Mesues.
Take of the Roots of round Birthwort, and of Gentian, Laurel Berries, and
Myrrh, each two Ounces; clarified Honey two Pound; make an Electuary according
to Art. It heats, dries, attenuates, is good for cold Diseases of the Head and
Stomach, has an alexipharmic quality, and many prefer it before Venice Treacle.
The Dose is from two Drams to half an Ounce.

Confection of Alkermes.
Take of the Syrup of the Grains of Kermes two Pound and an half, heat it, and
add of Ambar-grease cut small two Drams; sprinkle the following Powders with
liquid Ambar, of Wood of Aloes, and Cinnamon, each six Drams; of Lapis Lazuli
prepared, of prepared Pearls, each two Drams; of Leaf Gold one Dram; make an
Electuary according to Art. It heats, dries, is cardiac, good for Fainting, an
Apoplexy, and Melancholy. It is an excellent Astringent in a long and violent
Looseness. It is prepared with or without Musk. The Dose is from half a Scruple
to two Scruples.

Confection of Hyacinth.
Take of Hiathinths and red Coral, each half an Ounce; of true Bole Armenick
one Ounce; of the Grains of Kermes, of the Roots of Tormentil and white
Dittany, of the Seeds of Sorrel, Lemons, Purslain, of the Leaves of red Roses,
all the Sanders, of the Shavings of Ivory, each four Scruples; of the Shavings
of Hartshorn three Drams; of Saphyr, Smaragd, Topaz, Pearl, crude Silk, Gold,
Silver in Leaves, each two Scruples, with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of
Lemons; make an Electuary according to Art. It cools, dries is astringent,
sudorific, cardiac, and expels Melancholy. The Dose is from one Scruple to one
Dram.

Philonium Mesue.
Take of the Seeds of white Henbane, and white Pepper, each twenty Drams;
prepared Opium ten Drams, Saffron five Drams; the Roots of Pyrethrum, and
Indian Spiknard, and Castor, each one Dram; of clarified Honey, thrice the
quantity of all; make an Electuary according to Art. It dries, is astringent,
hypnotick, forces Urine, expels Gravel, being taken in Smallage Water; it also
stops vomiting. The Dose is from half a Scruple to half a Dram.

Nicholaus's quieting Opiate.
Take of the Flowers of red Roses and Violets, each three Drams; of the Seeds
of white Henbane, Lettice, white Poppy, Flea-bane, Purslain, Scariola, of the
Bark of the Root of Mandrake, of Opium prepared, Ginger, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, each
one Dram and an half; of all the Sanders, of Spodium of Ivory burnt, of
Tragacanth, each two Scruples, of clarified Honey, thrice the quantity of all;
make an Opiate according to Art. It cools, is astringent, anodyne, and
hypnotick. The Dose is from one Scruple to a Dram.

Purging Powders.
Diasena Montagnani.
TAke of the Leaves of Sena cleansed two Ounces; of Cream of Tartar half an
Ounce; of the Seeds of sweet Fennel two Drams, of Mace, Cinnamon, Sal Gemma,
each one Dram; make a Powder. It heats, dries, incides, attenuates gross
Humors, purges Melancholy, and is cephalic. The Dose is from one Dram to one
Dram and an half.

Diaturbith with Rhubarb.
Take of Gummy Turbith, Hermodactiles, choice Rhubarb, each one Ounce; of
prepared Scammony half an Ounce; of white and red Sanders, Ginger, Flowers of
Violets, each one Dram and an half; of Mastich, Seeds of Anise, Cinnamon, and
English Saffron, each half a Dram; make a Powder. It purges Phlegm and gross
Humors with Choler. The Dose is one Dram.

Galen's simple Hiera.
Take of lucid Soccotrine Aloes an hundred Drams; of Cinnamon, Wood of Aloes,
the Roots of Asarabacca, and Indian Spiknard, Saffron, and Mastich, each six
Drams; make a Powder. It purges only Choler: It heats, dries, is stomachic and
cephalic. The Dose is from one Dram to four Scruples.

Aromatic Powders.
Aromatic Rose Powder.
TAke of red Roses fifteen Drams, of Liquorish rasped seven Drams, of choice
Cinnamon five Drams; of Wood of Aloes and yellow Sanders, each three Drams; of
Gumarabic, Tragacanth, Mace, Cloves, each two Drams and an half; of Indian
Spiknard, Nutmeg, the lesser Cardamoms, Galingal, each one Dram; make a Powder.
It heats, dries, atenuates, is, stomachic, cardiac, and cephalic. The Dose is
one Dram.

Powder of Calaminth.
Take of the Herbs Mountain Calaminth, Origanum, Pennyroyal, the Seeds of
Macedonian Parsley, Sesely, each two Drams, Smallage, Tops of Thym, each half an
Ounce; black Pepper, Seeds of Lovage, each one Ounce; make a Powder. It heats,
dries, attenuates, forces Urine, and the Courses, expels Wind, and is
stomachic. The Dose is one Dram.

Powder of Galingal.
Take of the Roots of Galingal, of Wood of Aloes, each six Drams; of the Roots
of sweet smelling Flag, Ginger, of Cinnamon, Mace, Cloves, white and long
Pepper, the Seeds of Cummin, Lovage, the outward Barks of Oranges and Citrons
dried, each one Dram and an half; the Herbs Calaminth, Mint dried, Indian
Spike, the Seeds of Anise, Smallage, the lesser Cardomoms, Carawayes, Fennel,
each one Dram; make a Powder. It heats, dries, cuts, and volatilizes gross
Humors, expels Wind, sweetens the Breath, is cephalic, cardiac, stomachic,
alexipharmic. The Dose is one Dram.

Simple Powder of Orris.
Take of the Roots of Florentine Orris half an Ounce; of white Sugarcandy, of
the Powder Diatragacanth frigid, each two Drams; make a Powder. It heats,
mollifies, attenuates, incides, and is good for a Cough. The Dose is one Dram.

The greater Powder of Lacca.
Take of prepared Lacca, Rhubarb, Scaenanth, each three Drams; of the Roots of
round Birthwort, Asarabacca, Costus, Gentian, Madder, Indian Spiknard, woody
Cassia, Cinnamon, Saffron, of the Herbs Savin, Hyssop, of the thickened Juices
of Wormwood, Water Agrimony, bitter Almonds, the Seeds of Bishopsweed, Anise,
Smallage, Fennel, Bdellium, Mastich, Myrrh, each one Dram and an half; Pepper,
Ginger, each one Dram; make a Powder. It heats, dries, incides, opens, is
diuretic, and moves the Courses. It cures a Dropsy, drives out the Measles and
Smallpox, and is stomachic. The Dose is half a Dram.

The Powder called Diamargarit frigid.
Take of splendid Pearls three Drams; of Wood of Aloes, all the Sanders,
Cinnamon, of the four lesser cold Seeds, of white Poppy Seed, and of Myrtle
Berries, of the Flowers of Bugloss, Water Lillies, red Roses, Violets, of crude
Hartshorn, of the Bone of a Stag's Heart, of the Shavings of Ivory, each one
Dram, of white and red Coral, each half a Dram; make a Powder. It cools, is
astringent, pectoral, cardiac, and good for malignant Diseases. The Dose is one
Dram.

The Powder called Diambra.
Take of the Roots of Roman Doronicum and Galingal, of Cinnamon, Cloves,
Nutmeg, Mace, of the Leaves of Laurel, for Malabathrum, each three Drams; of
Ginger one Dram and an half; of the Wood of Aloes, yellow Sanders, lesser
Cardomoms, long Pepper, each two Drams; of Indian Spiknard and Ambar-grease,
each one Dram; make a Powder. It heats, dries, is cardiac, alexipharmic,
stomachic, and is good for old Men and Women. The Dose is one Dram.

The Powder called Dianthus.
Take of the Flowers of Rosmary one Ounce; of red Roses, Violets, of Liquorish
rasped, each six Drams; of Galingal, Zedoary, Ginger, Wood of Aloes, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Indian Spike, the Seeds of Anise, Dill, the lesser Cardomoms,
each four Scruples; make a Powder. It heats, dries, is cardiac, and expels
Melancholy. The Dose is one Dram.

The Powder called Diarrhodon Abbatis.
Take of red Roses one Ounce and an half; of white and red Sanders, each two
Drams and an half; of Wood of Aloes, Gum Arabic, Tragacanth, Spodium of Ivory,
each two Scruples; of the Roots of Asarabacca, Rhubarb, Indian Spike, Cinnamon,
Saffron, Cloves, of the Fruit of Berberries, of the Seeds of Sorrel, Anise, the
lesser Cardomoms, Endive, Lettice, Fennel, Basil, Purslain, Scariola, of the
Juice of Liquorish, of Mastich, each one Scruple, of crude Hartshorn, and
white Pearls, each half a Scruple; make a Powder. It cools, dries, is
astringent, cardiac, stomachic, and good for Consumptions. The Dose is one
Ounce.

The Powder called Diatragacanth frigid.
Take of white Gum Tragacanth, half an Ounce; of Gum Arabic two Drams and an
half; of fine Wheaten Flower one Dram; of Liquorish rasped, of the Seeds of
Citruls, Cucmuber, Cucurbit, Melons, each half a Dram; of white Sugarcandy six
Drams; make a Powder. We have prescribed but a small Quantity of it, because
the Composition, by reason of the greater cold Seeds, will not keep above three
Months, which is the reason also that we have omitted them in other
Compositions. It cools, is astringent, good for Consumptions and Coughs. The
Dose is one Dram.

The Powder of the three Sanders.
Take of the three Sanders, red Roses, white Sugarcandy, of the Seeds of
Lettice, Purslain, Scariola, each three Drams; of Rhubarb, Spodium of Ivory,
Juice of Liquorish, each two Drams and an half; of Gum Arabic, and Tragacanth,
and of fine Wheaten Flower, each one Dram and an half. It cools, binds, is
stomachic, cardiac, and extinguishes the Relics of Fevers. The Dose is one
Dram.

Pulvis Liberans.
Take of true Bole Armenick, six Drams; of the Roots of Tormentil two Drams; of
the Seeds of Sorrel, Carduus Benedictus, Citron, Coriander prepared, Endive,
Rue, each one Dram and an half; of all the Sanders, of the Roots of white
Dittany, each one Dram; of Roman Doronicum, Zedoary, Wood of Aloes, Wood of
Cassia, Cinnamon, the lesser Cardomoms, of Flowers of Bugloss, Saffron, Mace,
Water Lillies, Roses, Pearls, white and red Coral, Ambar, Hyacinth, Granate,
the Raspings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of Spodium of Ivory, of crude Silk cut,
each half a Dram; make a Powder. It binds, dries, is alexipharmic, is excellent
for the Plague, it moves Sweat, and preserves from Putrefaction. The Dose half
a Dram to one Dram.

Nephritic Powder.
Take of true nephritic Wood, of Liquorish rasped, of Peach Kernels, each one
Ounce; of the Seeds of Milium Solis, Saxifrage, each half an Ounce; of
Smallage, Carawayes, Daucus, Fennel, Broom, the greater Bur, of Lovage,
Macedonian Parsley, Mountain Siler, Roman Nettles, of the Roots of Asarabacca,
and Ginger, each two Drams; of Indian Spike, Schaenanth, Ambar, Crab's-eyes,
each one Dram and an half; of Sal Prunella, Tartar vitriolated, each two Drams
and an half; make a Powder. It heats, opens, attenuates, expels Gravel. The
Dose is one Dram.

A Powder for the Falling Sickness.
Take of the Roots of Male-peony, gathered at the beginning of Spring, at the
decrease of the Moon, the Seeds of Male-peony, the Roots of white Dittany, and
Misletoe of the Oak, the shavings of a Man's Scull, that died a violent Death,
the shavings of Unicorns horn, Elks hoof, each one Ounce; Oriental Pearl, the
Hyacinth stone, red Coral prepared, each half an Ounce; the Seeds of
Clovebasil, the Flowers of Limetree, Bettony, Lilly of the Valleys, each two
Drams; Ambar-grease, half a Scruple; oriental Musk, six Grains; of Leaves of
the purest Gold, number fifteen; make a Powder. This Powder is excellent for
the Falling Sickness, the Apoplexy and Palsy. The Dose is from half a Scruple
to half a Dram.

The Powder for the Bite of a mad Dog.
Take of the Leaves of Rue, Vervain, lesser Sage, Plantain, Polypody, common
Wormwood, Mint, Mugwort, Balm, Bettony, St. John's-wort, the lesser Centaury,
each equal parts. These Herbs must be gathered when they are at their
Perfection, that is about June; they must be gathered when the Moon is Full,
and the Weather fair. The Dose of this Powder is half a Dram; it must be mixed
with half a Dram of Powder of Vipers, and taken in a small Glass of White Wine
in the Morning Fasting, for nine days succesively. It is also good to apply at
the same time Parsley bruised to the Part affected.

Powder of Vipers.
Take as many Vipers flayed as you please; Cut off their Heads and Tails, and
take out their Entrails, but save the Heart and Liver, dry them in the shade,
wash the Bodies, Hearts, and Livers in White Wind, and hang them up to dry in
the shade; when they are quite dry, cut them very small, beat them to Powder.
It is very good for Scabs, Itches, and Leprosies, and for a Consumption; half a
Dram, or a Dram of it may be taken in the Morning Fasting; it may be taken for
a good while together.

A Powder for a Dentifrice.
Take of the Roots of florentine Orris, Pumex-stone, Hartshorn burnt, red
Coral prepared, Cutlebone, Cream of Tartar, all finely Powdered, each one
Ounce; of oriental Musk, and Civet, each half a Scruple; of the Oils of
Rhodium, Cloves, and Cinnamon, all by Destillation, each two Drops; make a
Powder. This does not only whiten and cleanse the Teeth, but fastens them, and
keeps them from Rotting.

An other Powder for the same.
Take of fine Dragons Blood, and of Roman Allom burnt, both finely Powdered,
each two Ounces; of oriental Musk, four Grains; mix them, make a Powder
according to art; rub the Teeth with it gently, Morning and Evening.

An Oderiferous Powder for the Head.
Take of the Roots of florentine Orris, eight Ounces; of yellow Sanders, four
Ounces; of Lavender Flowers, red Roses, and Tops of Marjoram, each three
Ounces; of Storax, and Benzion, each two Ounces; of sweet Tachamahacca, and of
the Flowers of Lillies of the Valleys, each one Ounce; of Cloves, Labdanum,
true Acorus, and round Cyperus, each one Dram; Powder them grossly. The chief
use of this Powder is for quilted Caps, to strengthen the Brain. It may by also
worn upon the Stomach, or Heart, or put amongst Clothes, or Linen for the said
purpose.

A Powder for the Worms.
Take of Wormseed, of the Seeds of Citron, Broom, Purslain, Colworts, choice
Rhubarb, Scordium, the lesser Centaury, Gentian, Hartshorn rasped, each one
Ounce; make a fine Powder. The Dose is from half a Scruple to a Dram, according
to the Age. When you use it, you must add to it Mercurius Dulcis, and Scammony;
the three last Days of the Moon are to be chosen for the use of this Powder.

A Digestive Powder.
Take of the Powder Vipers, of the Seeds of sweet Fennel, Anise and Coriander,
each one Ounce; of Daucus and cretick Bishops-weed, each half an Ounce; of the
outward Bark of dried Citron, of sharp Cinnamon, each three Drams; of Cloves
and Mace, each one Dram; mix an equal Quantity of white Sugar with this Powder;
half a Spoonful of it may be taken after Meals; it Cherishes the natural Heat,
helps Concoction expels Wind, preserves and restores lost Appetite, corrects
ill Fumes from the Stomach, and Sweetens the Breath.

A Powder against Miscarriage.
Take of oriental Pearls prepared, of Unicorns Horn, and Ivory rasped, of white
Ambar, red Coral prepared, Mastich, Kermes Grains, red Sanders, Lemnian Earth,
and Tormentil Roots, each half an Ounce; of Mace one Dram; of Cloves one
Scruple; make a Powder; mix with it an equal Quantity of white Sugar, and six
Leaves of fine Gold; half a Scruple, or a Scruple of it may be taken Fasting,
in Syrup of Quinces, or in Broth; it also good for a Looseness, the Bloody
Flux, and a Weakness of the Stomach.

A Powder to hasten Delivery.
Take the Testicles of a Horse dried in a Oven, according to Art, of sharp
Cinnamon, the Kernels of Dates, Borax, Saffron, the dried Leaves of Savin, each
two Drams; of Troches of Myrrh, one Dram; make a Powder.

An Hysteric Powder.
Take of the Warts growing on Horses Legs, falling off, or being cut off in the
Spring, one Ounce; of Assa-foetida, the Horns and Hoof of a Goat, each one
Dram; make a Powder. This Powder must be cast upon live Coals and the Fume must
be received upon the Parts assected through a Tunnel.

A Powder for the bloodly Flux.
Take of Lemnian Earth, Bolearmenick, red Roses, Balaustines, Roots of
Tormentil, and Bistort, the Tears of Dragons blood, red Coral prepared,
Bloodstone, each one Ounce; of the Seeds of Purslain, Plantain, and Flixweed,
each half an Ounce; of Cloves and Mace, each two Drams; the Dose is from one
Scruple to a Dram: It may be given in Wine, or some astringent Water, or
decoction; upon extraordinary occasions, you may mix a grain of Laudanum.

A Powder against Hemorrhages.
Take of Boodstone, the Kernel of the Eagle-stone, the Earth of Vitriol
washed, remaining after distillation, Bolearmenick, Franckincense, Horsetail,
Knotgrass, Lemnian Earth, burnt Hartshorn, Gypsum, each equal Parts; make a
Powder. It stops the Blood of a Woman's Veins or Arterles being applied with the
White of an Egg, and bound upon the part affected; it stops Defluxions on the
Eyes, being mixed with Vinegar, and applied to the Eyes.

A sneezing Powder.
Take of the dried Leaves of Marjoram, Sage, Bettony, of the Flowers of Lillies
of the Valleys, each one Ounce; of the Roots of Florentine Orris, of white
Hellebore, Pyrethrum, the Seeds of Roman Nigella, each two Drams; of the Tops
of Pennyroyal, and creeping Thym, each one Dram; make a Powder. It is good for
Apoplexies, the Falling sickness, Lethargies, and other Diseases of the Brain
proceeding from a Cold. In extarordinary Lethargies, Drowsiness, and sleepy
Diseases, two Drams of Euphorbium may be added to the Composition of this
Powder; but not unless there be very great necessity.

Troches
Agarick Trochiscated.
TAke of white and light Agarick, three Ounces, with a sufficient quantity of
Canary Wine, wherein two Drams of Ginger has bin infused; make Troches: They
purge Phlegm. The Dose is one Dram.

White Troches of Rhasis.
Take of Ceruss washed in Rose water, ten Drams; of fine wheaten flower, four
Drams; of Gum Arabic, and Tragacanth, each two Drams; of Camphor half a Dram;
with the white of an Egg, make Troches. If you would have Opium in it, you must
add a Dram. It dryes, binds, repels, thickens, asswages the acrimony of the
Humors, and is used outwardly for Inflammations of the Eyes.

Troches of Alhandal.
Take of the white and light pulp of Coloquintida, purged from the Seeds, cut
small, and powdered, with a sufficient quantity of Oil of Roses, ten Ounces; of
Gum Arabic, Tragacanth, Bdellium, each six Drams; Powder them all, and with
part of the Gum Tragacanth, make such a quantity of Mucilage in a sufficient
quantity of Rose water, as will make up the other Powders into a Past, whereof
make Troches to be dried in the shade. They purge powerfully, and are good for
the Colic, Apoplexy, Asthma, and Gout. The Dose is one Scruple.

Troches of Winter Cherries.
Take of Winter Cherries, three Drams, of true Bolearmenick, one Ounce; of the
Gums Arabic, and Tragacanth, of Dragons blood in tear's, of Frankincense, fine
wheaten Flower, juice of Liquorish, bitter Almonds, Pine kernels, the Seeds of
white Poppies, each six Drams; of the Seeds of Citruls, Gourds, Melons, each
three Drams and an half; of the Seeds of Smallage, and Henbane, of Ambar, and
prepared Opium, each two Drams; with the juice of Winter Cherries, make
Troches. They cool, mollify, heal Wounds, are anodyne, good for Heat of Urine,
and for Ulcers of the Kidneys, and provoke Urine, and have often done a great
deal of good in desperate cases. The Dose is from one Dram to two Drams.

White pectoral Troches.
Take of the whitest Sugar one Pound, of white Sugarcandy, and penidiate Sugar,
each four Ounces; of the Roots of Orris, two Ounces; of fine wheaten Flower one
Ounce and an half; with the mucilage of white Tragacanth, extracted in Rose
water, make small Troches. They mollisie, thicken, cleanse, are good for a
Cough, and a roughness of the Mouth. One Dram of them is to be held in the
Mouth, till it dissolves.

Troches of Cappers.
Take of the Bark of the Root of Cappers, of Gum Ammoniacum, of the Seeds of
the Chaste Tree, each six Drams; of the Seeds of Watercresses, and Nigella, of
the Leaves of Calaminth and Rue, of the Roots of Acorus, and round Birthwort,
of bitter Almonds, of the juice of water Agrimony thickened, each two Drams; of
the Roots of round Cyperus, of the Leaves of Scolopendrium, each one Dram. Make
Troches with the foresaid Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar. They heat, dry,
soften, open, and are good for obstructions of the Spleen. The Dose is from one
Dram to half an Ounce.

Trochisci Cypheos for Mithridate.
Take of the Pulp of white and fat Currants, Cyprian Turpentine, each three
Ounces; of Myrrh, and Schenanth, each one Ounce and an half; of Cinnamon, half
an Ounce; of the Roots of true Acorus, round Cyperus, Indian Spicknard, woody
Cassia, Juniper Berries, Bdellium, each three Drams; of Wood of Aloes, two
Drams and an half; of Saffron, one Dram; of the best Honey clarified, of Canary
Wine, each a sufficient quantity to make Troches. They heat, dry, attenuate,
heal, are Sudorifick, Cardiack, Alexipharmick. The Dose is one Dram.

Trochisci Hedychroi for Treacle.
Take of yellow Sanders, of the herbs Marjoram, Syriack Marum, of the Roots of
Asarabacca, each two Drams; Acorus, sweet Costus, Pontick Phu, Wood of Aloes,
Cinnamon, Schenanth, Oil of Nutmegs, each three Drams; Wood of Cassia, Indian
Spicknard, Laurel Leaves, Saffron, Myrrh, each six Drams; Gillyflowers of
Pliny, one Ounce and an half; Mastich, one Dram, Canary Wine, a sufficient
quantity, to make Troches; dry them in the shade, and Oil them over with the
Oil above mentioned. They heat, dry, open, are Diaphoretick, Sudorifick, and
Alexipharmick. The Dose is from half a Dram to three Drams.

Trochisci Aliptae Moschatae.
Take of pure Labdanum, three Ounces, of Storax Calamite one Ounce and an half;
of red Storax, one Ounce; of Wood of Aloes, two Drams; of Ambar, one Dram; of
Camphor, half a Dram, of Musk, half a Scruple; with a sufficient quantity of
Rose water, make Troches. They are hot and dry, they attenuate, incide, are
good for an Asthma, and for the vomiting up Milk. They strengthen, and are used
for Fames. The Dose is from one Scruple to half a Dram.

Trochisci Galliae Moschatae.
Take of Wood of Aloes, five Drams; of Ambar, three Drams; of Musk, one Dram;
of the Mucilage of Tragacanth extracted with Rose water, a sufficient quantity;
make Troches. They heat, dry, attenuate, comfort the Heart, Brain, and Stomach,
and yield a sweet Smell, and are used for Fumes.

Troches of Myrrh.
Take of choice Myrrh, three Drams; of Lupins cleansed, five Drams; of the
Roots of Madder, of the Leaves of Horse-mint, Pennyroyal, Rue, of the Seeds of
Cummin, Assafoetida, Sagapenum, Opoponax, each two Drams; with Syrup of Juice
of Mugwort, make Troches. They heat, dry, open, incide, expel the Courses, and
Secundine. The Dose is from two Drams to three.

Troches of Rhubarb.
Take of choice Rhubarb, ten Drams; of the Juice of Water Agrimony thickened,
half an Ounce; of the Leaves of red Roses, three Drams; of the Roots of
Asarabacca, Madder, Indian Spicknard, of the Leaves of Wormwood, of the Seeds
of Anise, and Smallage; each one Dram; of bitter Almonds half an Ounce; with
the juice of Roman Wormwood, make Troches. They heat, dry, attenuate, open,
purge gently, are good for a Dropsy, Cachexy, and Jaundice. The Dose is from
one Dram to three.

Renodaeus's Troches for a Gonorrhea.
Take of the Seeds of the Chaste Tree, of Roses, Balaustines. each half a Dram;
of the Shavings of Ivory, and Ambar, each one Dram and an half; of Bolearmenick
washed in Knot-grass Water, two Drams; of the Seeds of Plantain, four Scruples;
of Sassafras, two Scruples; with the Mucilage of the Seeds of Quinces extracted
in the Water of Water Lillies; make Troches. It cools, dries, and is
astringent. The Dose is from one Dram to two Drams.

Troches of Squills for Treacle.
Take a fresh clear Squill, the outward Bark, and woody Root being taken out:
Cover it with Wheaten Past, and roast it under the Ashes, or bake it in an
Oven, till the Parts grow crusty, and afterward with a pointed small Stick,
pierce through the body of the Squill; then separate the Crust from it; take of
the soft and fine Marrow of the Squill, one Pound; of the Flower of Lupins,
eight Ounces; mix them, and make Paste of them, and dry them in the shade. It
dries, incides, is thoracick, and alexipharmick. The Dose is from one Dram to
two.

Troches of sealed Earth.
Take of sealed Earth, or in stead of it, true Bolearmenick, half an Ounce; of
true Acacia, Hypocistis, Dragons Blood in Tears, Gum Arabic toasted, fine
Flower toasted, Boodstone, red Coral, Ambar, Spodium of Ivory, Balaustins,
red Roses, Seeds of red Roses, Seeds of Purslain toasted, Cyperus Nuts,
Hartshorn burnt, masculine Frankincense, Saffron, prepared Opium, each two
Drams; the Seeds of black Poppies, Pearls, Gum Tragacanth, each one Dram and an
half; with the Juice of Plantain, make Troches. They cool, dry, are astringent,
good for spitting of Blood, all Hemorrhagies, and great fluxes of the Courses.
The Dose is half a Dram with the Juice of Plantain.

Troches of Vipers for Treacle.
The best Vipers are to be had at Venice, or Padua. The Troches are prepared of
the flesh of Vipers, and Bread twice baked, both bruised in a Mortar, and made
into Troches. But how the Vipers are taken, how they are killed, and how the
Troches are made, you may see in Hoffman. They are alexipharmick; they cure the
Bites of Vipers, the Leprosy, and other Diseases of the Skin; but they are
rarely in use alone.

Pills.
Pills Aloephangin.
TAke of the Roots of Acorus, Asarabacca, Indian Spicknard, Wood of Aloes, and
yellow Sanders, Cinnamon, Mace, and Nutmegs, Cloves, Juniper berries, Cubebs,
the lesser Cardomoms, Schaenanth, each half an Ounce; red Roses, Wormwood, each
two Drams; of these extract a Tincture, with Spirit of Wine, in a Glass well
stopped, wherein dissolve of clear pure Aloes, one Pound; then gently evaporate
over hot Ashes the Spirit of Wine, and bring it to the consistence of Pills;
toward the end add, of Myrrh, and Mastich powdered, each half an Ounce; of
Saffron, two Drams; make a Mass: They heat, dry violently, attenuate, incide,
purge Choler, and Phlegm; are cephalic, and peculiarly proper for old Men. They
are also good for the Colic, and Wind. The Dose is from one Dram to two Drams.

Pills of Agarick.
Take of Agarick trochiscated, three Drams; of Gummy Turbith, five Drams; of
the Powder of Galen's simple Hiera half an Ounce; of the Troches of Alhandal,
of Myrrh, each two Drams; of Mastich, the Roots of Florentine Orris, the Leaves
of Horehound, each one Dram; with Canary Wine make a Mass. They heat, dry,
purge Phlegm, are good for the Head, the Breast, the Cough, Asthma, a Coma,
Catarrh, and Giddiness. The Dose is from half a Dram to four Scruples.

The Golden Pill.
Take of clear Aloes, Scammony prepared, each five Drams; of red Roses, and the
Seeds of Smallage, each two Drams and an half; of the Seeds of Anise, and
Fennel, each one Dram and an half; of Saffron, Mastich, the Troches of
Alhandal, each one Dram; with Honey of Roses make a Mass. They purge Choler,
and Phlegm; they attenuate, incide, heat, and dry. The Dose is from one Dram to
four Scruples.

Pill Coch
Take of the Powder of Galen's simple Hiera, ten Drams; of Troches of Alhandal,
three Drams and an half; of Scammony prepared, two Drams and an half; of Gummy
Turbith, and the Flowers of Staechas, each five Drams; with Syrup of Staechas
make a Mass. They heat, dry, purge strongly Phlegm and Choler. They are commonly
counted cephalic. The Dose is from two Scruples to four.

Pill of Houndstongue with Castor.
Take of the Roots of Houndstongue dried, of the Seeds of white Henbane, of
Opium prepared, each half an Ounce; of Myrrh six Drams; of male Frankincense,
five Drams; of Saffron, Castor, and Storax Calamite, each two Drams; with
Rose Water make a Mass. They cool, dry, bind, thicken, are anodyne, and
narcotick. The Dose is five Grains.

The true Catholic extract.
Take of the Pulp of Coloquintida, six Drams; of white Agarick, black
Hellebore, Jalap, and Turbith each four Ounces; Powder them all grossly, or cut
and bruise them, and make a Tincture in six Quarts of rectified Spirit of Wine.
Digest them fourteen nights and days, and shake the Glass sometimes; gently
pour off the Tincture, and strain it, through a linen Rag. To the strained
Liquor add of fountain Water a Quart, and the whole Liquor will turn Milky,
which distill in a Bath till only a Quart be left behind: Take the Glass out of
the Bath, whilst it is warm, and pour out the residue of the Water, with the
Resine into a new glazed Pan, and evaporate over a gentle fire to the
consistence of Honey: Afterward add of clear Aloes powdered, eight Ounces; of
Scammony sulphurated, four Ounces; of Spirit of Wine rectified, four Ounces;
mingle them, and evaporate them over a gentle fire to the consistence of an
extract fit to make Pills. It is a true catholic Purge. It purges Choler,
Phlegm, Melancholy, Serum, without any gripes. The Dose is from fifteen Grains
to a Scruple.

The greater Faetid Pill
Take of Troches of Alhandal, clear Aloes, Ammoniacum, Opoponax, Sagapenum,
Myrrh, Dodder of Thym, the Seeds of Rue, each five Drams; of prepared Scammony,
three Drams; of the Roots of Gummy Turbith, four Drams; of the lesser Spurge,
and Hermodactiles, each two Drams; of Ginger one Dram and an half; of Indian
Spicknard, Saffron, Castor, each one Dram; of Euphorbium powdered, two
Scruples; with the Juice of the Leaves of Leeks make a Mass. They heat, dry,
open, purge Phlegm and Choler, force the Courses, purge the most remote parts of
the Body, and are good for the Colic, Itch, and all cutaneous Diseases. The
Dose is from two Scruples to a Dram.

Bontius's hydropick Pill.
Take of the best Aloes, two Drams and an half; Gum Got dissolved in Malago
Wine, one Dram and an half; Diagrydium prepared the same way, one Dram; Gum
Ammoniacum, one Dram and an half; Tartar vitriolated, half a Dram; with a
sufficient quantity of Syrup of Roses solutive, make a Mass. They purge Serum
plentifully, and open, and resolve. The Dose is one Scruple.

Pills of Hiera with Agarick.
Take of the Powder of Galen's simple Hiera, of Troches of Agarick, each half
an Ounce; of clear Aloes, one Ounce; with Honey of Roses make a Mass. They
purge Phlegm, and Choler. The Dose is from one Dram to one Dram and an half.

The Iliack Pill.
Take of Coloquintida, Sagapenum, each six Drams; Diagrydium, two Drams; with
Wine make a Mass for Pills. They purge Phlegm, Choler, are good for the Cholic,
Iliack Passion, and an Hemicrany. The Dose is half a Dram.

The Pill of the Lapis Lazuli.
Take of the Lapis Lazuli powdered, and often washed, six Drams; of Dodder of
Thym, of the Roots of black Hellebore, of Agarick trochiscated, each one Ounce;
of Scammony prepared, of Sal Gemma, each two Drams and an half; of Cloves, and
the Seeds of Anise, each half an Ounce; of the Powder of Galen's simple Hiera,
fifteen Drams; with the Juice of Fumitory make a Mass. These Pills purge
Melancholy, Phlegm, and Choler; and heat, dry, and open; are good for a Cancer,
a Quartan Ague, and Obstructions of the Bowels. The Dose is from one Dram to
one Dram and an half.

Laudanum Opiatum.
Take of the Tincture of Opium prepared, of Opium sliced and toasted, and
powdered, and infused in Spirit of Vinegar, a sufficient Quantity; evaporate it
gently in a Glass to the Consistence of Honey. Take of this Extract one Ounce,
of English Saffron powdered, one Dram; of Castor powdered half a Dram: Mingle
them, and gently evaporate them to the Consistence of Pills. This is one of the
chief Instruments of Physic, whereby the Physician may do great things, and
gain himself a great Reputation, if he knows how to use them rightly. They ease
the greatest Pains, and procure Sleep, and qualify sharp Humors, strengthen
the Parts, move Sweat, stop vomiting, Bloody Flux, and often expel the Gravel
from the Kidneys. A strong Man may take a Pill weighing three Grains.

The Mastich Pill.
Take of Mastich half an Ounce; of Agarick trochiscated, three Drams; of fine
Aloes, ten Drams, with the Juice of Wormwood make a Mass. They purge gently
Phlegm and Choler, and they are stomachick. The Dose is one or two Drams.

Pills of Nitre.
Take of Salt of Nitre purified, of Euphorbium powdered, each one Dram; of
Scammony prepared, of Troches of Alhandal, the Roots of black Hellebore, the
best Aloes, Myrrh, Gum Arabic, each two Drams; with the Juice of Cabbage and
Honey boiled, make a Mass. They heat, dry, purge Phlegm and Choler from the
remote Parts of the Body. They are good for the French Pox, the Palsy,
Giddiness, and Falling Sickness. The Dose is half a Dram.

Common Pestilential Pills.
Take of the best Aloes, two Ounces; Myrrh, one Ounce; Saffron, half an Ounce;
with Canary Wine make a Mass. It purges Choler, preserves from the Plague and
Putrefaction; is cardiac and alexipharmic: The Dose is from one Dram to two
Drams.

Pilulae sine quibus.
Take of fine Aloes, fourteen Drams; of prepared Scammony, six Drams; of
Agarick trochiscated, Rhubarb, the Leaves of Sena cleansed, each half an Ounce;
of yellow Myrobalans, two Drams; of the Herb Wormwood, of the Flowers of
Violets, red Roses, Dodder, Mastich, Sal Gemma, each one Dram; with the Juice
of Fennel, and Eyebright make a Mass. They purge Choler, Phlegm, and
Melancholy, and are cephalic. The Dose is from one Dram to one Dram and an half.

Bontius's Pill of Tartar.
Take of Aloes Soccotrine, two Drams; of Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar,
strained, and thickened again, one Ounce and an half; Tartar vitriolated, one
Scruple and an half; make a Mass. It attenuates, opens Obstructions, and purges
gently. The Dose is from two Scruples to one Dram.

Quercetan's Pill of Ammoniacum.
Take of the Extract of Soccotrine Aloes prepared with the Juice of Roses, four
Ounces; of pure Gum Ammoniacum, six Drams; of choice Myrrh, half an Ounce; of
the Powder of the three Sanders, of choice Mastich, each one Dram and an half;
of Saffron, of the Salts of Ash and Wormwood, each two Scruples: Powder the
Myrrh, the Mastich, and Saffron apart; make a fine Powder of them: Afterward
soften the Gum Ammoniac with a little Vinegar of Squills, in a Brass Mortar
moderately heated, and then add to it the Extract of Aloes, and afterward all
the rest of the Ingredients. They open Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen,
and Mesentery, and cure long Agues. They cure Cachexies, and purge the Womb,
and force the Courses. The Dose is from one Scruple to a Dram.

Hysteric Pills.
Take of Faecula of Briony, choice Myrrh, Vitriol of Steel, Salt of Mugwort,
each two Drams; of choice Castor, Rue, Camphor, each two Scruples; of the soft
Extract of Aloes, made with the Juice of Mugwort, ten Drams. Beat the Castor
with the Rue and Myrrh; the Camphor must be mingled with them, being powdered
with a Drop or two of Spirit of Wine; then add the rest of the Ingredients.
These Pills suppress Vapors, and open Obstructions of the Courses. The Dose is
half a Dram.

Mesenterick Pills.
Take of the Extract of Aloes, made in the Juice of Fumitory, of choice Gum
Ammoniacum, each one Ounce; of opening Saffron of Mars, and of Diagrydium, each
half an Ounce; of choice Myrrh, Saffron, and Salt of Tamarisk, each two Drams;
of Riverius's Salt of Steel, two Scruples: Make a Mass for Pills. These Pills
open Obstructions of the Mesentery. They cure Cachexies, Dropsies, and open
Obstructions of the Womb. The Dose is from one Scruple to one Dram.

The Mercury Pill.
Take of choice Rhubarb, of the Troches of Alhandal, Diagrydium, Murcurius
Dulcis, each one Ounce; of Venice Turpentine, diluted with Oil of Turpentine, a
sufficient Quantity; make a Mass for Pills. These Pills are chiefly used for
the Cure of Venereal Diseases. They draw the virulent Humors from all Parts of
the Body, and evacuate them by Stool: But sometimes they cause a Salivation in
weak Persons. The Dose is from one Scruple to two.

Pills to stop a Gonorrhea.
Take of the Roots of Bistort, Tormentil, Water Lilly, Ivy Berries, Seeds of
Lettice, Rue, Chast-Tree, Ambar, Goats Blood, Mastich, Olibanum, Dragons Blood
in Tears, Nutmegs, each half an Ounce. You must beat together in a Brass Mortar
all the Ingredients, save the Mastich, which must be beat by it self; then heat
the Mortar, and incorporate them with Venice Turpentine. These Pills are taken
Morning and Evening for many Days fasting. The Dose is from half a Dram to a
Dram.

Pills for a virulent Gonorrhea.
Take of diaphoretick Antimony, newly prepared, of native Cinnabar, and
Cinnabar of Antimony, sealed Earth, Florentine Orris, Liquorish, white Ambar,
Crab's-eyes prepared, each half an Ounce; of choice Myrrh, Olibanum, Mastich,
and Saffron, each two Drams. You must choose the finest Mineral Cinnabar, and
that which is most weighty. Grind the Ambar and Crab's-eyes upon a Porphyry
Stone; Powder apart the Myrrh, Mastich, Olibanum, Saffron, Cinnabar Mineral,
Cinnabar of Antimony, and diaphoretick Antimony: Beat together in a Brass
Mortar the Roots of Orris and Liquorish; and having sifted, and well mingled
them, heat the Pestle and Mortar moderately hot, and incorporate all the
Ingredients with Turpentine. Note, these Pills, nor any other astringent
Medicines can be safely used, before the Body has been sufficiently purged.
Afterward they may be taken Morning and Evening, for many Weeks. The Dose is
half a Dram.

Pills of boiled Turpentine.
Take of Venice Turpentine, boiled till it is hard in Radish Water, or in the
Water of Winter Cherries, four Ounces; of Liquorish cleansed, and finely
powdered, one Ounce; boil the Turpentine over a soft Fire, in the distilled
Water of Radishes, or Winter Cherries, or in any other Plant that forces Urine,
till it be so hard, that you may make it into Pills. Then pour away all the
Water from the Turpentine, and before it is cold, incorporate with it the
Liquorish finely powdered. These Pills force Urine when it has been stopped by
Phlegm, and Gravel, or by the French Disease. They are also good at the
Beginning of a Gonorrhea, to make it run. One Dram or two of it may be taken
several Days together.

The Pill for the Cholick.
Take of choice Aloes, diluted, and thickened in the Juice of pale Roses, three
Ounces; of choice Agarick, one Ounce and an half; of Extract of Rhubarb, one
Ounce; of the Liver of a Wolf prepared, six Drams; of the Tops of Wormwood,
half an Ounce; of the Powder called Diarrhodon Abbatis, Salt of Wormwood, and
Nutmegs, each one Dram and an half. Note, the Liver of the Wolf must be taken
from a Wolf newly killed; having taken out the Gall, wash the Liver in White
Wine; put it into a glazed earthen Pot, the Cover being well luted, and set it
into an Oven after the Bread is drawn; let it continue there for some Hours;
then uncover the Pot, and turn the Liver; cover it again, and lute it as
before, and place it in the Oven after the Bread is drawn, and let it stand as
long as at first, and so do till the Liver be quite dry. Beat in a Brass Mortar
the Wormwood with the Agarick and Nutmegs, and the Wolf's Liver, and having
sifted the Powder, heat the Mortar and the Pestle, and melt in it by degrees
the Extract of Aloes and Rhubarb, and incorporate them afterward with as much
Syrup of Succory, as will make the whole Mass of a good Subsistence. These
Pills gently purge Choler, and serous Humors, and cure the Cholick; one of
them being taken every other Day, till the Patient is well. These Pills keep
the Body open, and evacuate gently and insensibly the ill Humors. A Dram of
them may be taken at a time, when you design to purge strongly.

Poterius's Catholic Pill.
Take of Soccotrine Aloes, half an Ounce; of choice Myrrh, two Drams; of choice
Mastich, one Dram; of Saffron half a Dram; of white Flowers of Antimony, one
Dram. Powder all the Ingredients apart, sift them through a fine Sieve, and
incorporate them with Syrup of Roses solutive. They are commended for the
Cholick, Giddiness, and Falling Sickness. The Dose is from fifteen Grains to
twenty four.

Oils prepared by Expression.
Oil of Sweet Almonds.
TAke what Quantity you please of Sweet Almonds dried, beat them small, and put
them into a course Canvase Bag; press out the Oil in a Press without Fire. It
is temperate, mollifies, is anodyne, and nourishes consumptive People. The Dose
is from half an Ounce to an Ounce. The following Oils are made in the same
manner. Oil of bitter Almonds, which heats, dries, incides, cleanses,
mollifies, is diuretic, and kills Worms.

The Oil of the Seeds of Lettice is made the same way, which cools, and cures a
Gonorrhea. Oil of the Seeds of Henbane promotes Sleep, the Temples being
anointed with it, stops a Gonorrhea, and the Courses, the Loins being anointed
with it. It eases the Pain of the Ear being dropped into it, and the Pain of the
Teeth, the Tooth being stopped with Lint dipped in it. It cools, and dries. True
Oil of Laurel, which is brought from the Fortunate Islands, heats, dries,
dissipates, and mollifies. Oil of Mace heats, dries, is nephritic, and good for
the Cholick. Oil of Walnuts, heats, dries, discusses, cures the Cholick, the
Itch, and is good for the Gout. Oil of Eggs, heats, moistens, is anodyne, and
vulnerary. Oil of ripe Olives, heats, moistens, cleanses, moves vomiting, is
vulnerary, and anodyne. Oil of unripe Olives, called Omphacine, cools, dries,
and is astringent. Palm Oil is brought from the Indies; it cools, and serves
instead of Oil of Roses. Oil of the Seeds of Rocket, heats, dries, provokes
Venery. Oil of Flax, is temperate, mollifies, and ripens. Oil of Nigella,
heats, dries, opens, is diuretic, and uterine. Oil of Poppies, cools,
moistens, promotes Sleep, is anodyne, and narcotick.

Oils prepared by Infusion and Decoction.
Oil of Wormwood.
TAke of the Tops of Wormwood cut, and bruised, four Ounces; Omphacine Oil,
three Pints; infuse them fifteen Days in a Glass, in the Sun, or in some hot
Place, repeating thrice the Infusion of Wormwood; and to the last Infusion add
of the Juice of Wormwood, four Ounces. Boil them to the Consumption of the
Juice. It heats, dries, kills Worms, and is stomachic.

Oil of the Leaves and Flowers of Dill.
It heats, moistens, mollifies, and resolves. Oil of the fresh Flowers of
Camomile, heats moderately, and is anodyne; it is called by Surgeons the Holy,
or Blessed Oil. Oil of Quinces cools, binds, stops vomiting, and a Looseness,
and the Bloody-slux. Oil of the Tops and Flowers of St. John's-wort, heats,
dries, attenuates, is anodyne, vulnerary, and is good for Burns. Oil of Jasmine
mollifies, digests, is good for a Scirrhus, a Pleurisy, an Asthma, and a cold
Catarrh, being outwardly used. Oil of the Flowers of Wall-flower heats, dries,
attenuates, digests, is anodyne; kills Worms, and moves the Courses. Oil of the
Flowers of Lilly of the Valleys, heats, dries, mollifies, is anodyne. Oil of
Marjoram heats, dries, attenuates, moves the Courses, and is cephalic. Oil of
crisped Mint heats, dries, strengthens, and stops vomiting; so does Oil of Nep:
Oil of the white Flowers of Water Lillies cools, moistens is anodyne. Oil of
Roses complete, made of Roses full blown, and ripe Oil, cools, binds, repels,
strengthens, and is anodyne. Oil of Roses omphacine is made of red Roses not
full blown, and omphacine Oil; it cools powerfully, binds and strengthens, and
is anodyne. Oil of Rue heats, dries, and is good for the Cholick. Simple Oil of
Scorpions mixed with Oil of bitter Almonds expels the Stone of the Bladder and
Reins, the Loins, Pubes, and Peritonaeum, being anointed with it. It is also
good for venomous Bites. Oil of the Leaves, and Berries of Nightshade mixed
with the Oil of Roses Omphacine, cools, moistens, binds. Oil of the Leaves of
sweet Trefoil, mollifies, ripens, is vulnerary, and cures a Rupture. Oil of the
Flowers of Violets made with Omphacine Oil, cools, moistens, mollifies, and is
thoracick. Oil of Mullein heats, dries, mollifies, is thoracick, good for the
Gout, and the Piles. I say nothing of the Composition of these Oils, because it
is well known.

Oil of Cappers.
Take of the Bark of Roots of Cappers, one Ounce; of the Bark of Tamarisk, of
the Roots of Cyperus, of the Seeds of Agnus castus, of the Leaves of
Scolopendrium, or of Ceterach, each two Drams; of Rue, one Dram; of Wine
Vinegar, and the best Wine, each two Ounces; of ripe Oil one Pint. Boil them in
a double Vessel to the consumption of the Oil and Vinegar; strain them. It
attenuates, opens, and mollifies a Scirrhus.

Oil of Castor.
Take of Castor, Storax, Calamite, Galbanum, Opoponax, Euphorbium, Woody
Cassia, the Roots of Costus, of Cyperus, of Pellitory of Spain, and of Indian
Spicknard, of the Leaves of Savin, of Saffron, Schaenanth, Cubebs, black and
long Pepper, each two Drams; of Oil, three Pints; of odoriferous Wine, a Quart;
powder those things that ought to be powdered, and infuse them all in Wine for
a natural day; boil them with Oil in a double Vessel to the consumption of the
Wine; then strain it out. It heats, cleanses, attenuats, moves the Courses, and
the Belly, is good for the Spine of the Back, and for the Nerves, being used
outwardly and inwardly. The Dose is one Dram.

Oil of Saffron for the Plaster of Frogs.
Take of English Saffron, Cardamoms, the Roots of Acorus, each one Ounce;
Myrrh, half an Ounce; infuse them in Vinegar for six days. Then add of Oil of
Olives, one Pint and an half: Boil them with a gentle fire till all the Vinegar
is consumed; then strain them. It heats, attenuates, mollifies.

Oil of Euphorbium.
Take of Euphorbium, half an Ounce; of the Oil of Wall-flowers, and odoriferous
Wine, each five Ounces; boil them to the consumption of the Wine. It heats,
dries, discusses, attracts, is good for the Noise of the Ears, and cures
Baldness.

Oil of Orris.
Take of the fresh Roots of Orris bruised, half a Pound; of the fresh Flowers
of sky-colored Orris, one Pound; of the Decoction, or Juice of other Roots of
Orris, one Pint; of Oil of Olives, three Pints and an half; boil them in a
double Vessel to the consumption of the Liquor; strain them. It heats,
attenuates, mollifies, cures Convulsions, Noise of the Ears, Obstructions of
the Lungs. It cures Diseases occasioned by the eating of Mushroms, Hemlock, and
Coriander.

Simple Oil of Earthworms.
Take of Earthworms washed in good White Wine, half a Pound; of Oil of Olives,
two Pound; of White Wine, four Ounces; boil them to the consumption of the
Wine; strain them out. It heats, moistens, is anodyne.

Oil of Mastich.
Take of choice Mastich, three Ounces; of Oil of Roses, one Pint; of
odoriferous Wine, two Ounces; boil them to the consumption of the Wine in a
double Vessel; strain them out. It heats moderatly, is astringent, strengthens,
cleanses the Face, and is stomachick.

Oil of the Mucilages.
Take of the fresh Roots of Marshmallows cut, four Ounces; of fresh Squills
bruised, four Ounces; of the Seeds of Fenugreek, and Flax whole, each one Ounce
and an half; infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Water; then boil the
Water gently, till it becomes thick, and Mucilaginous. Then add of the Oils of
Dill, Camomile, and white Lillies, each sixteen Ounces; boil them together to
the consumption of the watery humidity; stir it about now and then to keep it
from burning. It heats, moistens, dissipats, opens, and is anodyne.

Oil of Myrtles.
Take of the Berries of Myrtles dried and bruised, half a Pound; of Omphacine
Oil, one Pint and an half; of rough red Wine, four Ounces; infuse them, and
afterward boil them to the consumption of the Wine; then strain them out. It
cools, dries, consolidats, is thoracick, nervine, and being used with Labdanum,
after the manner of an Ointment, it hinders the Falling of the Hairs.

Nard Oil.
Take of Spicknard, three Ounces; of the Leaves of Marjoram, two Ounces; of
VVood of Aloes, and of Leaves of Laurel, of the Roots of sweet smelling Flag,
of Cyperus, and Elecampane, Cardamoms, Mace, Schaenanth, each one Ounce and an
half; of White Wine, and common VVat, each fourteen Ounces; of Oil of Olives,
four Pints and an half; boil them in a double Vessel, then strain them out. It
heats, dries, and is anodyne.

Oil of Foxes.
Take a Fox flayed, and his Bowels taken out, and his Bones broken, and the
Flesh cut small; boil all in a sufficient quantity of Sea water, or Salt water
till half is consumed; add of old Oil, two Quarts; of the Herbs Dill, Origanum,
Thym, each half a Pound; boil them again, till the Flesh falls from the Bones,
and till the Water is consumed; strain them out. It heats, dissipates
powerfully, is good for the Nerves, and Gout.

Balsoms
Apopleptick Balsom.
TAke of Oil of Nutmegs by expression, one Ounce; of Rosin of Storax, two
Drams; of Indian Balsom, and Ambar-grease, each one Dram and an half; of true
Civet, four Scruples; of oriental Musk, one Dram; of Oil of Ambar rectified,
half a Dram; of distilled Oil of Cinnamon, one Scruple; of the distilled Oils
of Lavender, Marjoram, Rue, Cloves, each fifteen Grains; of the distilled Oils
of Citron, Oranges, Rhodium wood, each half a Scruple; of Agate, six Grains.
Powder the Musk and Ambar-grease in a brass Mortar; mix with them a drop of
some of the distilled Oils; melt the Oil of Nutmegs in a Spoon over a gentle
fire; and when it is melted, and is half cold, incorporate with it the Storax,
the Indian Balsom, the Musk, and Ambar-grease; then add the Civet, and the
distilled Oils; mix them well, and make a Balsom. This is a great remedy for
Apoplexies, and all Diseases of the Brain, and is much commended for its
pleasant Smell, and is a great preservative against ill Smells, and a
pestilential Air; for Diseases of the Brain; the Temples and Sutures of the
Head may be anointed with it, or it may be put into the Ears with Cotton.

Hypnotick Balsom.
Take of Oil of Nutmegs by expression, and of Populeon Ointment, each one
Ounce; of Deers Marrow, Oil of Roses and Water Lillies, each three Drams; Oil
of Henbane-seed by expression, Oil of white Poppies, extract of Opium and
Saffron, each two Drams; of Ambar grease, Musk, Civet, and distilled Oil of
Rhodium, each eight Grains; moisten the extracts of Opium and Saffron with a
little Spirit of Wine; then incorporate them by degrees over a gentle fire with
the Oil of Nutmegs, Deers Marrow, and Populeon Ointment; then add the Oils; and
lastly the Ambar-grease powdered, and incorporated with the Civet. This Balsom
provokes Sleep gently, and eases pains of the Head occasioned by continued
Fevers. You may put a small quantity of it up the Nostrils, and into the Ears;
or you may anoint the Temples, Wrists, and Soles of the Feet with it.

Stomachick Balsom.
Take of Oil of Nutmegs by Expression, two Ounces; of the Oils of Wormwood,
Mastich, Nard, and white Wax, each six Drams; of the Oils by Distillation of
Wormwood, crisped Mint, Cinnamon, Cloves, Thym, and Mace, each one Dram: Melt
the white Wax, and the Oil of Nutmegs over a gentle Fire, when they are melted
take them from the Fire, and incorporate the Oils. This Balsom fortifies and
heats the Stomach, stops vomiting, quickens the Appetite, helps Digestion,
eases the Pain of the Stomach, the Cholic, the Gripes, and the Bloody Flux. It
is also very good for Diseases of the Brain, and Nerves, the Parts being
anointed with it.

Vterine Balsom.
Take of Goats Suet, of the Tears of Galbanum and Assa-foetida, of the Fat
contained in the Castors Cystis, one Dram and an half; of the distilled Oils of
Ambar, Jet, Rue, and Savin, each two Drams. Incorporate the Fat of the Castor,
and the distilled Oils, with the rest of the Ingredients, excepting the Goats
Tallow, which you must first melt, and when it is half cold again, mix it with
the rest. It asswages Pains of the Womb, and cures the Vapors, being applied
hot to the Pit of the Navel, and covered with a Walnut Shell. A little of it
may be taken up the Nostrils, and the Outside of the Throat may be anointed
with it. It is also good to provoke the Courses.

A Balsom to make the breeding of the Teeth easy.
Take of fresh May Butter, three Ounces; of Hen and Ducks Fat, each two Drams;
of the Juice of River-Crabs, drawn out with the Water of Blewbottle Flowers, of
the Mucilage of the Roots of Marshmallows, each two Ounces. Beat two or three
River Crabs in a Marble Mortar, with a wooden Pestle, moisten them with a
little Water of Blewbottles; press out two Ounces of the Juice, add to it two
Ounces of the Mucilage of Marshmallows, the May Butter, the Hens and Ducks
Fat; put them into a glazed Earthen Pot, and boil them over a gentle Fire, till
half the Moisture is consumed; then strain them, and add Sugarcandy finely
powdered, four Ounces; the Yolk of one Egg, Musk, and Ambar-grease, each six
Grains: Mix them, and make a Balsom. It softens the Gums, they being anointed
with it, and if Children should swallow it, it would do them no harm.

An excellent Balsom for the Hands.
Take of Venice Soap, moistened with the Juice of Lemons, half a Pound; white
Virgin Honey, two Drams; Talk of Venice, Sugarcandy, the Roots of Orris finely
powdered, each half an Ounce; Salt of Tartar, Borax, Sperma Caeti, each two
Drams; Indian Balsom, one Dram; Oils of Rhodium Wood, Cinnamon, and Cloves,
each half a Scruple; oriental Musk and Ambar-grease, each twelve Grains. Cut
the Soap small, and put it into a glazed earthen Pan, and dissolve it upon a
gentle Fire, in two Ounces of Lemon Juice, then add the Honey, the Sperma
Caeti, and the Balsom: Take the Pot from the Fire, and incorporate by degrees
the Powders, and lastly the Musk, Ambargrease, and distilled Oils: The Talk is
easily powdered, being first laid before a quick Fire for a Quarter of an Hour,
and then beaten in a Mortar heated with a hot Pestle, and then sifted. This
Balsom whitens, cleanses, and smoothens the Skin beyond any Paste or Pomatum
that can be prepared, the Hands being rubbed with it.

Ointments.
Fernelius's astringent Ointment.
TAke of Oil of Roses, often washed with Allom Water, one Pound and an half; of
white Wax, four Ounces; of Acacia, Myrtle Berries, Balaustins, the Barks of
Acorns and Pomgranates, of unripe Galls, Sumach, Mastich, each one Ounce.
Powder them all, and infuse them four Days in the Juices of Medlars and Sloes;
then dry them over a gentle Fire, and with Oil, and a sufficient Quantity of
Wax, make an Ointment according to Art. It dries cools, is powerfully
Astringent, defends the Parts from Fluxions, contracts the Breasts, and takes
off the Wrinkles from the Belly after Childbearing.

The Aegyptiack Ointment.
Take of Verdegrease, five Ounces; of crude Allom, one Ounce; of the best
Honey, fourteen Ounces; of strong Vinegar, seven Ounces: Boil them according to
Art, to the Consistence of an Ointment. It eats down proud and dead Flesh, and
is good for Fistula's, and old Ulcers.

Vnguentum Agrippae.
Take of the fresh Roots of Briony, two Pound; wild Cucumber, one Pound;
Squills, half a Pound; Orris, three Ounces; of the Roots of Wakerobin, Dwarf
Elder, Fern, each two Ounces; of white Wax, fifteen Ounces; of Oil, two Quarts:
Make an Ointment. It heats, dries, being applied to the Belly, it purges by
Stool. It is good for the Dropsy, and Diseases of the Spleen, the Belly being
anointed with it.

The white Ointment with Camphor.
Take of Oil of Roses, one Pint; of white Wax, three Ounces; of Ceruss, six
Ounces; of Camphor rubbed with Oil of Roses, two Drams: Make an Ointment. It
cools, dries, cures the Itch, Burns, Pustles, Ulcers, and other Vices of the
Skin.

Simple Ointment of Marshmallows.
Take of the Oil of the Mucilages, one Quart; of yellow Wax, half a Pound; of
Rosin, three Ounces; of Turpentine, one Ounce and an half: Make an Ointment. It
heats, moistens, mollifies, is good for the Pain of the Side, the Pain of the
Bladder, the Breast, and the like.

Compound Ointment of Marshmallows.
Take of the Oil of the Mucilages, one Quart; of yellow Wax, half a Pound; of
Rosin and Colophony, each three Ounces; of the Gums of Galbanum, and Ivy, and
Turpentine, each one Ounce: Make an Ointment according to Art. It heats,
moistens, mollifies, digests, and cures the hardness of the Nerves.

The Apostles Ointment.
Take of Ammoniacum, Rosin, Turpentine, yellow Wax, each fourteen Drams; of
Lytharge of Gold, nine Drams; of long Birthwort, Bdellium, Male Frankincense,
each six Drams; of Galbanum, Opoponax, Myrrh, each half an Ounce; of
Verdegrease, two Drams; of common Oil, one Quart; of Vinegar a sufficient
Quantity: Make an Ointment according to Art. It heats, dries, cleanses, takes
off dead Flesh, is good for Fistula's, Ulcers, and Wounds.

Vnguentum Arthanitae.
Take of the Juice of the Roots of Sow-bread, or for want of it, of the
Decoction of one Pound of the Roots dried, and cut into Slices, of the Juice of
wild Cucumber, of Butter, each half a Pound; of Oil of Orris, one Pound; of the
Roots of Polypody of the Oak, three Ounces; of the Pulp of Coloquintida, one
Ounce and an half; of Euphorbium, two Drams: Bruise those things that are to be
bruised, and infuse all for some Days; afterward boil them gently to the
Consumption of the Juices. In the strained Liquor dissolve two Ounces and an
half of yellow Wax. While these are warm, mingle with them three Drams of
Sagapenum dissolved in Vinegar. Boil and strain, and evaporate it again to the
Consistence of an Ointment; of Bulls Gall evaporated to the Consistence of
Honey, half an Ounce; and last of all, the following things finely powdered.
Take of Scammony, Coloquintida, white Turbith, Aloes, Mezereon Berries, each
two Drams and an half; of Euphorbium, Myrrh, the Flowers of Camomile, long
Pepper, Ginger, each one Dram; Sal Gemma, two Drams: Make an Ointment. It
purges by Stool, if the Hypogaster is anointed with it: But if the Stomach be
anointed with it, it occasions vomiting. It purges Water in the Dropsy, kills
and carries off Worms, and heats, and dries much.

The Golden Ointment.
Take of common Oil, a Quart; of yellow Sanders, six Ounces; of Turpentine, two
Ounces; of Rosine of the Pine, and Colophony, each one Ounce and an half; of
Mastich, and Frankincense, each one Ounce; of Saffron one Dram: Make an
Ointment according to Art. It heats, mollifies, cleanses, ripens, and is
anodyne.

Ointment called Basilicon.
Take of yellow Wax, black Pitch, and Rosine, each half a Pound; of common Oil,
a Quart: Make an Ointment according to Art. It heats, dries, heals Wounds, and
incarns Ulcers, and is anodyne.

Ointment of Lime.
Take of Quick Lime, washed according to Art, and dried, two Ounces; of Ceruss,
two Ounces and an half; of Litharge of Gold and Silver, each three Ounces; of
Tutty, two Drams; Oil of Roses, a Quart; of Calves Suet, eight Ounces; of the
Juices of Lettice, Plantain, and Nightshade, each four Ounces; of Ointment of
Roses, two Ounces and an half; with a sufficient Quantity of white Wax make an
Ointment. It cools, dries, and cures Burns.

Vnguentum Diapompholigos.
Take of Oil of Nightshade, sixteen Ounces; of white Wax, five Ounces; of
Ceruss washed, two Ounces; of Pompholix prepared, of Lead burnt and washed, of
Frankincense, each one Ounce: Make an Ointment according to Art. It cools,
dries, is good for Ulcers, is anodyne, and breeds Flesh, tames a cancerous
Malignity, and cures Ulcers of the Legs.

Ointment of Elecampane, with or without Mercury.
Take of the Roots of Elecampane, boiled in Vinegar, beat, and moderately
dried, one Pound; of old Hogs-lard salted, eight Ounces; of old Oil, four
Ounces; of Quicksilver, new Wax, Turpentine washed, each two Ounces; of common
Salt, one Ounce: Make an Ointment according to Art. It mollifies, heats, cures
Venereal Nodes, the Itch, and Lice.

Vnguentum Martiatum.
Take of the Herbs Wormwood, Southernwood, Basile, Calaminth, the lesser
Centaury, Germander, Garden Costus, Marjoram, Water Mint, Cowslip, Savin, Sage,
the lesser Housleek, each one Ounce and an half; Laurel Leaves, Rosmary, Rue,
each three Ounces; of the Seeds of Cummin, Fenugreek, the greater Nettle, each
half an Ounce; of Bears Fat, Deers Marrow, liquid Storax, each three Ounces; of
Butter, one Pound; of Oil of Nutmegs by Expression, one Ounce; of Oil of
Olives, two Quarts; of yellow Wax, one Pound; of good Wine, a sufficient
Quantity. The Herbs having been infused eight Days in Wine, make an Ointment
according to Art. It heats, mollifies, is good for cold Diseases of the Nerves,
for trembling, a Palsy, the Gout, and swelling of the Spleen.

Nerve Ointment.
Take of Ointment of Marshmallows, four Ounces; of the Fat of Ducks, Geese,
Dogs, Cats, each two Ounces; of the Oils of Dill, Camomile, Laurel, Worms,
Foxes, each one Ounce; of the Oil of Euphorbium, Peter, Spike, Turpentine, each
half an Ounce; of Spirit of Wine, one Ounce and an half; with a sufficient
Quantity of Wax: Make a soft Ointment according to Art. It heats, moistens,
mollifies, but is chiefly used for the Nerves.

An Ointment for the Eyes.
Take of Lapis Calaminaris prepared, three Ounces; of prepared Tutty, one
Ounce; of white Vitriol, and Camphor, each two Scruples; of Ointment of Roses,
one Pound: Make an Ointment according to Art. It cools, dries, stops Fluxions
upon the Eyes, is anodwne, takes off Redness of the Eyes, a little of it being
applied to the Corners of the Eyes, and to the Eyelids.

Vnguentum nutritum.
Take of Litharge of Gold finely powdered, half a Pound; of Oil of Roses, and
Wine Vinegar, each a sufficient Quantity, to make an Ointment. It cools, dries,
repels, breeds Flesh, and cicatrizes Ulcers.

The pectoral Ointment.
Take of fresh Butter, six Ounces; of Oil of Sweet Almonds, four Ounces; of the
Oils of Camomile, and Violets, each three Ounces; of Ducks and Hens Fat, each
two Ounces; of Roots of Orris, one Ounce; of white Wax, three Ounces: Make an
Ointment according to Art. It attenuates, digests, helps Expectoration, is
anodyne, and eases the Pain of the Breasts and Sides.

Pomatum Ointment.
Take of fresh Hogs-lard, cleared from the Skin, and washed in White Wind, of
Sheeps Suet washed in White Wind, each one Pound; sixteen Apples called
Pomwaters, cleansed and boiled in Rose Water, Rhodium Wood, Sassafras, the
Roots of Florentine Orris, each six Drams; of Benzoin, and Storax Calamite,
each half an Ounce: Make an Ointment. It heats, moistens, mollifies, and is
good for Chaps in the Lips.

Populeon Ointment.
Take of fresh Buds of the Poplar, three Pound; of fresh Hogs-lard unsalted,
six Pound; the Buds of the Poplar must be bruised, and infused in the Lard till
the following Herbs are gathered. Take of the Herbs Burdock, Henbane, Lettice,
Mandrakes, black Poppies, the greater and lesser Housleek, Nightshade, Violets,
Navelwort, or Purslain, the tender Tops of Brambles, each two Handfuls. Bruise
them all, and boil them with the Lard and Poplar Buds, till the Moisture is
consumed, and make an Ointment according to Art. It cools, mollifies, is
anodyne, disposes to Sleep, the Wrists, Forehead, and Temples being anointed
with it.

The Potable Ointment.
Take of fresh Butter without Salt, one Pound; of the Roots of Madder, the
greater Comfry, and Tormentil, each half an Ounce; of Castor, Dragons-Blood,
Crab's-eyes, each two Drams; of red Wine half a Pint. Boil them to the
Consumption of the Wine, and make an Ointment according to Art. It attenuates,
opens, dissolves coagulated Blood, and is good for Bruises. The Dose is half an
Ounce.

Galen's cooling Ointment.
Take of Omphacine Oil of Roses, four Ounces; of white Wax, one Ounce: Dissolve
the Wax in the Oil, and wash it often with Water, and shake it well. Lastly,
wash it with Rose Water, and add a little Vinegar to it, and so make an
Ointment according to Art. It cool, moistens, and is anodyne.

Ointment of Roses.
Take of fresh Hogs Lard, cleared from the Skin, two Pound; of fresh pale
Roses, a sufficient Quantity: Mix them, and set them in the Sun for some Days,
then let them ferment, and strain them out; to the strained Liquor add the same
Quantity of Roses; set them in the Sun again; boil them, and strain them as
before; repeat the Roses till the Lard has a pleasant Smell, and keep it for an
Ointment. It cools, mollifies, cures an Herpes, and Inflammations.

The Mundificative Ointment of Smallage.
Take of the Leaves of Smallage, three Handfuls; of Ground Ivy, the greater
Wormwood, the lesser Centaury, Germander, Sage, St. John's-wort, Plantain,
Milfoil, Perwinkle, the greater and middle Comfry, Bettony, Woodbine, Vervain,
Speedwel, yellow Ladies Bed-straw, Knot-grass, Adders Tongue, Burnet, each two
Handfuls; of common Oil, four Quarts; of white Pitch, Rams Suet, yellow Wax,
and Turpentine, each two Pound: Gather the Herbs, if it may be, all on the same
Day, when they are in their full Virtue, and bruise them in a Marble Mortar:
Melt the Wax, Pitch, and Suet in a Copper Pan tinned within, over a gentle Fire
in the Oil; put in the bruised Herbs, and boil them together gently, stirring
the Ingredients from time to time with a wooden Spatula; and when the Moisture
is almost all consumed, strain, and strongly press out the whole. When the
straining is cold, and separated from the Faeces and Moisture, take of choice
Myrrh powdered, and of Succotrine Aloes, each four Ounces; of round Birthwort,
and the Roots of Florentine Orris, each two Ounces; incorporate all these
finely powdered with the whole, and the Ointment is made. This Ointment is
proper to cleanse all sorts of Ulcers and Wounds, and dissipate excrementitious
Serosities, and to prevent them from breeding. It is also esteemed good against
the biting of mad Dogs.

Plasters.
Plaster of Bettony.
TAke of the Juice of Bettony, Smallage and Plantain, each one Pint; of Wax,
Gum Elemy, Rosine of the Pine, and Turpentine, each half a Pound; make a
Plaster according to art. It heats a little, and cleanses a little, and breeds
flesh. Forestus commends it for Wounds of the Head.

Plaster of Ceruss.
Take of Ceruss washed some time with Rainwater, and dried again and powdered,
of Oil of Olives, each half a Pound; of yellow Wax, two Ounces; boil it
according to art, and make a Plaster. It cools, dries, is good for Burns, and
Inflammations, for Vices of the Skin, and superficial Ulcers.

The Plaster called Diachalcitis, or Diapalma.
Take of old Oil, Litharge of Gold, each three Pound; old Hogs Lard cleared
from the Skins, two Pound; Chalcitis burnt, or of white Vitriol, four Ounces;
stir them in boiling with the green Branches of the Palm Tree, or of the Oak,
or Willow, or Medlar-tree, and make a Plaster according to art. It dries,
binds, and cleanses, is good for pestilential Tumors, bloody Wounds, and to
cleanse all manner of Ulcers, bruises black and blew, and is indeed a Plaster
of great use.

Simple Diachylon.
Take of the Oil of the Mucilages, three Pints; of Litharge of Gold, one Pound
and an half; make a Plaster according to art. It cools, moistens, mollifies,
ripens, resolves, dissipates, and is proper for Swellings of the Spleen,
Stomach, and the like.

Diachylon with Gums.
Take of Oil of the Mucilages, eight Pints; of Litharge of Gold, four Pound; of
Wax and Turpentine, each half a Pound; of Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Opoponax,
Sagapenum, each four Ounces; make a Plaster according to art. It mollifies
much, ripens, digests, heats moderately, and is good for old Swellings.

The Plaster called The Grace of God; with, and without Verdegrease.
Take of new Wax, Rosine, Goats Suet, each four Ounces; of Turpentine, two
Ounces; Verdegrease, Mastich, Olibanum, each three Drams; make a Plaster
according to art. It heats, dries, cleanses Ulcers and VVounds, and makes them
heal.

The Plaster called Gryseum, or of Lapis Calaminaris.
Take of Lapis Calaminaris prepared, one Ounce; of Litharge, two Ounces; of
Ceruss, and Tutty, each half an Ounce; of Turpentine, one Ounce; of
Frankincense, five Drams; of Mastich, three Drams; of Myrrh, two Drams; of
Castor, one Dram and an half; of Goats Suet, one Ounce; make a Plaster
according to art. It cools, dries, incarns, and cicatrizes.

Plaster of Melilot.
Take of the Tops of Melilot, six Ounces; of the Leaves of Wormwood, Marjoram,
of the Flowers of Camomile, of the Seeds of Fenugreek, of Laurel Berries, and
the Roots of Marshmallows, each three Drams; of the Roots of Cyperus, Orris,
and Indian Spicknard, of woody Cassia, the Seeds of Bishops-weed, Smallage, and
the lesser Cardomoms, each two Drams and an half; of Ammoniacum, ten Drams; of
Bdellium and Storax Calamite, each five Drams; of Turpentine, one Dram and an
half; dried Figs, number twelve; Rosine, Goats Suet, each four Ounces; of
yellow Wax, eight Ounces; of Oil of Spike two Ounces; of Oil of Marjoram, a
sufficient quantity. Make a Plaster according to art. It heats, mollifies,
ripens, resolves Hardness, it loosens, and is very anodyne.

Plaster of Red Lead.
Take of red Lead, one Pound; common Oil, a Quart; boil them according to art,
and add to them of Wax, one Pound and an half; of Turpentine, four Ounces; of
burnt Lead prepared, two Ounces; make a Plaster according to art. It cools and
dries Wounds, and old Ulcers, and heals them.

Plaster of the Mucilages.
Take of Oil of the Mucilages, six Ounces; of Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Opoponax,
Sagapenum, each half an Ounce; of Saffron, two Drams; of yellow Wax, twenty
Ounces; of Turpentine, two Ounces; make a Plaster according to art. It heats,
attenuates, mollifies, suppurates, draws, cleanses, takes off an Eschar in
Burns, and is good for Swellings.

Plaster called Oxycroceum.
Take of yellow Wax, Colophony, Ship Pitch, each six Ounces; English Saffron,
two Ounces; Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Mastich, Myrrh, Turpentine, Frankincense,
each two Ounces; of Vinegar a sufficient quantity to dissolve the Gums; make a
Plaster according to art. It heats, dries, mollifies, discusses Tumors, is
anodyne, good for broken Bones, and the Ischidiack pain.

Plaster of Frogs, with, or without Mercury.
Take of the Oils of Camomile, Dill, Lillies, Spike, each four Ounces; of
Saffron, two Ounces; of Hogs Lard, two Pound; of Calves fat, one Pound; of true
Oil of Laurel, eight Ounces; of male Frankincense, two Ounces and an half;
Euphorbium, ten Drams; live Frogs washed in Wine, number twelve; Earthworms
washed in Wine, seven Ounces; the Leaves of Feverfew, the Flowers of Schaenanth,
and Staechas, each four handfulls; the Juice of the Roots of Dwarf Elder, and
Elecampane, of clear Turpentine, each four Ounces; of liquid Storax, three
Ounces; of Litharge of Gold, two Pound; of quicksilver extinguished in
Turpentine, eight Ounces; of good Wine, two Quarts; of white Wax, a sufficient
quantity; make a Plaster according to art. It heats, mollifies powerfully,
takes off the pain of the Limbs, in the French Disease; is excellent for an
humoural Rupture of the Scrotum, especially if some Sulphur powdered be added
to it.

Fernelius's Plaster for Ruptures.
Take of true Acacia, long and round Birth-wort, Balaustins, Cups of Acorns,
Beans, unripe Galls, Malicorium, Myrtles, Cypress Nuts, the Seeds of Plantain,
each half an Ounce. Powder them all, and moisten them with Rose Vinegar, and
let them stand for two Days; then dry them; then take of the Roots of Comfry,
Fern, Osmund Royal, of the herb Horstail, each one Ounce; of Aloes, Mastich,
Mummy, Myrrh, Frankincense, each two Ounces; of Bolearmenick washed in Vinegar,
of the Lapis Calaminaris prepared, of Litharge of Gold, and Dragons Blood, each
three Ounces; of Ship Pitch, two Pound; of Turpentine a sufficient quantity;
powder them all, and with the foresaid Powder mix them with the Pitch melted,
and incorporate them exactly with the Turpentine, and so make a Plaster
according to art. It binds violently, dries, stops Fluxions, is good for
Ruptures, broken Bones, and to strengthen the parts.

Paracelsus's Stiptick Plaster.
Take of Ammoniacum, Bdellium, each two Ounces; of Galbanum, Myrrh, Olibanum,
Opoponax, the Roots of long and round Birth-wort, and of white Dittany, the
Lodestone prepared, each one Ounce; Oil of St. John's-wort, a Quart; true Oil
of Laurel, two Ounces; Litharge of Gold, one Pound and an half; yellow Wax,
half a Pound; Turpentine, four Ounces. Make a Plaster according to art. It
heats, dries, cleanses moderately, and draws.

The Cerate of Sanders.
Take of red Sanders, ten Drams; of the white and yellow Earth, each six Drams;
of red Roses, twelve Drams; of Bolearmenick, seven Drams; of Spodium of Ivory,
four Drams; of Camphor, two Drams; of Omphacine Oil of Roses, nine Drams; of
white Wax, a sufficient quantity to make a Cerate. It cools, dries,
strengthens, and is very good for Inflammations.

Galen's Stomach Cerate.
Take of Mastich, and red Roses, each twenty Drams; of the Leaves of Wormwood,
fifteen Drams; of Indian Spicknard, ten Drams; of Omphacine Oil of Roses, one
Pint; with a sufficient quantity of Wax make a Cerate. It cools, dries, binds,
stops Vomiting, and strengthens the Stomach.

A Sparadrap.
Take of Omphacine Oil of Roses, half a Pint; of Rams Suet, four Ounces; white
Wax, ten Ounces; of Litharge and red Lead, each three Ounces; of Bolearmenick,
Mastich, burnt Lead prepared, of Frankincense, and Tutty, each one Ounce and an
half; of Camphor, half an Ounce; Boy I the Litharge and red Lead together with
the Oil of Roses, and the Suet (a sufficient quantity of Water being added at
first) to a due consistence; than pour on the Wax melted; and lastly mingle the
Powders, and make a Plaster according to art; and while it is hot dip in a
Linen Cloth, and lay it upon a Plate moistened with Oil of Roses. It dries,
binds, strengthens, breeds Flesh, and heals.

Plaster of Sulphur.
Take of Ship Pitch, Rosine and yellow Wax, each twelve Ounces; of Sulphur
finely powdered, and of Oil of Camomile, each four Ounces; of Turpentine, Orris
Powdered, and Cummin, each one Ounce and an half; make a Plaster according to
art. It heats, powerfully, dries, attenuates mollifies, discusses, resolves,
draws, and is good for hard Tumors.

Plaster of Tobacco.
Take of Rams Suet, white Pitch, and Rosine, each one Pound and an half; yellow
Wax, one Pound; fresh Tobacco bruised, three Pound; bruise the Tobacco leaves
in a marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, and having boiled them with the Rams
Suet, Pitch, and Rosine over a gentle Fire in a copper Pan tinned, stirring
them from time to time, till the Moisture of the Tobacco be almost consumed,
strain and strongly press forth the Composition; then let it cool, and having
thrown away the Faeces remaining at the bottom, take of pure Gum Ammoniacum,
and of Venice Turpentine, each eight Ounces; melt the Gum Ammoniac in a brass
Mortar heated, and incorporate with it the Turpentine, and mix them with the
other ingredients off from the Fire; and when the Mass is almost cold, make it
up into Rolls This Plaster is commended to mollify hard internal Tumors,
particularly those of the Liver and Spleen, though they should prove schirrhous.

Angelus Sala's Magnetic Plaster.
Take of Sagapenum, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, each three Ounces; of yellow Wax, and
Turpentine, each four Ounces and an half; of arsenical Magnet, three Ounces; of
the Earth of Vitriol washed, one Ounce; of Oil of Ambar, half an Ounce: After
you have dissolved the Gums in twenty Ounces of Vinegar of Squills over a
moderate Fire, pass them through a strong Cloth, and boil them to the ordinary
consistence of Plasters; melt the Wax in a copper Pan with the Oil of Ambar,
and having taken them off the Fire, incorporate with them the Turpentine, Earth
of Vitriol, and arsenical Magnet finely powdered, together with the Gums
thickened, and the Plaster is made. The arsenical Magnet is made in the
following manner. Take of Hungarian Antimony, yellow Sulphur, and cristaline
Arsenick, each two Ounces; powder two Ounces of pure Antimony, as much yellow
Sulphur, and as much cristaline Arsenick, and having mingled them together, put
them over a Sand Bath moderately hot; keep the Cucurbit there, till the
Ingredients are altogether dissolved, which you shall know by putting into the
substances a small Iron Rod; for then they will stick to the Rod like
Turpentine: Then let the Matter cool; break the Cucurbit, and keep the Mass to
be powdered, when there is occasion. The Author of this Plaster cries it up
highly, and affirms, that being applied upon Bubo's, and pestilential
Carbuncles, it ripens them quickly, opens them, and draws at the same time the
Venom from the Center to the Circumference. It also perfectly cures the Kings
Evil, drawing the scrophulous Matter from the remote parts of the Body, and
pefectly cures in five or six Weeks.

A Plaster for Issues.
Take of Oil of Roses, and Rose Water, each a Quart; of Venice Ceruss, and
Litharge of Gold prepared, each eight Ounces; boil them according to art to a
Plaster; then add of white Wax, six Ounces; melt the white Wax cut into pieces,
and incorporate it exactly with the rest. This Plaster has no ill Smell, and
does not stick very close.

The Marrow of Chemistry.
Chemistry, which comes from the Hebrew Word Chema, signifying an hot Star, is
a contemplative and active Art: It examines all natural things; it teaches how
to separate the different Substances, which are found in mixed Bodies. Tubal
Cain, the eighth Man from Adam, was well skilled in Metallic Operations; and
Moses calcined the Golden Calf of the Children of Israel, and reduced it to a
Powder. It is called the Hermetic Art, from the ancient Egyptian Hermes, who
was well skilled in Chymistty, and was one of the first Inventors of it.

As to the Principles of Chemistry, they are five; Water, Spirit, Oil, Salt,
and Earth; two are passive, viz. Water and Earth; the rest are active. But to
pass by these things, we will treat only of such Medicines as are most used,
and approved in Physic. First, we will set down those Medicines that are made
of Vitriol.

To make the Oil and Spirit of Vitriol, the Vitriol is calcined till it is
yellow, that the accidental Humidity may fly away, and then it is distilled in
a Glass Retort, in the highest Degree of Fire for sixty Hours, whereby the
Spirit comes forth. At the Bottom remains a very acid corrosive Spirit, which
some call falsely, the Oil. This Distillation may be perfomed in a less Time,
and to more Advantage, with a large Receiver that has a large Mouth, for so the
Spirit will have a freer Passage. The honorable Mr. Boil makes his Ens Veneris
with Colcothar of Vitriol, first edulcorated with Rain Water, and afterward
sublimed with a double Quantity of Sal Ammoniac. This is a noble Medicine for
the Rickets. The same Colcothar edulcorated, and reduced to a Cataplasm with
the White of an Egg, often cures Cancers of the Breasts not ulcerated. Pour,
Drop by Drop, the corrosive Spirit into Rain Water impregnated with Vitriol,
and evaporate it half away, and you will see Streaks like Hairs; pour the
anisated Balsom of Sulphur into the said Water, and you will find a red Mass
like Soap. If you take Vitriol of Steel, with a double Quantity of Sal
Armoniack, and proceed in the same Method, you will have a Sublimate in Taste and
Smell like Ens Veneris. The Styptic Water is a Solution of Vitriol and other
Ingredients.

Take of Colcothar of red Vitriol, that remains in the Retort, after the Spirit
is drawn out, burnt Allom and Sugarcandy, each half a Dram; the Urine of a
young Person, and Rose Water, each half an Ounce; Plantain Water, two Ounces;
stir them all together a good while in a Mortar, then pour the Mixture into a
Viol, and when you use it, separate it by Inclination. This styptick Liquor
stops Arterial Blood without Excoriation. Apply a Rag dipped in it, and hold it a
while to the Part.

Some distill Vitriol of Mars for a Spirit, and count it a great Secret: But it
is nothing else but Spirit of Vitriol regenerated. Tartar vitriolated is
vulgarly made by dropping Spirit of Vitriol upon Oil of Tartar per Deliquium,
till it is perfectly saturated, and afterward they dry it, then they dissolve
it in Rain Water, filtrate and evaporate it, and again gently dry it for Use:
But the following way of preparing it is much better.

Take green Vitriol, dissolve it in Rain Water, afterward digest, and
filtrate, then by hot Iron Plates, wholly separate the Particles of Copper from
it, then filtrate it again, and drop upon it a sufficient Quantity of Spirit of
Sal Ammoniac, or Hartshorn; digest and filtrate it, and repeat the Operation
till no Filth remains at the Bottom, then evaporate it till it is dry, keep it
for Use. The Dose is one Scruple.

Of Roman Vitriol calcined, and Niter, each one Pound; of common Salt, two
Pound; and of Quick Lime, half a Pound, is made Aqua Fortis, by Distillation.
The common way of making Aqua Fortis, is with Colcothar of Vitriol, and Niter;
but I suppose this is Spirit of Niter; therefore take Vitriol calcined till it
is yellow, and of Niter, each equal Parts; put them both into a Glass Retort,
and having luted on the Receiver, keep up a strong Fire, as long as any Vapors
appear in the Receiver. If you add Sal Ammoniac, the Aqua Fortis will become
Aqua Regia, which is much used about Metals. Take the Caput Mortuum of Aqua
Fortis, and with Rain Water extract a Salt; filtrate, and cristalize it, then
grind it upon a Stone, and afterward put the Salt into a Retort, and pour upon
it the foresaid Aqua Fortis; distill, and cohobate it till the whole comes over
into the Receiver, and you will have a Noctiluca like Fire. The same way is made
the shining Salt, wherewith the Beard being moistened, appears in the Dark like
Fire, by the Addition of a fine Spirit, which few know, made of one Part of
Niter, and three Parts of English Bole, which you must afterward rectify, and
keep for Use. The Salt extracted by the Rain Water from the Caput Mortuum, is
nothing else but Niter, though some think it is an Alcali: So thought Dr. Mayow,
who affirms, in his Treatise of Niter, that the Caput Mortuum of distilled
Niter, is very like an Alcali Salt.

Among all the Salts, I think common Salt is the most excellent; this is
peculiar in it, viz. that it crackles and makes a Noise when we endeavor to
free it from its accidental Moisture. It is distilled in the same manner as
Niter. At the End of Distillation white Flowers are distilled in the Neck of
the Retort.

Take of the rectified Spirit of Salt, what Quantity you please; with Quick
Lime dry it to a Powder, melt it in a Crucible, and when it is cold, powder it,
and mix it with a fourth Part of Quicklime, and distill it in a Retort; the
Spirit that comes off, will smoke continually, and white Vapors will exhale,
that smell and raste pleasantly. This Spirit being taken in Broth, is good for
nephritick Pains, the Dropsy, and to open Obstructions, and very friendly to
the Bowels, and ferments. Vinegar being distilled, commonly the Phlegm comes
first, and then the acid Spirit: But the reason is because some evaporate first
the half, or three Parts of it, and then distill the Residue: But if a
sufficient quantity of Vinegar were distilled without previous Coction and
Evaporation; they would find that a fine Spirit would ascend before the Phlegm.

Put six Quarts of strong Vinegar into an Earthen Pan, evaporate in a Bath
about a Quart, which is the flegmatic Part, and pour that which remains into a
Glass, or Earthen Cucurbit, and distill it in a strong Sand Heat, until there
remains nothing at Bottom, but a Substance like Honey. This is the common way
of distilling Vinegar. Its principal Use is to dissolve, or precipitate Bodies.
It is sometimes mixed in Cordial Potions, to resist Putrefaction. The Dose is
half a Spoonful. It is mixed with Water, and this Oxycrate is used inwardly to
stop Bleeding, and is outwardly applied to cure Inflammations.

Sulphur burnt under a Bell yields a very acid and corrosive Spirit.

VVillis's Tincture of Sulphur is made in the following manner.
Take of Sulphur, one Ounce; of Salt of Tartar, three Ounces; of Canary Wine, a
Quart; make a Tincture according to Art. Of this Tincture is made the Syrup so
famous over all England.

Balsom of Sulphur is made in the following manner.
Put into a small Mattress, an Ounce and an half of Flowers of Sulphur, and pour
upon it eight Ounces of Oil of Turpentine; place your Mattress in Sand, and give
it a digesting Fire two Hours; afterward increase it a little for four Hours,
and the Oil will take a red Color. Let the Vessel cool, then separate the
clear Balsom from the Sulphur that could not dissolve. This Balsom is excellent
for Ulcers of the Lungs and Breast. The Dose is from one Drop to six in some
proper Liquor. You may reduce this Balsom to the Consistence of an Ointment, by
evaporating some Part of it, and it is used to cleanse Wounds and Ulcers.

If you would make Aniseed Balsom of Sulphar, you must use the Oil drawn from
Aniseeds instead of it, and proceed as before. It is more agreeable than the
former, and has less Acrimony.

From Tartar and Salt of Niter, is distilled a pleasant Spirit; which, when
rectified according to the common way, is good for Obstructions, and Gravel.

The Tincture of Salt of Tartar, which is really nothing else than alcalizat
Particles joined with Spirit of Wine, is made in the following manner.
Take of Salt of Tartar fused in a Crucible, and powdered in a hot Mortar, what
quantity you please; put it into a large Viol, afterward pour upon it a
sufficient quantity of rectified Spirit of Tartar hot, and mix them well; then
pour upon them Spirit of Wine, and shake them again, and you will presently have
a red Tincture impregnated with Salt of Tartar, which is of a pleasant Taste,
Smell, and Color. This Tincture excellently dissolves all distilled Oils, and
also Balsom of Gilead, which cannot be dissolved by Spirit of Wine, or any
other Menstruum, and so it becomes an excellent Diuretic, Aperitive,
Abstersive, and stomachic Medicine, good for an Asthma, Consumption and Dropsy.

Spirit of Tartar is made in the following manner.
Fill two Thirds of a Retort with Tartar grofly powdered; place your Retort in
a reverberatory Furnace, and fit it to a large capacious Receiver, and begin
the Distillation with a very small Fire, for three Hours, to warm the Retort,
and to drive out the Phlegm Drop by Drop. Throw away this insipid Water, and
refitting the Receiver, lute closely the Joints; increase the Fire by little
and little, and you will see Spirits fill the Receiver with Clouds. Continue it,
that the Oil may likewise come forth; then, when there will come no more, let
the Vessels cool, and unlute them. Pour that which is in the Receiver into a
Tunnel lined with brown Paper, that the Spirit may filtrate, and separate from
the thick black Oil that remains in the Filter: Keep this Oil in a Viol. It is
good to smell to in hysteric Fits, it is also good for paralytic Parts, and
cold Pains, but its Smell is very nauseous. Pour the Spirit into a Glass
Cucurbit, and rectify it by distilling it in Sand. It is good for the Palsy,
Asthma, and Scurvy, it works by Urine and Sweat; it is also used for hysteric
Diseases, and the Falling Sickness. The Dose is from one Dram to three, in some
proper Liquor.

Fixed Salt of Tartar is made in the following manner.
Break the Retort, which served you for Distillation of Tartar, and take out
the black Mass you find in it; calcine it until it becomes white, then put it
into a a great deal of hot Water, and make a Lee, filtrate it, and pour it into
a Gass, or Earthen Vessel; evaporate in a Sand Heat all the Water, and there
will remain a white Salt, which is called Salt of Tartar. It is aperitive, and
is used to draw forth the Tincture of Vegetables, and to open Obstructions.

Oil of Tartar per Deliquium is made in the following manner.
Take of Salt of Tartar, what quantity you please; powder it, and tie it up in
in a Rag, and hang it in a cold and moist Place; put a Glass under it to
receive the Liquor, which you must filtrate till it is clear. It cools,
cleanses, loosens, and is good for the Itch, and to cleanse the Skin; it cures
Ulcers in the Head, and Venereal Pustles.

The way of making Salt of Tartar with Niter is not good, for all the Tartar
does not fly away.

Tincture of Coral made after the best manner.
Take Coral grossly powdered, distill it in a Retort with a violent Fire for
forty Hours. In the Receiver you will find a red and unctuous Liquor, though in a
small quantity. Bring it to the Consistence of Honey, and then with Spirit of
Wine, draw a red Tincture. As to the other Preparations of this Tincture, there
is no depending on them, because the Menstruum is apt to grow red of it self,
or by the long Digestion, or by the Addition of Salts.

Magistery of Coral is made in the following manner.
Take what quantity you please of the Impregnation of Coral, either red or
white, made with distilled Vinegar. Pour it into a Viol, or Mattress, and drop
into it the Liquor of the Salt of Tartar, made by Deliquium; a Curd will
appear, which will precipitate to the Bottom, in a very white Powder. Decant
the clear Liquor, and wash the Powder five or six times with Water; dry it, it
is that which is called the Magistery of Coral. It chears, and fortifies the
Heart, resists Poison, stops the Bloody Flux, and all other Hemorrhagies. The
Dose is from ten to thirty Grains.

Salt of Coral.
Take what quantity you please of the Dissolution of Coral made by distilled
Vinegar; pour it into a Glass Cucurbit, or Earthen Pan, and evaporate in Sand
all the Moisture: There will remain at Bottom a Salt of Coral. Keep it in a
Viol well stopped. It has the same Virtues with the Magistery.

Of all imperfect Metals, except Lead, a Tincture may be drawn.

Take Regulus of Antimony, Iron, Copper, Tin, in a due Proportion; fuse, and
powder them, and fire them with a sufficient quantity of Niter. Increase the
Fire, and keep them in Fusion till the Mass is betwixt a sky and green Color,
then draw a Tincture with Spirit of Wine according to Art. This is an
excellent Medicine for Chronical Diseases, and Obstructions. Poterius's famous
Powder is made of Niter, Antimony, and Tin. If you mix with it Rosine of
Gujacum, you will have an excellent sudorific Medicine, and which I have much
experienced, says Viganus. If the Flowers of Antimony are reverberated with a
violent Fire, till they are very red, you may draw a red Tincture from them
with rectified Spirit of Wine.

Tincture of Antimony is made with Salt of Tartar, and Regulus of Antimony, by
calcining with Fusion of the Fire for three Days, in a Glass Furnace. At length
you will find a red Mass, wherewith a very red Tincture may be made with
rectified Spirit of Wine. I do not think, says Viganus, that any of the Salt
of Tartar remains in the Tincture, by reason of the violent Calcination; and we
find by Experience, that if the red Powder be exposed to the Air, it does not
lose its Redness.

Mercurius Dulcis.
Powder sixteen Ounces of corrosive Sublimate in a Glass Mortar; mix with it by
degrees twelve Ounces of Mercury revived from Cinnabar; stir this Mixture with
a wooden Pestle, till all the Quicksilver becomes imperceptible; then put this
gray Powder into several Viols, two Thirds whereof must remain empty; set them
in a Sand Furnace, with a little Fire at first, then increase it to the third
Degree; continue it in this Condition till your Sublimate is made, which
usually happens in four or five Hours. Break your Viols, and fling away a
little light Earth that is found at the Bottom. Separate also that which sticks
to the Neck of the Viols, but gather up carefully all that is in the Middle,
which is very white, and having powdered it, sublime it again in Viols, as
before; separate once more the Matter in the middle, and sublime it in other
Viols as before. Lastly, separate the Earthy Matter at the Bottom, and the
fuliginous that lies in the Neck of the Viols, and keep the Sublimate that is
in the middle, for it is sufficiently sweetened. Mercurius Dulcis is used for
all Venereal Diseases. It opens Obstructions, and kills Worms. The Dose is from
six Grains to half a Dram.

White Precipitate.
Dissolve eight Ounces of Mercury, revived from Cinnabar, in ten Ounces of
Spirit of Niter; after it is dissolved, pour upon it Salt Water filtrated, made
of five Ounces of Sea Salt, in a quart of Water; add a quarter of an Ounce of
volatile Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, and a white Powder will precipitate; when it
is settled, pour off the Water, and wash it well with Fountain Water, and dry
it in the Shade. It is used to raise a Salivation. The Dose is from four to
fifteen Grains. It cures Tetters, and the Itch, a Dram, or two Drams of it
being mixed with one Ounce of Pomatum.

Red Precipitate.
Dissolve four Ounces of Mercury revived from Cinnabar in five Ounces of Spirit
of Niter; pour the Dissolution into a shortnecked Viol, and evaporate with a
gentle Heat all the Moisture; then quicken the Fire by degrees, and raise to
the third Degree, and continue it so, till all the Matter is turned red; then
take it off the Fire, and break the Viol when it is cool, and take out the
Precipitate. It takes down proud Flesh, and lays open Chancres, being mixed
with burnt Allom, Aegyptiacum, and Basilicon.

Turbith Mineral.
Dissolve two Ounces of Quicksilver revived from Cinnabar, with eight Ounces of
Oil of Vitriol, in a Glass Retort; then set the Retort in Sand, and make a Fire
underneath, and distill the Humidity. Make the Fire strong enough toward the
End, to force out some of the last Spirits; then break your Retort, and powder
the white Mass in a Glass Mortar; pour warm Water upon it, and the Matter will
presently turn to a yellow Powder, which you must sweeten by washing it often,
then dry it in the Shade. It purges strongly, both by Vomit and Stool, and is
used for the French Pox. The Dose is from two Grains to six in Pills.

Opening Saffron of Mars.
Wash well several Iron Plates, and expose them to the Dew for a great while;
when they are rusty, you must gather up the Rust, and then put the Plates again
in the Dew, and gather the Rust as before; and so do till you have got enough.
This is really the best Saffron of Mars. It cures the Dropsy, Green Sickness,
Obstructions of the Liver, Pancreas, Spleen, and Mesentery. The Dose is from
two Grains to two Scruples.

Astringent Saffron of Mars.
VVash what quantity you please of the following aperitive Saffron of Mars,
five or six times with strong Vinegar, leaving it to steep an Hour at a time,
then calcine it in a Pot in a great Fire five or six Hours; after that let it
cool, and keep it for Use. For this opening Saffron of Mars, take of Filings of
Steel, and Sulphur powdered, each equal Quantities. Mix them together, and make
them into a Paste with Water; put this Paste into an Earthen Pan, and leave it
to ferment four or five Hours; after which put the Pan over a good Fire, and
stir the Matter with an Iron Spatula, which will flame; and when the Sulphur is
burnt, it will appear black; but continuing a good strong Fire, and stirring it
about two Hours, it will be of a very red Color, and then it is made. The
binding Saffron of Mars stops a Looseness, and immoderate Fluxes of Hemorrhoids
and Courses. The Dose is from fifteen Grains to a Dram.

Salt of Mars.
Take of Spirit of Wine and Oil of Vitriol, each equal Parts; put them in a
clean Drying Pan, and set it in the Sun for some time, then in the Shade
without stirring; it will turn to a Salt; dry it, and keep it in a Viol well
stopped. It is good for Obstructions. The Dose is from six to twelve Grains in
some proper Liquor.

Tincture of Steel.
Powder and mix well together, twelve Ounces of Rust of Iron, and two Pound of
white Tartar of Mount-pelier, then boil them in a great Iron Pot, with fifteen
Pints of Rain Water, twelve Hours; stir the Matter with an Iron Slice often,
and pour in more boiling Water, according as it consumes; afterward leave it a
while to settle, and you will have a black Liquor; filtrate, and evaporate it in
an Earthen Pan, over a Sand Fire, till a Skin rises upon it. It opens
Obstructions, is good for Cachexies, Dropsies, and Obstructions of the Courses.
The Dose is from a Dram to half an Ounce in a proper Liquor.

Volatile Spirit of Sal Ammoniac.
Powder apart eight Ounces of Sal Ammoniac, and a Pound and an half of quick
Lime; mix them in a Mortar, and pour upon them four Ounces of Water, and put it
presently into a Retort, half whereof must remain empty; set your Retort in a
Sand Furnace, and fit to it a great Receiver, and lute the Junctures exactly.
Begin the Distillation without Fire for a quarter of an Hour, afterward
increase by little and little to the second Degree, continue it till nothing
more comes forth; take off your Receiver, and pour out the Spirit immediately
into a Viol, turning away your Head, as much as may be, to avoid a very subtle
Vapor that continually arises from it. Stop the Bottle close with Wax to keep
in the Spirit. You Will have of it five Ounces and six Drams. It is good for
Obstructions, malignant Fevers, Falling Sickness, the Palsy, Plague, Smallpox,
and the like. It works by Perspiration, or by Urine. The Dose is from six to
twenty Drops in some proper Liquor.

Rosine of Jalap.
Powder grossly a Pound of good Jalap, and put it into a large Bolt-head, and
pour upon it as much rectified Spirit of Wine, as will rise three Fingers above
the Matter; stop the Bolt-head with another, whose Neck enters into it, and
luting the Junctures with a wet Bladder, digest it three Days in a Sand Heat;
the Spirit of Wine will receive a red Tincture. Decant it, and then pour more
upon the Jalap; proceed as before, and mixing your Dissolutions, filtrate them
through brown Paper. Put that which you have filtrated into a Glass Cucmbit,
and distill in a vaporous Bath, two Thirds of the Spirit of Wine, which may
serve another time for the same Operation. Pour that which remains at the
Bottom of the Cucurbit, into a large Earthen Pan filled with Water, and it will
turn to a Milk, which you must leave a Day to settle; and then separate the
Water by Inclination, you will find the Rosine at Bottom like Turpentine; wash
it several times with Water, and dry it in the Sun; it will grow hard like
common Rosine; powder it fine, and it will become white: Keep it in a Viol. It
purges Serum, and is good for Dropsies. The Dose is from four to twelve Grains.

Extract of Rhubarb.
Bruise, or cut very small a Pound of good Rhubarb, and put it into a glass
Cucurbit; pour upon it two Quarts of Succory or Endive Water; then having
placed the Cucurbit in a Bath of Sand, and kept a very moderate Fire under the
Bath, strain out the Tincture, and put the Sediment again into the Cucurbit,
and pour upon it a Quart of Succory Water. Renew the Maceration in the same
Bath, and with the same heat for six hours; then having strained, and pressed
out the substances, and returned the Sediment again into the Cucurbit, pour
upon it a Pint of good Spirit of Wine, and having carefully luted it, put it
into the same Bath, and renew the Maceration for six hours; strain the whole,
and press it out very hard; then having mixed this Tincture with the former,
and passed the whole Mixture through a Sheet of Cappaper, pour the filtred Liquor
into a glazed Pipkin, and evaporate the superfluous Moisture over a very gentle
Fire, which must be continued till the principal substance of the Rhubarb
remains at the Bottom of the Pipkin, about as thick as the Consistence of an
Extract.

Extract of Coloquintida.
Having cleansed the Coloquintida from all its Seeds, and cut the Pulp very
small, put a Pound thereof into an indifferent large Cucurbit, and place it
upon Sand, and put to the Coloquintida three Quarts of white Wine; put on the
head of the Cucurbit, and lute it well, and fit on a Receiver; kindle a gentle
Fire under the Furnace, and keep it so twelve hours; then unlute the Vessels,
and strain out the Infusion, and set it apart; put the Sediment into the
Cucurbit again, and pour upon it a Pint of good Spirit of Wine, and all the
Wine which was distilled into the Receiver; then stop up the Cucurbit, and lute
it well, and infuse the whole for twelve hours in a Bath like the former, but
with a little more heat; press out the Tincture, and mix it with the former,
and filter both through a Sheet of Cap-paper; put it again into a Cucurbit, fit
on a Receiver, and draw off in Sand with a moderate Fire the Spirit of Wine,
which will serve another time for the like Tinctures; then unlute the Vessels,
and pour all the Liquor that remains in the Cucurbit into a glazed Pipkin, and
evaporate the superfluous Moisture leisurely in Sand, till it come to the
Consistence of a Rob; When it is cold, keep it in a Pot for use, or you may
continue the Evaporation, and reduce this Rob to a real Extract of
Coloquintida. It is chiefly used to purge watery Humors from the remote parts
of the Body, and is also very good for a Dropsy. It may be given with Extract
of Rhubarb, or alone in Pills, from two or three Grains to eight or ten.

Oil of Cinnamon.
Bruise four Pounds of good Cinnamon, infuse in it six Quarts of hot Water, and
digest it in an earthen Vessel close stopped two days; pour the Infusion into a
large Copper Limbeck, and lute a Receiver close to it: Distill with a pretty
good Fire three or four Pints of the Liquor; then unlute the Limbeck, and pour
into it the distilled Water; you will find at bottom a little Oil, which you must
pour into a Viol, and stop it close; distill the Liquor as before; then
returning the Water into the Limbeck, take the Oil you find at bottom of the
Receiver, and mix it with the first; repeat this Cohobation, until there rises
no more Oil; then take away the Fire, and distill the Water that remains in the
Receiver, the same way that Spirit of Wine is rectified, and you will have an
excellent Spirituous Cinnamon Water. The Oil of Cinnamon strengthens the
Stomach, and is indeed an excellent Corroborative. After this manner almost all
the Oils of odoriferous Vegetables may be drawn, as Box, Roses, Rosmary,
Lavender, Juniper, Cloves, and Aniseeds.

Distillation of an odoriferous Plant, such as Balm, its Extract, and fixed Salt.
Take a good quantity of Balm newly gathered, when it is in its Vigor; beat it
well in a Mortar, and put it into a large earthen Pot; make a strong Decoction
of other Balm, and pour into the Pot enough of it, to sweat it sufficiently;
cover the Pot, and leave it two days in Digestion; then put the Matter into a
large copper Limbeck, and set on a Receiver; make a Fire of the second Degree
under it, and distill about half the Water; then let the Vessels cool, and
unlute them; you will find in the Receiver a very good Balm water. Let it stand
open in the Sun five or six days; then stop it, and keep it for use.

Press through a Linen Cloth, that which remains in the Body, and let the
Expression settle; filter and evaporate the Water with a gentle heat in an
earthen Vessel, till there remains an Extract of the consistence of Honey.

Dry the residence that remains after expression, and burn it with store of
other Balm likewise dried; you may obtain an Alkali Salt from the Ashes by a
Lee in Water, which being filtred, evaporate it in a Glass, or earthen Vessel
in Sand, there will remain a Salt, which you may make white by calcining it in
a Crucible in a strong Fire.

The Water, Extract, and Salt of all odoriferous Plants, such as Sage,
Marjoram, Thym, Mint, Hyssop, and the like may be drawn after the same manner.

The Distillation of a Plant, that is not oderiserous, such as Carduus
benedictus, and its essential Salt.
Take a good Quantity of Carduus Benedictus, when it is in its prime; pound it
in a Mortar, and fill with it two thirds of a Limbeck; draw by expression a
sufficient quantity of the Juice of other Carduus, and pour it into the
Limbeck, that the Herbs swiming in the Juice may not stick to the Bottom,
during the distillation: Distill with a Fire of the second Degree, about half as
much Water, as you used Juice.

Press through a Linen Cloth that which remains in the Limbeck; let the Juice
settle, and after it is filtred, evaporate with a small Fire about two thirds
of the Liquor in an earthen, or glass Vessel; set this Vessel in a cool place,
and leave it there eight or ten days, there will shout out Cristals round about
the Vessel; Separate them, and keep them in a Viol well stopped, these Cristals
are called the essential Salt. The extract of Carduus may be also made as the
Extract of Balm was. Succory, Fumitory, Sorel, Scabius, Cresses, and all other
Plants, that are not odoriferous, which yield good store of Juice, must be
distilled like Carduus Benedictus; and this method may serve to draw the
essential Salt out of any Plant whatsoever.

Spirit of Wine Tartarized.
Fill a large Bolt-head with a long Neck half full of Brandy, and fitting a
Head and Receiver, lute close the Junctures; set your Bolt-head upon a Pot half
filled with Water, to distill in a vaporous Bath: The Spirit will separate from
the Phlegm, and rise pure; continue the Fire till nothing more distills, so you will
have a pure Spirit of Wine at the first distillation. Put a Pound of Salt of
Tartar into a long Glass Body; pour upon it two Quarts of Spirit of Wine
prepared, as above; place your Vessel in Sand, and cover it with a Head, to
which fit a Receiver; lute well the Junctures with a wet Bladder, and give it a
gradual Fire, which continue until three parts of the Spirit of Wine are risen;
then remove the Fire, and keep this Spirit in a Viol well stopped.

Queen of Hungary's Water.
Gather Rosmary Flowers, when they are at their best, and fill a Glass Cucurbit
half full with them; pour on them a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine, to
infuse them; set the Cucurbit in a Bath, and joining its Head and Receiver,
lute close the Junctures, and give it a digestive Fire for three days; then
unlute them, and pour into the Cucurbit that which has bin distilled; refit
your Limbeck, and increase the Fire strong enough to make the Liquor distill
drop by drop, and when you have drawn about two thirds of it, put out the Fire;
let the Vessels cool, and unlute them. Keep the Water in a Viol well stopped.

Laudanum.
Cut into slices four Ounces of good Opium, and put it into a Bolt-head; pour
upon it a Quart of Rain Water well filtred; stop the Bolt-head, and setting it
in the Sand, increase your Fire by degrees, to make the Liquor boil for two
hours, strain it warm, and pour it into a Bottle. Take the Opium, which remains
undissolved in the Rain Water, dry it in an earthen Pan over a small Fire, and
putting it into a Mattress, pour upon it Spirit of Wine to the height of four
Fingers; stop the Marrass, and digest the Matter twelve hours in hot Ashes;
afterward strain the Liquor, and there will remain a glutinous Earth, which is
to be flung away. Evaporate both these Dissolutions of Opium separatly in Glass
Vessels in a Sand Heat, to the Consistence of Honey; then mix them, and
evaporate to the Consistence of a solid Extract.

Extract of Aloes.
Dissolve in a sufficient quantity of Juice of Roses, eight Ounces of
Soccatrine Aloes; after the dissolution is settled five or six hours, decant
it, and when you have filtred it, evaporate the Liquor gently, till it comes to
the Consistence of an Extract.

Distillation of Tobacco.
Put into a Glass Cucurbit eight Ounces of good Tobacco cut small; pour upon it
about an equal weight of Phlegm of Vitriol; cover the Cucurbit with its Head,
and digest the Matter in Sand for a day; fit to it a Receiver, and distill about
five Ounces of Liquor with a small Fire; keep it in a Viol. It is a strong
Vomit. The Dose is from two Drams to six in some proper Liquor. It is likewise
good for Tetters, and the Itch, the parts being gently rubbed with it. Put that
which remains in the Cucurbit-into an earthen Retort; place it in a Furnace,
and fit to it a great Receiver, and luting close the Junctures, begin with a
small Fire to raise all the Phlegm; increase the Fire by little and little, and
the Spirits will come forth with a black Oil; continue the Fire till there
comes no more. Let the Vessels cool, and unlute them. Pour that which you find
in the Receiver into a Tunnel lined with brown Paper; the watery part will pass
through, while the black and foetid Oil remains in the Filter. Keep it in a Viol.
A Dram of it may be mixed with two Ounces of Hogs Grease; it is a good remedy
for the Itch and Tetters. This Oil is very destructive to several Animals,
especially to Cats; for if a small Drop of it be dropped upon the Tongue, it
occasions deadly Convulsions, and the Creature perishes, if Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac be not presently applied to the Nostrils. Of the Juice of Tobacco the
Italians make an Ointment, which they count very good for sordid Ulcers. The
Spaniards are much delighted with Tobacco of their own growth, which is very
sweet, and best to make sneezing Powder. The Portuguese most esteem Brasil
Tobacco, which is very strong, and very narcotic. The People of China and Japan
have Tobacco, but they use it sparingly, as do the Turks and Persians. The
English and Dutch esteem Virginia Tobacco, which they sometimes mix with
Mastich, Ambar, Hartshorn, Lavender, Bettony, Sage, according to their
Constitution.

Distillation of Turpentine.
Take three Pounds of good Turpentine, and pour it into a Retort large enough
to remain half empty; add to it an handful of Stupe, to prevent the thicker
parts of the Turpentine from rising, when the Liquor distills; you must cleanse
the inside of the Neck of the Retort, and place it in a Furnace to distill in an
open Fire; fit to it a Receiver, and luting the Joints, begin the distillation
with a very small Fire, only to warm the Retort, and to drive out a volatile
Spirit; after which increase the Fire by degrees; there will come forth first a
clear Oil, then a yellow Oil, and at last a red Oil; Take care to separate
these Liquors, as they do distill, and when you see the red Oil begin to come
thick, take away the Fire, and when the Vessels are cold, unlute them; keep all
these Liquors separately in Viols. The volatile Spirit is an excellent
Aperitive. It is given from four to twelve Drops in some proper Liquor, to
expel Gravel, and for nephritic Pains. The first Oil serves for the same uses,
as the Spirit. The second and third serve as a Balsom to heal Wounds, to
assuage Swellings, and to fortify the Nerves.

Oil of Camphor.
Put into a Mattress three or four Ounces of good Camphor grossly beaten, and
pour upon it twice as much Spirit of Niter; stop your Vessel close, and set it
over a Pot half full of Water a little heated; stir it now and then to help
forward the Dissolution, which will be finished in three Hours, and then you will
find the Camphor turned into a clear Oil, which swims above the Spirit;
separate it, and keep it in a Viol well stopped. It is used for the Caries of
Bones, and to touch Nerves that are uncovered.

Oil of Myrrh per Deliquium.
Boil Eggs until they are hard; then cutting them in two, separate the Yolk,
and fill the White with Myrrh powdered; set them on little Sticks placed
conveniently in an Earthen Pan, in some moist place, and there will distill a
Liquor to the Bottom of the Vessel, which you must keep for Use. It clears the
Face from Spots.

Distillation of Vipers.
Put six Dozen of Vipers dried in the Shade into a coated Glass Retort; set it
in a reverberatory Furnace; fit to it a large Receiver, and lute the Joints
close; then begin the Distillation with a small Fire to warm the Retort gently,
and to drive out a flegmatic Water Drop by Drop; when this Water ceases to
drop, increase the Fire a little, and Spirits will come forth, which will fill
the Receiver with white Clouds, and at last a black Oil will distill, and a
little volatile Salt will stick to the Sides of the Receiver; continue the Fire
till there comes no more; then let the Vessels cool, and unlute them; shake
about the Receiver a little, that the volatile Salt may fall from the Sides,
and pour it all into a Bolt-head, fit to it, with a Head, and a small Receiver,
and lute the Joints with a wet Bladder. You must place your Vessel in Sand, and
with a gentle Fire under it, the volatile Salt will sublime, and stick to the
Head, and uppermost Part of the Bolt-head. Separate it, and keep it in a Viol
well stopped.

It is an excellent Medicine, good for malignant Fevers, Agues, Pox, Apoplexy,
Falling Sickness, Palsy, Hysteric Diseases, and the Bitings of all venomous
Beasts. The Dose is from six to sixteen Grains in some proper Liquor. That
which remains in the Bolt-head must be turned into a Tunnel lined with brown
Paper; the Spirit and Phlegm will pass through, but the stinking Oil will remain
behind; with this Oil Paralytick Parts may be anointed. The Spirit and Phlegm
mixed confusedly, must be put into an Alembick, and distilled in a vaporous
Bath, till half the Liquor comes off, and you will have a Spirit, that must be
kept well stopped. It is much of the same Virtue with the Salt. The Dose is from
ten to thirty Drops. The volatile Salt of Hartshorn may be drawn the same way,
and also the Spirit.

Distillation of Urine.
Take of sound Young Men's Urine, newly rendered, twelve Quarts; evaporate it in
an Earthen Cucurbit, in a Sand Heat to the Consistence of Honey; put on an Head
and Receiver, and lute the Joints close; make a small Fire, to draw off what
remains of the Phlegm; then increase it by degrees, and the Spirit will rise
with a little Oil, and afterward the volatile Salt, which will stick to the
Head; keep up the Fire, till there comes no more; then unlute the Vessels, and
separate the volatile Salt, and put it into a Bolt-head, and pour upon it the
Spirit that is in the Receiver; then put a Blind-head to the Bolt-head, and
lute the Joints with a wet Bladder; then set the Bolt-head on Sand, and sublime
with a small Fire all the volatile Salt, and keep it in a Viol well stopped. It
operates by Urine and Sweat, is good for Agues, and malignant Fevers, and opens
Obstructions. The Dose is from five to fifteen Grains in some proper Liquor.
That which remains in the Bolt-head must be filtred; the Spirit will pass
through the Filter, but the stinking Oil will be kept behind.

The Spirit may be distilled in a Sand Heat, to separate it from a thick
Matter, which remains at Bottom. It has the same Virtues as the Salt. It is
given from eight to twenty Drops.

Distillation of Honey.
Put four Pound of good Honey into a large Earthen Body, and distill the Water
in a moderate Sand Heat, until acid Drops begin to come; then put out the Fire,
and keep the Water for Use. It makes the Hair grow, the Roots of the Hairs
being moistened with a Sponge dipped in it, Put what remains in the Body into a
Glass-coated Retort, whereof two Thirds must remain empty; set the Retort in a
reverberatory Furnace; then put on a large Receiver, and lute the Joints; then
begin the Distillation with a gentle Fire for three Hours, to warm the Retort;
then increase it by degrees, and the Spirits will rise with a little black Oil,
and fill the Receiver with Clouds; continue the Fire till it will distill no
longer; then unlute the Vessels, and separate the Spirit from the black Oil in
a Tunnel lined with brown Paper. This Spirit opens Obstructions, and may be
dropped into Juleps to make them pleasantly acid.

Crocus Metallorum.
Take of Antimony and Niter, each one Pound; powder them, and mix them well
together; put this Mixture into an Iron Mortar, and cover it with a Tile; but
leave an open place, to put in and take out a live Coal; when the Coal is put
to it, the Matter will flame, and cause a great Detonation, which being over,
and the Mortar grown cold, strike against the Bottom, that the Matter may fall
down; then separate the Dross from the shining part with an Hammer. This is
called Liver of Antimony, which being washed several times, with warm Water, is
called Crocus Metallorum. The Dose of it is from two to eight Grains.

Glass of Antimony.
Take of Antimony powdered, one Pound; calcine it in a small Fire in an
unglazed earthen Pot. Stir the Matter continually with an Iron Spatula, until
Vapors rise no longer: But if, notwithstanding your stirring, the Powder
should chance to run into Lumps, as it often does, put it into a Mortar, and
powder it, and calcine it again, and when it will fume no more, and is of a
gray Color, put it into a Crucible, cover it with a Tile, and set it in a Wind
Furnace, and make a very strong Coal Fire to melt the Matter. Uncover the
Crucible about an Hour afterward, and put the End of an Iron Rod into it, to
see whether the Matter that sticks to it is become diaphanous; if so, pour it
upon a Marble Stone well warmed, and it will congeal, and you will have the Glass
of Antimony. Cool it, and keep it for Use. It is a violent Vomit. The Dose is
from two to six Grains.

Distillation of Guiacum.
Fill a large Retort three quarters full with Guiacum rasped; place it in a
reverberatory Furnace, and put on a large Receiver; begin the Distillation with
a Fire of the first Degree, to warm the Retort gently, and to distill the Water,
which they call Phlegm; continue it in this condition, until there come no more
Drops, which is a Sign that all the Phlegm is distilled. Throw away that which
you find in the Receiver, and fitting it again to the Neck of the Retort, lute
well the Junctures. You must afterward increase the Fire by degrees, and the
Spirits, and Oil will come forth in white Clouds; continue the Fire until there
comes no more; let the Vessels cool, and unlute them; pour that which is in the
Receiver into a Tunnel lined with brown Paper, set upon a Bottle, and the
Spirit will pass through, and leave the black Oil in the Tunnel; pour it into a
Viol, and keep it for Use; it is an excellent Remedy for Rottenness of Bones,
for the Toothache, and to cleanse old Ulcers. It may be rectified, as Oil of
Ambar is, and may be used inwardly in the Epilesy, Palsy, and to expel the
Secundine. The Dose is from two Drops to six.

Cornachine Powder.
Take of Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Diagrydium, and Cream of Tartar, each equal
Parts. The Dose is from twenty to forty five Grains.

Sweet Spirit of Niter.
Put eight Ounces of good Spirit of Niter, and so much Spirit of Wine
alcoholized into a large Bolthead; set it upon Straw in a Chimney, and the
Liquor will grow hot, without Fire under it; and half an Hour, or an Hour
afterward, it will boil very much; have a care of the red Vapors that come
out apace, at the Neck of the Bolt-head; and when the Ebullition is over,
you will find the Liquor clear at the Bottom, and to have lost half what it was.
Put it into a Viol, and keep it for Use. Sweet Spirit of Niter is good for the
Wind-Cholick, and nephritick Pains, for Hysteric Diseases, and all
Obstructions. The Dose is from four to eight Drops in some proper Liquor.

Sweet Spirit of Salt.
Take of Spirit of Salt, and Spirit of Wine, each equal Parts; mix them, and
set them in Digestion for two or three Days in a double Vessel, in a gentle
Sand Heat. It is good to expel Gravel. The Dose is from four to twelve Drops,
in some convenient Liquor.

Sal Prunellae.
Take of purified Saltpeter, two Pounds; put it into a Crucible, and set the
Crucible in a Furnace among burning Coals; when the Niter is melted, throw into
it one Ounce of Flowers of Sulphur, a Spoonful at a time, the Matter will
presently flame, and the more volatile Parts of the Saltpeter will fly away.
When the Flame is over, the Matter will remain in a very clear Fusion. Take the
Crucible out with a Pair of Tongs, and pour the Matter into a clean Brass
Basin, a little warmed; shake about the Basin to spread the Matter while it is
cooling. Sal Prunellae is cooling, and dinretick, is good for Fevers, Quinseys,
and the running of the Reins, and for all Diseases that are occasioned by Heat,
and Obstructions. The Dose is from half a Dram to a Dram in some proper Liquor.

Tincture of Ambar.
Make a fine Powder of six Ounces of yellow Ambar, put it into a Bolt-head, and
pour upon it rectified Spirit of Wine, to the Height of four Fingers; put
another Bolt-head into this, and so make a double Vessel; lute the Joints well
with a wet Bladder, and digest it five or six Days in hot Sand, till you have a
good Tincture; then pour off the Tincture, and put more Spirit of Wine to the
Matter; digest as before, and mix it with the other Tincture; filtrate them,
and distill them in a Limbeck, and draw off with a small Fire half the Spirit
Wine, and keep the Tincture in a Viol well stopped. It is good for hysteric
Diseases, the Palsy, Falling Sickness, and Apoplexy. The Dose is from ten Drops
to a Dram in some proper Liquor.

Destillation of Ambar.
Powder Ambar grossly, and fill with it two Thirds of a coated Glass Retort; set
it in a Furnace on two Iron Bars, and put on a large Receiver; lute the Joints
close, and with a small Fire warm the Retort, and drive out the Phlegm; then
increase the Fire by little and little, and there will distill a Spirit, and an
Oil; continue the Fire, until there comes no more; then let the Vessels cool,
and unlute them; pour a Pint of warm Water into the Receiver to dissolve some
volatile Salt that sticks to the Sides; pour all the Liquor into a Glass
Limbeck; put on a Receiver, and lute the Joints close; heat the Vessels with a
small Fire; afterward increase it a little, and the Spirit and Water will
rise, and with them a little white Oil; continue the Fire until no more rises,
and the thick Oil remains at the Bottom, without boiling; separate the white
Oil that swims upon the Phlegm and Spirit, and keep it in a Viol well stopped. It
is used inwardly for the Falling Sickness, Palsy, Apoplexy, and hysteric
Diseases. The Dose is from one Drop to three in some proper Liquor. To separate
the Water and Spirit, you must pour them both into a Glass Dish, and evaporate
over a very small Fire, two Thirds of it; that which remains is Spirit of
Ambar; keep it in a Viol well stopped. It is good for the Scurvy, Jaundice,
stoppage of the Urine, and for Ulcers in the Neck of the Bladder. The Dose is
from twelve to twenty four Drops in some proper Liquor. The black Oil must be
kept for external Uses.

Volatile Salt of Ambar.
Powder two Pounds of Ambar, put it into a large Earthen Cucurbit, whereof
three Parts must be empty; place it in Sand, put on the Head, and a small
Receiver, and lute the Junctures close; keep a small Fire under, for about an
Hour; then when the Cucurbit is grown hot, increase the Fire leisurely to the
third Degree, and there will drop first a Phlegm and Spirit, afterward the
volatile Salt rises, and sticks to the Head in Cristals, then there distills an
Oil, first white, then red; when the Vapors cease, put out the Fire, and when
the Vessels are cold unlute them; brush the volatile Salt together with a
Feather, and put it into a large Viol, whereof three Parts must be empty; place
the Viol in Sand, and stop it only with Paper, and with a little Fire sublime
the pure Salt in fair Crystals to the Top of the Viol; take the Viol from the
Fire, when you perceive the Oil rise; break the Viol, and put the Salt into
another Viol well stopped. This Salt is good for the Jaundice, Difficulty of
Urine, Ulcers in the Bladder, the Scurvy, and hysteric Fits, and is excellent
for all Obstructions. The Dose is from eight to sixteen Grains in some proper
Liquor.

Cinnabar of Antimony.
Take the Caput Mortuum of Antimony, remaining after the Distillation of the
Butter; put it into a small Glass Retort well coated, and place it in a
reverberatory Furnace; the Flame must not touch the Neck of the Retort;
continue the Fire an Hour and an half, and all the Caput Morttum will be
sublimed in the Neck of the Retort into the Substance of Cinnabar; break the
Retort, and separate the small Faeces. Powder the Cinnabar, and sublime it
again in a new Retort. It is an excellent Medicine both in young and old, and
without doubt like an Alcali. It attemperates the Acrimony of the Humors. The
Dose is two Grains.

Bezoardicum Minerale.
Melt in hot Ashes two Ounces of the Butter of Antimony, put it into a
Bolt-head, drop upon it good Spirit of Niter, till the Matter is quite
dissolevd; while it is dissolving, Vapors will rise from it, which you must
carefully avoid, and therefore it is best to place it in a Chimney. Pour the
Solution into an Earthen Pan, and evaporate it over a gentle Sand Fire, till it
is dry; a white Mass will remain, which you must let cool; then pour upon it
two Ounces of Spirit of Niter; set the Vessel again in Sand, and evaporate as
before; pour again two Ounces of Spirit of Niter, and after the Moisture is
evaporated, increase the Fire a little, and caldine the Matter half an Hour;
then put out the Fire, and you will have a white Powder. Keep it in a Viol well
stopped. It forces Sweat. The Dose is from six to twenty Grains in some proper
Liquor.

Butter of Antimony.
Take of Regulus of Antimony powdered, six Ounces; of sublimate Corrosive
powdered, one Pound; mix them, and put them into a Glass Retort, half whereof
must remain empty; place your Retort in Sand, put on a Receiver, and lute the
Joints; then kindle a small Fire, and there will drop a clear Oil; after that
increase the Fire a little, and white thick Liquor like Butter will come forth,
which you must melt with live Coals, placed near the Neck of the Retort, that
it may run into the Receiver. Continue Fire until you see a red Vapor come
forth; then take away the Receiver, and place another in its Room filled with
Water; increase the Fire by Degrees, and when the Retort is red hot, the
Mercury will run into the Water. Dry it and keep it for Use as other Mercury.
Butter of Antimony cleanses Ulcers, and eats down proud Flesh.

Common Regulus of Antimony.
Take of Antimony sixteen Ounces, of crude Tartar, twelve Ounces; of purified
Niter, six Ounces; powder them, and mix them well together; then make a large
Crucible red hot, throw in a Spoonful of the Mixture, and cover it with a Tile,
till the Noise is over, and so do by Spoonfuls, one after another, until all
the Matter is cast in; then make a great Fire about it, and when the Matter has
been a while in Fusion, pour it into a Mortar greased with Suet, and heated;
then strike the Sides of the Mortar with a Pair of Tongs, to make the Regulus
fall to the Bottom. When it is cold, separate the Dross that remains in the Top
with an Hammer; powder it, and melt it in another Crucible; then throw into it
a little Niter, and it will flame a little; then pour out the Matter into the
Mortar well cleansed and greased, and let it cool.

Diaphoretic Antimony.
Take of Antimony, one Part; of purified Niter, three Parts; mix them well
together, and cast a Spoonful of this Mixture into a red hot Crucible, in the
Fire; you will hear a Noise, and when the Detonation is over, throw in another
Spoonful, and so do, till all the Powder is in the Crucible; keep a great Fire
about it two Hours; then cast the white Matter into an Earthen Pan, filled
almost with clear Water, and leave it steeping warm ten or twelve Hours, that
the fixed Saltpeter may dissolve in it; separate the Liquor by Inclination,
wash the white Powder that remains at the Bottom five or six times with warm
Waand dry it. It is sudorifick, good for malignant Fevers, and other malignant
Diseases. The Dose is from six Grains to thirty in some proper Liquor.

Oil of the Barks of Oranges and Citrons.
Take of the fresh Barks of Oranges or Citrons, what Quantity you please;
infuse them till they putrify; then distill them in a sufficient Quantity of
Water. This Oil heats, dries, is diaphoretick, kills Worms, and is alexipharmic.

ADVERTISEMENT.
EXcellent purging Pills, prepared by the Author, are to be sold by Mr. Henry
Bonwick at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard: They cure the Scurvy, the
most reigning Diseases of this Kingdom; they purge the Head, Breast, Stomach,
and Reins, and cleanse the Blood, and are a very proper Purge for those that
cannot confine themselves when they want purging, but are forced to go abroad
about their Business. The Price of each Box is one Shilling six Pence, with
Directions for Use.

Books printed for Henry Bonwicke at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
COllections of Acute Diseases, in five Parts: 1. Of the Smallpox and Measles;
2. Of the Plague and Pestilential Fevers: 3. Of continual Fevers: 4. Of Agues,
a Pleurisy, Peripnumonia, Quinsie, and the Cholera Morbus: 5. and lastly, Of
the Bloody Flux, Miscarriage, of Acute Diseases of Women with Child, a
Rhumatism, Bleeding at Nose, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and several other Diseases. In
8o.

A Collection of Chronical Diseases, viz. the Cholick, the bilious Cholick,
Hysteric Diseases, the Gout, and the bloody Urine, from the Stone in the
Kidneys. In 8o.

Promptuarium Praxeos Medicae; seu Methodus Medendi Praescriptis Celeberrimorum
Medicorum Londinensium Concinnata; and in Ordinem Alphabeticum digesta. 12o.

The Complete Herbal of Physical Plants: Containing all such English and
Foreign Herbs. Shrubs, and Trees, as are used in Physic and Surgery; and to
the Virtues of those that are now in use, is added one Receipt, or more of some
Learned Physician. The Doses, or Quantities of such as are prescribed by the
London Physicians, and others, are proportioned. Also Directions for making
Compound Waters, Syrups, simple and compound Electuaries, Pills, Powders, and
other forts of Medicines: Moreover, the Gums, Balsams, Oils, Juices, and the
like, which are sold by Apothecaries and Druggists, are added to this Herbal;
and their Virtues and Uses are fully described. 8o.

The Store house of Physical Practice; being a general Treatise of the Causes
and Signs of all Diseases afflicting Human Bodies: Together with the shortest,
plainest, and safest way of curing them, by Method, Medicine, and Diet; to
which is added, for the Benefit of young Practisers, several choice Forms of
Medicines used by the London Physicians. 8o.

A general Treatise of the Diseases of Maids, Big-bellied Women, Childbed
Women, and Widows; together with the best methods of preventing and curing the
same.

These six by the Author of this Introduction.

Pains afflicting Human Bodies; their various Difference, causes, Parts
affected, Signals of Danger or Safety; showing the Tendency of chronick and
acute Diseases, for a seasonable Prevention of fatal Events; with a Tract of
Issues and Setons. By E Manwaring, M. D. 8o.

The Art of preserving and restoring Health, explaining the Nature and Causes
of the Distempers that afflict Mankind: Also showing, that every man is, or may
be, his own best Physician: To which is added, a Treatise of the most simple
and effectual Remedies for the Diseases of Men and Women. Written in French by
M. Flamand, M. D. and faithfully translated into English.

The complete Surgeon, or the whole Art of Surgery explained, by way of
Questions and Answers: Containing an exact Account of its Principles and
several Parts; viz. of the Bones, Muscles, Tumors, Ulcers, and Wounds, simple
and complicated, or those by Gun shot; as also of Venereal Diseases, the
Scurvy, Fractures, Luxations, and all sorts of Chyrurgical Operations; together
with their proper Bandages and Pressings. Whereto is added a Chyrurgical
Dispensatory; showing the manner how to prepare all such medicines as are most
necessary for a Surgeon, and particularly the mercurial Panacea. Written in
French by M.l.e Clerc, Physician in ordinary, and Privy Counselor to the
French King. Faithfully translated into English. In 12o.

Pia Desideria; or Divine Addresses; in three Parts: 1. Sighs of the Penitent
Soul. 2. Desires of the Religious Soul. 3. Ecstasies of the Enamored Soul.
Illustrated with 47 Cuts: Written in Latin by Herm. Hugo; Englished by Edin
Arwaker. 8o.

Country Conversations: Being an Account of some Discourses that happened in a
Visit to the Country last Summer, on diverse Subjects, chiefly of the modern
Comedies, of Drinking, of Translated Verse, of Painting and Painters, of Poets
and Poetry. 8o.

Letters of Religion and Virtue, to several Gentlemen and Ladies: In Opposition
to the Profaneness and Obscenity of those newly published under the Names of
the late E. of Rochester, Mr. Otway, Mr. Brown, etc. with some short
Reilections on diverse Subjects.

A Practical Discourse of the Sin against the Holy Ghost: Showing plainly, 1.
What it is. 2. How any Person may certainly know whether he has been guilty of
it Designed to bring Encouragement to the faithful Penitent; Tranquillity of
mind to the Obedient; Joys to them that love, and the returning Sinner from
Desparation. 8o.

A Discourse, proving from Scripture and Reason, that the Life of man is not
limited by any absolute Decree of God. By the Author of the Duty of Man.

A New Description of Paris: Containing, a particular Account of all the
Churches, Palaces, Monasteries, Colleges, Hospitals, Libraries, Cabinets of
Rarities, Academies of the Virtuofi, Paintings, Medals, Statues, and other
Sculptures, Monuments, and public Inscriptions, with all other remarkable
matters, in that great and famous City. Translated out of French: The ad.
Edition; to which is added a Map of Paris.

FINIS.

