The English And FRENCH COOK:

DESCRIBING The best and newest ways of ordering and dressing all sorts of
Flesh, Fish and Fowl, whether boiled, baked, stewed, roasted, broiled,
frigassied, fried, souc'd, marrinated, or pickled; with their proper Sauces and
Garnishes: Together with all manner of the most approved Soops and Potages
used, either in England or France.

By T.P. J.P. R.C. N.B. And several other approved Cooks of London and
Westminster.

LONDON: Printed for Simon Miller at the Star, at the West End of St. Paul's.
1674.

THE EPISTLE TO The Lovers of the Art OF Cookery.
WE do here present you with the plainest and best digested Method in the Art
of Cookery yet extant, for Dressing of all sorts of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, whether
Boiled, Baked, Stewed, Roasted, Broiled, Frigassi'd, Fried, Marrinated or
Souced; with the best Sauces, New A-la-mode, Soops and Potages: It Is full and
plain, so that from the Maid to the Master Cook all may reap benefit. Farewell.

How to Boil all sorts of FISH, FLESH and FOWL, according to the latest and
most approved experience in COOKERY.
FISH boiled and stewed.
Bream stewed.
HAving very well scaled your Bream and thoroughly washed it, do not forget to
preserve its blood, in which you must stew your Bream, by adding thereto
Claret, two slices of Ginger raced, the pulp of three quarters of a pound of
Prunes boiled and strained into the Broth, Vinegar, Salt, and an Anchovie or
two; some sweet Herbs with Horseradish root stamped and strained: Let not your
Fish have more Liquor than will just cover it; being enough, take some Butter
with a little Vinegar, in which the Bream was stewed, and beat them up
together; then dish up your Fish, pouring the Butter thereon, and garnish your
Dish with Barberries, Oranges and Lemons.

Base boiled to be eaten hot.
Save the Livers, Rows or Spawns of your Base, then scale and wash them well;
having so done, boil them up in Water, Wine-Vinegar, Salt, some sweet Herbs,
Lemons sliced, with three whole Onions; then take a lear of drawn Butter, large
Mace, whole Cinnamon, a whole Nut-meg quartered, with three Anchovies dissolved
therein; having disht it up, pour on your lear, and let your garnish be fried
Oysters and Bay Leaves. This seasoning will not be improper for Mullet or any
other sort of Fish.

Carps stewed.
Save the blood of your Carp, dress him and take out his Gall; then scotch him
on the back, and put him into a Stew Pan with a quart of White Wind, half a
dozen blades of large Mace, a dozen Cloves, three races of Ginger sliced, two
slit Nutmegs with a Faggot of sweet Herbs, three large Onions whole, four or
five Bay Leaves, and some Salt, stew all these together, but put not your Carp
in till the Pan boil, and then too with five ounces of sweet Butter: Let your
fire be a quick Charcoal fire; when it is enough, dish it in a large dish,
pouring thereon your Sauce commixed with the Spices, laying on Lemon sliced
with Lemon-pill or Barberries; let your garnish be dried Manchet grated and
searsed, with carved Sippets laid round the dish. At great Festivals garnish
the body with stewed Oysters, and fried batter made of several colors by the
juice of Herbs, as Violets, Saffron, Spinach, etc. dissolving therein an
Anchovie or two.

Another most excellent way.
Take a living Carp and scale it, then dry it with a cloth, and open the
belly, taking out the entrails, then wash the blood into a Pipkin with a pint
of Claret, with Vinegar and Water, some sweet Herbs, two whole Onions, half a
pound of Butter or more; stew these together three quarters of an hour softly;
then laying your Toasts in the bottom of the Dish, serve it up with Sippets,
pouring some of the broth on, and garnishing it with Rosemary.

Cockles stewed.
Wash them well with Vinegar, and boil them before you take them out of the
Shells, then put them into a Dish with Claret Vinegar, a handful of Capers,
Mace, Pepper, Salt, a little grated Bread and Time minced, with the yolks of
three Eggs chopped very small; stew these together till they are enough, then
put in a good spill of Butter, rubbing the Dish with a clove of Garlic.
Crawfish, Shrimps or Prawns may be done the same manner, making what variety of
garnish you please with the shells only.

Crabs stewed.
Take Crabs and boil them till they are enough, then take the meat out of the
shells, and having put it into a Pipkin, some Claret, Wine-Vinegar, minced
Time, Salt, grated Bread, Pepper, sweet Butter, Capers, large Mace, and the
yolks of four Eggs boiled hard and chopped very small; stew these together till
they are enough, then rubbing the Dish with a clove of Garlic, serve them up.

Cods head dressed after the best manner.
Cut your Head so large beyond the Gills, that you may have a pretty quantity
of the Body with it; then boil it in Water and Salt, then have in readiness a
quart of Cockles, with the shell'd meat of two or three Crabs, put these into a
Pipkin with almost half a pint of White Wind, a bunch of sweet Herbs, two
Onions, a little large Mace, a little grated Nutmeg, and some Oyster liquor;
then boil it till the liquor is wasted, then add to it two ladlefuls of drawn
Butter, then dish up your Cods head on Sippets, draining it first very well
over a Chafingdish of coals: Then cut your Pease or Spawn in thin slices, and
the Liver in pieces, take likewise the Gill and pick out the bones, and cut it
as you did the other; dish up your Spawn round about the Cods head, and some on
the top, and put all over it the Gill and Liver; then pour your lair on it with
some drawn Butter upon that again, sticking all your Gillbone with Oysters
fried in Butter, and stick them on the Spawn also; then grate on Nutmeg, and
dish it up very hot, garnishing your Dish with Lemon and Bay Leaves.

Eels boiled.
Take them and draw, fley, and wipe them clean, having cut them in pieces, boil
them in White wine, Water, Oyster liquor, large Mace, three or four Cloves
bruised, Salt, Spinach, Sorrel, Parsley grossly minced, an Onion, Pepper, and an
Anchovie; dish them up on Sippets, broth them with their own broth, beating up
a lear with good Butter, yolks of Eggs, with slices of Lemon, and some
Lemon-pill.

Eels stewed.
Draw your Eels and fley them, and cut them into pieces four inches long, then
put them into a Stew Pan with as much Claret as will just cover them, mingled
with some Water, strip some Time and put to them, with sweet Marjoram, Savory
pickled, Parsley and large Mace, be sure to stew them enough, then serve them
on Sippets, stick Bay Leaves round the Dish, garnish the Meat with sliced
Lemon, and the Dish with fine grated Manchet.

Flounders or Gudgeons boiled after an excellent manner.
Take a few sweet Herbs, tops of Time, sweet Marjoram, Winter-savory, tops of
Rosemary, some whole Mace, some picked Parsley, and boil them in a quart of
White Wind and Water, the quantities not exceeding each other: these
ingredients having boiled some time together, then put in your Flounders, and
scum your Pan very well; then add to them a crust of Manchet, five ounces of
sweet Butter, season all with Salt, Pepper and Verjuice, and so dish it up.

Flounders stewed.
Take large Flounders and scotch them, then lay them in a deep Dish with a pint
of the best Sallet Oil poured round about, a pint of Claret and White Wind
Vinegar equally mixed, and let there be two or three races of Ginger sliced,
some whole Cloves, and a blade or two of Mace, a Nutmeg sliced, a faggot of
sweet Herbs, with two or three cut Onions, stew all these together; when they
are enough serve them up on Sippets: then take a handful of Parsley minced very
small, and put it green into your lair, letting it boil but a little while,
then pour it upon your Fish, garnish your Dish with sliced Lemon and green
Parsley.

Gurnet red or gray, by some called Knowds, how boiled.
Draw your Gurnet and wash it clean, then boil it in Water and Salt, with a
faggot of sweet Herbs; then take it up and pour upon it Butter, Verjuyce,
Nutmeg and Pepper, thicken it with the yolks of three new-laid Eggs; let your
Dish be garnished with sliced Lemon or Barberries.

Jacks, if small, how to stew.
Take your Jacks and cut off the heads of them, then put them into Balls of
forced Meat made of Fish, so that the heads may be upright; indore them over
with yolks of Eggs and so bake them; drawing them out, cut them in pieces, and
stew them up in a Dish with White Wind, Water, Salt, Vinegar, sweet Herbs, some
Anchovies, Mace, sliced Ginger and Nutmeg; but put not in your Pike till the
liquor boils, and then let them be accompanied with some small forced
Fish-balls, yellow, green and white, which you may color with juice of Herbs;
having turned them once or twice, take out your Jack-heads so forced, and set
them round in the Dish; then take out the bodies with a slice, and place them
to the best advantage between and about them all over the Dish: Put Smelts
fried very stiff in the mouths of your Jacks, your forced Meats being round
about them; for variety you may make use of fried Oysters, with other small
fried Fish.

Lobsters stewed.
Take some large Lobsters, being boiled, break the Meat small, though you must
break the shells as little as possible may be; then put the Meat into a Pipkin,
adding thereto Claret, White wine, Vinegar, sliced Nutmeg, Salt and some
Butter, stew these together an hour softly: being stewed almost dry, put to it
some more Butter, stirring it well together, then lay very thin Toasts in your
Dish, laying the Meat thereon: or you may put the Meat into the shells, garnish
the Dish about with the Legs, and lay the Barrel over the Meat with some sliced
Lemon: If in the Summer, garnish your Dish with well-colour'd Flowers; if in
the Winter, with such as you can procure pickled.

Lamprels boiled.
Wash your Lamprels, but take not out the guts, then cut them in pieces about
an inch long, putting into a Pipkin twice as much Water as will cover them;
seasoning the Liquor with Pepper and Salt, and thickning it with three or four
Onions, a little grated Bread, and a little Barm or Ale-yeast; then shred a
handful of Parsley, a little Winter-savory, and Time very small: Let all boil
till half the broth be consumed; then put in half a pound of sweet Butter, give
it a walm or two and serve it up.

Mullets boiled.
Take a large Mullet, having trust it round, put it in your Kettle; adding to
your Water Salt, and a handful of sweet Herbs, making your Water boil before
you put in your Fish, which must be tied up in a clean cloth: having put in
with your Fish a pint of White wine Vinegar, let it boil till your Fish swim;
then take the Rivet and a pint of great Oysters, and as much Vinegar as their
Gravie, four blades of Mace, with a little gross Pepper, boil all these in a
Pipkin together, till your Oysters are enough, then strain the yolks of four
Eggs, with half a pint of Sack; having put in a little Butter and Sugar, put in
also your Wine and Eggs, then serve it on Sippets, pouring on the Broth, scrape
on Sugar and eat it hot. With this Broth you may boil a Pike, nay, a Capon, if
you will but add some roasted Chestnuts steept in Sack.

Muscles stewed.
Take Muscles, wash them clean, and boil them in Beer and Salt; then take them
out of the shells, and beard them from Gravel and stones; fry them in clarified
Butter, then pour away some of the butter, and put to them a Sauce made of
their own Liquor, some sweet Herbs chopped, a little White wine, Nutmeg, the
yolks of four or five Eggs dissolved in Wine-Vinegar, Salt and some sliced
Orange; give these materials a walm or two in a Pipkin, and so serve them up in
Scollop-shells.

Oysters stewed the best way.
Take a pottle or three pints of large great Oysters, parboil them in their own
Liquor, then wash them in warm Water, wipe them dry, and pull away the Fins;
flower them, and fry them in clarified Butter very white: then take them up and
put them into a large Dish with White Wind, a little Vinegar, five ounces of
sweet Butter, some grated Nutmeg, large Mace, Salt, and three or four slices of
an Orange; stew them but a little while, and dish them up on Sippets, pouring
on the Sauce, and running it over with beaten Butter, garnishing it with sliced
Orange or Lemon.

Pike boiled after an excellent manner.
Take a Pike^, and having cleans'd the Civet, trust him round, and scotcht his
back, put him into boiling Water and Vinegar, two parts Water, and the third
Vinegar, with some Salt; be sure you boil him up quick: Let your Sauce be made
of White-wine-Vinegar, Mace, whole Pepper, two dozen of Cockles boiled out of
their shells and washed clean, a faggot of sweet Herbs, the Liver stamped and
put to it, with a Horseradish scraped or sliced, boil all these together; dish
your Pike on Sippets, and beat up your Sauce with some good sweet Butter and
minced Lemon: You may garnish your Dish any how as you please.

Pike stewed. (In the same manner may be stewed Carp, Bream, Barbel, Chevin,
Rochet, Gurnet, Conger, Tench, Perch, Base or Mullet, or the like.)
This is the City fashion: Take any of the aforesaid Fish, and having drawn and
cleans'd it from blood or other impurities, lay it in a Dish, putting thereto
as much White Wind as will only cover it, and set a stewing: When it boils, put
in the Fish and scum it, and put to it some large Mace, whole Cinnamon, and some
Salt; being finely stewed, dish it on Sippets, then thicken the Broth with the
yolks of three or four Eggs, some thick Cream, Sugar and beaten Butter; give it
a walm, and pour it on the Pike with some boiled Currants, and boiled Prunes
laid all over it; also Mace, Cinnamon, some knots of Barberries and sliced
Lemon, scraping on some Sugar.

Plaice boiled.
Take good large Plaice, and boil them in White wine, Vinegar, large Mace, two
or three Cloves and Ginger sliced: Being boiled, serve them in beaten Butter
with juice of Sorrel strained, Bread, sliced Lemon, Grapes or Barberries.

Plaice stewed.
Make choice of the fairest you can get, and having drawn, washed and scotch'd
them, fry them a little; having so done, remove them into a Stew Pan, putting
thereto some White Wind, grated Nutmeg, Wine-Vinegar, Butter, Pepper and Salt:
And thus stew them with slices of Oranges or Lemons.

Prawns, Shrimps, or Craw-fish stewed.
First boil, then pick, and afterward stew them in some Claret Wine, sweet
Butter, Nutmeg and Salt; dish them in Scollop-shells, and run them over with
beaten Butter, with juice of an Orange or Lemon.

You may for variety sake take any of the aforesaid Shellfish, and stew them
in Butter and Cream, serving them in Scollop-shells.

Perches boiled an excellent way.
Lay your Perches scotcht in a deep Dish, with a pint of the best Sallet Oil
you can get, half a pint of White Wind, with the like quantity of Wine-Vinegar,
two races of Ginger sliced, some whole Cloves and Mace, a Nutmeg sliced, and a
faggot of sweet Herbs with two Onions cut not very small; let these be the
seasoning for your Pan: then let your Liquor boil up your Fish very quick; then
blanch them on both sides, and dish them on Sippets; after this, take a little
White Wind, Gravie and Vinegar, with grated Nutmeg, and a handful of Oysters
cut in pieces, put these all over your Fish, causing them to boil almost in the
Dish before you send it up; pour drawn Butter over all, and garnish your Dish
with Barberries and Lemons.

Salmon boiled the best way after the City fashion.
Having chin'd your Salmon, take a side thereof or more, and cut the pieces
into a reasonable bigness, wipe it only from the blood, but do not wash it;
then take no more Wine and Water (of each an equal proportion) than will cover
it: Having made the Liquor, boil with a handful of Salt, and then put in your
Salmon, making it boil up quick, adding a quart of White-wine-Vinegar, keeping
up a stiff fire, it will be boiled in half an hour; then take it off, and let
it cool, keeping it in a broad bottomed Earthen Pan with the Liquor: but if you
intend it shall be eaten hot, dish it up presently, and Sauce it with Butter
beaten up thick with Water, adding thereto the yolks of three Eggs dissolved
therein, some of the Liquor, grated Nutmeg, sliced Lemon poured thereon:
garnishing the Dish with fine sierced Manchet, Barberries sliced, Lemons,
Spices, and some greens fried.

Salmon stewed.
Take a Jole or Rand of Salmon, and first fry it, after that stew it in a Dish
on a chafing Dish of Charcoal with some Claret Wine, large Mace, sliced Nutmeg,
Salt, Wine-Vinegar, sliced Orange, and some sweet Butter: When enough, and the
sauce thick, Dish it on Sippets, lay the Spices on it with some slices of
Orange; garnish the Dish with some stale Manchet, grated and finely sierced.

Soals boiled.
Take the Soals, draw and fley them; then boil them in Vinegar, Salt,
White Wind and Mace, but let the Liquor boil before you put them in; being
enough, dish them up on carved Sippets; let your garnish be Mace, sliced
Lemons, Goosberries, Grapes or Barberries, and beat up some Butter thick with
the juice of Oranges, and run it over the Fish: For variety sake place all over
your Soals some stewed Oysters.

Soals stewed a very good way.
Take a pair of Soals, lard them with watered Salt-Salmon; then lay them on a
smooth board, cutting your lard all of an equal length; on each side lair it
but short, then flower your Soals, and fry them in strong Ale till they are
half done; then put them in a dish with half a dozen spoonfuls of white Wine,
three of Wine-Vinegar, three ounces of sweet Butter, some slices of Orange with
Salt, and some grated Nutmeg, cover the Dish whilst they are stewing; being
enough, dish them up with slices of Lemon, beaten Butter, with the juice of
Oranges.

Sturgeon boiled.
Take a Rand and cut it into square pieces, as big as a crown piece, stew them
in a broad-mouth'd Pipkin with three or four large Onions, some large Mace,
three or four Cloves, Pepper, Salt, some sliced Nutmeg, two or three
Bay Leaves, some White wine, and Water, Butter, and a race of sliced Ginger,
stew them well together, and serve them on Sippets, running them over with
beaten Butter, sliced Lemon and Barberries; let the garnish be the same.

Smelts stewed.
Take a deep Dish, and put your Smelts therein, put to them a quarter of a pint
of White wine, three ounces of Butter, some great Pepper, a handful of Parsley,
three or four sprigs of winter Savory, and as much of Time shredded small, with
the yolks of three Eggs minced: when you put in your Fish, let these accompany,
stewing them together, and now and then turning them with the Fish: when
enough, serve them up on Sippets, placing a top some bunches of Barberries
pickled, scraping Sugar thereon.

Scollops stewed.
Boil them very well in White wine, fair Water and Salt; take them out of the
shells, and stew them with some of the Liquor, Elder Vinegar, a few Cloves,
some large Mace, and some sweet Herbs chopped very small: being thoroughly
enough, serve them up in their own shells with beaten Butter, and the juice of
Oranges.

Tortoise stewed.
Take a Tortoise and cut off his head, feet and tail; and boil the body in
Wine, Salt and Water: being enough, uncase the meat from the shell, and stew it
in a Pipkin with some Butter, White wine, some of the Broth, a couple of whole
Onions, Time, Parsley, Winter-savory, and Rosemary minced: when enough, serve
it on Sippets.

Turbet boiled, or, as some call it, Calvere^
Having drawn your Turbet, wash (...) clean; then take an equal quantity (...)
Water and Wine with some Salt, and bo^^ it therein; not putting it in till the
Pa^ boils, adding thereto some sliced Onions large Mace, a Clove or two, some
slice^ Ginger, whole Pepper, and a bundle o^ sweet Herbs; scotch the Turbet on
the white side very thick overthwart one way only; this must be done before you
put it in (...) Being half boiled, put in some Orange-pill; being enough, dish
it up with the Spices, Herbs, some of the Liquor, Onions and sliced Lemons.

In the like manner you may dress Holy-burt, only let your Sauce be beaten
Butter, sliced Lemon, Herbs, Spices, Onions and Barberries.

Trouts stewed.
Take three or four Trouts or more according to their bigness, and put them in
a Dish with somewhat more than a quarter of a pint of Sack, or instead thereof
White wine with a piece of Butter about the quantity of a Tennis-ball, a little
whole Mace, some Parsley, a little Winter-savory and Time minced all together;
which done, put them to the Trouts: Let these stew about a quarter of an hour,
then take the yolk of a hard Egg, and mince it small, stewing your Trouts
therewith, then dish up, pour the Herbs and Liquor all over them; scraping
Loaf-sugar thereon, and serving them very hot to the Table.

Whitings stewed, and how to make a Broth thereof.
Take a quantity of Wine, and the like of Water, and put it over the Fire in a
deep dish; add thereunto a race of Ginger sliced, a little large Mace, a Nutmeg
quartered, with a faggot or two of sweet Herbs, as Marjoram, Time, etc. with
Parsley, not forgetting with Salt to season your Broth: When it has boiled a
little while, put in your Whitings, but be careful you place them so as you
intend to serve them up; and putting some Butter to them, let them boil a pace;
in a little time they will be enough: When they are boiled, pour away all the
Liquor from them into a Pipkin, and set it on the Fire again with your Spice
and sweet Herbs that were in it before; the take a handful of Parsley and mince
(...) small, with a little Fennel and Time, and le^^ them boil with the
Fish-broth; then tak^ the meat of two Crabs, with the Carka^ of a Lobster, the
yolks of three Eggs, (...) ladle of drawn Butter; beat all these together with
some of the said Liquor, stirring it in the Pipkin till it thickens; then shi^^
out your Whitings on Sippets, as yo^ would have them, dish up, pouring on you^
lair as it comes from the Fire; in the sam^ manner you may order Smelts or
Gudge^ons. The Broth is not only very pallatable^ but exceeding wholesome and
comfortable^ to a weak stomach.

Flesh of all sorts (excepting Fowl) boiled or stewed.
Breast of Veal boiled.
TAke a good midling Breast of Veal that is white and fat, bone it and beat it
well, then wash it dry: after this put to it a handful of sweet Herbs, Parsley,
and a little Sage minced small with a few Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg beaten,
mixing therewith a little Salt. Do not forget to wash over the inside of your
Veal with the yolks of Eggs, and strew your Herbs all over, then over that lay
some slices of Bacon cut thin, dipped in the yolks of Eggs; having so done, roll
it up in a Collar, and bind it hard with pretty broad Filleting: When it is
enough, cut the Collar into nine or ten pieces, laying on every piece some
Bacon; dish it on Sippets, and let your lair be Gravy and strong Broth, sliced
Nutmeg, all beaten up thick with drawn Butter, and two yolks of Eggs; run these
over your meat: let your Dish be garnished with slices of Bacon fried in the
yolks of Eggs.

Breast of Mutton stewed.
Joint your Breast of Mutton very well, then farce it with sweet Herbs and
minced Parsley; after this put it into a deep stewing Dish with the right side
downwards, adding thereto as much White wine and strong Broth as will stew it;
then set it over a large Chafing Dish of Coals, putting therein two or three
great Onions, a faggot of sweet Herbs, and a little large Mace: being almost
enough, take a handful of Spinach, Endive and Parsley, and put to it; Then dish
it up with so much Broth as is sufficient, thickened with the yolks of Egg^ and
drawn Butter; then pour on the lair with the Herbs on the top, and on^ that
some Capers and Sampier stewed therewith, and garnish the dish with Lemon or
Barberries.

Beef Collops stewed.
Cut from a buttock of Beef some thin slices, crossing the grain thereof:
having hackt them with the Back of your knife, fry them in sweet Butter; being
brown, put them into a Pipkin, with some strong Broth, some White wine, a
little Nutmeg, and so stew it very tender: About a half hour before you serve
it up, add to it some Mutton Gravy, Elder Vinegar, with two or three Cloves;
after it is disht, put to it some drawn Butter, with the juice of Oranges, and
some slices thereof on the top of it.

Buttock, Rump, Chine, Brisket, Sur-loyn, Rib, Flank or Fillet of Beef powdered
how to boil.
Take your choice of which you please, and in hot weather give it no longer
powdering than five or six days, but as long again in the Winter; if you stuff
it, let it be with all manner of sweet Herbs, with fat Beef minced, and some
Nutmeg; so serve it (after it has boiled a sufficient while) on Brewis with
Cabbidge boiled in Milk and drawn Butter run all over: garnish your dish with
Parsley, and Carrets sliced into several shapes.

Calves feet stewed.
Take your Calves feet and split them in the middle; after you have blanched
them, being boiled very tender, and having taken from them the great bones,
place them in a Stewing-dish, with some strong Broth, three pretty large
Onions, a Faggot of sweet Herbs, with Salt and a little large Mace: when you
perceive it boils, then put unto it a handful of Parsley, Spinach and sweet
Herbs minced with a large handful of Currants: The Feet being stewed, beat the
yolks of two or three Eggs with some Sugar and Butter; and with that thicken
your lair, and a little drawn Butter: dish up your Calves Feet on Sippets, and
pour on your Broth.

Calves head stewed.
First boil your Calves head in water half an hour; then take it up and pluck
it all to pieces, and put it into a Pipkin with Oysters and some of the broth
it was boiled in; adding thereto a pint of Claret, a quarter of a pound of
midling Bacon sliced, first parboiled, ten roasted Chestnuts split, the yolks of
four Eggs, sweet Herbs minced, and a little Horseradish root scraped: Let
these stew together an hour, let your Brains be parboiled and chopped a little,
and strew thereon a little Ginger and grated Bread, or make a little Batter
with Eggs, Ginger, Salt and Flower, putting in some juice of Spinach to make
them, when fried, look green: when the meat is dish'd, lay these fried Brains,
Oysters, the Chestnuts, and yolk of Eggs thereon, so serve it up hot with
Sippets.

Haunch of Venison boiled.
Take a Haunch of Venison and set it a boiling (having a little powdered it
before) then boil up four or five Colly-Flowers in strong broth, and some Milk:
When they are boiled, put them forth into a Pipkin, adding to them drawn
Butter, and keep them by the Fire in a warm condition: then boil up three or
four handfuls of Spinach in strong broth: when they are enough, pour out part
of the broth from them, and put in a little Vinegar, a ladleful of drawn
Butter, and a grated Nutmeg; your Dish being ready with Sippets in the bottom,
put in your Spinach thereon round toward the Dishes side: your Venison being
boiled, take it up and lay it in the middle of the Dish, and lay your
Colliflowers all over it; then pour on your drawn Butter over that: Lastly,
garnish it with Barberries, and your Dish with some green Parsley minced.

For variety sake you may force your Venison with a handful of sweet Herbs, and
Parsley minced with Beef Suet, and yolks of Eggs boiled hard; seasoning your
forcing with Pepper, Nutmeg, Ginger and Salt.

Lambs head boiled.
First take out the Brains and make a Pudding thereof; being boiled and cold,
cut it into bits, then mince some Lamb with Beef Suet, and put to it some
grated Bread, Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, some sweet Herbs minced with four or five
raw Eggs: work these all together, and fill the Lambs head therewith: Having
well cleansed and dried the head beforehand, then stew it between two Dishes
with some strong broth; what remains of this forcing, work it into balls, and
let them boil with the head, adding therewith some White wine, a whole Onion,
three or four sliced Pippins, some pieces of Artichokes, Sage leaves, large
Mace, with Lettice boiled and quartered, and put into beaten Butter; being
finely stewed, dish it up on Sippets, and put the balls with the other
materials thereon; then broth it, and run it over with beaten Butter and Lemon.

Lambs head stewed.
Having cleft the head and taken out the Brains, washing and cleansing it from
all its filth and impurity, set it a boiling in some strong broth; having
scum'd it after boiling, put in two or three blades of large Mace, some Capers,
some Pears quartered, a little Claret, Gravy, Marrow, and some Marry-gold
Flowers; when stewed enough, serve it on carved Sippets, and broth it, laying
on sliced Lemon, scalded Goosberries or Barberries.

Loyn of Lamb stewed.
Let your Loyn be cut into steaks pretty large, put it into a Pipkin with so
much Water as will cover it: when it simmers scum it, and then put to it
Capers, Samphire, the bottoms of some Hartichokes, four or five blades of large
Mace, half a Nutmeg sliced, Verjuice and Salt; give them the space of an hour
to be stewed in, then dish up your Lamb tenderly, blowing off the fat: put into
the broth scalded Spinach and Parsley minced with scalded Goosberries, a piece
of Butter; shake it well, dish it and serve it up on Sippets.

Leg of Lamb boiled.
Take Kidney suet, and cut it into square pieces about the bigness and length
of your Finger; then thrusting your knife into seven or eight places of the
meat, put those pieces of suet into each particular hole; then boil your Lamb,
remembering to turn it often, take heed of overboyling it; then boil a good
handful of Parsley tender, mince it small with your knife; then warm a quarter
of a pint of White wine Vinegar over some Coals, with Butter about the quantity
of an Egg; put in also some clusters of Barberries either boiled or pickled;
then dish up your meat on Sippets, pouring the sauce thereon.

Leg of Pork.
Having laid your Leg of Pork in salt about some nine days, stuff it with
Parsley and Sage, or you may boil it without stuffing, having in readiness a
handful of boiled Sage, mince it very small, and put it into a little strong
broth with Butter and Pepper, then take up your Turnips, being boiled tender,
and toss your Sage and them together with more drawn Butter; having dish'd up
your Pork, lay your Turnips over.

Legs of Veal and Bacon boiled.
Take pretty big Lard, and therewith lard your Leg of Veal all over, joining
some Lemon-pill to your Lard; then get a piece of middle Bacon, and boil the
Veal therewith: when your Bacon is enough, cut it into slices, and season it
with Pepper, and dried Sage incorporated together; dish up your Veal with your
Bacon round about it, and send with the serving it up some Saucers of
Green-sauce, strowing over it Parsley and Barberries; and that you may not be
ignorant of the making it, take two handfuls of Sorrel, and beat it well in a
Mortar, squeeze out the juice of it, and put thereto a little Vinegar, Sugar,
drawn Butter, and a grated Nutmeg, set it on the Coals till it be hot, then
pour it on your Veal and Bacon.

But to make Green-sauce to be served up in Saucers, you must do thus: Take two
or three handfuls of Sorrel, beaten in a Mortar with two Pippins quartered,
after paring adding thereto a little Vinegar and Sugar.

Legs, Necks, and Chines of Mutton boiled.
Take either of the aforementioned Joints, and lard them with a little
Lemonpill; then boil it in Water and Salt, with a faggot of sweet Herbs; then
take a pint and a half of Oysters well washed, and put them into a Pipkin, with
some of their own liquor, a little strong broth, and half a pint of gravy, as
much White wine; put to them two or three whole Onions, some Time, grated
Nutmeg, and two or three Anchovies, so let them boil together; then beat up
three or four yolks of Eggs in a little of the said broth to a convenient
thickness, with a ladleful of drawn broth amongst it; then dish it up on
Sippets, then overrun it with lair, placing your Oysters on the top thereof;
then serve it up garnished with Barberries or Lemon.

Neats Tongues boiled.
Take a Neats Tongue and boil it in Water and Salt, or you may salt it a
little, and only boil it in Water till it be tender; then blanch it, dish it
and stuff it with minced Lemon, mince the Pill and strew all over it, then run
it over with drawn Butter.

Neats Tongues stewed.
Make a hole in the but end of the Tongue, and take the meat and mince it with
Beef Suet, season it with Salt, Nutmeg, sweet Herbs minced, the yolks of two
raw Eggs, Pepper, Ginger, and mingling all together, stuff the Tongue
therewith, then wrap it in a caul of Veal, and boil it till it will blanch;
then with some Claret, Gravy, Cloves, Mace, Salt, Pepper, grated Bread, sweet
Herbs minced small, fried Onions, Marrow boiled in strong broth, stew it in a
Pipkin; when it is ready serve it up on Sippets, laying over it Grapes,
Goosberries, sliced Lemon or Oranges, run it over with beaten Butter,
garnishing the dish with stale grated Bread.

You may otherwise stew Neats Tongues in a Pipkin with Raisins, Mace, sliced
Dates, blanched Almonds, Marrow, Claret wine, Butter, Salt, Verjuice, Sugar,
strong broth or Gravy, slicing the Tongue withal: being thoroughly stewed,
dissolve the yolks of half a dozen Eggs in some Vinegar, and dish it up on fine
Sippets, with Lemon, running beaten Butter over all.

Ox Cheeks boiled.
Take a pair of Ox Cheeks and bone them: then put them six or seven hours in
Water to soak, then cleanse them from their blood, paring the rough of the
Mouth, taking out the balls of the Eyes; then stuff them with Beef Suet, hard
Eggs, sweet Herbs, Pepper and Salt, mingle all together, and let your stuffing
be on the inside, pricking the two Cheeks together, then boil them alone, or
with other Beef; being tenderly boiled, serve them up on Brewis with
interlarded Bacon or Pork Sausages: let there be on each side of the dish
saucers of Green-sauce or Mustard.

Ox Cheeks boiled to be eaten cold with Sallet.
Bone your Cheeks and cleanse them, then steep them in White wine twelve hours;
then season them with Nutmegs, Gloves, Pepper, Mace and Salt, roll them up,
boil them tender in Water, Vinegar and Salt, press them; and being cold slice
them into thin slices, and serve them with Oil and Vinegar.

Pig sucking boiled.
Take a young sucking Pig, and lay him round with his tail in his Mouth in a
Kettle, covering it with fair Water, and casting in a good handful of Salt, a
handful of Rosemary, Time, sweet Marjoram and Winter-savory: when half boiled,
take him up and fley the skin from him; then take him and quarter him, and lay
him in a Stew Pan, with Prunes, large Mace, Currants; then take him up being
enough, and lay him in Sippets with the aforesaid ingredients poured upon him.

Rabbets boiled.
Prick down your Rabbets heads to their shoulders, and that is the way to truss
them for boiling, gathering up their hind Legs to their Belly: you may lard
them with Bacon, if you please, or let it alone, and so boil them up white;
being boiled, take the Livers and mince them small with fat Bacon boiled, then
put it to half a pint of White wine, strong Broth and Vinegar, all making but
that quantity; then let it boil with some large Mace, add thereunto a little
Parsley minced with some Barberries, and a ladleful of drawn Butter; dish up
your Rabbets on your Sippets pouring your lair all over them, and garnish your
dish with Lemons and Barberries.

Shoulder of Mutton boiled.
Do not above half boil your Shoulder of Mutton; then slice the fleshy part
into thin slices, leaving some about the blade-bone, preserve the Gravy, and
put the Mutton into a Pipkin, with some of the broth in which it was boiled; a
little grated Bread, Oyster liquor, Vinegar, Bacon sliced thin and scalded, a
quarter of a pound of Sausages stripped out of their skins, large Mace, and a
little sliced Nutmeg: when it is almost stewed, put in the Gravy: when they
have boiled almost an hour, put to them a pint of Oysters, a faggot of sweet
Herbs and some Salt, then stew them a little longer; then take the blade-bone
and broil it, put it into your dish, and pour the materials in your Pipkin upon
it; garnish it with Oysters fried in batter, Lemons fliced, and Barberries; it
will not be amiss first to rub your dishes bottom with a clove of Garlic.

Shoulder of Mutton stewed with Oysters.
Roast your Shoulder of Mutton half, or a little more, take off the upper skin
whole, and cut the flesh into thin slices; then stew it with White wine, Mace,
Nutmeg, Anchovies, Oyster liquor, Salt, Capers, Olives, Samphire and slices of
Orange; leave some meat on the marrow-bone and blade, and laying them in a
dish, pour your stewed meat on the bones with stewed Oysters a top of that;
some great Oysters above and about them stewed with large Mace, two great
Onions, Butter, Vinegar, white Wine, a bundle of sweet Herbs, and over all
these lay the aforesaid skin of the Mutton a little warmed in this last liquor.

Tripes dressed hot out of the pan.
Boil them very tender, and laying them in a dish, let your sauce be beaten
Butter, Gravy, Pepper, Mustard and wine Vinegar, rubbing your dish first with a
clove of Garlic, running the sauce over them with a little Garlic bruised.

Venison stewed a quick and frugal way.
They which abound with Venison in many cold baked meats, may at any time stew
a dish speedily thus: Slice the Venison of your Pot, Pie or Pasty; then put it
into a Stewing-pan over a heap of coals with some Claret wine, a little
Rosemary, four or five Cloves, a little grated Bread, Sugar and Vinegar: having
stewed a while, grate on some Nutmeg, and serve it up. Since in this Section we
have lastly treated of Venison, give me leave to tell you how to recover
Venison when tainted, although the discourse belong not to this particular
place.

Venison when tainted how to recover it.
Take your Venison and lay it in a clean cloth, then put it under ground a
whole night, and it will remove the corruption, stink or savor: Or, you may
boil Water with Beer, Wine, Vinegar, Bay Leaves, Time, Savory, Rosemary and
Fennel of each a handful; when it boils put in your Venison, parboil it well,
and press it then, season it, and use it as you shall think fitting.

Fowl of all sorts, whether wild or tame, Land-Fowl or Sea-Fowl, boiled or
stewed.
Capon boiled in Rice.
TAke a well fed Capon, and boil it in Water and Salt; then take a quarter of a
pound of Rice and steep it in fair Water, and having half boiled it, strain the
Rice through a Cullender, and boil it in a Pipkin with a quart of Milk, and add
thereto half a pound of Sugar, with half an ounce of large Mace; boil it well,
but keep it from being too thick, then put in a little Rosewater: after this
blanch half a pound of Almonds, and with a little Cream and Rosewater beat them
in a Mortar very fine; strain them in a Pipkin by themselves; then take up your
Capon, setting your Almonds a little against the fire; having placed in your
Capon, pour on your Rice handsomely, then broth your Rice.

Capons boiled and larded with Lemons.
First, scald your Capon, and take a little dusty Oat-meal to make it boil
white, then take three ladlefuls of Mutton broth, a faggot of sweet Herbs, two
or three Dates cut long in pieces, a few parboiled Currants, a little whole
Pepper, a piece of whole Mace, and one Nutmeg; thicken it with Almonds, and
season it with Verjuyce, Sugar, and a small quantity of sweet Butter; then take
up your Capon, and lard it very thick with preserved Lemon; then lay your Capon
in a deep dish, for boiled meats, and pour the broth upon it: garnish your dish
with suckets and preserved Barberries.

Chickens boiled.
After you have scalded your Chickens truss them, and boil them in Water as
white as possibly you can; in a little time of boiling they will be enough,
then dish them up, having in readiness this sauce. If in Winter time, take a
pint of White wine, Verjuyce, half a dozen Dates, a small handful of
Pine-kernels, six or seven blades of large Mace, and a faggot of sweet Herbs,
boil all these together, till the one half be consumed; then beat it up thick
with Butter, and pour it on the Chickens, being dished with three or four
white-bread toasts dipped lightly in Allagant; lay on the chickens, yolks of
Eggs quartered, Lozenges, Sheeps tongues fried in green batter, being first
boiled and well blanched, and over all these lay some pieces of Marrow, and
some pickled Barberries.

But if you dress Chickens in the Summer time, having boiled them white, as
aforesaid: then for the sauce take some of the broth they were boiled in, with
some Claret, large Mace, the bottoms of three Hartichokes; being boiled and cut
into square pieces, an Ox Palate sliced thin, Salt and some sweet Herbs: These
being all boiled together, beat it up with Butter; and having dish'd your
chickens, run this sauce all over them, laying on the Chickens Asparagus
boiled, hard-lettice, and a handful of Goosberries, both scalded, some slices
of Lemon, and serve it up.

Chicken peeping to boil after an incomparable manner.
Take four French Manchets and chip them (or others will serve) and cut a round
hole in the top of them, taking out all the crum, and therewith mingle the
brawn of a roast Capon, mince it fine, and stamp it in a Mortar with Marchpane
paste, the yolks of hard Eggs, with the crum of one of the Manchets, some
Sugar, and sweet Herbs minced small, beaten Cinnamon, Cream, Marrow, Saffron,
yolks of Eggs, and some Currants, fill the concav'd or hollowed Manchets, and
boil them in a Napkin in some good Mutton broth, stopping the holes on the tops
of the Manchets; then stew some Sweet-breads of Veal, and six peeping Chickens
between two dishes; the^ fry some Lambstones dipped in batter, made of Flower and
Cream, two or three Egg^ and Salt; then take the bottoms of Hartichokes, beaten
up in Butter and Gravy. All being ready, dish the boiled Manchets with the
Chickens round about, then the Sweet-breads, and round the dish some fine
carved Sippets; then lay on the Marrow, fried Lambstones, and some Grapes,
thickning the broth with strained Almonds, some Cream and Sugar, give them a
walm, and broth the meat, garnishing it with Grapes, Pomegranats and sliced
Lemon.

Cocks, Bustards, Turkey, Pheasant, Peacock, Partridge, Plover, Heathcocks,
Cocks of the wood, Moor-hens, or any Land Fowl how to boil.
Take any of these Fowl above specified, and fley off the skin, but leave the
rump and legs whole with the pinions, then mince the flesh raw with some
Beef Suet, seasoning it with Salt, Pepper, Nutmeg, sweet Herbs minced, some raw
yolks of Eggs, and incorporate all together with three bottoms of boiled
Hartichokes, roasted Chestnuts blanched, some Marrow, and some boild skirrets
cut indifferently small; according to the bigness of your Fowl, you must
proportion the quantity of your ingredients: Then fill the skin and prick it up
in the back, stew it in a deep dish, and cover it with another, putting first
therein some strong broth, Marrow, Hartichokes boiled and quartered, large
Mace, White wine, Chestnuts, Salt, Grapes, Barberries, quarters of Pears, and
some of the meat made up in balls, and stewed with the Turkey; being thoroughly
stewed, serve it up on fine carved Sippets, broth it, and lay on the garnish
with slices of Lemon and whole Lemon-pill, run it over with beaten Butter,
garnishing the dish with Chestnuts, large Mace, and yolks of hard Eggs.

Duck wild boiled.
Having drawn and trust your wild Duck parboil it, then half roast it; after
this carve it, and save the Gravy: take store of Onions, Parsley, sliced Ginger
and Pepper, put the Gravy into a Pipkin with washed Currants, large Mace,
Barberries, a quart of Claret; let all boil together, scum it clean, put in
Butter and Sugar, and dish it up.

Otherways thus:
Truss your Duck, and boil it in Water with a little Claret, then take some of
the broth, and put therein Pistachos blanched, Cows Udder boiled, and sliced
Sausages stripped out of their skins, White wine, sweet Herbs, large Mace, and
boil all these together, till you think they are enough, then add thereto
Beet-roots boiled and cut in slices, beat it up with Butter; then carve up the
Duck, pouring the sauce on the top of her, and garnish the dish according to
your own fancy.

Duck tame how boiled.
First parboil your Duck very well, then take strong Mutton broth, a handful of
Parsley and an Onion, and chop them all together: put all these into a Pipkin
with Endive, picked and washed Barberries, a Turnip cut in pieces, and parboiled
till the rankness be gone; then put in a little Verjuyce, half a pound of
Butter; boil all together, stirring it till it be enough, and serve it up with
the Turnip, large Mace, Pepper, and a little Sugar.

Another excellent way.
Having drawn and trust your Duck, lay it in a Pipkin, and cover it with fair
Water; put therein six or seven blades of Mace, a good handful of Raisins of
the Sun, half a dozen sliced Onions, a good piece of sweet Butter; your Duck
being half boiled, add to it four or five pieces of Marrow, so let them
continue boiling, till neat near half your broth is consumed; then put in a
little Vinegar, garnish your dish with parboiled Onions and Raisins of the Sun,
lay your Duck upon Sippets in your garnish-dish, pouring your broth and Onions
on the top of your Duck, scrape on Sugar and serve it up hot to the Table.

Goose tame boiled.
Take a Goose and powder him three or four days, then take Oatmeal and steep it
in warm milk, and therewith fill the belly of your Goose, having first mingled
it with Beef Suet, minced Onions and Apples, seasoned with Cloves, Mace, some
sweet Herbs chopped, and Pepper, fasten the neck and vent, then boil it and
serve it on Brewis with Colliflowers, Cabbidge, Turnips and Barberries, then
run it over with beaten Butter.

Goose Gibblets or Swans Gibblels boiled.
Having picked and parboiled your Gibblets clean; put them into strong broth
with Onions, Currants, Mace and Parsley, and so let them boil all together:
being well boiled with the addition of Pepper, and a faggot of sweet Herbs, put
in Verjuyce and Butter.

Or you may put them into a Pipkin with a quart of White wine, half an ounce of
Sugar, a good quantity of Barberries, Spinach, a faggot of sweet Herbs, Turnips
boiled, and Carrets sliced, and put into the Pipkin: having boiled very well,
take strong broth, Verjuyce, and the yolks of four new laid Eggs, strain them,
and put them into the Pipkin.

Land or Sea fowl how to boil, as a Swan, Hopper, Crane, Wild or tame Goose,
Shoveller, Curlew, Hern, Bittern, Duck, Mallard, Widgeon, Teal, Gulls, Pewits,
Puffins, Barnacles, Sheldrakes, etc.
I shall begin with the Swan, and accordingly you may boil or stew any of the
aforementioned Fowl. You must take your Swan and bone it, leaving only the Legs
and wings, then make a farcing of some Beef Suet, Mutton or Venison minced with
sweet Herbs, beaten Nutmeg, Pepper, Cloves and Mace, then have some Oysters
parboiled in their own Liquor, and with some raw Eggs commix them with the
minced meat, then fill the body of the Fowl and prick it upon the back, then
boil it in a Stew Pan, putting thereto strong broth, White wine, Mace, Cloves,
Oysters liquor, boiled Marrow; boil these well together, and have Oysters in
the mean time stewed by themselves with Onions, Mace, Pepper, Butter, and a
little White wine: Next have the bottoms of Hartichokes ready boiled, and put
to them some beaten Butter and boiled Marrow; dish up your Fowl on some fine
carved Sippets, then broth it, and garnish it with stewed Oysters, Marrow,
Hartichokes, Goosberries, sliced Lemon, Barberries and Mace^ let the dish be
garnished with grated brea^ and Oysters.

Land-fowl of any sort how to dress after the Italian fashion.
Take half a dozen Plover, Partridge, Woodcock or Pigeon, being well cleans'd
and trust, put them into a Pipkin with a quart of strong broth, or the same
quantity of White wine with half Water, putting thereto some slices of
interlarded Bacon; after it boils scum it, and then putin some Mace, Nutmeg,
Ginger, Salt, Pepper, Sugar, Currants, some Sack, Raisins of the Sun, Prunes,
Sage, Time, a little Saffron, and dish them on carved Sippets.

Land-fowl of the smaller sort, as Ruffs, Brewes, Godwits, Knots, Doterels,
Streats, Pewits, Ollines, Gravelens, Ox-eyes, Redshankes, etc. how to boil.
Roast any of these Fowl till they are about half enough, sticking some Cloves
on the one side of them, preserve the Gravy, then take them and put them into a
Pipkin with their own Gravy, some Claret, and as much strong Broth as will
cover them, with Mace, Cloves, Pepper, Ginger, fried Onions, Salt, and a piece
of household bread; having stewed them enough, serve them up on carved Sippets.

Otherways how to boil small Land-fowl, as Quails, Plovers, Rails, Black-birds,
Thrushes, Snites, Wheat-ears, Larks, Sparrows, Martins, etc.
Take them and cut off their heads and legs, and boil them in strong broth;
scum it when it boils, and put in large Mace, White wine, washed Currants,
Dates, Marrow, Pepper and Salt: having stewed them sufficiently, dish them on
fine carved Sippets, thicken the Broth with strained Almonds, Rosewater and
Sugar, and garnish them with Barberries, Lemon and grated Bread, strewed about
the brims of the dish.

Sea-fowl of any sort how to boil.
Take and boil them in Beef-broth, or Water and Salt, adding thereto Pepper
grossly beaten, a bundle of Bay Leaves, Time and Rosemary bound up hard
together, and boil them with the Fowl; then prepare some Cabbidge boiled tender
in Water and Salt; then squeeze the Water from it, and put it in a Pipkin with
some strong Broth, Claret Wine, and a couple of big Onions, season it with
Salt, Pepper and Mace, with three or four dissolved Anchovies; stew these
together with a ladleful of sweet Butter, and a little White wine Vinegar: Your
Cabbidge being on Sippets, and your Goose boiled enough, lay it thereon with
some Cabbidge on the breast thereof, and serve it up. This is the most proper
manner of boiling any large Sea-fowl.

If of the smaller sort, half roast them, flash them down the breast, and put
them into a Pipkin with the breast downward, add to them three or four Onions
with Carrots sliced like lard, some Mace, Pepper and some Salt-butter, Savory,
Time, some strong broth and White wine, stew it very softly till half the broth
be consumed then dish it up on Sippets, pouring on the broth.

Veldifers, Woodcocks and Snites how boiled.
Take them with their guts in, and boil them in Water and Salt: being boiled
gut them, and chop them small with the Liver, put to it some grated White
bread, some of the broth they were boiled in, large Mace, and stew them
together with some Gravy, then in Vinegar dissolve the yolks of three Eggs, and
a little grated Nutmeg; when you are about to dish them add the Eggs thereunto,
running the sauce ever them with some beaten Butter, Capers, Lemon minced,
small Barberries or pickled Grapes.

Fish, Flesh and Fowl of all sorts, roasted, boiled, frigassied or fried.
Fish roasted, broiled, frigassied or fried.
Cockles frigassied.
HAving boiled your Cockles out of the shells and cleans'd them well from
gravel, then break ten Eggs, and put your Cockles therein with Ginger, Nutmeg
and Cinnamon, beat them together with some grated bread, with half a pint of
Cream; having made your Butter pretty hot in the Drying Pan, put in your
Frigassie, ever and anon supplying the sides of the Pan with a little Butter:
when it is fried on the one side, Butter your Plate and turn it, adding some
fresh Butter to your Pan, in with it again, and fry it brown; then dish it up,
squeezing some juice of Lemons thereon, strowing on Ginger and Cinnamon. If you
have a desire to have it be colored green, you may do it with the juice of
Spinach; if so, quarter your frigassie.

In like manner you may frigassie Prawns, Periwinkles, or any other small
Shellfish.

Carproasted with an excellent Sauce.
Take a Carp whilst living, draw and wash it, removing the Gall, Milt or Spawn;
having so done, make a pudding of Almond Paste, grated Manchet, Currants, Cream,
grated Nutmeg, raw yolks of Eggs, Carraway-seed, candied Lemon-Pill, and Salt,
make it stiff, and put it through the Gills into the Carps belly. You must
roast it in an Oven upon two or three cross sticks over a brass Pan, turn it
and let the Gravy drop into the Pan till roasted enough: put to it, when disht,
a sauce made of White wine or Claret, the Gravy of the Carp, a couple of
Anchovies dissolved therein, Nutmeg and Manchet grated, beat them up thick with
some sweet Butter, and the yolk of an Egg or two, pour this sauce on your Fish.

Otherways you may take a large live Carp, and when it is scaled and drawn,
make a little hole in the belly, and with the Pudding aforesaid, force his
belly full, then put it on a spit, having stitcht the hole up close: when it is
enough dish it on Sippets, adding to the Gravy, which you must carefully save,
some Oyster liquor and drawn Butter; your lair ought to be pretty thick: then
garnish your dish with small Fish fried, as Smelts, Roches, Gudgeons, etc. as
also some Shellfish stewed or fried.

Carp broiled.
Take a full grown Carp, scale it, and scrape off the slime, then wipe it
clean, draw it and wash out the blood, then steep it in White wine,
Wine-Vinegar, with three or four Cloves of Garlic, large Mace, whole Cloves,
gross Pepper, sliced Ginger and Salt; let it steep thus two hours and a half,
then put a clear scoured Gridiron on a slow fire, and broil it thereon, baste
it with some sweet Sallet Oil, in which was infused Time, Sprigs of Rosemary,
Parsley, sweet Majoram, and some few Bayleaves: being broiled enough, or near
upon, boil up the ingredients it was steeped in for sauce, adding thereto some
Oyster liquor; then dish it with the Spices on your Carp, and the Herbs round
about, then run it over with drawn Butter.

Conger roasted.
Take a good large fat Conger, draw, wash it and scrape away the slime, then
cut off the Finns, and spit it like a Roman S; after this put some beaten
Nutmeg into the belly thereof, with Salt, stripped Time, and some large Oysters
parboiled, roast it with the skin on, and preserve its Gravy for sauce. You may
otherways roast it cut into pieces three inches long, placing Bay Leaves
between every piece: when it is near enough, take the Gravy and boil it up with
Claret wine, Wine Vinegar, beaten Butter, and a couple of Anchovies dissolved,
with two or three flices of Orange.

Conger broiled.
Scald a fat Conger, then cut him into pieces, salt and broil it, baste it with
Rosemary, Time and Savory steept in Oil; and when enough, serve it up with the
sprigs of those Herbs and Parsley about it in beaten Butter and Vinegar.

Conger fried.
Scald your Conger, and cut off the Fins, then splat it, flower it, and fry it
in clarified Butter crisp, sauce it with beaten Butter and Vinegar, juice of
Lemons, garnish it with fried Parsley, fried Ellicsanders or Clary in Butter.

Crabs broiled.
After you have boiled your Crabs in Water and Salt, steep them in Oil and
Vinegar, well incorporated by beating; then put your Gridiron over a soft fire,
and put your Crabs thereon; as they broil baste them with Rosemary branches;
being broiled, serve them up with Oil and Vinegar, or Vinegar and beaten
Butter, with the Rosemary Branches they were basted with.

Crabs frigassi'd.
Take out all the meat of the body of your Crabs, and breaking the claws, mince
the meat thereof into the rest, and add thereto a little Claret wine, some
Fennel minced, and a grated Nutmeg; let these boil, then put in a little drawn
Butter, Vinegar, and the yolks of two Eggs; then put the meat, being enough,
into its proper shell, and garnish it round with the small legs, in the
buttering put some Cinnamon and Ginger.

Crabs fried.
Boil some large Crabs, and take the meat out of the great Claws, flower and
fry it, then take the meat out of the body, strain the one half for sauce, and
the other reserve for frying, and mix it with grated bread, Almond Paste,
Nutemg and Salt with yolks of Eggs, fry it in clarified Butter, first dipped in
Batter; then let your sauce be beaten Butter with juice of Orange and grated
Nutmeg, beaten up thick with some of the strained meat: Then run it over with
beaten Butter, placing the little legs about the meat, and fried Parsley round
the dish brim.

Eels roasted, or a Spitch-cock Eel.
Make choice of a large Silver Eel, draw it, fley it, and cut it in pieces,
somewhat longer than your middle finger; then spit it on a small spit, placing
between every piece a Bay-leaf, or instead thereof you may use Sage-leaves;
spit your pieces cross ways: being thoroughly roasted, (for otherwise it is
dangerous meat) serve it with Butter beaten up thick, with juice of Orange or
Vinegar and beaten Nutmeg; otherwise you may dredge it with beaten Carraway
seed, Cinnamon, and grated Bread, and serve it up with Venison sauce.

Eels roasted the best way.
Strip a good large Silver Eel, and cut it into pieces four inches long; when
you have well dried them, put them into a Dish; then take some Salt and Mace,
Nutmeg and a little Pepper beaten small, with a piece of Lemon-pill, two or
three Onions and Time small minced; strew these ingredients all made very small
on your pieces of Eel with yolks of Eggs, and be sure that you mingle in your
seasoning well with your hands; then spit your Eel cross ways on a small spit,
putting a Sage leaf between each piece; you may choose whether you will turn
them round constantly, letting them stand on the one side till they hiss and
grow brown, and then turn the other side to the fire; save your Gravy in the
Dish, wherein the Eel was seasoned, baste it with drawn Butter; then put to
your Gravy Claret, minced Oysters, Nutmeg grated, and a pretty big Onion, give
it a walm with a little drawn Butter, and dish up your fish, running your lair
over it.

Eels broiled.
Splat a large Eel down the back, joynting the backbone; being drawn and the
blood washed out clean, leave the skin on, cutting it into four equal pieces,
Salt them and baste them with Butter, broil them on a sort fire; being enough,
serve them with beaten Butter and juice of Lemon, with sprigs of Rosemary round
about them.

Eels broiled after the best fashion.
Let your Fish be very dry, then wash it over with Butter, strowing good store
of Salt over that; having first cut it into several pieces: then having your
Gridiron very clean, set it over the fire, till it be exceeding hot, and wash
the bars with Butter; then put on your Fish upon the Girdiron, with the salted
side toward the fire, buttering the upper side; when you think them enough on
the one side, turn them upon the other, basting still the upper side; the
extraordinary seasoning will so bind the Fish that it will not break; being
ready, dish it up with beaten Butter and juice of Orange.

Ling fried.
Take a Jole of Ling boiled and cold, and cut it out into pieces about the
bigness of your thumb, then make a batter of a very little flower, and eight
yolks of Eggs; your Pan being over the fire with clarified Butter, and very
hot, dip your Ling into the batter, and fill your Pan therewith; or you may fry
it without batter, only flowering it, and so fry it in clarified stuff; being
enough, dish it up, and lay on your Ling half a score patched Eggs, then run
over the Ling with drawn Butter; you may Oil your Ling instead of Butter, if
you please.

Lobsters roasted.
Take your Lobsters and half boil them, then take the meat out of the shells,
lard the meat of the claws, tail, and legs with fat salt Eel; then spit this
meat with some salt Eel on a small spit with Sage or Bayleaves between every
piece, stick on the Fish some Cloves with some sprigs of Rosemary: let the
barrel of the Lobster be roasted whole, basting them with sweet Butter; let
your sauce be made of Claret wine, the Gravy of the Fish, juice of Orange,
Anchovies, with some Butter and Nutmeg beaten up thick.

Lobsters broiled.
Take the tails of your Lobsters, and split them long-ways into two, then crack
your claws and put them over the Gridiron, with the barrel whole salted, baste
them with sweet Butter, Time, Rosemary, Parsley and Savory; being enough, serve
it up with Butter and Vinegar.

Lobsters fried.
Take out the meat of the barrels, and put thereto some Claret wine, the yolks
of two Eggs, a little minced Fennel and grated Nutmeg, then let it boil up with
the meat of the tails and claws with drawn Butter and Vinegar; dish them up on
Sippets in Saucers on a plate, garnish them with Fennel and Bay Leaves.

Lump fried.
Take your Lump and fley him, then splat him, and having divided him, cut each
side into two pieces, then season it with Salt, Nutmeg and Pepper; your Pan
being hot, fry him with clarified Butter, and dish it up with slices of
Oranges, Goosberries, Grapes, Barberries and Butter.

Lump roasted.
Take it and fley it, and cleanse it well within; then season it with Salt,
Mace, Pepper and Nutmeg, put into the belly an Onion, and a Bay leaf, roast it
and serve it up with beaten Butter and slices of Lemon.

Mullets fried.
Let your Mullets be drawn, scaled, scotched, washed clean, and then wiped dry;
having flowred them, fry them in clarified Butter: being enough, dish them and
sauce them with Claret, sliced Ginger, grated Nutmeg, Anchovies, Salt and some
sweet Butter beaten up thick together, garnish it with slices of Lemon. The
largest Mullets are best for boiling, soucing or baking, and the least for
frying.

Mullets broiled.
Let your Mullets be drawn and cleansed, as above specified, then lay them in a
Pan or dish, and put to them some very good Sallet Oil, Wine Vinegar, Salt,
some sprigs of Rosemary, Time and Parsley; then lay on your Gridiron over a
soft fire, and being made pretty hot, lay on your Fish, basting it with what it
was steeped in; when broil (...) enough, dish it up, and sauce it with
Anchovies, juice of Lemon, and Butter beaten up to a thickness.

Maids fried.
Having skinned your Fish, put them into boiling Water seasoned with Salt;
having lain there a little while, take them out and dry them well with a
cloth; then flower them, then take half a score Eggs, the yolks only of them,
and the whites of three more, some flower, Nutmeg, Ginger and Salt; then take a
little Parsley boiled green and minced small, and beat all these together with
a little Sack till the batter become thick: Having set over your Pan with
clarified Butter, and being hot dip in the Maids into your batter, and so fry
them brown and crisp; being enough, dish them up with Butter, Nutmeg, Vinegar,
and the Livers of the Fish beaten together; then take a pretty quantity of
Parsley, and fry it crisp and green, and strew it all over your Fish.

Muscles fried.
Put your Muscles into a Kettle, in which there is as much boiling Water as
will cover them; being enough, take them up and beard them; then wash them in
warm water, wipe them dry and flower them; being fried crisp, dish them up with
Butter, beaten up with the juice of Lemon and Parsley, strowed over them, fried
crisp and green.

Oysters roasted.
Make choice of your largest Oysters for roasting, which you must first open,
and then parboil them in their own liquor: after this wash them clean in some
warm Water; wipe them dry, and let them cool; then take some very fine Lard,
and lard each Oyster therewith; then spit them on a couple of skuers, strowing
on them some Nutmeg, Cloves and Pepper beaten very small; bind these skuers to
a spit and so roast them, basting them with Anchovie sauce, and some of their
own liquor: being roasted enough, bread them with a crust of a Manchet grated,
and dish them with Gravy, the fat whereof you must blow off, unto which add the
juice of Oranges or Lemons.

Oysters broiled an excellent way.
Open some large Oysters, and put them in a dish with some minced Time, Nutmeg
and bread grated, and a little Salt (...) then choose your largest bottom Oyste^
shells, and put therein two or three Oysters, adding to them a little Butter;
the^ place these shells on a Gridiron, suffering them thereon to boil till the
lower side be brown, supplying it still with melted Butter: when they are
enough, put into each shell a little Claret, grated Nutmeg, a little of their
own liquor, minced Time with grated bread, and let them boil again; then with
some drawn Butter dish them up. Scollop-shells are much better than their own
to broil them in.

Another very good way to broil Oysters.
Take a quart of large Oysters opened and parboiled in their own liquor, then
pour them into a Cullender, saving the liquor, then wash them very clean in
warm Water; after that wipe them dry, beard them and put them into a Pipkin
with large Mace, a large Onion, a little Butter, some of their own liquor,
White wine, Wine-Vinegar and Salt: having stewed them well, set some large
Oyster shells or Scollop shells over a Gridiron, putting into each shell, as
many Oysters as it will well nigh contain with some of the stewed liquor; let
the fire on which they are broiled be soft; when they are enough, fill the
shells with drawn Butter, and so serve them up.

Oysters fried.
Take a pottle of large Oysters well cleans'd and parboiled in their own
liquor, then dry them and flower them, and fry them in clarified Butter; or you
may first dip them in a batter made of Eggs, Flower, and Cream, seasoned with a
little Salt: Whilst these are frying, have in readiness some buttered Prawns or
Shrimps stewed in Cream and sweet Butter, and lay these at the bottom of your
Dish, laying your Oysters fried crisp round about them; run them all over with
juice of Oranges, and beaten Butter; with slices of Lemon on the top of all.

Pike roasted.
Season very well your Pike with Salt, and then lard him all over with pickle
Herring; then season him again with beaten Pepper, Nutmeg, and some minced
Time; then tie him with packthread to your spit, not turning him constantly
round, but letting some times the b^ stand toward the fire, sometimes the sid^
then dissolve a couple of Anchovies (...) Butter, and baste it therewith; after
it half roasted, take a stick of Oysters, w^ a Bay-leaf betwixt each and put to
it; you roast a couple of Pikes, as that you (...) do by tying one to the one
side of (...) spit, and the other to the other side, the you must have a couple
of sticks of ^^sters, placing a dish under them to (...) the Gravy, putting
thereto some Cla^ Oyster liquor, minced Time, and a grat^ Nutmeg; your Oysters
being roasted, dra^ them into the Dish withdrawing the B^ leaves, adding
thereto an Onion cut in^ slices; then dish up your Pike or Pik^ with the back
or brown side upwards then put a ladleful of drawn Butter to you lair and
Oysters, and pour it over you Pikes, garnishing them with Lemons; the best and
surest way is to put your Pike (...) a Dish and bake it, and the same form yo^
put him in, shift him into your dish yo^ send him up in, and so lair him as
before.

Pike fried.
Take a Pike, scald and splat him, hac^ the inside with a knife, and it will be
ribbed, then wipe him dry, flower him and fry him in clarified Butter, a little
Time, then take him up, wipe the Pan, and put him in again with Claret, sliced
Ginger, Nutmeg, two Anchovies, Salt and Saffron beaten very well, then fry him
till this last liquor be half consumed; then put in some sweet Butter, shake it
well, and dish it up with sliced Oranges or Lemon: you may rub the bottom of
the Dish with a clove of Garlic, if you like it.

Pike broiled.
Being drawn and washed clean, dry it and put it into a Dish with good Sallet
Oil, Wine Vinegar and Salt, there let it steep a little while; then put on your
Gridiron and broil your Pike over a soft fire, turn it and baste it often with
sprigs of Rosemary, Parsley and Time, out of the dish wherein it was steeped;
the Pike being broiled, take the steeping and warm it on the coals, and pour it
on your Fish, laying the Herbs round the Dish with flices of Oranges.

Pilehards, Herrings or Sprats broiled.
Gill, wash and dry them, season them with Salt, then broil them over a soft
fire, and baste them with Butter; being enough, serve them up with beaten
Butter, ^^stard and Pepper: or, you may sauce the^ with the juice of their own
heads squee^ between two Trenchers with some Be^ and Salt.

Plaice or Flounders broiled.
Having drawn, washed and dried, the scotch them on both sides, and broil the^
let your lair be Butter and Vinegar: Y^ may add to them in the same dish Salmo^
peels, or indifferent big Trouts split; (...) you place the outside uppermost,
each Fi^^ will seem double, if the other side upmost it will appear of a lovely
yellow; let you lair be a ladleful of drawn Butter, a little Vinegar, and some
grated Nutmeg; a to^ strew Parsley fried crisp and green.

Plaice or Flounders frigassi'd.
You must take out the bone in the fir^ place, by running your knife all along
upon the backside of your Fish, raising the Flesh on both sides from head to
tail; the^ cut each Fish into three or four collops according to their bigness;
dry it well, and corn it with a little Salt, then flower it, and when your
clarified Butter is very hot in the Pan, put in your Fish-collops; when almost
ready, take it up and set it by the fire, or in some hot place till you have
cleans'd your Pan, then put therein a ladleful of Butter, some White wine and
Oyster liquor; it will not be amiss to take the meat of two or three Crabs, and
put therein with your Flounder-Collops or Plaice, as also some whole and some
minced Oysters, some Time minced, a Nutmeg grated, two or three Anchovies; let
all these stew in a Pan, not putting in your Collops till these last mentioned
ingredients have stewed a pretty while; then dish them on Sippets, and run them
over with your lair; let your garnish be slices of Oranges, and the yolks of
hard Eggs chopped small: in this manner you may dress any solid or hard Fish,
as Mullets, Pike, Bace, Bream, etc.

Salmon roasted whole.
Let your Salmon be drawn at the Gills, then scale it and cleanse it from blood
and slime, then lard it with a fat salt Eel, put into his belly some sweet
Herbs whole, and fill it up with stewed Oysters that are large, and some Nutmeg
mingle therewith, not forgetting to put in therewith an Onion, and a little
Garlic; then place your Salmon in a Pan upon sticks laid a cro^ and put it
into an Oven with some Cla^ wine in your Pan with Anchovies dissolv^ therein;
as it drops baste it with Butte^ and the liquor that is in the Pan: when it is
enough, take what is in the Pan an^ boil it up with Pepper, Nutmeg, Rosema^ and
Bays; blowing off the fat, beat it (...) thick with Butter: having laid your
Sa^mon in a very large dish, rip up his bell^ and take away the Herbs, drawing
out o^ half of the Oysters into the dish, then po^ on your sauce and serve it
up.

Salmon in pieces roasted.
Take a Jole or Side of Salmon; if the first, cut it into three or four pieces,
if the other, into half a dozen pieces; season each piece with Salt, Nutmeg,
and a little Cinnamon; then stick them with a few Cloves, and spit them on a
small broach, laying between every piece a Bay leaf, sticking here and there
some sprigs of Rosemary; as it roasts baste it with Butter. Let your sauce be
the Gravy of the Salmon, Butter, juice of Oranges, Cinnamon and Sugar; beat up
the sauce indifferent thick, and garnish the Dish with grated Bread and slices
of Lemons.

Salmon frigassi'd.
Take a piece of fresh Salmon, it matters ^ot whether the middle piece or tail,
and ^ut it into the length and thickness of ^our forefinger; then take some
sweet Herbs with Parsley and a little Fennel, and ^ince them very small; then
take some Salt, Mace, Nutmeg, Ginger, Cloves, all beaten together, and put them
to your Salmon, with the yolks of half a score Eggs, and commix these very well
together; in the mean time get your Pan in readiness full of clarified stuff
and very hot, then with all imaginable expedition scatter your Fish with its
appurtenances, and be sure that you keep it from frying in lumps; when it is
three quarters fried, pour away your liquor from it, and in its room put in
some Oyster liquor, some White wine, some large Oysters, a couple of Anchovies,
a large Onion, Nutmeg and minced Time: being ready, dish it, and pour thereon
the yolks of four Eggs, beaten with some of the aforesaid liquor, and run it
over with drawn Butter, garnish it with Oysters, and serve it up on Sippets.

Salmon fried.
Take a chine of Salmon, and cut it i^ to pieces, flower it and fry it crisp
an^ brown in clarified Butter, then take a little Claret, grated Nutmeg, some
sweet Bu^ter, Oyster liquor and White wine Vin^gar; these must be stewed a
little whi^ together; then dish up your Salmon, an^ pour on this sauce: having
in readine^ Parsley fried green, or Ellicsanders an^ Sage leaves fried in
Batter, garnish it wit^ quartered Oranges round the dish, with some fried
greens.

Salmon broiled.
Take any part of the Salmon, whethe^ jole or chine, and lay it a steep in
Clare and Wine Vinegar, wherein you must pu^ some whole Cloves, a little large
Mace, (...) clove of Garlic, gross Pepper, sliced Ginger, and a little Salt;
let it steep herein an^ hour and a half, then broil it over a soft fire,
basting it with Butter, sprigs of Rosemary, sweet Marjoram, Parsley, Time, and
a few Bay Leaves: when it is near upon broiled, take the liquor wherein it was
steeped, and boil it up with Oyster liquor, then dish up your Fish, and pour
your lair thereon, laying the Herbs advantageously about it.

Soals roasted.
Take your Soals and draw them, then skin them and dry them, then take sweet
Marjoram, Time, Winter-Savory, and a sprig of Rosemary, and mince these small,
add hereunto some Salt and grated Nutmeg, and season your Soals therewith
moderately; then lard your Soals with a fat fresh Eel, and after this steep
them an hour in White wine, and Anchovies therein dissolved; then take them up,
and upon a small spit roast them, put the dish; wherein they were steeped,
under them, baste them with Butter, and being enough, boil up the Gravy, and
what it dropped into; then dish them, and pour this lair upon them, laying on
some slices of Lemon.

Sturgeon roasted.
Take a jole of fresh Sturgeon, wipe it dry, and cut it into pieces as big as a
Turkey's Eggs, season them with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, stick each piece with
two or three sprigs of Rosemary, and a Clove or two; in the spitting, put
between every piece a Sage or Bay leaf, baste them with Butter; when enough,
serve it (...) with Venison sauce or its own Gravy, B^^ter, juice of Orange and
Nutmeg, all be^ ten up together.

Sturgeon broiled.
Take a Rand or Jole that is fresh, sa^ it and steep it in good Sallet Oil and
Whit^ wine Vinegar about an hour, then put i^ over a soft fire, and baste it
with what i^ was steeped in, with branches of Tym^ and Rosemary: being ready,
serve it up with some of that it was basted with, and some of the Rosemary; or
you may tak^ for sauce Butter and Vinegar beaten up with slices of Lemons.

Sturgeon fried.
Take a Jole of fresh Sturgeon, and cut it into fine slices of an indifferent
thickness, take your knife and hack it, that it may look as if it were ribbed,
when it is fried; let your Pan with clarified stuff be hot before you put it
in: being half fried take it up, and cleansing your Pan, put it in again with
some White wine, beaten Saffron, Salt and an Anchovy: having fried it a while,
put in some Butter, grated Nutmeg, minced Lemon, and grated Ginger, then rub
your dishes bottom with a little Garlic and serve it up.

Turburt and Holyburt fried.
Cut your Turburt into slices about two inches thick, hack it with the back of
your knife, then fry it in clarified Butter (having first flowred it) till it
be brown or half ready; then take it up, cleanse your Pan, and in with it
again, with White wine, Anchovies, Nutmeg, Salt, Ginger, and beaten Saffron;
fry it thus a while, and then put in some Butter, serve it up with slices of
Lemon.

I should now according to my foregoing method give you an account how Turburt
is to be roasted and broiled: but because it is in all respects so done as
fresh Sturgeon, I shall desist here, and refer you to the forementioned Heads
or Titles.

Shrimps, Prawns, Periwinkles and Crawfish frigassied.
These you must first uncase, or take the meat out of the shells, which you
must put into a dish with a pint of Claret, an Onion sliced small, a couple of
Anchovies, with a faggot of sweet Herbs: stew these a little while over a
chasing-dish of coals with Ginger and Nutmeg; then put them into a Pan, with
the yolk of an Egg, Vinegar and Butter, and giving them a toss or two, serve
them up on Sippets.

Scollops broiled.
Put your Scollops over a Gridiron, then wash the meat in warm Water; being out
of the shells, slice it and season it with Cinnamon, Nutmeg and Ginger; then put
thereof into each particular shell with some Butter, grated Bread, and a little
Vinegar; when they are enough, serve them up in their shells on Plates.

Flesh Roasted, Broiled, Frigassied and Fried.
Brawn broiled.
Take a Collar of Brawn, and cut from it seven or eight thin round slices, lay
this on a Plate, and put into an Oven; when it is enough, serve it with juice
of Orange, Pepper, Gravy and beaten Butter.

Bacon broiled.
Make a sheet of Paper into the fashion of a dripping-Pan, then take some
interlarded, Bacon and cut it into very thin slices taking off the rind: lay
this Bacon in your paper, and put it over the fire upon a Gridiron, if the fire
be not too hot, it will broil very cleanly.

Calves head broiled.
Having taken out the brains and cleansed the head, boil it very white; then
take it up and scotch it with your knife, salt it and baste it with Butter:
when it begins to look brown, baste again and bread it, and having made a sauce
of Gravy, beaten Butter, chopped Capers, and a little Nutmeg grated, serve it up
with the brains on a a plate, which you must boil apart from the head with
sweet Herbs chopped small, as Sage, sweet Marjoram and Time.

Calves feet or Trotters fried.
Take a handful of young Parsley, and shred it very small: put it into four or
five raw Eggs, and beat them together; then take a little Nutmeg, Sugar, a corn
or two of Pepper and Salt, and season it therewith. Having boiled your feet
tender, slit them in halves, and roll them in Parsley and Egg: your Drying Pan
being charged with clarified Butter, and very hot withal put in your feet, they
will be presently done, which you shall know when the side that lies downwards
looks yellow, then turn them; by that time they are enough, have in readiness
Parsley boiled very tender, and beat it till it be as soft, as the pulp of a
roasted Apple, then put to it a quarter of a pint of Vinegar, two spoonfuls of
Sugar, and a little sweet Butter, heat it well, and pour it over the feet, then
scrape on some Sugar, and so serve it up.

Calves head roasted with Oysters.
Slit the Calves head, as (customary) to boil, and take out the brain and the
tongue, and parboil them both, and blanch the tongue, then mince them with a
little Sage, a few Oysters and Beef Suet or Marrow; then put to these four or
five yolks of Eggs, beaten Ginger, pepper, Nutmeg, grated Bread and Salt.
Having a little parboiled your head, dry it in a cloth, and fill the mouth and
skull with these ingredients; then stuff it with Oysters and spit it; as it
roasts preserve the Gravy in the Pan, into which you must put a few Oysters,
sweet Herbs minced, some White wine, and a little Nutmeg: when the head is
enough, pour out the liquor into a clean dish, and set it over a Chafing Dish
of coals, adding to the aforesaid materials, a little Butter, the juice of a
Lemon, and some Salt, beat these up thick together, and so dish your head and
serve it up.

Calves feet roasted.
Blanch your feet, after you have boiled them very tender; let them stand till
they are cold, then lard them thick with small lard: having so done, roast them
on a small spit; being enough, take Butter, Vinegar, Sugar and Cinnamon, and
beating them up thick, pour it on your feet, and so serve them up.

Calves feet or Sheeps trotters roasted, after the most approved manner.
Having boiled the feet tender split them, removing the hair, which is usually
about the toes of the Trotters; let your seasoning be small Pepper, Mace,
Cloves, Sait and Nutmeg beaten; then take several sorts of sweet Herbs, and
pound them well; having so done, take a dozen yolks of Eggs, with a very little
Water and Flower, and beat all these together into a batter; your pa^^ being
ready hot with good store of clarified Butter, dip in your feet into the batter
and lay them into the Pan; fry them no^ too fast, and add to them some stron^
broth, Vinegar and Sugar, and so let them stew a while; then dish them up with
drawn Butter, and the yolk of an Egg well beaten on Sippets; running the juice
o^ an Orange over them.

Deer red how to roast.
Take a Haunch or half thereof, lard it with small Lard, or stick it pretty
thick with Cloves, parboiling your Venison before you spit it, and then roast
it.

Fillet or leg of Veal roasted.
Take Beef Suet or Marrow, the yolks of four raw Eggs, a little Nutmeg and some
Salt, and mingle these together, then take a Fillet of Veal and stuff it
herewith very thick, then roast it, preserve the gravy to make the sauce:
having blown off the fat, put to it the juice of three Oranges, and giving it a
walm or two, pour in your sauce and dish it up.

Hare roasted.
Having larded your Hare with small Lard, and stuck him with Cloves pretty
thick, then make a Pudding of grated Bread, Currants, Eggs, Sugar, grated
Nutmeg, beaten Cinnamon, and a little Salt; you may do well to add some sweet
Cream: with this Pudding made pretty stiff, stuff the Hares belly and roast
her: Venison sauce is as proper as any whatever; but for variety you may take
Nutmeg, Ginger, beaten Cinnamon, boiled Prunes, Pepper and Currants strained,
Bread grated, Sugar and Cloves, all which you must boil together, till they are
as thick almost as Custard.

Some will roast a Hare with the skin on, making a stuffing of all manner of
sweet Herbs, minced very small, and wrapped up in Butter made into a Ball: this
they put into the Hares belly, pricking it up very close; all the while it is
roasting with the skin on it, it must be basted with Butter: being almost
enough, then strip the skin off, and stick Cloves on his back and sides, bread
it very well with grated Manchet, Flower and Cinnamon, then froth it up and dish
it: the usual sauce is Claret wine, Vinegar, Sugar, Cinnamon, Ginger, boiled up
to a moderate thickness.

Legs of Pork broiled.
Having skinned part of the Fillet, cut it into thin slices, and hack it with
the back of your knife; then take some Pepper and Salt, and mingle them with
Time and Sage minced extraordinary small; having seasoned your Collops
herewith, put them on a Gridiron: being enough, dish them up, and sauce them
with drawn Butter, Vinegar, Mustard and Sugar.

Lambs head roasted.
Take two or three Lambs heads, and having cleans'd them by soaking them in
several waters, and taking out the brains, fill the head with a pudding or what
farcing you shall like best; your Lambs heads being almost roasted, put on as
many Lambs tongues with as many sticks of Oysters as you have heads, let your
tongues be parboiled, blancht and larded, and with your tongues and Oysters
have Sweetbreads amongst them; then having some Gravy drawn with Claret wine,
put to it two Onions, a faggot of sweet Herbs, a couple of Anchovies, and a
large Nutmeg: your Tongues being thoroughly roasted, slit them and put them into
your Wine and Gravy, drawing your Sweet-breads and Oysters at the same time;
then dish up your heads on Sippets well soaked in strong Broth, then lay the
sides of your Tongues about the Heads by the sides of your Dish, placing your
Oysters and Sweet-breads all over your Tongues and Heads; then pour on your
lair with a ladleful of drawn Butter, and serve them up.

Lamb or Kid whole how to roast.
Take the Head of your Lamb and prick it backwards over the shoulder, tying it
down; then lard it with Bacon, and draw it with Time and Lemon-pill: this being
done, make your farcing or pudding of grated Bread, sweet Herbs, Beef Suet,
some Flower, some forced meat minced small; then season it with Cloves, Mace,
Ginger, Cinnamon and Salt, with some grated Nutmeg; add hereunto the yolks of
four Eggs and some sweet Cream, then wrap this composition in the Caul of the
Lamb, and stuff the belly thereof with it, and then prick it up close; when it
is roasted enough, serve it up with Venison sauce.

Leverets and Rabbits roasted.
In the casing your Leverets, cut not off neither their ears nor hinder legs,
but harl one leg through the other, and cut a hole in one ear to contain the
other; in this manner roast your Leveret; while it is roasting, make your sauce
with Winter-Savory, sweet Majoram, Time and Parsley minced very small, mince
also some yolks of hard Eggs, the Liver of the Leveret parboiled with some
Bacon and Beef Suet, boil these up well in a strong Broth and Vinegar: being
boiled, put thereunto drawn Butter, some Sugar and a grated Nutmeg, dish up
your Leverets on this sauce with slices of Lemon.

Mutton, a shoulder roasted the best way with Oysters.
Take a quart of large Oysters, and parhoil them in their own liquor; having
drained the liquor from them, wash them in White wine, then dry them and season
them with Salt and Nutmeg, stuff the shoulder very thick with these, and lard
it here and there with Anchovies: being at the fire, baste it with Claret wine;
then take the bottoms of eight Hartichokes boiled very tender, and cleared from
their strings, put these into beaten Butter, with the Marrow of as many
Marrow-bones; then set them by the fire, that they may not cool, putting to
them the Gravy of the Mutton, some Salt and sliced Nutmeg, with the juice of
two Lemons, and about a pint of great Oysters, being first parboiled; your
Mutton being roasted, dish it up, having added to your sauce an Anchovy, some
White wine, a whole Onion, stripped Time, and all boiled up together. Let your
Mutton lie in the middle of the dish, placing your Hartichokes round the dish
brims, putting the Marrow and Oysters on the Hartichokes bottoms, with some
sliced Lemon on the Mutton, and thus serve it.

Mutton, shoulder roasted without Oysters.
Whilst your shoulder of Mutton is roasting, make ready your sauce in this
manner: take the Gravy, Claret wine, grated Nutmeg, Pepper, sliced Lemon, and
Broombuds, put these in a Pipkin together with a little Salt, let them stew a
little while together, then dish up your Mutton, and pour in the sauce into the
Dish, garnish it with Barberries and sliced Lemon.

Mutton is a common sort of Flesh among the English, and because generally fed
on in Noblemens houses, as well as in those of mean degree, there are found out
many ways of dressing the several joints which belong to the sheep; fearing I
shall be too prolix, if I begin to treat thereof, I will wave and give you a
short account of what sauces are most used and esteemed for Mutton.

Some are for Gravy, Samphire, Capers and Salt stewed together; others are for
Oyster liquor and Gravy boiled together, with Eggs, Verjuyce, juice of Orange,
and slices of Lemon all over: A third sort are for Onions chopped with sweet
Herbs, Vinegar, Gravy and Salt boiled together: A fourth is only for Parsley
chopped and mingled with Vinegar: A fifth is for Verjuyce, Butter, Sugar, Gravy
with minced Parsley, or pickled Capers and Gravy, or Samphire cut an inch long
and Gravy, or Onions, Oyster liquor, Claret, Capers pickled, Cucumbers,
Broom-buds, Gravy, Nutmeg and Salt boiled together. Lastly, whole Onions stewed
in Gravy, White wine, with Pepper, Capers, Mace and slices of Lemon; or Water,
Claret, sliced Nutmeg and Gravy boiled up together.

Mutton, a Jegget how to roast.
Some may be ignorant what a Jegget of Mutton is, for their information it is a
Leg with half the Loin cut to it; you must roast it thus: draw it with Time and
Lemon-pill; be sure to save the Gravy that proceeds from it, and put thereto a
couple of cut Onions, two or three Anchovies, and a pretty quantity of Elder
Vinegar; after these have boiled together a little while, put to it some minced
Capers and Samphire, with a Nutmeg sliced, adding your Gravy and some Oyster
liquor. This is a sauce for any joint of Mutton.

Neats tongue roasted.
After you have boiled and blanched your Tongue, set it by; and when it is
cold, cut a hole in the butt-end thereof, and mince the meat you take from
thence, with some sweet Herbs finely minced therewith, the yolks of Eggs
sliced, some Pippins and Beef Suet chopped very small, some Salt and beaten
Ginger; having filled the hole of your Tongue with these materials, stop it
with a Caul of Veal, lard it with small Lard, and roast it: for your sauce you
must have Butter, Gravy, juice of Orange or Lemon, and some grated Nutmeg,
garnish it with sliced Lemon-pill and Barberries.

Neats Tongue and Vdder roasted otherways.
Take your Tongue and Udder and parboil them well, then blanch the Tongue, and
lard them both with great Lard; but first you must remember to season them with
Pepper, Nutmeg, Ginger and Cinnamon, then roast them and baste them with Butter;
and when they are almost roasted bread them with grated Bread, or dress them
with Flower, mingling therewith some of the forenam'd spices beaten small; dish
them up with a little Butter, Gravy, Juice of Orange, Sugar and slices of Lemon.

Neats Tongues and Vdders frigassi'd.
Take your Tongue and Udder, and boil them till they be enough; then with your
knife, cut them into slices, beginning at the butt-end, and ending within three
inches of the tip or small end, which you must cut length-ways for Sippets;
then take a handful of several sorts of sweet Herbs, as Time, Winter-Savory,
etc. mince them very small, and put them to the Tongue and Udder; to these add
the yolks of eight Eggs; and so commix all these together: having so done, fry
them in clarified Butter, then turn them out into a Stew Pan, and set it over
the fire with White wine, Sugar, Ginger, beaten Cinnamon, a little Vinegar, a
sprig or two of Rosemary, a handful of Bread grated; as it boils up, put into
it a ladleful of drawn Butter, then serve it up with the slices of your tips
and small end of Tongue and Udder; after this run your lair all over it.

Neats feet frigassied.
First boil, and then blanch them, split them, and fry them in clarified
Butter, or you may bone them, and fry them in Butter, strong Broth and Salt;
having fried a while, put into the Pan some green Chibbolds and minced Parsley,
some beaten Pepper, Time and Spearmint chopped very small; when almost enough,
make a sauce of the yolks of half a dozen Eggs dissolved in Vinegar, some
Mutton Gravy, a little Nutmeg with the juice of Oranges or Lemons; after this
manner dish them up.

Neats feet roasted.
Your Neats feet must be first boiled and blanched, and when they are cold lard
them, and make them fast to a small spit, baste them with Butter, Vinegar,
Sugar, and a little Nutmeg; being enough, have in readiness a sauce made of
Claret, White wine Vinegar, and toasts of brown wheaten Bread strained with the
Wine through the Strainer; then add thereto Ginger and beaten Cinnamon, a few
whole Cloves, put all into a Pipkin, and stir it with a branch of Rosemary till
it be reasonably thick.

Oxe-Pallets, etc. roasted after an incomparable manner.
Take Oxe-Pallets, Lambstones, Coxcombs and the stones, parboil these and
blanch them; then take half a dozen Rails, Snites, Quails, Ox-eyes or Larks,
and make them ready for the Spit; having got in readiness, interlarded Bacon,
Sage, etc. draw on a Bird upon your small spit, then a slice of interlarded
Bacon, and a Bay-leaf, then Lambstones, Cox-combs and Stones with some large
Oysters larded, then Bacon and a Sage leaf, then a Bird, and so on till you
have spitted all the Birds; then take the yolks of three Eggs, fine grated
Manchet, Salt, Nutmeg, Time and Rosemary minced very small, and with this baste
your spitted composition, as soon as you find them begin to roast: in the mean
time get the bottoms of Hartichokes boiled and quater'd, and dip them with
Marrow into Batter, and so fry them: the roast being enough, rub the bottom of
your Dish with Garlic, then place your Birds in the middle, place the Pallets
by themselves, Lambstones by themselves, the Combs, Stones and Sweet-breads
apart by themselves; and lastly, the Hartichokes and Marrow distinct from the
rest: let your sauce be Butter, Anchovies, sliced Onion, Salt, Oyster liquor,
Nutmeg, Gravy and White wine, set a little over the fire, pour this on, and
serve it up, garnished with sliced Lemon.

Pig roasted with the skin off.
Take a Pig that is newly killed, and being drawn fley him, then wipe him very
dry with a cloth; lay him aside and make a hard meat with grated Bread, half a
dozen yolks of Eggs, Cream, minced Time, Beef Suet, Salt, Cloves and Mace
beaten; with this Pudding made pretty stiff, stuff the belly of your Pig, and
skuer it up close, and sticking it full with sprigs of Time, lay it down to the
fire, with a Dish under it, in which is Claret wine, Time, a sliced Nutmeg, a
little Vinegar and Salt, as it roasts, baste the Pig herewith; being enough,
froth it up with Butter: then take the sauce into which it dropped, and putting
thereto a large piece of Butter with some minced Lemon, beat it up thick, and
di^ your Pig therein.

Pig roasted with the hair on.
Having drawn your Pig very clean at vent, taking out his guts, Liver and
Lights, wipe him well, cutting off his feet and truss him, and prick up the
belly; being laid to the fire, be careful of scorching him; when you perceive
the skin to rise up in blisters, pull off the skin and hair, having cleared him
of both, scotch him down the back, and baste him with Butter and Cream; then
take Currants, Salt, Sugar and grated Bread mingled together, and dredge him
therewith, continuing so to do till he is breaded above half an inch^ thick:
being roasted enough, serve it up with sauce made of Vinegar, whole Cloves,
whole Cinnamon, and Sugar boiled up to a consistency.

Pig roasted after the usual English fashion.
Having scalded your Pig, clear him very well from hairs, and wash him clean,
then put Sage and some household Bread into his belly, prick it up and roast
him; baste him at first with some Butter and Salt, but quickly wipe it off,
keeping him continually rub before a quick fire; being almost ready, baste him
very well, and then throw on him a great deal of Salt, turning him backwards
and forwards before the fire, which will make his crackling very crisp. For the
sauce let there be Sage minced small, with Currants well boiled in Vinegar and
Water, and thereunto the Gravy of the Pig, a little grated Bread, the Brains,
some Barberries and, Sugar; give these a walm or two, and serve the Pig on this
sauce with some beaten Butter.

Rabbets frigassied.
Let your Rabbets be very well parboiled, then cut them in halves or quarters,
flower them, and put them into your Pan with sweet Butter, let them fry
moderately; then get your lair ready made of the yolks of five Eggs well
beaten, with half a pint of White wine and strong Broth, a grated Nutmeg, and a
handful of Parsley boiled up green, and chopped small with a little Sugar; you
may put thereto some roasted Potatoes or Hartichokes bottoms sliced, let these
be put into the Pan with your Rabbets, and keep them shaking over the fire
until it be ready to boil; then dis^ your Rabbets on Sippets, and pour o^ your
lair as thick as drawn Butter, garnis^ it with Lemon, Barberries, and boile^
Parsley.

Scotch Collops fried or broiled made (...) Mutton.
Take the bone out of a Leg of Mutton, and slice it into very thin slices,
cros^ the grain of the meat; then beat them o^ hack them with the back of a
knife, the fry them in very good Butter, salting the^ before you put them into
the Pan; being fried, put to them grated Nutmeg, juyc^ of Orange, Gravy and a
little Claret; giv^ it a walm, dish it up and run beaten Butte^ over it.

Or having boned your Mutton, (...) your Collops round the Leg as thick as
trencher, hack them, season them with Sa^^ and broil them on a clear
Charcoal-fir^ broil them up quick and turn them; being enough, sauce them with
Gravy, juyce^ Orange, Nutmeg and Capers.

Scotch-Collops of Veal.
Take a Leg of Veal, and take out the bone, then cut it into thin slices,
knoc^^ them with the back of a cleaver, season them lightly with Salt, and take
Lard of an inch long, and draw through every piece: having so done, fry them in
clarified stuff, or rather in good sweet Butter: being near upon ready, make a
sauce of Claret, and Anchovy, some Mutton Gravy, and let it stand a very little
on the fire, then rub your dish with Garlic, lay in your meat and pour your
sauce thereon, garnish it with slices of Lemon.

Sheeps Tongues, Deers Tongues, or Calves Tongues fried.
Boil your Tongues and peel them, then cut them into thin slices, and put them
into the yolks of half a dozen Eggs beaten with Nutmeg, Sugar, Salt and
Cinnamon, with a handful of Currants; neither will it be irrequisite to add the
core of a Lemon cut into square pieces; let your Pan be just ready, as you have
done this last, and put these ingredients into the Pan by spoonfuls: being
fried (but have a care of the least burning, for that will spoil all) serve
them on Sippets, with sauce made of Sack, sweet Butter and Sugar, and serve it
hot, scraping on Sugar.

Steaks of Pork broiled.
Take a Loin of Pork, and take off the skin, then cut the leaner flesh into
thin slices; then take a Rowling-pin, and beat them as thin and as broad as you
can; then laying them on the dresser spread abroad, strew on them some Salt and
Sage minced very small, and put them on your Gridiron, then season the other
side as the former: when they are enough, dish them up on drawn Butter, Vinegar
and Mustard with a little Sugar.

Veal, the breast roasted with a Pudding in it.
Take a knife and open the lower end of your Breast of Veal close between the
skin and the ribs; then take some Veal and mince it small, with Time and fat
Bacon chopped small, some beaten Cloves and Mace, Salt, and four yolks of Eggs,
mingle these well together, and fill your Breast therewith, skuering it up, lay
it to the fire, save the Gravy, and beat it up with Butter, and the juice of
Oranges for sauce.

You may make your Pudding thus: Otherways take three or four yolks of Eggs,
some grated White-bread, Currants clean picked and well washed, Cream,
Rosewater, Cloves and Mace finely beaten, a little Saffron, Salt, Beef Suet
chopped small, sliced Dates and Sugar, make it up pretty stiff, and fill the
breast therewith.

Veal, a chine or neck roasted.
Draw your joints with Time, spit either one or other, and lay it to the fire;
then take some great Oysters parboiled, and put to them Parsley, Time, and
Winter-Savory minced small, with the yolks of four Eggs boiled hard and minced
small; then take Bacon and cut it into slices four square, and somewhat bigger
than your Oysters; then have in a readiness two square Rods about the bigness
of your little finger, and spit thereon a piece of Bacon, and then an Oyster so
long, till you have spitted all your Oysters and Bacon, then tie these rods on
your Veal; when it is about three quarters roasted, set under your roast a Dish
with some Claret, minced Time, and a Nutmeg grated: your Veal being ready, cut
off your rods, and slip your Bacon and Oysters into the Wine, putting them into
a Pipkin with the yolk of an Egg, and let them boil up thick with drawn Butter;
pour this lair all over your Veal, and serve it up: Thus you may roast a Fillet
or Leg.

Veal Olives how roasted.
Take a Fillet of Veal, and cut from thence large Collops, and hack them or
beat them with the back of your chopping knife or rowling-pin; season them with
Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace and Salt; then take some sweet Herbs and Beef Suet, and
mince them very small; add to them the yolks of six Eggs; then spread your
Collops, and strew on your farcing, rolling them up very close; now spit them
and roast them: prepare your sauce against they be ready, made of the Gravy,
that drops from them, some Claret wine, strong Broth and sweet Butter beaten up
to a reasonable thickness.

Veal, Fillet farced and roasted.
Take Time, Winter-Savory, sweet Marjoram and Beef Suet; and then mince them
very small, beat some Cloves and Mace, adding to what is abovenamed, Salt,
grated Bread, four or five Dates cut small, and a handful of Pine kernels
blanched; mix all these together with Verjuyce, and the yolk of an Egg: having
so done, make little holes in your Veal, and stuff it herewith very thick, then
roast it well: the sauce must be Butter, Vinegar, Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger
beaten, work your sauce up thick, then dishing your Veal, pour on your sauce
and garnish it with slices of Orange.

Veal, a Chine broiled.
Cut your Veal into four or five pieces, you may either lard it or let it
alone; but if you do, let the Lard be small, then season each piece with Salt;
then broil them on a Gridiron over a soft fire with some branches of Sage and
Rosemary between the Chine and the Gridiron; being broiled, sauce it with
Gravy, Butter, and juice of Orange beaten up thick.

Venison that is fat, how to broil.
Cut the fattest part of a Hanch of Venison into slices about half an inch
thick, salt each piece and broil them on a soft fire very leisurely; when they
have soaked a pretty while, bread them, and serve them with Gravy only: Thus
you may broil a Chine or side of Venison, being first boiled and seasoned with
a little Salt.

Venison, a Hanch roasted.
If your Venison has been seasoned, water it first, then stick it with short
sprigs of Rosemary, lay it to the fire, roast it not too much; and let your
sauce be half a pint of Claret, a handful and a half of grated Bread, some
Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, and a little Vinegar, boil all these together so long
till they are as thick as Pancake Batter, then dish up your Venison thereon.

Venison in Collops.
Take a Hanch of Venison, and cut part of it into Collops; then hack it with
the back of your knife; and having stuck it with small lard, take a handful of
Parsley and Spinach, good store of Time, a little Rosemary, with other sweet
Herbs, and mince them very small with Beef Suet; put these into a dish
together, with the addition of beaten Cloves, Nutmeg, good store of Salt, the
yolks of seven Eggs, mingle these all together with your hands, then spit your
Collops on a small spit, intermixing your Herbs, and so tie them all together:
set a dish under them to save the Gravy, in which you must put some Claret;
being almost roasted, put your dish over the coals with grated Bread, beaten
Cinnamon, Vinegar and Sugar; stir these together with your wine, and a ladleful
of drawn Butter, make not your lair too thick, and dishing your Venison, pour
it thereon.

Fowl of all sorts, both Land and Sea Fowl Roasted, Fried, Broiled, Frigassied.
Capon roasted with Oysters and Chestnuts.
TAke a good fat Capon, and make him ready for the spit, then boil a dozen
Chestnuts, being soft pill them, and put them into Claret wine warmed, with as
many large Oysters parboiled; put these into the belly of the Capon, and stop
them in with sweet Butter; let your fire be very good and quick, baste it with
sweet Butter, and as soon as it begins to drop preserve the Gravey; then take
half a pint of Claret wine, a piece of sweet Butter, a little gross Pepper,
half a score, or a score of parboiled Chestnuts, as many large Oysters, stew
these all together till half the liquor be consumed: your Capon being ready,
put in your Gravy to your sauce, bread up your Fowl, and dish it on your sauce.

Capons frigassied.
Your Capon to be frigassied must be either boiled or roasted, which you must
carve up, taking the Pinions from the Wings, and the Brawn from the Joint, as
they lie in the dish: Thus carved up to lie orderly on the Pan, put to them the
yolks of five Eggs, with sliced Nutmeg, and minced Time: Being thus all in the
dish, mingle them well together, and put them into your Pan with clarified
Butter half hot, and fry them till they are yellow, then turn them: after this
take some White wine with the yolks of three Eggs, a little strong Broth,
Gravy, an Onion cut in quarters, Anchovies, and a little Nutmeg grated; then
pour out what liquor is in your Pan, and add to it a ladleful of drawn Butter;
then put this lair into your Pan, and keep continually shaking it therein over
a slow fire till it grows thick; if it should prove too thick, you may thin it
with White wine; then dish up your Fowl, and pour in your sauce and serve it
up, garnisht with hard yolks of Eggs chopped small, and slices of Lemon.

Chickens frigassied.
Take half a dozen Chickens, draw, fley and cut them into quarters, not
removing the Gibblets and Liver; then take your Cleaver, and with the back
thereof beat them very well, then fry them brown with Butter; in the mean time
get Time, sweet Marjoram, and other sweet Herbs, and mince them small,
Oxe-Palates, Dates, the bottoms of three or four Hartichokes sliced all
together, Salt with beaten Ginger and Mace: The meat being enough, cleanse your
Pan, and put in your meat again with strong Broth, Verjuyce, and the rest of
the aforementioned materials, and let them fry till the liquor be half
consumed; then put in half a pound of Butter, Sugar, scalded Goosberries,
minced Lemon, and shake them well together, dish them up on Sippets, garnished
with grated Bread, sliced Lemon and scalded Goosberries.

The latest way of frigassying Chickens is thus: take them, scald them, and
quarter them, then break their bones by beating them with a back of the
Cleaver, dry them well, and then flower them; your Pan being hot, put them in
with their skinny side downward, and fry them brown on both sides: then pour
out your liquor, and have a lair in readiness made of Gravy and Claret, which
you must put into your Pan, adding thereto pieces of Sausages, cut about half
the length of your finger, a pint of Oysters, and an Onion or two, a faggot of
sweet Herbs, a grated Nutmeg, a couple of Anchovies; let these boil up in the
Pan: then take the yolks of five Eggs, and beat them in strong broth, take your
Pan off the fire and pour them in, shaking them whilst they are over the fire;
then dish up your Chickens on Sippets, pouring on your lair with Oysters, and
placing your bits of Sausages round the dish, garnishing it with Lemon.

Duckling frigassied.
Take Ducklings and cut them in small pieces, flower and fry them in sweet
Butter: having first dried them in a clean cloth; then take some Sack, an Onion
and Parsley chopped small, a piece of whole Mace, and a little gross Pepper,
adding hereunto some Butter, Sugar and Verjuyce: Then take a good handful of
Clary, and pick off the stalks: having done this, make a batter of four
new-laid Eggs, fine Flower, some sweet Cream, and a little Nutmeg, fry these in
a Pan; and having dish'd your Ducklings, pour on your fried Clary, etc. upon
them.

Ducks or Wigeons frigassied.
Quarter them first, race them, beat them with the back of your Cleaver: having
dried them well, put them into a Pan with sweet Butter, and fry them: when they
are almost fried, put into them a handful of minced Onions, some little Time;
after put in some Claret wine, with some thin flices of Bacon, and some Spinach
and Parsley boiled green and minced small: when it has fried a little while,
break in a dish three yolks of Eggs, with a grated Nutmeg, and a little Pepper,
put these into the Pan, then toss it up with a ladleful of drawn Butter; pour
on your lair, and let your Bacon be on the top of your Ducks.

Ducks roasted.
Having roasted your Ducks very well, provide in the mean time this following
sauce; boil some Onions sliced very thin in a little strong Broth, put thereto
a little Gravy, and some drawn Butter: This is the custom of some, but the best
and general rule is for all Wild Fowl, to boil up the Gravy with an Onion, a
little Nutmeg and Butter. For Water Fowl, it is customary to boil up sliced
Onions in strong Broth, with Gravy and a little drawn Butter.

Goose frigassied.
Take a Goose and roast him almost, then carve him and scotch with your knife
long ways, and cross it over again to make it look like chequer-work; then wash
it over with Butter, and strew Salt upon it; then put it into a dish with the
skinny side downward, so set it before the fire in a dripping-Pan, that it may
take a gentle heat, then turn the other side; then take it and lay it on your
Gridiron over a soft fire: when you think it is enough, baste the upper side
with Butter; then dredge it over with flower and bread grated; then put it over
again and froth it, and dish it up: your sauce must be Vinegar, Butter and
Mustard, with a little Sugar, put it into your dish with a little drawn Butter,
and lay your Goose a top of it, garnish it with Lemon, laying on Sausages round
the brims of the dish.

Hen roasted.
Make choice of an indifferent young Hen full of Eggs, fit it for the spit, and
roast it: being enough, take it up and break it open, and taking the brawn from
the joint, mince it into small slices, but save the wings and legs whole, with
the rump also, stew all in the Gravy with a little Salt; after this, mince a
Lemon into your sauce; let the minced brawn of the Hen be laid in the middle of
the dish, and the legs, wings and rump round about it; garnish the dish with
the yolks of hard Eggs minced small, and some slices of Orange or Lemon.

For a Hen roasted and not broken up, the usual sauce is, the yolks of four
Eggs boiled hard and minced, a little drawn Butter, some Claret wine, Gravy,
and the juice of a Lemon.

Larks roasted with Bacon.
Pull your Larks and draw them, and spit them on a small spit, with a slice of
Bacon, and a Sage-leaf between each Lark: being roasted, dish them up with a
sauce made of the juice of two or three Oranges, Claret, and a little sliced
Ginger; then set it on the fire a little while, and beat it up with a piece of
Butter, and so serve them up.

With the same sauce you may broil your Larks on a Gridiron, opening their
breasts and laying them abroad.

Plover roasted.
Take half a dozen green or gray Plovers, and roast them; being enough, have
some Onions boiled (being first sliced) in strong Broth, add thereunto Gravy,
and a little drawn Butter; or else Gravy boiled up with an Onion, a little
Nutmeg and Butter.

Partridges roasted.
Pull, draw and truss them, then roast them not too dry, sauce them with grated
Bread, Water, Salt, and a whole Onion boiled together: when it is boiled, take
out the Onion, and in its stead put in minced Lemon, and a piece of Butter;
then dish your Fowl, and serve it up with this sauce.

Partridges frigassied.
Truss your Partridges and roast them till they are three quarters enough, then
carve them up; after this fry them with an Onion chopped very small; add to
them half a pint of Gravy, three Anchovies, some grated Bread, drawn Butter,
and the yolks of two Eggs beaten with white wine, boil them till they come to a
thickness, and dish them up.

Pullets roasted.
Roast your Pullet saving the Gravy: having before stuffed the belly thereof with
a little Butter, the yolks of two hard Eggs minced, some Claret wine, the juice
of Lemon and Salt, pour your dripping out of the Pan, blowing off the fat, and
boil it up with a little Claret; then put to it some drawn Butter, and serve it
up with your Fowl.

Pigeons roasted.
Prepare them to truss, then make a farcing with Beef Suet or Marrow, mincing
it with the Liver of the Fowl very small, and mingle it with grated Bread, the
yolks of hard Eggs minced, Mace and Nutmeg beaten, the tops of Time shred very
small, and Salt, incorporate these together, with the yolks of hard Eggs and
Verjuyce; then cut the skin of the Fowl betwixt the Legs and body before it is
trussed; then put your finger to raise the skin from the flesh, but have a care
you do not break the skin; then farce it full with this meat, trussing the Legs
close to keep it in, then roast them, setting a dish under to save the Gravy,
which you must mix with some Claret wine, slieed Nutmeg, a little of that
farced Meat and Salt; then give it two or three walms on the fire, and beat it
up thick with the yolk of a raw Egg, and a piece of Butter, with a little
minced Lemon, and so serve it up.

You may for variety use this sauce, mince a handful of Parsley very small, and
wrap it up in a ball of Butter with a grated Nutmeg, put this into the belly of
your Pigeons: when you spit them, adding thereto some minced Bacon, with a few
Mints; take this farcing out when you draw them, and put it into Claret wine,
putting thereto grated Bread and drawn Butter, and you may use your Vine leaves
roasted and mince them therein.

Qails roasted.
Pull your Quails without breaking their skin, and roast them with some
Vineleaves, or dry the Vine-leaves in a dish before the fire; then mince them
very small, and put them into Claret wine, with a little Vinegar, small Pepper
and Salt; being boiled, beat it up thick with a piece of Butter, and so serve
up your Fowls.

Or you may only take some White wine, grated Nutmeg, Vine-leaves minced, and
some drawn Butter.

Rabbets roasted.
Spit them not back to back, but skuer them up side to side, so will they roast
much better; being roasted enough, take Butterand minced Parsley, being first
boiled or roasted in their bellies, and add thereto the Livers minced very
small, and so serve them up.

Snipe roasted.
You may either draw them or not, if you do, put an Onion into the belly of the
Fowls, and so roast them with a dish under them, in which must be some Claret
wine, Vinegar, an Anchovy, Pepper and Salt: when your Fowls are roasted, put
thereto a little grated Bread, some Butter, shaking them well together, and so
serve it up: This is very good sauce for a wild Duck, having first rubbed your
dish with a clove of Garlic.

If you do not draw your Fowl, then only take the guts and mince them very
small into Claret wine, with a little Salt, Gravy and Butter.

Another sauce is thus made, take some Onions and boil them, and add to them
some Pepper and Salt, with a little Butter, or raw Onions, Water, Pepper and
Salt, with the Gravy of any fresh Meat.

Turkey carbonado'd.
Your Turkey being roasted almost and carved, scotch it with your knife long
ways, crossing it over again, that it may look like Chequer-work; then wash it
over with Butter, strowing Salt thereon, then setting it in your dripping-Pan,
let it take a gentle heat, turning it twice or thrice, then set it on your
Gridiron over a soft Char-coal fire; when it is enough take it up, and sauce it
with Gravy and strong Broth boiled up with an Onion, a little grated Bread, a
sliced Nutmeg, an Anchovy, and a ladle of drawn Butter, adding thereto some
Salt; then dish up your Turkey, and pour your sauce all over it; then strew it
over with Barberries and garnish it with Oranges or Lemon.

Or you may take some sliced Manchet soaked in some strong Broth with Onions,
boil it up in Gravy, Nutmeg, Lemon cut like Dice, and drawn Butter, put this
under your Turkey.

Woodcocks roasted.
Having pulled and drawn them, wash and truss them, then lard them with a broad
piece of Bacon over the breast; being roasted, serve them on broiled tosts dipped
in Verjuyce, or the juice of Oranges with the Gravy, and warmed on the fire:
This is the French fashion.

The English way of roasting Woodcocks is thus: take them fresh and newly
killed, you may know when they are so, by opening their bill and smell to it,
or plucking a feather from the wing, and thrust it down their throat; if they
are tainted, you will know it by the smell of the feather. Having drawn, washed
and trust them, lay them to the fire, and baste them with Butter; being almost
enough, strew grated Bread on them, and be sure to save the Gravy, into which
you must put tosts that are buttered: Or, you may only mince the guts, being
roasted with the Fowl into their Gravy and a little Claret, and so serve them
up.

Or you may cut a Manchet into tosts, and put them into Gravy boiled up with an
Onion, a little strong Broth, some drawn Butter, and a little Nutmeg; pour this
o^ your tosts, and dish up your Cocks.

Fish, Flesh and Fowl of several sorts baked in Pan, or put into paste made
after several forms and fashions.
Fish baked in Pan or Pasty.
A Batilly Pie of Fish.
YOu must make a very large Coffin, and cut it with Batlements, garnish the
Coffin with as many Towers, as will contain your several sorts of Fish; be sure
to dry your Coffin well, and wash it over in the inside with the yolks of Eggs,
and flower it in the bottom to solder it, let the Fish you design for your Pie
be either broiled or fried brown; in the middle of your Pie place the head of a
Salmon, cut pretty large beyond the Gills, forced and baked in an Oven, the
heads of your other sort of Fish must stand upon forced meat; and place your
Fish severally one opposite to the other in their several partitions, pouring
over all your Fish, Oysters, Cockles, Prawns and Perriwinkles boiled up in
their proper ^airs (as has been formerly shown) and thickened up with drawn
Butter, remember to place your forced heads over the battlements.

Or you may make the like partitions upon a sheet of paste, in a dish with a
standing battlement, set round the brims; in which partitions you may dish up
all manner of shelled Fish with their distinct lairs.

Cockles and Muscles in Paste.
Having parboiled them, take out the meat and wash them very clean in the water
they were boiled in, and a little White wine; then mince them small with the
yolks of three or four new laid Eggs, season them with Salt, Nutmeg and Pepper,
wringing therein the juice of an Orange or two, then close them within tw^
sheets of paste, bake it, ice it, and ser^^ it up.

Carp Pie.
Scale your Carp and scrape off the slim^ then wipe it dry, and split it down
the back then cut it into several pieces, not ve^ small, taking away the Milt
or Spawn an^ Gall; having seasoned it with Nutme^^ Pepper, Salt and beaten
Ginger, lay so^^ Butter in the Pye-bottom, and put i^ thereon your pieces of
Carp so seasone^ and upon them three or four Bay-leave^ five or six blades of
large Mace, as man^ whole Cloves, some blanched Chesnut^ ^lices of Orange and
sweet Butter, the close it up and bake it; being baked, liquo^ it with beaten
Butter, the blood of the Carp, and some Claret wine; you man bake great
Oysters, and a couple of larg^ Onions with the Carp.

Carp baked otherways.
Scald, wash and draw a fair large Carp^ season it with Salt, Nutmeg and
Pepper, and put it into a Coffin with good store of Butter cast on some Raisins
of the Sun, the juice of two or three Oranges, and a top of all, some sweet
Butter to keep all the rest moist; before you bake it, sprinkle on some Vinegar.

Otherways.
Having first scalded your Carp, season it with Pepper, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves,
Ginger and Salt, and lay him into a Coffin fit for him; then lay on the top
thereof two or three Onions quartered, half a pint of large Oysters seasoned
with Time, then put in the yolks of half a dozen hard Eggs with Butter thereon,
then close up your Pie; when it is baked, pour in at the Funnel a lair made of
the Gravy of the Meat, drawn from it with some Claret wine, drawn Butter,
beaten up with the yolks of two Eggs; having shaked it together, dish it up:
you may bake a Carp seasoned with Raisins, Currants, Dates and Prunes; and then
let your lair be Vinegar and Butter with Sugar, and the yolks of three new laid
Eggs beaten.

Carp minced Pyes.
Cleanse your Carp and bone it, then take a good fat Eel and mince them
together; then season them with Nutmeg, Mace, Ginger, Pepper, Cinnamon and Salt,
adding thereto some Carraway seed, minced Lemon-pill, Currants, and the yolks of
five o^ six hard Eggs chopped small, with slice^ Dates and Sugar; then laying
some Butter in the bottoms of your Pyes, fill the^ with these materials, bake
them and the^ ice them.

Crab Pie.
Take half a dozen Crabs, boil them and take the meat out of the shells, the^
season it a little with Nutmeg and Salt, after this strain the meat of the body
with Claret wine, some Ginger, Cinnamon, Butter and juice of Orange; your Pie
being made, put some Butter in the bottom thereof, then lay in the Meat with
Sparagus, bottoms of Hartichokes, yolks of three hard Eggs minced, large Mace,
Grapes, Barberries, Dates, sliced Orange and Butter; when it is baked, liquor
it with some of the meat out of the body, mingled with Cream or drawn Butter.

You may compound your Crab otherways, as thus: mince it with a fresh water Eel
or Tench, and season them with Time, sweet Marjoram, and Winter-Savory, beaten
Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; add hereunto some roasted Chestnuts, bottoms of
Hartichokes, Sparagus boiled, and cut into pieces as long as your thumb, with
Pineapple seed and Grapes, fill your Pie herewith; and being baked, liquor it
with Butter, yolks of Eggs, Claret wine, and juice of Oranges beaten up thick.

Eel Pyes.
Take your silver fresh water Eels, skin and draw them, then season them with
Salt, Pepper, Nutmeg, and a blade or two of large Mace; then cut them into
pieces about four inches long, and lay them into your Pie, and cut into
quarters two or three large Onions, lay thereon some sweet Butter, large Mace,
Barberries or Goosberries; being baked, liquor your Pie with Butter, yolks of
Eggs, and juice of Orange beaten up together.

Eel minced Pyes.
Take a large silver Eel, and having skinned it, parboil it; then separate the
Fish from the bones, and mince it with Pippins, Figs, Wardens and Raisins of
the Sun, season it with Pepper, Mace, Cloves, Salt, Sugar, Saffron, Prunes,
Currants, Dates and whole Raisins of the Sun, with Butter laid on the top; make
your Pyes little in the form of a Beaker; and when baked, liquor them with
Butter, juice of Lemon, Sugar and White wine.

Eels baked the common way.
Take fresh water Eels, and cut them into pieces about the length of your
finger, season them with Pepper, Salt and Ginger, put them into a Coffin with
half a pound of sweet Butter, and add to them great Raisins of the Sun, an
Onion minced small, or Leeks cut grossly and so bake it.

Eel Pyes otherways.
Your Eels being skinned, cleans'd and cut into pieces three inches long, put to
them sweet Marjoram, Time, Winter-Savory, Onions or Leeks with Parsley minced
small, then season them with Nutmeg, Mace, Pepper, Cloves and Salt; having
coffined them, put all over them a quarter of a pound of Currants and Lemon
sliced, over these put Butter, close it, and when it is baked, lair it with
White wine and Vinegar, beaten up with the yolks of three Eggs, and some drawn
Butter; pour this in at the Funnel of the Pie, and shake it well together.

Flounder Pie.
Take Flounders, draw and wash them, then cut off their Finns and scotch them,
then mingle Pepper, Nutmeg, Salt and Mace, and season them therewith; then take
Leeks cut small, and strew over the bottom of your Pie; then put in your
Flounders, and lay on them the meat of Lobster claws and tail cut into small
pieces, the yolks of hard Eggs and Onions minced, with some Grapes or
Goosberries if you have them: Lastly, put on Butter, and close your Pie; when
baked, lair it with White wine and Parsley minced very small, with the meat of
the body of a Lobster, drawn Butter, and the yolk of a new laid Egg, shake
these together in your Pie, and serve it up hot to the Table.

Herring minced Pyes.
Take pickled Herrings, and water them well, then strip the skins from them
whole and lay them in a Tray, and put to them a pound of Almond paste; but you
must first mince your Herrings with two Lights or Rows; add also seven or eight
Dates, some grated Manchet, Sugar, Rosewater, a little Sack with Saffron, make
all these pretty stiff; then take your skins and fill them with this
composition, then lay Butter in the bottoms of your Pyes, and lay in your
Herrings with Dates, a top Goosberries, Currants and Butter, then close it, and
when baked, liquor it with Butter, Vinegar and Sugar.

Or thus you may make minced Pyes of Herrings or Pilchards; first bone, skin
and cleanse them, then mince them small with four or five Burgomy pears pared,
or any other sort of Pear that is mellow and pleasant; put to these Raisins of
the Sun, some Currants, Dates, Sugar, Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmeg, Butter and
Pepper, mingle all these together, fill your Pyes; and being baked, liquor them
with White wine Vinegar and Butter.

Haberdine or Stock Fish Pyes.
First boil it, and then take it from the skin and bones, and mince it with
some Pippins, season it with Ginger, Nutmeg, Pepper, Carraway seed, Cinnamon,
Currants, minced Raisins, Rosewater, minced Lemon-pill, Sugar, sliced Dates,
White wine, Verjuyce and Butter, fill your Pyes herewith, bake them and ice
them, and serve them up hot to the Table.

You may mince your Haberdine or Stock Fish with yolks of hard Eggs chopped
small, and all manner of sweet Herbs minced, mix them together, and season them
as aforesaid, then liquor it with Butter, Verjuyce, Sugar and beaten Cinnamon:
Lastly, ice your Pie.

Lamprey Pie.
Garbidge your Lamprey, taking out the black blood which is like a string in
the back, slit the back and pull it out, then season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and
Salt; make your Pie round, then roll your Lamprey as your Pie; lay two or three
whole Onions in your Pie, and put in good store of Butter with two or three
Bay Leaves, let it stand in the Oven three or four hours, then fill it up with
Butter, and keep it for your use.

Otherways to be eaten cold.
Take your Lamprey, and cut it open in the belly, then take out the backbone;
after this scald it, and scrape it well on the skinny side, season it on the
inside with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, and a little minced Onion, then close
it together, as if it were whole, then season the out side: have in readiness a
Coffin of Rye-dough, according to the wideness of your Lamprey, turned round
therein: put in two great Onions in the middle, with Bay Leaves and Butter, so
with your funnel, and garnishing indore it and bake it; fill it up with
clarified Butter when it is cold.

Lump Pie.
Take a Lump and skin him, then cut all the flesh from the bones into pieces
bigger than your thumb, season it with several sorts of sweet Herbs, Cloves,
Ginger, Mace, Salt and Pepper, with a handful of grated bread; your Pie being
made, throw into the bottom a handful of this seasoning, and put thereon your
pieces of Fish, on them put Marrow, Oysters, the yolks of hard Eggs cut in
halves, with sliced Lemon; lay on the top of that more seasoning, and then lay
on the remaining pieces of your fish, and on the top of them strew on the rest
of your seasoning; put a top of all good store of Butter, then close it up and
bake it: when it is baked, lair it with White wine, Oyster liquor, drawn
Butter, and the yolks of two or three Eggs, shake it well and serve it up.

Lump baked otherways.
Take a Lump and fley it, and split it in two, then season it with Nutmeg,
Pepper and Salt, and lay it into a Coffin, and on it lay some Bay Leaves, large
Mace, an Orange sliced, Goosberries, Grapes, Barberries and Butter, close it
up; and when it is baked, liquor it with drawn Butter; you may bake it thus, in
a dish or Pastypan.

Ling Pie made of a Jole of Ling.
Take a Jole of Ling, and boil it till it be almost enough; then take off the
skin, and season it with Pepper: having made your Pie, strew the bottom thereof
with Onions minced very small, close it, and bake it; then take the yolks and
whites of ten Eggs, and boil them between hard and soft; then mince them small,
and put them into drawn Butter, toss them together; then draw your Pie, cut
open the lid, and pour this liquor all over it, then put on your lid and serve
it up.

Another excellent way.
Let your Lump be skinned, cleansed and seasoned as aforesaid, and so put it
into your Pie, then lay on sliced Ginger, large Mace, close it up, and put a
Funnel thereon; put it into an Oven, and let it stand till it be half baked,
then draw it up with good sweet Sallet Oil, then put it in again: when it is
baked enough, draw it and cut it up, then beat three spoonsuls of Mustard, with
some of the Oil, and pour it therein, shake it well together, and serve it up.

Lobster Pyes.
Boil your Lobsters, then take the meat out of the shells, and let it stand
till it be cold, then lard it with salt Salmon, or a salt Eel, and season it
with Salt, Pepper and Nutmeg: having made your Pie, lay in the bottom thereof
some sweet Butter, and on it some pieces of fresh Eel, or fresh Salmon, and on
it a lair of Lobster, add to it some whole Cloves; and make thus three or four
lairs: lay last of all some slices of fresh Eel or fresh Salmon, and some whole
Cloves and Butter, then close it up, and when baked, fill it up with clarified
Butter.

Or you may take the meat of a Lobster, prepared as aforesaid, and season it
with Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Salt and Pepper, with a little Ginger; then lay it in a
Pie made somewhat in the form of a very large Lobster, and lay on it some Dates
cut in two, sliced Lemon, large Mace, Barberries, yolks of hard Eggs chopped, and
a pretty quantity of Butter, close it up, and when baked, liquor it with White
wine Vinegar, Butter and Sugar, and having iced it, dish it up.

Mullet Pie.
Gut your Mullet, scale it and wash it, then dry it very well: having so done,
lard it with a salt Eel, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, Mace, Salt, and a
little Ginger very lightly; then stuff its belly with a pudding made of grated
Bread, sweet Herbs, and some fresh Eel minced, add to these the yolks of hard
Eggs, an Anchovy washed and minced very small, some Nutmeg, and a little Salt;
then lay it in your Pie: then lay on your Fish, Cockles, Prawns, Capers, yolks
of hard Eggs minced small, Butter, large Mace and Barberries, close it up; and
when it is baked, cut open the lid, stick it full of Lozenges, then fill it up
with beaten Butter, laying on some slices of Lemon.

In the same manner you may bake Bace, Tench or Bream.

Muscle Pie.
Take a good quantity of Muscles, wash them very clean, and then set them a
boiling, making the water to boil before you put them in; being enough, take
them out of the shells, beard them very well, and cleanse them from stones and
gravel: then take Leeks and some sweet Herbs, and mix them therewith, and chop
them very small, adding thereunto some Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, with the yolks
of four hard Eggs minced small, put Butter at the bottom and top of your Pie,
and close it up: being baked, liquor it with Butter, White wine, and slices of
Lemon.

Oyster Pyes.
Save the liquor of your largest Oysters, season it with Pepper and Ginger, and
put your Oysters therein with two or three blades of large Mace; then lay the
Oysters with those ingredients into a Pie; add to them an Onion minced small,
some Currants, and a quarter of a pound of Butter; when it is baked, cut open
the lid, and put in a spoonful of Vinegar, with some drawn Butter, shake it
well together, and serve it up.

Oysters baked with other compounds.
Take Oysters, Cockles, Shrimps and Craw-fish, and season them with Salt,
Nutmeg and Pepper; after you have well washed and cleans'd them from any kind
of filth or gravel, then have in readiness Chestnuts roasted and blanched,
Skirrrets boiled, blanched and seasoned; then have a Dish or Pasty-pan ready
with a sheet of cool Butter paste, having laid some Butter in the bottom, lay
on your several sorts of Shellfish, and on them your Chestnuts, Skirrets with
sliced Lemon, large Mace, Barberries and Butter, close it, and when it is
baked, fill it up (having cut open the lid) with Butter and juice of Oranges
beaten up thick: you must make the Paste after this manner, for every half peck
of Flower you must allow two pound and a quarter of Butter, and the whites of
two Eggs, work it well together dry, then put cold Water to it, and your Paste
is made, this is only fit for Pasties and Pasty-pans.

Oyster Pyes otherways.
Take very large Oysters and (...) form them, season them with beaten Pepper,
Salt, Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg; add to these some grated Bread, and withal take
a good handful of Time, Parsley, Winter-Savory, a couple of Onions, and mince
them very small; put all these materials into your Pie with Potato's boiled,
and Chestnuts boiled and blanched, with the yolks of hard Eggs cut in halves:
lay over all Marrow, sliced Lemon, large Mace, Butter, and so close your Pie,
which must be made thin, since half an hour is sufficient to bake your
ingredients therein contained; when it is baked, pour into it a lair made of
White wine, Oyster liquor, two yolks of Eggs, and drawn Butter, shake it well
together, and letting it stand a little while in the Oven, serve it up.

Another very good way.
Parboil two quarts of large Oysters in their own liquor, throw a little Salt
on them, and mingle them with some sweet Herbs minced small; fill your Pie, and
put therein some large Mace, sliced Le^^on, a good handful of Marrow rolled in
^^^^ks of Eggs and Butter; when it is ba^^^^ ^ke Verjuyce, Sugar, Butter, a
little Pepper, and two Nutmegs grated, and liquor it therewith.

Oyster minced Pyes.
Take a pottle of large Oysters, parboiled in their own liquor, beard them, and
wash them in warm water from filth and gravel: having dried them, mince them
small, then season them lightly with Cinnamon, Mace, Cloves, Salt, Pepper,
Nutmeg, Carrawayseed, a few Raisins of the Sun minced small, sliced Dates,
Currants, Sugar, and half a pint of Claret, mingle these very well together; and
having made your Pyes about the bigness and form of a Tumbler, putting Butter
in the bottoms of the Pyes, fill them up herewith and bake them.

Pike baked.
Draw your Pike and wash him well; then lard him with pickle Herring; then take
a handful of sweet Herbs, another of Oysters, an Onion, and a little Lemonpill,
mince them all together, add to them Nutmeg, Salt, Pepper, Mace and Cloves:
then wash your Pike all over with the yolks of Eggs, both inside and outside,
and with the aforesaid ingredients season him; have a Pie in readiness made
into the form of a Pike, and lay him therein with Horseradish scraped, and with
two handfuls of Grapes all over him; having laid on a good piece of Butter,
close and bake your Pie, then draw it and liquor it with Butter, White wine
Vinegar, and the yolk of an Egg; you may add to your lair Oysters, Cockles,
Shrimps, Prawns and Craw-fish, with the yolks of hard Eggs, Lemon, Anchovies
and Gravy.

Pike baked to be eaten cold.
Take a large Pike, scale him and cleanse him, then lard him with salt Eel,
then make a forced meat of Fish, and stuff his belly therewith; then season him
with Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Ginger and Nutmeg beaten; then lay him into a Cossin
of like form, and bake him, draw your Pie, and pour in at the Funnel, Butter,
White wine, and the juice of Lemon, set it by, and eat it when cold.

Prawn or Shrimp Peteets.
Make your Coffins very little, as to the form let them be round, triangle, or
four square, or you may make them long to stand up an end; then take your
Shellfish and fry them in yolks of Eggs, Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmeg, Cloves and
Mace beaten together; when they are crisp and brown, fill your dried Coffins
with the Fish, put into a lair, made of drawn Butter, Claret wine and Oyster
liquor, beaten up with the yolks of Eggs; they will instantly be baked.

Salmon Pie.
Take a Salmon newly caught, scale, draw and wipe it dry, scrape the blood from
the backbone, scotch it on the backside, and season it with Cinnamon, Nutmeg,
Pepper, Salt, Carraways, and a little large Mace, and some Ginger; let the Pie
be made in the form of a Salmon, and lay in the bottom thereof some Butter,
then lay in your Salmon, and put some whole Cloves thereon, some sliced Nutmeg,
and good store of Butter, close it up, and baste it over with the yolks of Eggs
or Water wherein Saffrom has been steeped; when it is baked, fill it up with
clarified Butter.

Or thus:
Take the tail of a Salmon, and cut it into collops quite through both sides,
then butter your collops over and salt them, then half broil them; have a
coffin in readiness that is dried in an Oven, and wash the bottom with the
yolks of Eggs: then take a handful of sweet Herbs, the like of Oysters, a
little Fennel, and an Onion all minced small, take a handful of all these
together, and strew over the bottom of your Pie, being first seasoned with
Salt, Nutmeg, Cloves, Ginger and Pepper; then lay in your greatest pieces,
strowing them over with the afore-recited seasoning, interlaying large seasoned
Oysters with sliced Lemons, next lay on your smaller collops and serve them as
the former; lay over all good store of Butter: being baked, pour in a lair
which you must have in readiness made of White wine, Oyster liquor, and the
yolks of two Eggs beater together, shake it well together and serve it up.

Salmon minced Pyes.
Take a Jole of Salmon, and a good silver Eel boned, skinned and seasoned with
Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, beaten Ginger, Carraway-seed, Rosewater, Butter,
Verjuyce, Sugar and Orange-pill minced small; mingle all these together with
some sliced Dates and Currants; before you fill your Pies, put Butter in the
bottom, then bake them and ice them.

Salmon baked to be eaten cold.
Scrape the scales off your Salmon, then wash and dry him; after this chine him
and season him with good store of Salt, Pepper, Ginger, Mace and Cloves; then
lay him on a sheet of Pasty-paste, bordering him round to form your Pie into
the fashion of a Salmon; then put in sliced Ginger, Butter and large Mace on
the top, then turn up the other half sheet of your Paste on the back, closing
them on the belly side from head to tail, bringing him into proportion with his
finns, tail, head and gills: Lastly, scale him, leave a funnel to pour in
Butter, when it is baked, and fet him aside to cool.

Sturgeon Pyes to be eaten hot.
Take a Rand of Sturgeon, and cut it into collops about the bigness of a
Goose-Egg, then season them with Salt, Nutmeg, Ginger and Pepper: your Pie
being made, put into the bottom some Butter, then your collops of Sturgeon with
two or three Bay Leaves, some large Mace, whole Cloves, blanched Chestnuts,
Goosberries or Barberries, and some Butter; being baked, pour in a lair made of
Butter, the blood of the Sturgeon and Claret wine boiled up and beaten together.

Sturgeon Pyes to be eaten cold.
Take a Rand of Sturgeon, skin it, and wipe it dry, then cut it into large
slices; then take a Carp or a good large Eel skinned and boned, then season them
with Salt, Nutmeg and Pepper; then let a Coffin be ready, and lay therein first
Butter, then Sturgeon, then a lay of Eel, and next to that a lay of Tench, cut
into slices and seasoned as the former Fish; then begin with the first lay, and
second it with the rest, till you have laid all your Fish into the Pie; but be
sure to have your Sturgeon lie uppermost, and a top of all lay on sliced
Nutmeg, sliced Ginger, some whole Cloves next; be not sparing of Butter, then
close it up, and when it is baked, liquor it with clarified Butter: if you bake
it in Pots, with the seasoning before specified, you may keep it a long time.

Sturgeon minced Pyes.
Take a Rand of Sturgeon, and mince it very small, adding thereto some of the
fattest part of it; then take some Time, Marjoram, Winter-Savory, Sage,
Parsley, Sorrel, Straw-berry-leaves, Violet-leaves, and Spinach, chop these all
very small, and mingle them with your minced Sturgeon, add thereunto some
grated white Bread, Salt, Nutmeg, Currants, Cinnamon, yolks of Eggs, Cream, Sugar
and Butter, fill up your Pie herewith, and close it; being baked, draw it and
ice it.

Sturgeon Lumber Pie.
Take some of the brawny part of the Sturgeon, with some of the fat of the
belly, and chop them small; add hereunto either Carp, Tench, or fresh water Eel
minced small, then season it with Carraway-seed, Ginger, Cinnamon, Salt, Nutmeg
and Pepper; put to these the yolks of six raw Eggs, and the quarters of four
that are boiled hard, incorporate these together, and make them up into balls,
and fill your Pie therewith, and lay a top some sliced Dates, large Mace,
sliced Lemon, Grapes, Goosberries or Barberries, and Butter, close it up, and
being baked, liquor it with Butter, White wine and Sugar.

Stock Fish baked.
Take your Stock Fish, and water it, then boil it tender, then lay it to cool,
and after that take some of the whitest of the Fish and mince it small, add
thereunto parboiled Currants, Raisins of the Sun, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper,
Salt, and a piece of sweet Butter, then bake it, draw it, and cut open the lid,
and squeeze in the juice of two Oranges.

Tench baked with a pudding in his belly.
Scald your Tench, and scour it well; being washed clean, dry it: then take
grated white Bread, sweet Cream, the yolks of three new laid Eggs, some
parboiled Currants, and some sweet Herbs minced small: Lastly, season it with
Pepper and Nutmeg, and make it into a stiff pudding, and therewith fill your
Tenches belly: season your Fish on the one side, with a little Pepper, Salt and
Nutmeg; and put him into a deep Coffin with some Butter; then close it, and
when baked draw it, and cut it open, then strew thereon some preserved Orange
minced: after this take Vinegar, Butter, Nutmeg, Sugar, and the yolk of a new
laid Egg, and boil them up over a chafing dish of coals, stirring it
continually to keep it from curdling, then pour it into your Pie, and shaking
it well together serve it up.

Turbut baked.
Draw and wash your Turbut very clean, and cut off the finns, then scotch him
on both sides, and season him with Time, sweet Marjoram, Winter-Savory, and
other sweet Herbs with Salt, Pepper, Nutmeg, Cloves and Mace: this seasoning
must be for the under side only; for the upper side take only Pepper, Cloves,
Mace and Salt, rubbing it well into the scotches: having made your Pie into the
shape or form of your Fish, dry it a little in an Oven, taking it out, wash it
in the bottom with the yolks of Eggs, and strew thereon some minced Onions, and
four or five Anchovies washed clean: then lay in your Turbut with the backside
downward; lay about the sides of your Fish some forced fish-balls; with the
Liver of your Turbut on the top, also a pint of large Oysters, and the yolks of
eight hard Eggs chopped, with a pound of Butter: then put him into the Oven,
and as be bakes, put into your Pie Butter, supplying it continually, for it
will require a great deal: When baked, draw it, and fill it up with a lair made
of White wine Vinegar, Oyster liquor, and the yolks of half a dozen Eggs beaten
up together; shaking it together, let it stand a little while longer in the
Oven; then draw it, and cut it open, garnishing it with fried Oysters, sticking
it all over with toasts made of white Bread, and run it over with drawn Butter,
thus serve it up.

Flesh of all sorts (excepting Fowl) baked in Pan or Pastry.
Battalia or Bisk-Pyes to be made according to each season of the whole year
throughout.
HAving formed your Paste into the fashion of a Castle, your ingredients to
fill it must be several, viz. young Rabbits, Lambstones, sweet-breads, Pallates
sliced, forced meat balls with Chickens, Peepers and Squobs, season all these
with Salt, Pepper, Nutmeg, Cloves and Mace beaten small, with minced Time, also
some Sausages and Oysters, if in season: If it be in May that you make this
Pie, you may then take the meat of a Lobster: Having all your ingredients ready
by you, and fitted for your Pie, lay first your Rabbets cut in pieces into the
Coffin with slices of Bacon; your Pigeons and Chicken being split, lay one half
of a Chicken on each quarter of your Rabbet, then half a Lambstone, next half a
Chicken, then a sweet Bread, and lastly your forced meats; over all strew on
your Pallates, with Oysters, the Marrow of three bones dipped in the yolks of
Eggs, two handfuls of blanched Chestnuts, with some Pine-Apples, laying Butter
over all, close up your Pie; being baked, lair it with White wine, with five
Anchovies dissolved therein, beat these up with the yolks of Eggs, strong
Broth, and drawn Butter.

Instead of Oysters, Chestnuts, etc. in the Summer time you may make use of
Hartichokes, Cabbidge, Lettuce, Colliflowers or Sparagrass. In the Winter time,
instead of your Chickens and Pigeons, you may use the smaller sort of
Wild-fowl; and so use continually what every season produces.

Another very good way.
Having made your Pie by taking three quarts of Flower, and three quarters of a
pound of Butter, boiling the Butter in Water, and so making up the Paste ho^
and quick, I say, then take four Oxe-pallates, boiled, blanched, and chopped into
pieces, as many Lambstones, and half a dozen Veal sweet Breads, parboiled and
quartered, a dozen and a half of Coxcombs boiled and blanched, half a dozen
Pigeon peepers, and as many Chickens; having filled them for the Pie, place
them therein orderly, that is, somewhat of every ingredient laid one upon the
other, and all upon the Chickens and Pigeons; then over all strew the yolks of
hard Eggs, minced with good store of Butter, close it up, and let it stand an
hour and half in the Oven, then draw it and liquor it with Gravy, sliced Lemon,
and Butter beaten up thick.

Brawn baked to be eaten cold.
Take your raw lean Brawn, and the like quantity of fat Bacon, mince them
small, and beat them in a Mortar, pounding therewith a handful of Sage; then
season them with Pepper and Salt, and good store of Ginger, adding thereto the
yolks of Eggs and Vinegar, then put your Brawn into a cold Paste, and lay
thereon Butter and Bay Leaves; let the form of your Pie be round or like a
Brawn.

Beef either Buttock, Brisket, Fillet or Surloyn larded, or not, baked Red Deer
fashion.
Bone your Beef, and lard the leanest parts, or not, then season it with
Nutmeg, Pepper and Ginger of each five ounces, and a pound of Salt; then lay in
your Pie good store of Butter, and upon that put your Beef, and on that half an
ounce of beaten Cloves, the rest of the seasoning with a good quantity of
Butter, and three or four Bay Leaves; being baked, fill it up with clarified
Butter, and set it by.

You may serve it up hot, but then there must not be above half the seasoning;
either hot or cold you will hardly distinguish it from Venison.

Beef minced Pyes.
Mince part of a Buttock of Beef very small, with half as much Beef Suet,
season it with Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg and Salt, add to these half as much
Fruit as there is Meat and Suet, viz. Raisins of the Sun, Prunes and Currants,
and herewith fill your Pyes, strew on the the top some minced Lemon-pill and
sliced Dates.

Beef how to Collar.
Take a fine fat Flank of Beef, and lay it three days and as many nights in
Pump Water; shift it thrice in four and twenty hours, then take it out and dry
it, taking out the bones and grosser fat, then cut it into three lairs; take a
good quantity of Salt and Sage chopped, and mingle them together: strew these
between every lair, and lay one upon the other; then take Cloves and Mace of
each an ounce, and beat them small, with an ounce of Nutmegs, strowing them
also between the lairs of Beef: having roul'd it up very close, take packthread
and tie it very hard, then put it into a long tin Pan, or earthen Pot made for
that purpose; let the top of the Pot or Pan be tied round with Cap-paper, set
it into the Oven, it will require nine hours baking.

If you will have it look very red, for that is its proper color, powder it in
Salt Petre four or five days, then wash it off, then roll it up with the
seasoning aforesaid.

Calves head Pie or Pasty.
Boil a Calves head till it is almost enough, having first cleaned and cleans'd
it, then take it up, and take the bones from the Flesh with as little breaking
it as you may; when it is cold, force or stuff it with Time, sweet Majoram,
Penniroyal and Winter-Savory, with the yolks of hard Eggs, raw Veal, and
Beef Suet minced very small; then season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt; your
Pie being ready, lay the Head therein, underlaying it with some raw Veal, then
cover the Head with good store of Spices, so close it up; when it is baked,
fill it up with clarified Butter: Thus you must do, if you intend to eat it
cold, if otherways season the Head with the aforesaid Spices but lightly, and
put some Butter a top with Grapes or Goosberries; when baked, liquor it with
Gravy, juice of Oranges, and Butter beaten up pretty thick.

Calves head Pie made otherways.
Having cleft the head, and washed the cheeks very clean, boil it till it is
almost enough, then take it up, and when cold, cut the flesh from the bones
into pieces as big as a shilling; then mince sweet Herbs, and put them to your
meat, with Nutmeg, Pepper, Cloves, Mace and Salt, let some slices of Bacon and
Oysters be seasoned with the same; your Pie being ready, put in your meat, with
the Bacon, Oysters, and two or three Sage-leaves on the top; then put on slices
of Lemon, a handful of Barberries, and a good piece of Butter, so close your
Pie; when it is baked, cut up the lid, and liquor it with Gravy, Claret, the
yolks of Eggs and drawn Butter.

Calves feet Pie.
Take two pair and a half of Calves feet, boil them tender, and blanch them,
then bone them, and mince them very small, season them with Pepper, Salt,
Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Ginger, add to them a pound of Currants, a quarter of a
pound of Dates sliced, and the like quantity of Sugar with a little Rosewater,
Verjuyce, and stir all these together in a Tray; then lay some Butter in a Pie,
and put in one half of the aforenamed materials, then lay on the Marrow of two
bones, laying on the other half of the meat on the Marrow, sticking some Dates
a top, then put it into an Oven; and when it is half baked, liquor it with
Butter, White wine, and ice it, then set it into the Oven again till it be
baked enough.

Calves Chaldron baked.
Parboil it first, and when it is cool, cut it into small pieces, and season it
with Salt, Nutmeg and Pepper, add to it some sweet Herbs minced small, then
sprinkle it with Verjuyce, and close your Pie; when it is baked lair it with
Butter, Vinegar, Nutmeg, Sugar, and the yolks of three new laid Eggs, two
spoonfuls of Sack, and the juice of an Orange.

Calves Chaldron minced Pyes.
Your Chaldron being minced small, after it is tender boiled and cold, put to
it some small pieces of lard, some yolks of hard Eggs chopped grossly; add
thereunto some Mutton and Lamb cut into small gobbets with Goosberries, Grapes
or Barberries, then season it with Salt, Nutmeg and Pepper, and fill your Pie
therewith, laying on it some pieces of interlarded Bacon and Butter, close it
up, and when baked, liquor it with Butter and White wine.

Convey Livers baked.
Take half a dozen or more, first parboil them, then chop them small with sweet
Herbs, as Time, Winter-Savory, Penniroyal, etc. and the yolks of two hard Eggs,
feason them with Ginger, Nutmeg, Pepper and Cinnamon, add to them some parboiled
Currants and Butter, then make some little Pasties, and fill them therewith,
then bake them, and serve them up with scraped Sugar.

Fawn or young Roe.
First bone him, then lard him with Bacon, then season him with Pepper, Salt,
Cloves, Nutmeg and Mace; make your Pie in the form of a Roe, and close it up on
the back, or you may make it after what fashion you please: when it is baked,
lair it with Claret wine, grated Bread, beaten Cinnamon, Vinegar and Sugar
boiled up together, put in also a ladleful of drawn Butter, and so serve it up.

Fawn baked to be eaten cold.
Bone it as before, then parboil and lard it very thick, after this season it
with a little fine Pepper, Nutmeg, Cloves and Mace, and as much Cloves as you
shall judge sufficient; then fill the belly with some Savory, forced Meats, and
put it into a Coffin proportioned to its own form, then lay thereon good store
of Butter, and close it up, when it is baked and cold, fill it up at the funnel
with clarified Butter.

Goat Pasty.
Take the hind quarter of a fat Goat, bone it, and skin it, then cut it into a
befitting shape for your Pasty; having beaten it well with a Rolling-pin,
season it with Pepper, Salt, minced Time and Nutmeg; then set it a soaking in
this seasoning all night with Claret, then put it into its Coffin and bake it,
strowing on the top some minced Beef Suet.

Whilst it is baking, break the bones you took out of the Flesh of the Goat,
and put them into a Pipkin with a pint of Claret, and a little strong Broth;
then cover your Pipkin with a sheet of course paste, and bake them also: your
Pasty being baked enough, fill it with the liquor out of the Pipkin, serve it
up, and a very critical Palate will not be able to discern the difference
between that and Venison.

Gammon of Bacon Pie.
Take a Westphalia Ham, and boil it very tender, then take off the skin and
season it with Pepper, and some minced Sage, stick it with Lemon-pill in the
upper side; then make your Pie something high of buttered Paste, and put your
Gammon in the middle thereof; then take half a dozen of Pigeons, and as many
Lambstones, with so many sweet-Breads, season them with Pepper, Cloves, Mace
and Cinnamon with a little Salt, lay the Pigeons round about the Gammon, and the
Lambstones and sweet-Breads on the top thereof; lay over it large Mace, a few
sweet Herbs minced, and put on Butter all over, then close it up, and let it
have a gentle soaking; being baked, lair it with Claret wine hoiled up with two
or three Onions, a faggot of sweet Herbs, with a handful of Sage minced, and
boiled therein, a little strong Broth and drawn Butter, thickened up with the
yolk of an Egg, and serve it up.

Hot compounded baked meat.
Take a Leg of Lamb, and divide it into parts, with the one you must make some
forced Meats, and the other slice into thin slices, then take four Chickens,
four Pigeons, six Quails, six Larks, some Black-birds or Thrushes with other
small Birds, and quarter them, season them severally with beaten Pepper,
Cloves, Mace, Salt and Nutmeg, mince also a handful of sweet Herbs and Parsley,
with Beef Suet, and a handful of Currants, adding thereto some grated Bread; lay
your Meat abroad, and spread these ingredients on them, then roll them up into
little Collers; let your Pie be shaped round or Battalia like; let your Lamb
lie in the bottom, your Pigeons and Chickens next, and lastly your Larks and
other small Fowl, over these spread bottoms of boiled Hartichokes, Sparagrass
and Grapes, if in the Summer time otherwise, Chestnuts, Dates, Skirrets and
Potatoes; you may also put some Lambstones, Marrow, sweet-Breads, and the yolks
of two or three hard Eggs, putting Butter on your Pie, close it up; being
baked, lair it with Anchovies dissolved in Claret, a little strong Broth and
Gravy, with a grated Nutmeg, and a little drawn Butten beaten up with the yolks
of two Eggs. This some call a Bastard Biss Pie.

Hare Pie.
Take a Hare, uncase him, then bone and lard him with great Lard, then take two
ounces of Pepper, as much of Nutmegs, and eight ounces of Salt, mix these
together, and season your Hare herewith; then make your Pie in what form you
please of bolted course Rye and Meal, put Butter in the bottom, and lay in your
Hare, laying upon it some whole Cloves, a sheet of Lard, and a good quantity of
Butter, then baste it over with Saffron water and bake it, then draw it, and
liquor it with clarified Butter: you may make your Pie of white Paste, if you
intend to eat it hot.

Otherways.
Make your Pie of a Gallon of Flower, then take two Hares and season them
lightly without, with Salt, Nutmeg and Pepper, then take half an ounce of
Nutmegs, the like of Pepper, a little Salt, Capers, Raisins, Pears in quarters,
Prunes, with Grapes, Lemon or Goosberries, and fill the belly herewith; being
baked, liquor it with Verjuyce and Sugar, with some large Mace, you may use
White wine or Claret in the stead of Verjuyce.

Hare minced Pyes.
Take a Hare and bone him, then mince him small with Beef Suet, and a pound and
half of Raisins minced, some Currants, Cloves, Mace, Salt and Cinnamon, mingle
these together, and fill your several Pyes therewith; when baked, liquor them
with Sack or White wine and Sugar.

Hares baked a-la-mode de France.
Take two Hares and parboil them, then take the flesh from the bones and mince
it small, put it into a Mortar, and beat it into a lump, season it and souce it
in Wine and Vinegar; lap all this pulp about the Chine of one Hare, so it will
seem but one; having larded it very well, put it into a Coffin with good store
of Butter; being baked, liquor it with melted Butter, Nutmeg, Ginger and Sugar.

Hares baked to be eaten cold.
Your Hare being parboiled, and the flesh taken from the bones, mingle it with
some Westphalia Ham boiled very tender; mince these well together, and beat
them in a Mortar, then season them with sweet Herbs, Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace
and Nutmeg, with a little Vinegar, and the yolks of four Eggs, then beat them
again, till you have reduced them into a pulpy substance: having your Pie made
in some proportion like a Hare, lay in some of the Meat, wash it with the volks
of Eggs, and squeeze it down, then lay a laying of Bacon, cut indifferently
small, and wash that likewise, and so do over every lay till all your meat be
in the Pie; the last lay must be the Bacon with Butter a top, then close it,
setting the Ears and Head in their proper places, with a Funnel in the middle,
and when it is baked, fill it with clarified Butter, and when you carve it
begin at the Tail.

Lumber Pie.
Cut your Beef Suet into square pieces, and mingle them with Pepper, grated
Bread, Cloves, Mace, some bits of Veal, sweet Herbs, Salt, Sugar, the yolks of
four Eggs quartered, with Barberries, and a little Cream; work all these
together, and put it into the Cauls of Veal like Sausages, then bake them
almost in a Dish; and having a Pie made ready, draw them and lay them therein
with Butter, Verjuyce, Sugar, Dates, large Mace, Grapes or Barberries and
Marrow; being baked scrape Sugar thereon.

Another very good way.
Take two pound of Beef Suet, one pound of the flesh of Capon boiled, and
another of a Leg of Veal parboiled; mince these small, and add to them some
sweet Herbs, and a good handful of Spinach, with minced Pippins, two or three
handfuls of grated Bread, a little Rosewater, the yolks of four Eggs, a pound
of Currants; lastly, season it with Salt, Nutmeg, Pepper, Ginger, Cloves and
Mace; lay all these materials into the Pie, and lay a top thereof the Marrow of
four Marrow-bones, seasoned with Cinnamon, grated Nutmeg, and the juice of an
Orange, with the yolks of Eggs; above all lay sliced Orangado, dried Citron,
Ringo roots, candyed Ginger, preserved Barberries, Dates, Sugar and Butter, and
close it up; when it is baked, liquor it with Verjuyce and Sugar, beaten
together with the yolks of three Eggs, and serve it up.

Lamb Pie.
Cut your Lamb into Steaks, Kidney, and all the fat with it, season it with
Salt, Nutmeg, Pepper and Mace; your Pie being made, lay in these ingredients,
with a pound of Currants and Prunes, lay Butter at top, and let it soak in the
Oven three hours and a half; when it is baked, liquor it with a pint of White
wine, six yolks of Eggs, Sugar, and a quarter of a pound of Butter, beat these
up over the fire in a Pipkin till they boil, then cut open the lid, and pour
this into it, shaking it well together.

Lamb Pasty.
Having bon'd your Lamb, cut it four square, then season it with Salt, beaten
Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, and minced Time, lay in some Beef Suet, and your
Lamb thereupon, making a high border about it; then turning over your sheet,
close and bake your Pasty; when it is enough, liquor it with Claret, Sugar,
Vinegar, and the yolks of Eggs beaten up together; if you would have your sauce
only savory and not sweet, let it be Gravy only, or the baking of bones in
Claret wine.

Leg of Pork Pie.
Skin and bone your Pork, beat it well, and lay it in Claret wine; then season
it with Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, Pepper and Salt; then make your Pie
Venison like, and lay the Pork therein, close it and set it into the Oven, it
will require above eight hours baking; before you set it in, wash it over with
yolks of Eggs or Saffron Water.

Marrow Pyes.
Take Veal, mince it with Beef Suet, and season it with Pepper, Nutmeg and
Salt, add to them boiled Sparagrass cut the length of your thumb, yolks of hard
Eggs quartered, sweet-Breads of Veal cut small, Potatoes or Hartichokes cut in
like manner, some interlarded Bacon and Chestnuts, mingle all these with your
Marrow, fill your Pyes and bake them, liquor them with beaten Butter.

Or you may make them of bottoms of Hartichokes, Suckers, yolks of hard Eggs,
Chestnuts boiled, and blanched Marrow, interlarded Bacon cut square, Veal
sweet-Breads, Lambstones, Potatoes, Skirrets and Sparagus.

Mutton minced Pyes.
Take the half of a Leg of Mutton, and two pound of Beef Suet, mince these very
small; then add to these a pound of Currants, the like of Raisins of the Sun,
one pound of Prunes, half an ounce of Carraway seed, and half an ounce of
Nutmegs, three ounces of Salt, Pepper and Mace of each half an ounce, mingle
these well together, and fill your Pyes herewith.

Minced Pyes of Beef.
Take four pound of Beef, and the like quantity of Suet, with four ounces of
Salt, Nutmeg, Pepper, Cloves and Mace of each one ounce, Currants and Raisins of
the Sun of each two pound; your Meat and Suet being chopped very small; mingle
all these together and fill your Pyes.

Minced Pyes of Veal.
Take a Leg of Veal, and having parboiled it, mince it, when cold, with
Beefsuet, then season it with Pepper, Salt and Goosberries, mix it with
Verjuyce, Currants, Sugar, and a little beaten Saffron, you may shape them as
you please, no Pyes having more variety of forms than these.

Mare-maid Pie, alias Pig-pie.
Take a sucking Pig, skin it, bone it and quarter it, then have a fresh water
fat Eel, fley'd, split, boned, and seasoned with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg; then
make your Pie round, and lay therein the several quarters of your Pig with your
Eel, equally distributed among them all, lay over all some whole Cloves, slices
of Bacon and Butter, close it up, bake it in fine Paste; being enough, draw it,
and fill it up with sweet Butter.

Neats tongue baked.
Boil your Neats Tongue very tender, then season it with Nutmeg, Mace and a
little Salt; after this make a Pie in the resemblance of the Tongue, and lay it
therein, with five or six blades of Mace upon it, three or four Dates
quartered, a little Orange sliced, with the core of a Lemon, half a pound of
Butter, some Sugar, and so close it up; let it stand an hour and a half in the
Oven, then draw it, liquor it with Sack, and the juice of a Lemon, a little
Sugar, the yolks of two Eggs, and a little sweet Butter; these must be set over
the fire, and carefully stirred before you pour them in.

Neats Tongue Pie otherways.
Being boiled tender, blanched and cold, mince small some of the Meat, which
you must cut out of the butt-end, with some Beef Suet, season it with Pepper,
beaten Ginger and Salt, Currants, grated Bread, two or three yolks of Eggs,
Raisins and Orange minced small, with some minced sweet Herbs, fill your Tongue
herewith, then wrap it in a Caul of Veal, laying some thin slices of Veal under
the Tongue, with some slices of interlarded Bacon, place on the top of all some
Marrow, large Mace, Barberries and Butter; when it is baked, liquor it with
White wine, Butter and Sugar.

Neats Tongue minced Pyes.
Your Tongue being boiled tender, when it is cold blanch it and mince it very
small with three pound of Beef Suet, then let your seasoning be an ounce of
Cloves and Mace beaten, a little Salt, a preserved Orange, and a little
Lemon-pill minced, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, three pound of Currants, a
little Rosewater, some Sack; mingle these all together, and fill your Pyes.

Neats Tongue baked in a dish.
Having boiled it tender, blanch it; then take the flesh out of the butt-end,
and mince it very small with Marrow and Beef Suet, season it with Nutmeg,
Pepper, Salt, parboiled Currants, and a Date cut in pieces; add to these the
yolks of two new laid Eggs, and a spoonful of sweet Cream, then work these
together with the powder of a dried Orange-pill, sprinkle some Verjuyce over
it, and cast on some Sugar: Stuff your Tongue herewith, and bake it in a Dish,
baste it with sweet Butter to keep it from drying; being enough, sauce it with
Vinegar, Butter, Nutmeg, Sugar, and the juice of an Orange.

Olive Pie.
Take Veal or Mutton, and cut it into thin slices, hack them with the back of
your knife, and spread them abroad, then take Strawberry-leaves, Sorrel,
Violetleaves, Endive, Sage, Parsley, Spinach, Savory, Marjoram, and a little
Time; mince these small with the yolks of hard Eggs; add to them half a pound
of Currants, Nutmeg, Pepper, Cinnamon, Sugar and Salt, some minced Raisins,
Goosberries and Dates minced small, mingle these together, and strew them on
your slices of Mutton or Veal, then roll them up, and put them into a Pie; lay
on the top of them some Dates, Marrow, large Mace and Butter, close it up; when
baked, liquor it with Verjuyce, Sugar and Butter, and so serve it up.

Oxe-cheek Pie.
Let your Oxe-check be young, and boil it tender; when it is cold cut it out
into slices; then add thereto Time, sweet Marjoram, Savory and Spinach with an
Onion, season your flesh with Pepper, Nutmeg, Mace, Cloves and Salt, put it
into your Pie with some seasoned and sliced Pallates; then put in two whole
Onions with some Butter, and close it up; when it is baked, liquor it with
Claret wine, the yolks of Eggs, Vinegar and Sugar beaten all together.

Oxe-cheek Pie otherways.
Having boiled it tender, bone it, and season it with Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt;
having made your Pie, put into the bottom thereof some Beef Suet minced
indifferently small; then lay on the Cheeks, and over them a pudding made of
minced raw Veal, Currants, grated Bread, Suet, Eggs, Saffron, Nutmeg, Pepper,
Salt, thin slices of interlarded Bacon and Butter, close it up, and when baked,
liquor it with Butter.

Oxe-Pallate Pie.
Boil your Pallates tender, and blanch them, cut them in pieces, and add to
them the sweet-breads of Lamb or Veal, squab Pigeons, Marrow, Lambstones,
Cocks-combs, Pine-kernels, Chestnuts, Oysters and Capers, balls of forced Meat,
seasoned with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper, Salt, a small quantity of Cloves and
Mace, Lemon, Grapes or Goosberries, fill your Pie herewith, and lay on the top
some Butter; when it is baked, lair it with half a pint of Mutton Gravy, the
yolks of four raw Eggs, a little White wine, a couple of Anchovies and juice of
Lemon; stir it well about, and set it into the Oven agan, there let it stand
till it be almost ready to boil, then take it out and serve it up.

Pallates otherwise baked.
Take Pallates, Lips and Noses boiled tender, with Cock-stones, Cocks-combs,
Lambstones and sweet-Breads scalded, slice all these, and put to them half a
pint of large Oysters parboiled in their own liquor, quartered Dates,
Pine-kernels, pickled Broom-buds, slices of interlarded Bacon scalded, a dozen
Chestnuts roasted and blanched, season all these with Salt, Nutmeg, large Mace,
and fill your Pie herewith, laying on the top good store of sweet Butter, with
some Marrow; when it is baked, liquor it with Claret, Butter, and the yolks of
Eggs beaten together, shake it well together, and garnish it with sliced Lemon,
pickled Barberries, Grapes or Goosberries.

Pig Pie.
Take a young Pig and skin it, then bone it and beat it very small, season it
with Nutmeg, Ginger, a little Pepper and Salt, rubbed well on it, let your Pie
be round and deep, and be not sparing of your Butter in the baking; it will
require five hours baking.

Or thus:
Skin a small fat Pig, and cut it into quarters, then season it with Salt,
Pepper and Ginger; then lay it in your Pie with some stripped and minced Parsley,
some sprigs of Winter-Savory, lay upon these the yolks of four Eggs boiled hard
and minced, over these put some blades of large Mace, a handful of clusters of
Barberries, a handful of well washed and clean picked Currants, a little Sugar,
half a pound of sweet Butter, close it, and let it stand in the Oven two hours,
in which time it will be baked, then draw it, and put therein half a pint of
white wine and Sugar; being first warmed over the fire, put on the Pye-lid, and
so serve it up.

Or thus you may bake a Pig; scald it, and slit it on the midst, then fley it
and bone it; season it with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg; take some
sweet Herbs and chop them small, with the yolks of three new laid Eggs, and
some Currants; then lay one half of the Pig into your Pie and Herbs thereon,
then lay in your other half, and strew the rest of your Herbs thereon, with a
good quantity of Butter: This way is good either hot or cold.

Pig-pye after the newest fashion.
Having fley'd your Pig, cut it into quarters, season it with Salt, Ginger and
Pepper, then lay it into your Pie; after this take Parsley and Winter-Savory
stripped, and mince them small, strew these over the several quarters or smaller
pieces, and over them the yolks of four or five hard Eggs chopped small; over
these four or five blades of Mace, a dozen bunches or more of Barberries, with
a handful of Currants well cleansed, some Sugar, and over all sweet Butter, bake
it and liquor it with Verjuyce and Sugar warmed, lay on the lid, and scrape
Sugar thereon.

Pork baked to be eaten cold.
Bone first a Loyn of Pork, and cut part thereof into Collops, as big as a Hens
Egg, with as many Collops of Veal of the same bigness, and beat them both with
the back of a Cleaver; you must season your Veal with minced Time, Nutmeg,
Cloves and Mace, with the yolks of Eggs; your Pork must be seasoned otherways,
with minced Sage, Pepper, Salt, and the yolks of Eggs also; then lay a laying
of Pork into your Pie, and a laying of Veal upon it, then Pork on that, and
Veal upon that, till all your Meat is in; then close it, and baste your Pie
with Saffron water, or the yolks of Eggs; when it is baked and cold, fill it
with clarified Butter, let your first and last laying be Pork.

Rabbets baked to be eaten cold.
Parboil your Rabbets and bone them, then lard them, and season them with
Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Nutmeg and Mace, then put them into the Pie, with a good
quantity of Winter-savory and forced Meats, put on a pound of Butter on the
top, and close it, when baked and cold, fill it with clarified Butter.

Red Deer baked.
Having taken out the back sinew and boned your side of Venison, season it and
lard the Fillets with great Lard; your proper seasoning is Nutmeg and Pepper of
each three ounces, and five ounces of Salt, slash your Venison for the better
entering in of your seasoning; your Pie or Pasty being made, lay in the bottom
some Butter, a quarter of an ounce of Cloves* two or three Bay Leaves, then lay
in your flesh, and thereon a few Cloves, and good store of Butter, close it up,
and let it soak in the Oven nine hours at least; before you put it into the
Oven, baste it with Saffron water; when baked, fill it up with clarified Butter.

Another very excellent way to bake Red Deer.
Bone your Venison, and if it be the side, skin it, and beat it with an
Iron-pestle, but not too small, then lay it a steeping in Claret wine and
Vinegar twenty four hours: having lain that time, take it out, and dry it with
a cloth; if it be lean, lard it with great Lard as long and as thick as your
finger; season it exceeding well with Nutmeg, Mace, Ginger, Pepper and Salt,
make your Pie with Rye Paste, deep, round, and very thick, laying Bay Leaves in
the bottom and top, then close it, leaving a funnel in the middle; if you
intend to keep it long, when it is baked, pour away all the Gravy, and take
Butter and knead it, and wash it in two or three waters, then melt it, and fill
up your Pie therewith; you may keep it thus a quarter of a year, you may bake
it after this manner in a Pot, and it will not only keep longer, but require
less Butter to fill it up.

Steak-pye of Mutton.
Having made your Pie deep, round and pretty thick, take a Neck and Breast of
Mutton, and cut them out into pieces as to fry, hack it with your Cleaver, and
season it with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, sweet Herbs minced very small, a handful
of Capers, two Onions minced small, the yolks of three or four hard Eggs
chopped: thus seasoned, lay in your meat scattering these materials over it,
and laying pretty store of Butter on the top, then close it, and let it soak in
the Oven three hours at least in a moderate heat.

Steak-pye with a French Pudding in it.
Season your Steaks as afor^said, and let them stand in the Tray or Dish two
hours; then take a lean piece of Mutton, and mince it small with Beef Suet, and
a few sweet Herbs, with two or three leaves of red Sage, grated Bread, yolks of
Eggs, sweet Cream, Raisins of the Sun, incorporate these together, and make an
indifferent stiff Pudding, roll them into balls, and when you have laid your
Steaks in a deep Pie, put your Pudding balls in also with some Butter; Lastly,
sprinkle a little Verjuyce thereon, and close it up: being baked, take
Bay Leaves and fry them in Butter, and stick them in the walls; serve up your
Pie with a cover, squeezing thereon the juice of Oranges or Lemon.

Otherways.
Cut a Neck and Breast of Mutton between every rib, and beat each distinctly
with the back of a Cleaver, then season the pieces with Pepper and Salt; having
laid them into your Pie, put thereon four or five blades of large Mace, and
half a pound of sweet Butter, close it up, and let it stand in the Oven two
hours: in the mean time boil some Parsley very tender, and beat it as soft as
the pulp of a boiled Turnip, put to it a quarter of a pint of White wine
Vinegar, a little sweet Butter, and two spoonfuls of Sugar, heat these over the
fire, then draw your Pie, and cut open the lid, and pour this sauce all over
the Pie, then shake it well on your Peel, that the Sauce and Gravy may mingle
together, put on the lid, and scrape on some Sugar.

Sweet-breads baked.
Take Sweet-breads and boil them, adding thereto some parboiled Currants, two or
three minced Dates, the yolks of a couple of new laid Eggs, some grated white
Bread, season it lightly with Pepper, Salt, Nutmeg and Sugar, wring in the
juice of an Orange or a Lemon; lay these materials between two sheets of
Puff-paste, and bake it: it will do every whit as well fried in good sweet
Butter.

Sheeps Tongues baked.
Having boiled them tender, blanch them and cut them into thin slices, then
season them with Cinnamon, Ginger, and a little Pepper, and put them into a
Coffin of fine Paste, with sweet Butter, and a few sweet Herbs minced very
small: whilst it is baking, take a little Vinegar, Butter, Nutmeg, Sugar, the
yolk of a new laid Egg, one spoonful of Sack, and the juice of a Lemon; boil
all these together on a Chafing Dish of coals, and put it into your Pie; shog
it well together and serve it up.

Tongue Pie.
Take a Tongue and Udder, after you have either boiled or roasted it, and slice
them into thin slices, and season them with Cinnamon, Ginger and Salt; then take
half a pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned; your Pie being in readiness, lay in
a laying of Tongue and Udder, and another of Raisins, continuing so doing till
your Pie be filled; put Butter on the top, and close it up; when it is baked,
liquor it with this Caudle, which you must make whilst it is baking, take Eggs,
Vinegar and White wine, Sugar and Butter, beat these up together, till it is
ready to boil; then opening your Pie, pour it all over, and serve it up hot.

Veal a Breast, Rack, or Loyn how to bake.
Take which Joint you please and bone it, season it with Salt, Nutmeg and
Pepper; then take some sweet Herbs, as Time, sweet Marjoram, Penniroyal,
Winter-savory, etc. and mince these small with some Beef Suet, stuff your Loyn
or Breast of Veal herewith, and put it into your Pie, close it, and bake it in
good crust, and liquor it with Butter, and the juice of an Orange or Lemon.

Veal (Fillet) Pie.
Cut your Fillet into pieces about the bigness of Walnuts, and season them with
Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar and Salt; as to the form you may make what choice you
please, lay in your meat with Chestnuts roasted, blanched and quartered, Dates
sliced, and the Marrow of two Marrowbones, close it, and when baked, make a a
caudle of White wine, Cinnamon, Sugar and Ginger beaten up together, and poured
into your Pie.

The same to be eaten cold.
Make a Pie of hot Butter, paste and fine Flower, then take a Leg of Veal, and
cut off a large Fillet, then divide that into three equal pieces, and parboil
them; when cold, season them with Salt, beaten Pepper, Nutmeg, Cloves and Mace,
then lay in one Fillet, and strew on some minced Time, laying on some slices of
Bacon, seasoned with Pepper and Sage; then lay on the second, and so the third
Fillet with Bacon over every lay; then over all strew some minced Time, and a
little seasoning, with some large Mace and store of Butter: This done, close up
your Pie, baste it with yolks of Eggs; when it is baked and cold, fill it up
with clarified Butter.

Forget not to beat your Veal very well with the back of your Cleaver before
you season it.

Vmble Pie made of a Lambs head and Purt'nance.
Boil your meat reasonable tender, take the flesh from the bone, and mince it
small with Beef Suet and Marrow, with the Liver, Lights and Heart, a few sweet
Herbs and Currants, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, bake it in the form
of an Umble Pie, and your Palate shall hardly distinguish which is which.

Venison Pie.
Raise a four square Coffin of hot Butter Paste; then take some Oxe-suet minced
small, and lay in the bottom of your Pie; then take your Venison seasoned with
beaten Pepper, Cinnamon, Cloves, Ginger, Salt, Mace and Nutmeg pounded, be sure
to slash your Venison, that it may the better entertain the seasoning, then lay
you meat into your Pie with Butter on the top, and some few Cloves; let your
Walls be substantial; when it is baked, and that will not be under six hours,
cut it up, and put into it about a quart of Venison Sauce.

Venison Pasty of a fallow Deer to eat hot or cold.
Take the side of a Fallow Deer, bone it and lard it with great Lard, then take
Pepper and Nutmeg of each two ounces and a half, of Salt five ounces, and
season it herewith; then have a Pasty made of a good thickness, and lay some
Butter therein, upon that lay your Venison the inside downwards, coat it thick
with seasoning, and lay thereon a good quantity of Butter, not forgetting to
prick on some whole Cloves, indore it with Eggs, and bake it; when it is cold,
fill it up with clarified Butter.

Otherwise in the best manner.
First bake it in its own blood, wipe it clean, but wash it not; then skin it,
bone it, and season it as before expressed, then bake it again in fine Paste,
Puff-paste, or short Paste.

Land-fowl or Sea-fowl of all sorts baked in Pan or Pasty.
Brand-gees's baked to be eaten cold.
TAke your Geese and parboil them, then take out the Breast Bone with as many
other bones as you can, with this proviso, you do not unshape your Fowl; then
season them with Pepper and Salt, and lard them with good large Lard, and put
them into a Coffin and bake them; when it is cold, fill it up with clarified
Butter.

Chicken Pie.
Take eight Chicken-peepers, four sweet-Breads of Veal, as many Sheeps Tongues
boiled tender, blanched and cut into thin slices with the sweet-Breads, half a
dozen Larks or Sparrows, half a score Cockscombs, a pint and a half of great
oysters parboiled, and the marrow of four Marrow-bones; let all these be
seasoned lightly with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg; fill your Pie three quarters
full with these materials, then take some Veal and mince it, with as much
Marrow, a little grated Bread, the yolks of three Eggs, minced Dates, Salt,
Nutmeg, sweet Marjoram, work up these with a little Cream, and make it into
balls, and lay them into your Pie, with some Gravy, bottoms of Hartichokes, and
some Butter over all, lay some Marrow, Chestnuts boiled and blanched, large
Mace, and a handful of Goosberries, close up your Pie, and when baked, liquor
it with a little Butter, juice of Oranges and Claret wine.

Or you may bake them thus: having trust them, season them lightly as before,
and put them into a Coffin, lay on them sliced Dates, with the Marrow of four
Marrow-bones, some large Mace, six ounces of Eringo roots, some Grapes and
Butter, close it up, and being half baked, liquor it with a good quantity of
Butter, Grapes, Verjuyce and Sugar, then bake it till it is enough, ice it and
serve it up.

Chicken Pyes for Winter.
Season your Chickens after you have trust them, with Cloves, Salt, Pepper,
Nutmeg beaten and Mace; then take some Parsley and Time and mince them small,
and mould them into a ball with some Butter, and some of the aforesaid
seasoning, stuff the bellies of your Chickens herewith, and then lay them into
your Pie with sliced Lemons on the top of them, and the bottoms of boiled
Hartichokes cut into square pieces, close it up, and when it is baked, take the
yolk of an Egg, a grated Nutmeg, White wine, Gravy and Butter beaten up
together, and lair it therewith.

Chicken Pyes for the Summer.
Take half a dozen Chicken-peepers and truss them, season them with Nutmeg,
Salt, Ginger and whole Mace, lay them into your Pie on their backs, and cover
them with scalded Goosberries or Cabbage, Lettice, with some Asparagus boiled,
and Butter; when it is baked, liquor it with a pint of White wine, the yolks of
half a dozen Eggs, Sugar, and a quarter of a pound of Butter beaten up over the
fire till it boileth.

Chickens baked with Grapes.
Having trust and scalded your Chickens, season them with Pepper, Salt and
Nutmeg, and lay them into a Pie with half a pound of Butter; when it is baked,
cut it up, and lay on the Breasts of your Chicken some Grapes boiled in
Verjuyce, Butter, Nutmeg and Sugar, with the juice of an Orange or Lemon.

Capon baked in Pasty-pan.
Your Capon being roasted and cold, take the flesh from the bones and slice it,
but preserve the Thighs and Pinions, add to the flesh of your Capon four
sweet-Breads, half a pint of Oysters, three Lambstones, and season them all
with Nutmeg, Salt, Cloves, Mace, minced Time, sweet Marjoram and Penniroyal;
lay into your Pasty-pan a sheet of paste, and in the bottom thereof lay your
Thighs and Pinions; and upon them strew a minced Onion, on these lay your
flesh, and upon it the sweet-Breads, Lambstones and Oysters cut into halves,
over all a handful of boiled and blanched Chestnuts, put Butter on the top, and
close your Pan; when it is baked, lair it with Claret wine, strong Broth,
Gravy, drawn Butter, some Anchovies dissolved, with a grated Nutmeg, garnish it
with slices of Lemon.

In the same manner you may bake a Turkey.

Curlew or Hernshaw baked.
Truss them and parboil them, then season them with Pepper, Salt and Ginger,
put them in deep Coffins with a good quantity of Butter, and let the heads be
visible.

Crane, Bustard or Peacock baked to be eaten cold.
Bone your Bustard, Peacock, Crane or Turkey, parboil and lard it with large
Lard, then season it with Salt, Nutmeg and Pepper of each about two ounces and
a half; your Pie being ready, lay in the bottom thereof some Butter, with some
beaten Cloves, then lay in your Fowl with the rest of the seasoning thereon,
with a good quantity of Butter, close it, baste it with Saffron water, and when
baked and cold, fill it up with clarified Butter.

Hen baked to be eaten cold.
Having parboiled a young fleshy Hen, cut off the Legs, Wings and Merry
thought, then flat the Carcass to lie handsome in the Pie; after this; season
the flesh with Salt, Pepper, Cloves and Mace, and put it into a Coffin with
Lambstones sliced, sweet-Breads, Sausages, some Oysters, the yolks of hard
Eggs, and two Onions cut in halves, put on half a pound of Butter and close
your Pie; when it is baked lair it with Claret, strong Broth, beaten up with
the yolk of an Egg, a grated Nutmeg and drawn Butter.

Hen baked in Pasty-pan.
Slice the flesh from the bones of a young Hen, that has been roasted or
boiled, and is cold, and season it with sweet Marjoram, Time, Parsley, and a
large Onion minced very small, with Cloves, Mace and Nutmeg beaten; then put
your bones into the Pasty-pan, first under-laying it with a sheet of fine
paste; let your sliced meat lie on the top hereof, and over all put Butter,
then close it with another sheet of paste; being baked, batter the yolks of
half a dozen Eggs, being indifferent thick, put to them some strong broth, and
a quarter of a pint of Claret wine, with some Parsley boiled green and shred
small, stir all these together with a ladleful of drawn Butter; take out the
bones before you put in this lair, then stir all very well together; then stick
the bones a top on the meat, and garnish it with slices of Oranges or Lemons.

Herns baked to be eaten cold.
So bone your Hern, that you do not mishape it; then lard it, and season it
with Pepper, Salt, Cloves and Mace beaten, then lay it into a Coffin, making
the head to appear out of the lid; when it is baked, fill it up with clarified
Butter.

Heath-pouts, Pheasant-pouts, or Pea-chikens baked.
Take any of the aforesaid and bone them, and lard them with Lard as big as
your little finger almost, then season them with Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, and a
few Cloves; your Pie being made, lay some Butter in the bottom thereof, then
lay on your Fowls with good store of seasoning and Butter; if you intend to eat
it cold, then must you also, when it is baked and cold, fill it up with
clarified Butter; if you would have your Pie to be eaten hot, season your Fowl
but lightly, and put into your Pie with them Beef Suet, and some Veal minced
small, some sweet herbs, grated Nutmeg, Pepper, Salt, the yolks of four raw
Eggs, bottoms of boiled Hartichokes, Grapes or Goosberries.

Larks or Sparrow Pyes.
Take what quantity of them you think fit, truss them and parboil them, then
season them with Pepper and Salt, then lay them in a Pie with Butter on the top
and bottom, mingle amongst them some Marrow, and a few Chestnuts boiled and
blanched.

Mallard Pyes.
Take a couple or more of wild Mallards, and season them very well with Pepper
and Cloves beaten, some Salt and a little Nutmeg, lay them into a deep Coffin
with store of Butter, and a couple of large Onions minced small; when baked,
liquor your Pie with Butter only, or with an Anchovie.

Partridge minced Pyes.
Take a brace of Partridges and mince them, mince the like quantity of
Beef Suet, then take Orangado and green Citron of each two ounces; let the Meat
be seasoned with beaten Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, Salt and Sugar; mingle all these
together, and close it up in Puff-paste: being baked, open it and put therein
half a grain of Amber-griese dissolved in Rosewater, stirring it well together
serve it up.

Pigeons, Stock-doves, Qails or Rails baked to be eaten cold.
Having made your Pie of a pottle of fine Flower, and a quarter of a pound of
Butter boiled in fair Water made up quick and stiff; then take half a dozen
Stockdoves or Pigeons, truss, wash, and wipe them dry, then season them with
Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt of each two ounces and a half; laying some Butter in
the bottom of the Pie, put in your Fowl and the remaining seasoning, with good
store of Butter on the top; when it is baked and cold, fill it up with
clarified Butter.

If you will eat your Pie hot, then use but half the seasoning, and when it is
baked, lair it with Butter, Verjuyce, Sugar, some sweet Marjoram boiled and
chopped small, with the yolk of an Egg beaten up all together.

Sea-fowl of all sorts baked, a Swan, Whopper, etc.
Let your Swan, Whopper, or any other Sea-fowl be parboiled, then boned, and
afterward larded; then take four ounces of Salt, three of Nutmeg, two of
Pepper, and season your Fowl herewith, bake them in Rye-paste made up stiff
with boiling liquor, if you will eat it cold; if hot, use but half the
seasoning, and bake them in fine Paste liquor'd with Claret, Gravy, Butter, an
Onion, Capers or Oysters. Thus you may bake Shovellers, Herns, Curlews, Gulls,
Wild-Geese, Tame-Geese, and Muscovia Ducks.

Swan Pie to be eaten cold.
In the first place uncase or skin your Swan, then bone him and lard the flesh,
season it lightly with Pepper, Salt, Cloves and Mace; then make your Pie
Swan-like of Rye dough, and lay your Swan therein, and upon it lay some sheets
of Lard and Bay Leaves, and Buttter on the top of that; close it up, and baste
it with the yolks of Eggs; when it is baked, fill it up with clarified Butter.

Otherways.
Only pluck your Swan and skin it, not scald it, and take out the bones, then
parboil it, and season it with Salt, Pepper and Ginger; having larded it, put
it into a deep Rye-coffin, with a good quantity of Butter; let it soak very
well in the Oven, and being baked, pour in at the Funnel some molten Butter.

Turkey baked in the French fashion.
Having boned your Turkey, lard it with big Lard, then season it with Pepper,
Cloves and Mace, Salt and Nutmeg; put into his belly some interlarded Bacon,
some Rosemary, Bays, whole Cloves, whole Pepper and Mace, then let it steep all
night in White wine; in the morning close it up in a sheet of course paste, and
bake it in a Pan with the same liquor it was in, it will require four hours
baking; when it is enough, serve it on a Pye-plate stuck with Rosemary and
Bays, with Mustard and Sugar in saucers.

Turkey baked to be eaten cold.
Parboil your Fowl, then bone and lard him, season him also with Pepper, Salt,
Cloves and Mace, put him into a deep Coffin with Butter on the top and bottom,
let the head peep through the lid, then baste it with Saffron-water, and when
baked and cold, fill it up with clarified Butter.

Wild or tame Goose-pye.
Having broken the bones of your Goose parboil him, then take Pepper, Salt,
Cloves and Mace, and season him therewith; then take a couple of Rabbets and
lard them very well, then make your Pie of good hot Butter paste; then lay in
your Goose with a Rabbet on each side, with store of Butter on the the top.
This is the good House-wives standing Dish.

All sorts of Fish, Flesh and Fowl marinated, pickled or souced.
Fish marinated, pickled or souced.
Carp marinated.
HAving scraped, washed, cleans'd and dried your Carp, split it down the back,
flower it, and fry it crisp in Sallet Oil, then lay it in a deep Dish, then put
into a Pipkin some White wine Vinegar, with a bundle of all sorts of sweet
Herbs, with some large Mace, sliced Ginger, gross Pepper, sliced Nutmeg, whole
Cloves, and some Salt; boil these together a little while, and pour it on your
Fish, then presently cover it up close for two hours to detain the spirits of
the Herbs and Spices from flying out; then lay some slices of Lemon thereon and
barrel it up.

Conger marinated.
Cut it into pieces, and fry it in clarified Butter, then put it into a barrel,
laying between every lay of Fish fried Bay Leaves, large Mace, sliced Ginger,
and a few whole Cloves: Lastly, add to them some Salt and White wine Vinegar,
and so head your Cask.

Conger souced.
Take a fat Conger, splat it and bone it, having first fley'd and scalded it,
season him with Salt, Mace, and minced Nutmeg, then bind it up hard in a clean
cloth, and boil it in Water and White wine, of each an equal quantity, throw
some Salt therein and keep it for your use.

Conger pickled.
First fley your Eel, then cut him in pieces, and bind them up together with
tape, then boil it in Water, Vinegar and Salt, with a handful of Fennel; when
it is boiled, put it into your Soucing-pan with some of the same liquor, Beer,
Vinegar, and a handful of green Fennel laid on the top of your Fish.

Caveer pickled.
Wash your Caveer in Vinegar, season it with Salt, then press it two or three
days, so that all the liquor may run from it; then mix it with beaten Pepper
and Salt, press it once more as long as before; if you find it seasoned high
enough, put it into an earthen pot, and strew some Salt upon it; when you use
it, you may either slice it on a plate with Oil, Vinegar, and sliced Lemon; or
temper it in a Dish with Vinegar; then pour on Oil, juice of Oranges, Pepper,
and some sliced Lemon, and strew on the pill being shred small.

Eels collar'd.
Take a good large silver Eel, split him down the back, and take forth the
bone, wash and dry him, then salt him; after this take minced Oysters, Time,
sweet Marjoram, Winter-savory, an Onion minced small, Nutmeg, Cloves and Mace
pounded in a Mortar, strew these ingredients on the inside of the Eel or Eels,
then roll them up close, and bind them with tape, boil them in Vinegar, Water
and Salt, a faggot of sweet Herbs, and three whole Onions, adding to this
pickle some Ginger, garnish your Dish with Fennel and Flowers.

Eels souced otherways.
Take four large fat Eels, scour them in Salt, draw, wash and cleanse them,
then cut them into equal pieces a finger and half in length, scotch them on the
back, and lay them a steeping in Wine Vinegar and Salt about two hours, then
boil them with sweet Herbs, Onions, large Mace; being boiled, pour away the
liquor; when they are cold, take a pint of the liquor, and as much White wine,
and boil it up with some Saffron beaten to powder, then take out the Spices,
wherein the Fish was boiled, and add them to your White wine, etc. and pour all
over your Eels.

Flounders, Plaice or Soals marinated.
Dry well with a clean cloth your Fish, flower them and fry them in Sallet Oil,
which you must make very hot, and that will make your Flounders fry crisp and
brown, then put them into a large earthen Pan, put thereto sliced Nutmeg,
Ginger, large Mace, whole Pepper, and a couple of sliced Lemons, over these lay
some Bay Leaves fried, and a little Salt, pouring on them as much White wine
and Vinegar as will cover them.

Lobsters, Prawns, Shrimps or Craw-fish pickled.
Boil your Lobsters, Prawns, etc. then take Fennel and bruise it in Salt and
Vinegar, and with a sprig of Fennel wash them between the carcass and tail;
leave some branched Fennel under the tails, pour on them White wine, Vinegar,
Mace, Cloves, Nutmeg, and sliced Ginger.

Lobsters marinated.
Half boil your Lobsters, then take out the meat from the shells, and lard the
tails with a Salt Eel, then cut the tails long ways, and fry them in sweet Oil,
when enough, set them by; then take White wine Vinegar, Mace, Nutmeg, sliced
Ginger, Cloves, Pepper, Salt, the tops of Time, Rosemary, Sage, Winter-savory,
sweet Marjoram, Bay Leaves and Parsley, dish up your Fish, and pour all these
materials thereon with the slices of three Lemons, running it all over with
Butter.

Lobsters pickled otherways.
Take Vinegar, White wine and Salt, and boil your Lobsters therein; being
boiled set them by: then take large Mace, whole Pepper, and all manner of sweet
Herbs, and boil them all together in the liquor with the Lobsters, adding
thereto some whole Cloves, then barrel them up in a Vessel that will just
contain them, pouring the liquor on them, and keep them for your use.

Lumps souced.
Boil your Lump with the skin on, having first scalded and scraped it very
well, then take the tail of a Lobster some large Oysters, Prawns, the yolks of
hard Eggs, some sweet Herbs, and mince these all together; then put to them
some grated Bread, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, and some Salt, it will not be
amiss to add hereunto an Anchovie or two, put these into the belly of your
Lump, and boil him in White wine, Water, Vinegar and Salt, serve him to the
Table with some of the liquor.

You may in this manner souce any Fish, as Soals, Mullets, Dace, Gurnets,
Pikes, Carps, Perches, Tenches and Roches.

Mullets souced.
Having scaled and washed them clean, lay them in a Dish, and throw some Salt
upon them, some sliced Ginger and large Mace, put some Wine Vinegar, and two or
three Cloves; then boil it with as much Wine as Water, but put not in the Fish
till the Water boils; being boiled enough, put it into a flat-bottom'd
earthen-Pan, and pour on the liquor and cover it close.

Mullet marinated.
Take a Gallon of Vinegar, and a quart of Water, a good handful of Bay Leaves,
as much Rosemary, and a quarter of a pound of Pepper beaten small; put these
together, and boil them over a soft fire, and season the broth with Salt; then
fry your Fish in good clarified Butter, take them up and put them into a barrel
that is but just sufficient to contain them, lay the Bay Leaves and Rosemary
between every lay of Fish, and pour the broth on it; when it is cold close up
the Vessel.

Oysters pickled.
Make choice of your largest Oysters, strain them from the liquor and wash them
clean; then set on as much Water as you think will cover them, and when it
boileth, put them in and but just scald them, pour them from the liquor, then
take some of their own liquor, and mingle it with a little of that in which
they were scalded, some Vinegar, large Mace, whole Pepper, Salt, and two or
three Bay Leaves, boil all these together; and when your Oysters are cold
barrel them, and fill them up with liquor, putting thereto, if you like it, a
Clove of Garlic.

Another way.
Take a Gallon of very fair large Oysters, they are best about the full of the
Moon, parboil these in their own liquor, then take them up and dry them in a
clean cloth, and put them into a well seasoned barrel; then take the Oyster
liquor well cleansed from the dregs, and boil it with a pint and a half of
White wine, half a pint of White wine Vinegar, four or five blades of whole
Mace, three quarters of an ounce of Pepper not beaten, three ounces of white
Salt, three races of sliced Ginger, and a dozen or fourteen Cloves, pour this
liquor into your barrel and head it up close.

Serve them up in a clean Dish with Bayleaves, Barberries, and sliced Lemon
round about them.

Oysters marinated.
Take six quarts of large Oysters, parboil them as aforesaid, then wash them in
warm Water, dry them, flower them, and fry them in a pottle of sweet Sallet
Oil, make them as crisp as you can, and keep them warm till you have made a
sauce of White wine, wine Vinegar, half a dozen blades of Mace, sliced Nutmeg,
Ginger sliced, a good quantity of Cloves and whole Pepper, with some Salt; boil
all these Spices with a faggot or two of sweet Herbs; having dish'd your
Oysters, pour on the liquor and Spices, and garnish it with sliced Lemon.

Pike souced.
Having drawn and cleans'd your Pike very well, put on your kettle, and when
your Water boils, put in your Pike with some Salt, let it boil leasurely with
no more liquor than will cover it: or you may boil it for keeping a
considerable while in as much Wine as Water indifferently seasoned with Salt,
add thereto a little Vinegar, sliced Ginger, large Mace, Cloves and some
Lemon-pill; being boiled not too much, take it up and lay it by till you have
boiled up the liquor to a consistency, then lay it in some deep Pan, and pour
your liquor all over it, and cover it up close.

Salmon how to pickle to keep six months or longer.
Take the Salmon and cut it in six round pieces, then boil it in Vinegar and
Water, two parts of the former and one of the latter, put not in your Salmon
till the liquor has boiled half an hour; your Salmon being boiled, take it up
and drain it, then take Rosemary-leaves, Bay Leaves, Cloves, Mace and whole
Pepper, a good quantity of each, and boil them in two quarts of White wine, and
as much of Vinegar, let these boil half an hour; your Salmon being cold, rub it
well with Pepper and Salt, and put it up in a barrel with a lay of Salmon, and
another of Spice, that is boiled in the liquor; having filled your Vessel, pour
on the liquor. Renew your pickle once a quarter, and your Salmon will keep a
complete twelvemonth.

Salmon pickled in Collers.
Having cut off some of the tail, take the rest of the side, wash and dry it;
then wash it with the yolks of Eggs, mince some sweet Herbs, and strew thereon,
with a little Fennel, season it with good store of Salt, Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace,
Ginger and Pepper, then bind it up in Collers with broad tape, then set over
your Kettle with Water, Vinegar and Salt, and let it boil with a faggot of
sweet Herbs, sliced Ginger and Nutmeg, then lay it, when boiled, into your
Souce-pan, and pour some liquor thereon.

Soals souced.
Take new caught Soals, and scotch them on the White side thick, but not too
deep, then boil them in White wine, wine Vinegar, Cloves, Mace, sliced Ginger
and Salt, not putting in your Fish till your liquor boils, which must be no
more than will cover them; then put in sliced Onions, Parsley, Time, Sage,
Rosemary, sweet Marjoram, and Winter-savory; being boiled enough, set your Fish
a cooling.

Soals souced and Coller'd.
Take out the bone of your Soals, and either scrape or skin them, but scraping
is most proper; then take Salmon, Oysters, Lobsters, Shrimps or Prawns, and
mince these with the yolks of Eggs boiled hard with some Anchovies, add to
these a handful or what you think fit of minced Herbs, season all with Nutmeg,
Cloves, Ginger, Pepper and Salt; your Soals being dried and washed over with
the yolks of Eggs, spread on them the aforesaid materials, then roll up your
Soals in Collers, binding them hard with Tape; when they are boiled, pickle
them in Wine, Water, Vinegar, Salt, Spices and sweet Herbs boiled together.

Sturgeon pickled.
Garbidge your Sturgeon, if it be a Female keep the Spawn to make Caveer, split
him down equally on the back, cut off your Jole to the body-ward, then your
first and second Rand very fair, let your tailpiece be the least, bind up these
pieces close with flag or tape, and season them with Salt very well, let it
boil an hour and a half before you take it up, and all the while it boils, scum
off the Oil, and supply it with liquor, otherways your Sturgeon will be rusty.

Sturgeon souced a better way to keep a long time.
Having drawn your Sturgeon, cut down your Sturgeon on the back into equal
Sides and Rands, then wash it from the blood with Water and Salt, then boil it
in Water, Vinegar and Salt till it be tender, then lay it in some place to
cool, when cold barrel it up close with the liquor it was boiled in.

Sturgeon marinated.
Take the Joles and Rands of Sturgeon, and having cleans'd, dried and flowered
them, fry them in a large Kettle wherein you must have three Gallons of
Rape-Oyl clarified; being fried crisp, set them to cool, in the mean time make
your pickle of a Gallon and a half of White wine, two Gallons of wine Vinegar,
four or five handfuls of Salt, a quarter of a pound of large Mace, five ounces
of whole Pepper, two ounces of sliced Ginger; and when it is cold pack it up
close, pouring this pickle upon it.

Smelts marinated.
Put a quart of Sallet Oil or more into a Drying Pan, and when it is hot put in
your Fish so many as the Oil will cover, as it wastes supply it with more; then
fry Bay Leaves in the Oil the Fish was fried in, then put some Claret wine into
an earthen Pan, and put the fried Leaves into the bottom thereof, and let some
of them lie aloft, slice an ounce of Nutmeg, as much Ginger and Mace, a few
Cloves and Wine Vinegar, then put in your Fish, so that the Bay Leaves and
Spices cover it; when you serve it, let it be with Bay Leaves and the Spices.

Otherways marinated white or red.
Gill some large Smelts and lay them in a Pan, put on them a row of sliced
Lemon, sliced Ginger, Nutmeg, large Mace and whole Pepper, then a row of
Smelts, and so continue doing till they are all placed; then put to them White
wine, Vinegar, Salt and Bay Leaves: thus you must do, if you would have them
white; but if red, then must your pickle be Red-wine well mingled with
Cocheneil, a weeks time will thoroughly pickle them; when you dish them up, you
must divide them as an Anchovie, strowing on Lemon cut four square, with
Broom-buds and Barberries.

Turbut souced.
Having fitted your Fish for the Kettle, and your liquor boiling, put your
Turbut therein, season it in the boiling very well with Salt, and let it boil
leisurely and scum it often.

If you intend to keep it a good while, boil it in as much Water and White wine
as will cover it; some Wine Vinegar, sliced Ginger, large Mace, some Cloves,
and some Lemon-pill; being boiled and cold, put in a sliced Lemon, and keep it
for your use in an earthen Pan.

Tench souced.
Draw your Tench at the Gills, and cut them off, then will they boil the
whiter, have Water on the fire, and season it with Salt, Vinegar, five or six
Bay Leaves, large Mace, whole Cloves, some faggots of sweet Herbs bound up hard
together; so soon as your liquor-boils, put in your Tench wiped clean, but not
scaled, being boiled wash off the loose scales; then strain the liquor through
a jelly-bag, and put to it some Izing-glass, being washed and steeped for that
purpose, and boil it very cleanly, dish your Fish in the Dish you intend to
send it up in, then strain the liquor through the bag, pour it on the Fish and
let it cool.

This Jelly will serve to jelly Lobsters, Crawfish or Prawns, hanging them in
some glass by a thread at their full length, and filling the glass with the
Jelly when it is warm; it being cold, turn it out of the glass.

All sorts of Herbs, Roots, etc. pickled, with Sallets and Grand Sallets.
Artichokes.
WHen your Artichokes are ripe, gather them and cut off the stalk within an
inch of the Choke, wash them clean and boil them in Water and Salt, then take
them up, laying the bottoms upward till they be cold: this being done, provide
a Vessel of clear Water and Salt boiled together and cooled, then put the
Artichokes into it, cover it close, and so you may keep them all the year
round: do not make your Pickle too salt; they are good for Pyes at Christmas,
or for show.

Another very good.
Take your Artichokes not too ripe, for then they will be full of strings, pare
them round to the bottom, and boil them tender, take them up and set them a
cooling, then take White wine and stale Beer, with good store of whole Pepper,
so put them into a barrel with a little Salt, keep them close, and they will
serve for baked meats and boiled meats all the year.

Ashen-keys pickled.
Having boiled your Ashen-keys, put them into a Pot, and put thereunto some
Vinegar, keep it close covered.

Alexander-buds pickled.
You must make choice of your Alexander-buds before they run to seed, and take
off their tops and loose leaves, so that the Bud may be entire and firm, cut
part of the Root to them, and parboil them very well in Water and Salt, then
put them from the liquor, and when they are cold, put to them Vinegar, Salt,
and some stale Beer, when you use them, slit them in the middle.

Bogberries pickled.
Take some Bogberries, and put them into Gallipots, then pour into them some
Vinegar and Sugar boiled together, close the top of your Pots, and these will
serve for garnish all the year: Thus you may pickle Hog-haws; if not ripe, you
must boil them.

Broom-buds pickled.
First tie up your Broom-buds in little bags, then make a strong pickle of
Water and Salt, boiling it so long till it will bear an Egg: having put your
Broom-buds into pots fitting for the purpose, pour in your pickle when it is
cold, there let them lie till they look black, then shift them till they look
of a bright or green color; after this, when occasion shall serve, you may
take them out and boil them; then pickle them in Vinegar.

Burdock-roots pickled.
Take Burdock-roots and half boil them, having first scraped them very clean,
then put them up into convenient Vessels, and pour into them a like quantity of
White wine and wine Vinegar, with some Salt and Pepper, when you use them slice
them thin.

Barberries pickled.
Pick your Barberries from the Leaves in clusters, when they are ripe, and put
them into boiling Water, there let them lie hot half a quarter of an hour, then
close them in Gallipots, putting a pickle to them of White wine and Vinegar not
made too sharp.

Broom-capers.
Boil the greatest and hardest Broom-buds in wine Vinegar and Bay Salt, scum it
clean; when it is cold, you may put in raw ones also, each by themselves,
laying a weight upon them, for all that swim will be black, and the raw ones
that are pressed down will be as green as grass, those that are boiled will
change color.

Cucumbers how to pickle.
Cut your Cucumbers in pieces, boil them in Spring Water, Sugar and Dill, a
walm or two, take them up, and let your pickle stand until it be cold.

The best way is thus:
After Bartholomew-tide, make choice of your smallest Cucumbers, by some called
Gerkins, cleanse them well from all dirt and impurity, then put in the bottom
of an earthen Pot or Ferkin, some Bay and Dillleaves, some whole Pepper, blades
of Mace and some Cloves, then place a laying of Cucumbers thereon, then a lay
of Bay and Dill-leaves, then a lay of Cucumbers, till you have filled your
Vessel, you must thus continue to do, then make a liquor of Water and Dill to
make it strong, with some Salt; you may boil this liquor, if you please, but
pour it not to them till it be cold, then let your Cucumbers lie herein fifteen
or sixteen days, then pour the liquor from them, not all, and fill it up with
White wine, Vinegar; this will make your Cucumbers look green, be green and not
too sour.

Caper-rowlers of Radish-cods.
Take them when they be hard, and not overmuch open, boil them tender in fair
Water, then boil White wine, Vinegar and Bay Salt together, and keep them
therein.

Cucumbers otherways pickled.
Being put into an earthen Pot, let the pickle you put to them be Vinegar,
Salt, whole Pepper, Dill-seed, some of the stalks, cut Charnel, fair Water, and
some Sycamore leaves.

Clove-Gilliflowers pickled.
Pick a good quantity of Clove-Gilliflowers, put them into an equal quantity of
White wine and Vinegar, with so much Sugar as will make them both sweet and
sharp, add to them a few Cloves.

Cowslips pickled.
Pick them, and let them lie only in Vinegar and Sugar.

Currants red and white pickled.
Take red or white Currants, being not thoroughly ripe, and give them a walm in
White wine and Vinegar, with so much Sugar as will indifferently sweeten it,
cover them over in this liquor, and keep them always under it.

Cabbidge stalks pickled.
Take a quantity of Cabbidge stalks from the Cabbidge, so far as the pith is
good, about Michaelmas the time is best, shave off the outside, and cut them
into quarters, half boil them in Water and Salt, then cut the pith from the
outward pill, and pickle it in White wine, a little stale Beer, bruised Pepper,
a little large Mace, a few Fennelseeds and Salt, slice these out with your
pickled Sallets.

Charnel pickled.
Give your Charnel two or three walms in boiling Water, your pickle must be
only Vinegar.

Dill or Fennel pickled.
Tie up young Fennel in bunches, and give it half a dozen of walms in boiling
Water, then put it up, and let your pickle be Vinegar only.

Elder tops pickled.
About the middle of April break the tops of young sprouts of Elder, about six
inches in length, and having a convenient quantity, give them half a dozen
walms in boiling Water, then drain them in a Cullender; let your pickle be Wine
or Beer, adding thereto some Salt, and a little bruised Pepper, stop them up
close in the said pickle: This is not only a wholesome Sallet, but also
commendable.

Or thus:
Take young sprouts of Elder, and break their tops five inches long; then boil
them in Water, and lay them in a Cullender to drain: having prepared a pickle
of Wine or Beer, with some Salt and bruised Pepper, put them therein and stop
them up close.

Elder-buds pickled.
Gather them before they are full blown, and lay them in White wine Vinegar,
these will make an excellent Sallet; if they are thoroughly blown, make thereof
Elder Vinegar.

Or thus:
Set Vinegar over the Fire, and give your Buds a walm or two therein, with
Salt, Pepper, large Mace and Lemon-pill cut in pieces, then drain your Buds
from the liquor and let them cool, then put them into a Pot, and put your
liquor, when cold, unto them.

Endive curled.
Let your Endive be first scalded in boiling Water, then lay it in a pickle of
half White wine, and half Vinegar.

Flowers of any kind pickled.
Put them into a Gallipot with as much Sugar as they weigh, and fill them up
with wine Vinegar, a pint to a pound of Sugar.

Grapes and Goosberries pickled.
Having picked them, put them into the juice of Crab, Cherries, Grape-Verjuyce,
or any other Verjuyce, and so barrel them up; or take green Grapes, and lay
them in a pickle of White wine and Vinegar.

Green Figs pickled.
Take green Figs, flit them in two, and boil them in Vinegar, some Sugar, large
Mace and Cloves, and put them into a Gallipot with the same liquor; they are a
good garnish for boiled meats in Winter.

Hop-buds pickled.
Take your Hop-buds and give them a walm or two in Water and Salt, then lay
them in White wine and Vinegar.

Kit-keys, Crucifex, Pease or Purslane pickled.
Take any of the aforesaid, and lay them in as much Wine as Water, with a
little Salt, then boil them after this, put them into a Pot, and cover them
with Vinegar made of White wine.

Lemons pickled.
First boil them in Water and Salt, and then put them into a Vessel filled up
with White wine.

Lemon or Orange-pill pickled.
Boil then in Vinegar and Sugar, having first parboiled them in Water, divide
the whole Pill into halves, and cut them into thongs according to the extent,
you must put them up in the same pickle they were boiled in: This is an
excellent Winter Sallet.

Marsh-Mallow-stalks pickled.
The time to gather these is about the latter end of March, for then the stalks
will be of a convenient bigness; gather what quantity you think fit, and peel
off the outward Pill, when your Water boils, being seasoned with Salt, put them
therein, give them half a dozen walms, then take them up, drain them, and let
them cool, then make a pickle of stale Beer, some Vinegar, gross Pepper, and a
handful of Salt, according to the quainty of your stalks.

There is a pretty way of ordering them to make them pass for a Dish of Pease,
and that is thus: Take some stalks pilled, and cut them into the form of Pease,
so many as will make a handsome dishful, then set them over the Fire in a
Skillet of Water, and let them boil with some Pepper tied up in a clean rag;
when boiled enough over a quick Fire, put them into a Cullender, and drain them
well from the Water, then dish them up like Pease with good store of Butter,
with Pepper and Salt round the Dish brims; Pease and these Stalks have a taste
very semblable, in so much, that they are frequently called March Pease: I have
known them so well shaped, and so curiously ordered, that the Eaters have
wondered how Pease should come so soon.

Mallagatoons pickled.
Take them before they are ripe, so that you may split the stone with your
knife, then add to them half their weight of Sugar, then boil them therewith
and scum it, lay your Mallagatoons with their skin side downward, let them only
simmer: after the same manner you may order Peaches and Apricocks, and put them
up in the same pickle they were boiled in.

Mushroms pickled.
Take what quantity of Mushroms you please to pickle, blanch them over the
crown, and barb them beneath, throw away what looks black, for they are old,
put those that are young and fresh (which will look red) into a Pan of boiling
Water; having boiled a little time, take them up and drain them, when they are
cold, put them into some convenient Vessel, and add thereto some Cloves, Mace,
Ginger, Pepper and Nutmeg, then take the White wine, a little Vinegar and Salt,
and pour this liquor in to your Mushroms, stop them close, and so keep them the
whole year.

Purslain pickled.
Gather them at their full growth, but not too old, parboil them and keep them
in White wine Vinegar and Sugar.

Or thus:
Wash the Stalks clean, and cut them into lengths of six inches, boil them in
Water and Salt indifferent tender, then drain and cool them; after this put to
them a pickle of stale Beer and wine Vinegar, adding thereto some Salt; if you
stop them up close, they will keep till the Spring following.

Quinces pickled.
First core your Quinces, those which are fairest and largest, the worse sort
cut in pieces, and boil them to make your liquor strong, then put in whole
Quinces, and let them be a quarter boiled, then strain your liquor and put to
it some Salt, some strong stale Beer; then lay your Quinces into a Pot, and put
in the liquor, so stop it up close.

Otherways.
Take Quinces and neither pare or core them with your scroop, boil them
indifferently in Water and Salt, then barrel them and cover them in the liquor
they were boiled in; or you may pare them and boil them in White wine, into
which you must put whole Cloves, sliced Ginger and Cinnamon: Lastly, you may
barrel them up raw and put to them only White wine.

Red Cabbidge pickled.
Take your close leaved Cabbidge, and cut it into pieces or quarters, when your
liquor boils, parboil it therein, then take it up, drain it and pickle it in
Claret wine Vinegar.

Reddish tops pickled.
Half boil them, then put them into White wine, Salt, a little stale Beer, Mace
and bruised Pepper.

Sparagrass to keep all the year.
Parboil them but a very little, and put them into clarified Butter, cover them
with it, the Butter being cold cover it; about a Month after refresh them with
new Butter, and bury them under ground in a Pot covered over with leather.

Samphire pickled green.
Let your Samphire be fresh gathered, and pickle it in Water and Salt; when you
use it, boil it half a dozen walms, then drain it, and when it is cold, put it
into a pickle of Vinegar, for your present use; some boil it at first in Water
and Salt, and keep it in the same liquor, but the first way is the best.

Otherways.
Pick the branches from the dead leaves of the Samphire, and lay it into a
small barrel, then put thereto a strong brine of white Salt well scum'd; when
it is cold, put it into the barrel, cover it and keep it the whole year round;
when you would use it, let your Water boil in a Pipkin, and put your Samphire
therein, then take it up, and when it is cold, put Vinegar to it.

Stalks of Sherdowns or Thistles pickled.
These Sherdowns run up like an Artichoke, and have the same resemblance in
their roots, you must peel both root and stalk, and boil them in Water and
Salt, pickle them in White wine: This is very serviceable for either boiled or
baked Meats.

Shampinions pickled.
Parboil them a little in Water and Salt, then lay them in a pickle of white
wine, white wine Vinegar, bruised Pepper, Salt, and some large Mace.

Sleep-at-noon pickled.
Parboil it in water and salt, then drain it from the water, and when it is
cold pickle it in white wine and Vinegar, with a little Pepper and large Mace.

Tarragon pickled.
Strip your Tarragon from the stalk, and put it into a Vessel with half white
wine and half Vinegar, stop it close, and keep it for your use.

Turnip tops pickled.
Let your Turnip tops be young, and cut off the withered leaves or branches;
when your water boils put them therein, letting them lie till they are pretty
tender, then drain them from the water, and let them stand till they are cold;
then pickle them in white wine, Vinegar and Salt.

All manner of Sallets and Grand-Sallets.
A grand Sallet for the Spring.
THe necessary and usual ingredients are Cowslip-buds, Violets and their
Leaves, Strawberry-leaves, Brooklime, Watercresses, young Lettice, Spinach,
Alexander-buds, etc. you must have them all apart, then take by themselves
Samphire, Olives, Capers, Broom-buds, Cucumbers, Raisins and Currants parboiled,
blanched Almonds, Barberries, with other pickles; then prepare your standard
for the middle of your grand Sallet, let not the Basis be Butter as some
absurdly make it, but a Turnip or another hard thing, on which it may
conveniently stand: Let your standard be like a Castle made of paste, and
washed over with the yolks of Eggs, and within it a Tree made in like manner,
and colored green with Herbs, and stuck with Flowers; you must have hereunto
annexed twelve supporters round stooping to and fastened to your Castle; then
having four rings of Paste, the one bigger than the other, the biggest must
cover your Castle, and reach within three inches of the foot of your Supporter,
the second must be within two inches of that, and so place as many as you think
fit gradually, that they may be like so many ascending steps: this done, place
your Sallet round of one sort on the uppermost ring, so round all the other
till you come to the dish, with every one a several sort, then place all your
pickles from that to the brim of your Dish severally, one answering another
severally: then garnish your dish with all things suitable to the season.

Take notice that your Standard in the Summer ought to be the resemblance of a
green Tree; in Autumn a Castle carved out of Carrets and Turnips; in the Winter
a Tree hung with Snow: These grand Sallets are only for great Feasts.

Grand Sallets of less trouble and more usual.
Take the Buds of all good Sallet-herbs, wash them and swing them in a clean
Napkin, then lay th^se in a pile in the middle of the Dish, (...) about the
Center lay blanched Almo^^^ ^l^w Figs, Raisins of the Sun, Currants, Capers and
Olives, next these jagged Beets, jagged Lemons, Cabbage, Lettice in quarters,
over all pour Oil, Vinegar and Sugar.

Another.
Take all sorts of good Herbs the Season does afford, the little Leaves of red
Sage, the smallest Leaves of Sorrel, and the Leaves of Parsley pickled very
small, the youngest leaves of Spinach, the smallest leaves of Burnet and
Lettice, white Endive and Charvel, all finely picked and washed, and swung in a
Napkin, then place these in the middle of your Dish, and about them lay Capers,
Currants, Olives, Lemons sliced, Beet-roots boiled, carved and sliced, Oil and
Vinegar.

Another.
In the midst of your Dish place your small Salleting, on that some small
Lettice finely picked and washed, after that some Ellicsander-buds cut in
halves, lay Parsnips in quarters round the Dish, being first boiled, and
between the quarters some small Lettice, some Watercresses and
Ellicsander-buds, lastly pour on Oil and Vinegar.

A Sallet of Fennel.
Take young Fennel about a foot long in the Spring, tie it up in bunches, as
you do Sparagrass; when your water boils, put in enough to make a Dish, after
it is boiled drain it well, dish it as you do Sparagrass, and serve it up with
Butter and Vinegar.

A Sallet of Scurvy Grass.
Pick your Scurvy Grass very well, then soak it in water, and swing it as dry
as you can, then lay it round in a dish with Capers and Currants, about it
carved Lemon, and Orange round that, with Eggs on the center, boiled pretty
hard and quartered; lastly, pour on Oil, Vinegar, and Sugar scraped thereon, so
trim your Dish brim.

A Sallet of green Pease.
Your Pease appearing near a foot above ground, cut off what you think
sufficient for a Sallet, then put it into boiling liquor; being enough, drain
out the water, and put to it some drawn Butter, season it with Salt, and hack
it with your Knife, toss it with the Butter, and so serve it up. Turnip or
Raddish tops so ordered are excellent good.

A Sallet of Alexander-buds.
Cleanse by washing some of your large Alexander-buds, then put them into
boiling water; being tender, drain them, lay these in the midst of a Dish round
about upright, with boiled Currants and Capers, lay on and about the Dish carved
Lemon, and pour on Oil and Vinegar.

A Sallet of boiled Spinach.
Put in your Spinach into boiling water, and boil it very thick, or it will
change its color, when it is tender take it up, drain it, and hack it with
your knife, then stew it with parboiled Currants, a little Vinegar, drawn
Butter, Sugar, a grated Nutmeg and Salt; let these stew till it be ready to
boil up, then have in readiness some white-bread toasts, and put them into the
bottom of your Dish, and put your Sallet on them by spoonfuls, scrape on Sugar
and serve it up.

A Sallet of Watercresses.
Pick, wash, drain and lay them in the center of your Dish with sliced Lemon
and Oranges, finely carved, one against the other in partitions, with some
Alexanderbuds, Currants, Capers, Oil, Vinegar, with scraped Sugar, or without.

A Sallet of pickled Capers.
Lay your pickled Capers and Currants hashed and boiled together in the middle
of your Dish, with red Beets boiled and jagged, Lemons done in the same manner,
and dished round the Capers and Currants: thus serve it up with Oil and Vinegar.

A Sallet of Rose-buds and Clove-Gilliflowers.
Pick your Rose-buds, and put them into an earthen Pipkin, with White wine
Vinegar and Sugar. Thus may you use Violets, Cowslips, or Rosemary Flowers.

Diverse Sallets boiled.
Parboil Spinach, and chop it fine with your knife, then set it over a
Chasing-dish of Coals with Butter and Vinegar, season it with Nutmeg, Cinnamon,
Ginger, Sugar, and a few of parboiled Currants, garnish it with hard Eggs cut
into quarters, and serve it up on Sippets: in this manner you may order
Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Succory, Colliflowers, Sorrel, Marrygold-leaves,
Watercresses, Leeks, boiled Onions, Sparagrass, Rochet, Alexanders; parboil
them first, and season them all alike. Butter, Vinegar, Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar
and Eggs are very good for boiled Sallets.

A Sallet of Mallows.
Strip off the leaves from the tender stalks, saving the tops, let them lie in
water, and then boil them tender, set them over the Coals with Butter and
Vinegar, let them stand a while, then put in grated Bread and Sugar between
every lay.

A Sallet of Burdock-roots.
Cut off the outward rind, and let them soak an hour and a quarter; after this
boil them till they be tender, then set them over a Chafing Dish with Butter
and Vinegar, having stood a quarter of an hour, put grated Bread between every
lay and serve them up.

Flesh of all sorts marinated, pickled or souced.
Bullocks Cheek souced.
TAke a fat Bullocks cheek and lay it in Pepper and Salt four days, having
first boned and cleans'd it well, then roll it into an even Collar, then boil
it in Water and Salt till it be very tender, then tie it up in a hoop as you do
Brawn, and lay it into a Vessel with some White wine, stale Beer, Mace, Cloves
and Pepper.

Beef how to Collar red.
Take a Flank of Beef, and cut it out four foot in length, and about two in
breadth, then mingle a little Cocheneil and Alum together, and put them into a
pint of Red wine; after this, season your Beef with Saltpeter, then lay your
Beef into a Tray, with your Red wine a whole day and a night, then season your
Beef with sweet Herbs, minced Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace and Pepper beaten very
small; Collar up your Beef, and bind it about very hard with Tape, then boil it
leisurely in Pumpwater; when it is cold, lay it in a Vessel, and put to it a
pickle made of White wine, strong Broth and Vinegar; cut it when you serve it
into slices upon a plate with Vinegar, or at a great Feast divide it into three
Collers, and place them in a Dish, stick Bayleaves upon them, and garnish the
Dish with Flowers and green.

Brawn souced.
Let your Brawn be about three years growth, take out the bones of his sides,
having cut off his head close to his ears, then cut four Collers of a side, cut
the Collers deeper in the belly than the back, because the belly will shrink in
the boiling; having made your Collers equal, not bigger in one place than the
other, lay them in Water two days and a night, scrape them in warm Water half a
dozen several times during that space; then having laid them a little while in
cold Water, roll them up in Collers, and tie them up with Tape.

You must boil them with a very quick fire, scum off the fat as it rises;
after an hour let it boil leisurely, when it is tender, draw your fire, and let
it stand till the next morning, then take them out and bind them in broad
hoops, laying them in Oat-meal and Bran boiled in Water, which must be strained
through a strainer into the Vessel, where you intend to keep them, adding Salt
thereto, and close it up from the air.

Brawn coller'd and souced the best way.
Let not your Brawn be quite so old as the former, then scald it and bone it,
making but three Collers thereof, viz. the neek Collar, the sheald Collar, and
the Flank Collar; water your Collers two days, each day shift it thrice and
scrape it; the last day squeeze out the blood, wash it very clean, and dry it
in a cloth; when it is dry, sprinkle on Salt and roll it up, beginning from
the belly, adding some flesh to the flank to make it correspond in thickness
with the back, of which you may be supplied from the Gammon, then bind it up as
hard as possibly you may, and put it into your boiling liquor, scum it
continually, and as it ought to boil five hours at least, so supply constantly
the wasting of the Water with more; if a Wheat-straw will penetrate it, you may
conclude it is enough, then draw your fire, and pour in by little and little
cold Water, not suffering it to settle in its own liquor, and it will be of a
delicate white color, then take them up, and set your Collers an end. Let your
sauce be small Beer, mixed with Bran and fine Oaten Flower boiled in Water and
Salt strained through a hair-sieve and mingled with your Beer, put your Brawn
herein, and stop your Vessel close.

Otherways to souce a young sucking Pig.
Having cut off the head, scald it and cut it down the back, soak the sides
well in Water, and cleanse it from the blood; then dry the sides, after this
season them with Nutmeg, Ginger and Salt, roll them and tie them up hard in
clean clouts; then lay them into a broad Pan, with as much Water as will cover
them, and put thereto a pottle of White wine; when it boils put in your Pig,
and not before, with Salt, Ginger, Mace, Parsley and Fennel-roots scraped and
picked; when they are about half boiled, put in a pottle more of White wine,
when thoroughly boiled, put in slices of Lemonpill.

Calves head souced.
Scald your Calves head, and take away the bones, then soak it in Water seven
or eight hours, changing the Water twice in that time; having dried it with a
cloth, season it with some Salt and bruised Garlic (if you like it) then
rolling it up into a Collar, bind it up very close, and boil it in White wine,
Water and Salt, when boiled, keep it in the souce liquor, serve it in the
Collar, or slice it with Oil, Vinegar and Pepper: This dish will puzzle a good
Palate to tell what it is.

Capon souced.
Having procured a young and full bodied Capon, prepare him as for the spit,
then let him soak four hours with a knuckle of Veal well joynted, then set them
a boiling in a deep Pan or Pipkin with a gallon of Water, when it boils, scum
it, and put in half a dozen blades of Mace, two or three races of Ginger
sliced, three Fennel-roots, and as many of Parsley: when your Capon is boiled,
take it up, and put to your souced Broth, a quart of White wine, and boil it to
a jelly, then put it into an earthen Pan, or some other Vessel, and lay your
Capon therein, with the slices of three Lemons, and cover it close, serve it
and garnish it with pieces of Lemon, Barberries, Mace, Nutmeg and some of the
jelly.

Goats-flesh coller'd and souc'd.
Take the neck or breast of a Goat, and when you have taken out the bones, with
a rowling-pin beat it into an equal thickness, so that one part be not thinner
than another, then season it with Cloves, Mace, Salt, Pepper, Ginger, all
manner of sweet Herbs minced small, and so collar it, binding it very hard with
Tape, add to your Spices, etc. aforesaid, a pint and a half of White wine, and
so bake it in a Pot; when it is baked, put in half a pint of White wine more,
with some strong Broth; then divide your Collar, and let it lie in the same
pickle; you may serve it up in slices or otherways.

Geese coller'd and souc'd.
Take a Goose and boneit, then cut the flesh square and soak it twelve hours in
a little White wine, Cloves, Mace, Pepper and Salt, then take it up and lay
small pieces of Anchovies all over it, with Westphalia Bacon minced small, then
roll it up hard, and boil it in strong Broth, and a little White wine, whole
Pepper and large Mace, let this be the only pickle; when you serve them, cut
them in halves, and garnish the Dish with Westphalia Bacon minced.

Mutton coller'd and souc'd.
Take a breast of Mutton, cut off the neck end and bone it, slice it about the
Brisket, soak it very well in water from the blood; it being dried and spread
abroad, season it with an Onion minced, a little Samphire, a few Capers, a
pickled Cucumber, and some Time also, Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Ginger and Salt,
with a few pieces of Anchovies, over all these sprinkle with a feather the yolk
of an Egg, roll up your Collar, and boil it in Water and Salt, with a faggot of
sweet Herbs; when it is tender boiled, take it up and lay it in some of the
liquor with White wine put thereto. Thus you may order your Chines, but then
you must lard them.

Pig souced.
Split, bone, and soak your Pig in several waters, then dry it and season it
with Sage, Salt, sweet Herbs minced, Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg and Ginger,
strew these ingredients being well mixed together on both sides of your Pig,
beginning at the tail, collar it up close, and bind it hard, wash it without
clean from the Herbs, and boil it in fair Water, scumming it continually; when
it is half boiled, put thereto a faggot of sweet Herbs, some large Mace, a race
or two of Ginger sliced, with half a pint of White wine Vinegar, and a little
Izing-glass; take up your Pig, when it is enough, and boil up the liquor to a
jelly, take off the bottom and top, and pour the rest upon your Pig into an
earthen Pan, having first let it cool and melted it again; when you dish it,
cut it into four quarters, with the head in the middle, and an Apple in his
mouth, beat your jelly and pour over it, garnish your dish with Flowers and
Bay Leaves.

Some souce a sucking Pig after this manner: first scald the Pig, then cut it
into four quarters, bone it and let it lie in Water twenty four hours, then
roll it up like Brawn with Sage leaves, and Lard watered and cut small, grated
Bread mixed with juice of Orange, season it with Nutmeg, Mace and Salt; having
rolled it, bind it up hard with Tape, then boil it in Water, White wine, Mace,
whole Ginger, a little Lemon-pill, a faggot of sweet Herbs and Salt, boil it
very well, and set it in an earthen Pot to cool in the liquor, and let it souce
there two days at least; you may slice it out, or serve it whole with Sugar and
Mustard.

Another very good way.
Chine your Pig in two parts, take out all the bones and lay it in water all
night, the next day scrape out all the filth from the back, and wipe it very
dry, then cast Pepper on it, a little large Mace, Ginger, and a Bay-leaf or two
in the same manner, as you would order a Collar of Brawn, let your Water boil
before you put it in, scumming it continually till it be half boiled, then take
out a ladleful or two of the liquor, and put it into a Pipkin, and boil with it
some Rhenish wine or Claret, sliced Nutmeg, gross Pepper and sliced Ginger; let
it stand till it be almost cold, then dish it with Bay Leaves.

Pork coller'd and souc'd.
Take a piece of Pork out of the side, water it all night, and squeeze the
blood from it, then season it with a handful of Sage, sweet Marjoram, Time,
Parsley, all minced very small together, then cut some collops out of a Leg of
Veal, hack them with your knife, and season them with Salt, Nutmeg, Mace and
Pepper, and having first washed your Pork on the inside with yolks of Eggs,
wash the outside of your Veal therewith, and lay it within your Pork; lastly,
strew on your remaining seasoning, and roll it up hard, binding it with Tape:
when it is boiled, souce it in some of the same liquor, with a little Vinegar,
beaten Pepper and Ginger; when you serve it up, stick your Pork with Bay Leaves
or Rosemary and Flowers, garnishing your Dish with Flowers and Sage.

Rams head souced.
Cut the head off, with a good part of the neck adjoining to it, and boil it
with the skin on a good while; when it is thoroughly boiled, (which will require
a considerable time) take it up and pluck off the skin, then take Broth you
have boiled some fresh meat in, and boil it over again, with Vinegar, Salt, a
good handful of sweet Herbs, Ginger, Pepper, a good piece of Horse-raddish root
scraped, and a quarter of a pound of French-barley; being boiled, strain them
through a bag, and souce the head in it; you may serve it up either in slices,
or whole with the horns on.

Sides of Lamb souced.
Bone your fide of Lamb, soak it and squeeze it well from the blood, wipe it
dry, and season the inside with beaten Nutmeg, Ginger, some sweet Herbs minced
small, whole Coriander-seed, minced Lemon-pill and Salt; lastly, some slices of
broad Lard over all: then roll it up in a Collar, and tie it up in a clean
cloth, put it into your liquor when it boils, and scum it very well, and then
put in sliced Ginger, sliced Nutmeg, Salt, Fennel and Parsley roots,; being
almost boiled, put in a quart of White wine, when it is enough take it off, and
put in slices of Lemon, with the Pill of two whole Lemons; boil it close
covered to make the Veal look white.

Thus you may order a breast of Veal, or any joint of Mutton, Kid, Fawn or
Venison.

Swan coller'd.
Bone your Swan, and part the two sides, season it according to the foregoing
directions in the soucing of Geese, season it with Pepper and Sage minced, and
dipping them into yolks of Eggs, lay them on the two sides of your Swan, so
roll them up into Collers; let the pickle be the same as was shown you before
for the Geese; boil the head to set upon your Collers in the middle of the dish.

Venison coller'd.
Take a Hanch or Side of Venison, and cut it into pieces fit to make three
Collers; first lard your pieces, and then season them with Pepper, Cloves,
Mace, Nutmeg, and as much Salt as will convert your Spices into a grayish
color, then roll up your Collers, and put them into an earthen Pot, and bake
them with Butter, covering your Pot with course paste; having stood five or six
hours in the Oven, draw it and let it cool, then take out your Venison, and
pour away the gravy, and make your Pot clean, then lay in the bottom thereof
some clarified Butter, lay in upon it your Venison, and fill it up with
clarified Butter: Thus you may keep Venison a whole year.

Veal a breast souced.
Take out the bones of your breast of Veal, and lay it in Water till you have
purged it from its blood; having dried it, take all manner of sweet Herbs,
Nutmeg and Cinnamon beaten, Ginger beaten grossly, Callendar pared, Lemon cut in
pieces, mingle these together, then spread your Veal, and strew on the inside
thereof these materials before recited; then roll it up like a Collar of Brawn,
and bind it close; when your liquor boils, put in your Veal and scum it well,
then put in a faggot of sweet Herbs, and keep it covered, for that will make it
look white, when it is almost boiled, put in some sliced Nutmeg, large Mace, a
little Ginger and a Lemon or two sliced.

Or thus:
Take a breast of Veal, bone it, cleanse it from the blood, and season it as
aforesaid, then take thin flices of fat Bacon, and season them with Sage and
Pepper, dipping them into the yolks of Eggs, and lay these all over the inside
of your Veal, then roll it up, beginning at the neck, and having tied it fast,
boil it with the bones, and a faggot of sweet Herbs, scumming it till it is
boiled, then put it into your soucing-Pan with the same Broth, adding some
Vinegar and Salt thereto, with some large Mace.

Veal a leg souced.
First take a Leg of Veal and bone it, then take great Lard and season it with
Pepper, Cloves and Mace, and lard your Leg there with, season the Veal with the
same seasoning, adding some Salt thereto; lay your Veal abroad, being beaten
flat and even, and strew thereon all manner of sweet Herbs minced small, and
strowed on it, roll it up as before, and boil it in a Pipkin with Water, White
wine and Salt, pickle it in the liquor it was boiled in: you may serve it up
whole or in slices.

Wigeons souced and coller'd.
Take the same method in ordering your Wigeons, as you did before in the Swans,
only add thereto a couple of Onions before you roll them up into Collers; and
by this rule you may do any Fowl according to their nature when they are in
season.

A general Jelly for any kind of souced meats.
Take three or four pair of Calves feet, scald them and cleanse them very well,
taking away the fat betwixt the claws, and also the long shank bones, lay them
a soaking in water five hours, and boil them in two Gallons of Water till it is
consumed to three quarts; being boiled, strain it through a Strainer; when the
broth is cold, take it from the grounds, and divide it into three parts for
three several colors, putting each part into a several Pipkin with a quart of
White wine, let one be colored with Cocheneil, the second with Saffron, and
let the last have its own complexon, let each Pipkin have some Cinnamon, a race
of Ginger, and a little Mace, with some Nutmeg, slicing each particular Spice,
melt your Jelly, and put into every Pipkin a pound or somewhat more of Sugar,
and with it the yolks of half a dozen Eggs beaten very well, stir these well
together, and when it is ready to boil, take it off and strain it through bags,
so keep it for your use.

HAving treated of the more substantial part of Food and their several ways of
dressing, whether Fish, Flesh or Fowl boiled, stewed, roasted, fried, broiled,
frigassied, baked in Paste, or out of Paste, marinated, souced and pickled,
each in their orders Alphabetically digested, with their several proper Sauces
and Pickles; I shall in the next place discourse methodically, and according to
order, of the right framing and compounding (according to the latest and best
fashion) all manner of Keck-shaws, as Florentines, Jellies, Leaches, Creams,
Puddings, Custards and Cheescakes: And the first I shall begin with according
to the propounded order is

TARTS.

Almond Tart.
TAke three quarters of a pound of blanched Almonds, and soak them a a while in
Water, then pound them in a stone Mortar, a wooden one will serve, or a deep
Tray, put to them some Rosewater; when you have pounded them very well, pound
them over again with a little Cream, then set on about a pint and a half of
Cream over the fire, and put your pounded Almonds therein with some Cinnamon,
large Mace, and a grain of Musk fastened to a thread, stir it continually that
it burn not to the bottom till it be thick, then take it off the fire, and beat
in the yolks of four or five Eggs, with the whites of two, so season it with
Sugar or Orangado, and bake it either in a Dish or Paste.

Or you may only strain beaten Almonds with Cream, yolks of Eggs, Sugar,
Cinnamon and Ginger, boil it thick, fill your Tart, and when it is baked ice it.

Damsin Tart.
Boil them very well in wine, strain them with Cream, Sugar, Cinnamon and
Ginger, then boil them again, and so fill your Tart.

Strawberry Tart.
Wash your Strawberries, which you must procure of the midling size, and put
them into your Paste, season them with Cinnamon, Ginger, and a little red Wine,
on the top lay Sugar, let it stand in the Oven about half an hour, then draw
it, ice it and scrape on Sugar.

Cherry Tart.
Stone your Cherries and lay them in the bottom of your Pie, with beaten
Cinnamon, Ginger and Sugar, then close it up, bake it and ice it; when it is
baked, pour into it Muskadine and Damask water well mingled together, and
scrape on Sugar.

Medler Tart.
Your Medlers that are rotten are only fit for the purpose, which you must
strain into a Dish, and then set them over a Chafing Dish of coals, season it
with Sugar, Ginger and Cinnamon, adding thereto some yolks of Eggs beaten;
having boiled half a quarter of an hour, lay it into your paste, being baked,
scrape on Sugar.

Pineapple Tart.
Take three handfuls of Pine-apples, the pulp of as many Pippins, with a
pricked Quince; when they are well beaten, put to them three quarters of a pint
of Cream, a little Rosewater, the yolks of five Eggs, with half a quarter of a
pound of Sugar, you may thin it with more Cream, if you find it too thick; let
your Paste, in which you put these ingredients, be thin, low and dried, so
close it up and bake it.

A Spring Tart.
Gather what buds are not bitter, also the leaves of Primroses, Violets and
Strawberries, with young Spinach, and boil them, and put them into a Cullender,
then chop your Herbs very small, and boil them over again in Cream, add
thereunto so many yolks with the whites, as will sufficiently thicken your
Cream, to which you must add some grated Naples biscuit, color all green with
the juice of Spinach, and season it with Sugar, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and a little
Salt, you may bake it in Puff-paste or otherways.

Taffety Tart.
Having wetted the Paste with Butter and cold water, roll it very thin, then
lay Apples in lays, and between every lay of Apples, strew some fine Sugar and
some Lemon-pill cut very small; let them bake an hour, then ice them with
Rosewater, Sugar and Butter, and wash them over with the same, then strew more
fine Sugar on them, and put them into the same Oven again, you may serve them
either hot or cold.

Cowslip Tart.
Take three quarts of the blossoms of Cowslips, mince them and pound them in a
Mortar, put to them a quarter of a pound of Naple-bisket grated, a pint of
Cream, and put them into a Skillet, and let them boil a little on the fire,
then take them off, and beat in the yolks of half a dozen Eggs with some Cream;
make it thick over the fire, but let it not curdle, season it with Sugar, a
little Rosewater and Salt; your best way is to let your Cream be cold before
you stir in your Eggs, then bake it in Paste or Dish.

Cream Tart.
Take Quinces, Pears, Wardens and Pippins, slice them into quarters, boil them
and strain them into Cream, as also Malagatoons, Necturus, Apricocks, Peaches,
Plums or Cherries, fill your Tart, and lay on the top preserved Citron; when it
is baked, beat Rosewater and Sugar, and pour thereon.

A Tart of green Pease.
Boil your Pease tender, and drain them well in a Cullender, season them with
Salt and Saffron, and put some Sugar and sweet Butter, then bake it almost an
hour, then draw it forth of the Oven, and ice it, put in a little Verjuyce, and
shake them well together, then scrape on Sugar and serve it.

Prune Tart.
Stew two pound of Prunes in as much Claret wine as will cover them; being
tender strain them, then wash and rub them all together, and pour in some of
the liquor they were stewed in to wash the Prunes from the stones, and this
will be instrumental to carry all off but the skin and stones; then set what
you have strained over a Chafing Dish of coals with, a little whole Cinnamon,
large Mace, a little Orangado and Citron minced, season it with Sugar,
Rosewater, beaten Cinnamon and Ginger, let it boil up till it be thick, after
this take out your whole Spice; let not the Walls of your Tart be above an inch
and a half high, and dry it first in an Oven, you may make it cornered fashion
either in six or in eight, then put in your stuff, and let no, corner be empty,
but with your spoon plant it every where, put it into the Oven, and let it
stand a little, when you draw it, stick it with Lozenges, and scrape on Sugar.

A Goosberry Tart baked green and clear as Crystal.
When you have formed your Tarts into what form you think fit, strew some Sugar
in the bottom of them, then take large round Goosberries picked, and lay them
therein one by one, covering the bottom, and sprinkle thereon some Sugar, then
lay on another lay, and cover that with Sugar, and so continue doing till your
coffins be full, let the lid of your Tarts be carved, and bake them quick, by
which means they will be green and clear. So will Codlins bake green, if you
order them, as you do the Goosberries, and cutting the lids; but if you would
have your fruits baked red, bake them slowly, and let their lids be close.

Puff-paste how to make it the best way.
Take a pottle of Flower, and the whites of half a dozen Eggs, make it up into
Paste with cold Water, but make it not too stiff, work it well, and roll it
forth four square into a sheet as thick as your finger; then take three pound
of Butter, and beat it well with a Rowling-pin, then lay it on in slices all
over your Paste, and as thick as your finger, and strew a little Flower over
it, then roll up your sheet of Paste like a collar with the Butter within,
squeeze and close it at both ends with your Rowling-pin, scruise it all along
the roll of Paste, and roll it broad and longways, then clap up both ends, and
make them meet in the middle one over the other, and fasten it down again with
the Rowling-pin, rolling it forth every way as thin as it was at first when you
laid on the Butter; then flower your board well underneath, and spread it over
with Butter, roll it up, and work it as before: thus do three or four times
till the aforesaid Butter be spent: In the Summer you must make your Puff-paste
in the morning, and set it in some cool place: In the Winter you must beat your
Butter very well, otherways its hardness will break your Paste.

Rice-Tart.
Take a quantity of Rice and boil it very tender in Milk or Cream, then pour it
into a Dish, and season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, Cinnamon, Salt, Sugar, and the
yolks of six Eggs, put it into your Paste with some juice of Orange, close it,
bake it, and scrape on Sugar.

Warden Tart.
Take two dozen of Wardens, pare them, and slice them into your Tart, put to
them as many Cloves, a pound and a quarter of refined Sugar, six or seven
blades of Cinnamon broken into pretty big pieces, four races of Ginger sliced,
let it soak in the Oven four hours at least, then draw it, ice it with double
refined Sugar, Rosewater and Butter.

Pippin Tart.
Take what quantity you think fit of fair Pippins, pare them and core them;
having cut them into quarters, then stew them in Claret wine, whole Cinnamon and
sliced Ginger, stew them about half an hour, then put them into a Dish to cool,
but break them not; after you have laid them orderly into your Tart, lay upon
them some green Citron minced small, candyed Orange or Coriander, and some
Sugar; when it is baked, ice it and scrape on some Sugar.

A Tart made of Quinces, Wardens, Pears and Pippins.
Take eight Pippins, five Quinces, four Wardens, six Pears, pare them and slice
them into thin slices, then season them with beaten Cinnamon, Orange and Citron
candyed and minced, or for want of that you may use the raw Pills of Lemon or
Orange minced small, lay on the top of all two pound of Sugar, then close up
your Paste, Pasty-pan or Dish, bake it and ice it, scraping on Sugar.

Spinach Tart of three colors.
Take three handfuls of young Spinach, wash it clean, and put it into a Skillet
of boiling Water, being tender boiled, have in readiness three pints of Cream
boiled with Cinnamon that is whole, quartered Nutmeg; and one grain of Musk,
then strain the Cream with the yolks of fourteen Eggs and the boiled Spinach
into a Dish, with some Rosewater, a little Sack, and some fine Sugar, boil all
these over a Chafing Dish of coals, and stir it continually, so that you keep
it from curdling; when your Tart is dried in the Oven, fill it therewith,
having first made three distinct colors thereof.

Another very good way.
Make your Tart with works about an inch high, then provide a good quantity of
Spinach; having beaten it very well, strain it, then beat Almonds with
Rosewater very small, and mix them therewith, if you have a quart of this
composition, add to it a dozen Eggs with half the whites, with one grain of
Musk, beat these all together, and when your Tart is dried in the Oven fill it
herewith, and bake it.

You were better bake it in a Pasty-pan, making your Paste of cold Butter and
Water; it being fitted to the pan, put in your Tart-stuff, and let it bake
gently uncovered in an Oven slenderly heated, then fet it on a Plate, and stick
it full of small Comfits or sprigs of preserved Barberries or Orangado sliced,
or what other Sweetmeats you have by you.

A Tart made after the French fashion.
Take half the breast of a cold roasted Turkey, mince it and beat it with half
a pound of Lard minced, the marrow of two bones, half a pound of Butter; the
juice of two Lemons and a pound of Sugar, add to these half a pound of blanched
Almonds pounded in a Mortar with Rosewater, mix all these together, then slice
a piece of green Citron, and put thereto the yolks of half a dozen Eggs beaten;
having mingled them well together, fill your coffin herewith.

Bacon Tart.
Take new Lard or fat Bacon the freshest you can get; if it be not fresh, water
it two or three days; then cut it into pieces about an inch long, and after
that into square pieces, mingle it with as much green dried Citron of the same
cut, beat as much sweet Almonds with Rosewater, mix these together with good
store of Sugar, and a little beaten Ginger, and a spoonful of Oil; your Tart
being made round and shallow, lay in this composition, sticking thereon green
Citron, then close your Tart, or you may bake it in a Pasty-pan which is the
better way; in an hours time it will be baked, then draw it, and stick the lid
with sliced Citron, strew on some small perfumed Carraway Comfits, you may eat
it hot or cold, but best cold.

An excellent way to make an Almond Tart.
Having blanched your Almonds, beat them in a Marble Mortar with Rosewater to
keep them from Oyling, mix them with half the weight of Sugar, a quarter of the
weight of Pine-kernels, a small quantity of white Bread grated, the yolks of
four Eggs with half the whites, some preserved Citron, Orange or Lemon minced,
mingle these together with Cream, then fill your Tart herewith, bake it in an
Oven not too hot, and let it not stand there too long, when it is baked, stick
it with Preserves and Carraway comfits.

A Clary Tart.
Take two handfuls of Clary, wash it, and cut it indifferently small, then beat
it with the yolks of eight Eggs and half their whites, put it into a Drying Pan
with good store of sweet Butter, sweeten it and stir it well as it fryeth, fry
it but a little while, and have a special care you burn it not, then take two
handfuls of Spinach boiled very tender, press out the water and mince it small,
then take two or three Potatoes boiled and minced, with some Marrow; season all
these together with Nutmeg, Mace, Salt, Sugar, Verjuyce, and the pulp of Lemon
chopped small: your Tart being made, lay in this composition, and on the top
place the Marrow of two or three bones as whole as you can; having closed it,
bake it in an Oven not over hot an hour and half; then make a Caudle of yolks
of Eggs, Cinnamon, Verjuyce, Butter, Sugar and sliced Lemon; beat these together
till it boileth; your Tart being baked, pour this Caudle into it, scrape on
Sugar and serve it up.

Apricock Tart.
Take a quantity of Apricocks three quarters ripe, scrape the outside off, and
put them into Water as you scrape them; having raised your Tart, dry them and
fill it therewith, strew good store of Sugar on the top, close it, bake it an
hour, and scrape on Sugar.

Codling Tart.
Take your Codlings and scald them, letting them stand an hour in the same
Water that scalded them, being covered, and this will make them look very
green, then put them into your Tart whole or in quarters, with Sugar and a
little Musk, close them and let your lid be carved; whilst it is baking, boil a
quart of Cream with the yolks of four or five Eggs, Sugar and Musk; when your
Tart is half baked, cut it open and pour it on the Codlings, then set it into
the Oven again for half an hour, then draw it, scrape on Sugar, and serve it up
to the Table.

A quarter Tart of Pippins.
Quarter your Pippins, and lay them between two sheets of Paste, put in a piece
of whole Cinnamon, two or three bruised Cloves, a little sliced Ginger,
Orengado, a bit of sweet Butter about the bigness of an Egg, good store of
Sugar, sprinkle on some Rosewater, then close your Tart and bake it, ice it
before you set it up.

If you put your Pippins into Puff-paste, or short Paste, you must then first
boil your Pippins in Claret wine and Sugar, or else your Apples will be hard
when your crust is burnt; but in the boiling them, have a care you do not break
the quarters.

An excellent Cherry Pie.
Stone a pound of Cherries, bruise them and stamp them; after this boil up
their juice with Sugar. Then take two pounds more and stone them likewise, but
do not bruise them, and lay them with the aforesaid Syrrup in your Tart, being
baked, ice it and serve it up hot.

Puff-paste the best way how to make.
Take three pints of Flower, and two pounds of sweet Butter, work half a pound
of the Butter into the Flower dry between your hands, then break into the
Flower five Eggs, and as much fair Water as will wet it to make it reasonable
light Paste, then work it into a piece of a foot long, strew a little Flower on
the Table, then take it by the end and beat it well about the board till it
stretch long, and then double it, and taking both ends in your hand beat it
again, and so do five or six times; then work it up and roll it abroad, and
then take the other pound of Butter, and cut it in thin slices, and spread it
all over the one half of your Paste, then turn the other half over your Butter
side, and turn in the sides round underneath, then crush it down with a
Rowling-pin, and so work it five or six times with your Butter, then you may
roll it broad, and cut it into four quarters, then take a Dish as broad as your
piece of Paste, and strew thereon a little Flower, then lay on one piece of
Paste, and you may put into it Marrow, Artichokes bottoms or Potatoes, but you
must roll your bits of Marrow in the yolks of raw Eggs, and season them with
Cinnamon, Ginger, Sugar, and a very little Salt; then lay on your other sheet,
and close it round your Dish with your thumb; then cut off your round with your
knife close to the brim, and cut it cross the brim of the Dish like
Virginal-keys, and turn them cross one over another, then bake it in an Oven.

FLORENTINES.
LEt your Paste be made after the same manner, as the Puff-paste above
described, then boil the yolks of six Eggs with half a pint of Cream, keep it
from burning by stirring it continually, and it will turn thick like Curds and
be yellow, season it with Sugar, Cinnamon, and a little Nutmeg, with three or
four sliced Dates, some pieces of Almond Paste, half a dozen pieces of Marrow,
stir them together, and put them into the Florentine, then bake it in an Oven
as hot as for Pyes.

If you have Rice, boil it tender in Milk, and a blade or two of Mace, boil it
till the Milk be consumed, then season it with a little Nutmeg, Cinnamon and
Sugar, two or three raw Eggs, a little Salt, a little Rosewater, a handful of
Currants, three or four sliced Dates, put these into your Florentine, and bake
it as before.

If you have neither of these, take quarters of Pippins or Pears, the coars
taken out and boiled tender in Claret wine, or for want of these you may take
Goosberries, Cherries, or Damsens, or Apricocks without the stones, and put
them into your Florentine; when you see your Paste rise up white in the Oven,
and begin to turn yellow, take it forth and wash it with Rosewater and Butter,
scrape on fine Sugar, and set it into the Oven again about a quarter of an
hour, then draw it forth and serve it up.

Florentines of Rice.
The Paste for your Florentines ought to be a rich cold buttered Paste, or the
Puffpaste aforementioned. Take a pound and half of Rice, pick it and wash it,
then parboil it well in Water, then put it into a Cullender and drain it from
the Water; after this boil it in Cream so long till it is as thick as you can
make it without burning of it; in the boiling thereof put half a dozen sticks
of Cinnamon, put it into a deep Dish to cool, then take a moiety thereof and
break in four or five Eggs with the whites of two, put to it three quarters of
a pound of Beef Suet minced small, with the like weight of Currants, fourteen or
fifteen sliced Dates, season it with Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and a few Cloves, also a
little Mace, Ginger and Salt, with a handful of Sugar, and some Rosewater,
incorporate these into a thick body with some Cream, then put it into a Dish
with Paste; fill not your Dish too full lest it boil over, then jagg a sheet of
Puff-paste the breadth of your Dish, about half an inch broad, twist them and
lay over your Florentine from one side to the other, then cross them again,
that they may be Chequerwork, then cut the Paste upon the brim of your Dish,
double over all the ends of your Cross-bars, when it is baked stick Lozenges in
the Chequers, scrape on Sugar and serve it.

Another sort of Florentine.
Whilst you have some Currants boiling, pare half a score Pippins, and cut them
from the Core into the aforesaid Water and Currants, boil them tender, and put
them into a Cullender, there let them drain very well, then put them into a
Dish, and when they are cold, season them with Sugar, Rosewater, Cinnamon and
Carraway-seeds, then roll out two sheets of Paste, the one of which place in
the bottom of your Dish; and all over the brims, then put in your ingredients,
laying them round and high, wet it round and cover it with your other sheet,
close it and carve it about the brims of your Dish, in what form or fashion you
shall think fit; prick the lid, and when it is baked scrape on Sugar.

Florentine of Veal.
Mince cold Veal fine, then take grated Bread, Currants, Dates, Sugar, Nutmeg,
Pepper, two or three Eggs, and Rosewater, mingle all these together, and put it
over a Chafing Dish of Coals, stir them till they be warm, after this enclose
them between two sheets of Paste and bake it.

A Florentine of a Coney, the wing of a Capon, or the Kidney of a Loyn of Veal.
Mince any of these with sweet Herbs, parboiled Currants, a Date or two minced
small, a piece of preserved Orange or Lemon minced as small as your Date,
season it with Cinnamon, Nutmeg and Ginger, with some Sugar, then take the yolks
of two new laid Eggs, a spoonful of sweet Cream and Marrow cut in short pieces;
bake these in a Dish between two leaves of Puff-paste, putting some Rosewater
to it before you close it, being baked scrape on Sugar.

Florentine of Spinach.
Take a good quantity of young Spinach, and when your Water boils, parboil it
therein, drain it in a Cullender, and squeeze out the Water, then mince it
small with some Orengado, and put to it Currants proportionable to your Spinach,
season it with Cinnamon, Ginger, beaten Nutmeg and Salt, put it into your Dish
between two sheets of Puff-paste, put to it Butter and Sugar, close it, prick
it and bake it, when it is baked, put to it a little Sack, drawn Butter and
Vinegar, scrape on Sugar and serve it.

Florentine of Potatoes and Artichokes.
Put these Roots into boiling Water, and when they are boiled tender, blanch
them and season them with Nutmeg, Pepper, Cinnamon and Salt, season them but
lightly, then lay on a sheet of Paste in a Dish, and upon that some bits of
Butter, then lay in your Potatoes and Artichokes round the Dish with some
Eringo roots and Dates sliced in halves, Beef-Marrow, large Mace, sliced Lemon
and some Butter, then close it up with a-another sheet of Paste; when it is
baked, liquor it with Grape-Verjuyce, Butter and Sugar, and ice it.

Florentine of Barberries.
Take what quantity you think convenient and boil them with Claret wine and
Rosewater, adding thereto some Sugar; being boiled very thick, strain them and
put them on a bottom of Puff-paste in a Dish, then close them up with a cut
cover of the same Paste: when it is baked, ice it and stick the pulp thereof
all over with raw Barberries.

Florentine of Marrow.
Take the Marrow of four Marrow-bones and cut them into squares like large
Dice, add hereunto a grated Manchet, some sliced Dates, a quarter of a pound of
Currants, some Cream, roasted Wardens, Pippins or Quinces sliced, and the yolks
of four raw Eggs, season them with Cinnamon, Ginger and Sugar, mingle these well
together, and lay them in a Dish on a sheet of Paste and bake them.

Florentine of Rice.
Having picked your Rice very clean, boil it tender, then lay it in a Dish, and
put to it Butter, Sugar, Nutmeg and Salt, with a little Rosewater, and the
yolks of half a dozen Eggs, then put these ingredients on a sheet of Puff-paste
in a Dish, being half baked ice it.

Or you may mix your Rice with some Cream, Rosewater, Sugar, Cinnamon, yolks of
Eggs, Salt, boiled Currants and Butter, being baked, scrape on some Sugar.

JELLIES.
YOur usual stock for Jellies are Calves feet boiled very tender and blanched,
and knucles of Veal with the bones not broken; of these, take what quantity you
think fit, and lay them in Water a Night and Day, shift them often in that time
into fresh Water, and cleanse them well from the Blood, then boil them in so
much fair Water as will cover them, and a little more; as they boil, scum your
Pot, then put to them a little Salt, also type up in a Linen bag, some large
Nutmeg, Ginger and sliced Cinnamon, let these boil soberly the space of two
hours and a half; at which time you may try with your spoon whether it will
jelly, if not, boil it a little longer, but not down too low, for then it will
be apt to change color; if you find it jelly to your satisfaction and desire,
add to your Jelly some Izing-glass, let it then simper a little longer, then
take it off and strain it into a Dish or Pipkin, there to stand and cool till
you are ready to use it.

Jellies of John-Apples.
Pare them and cut them into less than quarters, then pick out the Kernels, but
leave the cores, and as you pare them, drop them into fair Water to keep them
from changing color, then put to them a pound of Apples, three quarters of a
pint of Water, and let it boil apace till it be half consumed, then run it
through a jelly bag, then take the full weight of them in double refined Sugar,
wet the Sugar thin with Water, and let it boil almost to a Candy, then put to
it the liquor of the Apples, and two or three slices of Orange-pill, a little
Musk, and a little Ambergriese tied in a Tiffany bag, and let it not boil too
softly for fear of losing the color, then warm a little juice of Orange and
Lemon together, and being half boiled put it therein; having reduced it to a
Jelly, you may use it by pouring it on some preserved Oranges laid in a glass
for that purpose, or otherways.

Jellies for soust meats.
Take four pair of Calves feet, scald them and take way the fat between the
claws, as also the long shank-bones, lay them in Water five hours, and boil
them in three quarts of (...) Spring Water to one quart, then strain it and set
it a cooling, after this, take away the grounds from it, and divide the purer
part into three equal proportions, putting each into a several Pipkin, adding
to every Pipkin a quart of wine, likewise a pound of Sugar, being first well
beaten in a Dish with the whites of Eggs, stew these together a little while
over a soft fire with Nutmeg, Ginger, Mace and Cinnamon, and color them
severally with Cocheneil, Saffron, etc. and so set them up for your use.

Crystal Jelly.
Take three pair of Calves feet, and two knuckles of Veal, wash them very well,
and let them stand twelve hours in Water, then boil them in spring Water from
five quarts to a Gallon; after this let the liquor stand, and when it is cold
pare away the bottom and top, then put to it some Rosewater, double refined
Sugar, seven spoonfuls of Oil of Cinnamon, the like quantity of Oil of Ginger,
four spoonfuls of Oil of Nutmeg, a grain and a half of Musk tied in a fine
linen cloth; when you have boiled all these together, put it into an earthen
Dish, and so let it stand for your use; when it is cold, serve it in slices or
otherways.

Or thus a much better way.
Your stock being cold, as aforesaid, take away the top and bottom, and put the
rest into a Pipkin, adding thereto some Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, sliced Ginger
and Nutmeg, together with a grain of Musk and Ambergriese tied in a
Tiffany-bag, put in also some Rosewater, and if your stock be stiff, a quart of
Rhenish wine, or what you think fit thereof to make the Jelly of a proper
thickness, season it with Sugar convenient for your Palate, and drop in of Oil
of Mace and Nutmeg, three drops of each, set these over the fire for the space
of a quarter of an hour, then take it off and squeeze into it the juice of half
a score Lemons beaten to a froth with the whites of six Eggs, then set it over
the fire till it boils, then take it off and strain it, having two Dishes, the
first straining pour in again, and let it run into the other dish till it be
clear.

Jelly of Raspisses.
First strain your Raspisses, and to every quart of juice add a pound and half
of Sugar; pick out some of the fairest, and having strowed Sugar in the bottom
of the Skillet, lay them in one by one, then put the juice upon them with some
Sugar, reserving some to put in when they boil, let them boil apace, and add
Sugar continually till they are enough.

Jelly for service of several colors.
Take four pair of Calves feet, a Knuckle of Veal, and a fleshy Capon, prepare
them as in the crystal Jelly; boil them in three gallons of Spring water, till
the one half be consumed, then strain it into an earthen Pan and let it cool;
after this pare the bottom and top, and dissolve it again, and divide it into
four equal proportions, and put them into as many Pipkins which will contain
about five pints a piece; put into one Saffron, into the second Cocheneil
beaten with Alum, into the third Turnsole, and let the last have its proper
color; put to every Pipkin a quart of White wine, and the juice of two Lemons,
put to the last Jelly one race of Ginger pared and sliced, and three blades of
large Mace: to the red Jelly two Nutmegs, and the quantity of as much Cinnamon,
with the same of Ginger: To the Turnsole put the like quantity of each with
some whole Cloves: Lastly, to the Amber and yellow Jelly the like quantity of
Spices. Then take the whites of a dozen and a half of Eggs, and beat them with
six pound of double refined Sugar, and divide this into four parts, putting
each proportion into every several Skillet; boil these again, then take them
off and strain them, once more set it over the fire, and when it boils up take
it off and strain it into an earthen Pan, so let it cool and keep it for your
use.

Jelly of Pippins Amber color.
Take a dozen fair Pippins and core them, boil them in three pints of fair
spring Water, till one half is consumed, then put in half a pint of Rosewater,
a pound and half of fine Sugar, and boil it uncovered till it come to the
color of Amber; if you would know when it is enough, drop some thereof from
your spoon upon a piece of glass; if it stand, it is enough, then run it into
an earthen Pan upon a Chafing Dish of coals, and while it is warm, fill up your
Boxes or Printing Moulds with a spoon, let it stand till it be cold, then turn
it ou^ of your Printing Moulds, and serve it at your pleasure.

The same Jellyed as red as a Ruby.
Take the same quantity of Pippins, as aforesaid, and core them, then boil them
in the like quantity of spring Water, with a pound and half of fine Sugar, boil
it covered close till it be red; the boiling either open or covered, gives them
the difference of complexion. Where note, let your Boxes lie four or five hours
in Water before you put in your Jellies, and it will not stick to them.

Jelly of Oranges.
Shave your Oranges thin, quarter them and lay them in Water three days, shift
them twice a day, then boil them very tender in several Waters till the
bitterness be gone; having dried them with a cloth cut them into thin slices
cross the quarters, then take their weight of fine Sugar, fill a pint of juice
of Apple-Johns and spring Water, strong of the Apples as you can make it, then
mingle the sliced Oranges and liquor together, your Sugar being finely beaten
and wet with Water, boil it a while, scum it and put the Oranges and Apple
liquor into it, boil it till it be ready to jelly, then put in the juice of
four Oranges and Lemons together, boil it a little after this, and add to it,
if you think fit, a little Musk and Ambergriese tied in a Tiffany-rag.

Otherways.
Take the juice of a dozen and a half of Oranges, with a quart of the aforesaid
stock, let them boil together a quarter of an hour, seasoned as was directed in
the crystal Jelly; if too weak, add some Izing-glass as much as may suffice; if
two strong, put thereto some Rhenish wine, clarifying it with the whites of
Eggs, then run it into your bags.

In the like manner you may make Jelly of red Currants, the juice thereof being
mingled with a little Rhenish wine; in the Winter season, you may use the
Syrrup of Mulberries, Barberries, or the Syrrup of Orangado, so will you have
your several colored Jellies with their several tastes.

Hartshorn Jelly.
Take the Brawn of four Cocks, steep it in Water a day and a night, and shift
it twice or thrice in that time, then take four ounces of Hartshorn, and boil
these together near upon two hours, then strain the broth into a Pipkin, and
let it be cold; after this take off the bottom and top, then put in your clean
Jelly into a Pipkin, and season it as you did your crystal Jelly before, only
adding thereto a little China-root sliced; you may also add Majesty of Pearl or
Corral in stead thereof; then put it over the fire again for the space of about
a quarter of an hour, then clarify it with whites of Eggs, and run it through
your bags, as aforesaid, and so preserve it for your use. This Jelly is a very
great Cordial, restringent, and will strengthen very much the back.

Another most excellent way.
Take what quantity you please of Hartshorn, the like of Izing-glass and Dates,
the same of sliced Figs and Prunes, to half a pound of the aforesaid
ingredients put a pound of Sugar, of Cinnamon and Ginger each half an ounce, a
quartern of Mace, and the like of Cloves, half an ounce of Nutmegs, and a
little red Saunders, slice your Spices, but let your Cinnamon be put in whole;
you may do well to add a stick of Liquorish.

A most excellent white Jelly.
Take a couple of Capons, boil them and take away the fat and lungs, first of
all having soaked them in water three or four hours, immediately after
trussing, let the Water you boil them in be at least two gallons, unto which
you must put a gallon of White wine, scum these and boil them to a Jelly,
strain the Broth from the grounds, and blow off the fat clean, then take a
quart of the Jelly-broth, and a quart of Cream, a pound and a half of Sugar,
and a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, mingle these all together, and let them
have a walm or two over the fire, with half an ounce of fine sierced Ginger,
then set it a cooling, and slice it or cast it into Printing-Moulds.

A most incomparable Jelly for a weak back.
Take a quart of spring Water, and put therein two Ounces and a half of
Hartshorn, boil it over a soft fire till it waste to a pint, then take it off
the fire, and having stood a while, strain it through a fine cloth, crushing
the Hartshorn with a spoon gently; then put to it the juice of a Lemon, two
spoonfuls of Red-rose-water, half a spoonful of Cinamon-water, four or five
ounces of fine Sugar, or sweeten it according to your discretion, then put it
out into little Glasses, and let it stand twenty four hours. When you use it,
let it be in the Morning, or about four of the clock in the Afternoon; it is
excellent if you dissolve it in a dish of Broth.

Thus much for Jellies; The next thing that will employ our consideration and
fancy, will be the composition of Leaches, but before we treat hereof, it will
be very requisite to show you the use of your Jelly and Leach.

They are a great second and third Course dish; your Jelly being sliced forth
thin and laid in your Dish.

Your Jelly is cut forth into Ribbonds, and placed between your Jelly with your
colors opposite to one another; beat some of your Jelly in pieces, and place
it in gobblets in the middle of your Dish, also garnish it with Gobblets or
Diamonds of Jelly in every vacant place; you may run your Jelly into a
Lemon-pill with the pulp taken out.

LEACHES.
How to make a Leach all manner of ways.
TAke a quarter of a pound of the best Jordan Almonds, blanch them and steep
them in Water ten hours or more, then pound them in a Marble-morter very small,
then put them into a Pipkin or Skillet with a quart of Milk over the fire, and
let them boil half an hour, but continually stir it, for otherways it may burn
to; then strain out your Milk into another Skillet through a hair-strainer;
then put to it an ounce of Izing-glass that had before been steept an hour and
half in Milk, and withal a good quantity of Cinnamon, with some large Mace and
Nutmeg quartered, also a pound of fine white Sugar, of Musk and Ambergriese
both together one grain, then set it again on the fire, and stir it continually
till you take it off; when it is enough, put to it some Rosewater, and dish it
up in a Basin.

If you would have your Leaches of several colors, you must follow the same
method prescribed you in the tincturing your Jellies: for Example, tie up
Spinach well beaten in a Tiffany-rag, squeeze that, and the juice gives a green
tincture or complexion to your Jelly or Leach; if you will have your colors to
be yellow or red, then use in the same manner Cocheneil and Saffron, but have a
care you press them not too hard with your spoon, and by that means break the
bag, and so defile your Leach, etc. If you would have any other colors, you
must make use of Syrrups which are clear, and forget not to steep your
Cocheneil and Saffron in Rosewater before you use it.

A most excellent French Leach.
Take three pints of Cream, half a pint of Rosewater, five grains of Musk
dissolved in the same, and half a dozen large blades of Mace boiled with half a
pound of Izing-glass; being steeped and washed clean, put to it half a pound of
Sugar, being boiled to a Jelly, run it through your bag into a Dish, when it is
cold, slice it into Chequer-work, and so serve it on a Plate or glasses.

The best way of making an Almond Leach.
Take two ounces of Izing-glass, and lay it a steeping an hour and a half in
Water, shift it and boil it in fair Water, then let it cool; then take three
pound of Almonds and blanch them, when you have so done, pound them in a stoen
Mortar, and put to them some Milk to keep them from oyling, after you have
strained them, add to them large Mace and sheed Ginger, and boil them till they
savor well of the Spice, then put in your dissolved Izing-glass, Sugar, and a
little Rosewater, run these through a strainer, and put it into dishes. You may
discolor some part of this Leach by Saffron, another by Turnsole or green
Wheat, and another by Blew-bottles.

Another Leach of Almonds as white as snow.
Take a pound of Almonds, steep them in Water six hours, and blanch them into
cold, Water, then make a decoction of half a pound of Izing-glass, with two
quarts of White wine, and the juice of two Lemons, boil them till half be
wasted, when it is cold strain it, then mingle them with the Almonds, and
strain them with a pound of double refined Sugar, and the juice of two Lemons,
turn it into colors by the helps aforesaid, red, white, yellow and blew, and
put it into Egg-shells or Orange-pills, with the pulp taken forth, this Leach
will appear of a lovely white to the eye.

Or thus:
Take two ounces of Izing-glass, lay it two hours steeping in Water, then boil
it in spring Water; being well dissolved set it to cool, then have a pound of
Almonds beaten very fine with Rosewater, strain them with a pint of new Milk,
and put in some Mace and sliced Ginger, then set them over the fire about a
quarter of an hour, after put in your Izing-glass, some Sugar, and a little
Rosewater, then run it through your strainer into dishes.

White Leach of Cream.
Take a pint of Cream, half a dozen spoonfuls of Rosewater, one grain of Musk,
one drop of the Oil of Mace, or a large blade, boil them with a quarter of a
pound of Sugar, and the like weight of Izingglass; being washed clean and
steeped, then run it through your Jelly-bag into a Dish; when it is cold, slice
it on a Plate in Chequer-work.

Creams of all sorts.
Barley Cream.
TAke half a pound of French Barley, and boil it in several waters till it be
soft, and the water look not red, then take two quarts of sweet Cream, and boil
it with large Mace, and quartered Nutmeg, till it be indifferent thick, then
have in readiness half a pound of Almonds finely beaten, strain them into a
dish with Rosewater, having poured it into the Cream, set it over the fire,
stir it continually till it boil, then season it with Sugar, Musk or
Ambergriese, and serve it up cold.

Stone Cream.
Take a quantity of Cream as much as you judge sufficient, and proportion large
Mace, Cinnamon and Rosewater accordingly, season it well with Sugar, and boil it
till it taste very well of the Spice, then dish it and stir it till it be no
warmer than Milk coming from the Cow, then put in a little Runnet, and stir it
together, when it has stood a while a cooling, serve it up.

Or thus:
Take a quart of thick sweet Cream, and mingle therewith seven or eight
spoonfuls of Rosewater, season it well with Sugar, and boil it till one quarter
be wasted, then take it off, and when it is off he fire, stir it in the dish
you intend to serve it till it be lukewarm, then stir it again, and put some
Runnet therein; when it is cold, strew on Sugar and beaten Cinnamon.

Cream made with Snow.
Take a pint and half of Cream, and boil it with a stick or two of Cinnamon,
thicken it with Rice-flower, and the yolks of Eggs; having seasoned it with a
little Salt, Rosewater and Sugar, let it have a walm or two, then put it into a
Dish, and lay clowted Cream upon it, and fill up the Dish with froth of Cream
that comes up to the mouth of the Churn, when you make Butter, sprinkle it with
Rosewater, and scrape Sugar thereon, with some Pinekernels.

Cream with Snow made otherways.
Take a pint of Cream, three whites of Eggs, half a quartern of Rosewater, four
ounces of double refined Sugar, beat these together very well in a deep Basin
with Musk and Ambergriese dissolved, having in readiness a Silver Dish or China
Basin, take a Manchet and cut away the top and bottom crust, then lay it in the
bottom of your Dish, and stick thereon a sprig of Rosemary, then beat your
aforementioned materials up together, and as it does froth, so lay the froth
with a spoon therein, till you have filled the Dish.

Otherways.
Take the whites of eight Eggs, and having mingled therewith some Rosewater,
beat them very well together with a bunch of Feathers, by which means in the
working you will make your whites to look just like Snow; having then, as
aforesaid, laid the crum of a Manchet in the bottom of your Dish, with a branch
of Bays stuck thereon, lay in the bottom some thick clowted Cream, and on the
top thereof lay your Snow in heaps.

Cheese Cream.
Your Curds being well cleans'd from the Whey, season them with beaten Cinnamon,
Sugar and Rosewater, then fill herewith two or three dishes, with about a pint
a piece in each, then lay trenchers on the top of themwith a board, and so
press them till they are like green Cheeses, then turn them out whole into your
Dish; have in readiness a pottle of Cream, with whole Cinnamon, large Mace, and
a Nutmeg quartered, with the yolks of half a dozen Eggs beaten with some
Rosewater, put it in a little before you take it off the fire, season it with
some fine Sugar; when it is almost cold, put it above and beneath the Cheeses.

Some only season your pure fresh Cream with beaten Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Rosewater
and Sugar, with as much grated Naples-bisket, as will make it thick, so pour it
over your Cheeses, as is before specified, and scrape on Cinnamon and Sugar.

Apple Cream.
Take nine sound Pippins, pare, slice or quarter them, put them into a Skillet
with some Claret wine, a race of Ginger sliced thin, a little Lemon-pill cut
small and some Sugar, let these stew together till they be soft, then put them
into a Dish, and when they are cold, take a quart of Cream, boiled with some
Nutmeg, and mingle it with your Apple-stuff till you have reduced it to what
thickness you think is most convenient for your purpose.

Another way to make Apple Cream.
Take eight or ten Pippins, pare, core and quarter them, then boil them in a
pint of White wine and a pint of Sack with a Pill of minced Orangado, some
whole Cinnamon and Ginger sliced, half a pound of Sugar, and keep them covered
until they are boiled to a Jelly, then lay them by spoonfuls up high in a Dish,
when they are cold, pour in your Cream boiled, as aforesaid: stick your Rocks
of Jelly with sliced Citron.

You may avoid using any wine, only adding a pound of Sugar, if the quantity of
your Pippins extend to a dozen, boil them in no more Water than will cover
them, when they are boiled enough, they will be as red as a Ruby and as clear.

Quince Cream.
Take a convenient quantity of Quinces, and when your Water boils, put them
therein; when they are tender boiled, take them up and peel them, strain them
and mingle them with fine Sugar, then make it of a convenient thickness with
sweet Cream, or you may boil the Cream with a stick of Cinnamon, but put it not
to the Quinces till it be cold; in the same manner you may order Wardens or
Pears.

Or thus you mayorder your Quinces, let them be unpared, and put them into
Water which must boil first; when they are boiled tender, strip their skin and
core them, then season them with beaten Ci^amon, Ginger, Orangado, dried Citron
minced small, Carraway comfits, Rosewater and Sugar; your Cream being boiled,
thus seasoned, and in a manner cold, put it in among your Quinces by spoonfuls.

Cream called Sack Cream.
Whilst three pints of Cream is boiling on the fire, beat the yolks of eight or
nine Eggs with some Sack, and put it into your Skillet, keeping it stirring
till it come to a curd, then run it through a strainer and save your curd,
being severed from your whey, season it with beaten Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmeg,
Sugar and Rosewater, so lay it in your Dish, and strew on Cinnamon and Sugar.

Or only take a quart of Cream, and set it on the fire, and when it is boiled,
drop in two spoonfuls of Sack, and stir it well, so that you keep it from
curdling, then season it with Sugar and Rosewater.

Rasberry Cream.
You must boil up your Cream as the former, then take a pretty quantity of
Rasberries and mingle with your Cream, bruising them well; when your Cream is
almost cold, season it with Sugar and Rosewater, stir them well together, strew
on Sugar and dish it up.

Red-currans Cream.
Bruise, as aforesaid, your Currants with a ladleful or two of your Cream, being
first boiled, then strain them, then put your strained stuff to the said Cream,
but not before it be almost cold, and it will be purely red.

Cabbidge Cream.
Set three quarts of new Milk over the fire, and scum it as long as any froth
arises, then empty it into seven or eight bouls as fast as you can without
frothing, then set them where the wind may come; when they are somewhat cold,
gather the Cream on the top with your hand, crumpling it together, and lay it
on a Plate; when you have laid four or five layings one upon the other, then
take a feather and wet it in Rosewater and Musk and stroke over it; then sierce
a little grated Nutmeg and fine Sugar, and lay on three or four lays more, then
put all the Milk to boil again, and when it just rises up, distribute it as
before into your bouls, and use it in like manner: thus you may do four or five
times, still laying on your Cream as before, and so order it, that it may lie
round and high as a Cabbidge: let one of the first bouls stand, because the
Cream of it will be thickest and most crumpled, and lay on that last on the top
of all; when you serve it up, scrape on Loaf-sugar; here note that this must be
made over night for next days dinner, and in the morning for supper.

Another excellent way.
Take two gallons of new Milk, and when it boileth, put therein a quart of
Cream, with the whites of three Eggs beaten up very well, let it boil but a
very little time, and take it off, and put it into several broad earthen
Milk-pans, and let it stand till it is cold; then having boiled a Cabbidge in
Milk, cut it in two, and put half thereof into your Dish with the cut side
downward, then scum the Cream off your Pans, and lay them on the Cabbidge;
after this sprinkle on Cinnamon, Rosewater and Sugar between each sheet or lay,
so lay on the top of the other until you have laid on all your Cream; by so
doing your Cream will appear like a Cabbidge; for ornament stick on sprigs of
Rosemary, which you must snow artificially.

Almond Cream.
Take a pound of Almond paste that has been pounded in a Mortar with
Rosewater, and strain it with a pottle of Cream, then put it into a Skillet
with two sticks of Cinnamon and boil it, stir it continually, and when it is
boiled thick, put it into a Dish, let it cool, scrape on Sugar and serve it up.

Or thus; take three pints of Cream, and boil it over night, in the morning
take three quarters of a pound of Almonds blanched and finely beaten, strain
them with the Cream, and add thereto somewhat more than a quarten of double
refined Sugar, some Rosewater, Cinnamon and Ginger finely beaten and fierced,
then dish it, scrape on Sugar and serve it up.

Almond Cream the best away.
Take half a pound of Almonds (right Jordan, for they are the best) and pound
them in a Mortar with Rosewater and Sugar; sprinkling them in by degrees; as
you are pounding incorporate these well together with Rice-flowre and a little
Milk, making it no thicker than batter; when your Cream boileth, pour this
stuff into your Skillet, and let them boil together with Izing-glass, Nutmeg
and Cinnamon, with a blade or two of large Mace, keep it stirring over the fire
for the space of half an hour, then take it off, and put therein the yolks of
half a dozen Eggs well beaten in some Cream and Rosewater, with three quarters
of a pound of fine Sugar, stir all together, and dish it up; three quarts of
Milk will be sufficient for the aforesaid ingredients.

Goosberry Cream.
Take what quantity of Cream you think fit, and boil it with Cinnamon, Nutmeg,
Mace, Sugar, Rosewater, and the yolks of Eggs beaten; having boiled a little
while, take it off and dish it, then have in readiness some preserved
Goosberries, and stick them on a pin in rows as thick as they can lie on the
Cream, garnish your dish with the same, sprinkle on Sugar and serve it up.

Otherways.
Take a quantity of Goosberries codled green, and boil them up with Sugar, then
put them into raw or boiled Cream, strained or not, it is better to let them be
whole, scrape on Sugar and serve them up.

In like manner you may order Raspiss, Red-currans or Strawberries, or you may
serve them in Wine and Sugar without any Cream.

Rice Cream.
Take three quarts of Cream, and three handfuls of Rice-Flowre, with half a
pound of Sugar, mingle the two last named very well together, and put it into
the Cream; then beat the yolk of an Egg or two, with a little Rosewater, and
put it likewise into the Cream, stir these all together continually over a
quick fire till it be as thick as pap.

Rice Milk or Cream otherways.
Having boiled your Rice near upon a quarter of an hour, put it out into a
Cullender, and pick out the unhuskt Rice from the rest; if it be half a pound
of Rice that you use, then must you have three quarts of Milk or Cream; when it
boils, put in your Rice with large Mace, whole Cinnamon, and a Nutmeg in halves;
when it begins to thicken, take the yolks of half a dozen Eggs, and beat them
with Rosewater, and a ladleful of your boiling Cream, then stir it all into
your Cream over the fire, then take it off and season it with Sugar and a
little Salt, take out your whole Spice, and dish it up, scrape on it Sugar, and
on the brims of your Dish, and serve it up.

Clowted Cream.
Take new Milk from the Cow, and let it over the fire in two or three broad
earthen Pans, when it is ready to boil take it off, and set it by to cool, when
it is cold scum i^ off with your Scummer, and season it with Rosewater, Musk
and Sugar.

Another rare Cream.
Take a pound of Almond-paste fine beaten with Rosewater, mingle it with a
quart of Cream, half a dozen Eggs, a little Sack, half a pound of Sugar, and
some beaten Nutmeg; strain them and put them into a clean scoured Skillet, and
set it on a soft fire, stir it continually, and being of an indifferent
thickness, dish it up with juice of Oranges, Sugar, and a stick or two of
candyed Pistaches.

Another.
When you churn Butter, take out a pint of Cream, just as it is about to turn
to Butter, then boil a quart of thick new Cream, season it with Sugar, and a
little Rosewater, when it is quite cold, mingle it well with your former Cream,
and so dish it.

An extraordinary clowted Cream.
Take two gallons and a half of new Milk, and when it boils, make a hole in the
middle of the Milk, and pour in two quarts of good new thick Cream, and put it
into the hole as it boileth: thus boil it half an hour, then divide it into
four Milkpans, and let it cool four and twenty hours or longer, if the weather
be not too hot, then take it up with a slice, and put it into a Dish clod upon
clod, and sprinkle thereon Rosewater and Sugar.

Codling Cream.
Take a dozen and a half of fair Codlings and coddle them, then skin and core
them; after this, beat them in a Mortar, then take three pints of Cream, and
mix them well together, and strain it into a a Dish, and mix it with Sugar,
Sack, Musk and Rosewater; you may order any fruit after the same manner if you
please.

Otherways.
Take two dozen of Codlings which are codled very green, and clean skinned, then
put them in a Dish half filled with Rosewater, and three quarters of a pound of
Sugar, boil these together till half the liquor be consumed, keep it stirring
till it be ready, then fill up your Dish with thick sweet Cream, and stir it
till it be well incorporated; when it has boiled a little while, take it off,
let it cool, then scrape on Sugar and serve it.

Or you may take a quart of Cream, and boil it with Mace, Sugar, two yolks of
Eggs, two spoonfuls of Rosewater, and a grain of Ambergriese, put it into the
Cream, and set it over the fire till it be ready to boil, then set them to
cool, stirring them till they be cold; then add to it a quart of green codling
stuff strained, strew on Sugar and serve it up.

Plum Cream.
It matters not what your Plums are, so they be fair, and put them into a Dish
with some Sugar, White wine, Sack, Claret or Rosewater, close them up with
paste, and bake them; then set them by to cool, and when they are cold, put in
raw Cream, or that which is boiled with Eggs, scrape on Sugar.

Cast Cream.
Take two quarts of Cream, and a quart of Milk, the yolks of six Eggs, and the
whites of six more, strain them together and boil them, and stir them
continually till they be thick, then put therein some Verjuyce and put it into
a strainer, and drain the whey from it; then put to it some Sugar and
Rosewater, strew all over it some preserved Pine-kernels.

Whipped Cream.
Take a quart of Milk and put it into an earthen Pan, with a quarter of a pound
of Sugar, take also one pint of sweet Cream, which you must mingle with your
Milk gradually, as you are whipping it, with your rods, take off the scum by
degrees, and put it in a Dish after the from of a Pyramid.

Or thus, take Milk and put it into a large bowl or basin, and whip it with
rods till it be as thick as the Cream that comes off the top of a Churn, then
lay fine linen clouts on saucers, being wet, and lay on the Cream, and let it
rest two or three hours, then turn it into a Silver Dish with raw Cream, Sugar
it and serve it up.

Italian Cream.
Take three pints of Cream, and fifteen yolks of Eggs, and strain them with a
little Salt, Saffron, Rosewater, juice of Orange, a little White wine, and
three quarters of a pound of fine Sugar, bake these ingredients in a Dish with
Cinnamon, with candied Pistaches stuck thereon.

Pyramidis Cream made after a most excellent manner.
Take three pints of Water, and eight ounces of Hartshorn, put it into a
bottle with Gum-dragon, and Gum-arabick, of each the quantity of an Egg, let
the bottle be so big, that it may hold a pint more, stop it very close with
cork, and tie a cloth over it, put the bottle into a beef-pot, or you may boil
it by it self in Water, let it boil three hours, then take the same quanrity of
Cream as there is of Jelly, with three quarters of a pound of Almonds well
beaten with Rosewater, mingle them with the Cream, strain it, put the Jelly
when it is cold into a Basin, and the Cream to it, sweetning it as you shall
think most convenient; add to it three or four grains of Musk and Ambergriese,
set it over the fire, and stir it continually till it be seething hot, but let
it not boil, then put it into a glass, and let it stand till it be cold, when
you use it, put the dish in some warm Water, and serve it with Cream.

Puddings of all sorts.
Quaking Pudding.
TAke a pint and half of Cream, a grated Manchet, half a dozen spoonfuls of
Cream, and commix it with four spoonfuls of Rice-flowre, then without cloding
beat it into batter; then take eight Eggs, and mingle them all together,
beating them up with a little Rosewater, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon beaten
with a little Salt; if it be too thick, thin it with more Cream; then take a
thick cloth washed over with Butter, and put your Pudding therein, in the tying
of it give it some liberty to rise, then put it into your boiling liquor; let
it boil for the space of a full hour, covering your Pot very close, keep it
constantly turning for the first quarter of the hour, and let it boil very
fiercely; when it is enough, take it up and turn it into a Dish, stick it all
over with blanched Dates and dried Citron, perfume a little Rosewater with Musk
or Ambergriese, adding some Vinegar, drawn Butter, and a good quantity of
Sugar; being very hot, pour it on your Pudding, scrape Loaf-sugar on the brims
of your Dish, and so serve it up; you may do well in the sticking of your
Pudding to add some Orangado to the aforesaid.

Quaking Pudding baked.
Take a Manchet, slice it and scald it with a pint of Cream, then put to it a
pound of blanched Almonds pounded small with Rosewater, add thereto a quarter
of a pound of Dates sliced and cut small, a handful of Currants boiled, and some
Marrow minced, beat these together, and season it with Nutmeg, Sugar and Salt,
putting thereto the yolks of half a dozen Eggs.

If you will make your Pudding either to boil or bake, take a pint of good
thick Cream, boil it with some large Mace, whole Cinnamon and sliced Ginger,
with a little Nutmeg, then take the yolks of six Eggs, beat them well, and
grate the quantity of a half-penny-loaf of stale Manchet, put it to the Eggs
with a spoonful of Flower, season it with Sugar as is requisite, with a little
Salt, then either bake or boil it; an hour will serve for either.

Shaking Pudding.
Take a pint of sweet Cream, boil it with large Mace, sliced Nutmeg and Ginger,
then put in a few Almonds beaten with Rosewater, being first blanched, then
beat four Eggs with half their whites; having strained all together, mingle
therewith sliced Ginger, Sugar, grated Bread and Salt, then butter a cloth and
flower it, having tied it hard, put it into your boiling Water, as you must do
by all Puddings, then dish it up with Butter and Verjuyce, putting therein a
little Sugar.

Wine Puddings.
Take the crumbs of two Manchets sliced, and infuse them in half a pint of Wine,
with as much Sugar as you shall think requisite, but first scald your Wine,
then take half a dozen Eggs, and beat them with Rosewater, then put sliced
Dates, Marrow and Nutmeg thereunto, mingling them all together, and filling
your guts herewith boil them.

Puddings of several colors.
In the first place you must procure half a dozen dishes bespoke on purpose of
the Turner with covers befitting them; then butter the inside of your Dishes,
fill one of them with the ingredients of your Quaking Pudding, then put on the
cover and bind it down with a cloth prepared for that purpose with pack-thread,
then take as much more of the same stuff as will fill a Dish, and color it
with Spinach, and tie up this as the former; then take of Cowslips, Violets,
and Clove-gilly-flowers of each a handful, and mince them a part, and beat them
severally in a Mortar, then take as much of the said Pudding-stuff as will fill
three Dishes, putting into every Dish each distinct juice, viz. Cowslips into
one, etc. and bind them up, having first covered them, as aforesaid; when they
are boiled, uncover your Dishes, and turn out your Puddings into a large Dish,
stick them with Suckets, and lair them with Butter, Vinegar, Rosewater, and
good store of Sugar, scrape on some Sugar and serve them up: this is a very
becoming Dish for any great Feast.

Marrow-puddings boiled in skins.
Take a quart of Cream, a roll of French bread sliced very thin, and put it
over the fire a soaking with Cinnamon, that is whole, till it is ready to boil,
then beat half a do^en yolks of Eggs, your Cream being almost cold put them
therein, and put to them the Marrow of three Marrow-bones minced with some
minced Orangado, Citron, beaten Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Rosewater, Sugar
and a little Salt, you may thin it with Cream, if your Manchet swells too much,
for it must be no thicker than pancake batter; then having your Hogs-guts ready
cleansed and washed, fill them up, and tie them like Beads; being about the
bigness and length of an Egg; you must give two inches scope to every one of
these in the tying, else they will break; boil them very softly in a Kettle for
the space of half an hour or more, then take them up and keep them for service.

Marrow-puddings baked.
Let your Dish be indifferent deep on the bottom whereof lay Sippets of white
Bread, and on that lay raw Marrow all over with Dates, Raisins of the Sun,
Orangado and other Suckets; then having in readiness some Cream boiled up with
the yolks of Eggs, lay thereon a ladleful or two thereof, Marrow upon that,
upon your Marrow make a lay of Dates, Raisins, etc. and then a lay of Cream,
continue so doing till you have filled your Dish, garnish the brim of your Dish
with Paste, then set it in the Oven half an hour, and it will be enough. In the
boiling of your Cream you must put in whole Cinnamon and large Mace, and season
it with Rosewater, Sugar, and grated Nutmeg.

Black-puddings.
Take six quarts of great Oat-meal, and put to it three Gallons of strong
Broth, let it boil softly over the fire about half an hour, stirring it
continually, pour it forth into a great earthen-Pan, let it be cold, and put to
it five or six quarts of Hogs-blood strained, mix these together, and let them
steep all night; then take an indifferent handful of Winter-savory, and as much
Penniroyal, some Hysop and Rosemary, with a handful of Time and Sives, or
instead thereof Onions or Leeks, and a handful of Sage, mince all these
together, and mingle them with your aforesaid ingredients, let your seasoning
be Pepper beaten small, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Cinnamon, Nutmegs and Salt, then
cut in a good quantity of Lard about the bigness of a great Dye, adding thereto
the yolks of a dozen and a half of Eggs beaten very well, mingle these well
with your hands. Your small Hogs-guts being cleansed and watered a day before,
cut them about a yard long or somewhat more, blow them up to see whether they
be sound, and fill them with the materials aforesaid, and tie up your lengths
in six links or four, as you shall judge fit; let your Water boil moderately,
and having boiled your Puddings about half an hour, take them up, and put
others in; then put them in for half an hour more; do this as you are filling
your Puddings, supply your Pan with Hogssuet, and order your hand in the
filling that the ingredients may all carry a due proportion.

Black-puddings otherways made.
Take the blood of a Hog whilst it is warm, and put therein some Salt; when it
is cold, put in gross Oat-meal well picked; after it has stood a soaking all
night, then put in Rosemary, Time, Penniroyal, Savory and Fennel minced small,
alter the hardness and redness of the blood with some Cream, beat in half a
dozen Eggs, and season it with Cloves, Mace, Pepper, Fennelseed, and cut in
good store of Beef Suet in pretty big lumps.

Or else take a quantity of Oatmeal, the one half you must pick and put it into
Hogs-blood whilst it is warm, being first well strained, so let it stand all
night; then take the other part of the Oatmeal and pick it also, and boil it in
Milk till it be tender, and all the Milk consumed, then put it to the blood,
stirring it well together, put in good store of Hogs-suet, and season it with
sweet Herbs, as aforesaid, Salt, Pepper and Fennel-seed, fill not the guts too
full, and boil them gently.

Polony Sausages.
Take of a Gammon of Bacon boiled, a good piece, take as much Lard and mince
them both small, mingle these together, and beat them in a Mortar, then season
them with Time and Sage minced very small, and good store of Pepper pulverized
with some Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace and Salt, add to them the yolks of Eggs, and as
much red Wine as will render them stiff, mingle them with your hands, and fill
your skins, which must be as big as the small end of a Rolling-pin, then hang
them in your Chimney for some time; when you use them, cut them out thin
round-ways, and put them into a Dish with Oil and Vinegar, they will serve
either for a second course or collation for a drinking bout; if you season them
very well with the aforesaid ingredients, they will keep a long time, they must
hang either in a place indifferently hot and cold.

Liver Puddings.
Having boiled your Hogs Liver, grate it, and add to it a greater quantity of
grated Bread than there is of Liver, with both their quantities of fine Flower:
to every quart of this composition allow four Eggs, half a pound of Beef Suet
minced very small, a quarter of a pound of Currants, a little Rosewater, some
Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, Cinnamon and Ginger beaten small; having seasoned it with
Salt, put thereunto Winter-savory, Penniroyal, sweet Marjoram and Time minced
very small, then mingle all these with a little Milk; and having made this
mixture as thick as Frumenty, fill your guts therewith, then boil them soberly
for the space of an hour, and if you perceive any of them to bladder prick them.

Or thus: Take a Liver, as aforesaid, boil it dry, and let it stand till it be
cold, then grate it and sift it through a Cullender, put Cream to it, and the
flick of a Hog minced small, with some grated Bread, also add thereto sweet
Herbs minced small with Nutmeg, Mace, Pepper, Anniseed, Rosewater, Cream and
Eggs, with some Currants and Dates, as you shall think fit, so fill the guts and
boil them.

Oatmeal Puddings.
Take a pottle of Milk, and set it over the fire, with four or five sticks of
Cinnamon and large Mace, then take three handfuls of great Oatmeal and beat it
small in a Mortar, then stirring your Milk put it therein, making it of an
indifferent thickness; then put in two handfuls of Beefsuet cut small, stir it
and let it boil half an hour; then pour it forth into an earthen-Pan, and let
it stand till it be almost cold, if it grows thicker than is requisite, you may
make it thinner with some new Milk, then break into it the yolks of five or six
Eggs, with a quartern of Sugar, a grated Nutmeg, and some Rosewater, butter the
bottom of your Dish, and pour in your Pudding of the thickness of Batter; then
put it into an Oven about half heated, and let it stand there half an hour,
then draw it, scrape on Sugar and serve it up.

Or thus:
Pick and wash very clean a quart of whole Oatmeal, steep it in warm Milk all
night, next morning drain it and boil it in three pints of Cream; when it is
cold, put to it the yolks of half a dozen Eggs, and but half the whites,
Cloves, Mace, Saffro^^ Salt, Dates sliced and Sugar, boil it in a Pipkin, serve
it with beaten Butter, and stick it with sliced Dates, and serape on Sugar; you
may for variety add Raisins of the Sun, all manner of sweet Herbs, being
seasoned as before.

Or you may take great Oatmeal, pick and scald it in Cream, then season it with
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Ginger, Pepper, Currants, you may either bake it in a Dish, or
boil it in a Napkin, serve it with beaten Butter and Sugar scraped thereon.

Oatmeal Pudding after the best manner.
Take great Oatmeal well picked and washed, and bind it up in a bag, then boil
it in Beef-broth tender, then take some Cream and boil it with large Mace and
sliced Nutmeg, then take it off the fire, and slice a Manchet very thin into
the Cream; to a quart thereof take eight Eggs, the whites but half so many, and
mix it with your Oatmeal, then add thereto a good quantity of Beef Suet,
Rosewater, Salt and Sugar, stir them will together, butter the bottom of your
Dish and so bake it.

Rice-flowre Pudding.
Thicken a pottle of Milk with as much Rice-flowre as will make it as thick as
Batter, then boil it with Cinnamon and large Mace, then put into it a piece of
Butter, and stir it continually; when it is indifferently thick, put it into an
earthen-Pan to cool, when it is almost cold, add to it two handfuls of Currants,
a little Sugar, beaten Cinnamon, and a handful of minced Dates, with the yolks
of half a dozen Eggs, the whites of three omitted, butter the bottom of your
Dish, and pour in your Pudding; you will do well to garnish the brims of your
dish with paste; when it is baked scrape on Sugar.

Rice-pudding in guts.
Take a pottle of Milk, set it over the fire, and put therein three quarters of
a pound of Rice well picked and washed, with a little beaten Ma^e, and boil it
till the Mace be dry, then pour your Rice into a strainer, that you may drain
it from its moisture, then put to it the yolks of eight Eggs, and the whites of
four, three quart^rns of Sugar, a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, a pound and
half of Currants, and the like quantity of Beef Suet minced, season it with
Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Salt; then d^y the small guts of a Hog, Sheep or Heifer,
being well cleansed and steeped, fill your guts with the aforesaid ingredients,
cut your guts a foot long, tie them both ends together; a quarter of an hours
boiling will serve the turn.

Or you may boil the Rice first in Water then in Milk, after that with Salt in
Cream; then take half a dozen Eggs, grated Bread, good store of Marrow minced
small, some Nutmeg, Sugar and Salt, fill the guts, put them in a Pipkin, and
boil them in Milk and Rosewater.

Rice-pudding baked.
Boil the Rice tender in Milk, and season it with Nutmeg, Mace, Rosewater,
Sugar, Eggs, and but half the whites, grated Bread with Marrow minced, then
putting in a little Ambergriefe, bake it in a Dish, the bottom whereof must be
buttered.

Hasty-pudding in a Dish.
Take three pints of good thick Cream, and when it boils, put therein two penny
Manchets grated and mingled with a quarter of a pint of Flower, a quarter of
Sugar, Nutmeg, Salt, and half a pound of Butter, stir it continually, and put
thereto the yolks of half a dozen Eggs; when it is boiled enough, pour it into
a Dish, stick it with preserved Orange-pill, run it all over with Butter, and
scrape upon it some double refined Sugar.

Hasty-pudding in a bag.
Take a quart of thick Cream, with two spoonfuls of Flower, season it with
Sugar, Nutmeg, Salt, wet your bag and flower it, then pour in your Cream whilst
it is hot, when it is boiled butter it. This Pudding is not inferior to any
Custard.

Or you may take a pint of good Milk, put thereto a handful of Raisins of the
Sun, with as many Currants, and a piece of Butter, then grate a Manchet and
Nutmeg, and put thereto a handful of Flower, when the Milk boils, put in the
bread, let it boil a quarter of an hour, then dish it up (...) beaten Butter.

Hasty-pudding the bost way made.
Take a quart of good thick Cream, and the quantity of a French Roll and half,
^rated or rather sliced thin; when your Cream boils, put in your Bread with
grated Nutmeg, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace and Ginger beaten, add thereto a spoonful
(...) two of Flower, incorporate these well together, and keep it stirring, as
it boils put in a spit of Butter, then take the yolks of four Eggs, and the
whites of two, beat them and put them into your Skillet or Pipkin, with a
handful of Sugar, and a little Rosewater, then stir it well till you perceive
it to thicken and boil, then put it out into the Dish you intend to serve it up
in, set it over a Chafing Dish of coals, and heat a Fire-shovel red hot, then
hold it close to the top of your Pudding, till you perceive it look brown, then
scrape on some Sugar and serve it.

Andolians or Blood-puddings.
Having soaked your Hogs-guts, turn them, scour them, and steep them in Water
twenty four hours, then take them out, wipe them dry, and turn the fat side
outward: Then take Pepper, chopped Sage, a little Cloves and Mace beaten,
Corianderseed and Salt, mingle all together, and season the fat side of the
guts, then turn that side inwards again, and draw one gut over another, to what
bigness you please, then boil them in a Pot or Pan of fair Water, with a piece
of interlarded Bacon, and some Spices, with a little Salt, tie them fast at
both ends, and make them of what length you please.

Or you may take blood and strain it, three parts of Blood to two of Cream, a
couple of Manchets and Beef Suet cut square like Dice, the yolks of half a
dozen Eggs, Salt, sweet Herbs, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace and Pepper.

As for your blood, you may either take that of a Goose, Sheep, Calf, Lamb or
Fawn.

A most incomparable rare Marrow-pudding.
Take the Marrow of four Marrowbones, two French Rolls, half a pound of Raisins
of the Sun ready boiled and cold, Cinnamon a quarter of an Ounce fine beaten,
two grated Nutmegs, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, a quarter of a pound of
Dates, Sack half a pint, a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, ten Eggs, two grains
of Ambergriefe, and two of Musk dissolved: Lastly, have in readiness a deep
Dish, and lay in the bottom some slices of French Bread, and strew thereon
Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Sugar mingled together, and sprinkle the slices with Sack
and Rosewater; then lay on some Raisins of the Sun, some sliced Dates, and good
big pieces of Marrow: And thus make two or three lays of the aforesaid
ingredients, with some Musk, and a great deal of Marrow on the top, then take a
pottle of Cream, and strain it, with half a quarter of fine Sugar, and a little
Salt, with the yolks of twelve Eggs and six whites, then set the Dish into the
Oven temperately hot, when baked scrape on some Sugar.

An excellent boiled Pudding.
Beat the yolks only of half a dozen Eggs with Rosewater, and a pint of Cream,
warm it with a piece of Butter as big as a Pullets egg; when it is melted, mix
them well together, and season it with Nutmeg, Sugar, and Salt, then put in as
much Bread as will make it as thick as Batter, with a spoonful of Flower, then
take a double cloth, wet it and flower it, tie it fast, and put it in the Pot,
being boiled, serve it with Butter, Verjuyce and Sugar.

Or you may take Pinamolets or French Bread, grate it and sift it through a
Cullender, and mix it with Flower, minced Dates, Currants, Nutmeg, Cinnamon,
minced Suet, Milk from the Cow, Sugar and Eggs, take away one moiety of the
whites, and mingle them all together, then make it round like a loaf, when the
liquor boils, put it in tied up in a double cloth.

Cream Puddings.
Take a pint of Cream, season it with Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Ginger and Mace, let
your Ginger be quartered, then put to it the yolks of four Egg, and half the
quantity of Whites, half a pound of Almonds blanched, beaten and strained with
the Cream, a little Rosewater, Sugar and a very little Flower, then put your
Pudding into a bag or Napkin, having first wetted and flowered it; being
boiled, let your Sauce be Sack, Sugar and Butter beaten up thick together with
the yolk of an Egg; then blanch some Almonds, slice them and stick the Pudding
very thick all over, then scrape on Sugar and serve it up.

Green Puddings of Herbs.
Take a quart and somewhat more of Cream, and steep therein the pith of a
penny-white-loaf, into which you must beat the yolks of eight Eggs, then add
thereto Currants, Sugar, Cloves, beaten Mace, Dates, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, sweet
Marjoram, Time, Savory, Penniroyal minced very small, the juice of Spinach,
Saffron and Salt, boil these with Beef Suet or Marrow, or without either; these
Puddings are excellent to be served up alone in a Dish, or good stuffings for
boiled or roasted Poultry, Kid, Lamb or Veal.

Another excellent boiled Pudding.
Beat six Eggs into a pint of Cream, put it over the Fire, and scald the Crum
of a Manchet therein, then put to it half a pound of blanched Almonds beaten
small with Rosewater, season it with Sugar, Nutmeg and Salt, some Dates sliced
and cut small, some Currants boiled, and some Marrow minced, beat them all
together and bake it.

Almond Pudding in a Dish.
Take a pound of Almonds, blanch and pound them in a Marble-Morter, strain them
with a quart of Cream, a grated Manchet sierced, four Eggs, some Sugar, Nutmeg
grated, some Dates, and a little Salt, boil it and serve it in a Dish with
beaten Butter, stick it with Wafers, and scrape on Sugar.

Some use this course by taking a pound of Almond-paste, some grated
Naplesbisket, Cream, Rosewater, yolks of Eggs, beaten Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmeg,
some boiled Currants, Pistaches and Musk, boil it in a Napkin, and serve it as
the former.

Almond Puddings in guts.
Take a pound and a half of Almond-paste, and put thereto some new Milk or
Cream, with four or five blades of Mace, and some sliced Nutmegs; when it is
boiled, take the Spice clean from it, then grate a penny Manchet, and sierce it
through a Cullender, put it into the Cream, and let it stand till it be cold,
then put in the Almonds, eight yolks of Eggs, Salt, Sugar, and good store of
Marrow or Beef Suet finely minced, and therewith fill the guts.

Cinnamon Puddings.
Take two quarts of Cream, and steep therein two French Rolls, a dozen yolks of
Eggs, Dates, an ounce of beaten Cinnamon and some Almond-paste; you may
sometimes use Rosewater and boiled Currants; either boil or bake it, which you
please.

Haggus Puddings.
Take a Calves chaldron, boil it, and when it is cold, mince it very small,
then take the yolks of four Eggs, and the whites of two, some Cream, grated
Bread, Sugar, Salt, Currants, Rosewater, some Beefsuet or Marrow, sweet Herbs,
Marjoram, Time, Parsley; and mingle all together; then having a Sheep-maw ready
dressed, put in the aforesaid materials and boil it.

Others take good store of Parsley, Savory, Time, Onions, and Oatmeal groats
chopped together, and mingled with some minced Beef Suet, with Cloves, Mace,
Pepper and Salt, fill the panch, sow it up and boil it; when it is boiled, cut
a hole in it, and put in some beaten Butter, with yolks of the three Eggs.

Another very good way.
Take a Calves chaldron or Muggets, boil it tender and mince it small, put to
it grated Bread, the yolks of six Eggs, with as many whites, some Cream, sweet
Herbs, Spinach, Succory, Sorrel, Strawberry-leaves minced small, a little
Butter, Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Ginger, Currants, Sugar, Salt, Dates, and
boil it in a Napkin or Calves-panch; being boiled, dish it and trim it with
scraped Sugar, stick it with sliced Almonds, and run it over with beaten Butter.

Chiveridge Puddings.
Lay the fattest of a Hog in fair Water and Salt to scowr them, then take the
longest and fattest gut, and stuff it with Nutmeg, Sugar, Ginger, Pepper, and
sliced Dates, boil them and serve them to the Table.

Swan or Goose-pudding.
Take the blood of either and strain it, and put therein Oatineal ^o steep, or
grated Bread in Milk or Cream, with Nutmeg, Pepper, sweet Herbs minced,
Beef Suet, Rosewater, minced Lemon-pill, with a small quantity of
Coriander-seed: This is a very good Pudding for a Swan or Gooses Neck.

Veal pudding.
Take some of the raw flesh of a Leg of Veal, and mince it very small, then
mingle it with lard cut into square pieces, and ^ince some sweet Herbs, as
Marjoram, Pen^iroyal, etc. with some Spice, as Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper and Salt,
work or incorporate all together, with Cinnamon, Sugar, Barberries, sliced Figs,
blanched Almonds, half a pound of Beef Suet finely minced, put these into Hog
or Sheep-guts well cleansed, cut them an inch and a half long, tie them and
boil them in a Pipkin, with Claret wine, with large Mace; being almost boiled,
have some boiled Grapes in small bunches, and Barberries in knots, then dish
them on French Bread; being scalded with Mutton Broth or Gravy, garnish your
dish with sliced Lemon: this is a most delicate Pudding.

Bread Pudding in guts.
Take some Cream and boil it with Mace, and mix therewith some Almonds blanched
and beaten with Rosewater, then take Cream, Eggs, Nutmeg, Currants, Salt and
Marrow, and mingle them all together, with as much grated white Bread, as you
shall think sufficient, and herewith fill your guts.

Bread Puddings green or yellow.
Grate three penny-white-loaves, and sierce them through a Cullender, put them
into a deep dish, and put to them three Eggs, three pints of Cream, Cloves,
Mace, Saffron, Salt, Rosewater, Sugar, Currants, three quarters of a pound of
Beef Suet, and the like quantity of Dates; if you would have your Pudding
green, color it with Spinach, and all manner of sweet Herbs stamped amongst
it, as Savory, sweet Marjoram, Rosemary, Penniroyal, etc. but if yellow, put
therein only Saffron-water.

An Italian Pudding.
Take a fine Manchet, and cut it into square pieces like Dice, then put to it
half a pound of Beef Suet minced small, Raisins of the Sun, Cloves, Mace,
Dates, Sugar, Marrow, Rosewater, Eggs and Cream, mingle all these together,
then Butter the bottom of your Dish, and put in the aforementioned ingredients,
about three quarters of an hour it will be baked, then scrape on Sugar.

Some Italians use to take half a pound of grated Parmisan, or old Cheese, a
penny Manchet grated, sweet Herbs chopped very small, Cinnamon, Pepper, Salt,
Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, four Eggs, Sugar and Currants, bake it in a Dish or Pie,
or boil it in a Napkin; being boiled, serve it with beaten Butter, Sugar and
Cinnamon.

French Pudding.
Take a pound of Raisins of the Sun, two penny white-loaves chopped and cut into
dice-work, a pound of Beef Suet finely minced, somewhat more than a quartern of
Sugar, twelve or fourteen Dates sliced, a grain of Musk, a dozen and a half
pretty big lumps of Marrow, Salt, a pint of Cream, half a dozen Eggs beaten
with it, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Salt and a Pippin or two pared, with a couple of
Pome-waters sliced and put in the bottom of the Dish before you bake it; if you
find your ingredients too many, or your Dish or Pan be too little to hold them,
divide them in two equal parts, and bake them a part.

If you would make a French Barley Pudding, thus you must do; Take a quart of
Barley and boil it, then add to it the quantity of Bread, as amounts to a
Manchet, then beat a pound of blanched Almonds with Rosewater, and strain them
with Cream, then take the yolks of eight Eggs, and the whites of four, and beat
them with Rosewater, season it with Nutmeg, Mace, Salt, Marrow, or Beef Suet
cut small, then filling the guts herewith boil them.

Puddings of Swines Lights.
Take your Lights and parboil them, then mince them very small with Suet, and
mix them with grated Bread, Cream, Currants, Eggs, Nutmeg, Salt and Rosewater,
so fill the guts.

A very good Pudding.
Take the crumbs of white Bread, the like quantity of white Flower, the yolks of
four Eggs, and as much Cream as will make it as thick as pancake Batter, then
butter your Dish, bake it and scrape on Sugar.

White Puddings the best way to make them.
Take Hogs Umbles and boil them very tender, then take some of the Lights with
the Heart, and all the fleshy part about them, picking the sinewy skins from
them all, then chop the meat very small, and put to it some of the Liver finely
sierced, some grated Nutmeg, the yolks of half a dozen Eggs, a pint of Cream,
two or three spoonfuls of Sack, Sugar, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Cinnamon,
Carraway-seed, a little Rosewater, good store of Hogs-fat, and some Salt, let
your guts lie a steep in Rosewater till you fill them.

Another approved way.
Take three pints of great Oatmeal picked very clean, steep it in Milk three or
four hours, then drain the Milk from it, and let it lie all night in Water that
is warm, in the Morning drain it from the Water, and put to it two pound of
minced Beefsuet, half a score Eggs with half their whites, a quarter of an
ounce of Nutmegs, as much Sugar, a little Mace, a quart of Cream, and a little
Salt, mix them well together, and fill your guts herewith.

Cambridge Pudding.
Sierce grated Bread through a Cullender, and mingle it with some Flower,
minced Dates, Currants, Nutmeg, Cinnamon and Pepper, minced Suet, new Milk warm,
fine Sugar and Eggs, take away some of their whites, and incorporate all
together. Take half a Pudding on the one side, and half a Pudding on the other,
and put Butter in the midst, putting the one half of the Pudding aloft upon the
other made round like a Loaf; put in your Pudding when the liquor boileth, and
when it is enough, cut it in the midst and serve it up.

All sorts of Forcings or Farcings for any Roots, Land-fowl, Sea-fowl, or any
other joints of Meat.
Roots, as Mellons, Pompions, etc.
HAving taken the seeds out of your Mellon, cut it round two fingers deep, then
let your farcing or stuffing be grated Bread, beaten Almonds, Rosewater and
Sugar, with some of the Pulp of the Mellon stamped with it, also Bisket-bread
pulverized, some Coriander-seed, candied Lemon-pill minced, some beaten Mace
and Marrow minced small, beaten Cinnamon, yolks of raw Eggs, sweet Herbs,
Saffron and Musk a grain, then fill your rounds of Mellons, and put them in a
flat bottomed Dish with Butter in the bottom, and so bake them.

Let your sauce be made of White wine and strong broth strained with beaten
Almonds, Sugar and Cinnamon, serve them on Sippets finely carved, give this
Broth a walm, and pour it on your Mellons, with some fine scraped Sugar, dry
them in the Oven, and serve them.

In the same manner you may do them whole, also Cucumbers, Pompions, Gourds,
great Onions, Parsnips, Turnips, Carrots, etc.

Farcings or Stuffings for any sort of Fowl.
Take Mutton, Veal or Lamb, mince it and put to it some grated Bread, yolks of
Eggs, Cream, Currants, Dates, Sugar, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Ginger, Mace, juice of
Spinach, sweet Herbs, Salt, and mingle all together, with some whole Marrow: if
you would have your farcing look yellow use Saffron water.

Or you may use this farcing: take a Calves Udder boiled and cold, and stamp it
with Almond-paste, Cheese-curds, Sugar; Cinnamon, Ginger, Mace, Cream, Salt, raw
Eggs, and some Marrow or Butter.

Another excellent Farcing for any sort of Fowl.
Take part of a Leg of Veal, and mince it with some Beef Suet, sweet Herbs,
grated Bread, Eggs, Nutmeg, Pepper, Ginger, Salt, Dates, Currants, Raisins,
candyed Oranges, Coriander-seed, and a little Cream, bake or boil them, you
must thicken them with the yolks of Eggs, Sugar and Verjuyce, and serve them on
Sippets, strew on Sugar, and garnish your Dish with Lemon sliced.

Otherways.
Take Rice-flowre and strain it either with Cream or Goats-milk, and the brawn
of a Capon roasted, minced and stamped, boil them to a good thickness, with
some Marrow, Rosewater, Sugar and Salt, with some Nutmeg, Almond-paste, and
beaten Mace, when they are cold, fill your Poultry herewith, or farce any other
joint of meat proper for farcing.

Farcings of Livers of Poultry.
Take your Livers when they are raw, and cut them into square pieces about the
bigness of small dice, cut as much interlarded Bacon in the same form, with
some sweet Herbs chopped very small, add thereunto some yolks of Eggs, beaten
Cloves, Mace, Pepper and Salt; and if you please some Prunes and Raisins of the
Sun, some grated old Cheshire Cheese, a clove or two of Garlic, and fill your
Fowl whether you roast it or boil it.

Farcings for Turkeys, Pheasants, and the better sort of Fowl.
Take Veal and Beef Suet, and mince them together, and let your seasoning be
Cloves, Mace, a few Currants, Salt, and the bottoms of Artichokes boiled, and
cut into small squares, mingle these together with Pine-apple-seed, Pistaches,
Chestnuts, yolks of Eggs, and fill your Fowl herewith.

Farcings for Sea-fowl boiled or baked.
Take some of the flesh of a Leg of Mutton, and mince the meat small with
Beef Suet, Penniroyal, sweet Marjoram, Time and other sweet Herbs, add
thereunto grated Bread, Dates, Currants, Raisins Orange minced small, Ginger,
Pepper, Nutmeg, Cream and Eggs, farce your Fowl herewith, and boil or roast
them, let your sauce be Marrow, strong Broth, White wine, Verjuyce, Mace, Sugar
and yolks of Eggs, strained with Verjuyce, serve them in on fine carved Sippets
and sliced Lemon, Grapes, etc.

Farcings for Mutton.
Cut a pretty big hole in a Leg of Mutton, and the flesh that you take from
thence mince with Beef Suet or Bacon, sweet Herbs, Pepper, Salt, Cloves and
Mace, and two or three cloves of Garlic, raw Eggs, two or three Chestnuts, work
up these ingredients together, and farce your Leg therewith; when you have
pricked it up, either roast it or boil it, make sauce with the remainder of the
meat, and stew it on the fire with Gravy, Chestnuts, Pistaches or Pine-apples,
bits of Artichokes, Pears, Grapes or Pippins, and thus serve it.

Farcings for Lamb.
Mince some Lamb with Suet, Parsley, Time, Savory, Mary-golds, Endive and
Spinach; being finely minced, mingle herewith grated Bread, grated Nutmeg,
Currants, Dates, yolks of Eggs, Rosewater and Verjuyce.

Farcings for Veal.
Having minced some of a Leg of Veal, cut your lard like Dice, and put to it
with some minced Penniroyal, sweet Marjoram, Winter-savory, Nutmeg, a little
Cammomile, Pepper, Salt, Ginger, Cinnamon, Sugar, and incorporate these
together, then fill some Beef-guts herewith, and stew them in a Pipkin with
some Claret wine, let not the guts be above three inches long, infuse in the
stewing large Mace, Capers and Marrow; being enough, serve them on Sippets with
sliced Lemon and Barberries, and run them over with beaten Butter, and scrape
on Sugar.

Farcings for Venison.
Mince Mutton with Beef Suet, Orange-pill, grated Nutmeg, grated Bread,
Coriander-seed, Pepper, Salt, and yolks of Eggs, mingle all these together, and
stuff your Venison; let your Sauce be Gravy, strong Broth, Dates, Currants,
Sugar, Salt, Lemons and Barberries.

Thus you may farce a Leg or Breast of Veal, Loins of Beef, Mutton, or any
joint of meat.

Another good Farcing.
Mince a Leg of Mutton or Lamb with Beef Suet, with all manner of sweet Herbs,
also Cloves, Mace, Salt, Currants, Sugar, and fill the Leg with half the meat,
then make the rest into little Cakes, as broad as a half Crown, and stew them
in a Pipkin with strong Mutton Broth, Cloves, Mace and Vinegar, you may either
boil, bake or roast the Leg.

A Farced Pudding.
Mince a Leg of Mutton with sweet Herbs, put thereto grated Bread, minced
Dates, Currants, Raisins of the Sun, a little Orangado or preserved Lemon sliced
thin, a few Coriander-seeds, Nutmeg, Pepper and Ginger, mingle all together
with some Cream and yolks of Eggs, work it together very well, then wrap the
meat in a caul of Mutton or Veal, and so either boil or bake it.

A grand farced or forced Dish.
Boil some Eggs till they be very hard, then separate the yolks from the
whites, and divide them into halves, then pound the yolks in a stone Mortar
with March-pane stuff, and sweet Herbs chopped very small, add these unto the
Eggs with Sugar and Cinnamon finely beaten, mingle all together with Currants and
Salt, fill the whites and set them by; then have preserved Oranges candied,
fill them with March-pane-paste and Sugar and set them by; then have boiled
Asparagus minced with Butter and a little Sack; have next boiled Chestnuts
blanched and Pistaches, then Marrow sleeped in Rosewater, and fried in Butter;
after this have green Codlings sliced, mixed with Bisket-bread and Eggs, and
fried in little Cakes; next have Sweet-breads or Lambstones, and yolks of Eggs
dipped in Butter and fried; then have Pigeon-peepers and Chicken-peepers fried,
or any small Fowl, and some Artichokes and Potatoes boiled and fried in Butter,
and some balls as big as a Walnut made of Parmisan, dipped in Butter and fried;
set these all by severally, as you did the first. Put all these in a great
Charger, and place the Chickens, or whatever Fowl you have in the middle of the
Dish, then lay a lay of Sweet-breads, then a lay of Artichoke-bottoms and
Marrow, and on them some preserved Oranges, round that place your hard Eggs,
fried Asparagus, yolks of Eggs, Chestnuts and Pistaches then your green Codlings
stuffed; the Charger being full, put Marrow all over with the juice of Oranges.
Some do it thus: Take two pound of Beef-marrow, and cut it as big as great
Dice, and a pound of Dates cut into small squares, then take a pound of Prunes
and stone them, and a pound of Currants, put these aforesaid into a Platter,
with twenty yolks of Eggs, a pound of Sugar, an ounce of Cinnamon; having
mingled all these together, take the yolks of twenty Eggs more, strain them
with a little Rosewater, a little Musk and Sugar, fry them in two Pancakes with
a little Butter; being fried yellow, lay it in a Dish, and spread the former
Materials thereon, then take the other and cut it into thin slices as broad as
your little finger, and lay it over the Dish like a Lettice-window, set it in
the Oven a little, then fry it.

CUSTARDS.
LEt your paste of your Custards be made up of fine Flower, done up with
boiling liquor, and made stiff; and having made the forms, dry them in an Oven;
then take a quart of Cream, half a score Eggs, half a pound of Sugar, a little
Mace, half as much Ginger beaten very fine, and a spoonful of Salt, strain them
through a strainer, and fill therewith your forms, then bake them fair and
white, draw them, dish them, and scrape thereon double refined Sugar.

Almond Custard.
Take a pound and half of Almonds, blanch and beat them very fine with
Rosewater, then strain them with a pint and half of Cream, fifteen whites of
Eggs, and three quarters of a pound of Sugar which is refined, make the Paste
as before specified, and bake it in an Oven moderately heated that it may look
fair and white, then draw it and scrape on Sugar.

Custard without Eggs.
Take three quartes of a pound of Almonds, being blanched, pound them with
Rosewater in a stone-Morter, then put in some Rice-flowre, and beat them well
together, with some Cloves, Mace and Salt, let the Spices be beaten with some
Ginger, and strain them all with some fair spring Water, add unto what was
strained half a pound of double refined Sugar, and a little Saffron; your forms
being ready dried, lay in the bottom of them some sliced Dates, Raisins of the
Sun stoned, and some boiled Currants, fill them and bake them, being baked
scrape Sugar upon them; forget not to prick your forms or Custards, before you
set them in the Oven.

Or thus: if you make your Custard in paste, set it in works, and dry it in the
Oven, then beat the spawn of a Pike in a Mortar, and strain it with Cream,
season it with Sugar, Rosewater, a grated Nutmeg, and a little Mace, beat them
well together, fill your forms, and when it is baked, strew comfits thereon.

CHEESE-CAKES.
DRain the whey from your curds made of new Milk, to every pottle of curds
allow a quarter of a pound of Butter, a good quantity of Rosewater, three
grains of Ambergriese, the crumbs of a Manchet rubbed through a Cullender, the
yolks of ten Eggs, a grated Nutmeg, a little Salt, and good store of Sugar, mix
all these well together with a little Cream, but do not make them too soft;
instead of Bread, take Almonds which will be much better, put up your
ingredients into Puff-paste, and bake them in a quick Oven, and let them not
stand too long lest they should be too dry.

Otherways.
Make your crust of cold Butter-paste, to a gallon of Flower take a pound of
Butter, then take curds made of Cream which are very fresh and new, and put
them into your Cheese-cloth, and press out all the Whey, then stamp in a fine
grated Manchet among the Curds, some Cloves and Mace, a pound and a half of
well-washed Currants, the yolks of eight Eggs, some Rosewater, Salt, half a
pound of refined Sugar, with a Nutmeg or two; incorporate these well together
with a quarter of a pound of good sweet Butter and some Cream, make it not too
soft, put your materials into paste and bake them.

Or thus:
Take three quarts of Flower, and three quarters of a pound of Butter, a little
Yest or Barm, with a small quantity of Saffron made into powder, add these to
the Flower, but melt your Butter in Milk, and so make up the Paste; then take
the Curds of three quarts of new Milk-cheese, with near upon a pint of Cream,
drain the Whey well from the Curds, and pound it in a Mortar with half a pound
of Sugar, three quarters of a pound of Currants washed and well picked, a grated
Nutmeg, some Cinnamon beaten fine, Salt, Rosewater, a little Saffron pulverized,
and half a dozen yolks of Eggs, work it up stiff with Butter and Cream.

Otherways.
Take the yolks of eighteen Eggs, and the whites of half as many, beat them
very well, then take three pints of Cream, and boil it with Mace; after this
take it off the sire, stir it and put in the Eggs, then set it on the fire, and
let it boil till it curdleth, then take it off, and put therein half a pound of
Sugar, some grated Nutmeg, and beaten Mace, then dissolve two grains of
Ambergriese in four spoonfuls of Rosewater, and put therein with half a handful
of grated Bread, half a pound of blanched Almonds beaten small, a little Cream
and some Currants, put them in Paste, as aforesaid, and let them bake a quarter
of an hour which will be sufficient.

Some will take a pottle of Flower, half a pound of Butter, and the white of an
Egg working it well into the Flower with the Butter, then put a little cold
Water to it, and work it up stiff, then take a pottle of Cream, half a pound of
Sugar, and a pound of boiled Currants, a whole Nutmeg grated, and boil these
together gently with the yolks of eighten Eggs, stir it continually; when it
has boiled enough, take it off, and let it cool, then fill your Cheese-cakes.

Cheese-cakes in the French fashion.
Take a pound and a half of Pistaches stamped, with two pound and a half of new
morning Cheese-curds, three ounces and a half of Elder-flowers, twelve Eggs, a
pound and a quarter of Sugar, the like quantity of Butter, and a pottle of
Flower, strain these in a course strainer, and fill your forms made of
Puff-paste, or other Paste as good as cold Butter paste, etc.

Otherways after the French fashion.
Take fix pound of the best Holland-cheese, and eight pound of new-made morning
Milk Cheese-curds, and beat them in a Mortar, then put Sugar to them, about a
pound or more, and half a pound of well picked and washed Currants, fifteen Eggs
well beaten, Cream, three quarters of an ounce of Cinnamon, half an ounce of
Mace, and a little Saffron, mix them well together, and fill your Cheese-cakes
Pasty-ways, made of Puff-paste or cold Butter-paste; being baked, ice them with
yolks of Eggs, Rosewater and Sugar.

The best way of making Cheese-cakes.
Take a pretty large morning Milk-cheese of about fix pound in weight, pound it
in ^one or wooden Mortar, and with a pound of Water amongst it, and a pound of
Sugar, ^dd thereto beaten Mace, two pounds of Currants, a pound of Almonds
blanched and beaten with Rosewater, and a little Salt; then boil some Cream,
and thicken it with the yolks of Eggs, work these well together, but let not
the Curd be two soft, make the Paste of cold Butter and Water, form it
Pasty-ways and fill it.

White-pots and Fools.
White-pots the French fashion.
TAke a quart of good thick Cream, and boil it with four or five blades of
large Mace, and some whole Cinnamon, then take the whites of four Eggs, and Seat
them well, when the Cream boils up put them in, then take it off the fire, and
keep it stirring a little while, and put in some Sugar, then pare half a doven
Pippins, slice them and put them into a pint of Claret wine, some Raisins of
the Sun, Sugar, beaten Cinnamon, and beaten Ginger, boil your Apples to a pap,
then cut some Sippets very thin, and dry them before the fire; when the Apples
and Cream are boiled and cold, take half the Sippets and lay them in a dish,
lay half the Apples on them then lay on the rest of the Sippers, then Apples as
you did before, then pour on the rest of the Cream, and bake it in the Oven as
a Custard, and when you serve it scrape on Sugar.

Rice White-pot.
Take three pints of Cream, and a quarter of a pound of Rice well picked, some
beaten Nutmeg, Ginger and Sugar, boil these together, and set it by till it is
cold; then strain into it the yolks of half a score Eggs, a quarter of a pound
of Currants well-washed, and some Salt, incorporate these together, and bake it.

You may put these ingredients either into Paste, Earthen-Pan, Dish or deep
Basin; and when it is baked, garnish your Dish with Sugar, Orange, Comfits and
Cinnamon.

White-pot after the Devonshire fashion.
Take Mornings-milk, and soak therein some slices of white Bread, and put
therein a little Flower with the yolks of Eggs beaten very small, bruise your
Bread, so that it is wholly incorporated with your Milk, Eggs and Flower, make
it about the thickness of Pancake batter, then fill a deep earthen-pan
herewith, and lay some pieces of Butter on the top, tie a brown paper about the
head thereof, and put it into your Oven, when it is baked, on the top there
will be a hard crust. You may make them without Flower and with Rice, or
without either, only with Bread.

A Norfolk-fool.
Take three pints of Cream, and boil it with large Mace and whole Cinnamon,
having boiled a very little time, put therein the yolks of eight Eggs well
beaten, then take it off the fire, and take out your Mace and Cinnamon; the
Cream being of an indifferent thickness, cut a Manchet into fine slices, and
cover the bottom of your Dish; then pour on some Cream, then more bread, do
this three or four times till the Dish be full; then trim the dish si^^e with
fine carved Sippets, and stick it with sliced Dates, scrape on Sugar and serve
it.

A Westminster Fool.
Slice a Manchet very thin, and lay it in the bottom of a Dish, and wet them
with Sack; then take what quantity of Cream you think fit, and boil it with
Eggs and large Mace, season it with Rosewater and Sugar, then stir it well
together to prevent curdling, then pour it on the Bread, and let it cool, when
it is cold serve it up.

Possets, Wassels, Syllabubs and Blamangers.
A Sack Posset.
TAke three pints of very good new Cream, and a quarter of a pound of Almonds
stamped with some Rosewater, strain it with the Cream, then boil it with a
little Ambergriese, then put a pint of Sack into a Basin, and set it over the
fire till it be blood-warm, then take the yolks of nine Eggs with three whites,
having beaten them well, put them into the Sack, then stir them together in the
Basin with the Cream; having suffered it to cool a little before you put it in,
stir so long till you find it as thick as you would have it, then pound Amber
small, and mingle it with Sugar, and a little Musk, and strew it on the top of
the Posset, it will give it a most delightful taste.

Or thus: take ten Eggs, beat the whites and yolks together, and strain them
into a quart of Cream, season it with Nutmeg and Sugar, and put to them a pint
of Canary, stir them well together, and put them into your Basin, then set it
over a Chafing Dish of coals, and stir it till it be indifferently thick, then
scrape on Sugar and serve it.

Another excellent Sack-posset.
Take the yolks of two dozen of Eggs, and five pints of good sweet Cream, and
boil it with a good quantity of whole Cinnamon, and stir it continually on a
good fire, then strain the Eggs with some raw Cream; when the Cream is so well
boiled that it tastes of the Spice, take it off the fire, and pour in your
Eggs, and stir them well among the Cream; being indifferent thick, have a quart
of Sack in a deep Basin that will contain the rest of the materials, and pour
in your Cream, etc. with a pound of double refined Sugar, and some fine grated
Nutmeg, pour it in as high as you can hold your Skillet, let it spatter in the
Basin to make it froth: you may, if you please, take off the Curd and add
thereto fine grated Manchet, Loaf-Sugar finely beaten, and a little White wine.

A Sack-posset without Milk or Cream.
Take the yolks and whites of twenty Eggs, but remove the Cock-treads, beat
these very well, then take a pint and a half of Sack, and a quart of Ale boiled
and scum'd, and put into it a pound of Sugar, and three quarters of a Nutmeg,
let it boil a little together, then take it off the fire, stirring the Eggs
still, put into them two or three ladlefuls of the liquor, then mingle all
together, set it over the fire till it be pretty thick, and serve it up.

A French-Posset.
Take three pints of Cream and a Nutmeg, and set it over the fire, and let it
boil, as it is boiling, have a Basin wherein there must be a pint of White wine
well sweetened with Sugar, then set it over the coals to warm a little, then put
in your Cream, stir (...) and let it stand simmering over the ^^^e an hour and
a half.

A Covent-Garden-Posset.
Take a quart of new Cream, a quarter of an ounce of Cinnamon, and a Nutmeg
quartered, and boil it till it taste of the Spice, and keep it always stirring,
or it will burn to, then take the yolks of eight Eggs well beaten, with a
little cold Cream, and put them into the hot Cream over the fire, and stir it
till it begin to boil, then take it off, and stir it till it be indifferently
cold, sweetning it with some Sugar, then take a little more than a quarter of a
pint of Sack, and sweeten that also, then set it on the ^^^e till it be ready
to boil, then put it into a deep Basin and pour the Cream into it, elevating
your hand as high as you can conveniently to make it froth, which is the grace
of your Posset, and if you put it through a Tunnel, it is held the most
exquisite way.

A Worcester Syllabub.
Take a Syllabub pot, and fill it half full of Red-streak'd Sider, with good
store of Sugar, and a little Nutmeg, stir it well together, and put in as much
thick Cream a spoonful at a time, as fast as you can, as though you milk'd in,
then stir it together very softly once about, and let it stand two hours before
you eat it, for the standing makes the curd.

If in the Field, only Milk the Cow into your Sider, Nutmeg, Sugar, and so
drink it warm.

Another very good Syllabub.
Take a pint of Canary or White wine, a sprig of Rosemary, a Nutmeg quartered,
the juice of a Lemon, some of the Pill with Sugar, put these together into a
Pot all night, and cover them; in the Morning take a pint of Cream, and a pint
and half of new Milk; then take out the Lemon-pill, Rosewater and Nutmeg, and
squirt your Milk and Cream into the Pot.

Or take a pint of thick Cream, and a pint of White wine, and put them together
in a deep Basin, with two whites of Eggs, the juice of a Lemon, some pill, and
a little Sugar, then take some rods and whip it, and as the froth arises, take
it off with a spoon, and put it into a Fruit-dish, and lay fine sierced Sugar
thereon.

A Wassel.
Boil three pints of Cream with four or five whole Cloves, then have the yolks
of half a dozen Eggs dissolved in Cream, the Cream being well boiled, so that
it taste of the Spices, put in your Eggs, and stir them well together; then
have some Muskadine or Tent, and being warmed, pour it into a Dish with Sugar,
wherein there are fine Sippets of French-bread, then pour on your Cream upon
that, then cast on Ginger, Cinnamon and Sugar, and stick it with blanched
Almonds.

Blamangers.
Take a pottle of morning Milk, and a pound of fine sierced Rice-flowre, strain
them through a strainer into a broad Skillet, and set it on a soft fire, stir
it with a broad stick, and when it is a little thick, take it off the fire;
then put in half a pint of Rosewater, and set it over the fire again, stir it
well, and beat it with your stick from one side of the Pan to the other; when
it is as thick as pap take it off, when it is cold, lay it in slices on a Dish,
and scrape on Sugar.

Blamanger in the French fashion.
Take a Pike and boil it in fair Water very tender, then take the flesh from
the bones and chop it very small, then take a pound of Almond-paste, and beat
it with your Fish aforesaid, put to them a quart of Cream, the whites of a
dozen Eggs well beaten, and the crumbs of a French-manchet, mingle all together,
and strain them with some Sugar and Salt, then put them in a broad Stew Pan
over the fire, stir it and boil it thick; being boiled, let it stand till it be
cold, then strain it again into a clean Dish, scrape on Sugar and serve it.

Blamanger after the Italian fashion.
Take a Capon that is either boiled or roasted, and being cold, strip off the
skin, mince it and pound it in a stone Mortar with Almonds blanched, then mix
it with some Capon broth, and crumbs of Whitebread strained together with some
Salt, Rosewater and Sugar, boil it to a good thickness, then either put it in
Paste o^ serve it in a Dish.

Blamanger after the English fashion.
Take two quarts of fine Flower, half a pound of Butter, the like quantity of
Sugar, some Saffron, Rosewater, beaten Cinnamon, and the yolks of Eggs, work up
all cold together with some Almondpaste.

Potages, Soops, Cawdles, etc.
How to make broth for the feeding of all Pots for Potages, whether English or
French fashion.
ACcording to the quantity of what Broth you will have, you must proportion
your knuckles of Beef, the flesh of the hinder part of the Rump of Mutton and
Hens; you must sees the flesh, very well with Parsley, young Onions, and Time
tied in a bundle with Cloves, Mace, and same beaten Cinnamon; keeping always
some warm Water to fill up your Pot, as your Liquor consumes; when you have
boiled them well, strain the broth, and preserve it for your use.

For first Courses and brown Potages, set your roasted meat to boil with a
bundle of Herbs, as aforesaid, after you have taken the juice of it; having
boiled it a good while, strain it and keep it for your use.

Potages for Flesh-days.
Potages of Partridges with Coleworts.
TRuss your Partridges, lard them and put them into your Pot with good Broth,
and put your Coleworts in also, being boiled, pass into your Pot a little
melted Lard, let your seasoning be Mace, Cloves, Pepper and Salt; having soaked
your crusts and dish'd your Fowl, garnish them with Sausages and Lemon,
strowing Salt on the brims of the Dish.

Potages of Ducks and Turnips.
Having larded your Ducks, give them half a dozen turns on a spit before a
quick fire, then draw them and boil them, then take your Turnips and cut them
into what forms you think fit, pass them in a Pan (having first flowr'd them)
with melted lard; being brown; put them into the Pot where your Ducks are, and
boil them well; having soaked your Bread to make your Potage thick, dish your
Ducks and Purnips, strowing some Capers, and a little Vinegar thereon, let your
garnish be carved Turnips.

Potage for a grand boiled Meat.
Take strong broth and boil therein what Fowl or other meat you have, then take
three pints thereof, with a pint and half of Gravy drawn with Wine, nine
And^ovies, four whole Onions, half a pint of Oyster liquor, a handful and half
of Raspin of French-bread, the juice of four Lemons, the yolks of three Eggs
beaten into it, when you are ready to use it, with a sliced. Nutmeg, so draw it
up all together.

You may use Herbs in the same broth; as Spinach, Sorrel, Endive, Lettice,
Burslain, with some faggots of sweet Herbs: This is a very rich broth with a
high hogo, and is most sitting for great Dishes on great Festivals.

Potage called Skink.
According to the quantity of broth you would have, proportion the flesh of the
Legs of Beef, which you must cut into small pieces about the highness of a
Tennis-ball or less, break the bones in pieces, and let them soak in Water,
washing and cleansing it from the blood, but just cover it in your Pot with
Water, when it boils scum it, then put in some Pepper in a cloth, and when it
is half boiled, put in four Onions, a little Cloves and whole Mace, with a race
or two of Ginger sliced, then take up a ladleful thereof, and steep therein
some Saffron tied up in a rag, bruise it till you have colored your broth,
then put it into your Pot, and let it boil till your Meat be very, tender;
having seasoned it with Salt, dish it up on Sippets of French-bread, with some
of the Meat in the middle of the Dish.

You may for variety put in chopped clove Caboildge, or bruised Spinach, and cut
Emdive.

Potage of Pullets and Sparagus.
Truss your Pollets and whiten them, then put them into your Pot with a sheet
of Lard over them, fill your pot with strong broth, and season it with Salt,
Pepper, Cinnamon, heaten Cloves and Mace, a whole Onion pill'd, and a bunch of
sweet Herbs, let them not boil too long; then dry your bread and soak it, lay
your Pullets in the middle of your Dish with the Asparagus, garnish them with
fried Sparagus, broken Combs, Mushromes, or the Gibblets of your Pullets, with
a few Pistaches, lay round the brim of your Dish slices of Lemon and Lemon-pill.

Potage of Liverings.
Cut a Fillet of Veal into thin slices, and stuff them very well, put the
slices thereof into a Pipkin with some of your best broth; having seasoned it
with Salt, Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmeg, and a very little Pepper, soak your Bread
Oando garnish it with your Liverings, Mushromes, Sparagus, Mutton juice and
Pistaches.

A most excellent Potage, called Le Potage blanck de Lion.
Take a pint or a quart of White wine, put it on the fire in a Pipkin, with
four or five Pippins pared, eight Dates cut in halves, a faggot of sweet Herbs,
large Mace, Cinnamon, a quartered Numeg, let them boil together, and if you want
liquor, add a pint of strong broth, then take the Marrow of three Marrow-bones
and wrap it in the yolks of Eggs and grated Bread to keep it from melting away,
and when your Pot boils, put it therein, then take the yolks of four Eggs, and
beat them in White wine or strong broth, and when your aforesaid ingredients
are enough, stir your Eggs therein, and season it to your Pallet with Sugar,
then take it off the fire, and serve it up with boiled Capons or Chickens,
garnish the Marrow and Dates on the Breast of them, you may put into this broth
Spanish Potatoes or Skirrets.

Potage of Quails.
Truss you^ Quails, whiten and flower them and pass them with Lard, then put
them in the Pot, boil and season them with Salt, soak your Bread, and garnish
it with your Quails, with Lemon, Mushromes, Cocks-combs and Pistaches.

Potage restorative or strengthening.
Take the broth where Marrow-bones have been boiled, you may be easily supplied
therewith from places accustomed to feasting, boil therein a good quantity of
great Turnips; when they are boiled, press the juice out of them, and put it
into the Pot wherein the Turnips were boiled, then take a couple of old red
Cocks scalded and beaten to pieces with the back of a Cleaver, then put them
into the said broth with a couple of Calves feet, let them boil together, and
scum them very well; when they are half boiled, put therein some Raisins of the
Sun stoned, sliced Liquorish, a few Anniseeds, with a handful of Pine-Apples
and Pistaches beaten in a Mortar, add thereunto Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, and a
pint of red Wine; having boiled the Meat to a mash, strain it into a Pipkin,
then put to it white Sugar Candy, clarify it with the whites of Eggs when you
boil it again, and run it through your Jelly-bags; take a quarter of a pint of
this Morning, Evening, and if you please at Noon.

Potage of Wood-Quests.
Take your Wood-Quests, or other large Pigeons, whiten and lard them, boil and
season them with a sprig of Time, whole Pepper, a little beaten Ginger, and
some large Mace, soak your Bread, and garnish your Wood-Quests with bottoms of
Artichokes and Sparagus, then serve them.

Potage of Venison.
Take a Hanch of Venison, and cut it into six pieces, and place them in the
bottom of a Pan or Pot, then put in no more Water than will cover it, let it
boil, then scum it, after that add to it a good quantity of whole Pepper; when
it is half boiled, put in four whole Onions, Cloves, and large Mace, some
sliced Ginger, Nutmeg, three or four faggots of sweet Herbs, let it boil till
the Venison be very tender, and a good part of the broth be wasted; after this
pour out the broth from the meat into a Pipkin, keep your Venison hot in the
same Pot by adding other hot broth unto it; then take a couple of red-Beet
roots, having very well parboiled them before, cut them into square pieces as
big as a shilling, and put them into the broth which is in your Pipkin, and let
them boil till they are very tender, add unto the boiling four Anchovies
minced, then dish up your Venison on Sippets of French-bread, then pour on your
broth so much as will near-upon fill the Dish, then take your roots by
themselves, and toss them in a little drawn Butter, and lay them all over the
Venison; if the Beets be good, it will make the broth red enough, which you
must have visible round about the Dish sides; but if it prove pale, put to it
some Saunders: This is a very savory Potage.

The Queens Potage.
Take Almonds, beat them and boil them with good broth, a bundle of Herbs, and
the inside of a Lemon, a few crumbs of Bread, then season them with Salt, stir
them often and strain them. Then take your Bread and soak it with the best
broth, which is thus to be made.

When you have boned a Capon or Partridge, take the bones and beat them in a
Mortar, then seethe these bones in strong broth with Mushromes, and strain all
through a linen cloth, and with this broth shak your Bread, as it soaks,
sprinkle it with Almond broth, then put unto it a little minced meat, either of
Partridge or Capon, and still, as it soaks, put in more Almond-broth until it
be full, then take the Fire-shovel red hot, and hold it over, garnish your Dish
with Cocks-combs, Pistaches and Pome-granates.

Potage in the Italian fashion.
Boil green Pease with some strong broth and interlarded Bacon cut into slices,
the Pease being boiled, put to them some chopped Parsley, Pepper, Anniseed, and
strain some of the Pease to thicken the broth, give it a walm, and serve it on
Sippets with boiled Chickens, Pigeons, Kids or Lambs-heads, Mutton, Duck,
Mallard, or any Poultry; for variety thicken the broth with Eggs.

Potage of Mutton, Veal or Beef in the English fashion.
Cut a Rack of Mutton in two pieces, and take a Knuckle of Veal and boil it
with good store of Herbs, with a pint of Oatmeal chopped amongst them, let your
Herbs be Time, sweet Marjoram, Parsley, Sives, Succory, Marry-golds,
Strawberri^ and Violet-leaves, Beets, Borrage, Sorrel, Blood-wort, Sage,
Penniroyal, with a little Salt; being well boiled, serve them on carved
Sippets, with the meat in the midst thereof.

Otherways.
Take the best old Pease you can get, wash and boil them in fair Water; when
they boil scum them, and put in a piece of interlarded Bacon, put in also a
bundle of Mints with other sweet Herbs, serve the Bacon on Sippets in thin
slices, but boil not your Potage too thick.

The Dukes Potage.
Let your broth be the same of that of ^he Queens, extracted from roasted
bones, ^hen soak a loaf of Bread with the crust, after that a small hash of
Partridges which ^ou must strew upon the Bread so thin as it ^ay hardly appear,
soak it and fill it by little and little, garnish it with your smallest
Mushromes, Cock-combs, Kidneys, Pi^aches, Lemon and serve it.

The Princes Potage.
Take either Capons or Partridges and roast them, then take out the bones and
mince the brawn small, take also the bones, break them and seethe them with
broth in in Earthen-pot, with a bundle of Herbs, then strain them through a
linen cloth, soak your Bread, and lay it on a bed of flesh, or if you will
instead thereof a bed of Almond-broth, boil it well, and fill it by degrees,
then garnish it with the Pinnions; then take three Eggs with a little
Almond-broth, or any other broth, beat them well together, and pour them on
your Potage, hold the fire-shovel over it, and so serve it.

Potage of Teals with Hypocrast.
Take Teals, dress and cleanse them well, whiten them, as before specified,
stuff them within with some Lard, then fry them with fresh Seam, then boil them
in a Pot, when they are almost boiled, throw in some Prunes with a piece of
Sugar, garnish your Potage with the Teals and Prunes.

Potage without the sight of Herbs.
Having minced several sorts of sweet Herbs very small, stamp them with your
Oatmeal, then strain them through a strainer with some of the broth of the Pot,
boil your Herbs and Oatmeal with your Mutton, and some Salt, let your Herbs be
Violet-leaves, Strawberry-leaves, Succory, Spinach, Scallions, Parsley and
Marry-goldflowers; having boiled them enough, serve them on Sippets.

Potage of Larks.
Having drawn your Larks, whiten and flower them, and pass them in a Pan with
Butter, Lard or fresh Seam, until they be very brown, then put them in a Pot
with good broth, and a bundle of Herbs, and boil them, soak a loaf well, and
garnish it with your Larks, adding thereto Beef-pallates, Mutton-juyce and
Lemon, then serve it.

Potage of young Pigeons.
Scald your Pigeons and boil them in good broth, with a bundle of sweet Herbs,
cover them with a sheet of Lard, then lay them on a soaked loaf, and garnish
them with Hartichokes and Sparagus fried, green Pease or Lettice.

Potage of Pullets with Colliflowers.
Fit your Pullets for the Pot, and boil them with a faggot of sweet Herbs,
season them with Salt, Cloves, Pepper and grated Nutmeg, then let your Bread be
soaked and garnished with Colliflowers, pour on some Mutton-juyce or Gravy, and
serve it up.

An excellent Potage to cleanse the blood.
Put over the fire about a gallon of fair Water, and put therein a handful of
great Oatmeal beaten small, and a piece of Rib-Bacon, then take a handful of
Brooklime, as many Watercresses, Nettle-tops, Elder-buds, Violet-leaves,
Primrose-leaves, with young Alexander-leaves, mince all these very small, and
put them into your broth with a little large Mace, season it with Salt, when
you dish it, put in some Butter.

Potage of young Pigeons roasted.
Having seasoned your broth with Salt and Cloves, put in your Pigeons and boil
them, make your Potage brown, then soak your Bread, and garnish it with your
Fowl, and pour on your broth.

Potage of green Geese with Pease-broth.
Take your green Geese and boil them by themselves, then take some Pease and
boil them in like manner; being well boiled, pass them through a very fine
strainer, and put your Pease-broth into a Pot, with a faggot of sweet Herbs,
pass a little Lard in a Drying Pan, and when it is melted, put it into your
broth; soak your bread in your Geese-broth, then pour your Peasebroth over it.

Potage of Goose-gibblets.
Whiten your Gibblets and put them into a Pot with good broth, a faggot of
sweet Herbs, and a sheet of Lard, let them boil very well, then soak your
Bread, and lay them thereon, pour on your broth, and upon all put some minced
Capers.

Potage of Pullets with green Pease.
Scald and truss your Pullets, and put them into your Pot with good broth, and
scum it well, then pass your Pease in a Pan with Butter or Lard, and soak them
with Lettuce steeped in fair Water and whitened, foak also your Bread, and then
garnish it with your Pullets, Pease and Lettuce.

Potage of young Rabbets.
Parboil your Rabbets, then pass them in a Drying Pan with Lard, then boil them
in good broth with a faggot of sweet Herbs, soak well your Bread, and garnish
it with young Rabbets and Mushromes.

Potage of Lambs Purtenances.
Whiten your Purtenances, and seethe them in good broth with a bundle of sweet
Herbs, a sheet of Lard or fat Bacon, soak your Bread, lay on your Purtenances,
and pour all over it white broth, which broth is thus made.

Take a pint of strong broth from the boiling of your Purtenances, a pine of
Sack, a quart of White wine, and put them into a Pipkin together with about a
dozen Dates cut in halves, whole Prunelloes, Cinnamon, Ginger, Cloves, Mace,
half a pound of white Sugar, with the Marrow of two or three bones, let these
boil till the Marrow be enough, then take it from the fire, and thicken it with
the yolks of Eggs, beaten very well and strained through a clean cloth, then
garnish it with Lettuce, Suckets, candied Lemon and Wafers, and so serve it up.

Potage of Larks.
Having drawn and trust them, pass them in a Pan with Lard, having first
flowered them, then put them into a Pot with good broth, half a pint of White
wine, and half a pound of Sugar; then soak your Bread, garnish it with your
Larks, and pour on your broth.

Potage of Veal.
Boil a Knuckle of Veal in good broth, then skin it and put therein some white
Succory, soak your Bread, and garnish it with your Knuckle, Succory and
Mushromes.

You may make Potage of a breast of Veal by first blanching it in fresh Water,
then boil it in good broth, with a faggot of sweet Herbs, Capers and Samphire.

Potage of Thrushes.
Draw, truss and flower them, then pass them in a Pan with some Butter, then
boil them in good broth, with sweet Herbs, garnish your soaked Bread with your
Birds, Beef-pallates and Mushromes.

Potage of Tortoise.
Having taken off the Head of your Tortoise, boil the body in Water, and when
it is almost enough, put into your broth some White wine, a faggot of sweet
Herbs, and some Lard; when it is boiled, take the meat out of the shell, throw
away the Gall, and cut the rest into pieces, then pass them in a Pan with some
Lard, some Nutmeg and Cinnamon beaten, a little Ginger and Salt, then stew them
in a Dish, and soak your Bread therein, squeeze in the juice of a Lemon, and
Garnish it with cut Sparagus.

Potage of a sucking Pig.
Scald your Pig very neatly, then cut it into half a dozen pieces, whiten them
in broth, and boil them with some Herbs, a piece of Lard, see that your Pot be
supplied with good broth, as it consumes in boiling, then soak your Bread, and
when your Pig is boiled enough, place the head in the midst of the Dish, with
the quarters round about it, and the purtenances round them, pour on your broth
and serve it.

Potage of minced Mutton.
Take the flesh of any joint of Mutton, and mince it with Beef Suet, season it
with some beaten Nutmeg, a little Pepper, and some Salt, and stew it in a
Stew Pan, soak your Bread in your best broth, then garnish it with your minced
meats, and Cockscombs, then pour on your broth with the juice of Mutton.

Potage of Beef.
Take a Leg of Beef, and stew it till it be so tender that it is ready to fall
in pieces, season it with a bundle of Herbs, Cloves, Capers, Samphire,
Mushromes, etc. then soak your Bread, and garnish it with your meat.

Potage of Capons and Pullets with Rice.
Having fitted your Capons or Pullets for the Pot, season your broth and boil
them therein, then pick your Rice very well, wash and dry it very well before
the fire, then boil it in good broth, then soak your Bread and garnish it with
your Capons or Pullets, together with the Rice; you may, as you shall think
good, put some Saffron into the broth.

Potage of a Calves head fried.
First boil your Calves head, then bone it, after that cut it into several
pieces, then mingle your meat with large Oysters cut into pieces, and season
them with Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt, then flower it and fry it with good sweet
Butter, soak your Bread, and lay in your meat and Oysters, pour on your broth,
and garnish your Dish with Mushromes, Pomegranats, sliced Lemon and Capers.

Potage of breasts of Mutton with Turnips.
Take the neck-ends of your breasts and boil them, then take some Turnips, pare
them and slice them, then fry them (having first flowr'd them) in Butter, and
put them to your Mutton, season your broth with Cloves, Pepper, Nutmeg, two or
three blades of Mace, a whole Onion peeled, Salt and a faggot of sweet Herbs;
if your Potage be too thin, take some flower and mingling it with Pepper and
Verjuyce, put it into your Pot, then soak your bread and serve it.

Potage of Wood-cocks roasted.
First almost roast your Wood-cocks, then boil them with some sweet Herbs, soak
your Bread in strong broth, and lay your Wood-cocks thereon, pour on your broth
and serve them.

Farced Potages for Flesh-days.
Potage of Capons farced.
TAke out the bones of your Capons at the neck, and fill them up with the flesh
of Squabs or Chickens minced small with Beef Suet; when they are well seasoned,
boil them in good broth.

Potage of young Cocks.
Take out their stomach-bone, and fill them up with minced Veal, mingled with
the yolks of raw Eggs, Chibbals, Parsley, Pepper, Nutmeg, Ginger and Mace, with
some Salt, then truss and whiten them, then boil them in good broth, and serve
them as aforesaid.

Potage of Pullets farced.
Dress them and blanch them in fresh Water, then pull up the skin with your
finger, and farce them with the brawn of Capon-suet, and the yolks of Eggs
minced together, season them with Pepper, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace and Cinnamon
beaten small with a little Salt, then boil them in good broth, then soak your
Bread, lay your Pullets thereon, and garnish them with the bottoms of
Artichokes and Sparagus.

Potage of young Pigeons farced.
Scald them, and farce or stuff them, as the Pullets aforesaid, blanch them and
boil them in good broth, season them with a sheet of Lard, soak your Bread, lay
on your Pigeons, and garnish them with their Wings and Livers, pour on your
broth with the juice of a Leg of Mutton roasted.

Potage of Ducks farced.
Bone them as you did the Capons, and stuff them with the flesh of Chickens,
Sweet-breads, Mushromes, or what other things you think fit, minced small with
a little Lard, you may add thereunto Chibbals, Parsley, Pepper, Nutmeg, Cinnamon
and Mace with lean Pork minced small, and mingled with the raw yolks of Eggs,
then sow up your Ducks, blanch them and boil them in good broth well seasoned;
temper some Flower with your broth to thicken it.

Potage of a Leg or Breast of Veal farced.
Take up the skin of your Leg of Veal very neatly, and truss up the knuckle,
then whiten it, then take some of the flesh of the Leg, and mince it with
Beef Suet, Lard, yolks of Eggs, and fine sweet Herbs, season them and stuff
your Leg herewith, then boil it in good broth with Succory, and serve it on
your soaked Bread with a little Verjuyce.

If you would make your Potage of a Breast of Veal, open it at the nether end,
and stuff it with minced meat and Suet, the Crum of a loaf, and all manner of
sweet Herbs.

Potage of a Calves head farced.
Boil your Calves head, skin and bone it, take out the brains and eyes, and set
them aside, then mince the flesh with Beef Suet, Marrow and raw Eggs, then set
the eyes and brains in their proper places, when it is farced, sow it neatly
up, then whiten it and boil it in good broth, then take some Calves feet,
parboil them, cleave them in the middle, and pass them in a Pan with Butter,
and put them into your Pot with Capers, then soak your Bread, and garnish it
with the Head, Feet and Capers.

Potage of Lambs head farced.
You must order it as you did your Calves head, then farce them with the Liver
and Lights of Lamb, Beef Suet, and yolks of Eggs, Parsley, and fine Herbs
minced small, then boil them in good broth, then garnish your soaked Bread with
the heads and purtenances, which you may blanch with the yolks of Eggs tempered
with Verjuyce.

Potage of Leg of Mutton farced.
Bone a Leg of Mutton, and mince the flesh very small with Beef Suet and Lard,
then farce the skin, and sow it up very finely, having seasoned it before the
stuffing with Salt and several Spices, then boil it in good broth with a faggot
of sweet Herbs, some Capers and Turnips, garnish your soaked Loaf with the Meat
and Turnips.

But the best way is thus: take your Legs of Mutton, and raise up their skin
very neatly, and take out the flesh, then mince it with Marrow, sweet Herbs and
Spinach, with some White-bread grated very fine, then season it with Pepper,
Nutmeg, Cloves and Mace with some Salt, adding thereto some Currants well picked
and cleans'd, then put thereto a good quantity of Sugar, and as many Eggs as
are sufficient to bind it, mingle all well together, and farce your Leg
herewith; when you have baked it in an Oven, garnish your Dish with the
remaining meat and White-broth.

Potage of Geese farced.
Take the brisket from your Geese, then make a farcing of what things your own
fancy shall judge most proper, and stuff them therewith, then flower them and
boil them in good broth, then garnish your soaked Bread with the Geese and
Peasebroth, or Pease only.

Potage of Partridges.
Having taken the brisket from them, take some of the Leg of Veal and mince it,
then season it with Salt, sweet Herbs and Spices; having stufft your Partridges
herewith, boil them in good broth with some Herbs, soak your Bread, and lay
your Fowl thereon, garnish your Dish with bottoms of Artichokes and Sparagus.

Potage of Turkey farced.
Bone your Turkey as you did your other Birds, and take the flesh of a Capon,
Beefsuet and Marrow, and mince them very small, then put some yolks of Eggs
thereto, stuff your Turkey, and boil it in good broth, dish it up on soaked
Bread with some boiled Chestnuts blanched and Mushromes. In the boiling, put in
a bundle of Chibbals, Parsley and Time tied together.

All manner of Potages for Lent.
ALl the Lent Potages are made and seasoned as these for the fasting days, only
this excepted, that you put no Eggs in them, but in some you mix Pease-broth,
in others broth of Almonds, which you will serve white or marbled, and the
garnishes are the same.

Almond broth.
Blanch your Almonds, and pound them in a stone Mortar, in the pounding
sprinkle them with Rosewater, after you have well pounded them, put them into
Fish-broth with crumbs of Bread, boil these together with Salt-Butter, a little
beaten Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, an Onion, and some Lemon-pill; when it is boiled,
pass it through a strainer, and keep it in a Pot for your use.

Or you may make Almond broth with Milk, having blanched and pounded your
Almonds with Rosewater, as aforesaid, then put them into fresh Milk with crumbs
of Bread, Salt, Cinnamon, a Clove or two, and boil them a little while, then
pass it through your strainer, and when you are ready to serve it, sweeten it
with Sugar.

Fish-broth.
Take half Pease-broth, and half Water, and put to them the bones of a Carp, or
any other Fish-bones with an Onion sticked with Cloves, a faggot of sweet
Herbs, and a little Salt, boil all well together with some crumbs of Bread, and
some Butter, then pass it through a strainer and preserve it for your use.

This is a very good Potage for Craw-fish, boiling it a while with the shells
of your Craw-fish, stamped and strained through a linen cloth, by means
whereof your Potage will be colored red; afterward strain all, then season
your broth and dish it up.

Pease-broth.
Steep your Pease twelve hours or more, having first picked them from such as
are worm-eaten, then seethe them with Conduit water lukewarm: this will make
your Pease-broth clear and very good.

Here note that your Craw-fish must be served with Pease-potage; Carps with
Pease-broth and Almonds; Potage of Herbs with a very little Pease-broth; Potage
of Tenches with fried Flower, and a little Pease-broth; the Queens Potage with
broth of Carp, or other Fish-broth and Almonds; the Princes Potage with
Pease-broth, wherein was seethed the Bones of Carps; Tortoise with Pease-broth;
Mushromes with Pease-broth, and Soals with the same; Smelts with good broth
mingled with Almonds; Sparagus, with Pease-broth and Herbs; Lettuce with
Pease-broth; Cabbidge, and fried Bread, or Coleworts and Milk, with Pease-broth
and a good deal of Butter.

Potage of Cabbidge or Coleworts with Peasebroth.
Having steeped your Pease all night, boil them the next day with Mace, an
Onion stuck with Cloves, Pepper and Salt; when your broth is enough, dish it
up, and garnish it with Cabbidge or Coleworts sodden in Milk, with some pieces
of fried Bread, boiled therewith.

Potage of Pumpkin.
Boil your Pumpkin very well, then take some Chibbals, fry them and put them
into your Pot, season your broth with Salt, and let it simmer again, then serve
it up with Pepper and Nutmeg.

Otherways.
Boil it very well, then strain it through a strainer into a Pan, then put to
it a pretty quantity of Milk, with some Butter, then soak your Bread, and serve
it with Nutmeg, Pepper, and some beaten Cinnamon.

Potage of Turnips with White-broth.
Having scraped your Turnips very clean, put them in a Pot with Water; when
they are well boiled, season them with Salt, Nutmeg beaten, and a bundle of
Herbs, and take them off the fire, and put to them some fresh Butter and stir
it, then run it over with some Almond broth and serve it.

Potage of fried Turnips.
Scrape them and quarter them, blanch and flower them; when they are dry fry
them, then boil them in Water with a little Pepper and an Onion stuck with
Cloves; if your broth be not thick enough, mingle some Flower with a little
Vinegar and fry it, and put it to your broth.

Potage of Pease-broth.
Take the clearest of your Pease-broth, and put it into a Pot, then fry some
Sorrel, Chervil, and a little Parsley with Butter, put these into your Pot
also, then season your broth, and let it boil, when it is enough, serve it with
Parsley and Roots sodden together.

Potage without Butter.
Take good store of Herbs, season them very well, seethe them with a crust of
Bread, stove or soak, and serve them up.

Potage of small Vails.
Take four or five Loaves, and make a hole in the top and take out the crum,
boil them, then fry them in butter, being filled with Milts of Carps, Mushromes
and broken Sparagus, then soak them leisurely on your Potage, and let your
garnish be the same with your fillings.

Potage of Muscles.
Scrape and wash them well, then boil them in a Pan of Water, Salt, and an
Onion, when they are boiled, take them out and pick them, taking off the shell
to some and leaving it to others for to garnish, after they are thus picked
pass them in a Pan with some Parsley; as for your broth, after it is settled,
leave the bottom lest there be any gravel in it, then boil it, and when it
boils, fry into it a little Parsley, with some fresh Butter, then soak your
Bread, and garnish it with your Muscles; pouring on your broth.

Potage of Frogs.
Having broken their bones and trust them, blanch them, and drain them very
well, then lay them into a Dish till you have made ready some Pease-broth, fry
into it a little minced Parsley with Butter; having boiled a while, put the
Frogs into your broth, but take them out presently, then allay a little
Saffron, and put it into your Pot, having soaked your Bread, garnish it with
the Frogs.

Potage of Salmon.
You must cut your Salmon into pieces and pickle them, then pass them in a Pan
with some Butter, stick them with Cloves, then stew them between two Dishes
with some Butter, a faggot of sweet Herbs, Sugar, White wine, a little Salt,
large Mace, beaten Cinnamon and Pepper well beaten, then stove or soak them,
then dry your Bread, and stove or soak it also with some other broth, garnish
it with slices of Salmon, Figs, Dates or Prunelloes, and pour the sauce over it.

Potage of Bran.
Take Wheat Bran the biggest you can procure, and boil it very well in Water,
with one handful of Almonds, and a bundle of Herbs, then season it well, then
pass it through a strainer, and boil it again, soak your Bread, and fill your
Dish with this broth which you may whiten if you please.

Potage of Frogs with Saffron.
Truss up your Frogs and boil them in broth, or with Pease-broth, and season
them with Parsley, an Onion stuck with Cloves, and a sprig or two of Time, soak
your Bread, and garnish it with your Frogs blanched and a little Saffron.

Potage of Frogs with Almonds.
Having trust them up Cherry-like, fry them and stove them up between two
Dishes, with a little fresh Butter, a drop of Verjuyce, the juice of an Orange
or Lemon, and season them with a bundle of Herbs; then to make your broth, boil
some with Pease-broth, or Water, Salt, Parsley, Chibbals, a handful of stamped
Almonds, after which strain them together, soak your Bread, upon which you may
put a little of the Hosh of a Carp, fill up your Dish and garnish it with your
Frogs, Lemon and Pomegranate.

Potage of Hops.
Whilst your Pease-broth is boiling, pass some good Herbs in a Pan into it, let
your Hops boil in your Potage, after that they are whitened, a little before
you serve them, take them up and put unto them some Butter, Salt, Nutmeg,
Cinnamon, Vinegar, and very little broth; when it is well seasoned, stove or
soak your Bread, garnish it with your Hops, and fill your Dish.

Potage of Parsnips.
Make choice of those that are middle sized, scrape and wash them clean, then
boil them with Butter, and a faggot of sweet Herbs, and season them with Salt,
and a few Cloves, then take them up and peel them, then put them with Butter,
and stove them, then soak your Bread, and garnish it with your Parsnips.

Potage of Leeks with Milk.
Cut your Leeks very small, blanch and dry them, then boil them with clear
Peasebroth, having boiled a while put in some Milk, Pepper, Salt, Cloves and
Mace, then soak your Bread and garnish it with your Leeks.

Potage of Sparagus.
Take Sparagus, and cut them not very short, then fry them in sweet Butter,
Salt, pepper, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Mace, Parsley, and minced Chibbals, stove them
all together, then make a broth of Pease or Herbs, which you must strain with
the juice of Mushromes, then soak your Bread and garnish it with your Sparagus.

Potage of Colliflowers.
Having blanched them in fresh Water; put them into a Pot with good broth, or
with Pease-broth well seasoned, with Butter, Salt and an Onion stuck with
Cloves, after they are sod, so that they be not broken, soak your Bread,
garnish it with your Colliflowers: it will not be improper to put into your
Potage, some Milk, Pepper and Nutmeg.

Potage of Rice.
Boil your Rice with Water or Milk till (...) is burst; having seasoned your
Rice, ^ake out a part thereof to fry, and make a Potage of what remains with
Butter, Salt, Pepper, Nutmeg, and an Onion stuck with Cloves.

Potage of Barnicle.
Dress your Barnicles, and lard them with Eel, roast them a very little, then
put them into a Pot with Water, some Peasebroth, and a bundle of Herbs, when
they are almost enough, pass some Turnips in a Pan, and put them to your
Barnicles, thicken your broth with a little fried Flower, and a drop of
Verjuyce, then stove your Bread, and garnish it with your Barnicle.

Potage of Burts.
Soak your, Bread with the best of your broths, and garnish it with your Burts,
being first fried in a Pan, and add thereto some Mushromes, Capers and Samphire
cut small, with broken Sparagus, and so serve them up.

A Catalogue of those things that are usually served up on Good Friday, with
some Dishes that are only proper for that day.
POtage of Almond milk, Potage of Turnips, Potage of Parsnips, Potage of
Sparagus, Potage of Pumpkins, the Dauphins Potage garnished with small pieces
of Puff-paste, Potage of Milk, the brown Potage of Onions, Potage of Peasebroth
garnished with Lettuce and broken Sparagus, Potage of Colliflowers, Potages of
Rice garnished with dried Leaves, Potage of green Pease, etc.

The first course for Good Friday.
Red-Bets or Red-Parsnips cut square like Dice with brown Butter and Salt.

Red-Beets cut into slices, fried and served up with white Butter.

Red-Carrots stamped and passed in the Pan with Onions, crumbs of Bread,
Almonds, Mushromes and fresh Butter, all well allai'd and seasoned.

Red-Carrots fried with brown Butter and Onions.

Red-Carrots cut into round pieces with a white Sauce, with Butter, Salt,
Nutmeg, Chibbals, and a little Vinegar.

White-Carrots fried, and Carrots fried in Paste.

Carrots minced with Mushromes.

Tourts or Cakes made of Pistaches, Cakes of Herbs, buttered Cakes, and Almond
Cakes.

Parsnips with a white Sauce, and Parsnips fried with Butter.

Serfisis with a white Sauce and Butter.

Spinach or Apples buttered or fried.

Pap of Flower, pap of Rice and Almonds strained.

Broken Sparagus fried and buttered.

Fricasses of Mushromes, Carrots and Pistaches served up warm with Sugar, and
good store of Butter.

Skirrets with white Sauce and Butter, and Skirrets fried.

Pumpkins or Jerusalem Artichokes fried.

Rice sodden till it burst, and mingled with Milk and Sugar.

Other Dishes to be served on Good Friday.
Potage of Health.
THis Potage must be made of Sorrel, Lettuce, Beet, Purslain, and a bundle of
Herbs, you must boil them all together with some Salt, Butter, and the
Lantamure or kissing crust of a Loaf, stoved or soaked, and so served up.

Pease-Potage.
Steep your Pease eighteen hours, then boil them in a Pot with a faggot of
sweet Herbs, some Capers, and an Onion stuck with Cloves, serve it up,
garnished with fried Bead.

Potage of Loaves.
Take half a dozen of Loaves, and open them at the top, and take out the pith
or crum, then dry them by the fire, or make them brown in the Pan with fresh
Butter, then soak them in broth made on purpose with Mushromes, Pease-broth,
Onion stuck with Cloves, and all well seasoned; garnish your Dish with your
fried Bread, then fill it up with Artichokes, Mushromes fry^d, and Sparagus,
besprinkle your Po^age with juice of Mushromes, and gar^ish your Dish round
about with Pomegranates.

Potage of Sprouts of Coleworts.
Boil them in Water, Salt, Pease-broth, Butter, Onion sticked, and a little
Pepper, then soak your Bread, garnish it with your Sprouts, and fill your Dish
therewith.

Another very good Dish made of Barley.
Take half a pound of perl'd Barley, and boil it till it begins to break, then
put it into a Cullender, and set on your Skillet with other liquor, and when it
boils, put in the Barley again, and let it boil till it be very soft; having
strained the Water hom it, take half a pound of blanched Almonds, and beat them
in a Mortar, having beaten them a while, beat them over again with your Barley,
then put to them some of the same liquor, some Sack, Rosewater, and season it
with Sugar, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, and boil them all together over a chafing dish of
coals, then dish it with a ladleful of drawn Butter, and scrape on Sugar.

Fried toasts.
Take a couple of stale two-penny loaves, and cut them in round slices through
the loaf, then soak them in Sack and strong Ale on the one side, then dry them
on a Pye-plate on that side, and do in like manner to the other side; then take
a pint of Cream seasoned with Nutmeg and Cinnamon, and dip your toasts therein;
your Pan being hot with clarified Butter, put them in and fry them brown on
both sides, then dish them up, and pour on them Butter, Rosewater and Sack
drawn together, lastly scrape on Sugar.

Another very good dish proper for Goodfriday.
Take a pint of Flower, and put thereto half a pint of Cream, some Butter,
Sugar, Cinnamon beaten, Nutmeg grated, and make it into a stiff paste with
Rosewater, then roll them out into very thin ropes, and gage them round your
Pan, being first made hot with clarified Butter, fry them quick, but burn them
not, then scrape on Sugar and serve them up.

Another.
Take three handfuls of Primrose-leaves, boil them and drain the Water from
them, and mince them small with four Pippins pared and cored, season them with
Cinnamon, and put to them a handful of dry Flower, a little Sugar, Cream and
Rosewater; your stuff must be so thick, that it run not abroad; when your Pan
is hot with clarified Butter, drop your ingredients in by spoonfuls, fry them
crisp on both sides, dish them and scrape on Sugar.

Another for any Friday.
Take half a pound of Almonds blanch, and pound them, and as they are a
pounding, put in some Rosewater to keep them from oyling, strain them into
Cream, then take Artichoke bottoms and Marrow, your Cream being boiled with
Dates, Sugar, whole Cinnamon, large Mace and Nutmeg, your Cream being cold, put
it into a Dish garnished with Paste on the brims, then put on your Artichokes
and Marrow, and bake it for a quarter of an hour, then take out the whole
Spices and serve it up.

All manner of Potages for Fastingdays out of Lent.
Potage of Craw-fish.
HAving cleans'd your Craw-fish very well, boil them with Wine Vinegar, Salt
and Pepper; when they look red pick the feet and tail, and fry them with sweet
Butter, then take the bodies of your Crawfish, and pound them very well with
Onions, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Pepper, Salt, hard Eggs, and the crumbs of white
Bread, let them soak in good broth made of Herbs, or clear Pease-broth; having
boiled these together, strain them and set them before the fire, then take some
Butter with minced Parsley, fry it and put it into your Potage, which you must
be mindful to season well, your crusts being soaked, put on the hash of a Carp,
with the juice of Mushromes, fill up your Dish, and garnish it with the feet
and tails of your Craw-fish, with Pomegranates, and the juice of Lemons.

Potage of Snails.
You must first wash your Snails in many waters, then put them into an
carthen-Pan or wide Dish, and put to them as much Water as will cover them,
then set your Dish over a Chafing Dish of coals; having boiled a while, take
them out of the Shells and scowr them with Water and Salt four or five times,
then let them boil a little while in a Pipkin with Water and Salt, then take
them up and lay them in a Dish with some very good Sallet Oil, when the Oil
boils, put in some sliced Onions, fry them and put the Snails to them, and stew
them well together; then take the Snails, Oil and Onions, and put them into a
Pipkin together sizeable for them, and put as much Water to them, as will be
sufficient to make a Potage with some Salt, and let them stew four hours, then
mince some sweet Herbs, as Time, Penniroyal, Parsley, etc. having minced them
very well, pound them to a green Sauce, and put in some crumbs of Bread soaked
in the Potage with a little Saffron and beaten Cloves, put all to the Snails,
and give them a walm or two: when you serve them up, squeeze in the juice of a
Lemon, put in Vinegar also, and a clove of Garlic among the Herbs, serve them
up on Sippets: This is a most excellent Potage.

Potage of Carp.
Having bon'd the Carp, set him aside and take the bones and boil them in
Peasepotage, with some Onions, hard Eggs, and the crumbs of white Bread; having
boiled strain them, then fry them with Parsley, and put them in the broth
again; then dry and soak your Bread; after this take the flesh of your Carp,
hash it, and when it is boiled, lay it on your Bread, then pour on your broth,
filling your Dish, and sprinkle it with the juice of Lemon and Mushromes.

Potage of Tenches.
You must bone your Tench in the same manner as you did your Carp, then take
the flesh and mince it very small, and farce it, seasoning your farcings well,
and close up the hole wherein they were put; your Bread being soaked, garnish
it with your Tenches, and pour on your broth, it matters not whether the broth
be made of Pease, Turnips, Herbs, Tenches, Amonds, Carps or Craw-fish.

Potage of French Barley.
Having picked and cleans'd your Barley very well from dust, put it into
boiling Milk, being boiled down, put into it large Mace, Cream, Sugar, and a
little Salt, boil it indifferent thick, then put it into a Dish, scrape on
Sugar and serve it.

Potage of Carps farced.
Separate the bones from the flesh, then farce them with their own flesh, and
close up the hole neatly, through which you conveyed your Farcings; then put
them into a Dish of broth, and stew or boil them, add thereunto Butter,
Chibbals, Verjuyce, large Mace, a faggot of sweet Herbs and Pepoper; then take
your bones and boil them, and having boiled a pretty while strain the broth,
and put it to your Carps, then soak your crusts, and lay your Carp thereon,
pouring the Potage upon it, garnish it with Capers, Pine-seeds and Mushromes.

Potage of roasted Carps.
Press your Carps, and slit them on the top, then melt some Butter, and end ore
your Carp therewith, then put it on the Gridiron and broil it. Then take some
Turnips, and cut them in two, whiten, flower and fry them, then put them into
some. Pease-broth or Water, season them and let them boil, then soak your
Bread, and lay your Carps thereon with Butter, Parsley, Chibbals, and a little
Vinegar, then garnish it with the Turnips, Samphire, and a few Capers.

Gruel Potage.
Having picked your Oatmeal very well, boil it over a soft fire, when it is
tender, strain it through a Strainer, then put it into a Pipkin with some
Spring water, make your Potage pretty thick of the strained Oatmeal, and add
thereto some Raisins of the Sun well picked and stoned, some large Mace, Salt,
with a small faggot of sweet Herbs, Rosewater and Saffron, set it a stewing on
the fire with some Sugar; when it is near upon enough, put to it some Butter
with the yolks of Eggs strained.

Or you may take Oatmeal and chop some Herbs amongst it, then put them into
boiling liquor, with some Raisins or Currants, or both, and when it is boiled to
an indifferent, thickness put Butter to it.

Or you may only take Oatmeal, a bundle of sweet Herbs minced small, with some
Onions and Salt, boil these together, and season them with Butter.

The Queens Potage.
You may take your choice whether you will have Carps or Tenches, then boil
them with Water, Salt, an Onion, Parsley, hard Eggs, and the crumbs of a white
Loaf, when they have boiled a while, strain your broth, and put it into another
Pot with some Butter, then take some Almonds, blanch them and pound them, and
mingle with one moiety of your broth; having boiled a while, strain them, and
put in an Onion stuck with Cloves, then set it over a gentle fire, then soak
your dish with a little of your first broth, and fill up your dish with
White-broth, with the yolk of an Egg allai'd with Verjuyce, and the juice of
Mushromes, let it not be too thick, serve it garnished with Lemon and
Pomegranate.

The Duchess of Anjou's Potage.
Take the bones of a Carp, and boil them in Pease-broth that is very clear,
with the yolks of Eggs, a bundle of Herbs, and all well seasoned, then dry a
loaf and soak it, and fry into it some hash of Carp, and juice of Mushromes,
Melts, Livers of Eel-pouts; and all manner of sweet Herbs, dish it up, and
garnish it with Pomegranate and sliced Lemon.

Potage of Tortoise.
Cut off their heads, boil them and take the flesh out of the shell, and cut it
into pieces, then pass them in a Pan with Butter, Parsley and Chibbals; having
thus past and seasoned them, put them into a Dish, and let them soak over a
Chasing-dish of coals with some broth, be careful in the removing of the gall
when you cut your Tortoise in pieces, your Bread being soaked, garnish it with
your Tortoise, and place Sparagus broken about your Dish, Mushromes, slices of
Lemon or Oranges.

Potage of Wheat.
Take a quantity of Wheat and wet it, then put it into a bag, and beat it with
a wash beetle, being hul'd and cleans'd from the dust, boil it over night, and
let it soak on a soft fire till the morning; then being ready to use it, take
as much as you think convenient, and put it into a Pipkin or Skillet with a
proper quantity of Milk, and boil it with Mace, Salt, Cinnamon, Saffron and the
yolks of two or three Eggs, boil it thick, scrape on Sugar and serve it.

Potage of Mushromes farced.
Take your youngest and freshest Mushromes, wash them very well, and boil them
in Water with an Onion stuck with Cloves, and a sprig or two of Time, season
your broth, boil it, strain it, and put it into a Pot, then pass your Mushromes
in a Pan, with Butter, Parsley, Pine-apple-seed, with Capers, and put them into
the Pot again and let them simmer; then soak your Bread, and lay it on a bed of
a hash of Carps, then fill it up by degrees with your other materials, after it
is filled garnish your Potage with your Mushromes farced, with the same farce
wherewith you made your hash between two Dishes, and with Melts, garnish your
Dish with Pomegranate or sliced Lemon and serve it.

Potage of Rice.
Having picked your Rice clean, and taken the dust from it, wash it and boil it
in Milk; having boiled a while, put to it some Cream, large Mace, whole
Cinnamon, Salt and Sugar, boil it on a moderate fire, scrape on Sugar and serve
it.

You may boil your Rice, and stran it with Almond Milk, seasoning it as you did
the former.

Potage of Soals farced.
Take your Soals and fry them till they are three quarters enough, then open
them along the bone, and separate the flesh from it, then take Melts, Oysters,
Capers and Mushromes, and pass them in a Pan with Parsley and whole Chibbals,
then stuff or farce your Soals with these ingredients, then soak them in broth,
fresh Butter, the juice of a Lemon or Verjuyce, then soak your Bread in
fish-broth, and garnish it with your Soals, Mushromes, and their juice, Melts,
and slices of Lemon.

Potage of Milk.
Take whole Oatmeal and pick it clear, then put it into a Pipkin of boiling
Water, when it is very tender, put in Milk or Cream, Salt and fresh Butter with
a little beaten Nutmeg and Cinnamon.

Potage of Ellicksander.
Take Oatmeal, pick it and cleanse it, then chop amongst it some Ellicksanders,
when your Water boils, put in your ingredients with a little Salt, let it boil
moderately, and not too thick, and when it is enough, put some Butter to it.

Potage of Smelts.
Having made a broth either of Almonds, Fish, Mushromes or Pease-broth well
seasoned, take your Bread and soak it, and pour a little White-broth over it,
of yolks of Eggs allayed with Verjuyce, and the juice of Mushromes; then take a
quartern of Smelts, or what quantity you think fit, fry them in Butter with
Parsley and Chibbals, and garnish your Dish with them, adding Pomegranates and
Lemon.

Potage of Pease.
Shell a quantity of green Pease, and put them into a Pipkin of fair boiling
Water, then put in your Herbs, some Oatmeal and Salt, let them boil moderately,
and not too thick, and when they are enough, put some Butter to them.

You may boil them in Milk or Cream, putting to them some sprigs of Mint, with
a little Salt; if not thick enough, put in some Milk and Flower well tempered
together, with the yolk of an Egg.

Potage of Sparagus.
Take a good quantity of Herbs with crumbs of Bread, season them well and boil
them, then take them up, drain and fry them, after they are fried, put them in
the Pot again, then soak your Bread, and garnish it with Sparagus, which you
must have ready boiled with Salt, drained and seasoned with Butter, Salt,
Cinnamon, and Nutmeg, over all strew your broken Sparagus which is fried, and
serve it.

Potage of old dry Pease.
Take a quantity of Seed-pease which are the best, pick those that are
worm-eaten from the rest and wash them; then put them into boiling liquor,
being tender boiled, take out some of them and strain them, and set them by for
your use, then season the rest with Salt, a bundle of Mints and Butter, let
these stew leisurely, and strew some Pepper over them.

Put Salt to your strained Pease-potage with large Mace, a bundle of sweet
Herbs, and some pickled Capers, stew them well together, lay in the bottom of
your Dish slices of bread, and grated manchet to garnish it.

Potage of Fish-harslets.
Bone a couple of Carps, and hash them with Butter, and good store of sweet
Herbs, then take the bones and boil them in any sort of broth with a faggot of
Herbs, Butter and Salt; then take the skin of your Carps, and make thereof some
Harslets, then lay these over your seasoned hash, and roll them up like small
Chitterlings; after they are thus rouled up, seethe them in a Dish with Butter,
a little Verjuyce, and a Chibbal, then soak your bread and garnish it with your
Hash and Harslets, and lay a top Mushromes and broken Sparagus.

A very good Potage.
Put Water in a Pipkin and boil it, then strain some Oatmeal and put to it,
with large Mace, whole Cinnamon, Salt, a bundle of sweet Herbs, some strained
and whole Prunes, with some Raisins of the Sun, being well stewed on a soft
fire and pretty thick, put in some Claret and Sugar, serve it in a deep Dish
and scrape on Sugar.

Potage of Lettuce farced.
Blanch your Lettuce in fresh Water, then make a Farce either of Herbs or Fish,
and having farced them with it, let them soak in a Pot with some Pease-broth,
season them well with Salt and Butter, and an Onion stuck with Cloves, soak
your bread, and garnish it with your Lettuce which you must cut in halves.

Potage of Cabbidge.
Blanch or whiten your Cabbidge or Coleworts, having first cut them into
quarters, then put them into a Pot of Water with store of Butter, Salt and
Pepper, with an Onion stuck with Cloves; when they are well boiled, put to them
some Milk, then soak your bread, and garnish it with your Cabbidge or Coleworts.

Potage of Onion.
First have a Pipkin of boiling liquor over the fire, then fry good store of
sliced Onions, and put them into the Pipkin with what they were fried in, also
some Pepper and Salt, being well stewed together, serve them on Sippets of
French-bread.

Potage of Pumpkin.
Having cut your Pumpkin into pieces, boil it with Water and Salt; after it is
well boiled, strain it and put it into a Pot with an Onion stuck with Cloves,
fresh Butter and Pepper, soak your bread, and allay the yolks of four Eggs, and
pour them over your broth, so serve it.

Or thus; cut and boil your Pumpkin, as aforesaid, then put it through a
straining-pan with some Milk, and boil it with Butter, season it with Salt,
Pepper, Cinnamon and an Onion stuck with Cloves; you may, if you please, serve
it with yolks of Eggs allayed, or without them.

Potage of Almonds.
Take half a pound of Almond-paste, or what quantity you please, and mingle it
with new Milk, then have a quart of Cream boiling in a Pipkin or Skillet, then
put in the Milk and Almonds with some Mace, Salt and Sugar, serve it on Sippets
of French-bread, and scrape on Sugar.

Or you may strain your Almonds with fair Water, and boil them with Salt, Mace
and Sugar, adding some yolks of Eggs dissolved in Saffron.

Potage of Turnips.
You must first scrape and wash them very clean, then cut them into quarters,
whiten them and boil them in Water, Butter, Salt, and an Onion stuck with
Cloves, after they are boiled enough, soak your bread, then put on your Turnips
with good store of Butter.

Or having fitted them for the Pot, as aforesaid, cut them in halves, blanch
and flower them, then pass them in a Pan with refined Butter; when your Turnips
are brown, take them from the Butter, and put them into a Pot with some Water
or Pease-broth, let them boil a pretty while, and forget not to season your
broth, then soak your bread, and garnish it with your Turnips, Grapes and
Capers.

Potage of green Pease.
Pass your Pease in a Pan with melted Lard, but be sure that it be very new,
then set them a soaking in a small Pot, well seasoned with Parsley and
Chibbals, then soak a Loaf with some Herb-broth, or old Pease-broth, then
garnish it with green Pease.

Or you may take the biggest and strain them, after you have boiled them very
tender, then fry some Parsley and Chibbals into it minced small, season it
well, put ^ome Capers into it, and garnish it with ^^yed bread.

Potage of Cucumbers farced.
Take Cucumbers, pare them and hol^ow them, then whiten them, and having
^rain'd them, make a farce of Sorrel, ^olks of Eggs and their whites, season
them and pour them into your Cucumbers, after this put them into some Water or
Pease-broth; having boiled them a while, season them as you shall think fit
with Capers, then soak your bread and garnish it with your Cucumbers cut into
quarters.

Potage of Oysters.
Blanch your Oysters very well and flower them, then pass them in a Pan with a
little Parsley, then soak them in a Pot, then soak your bread also in other
broth, when it is well soaked, garnish it with your Oysters, whereof some must
be fried; you must put to the fried Oysters, Pomegranates, and sliced Lemon for
the garnish.

Potage of Salmon.
Take a Rand of Salmon, and cut it into pieces, then pass it in the Pan, after
tha^ soak it a little while in White wine an^ Sugar, then soak your bread in
well seasoned broth; after your Fish has boiled a little, lay it on your Bread
with the broth.

Or you may take the Jole, or any other part of the Salmon, and having cut it
to pieces and fried it, season it with Nutmeg, Salt, Ginger and Pepper, then
boil it in White wine and Sugar, with a little Vinegar, a faggot of sweet
Herbs, Chibbals, and some blades of large Mace; after it has boiled a while,
put in some of your best broth, garnish it with Oysters, yolks of Eggs boiled
hard, minced fine with fried Parsley, Mushromes, Pomegranate and sliced Lemon.

Potage of Frogs with Saffron.
Having trussed your Frogs, boil them in Pease-broth, and season them with
Parsley, an Onion stuck with Cloves, and a sprig or two of Time; then soak your
Bread, and garnish it with your Frogs whitened in fresh Water, adding thereto
the yolks of Eggs or Saffron.

Potage of Bran.
Take your largest Bran, and order it as (...) are directed in the title of
Bran-Po^e, in the Table of Potages for Lent; on^ for Fasting-days out of Lent,
you may (...) into your Potage some Eggs allayed ^^th Verjuyce, let your
garnish be paste ^l'd Fleurons.

Potage of Hops.
Take good store of sweet Herbs, chop ^^em indifferent small, and add to them
^e crumbs of a White-loaf, then boil them (...) fair Water, then take them up,
drain ^^em and pass them a little in the Pan, and ^^t them into the Pot again,
then take ^^sley and fry it in Butter with a bundle (...) Herbs, and put it
into your Pot, then ^il your Hops with Water and Salt; be^g boiled enough,
drain it and put But^^ to it, then soak your Bread, and serve ^ur Potage
whitened with yolks of Eggs ^ayed in Verjuyce.

Potage of Rasberries.
Take the yolks of half a dozen Eggs, ^^d allay them with the juice of a pint
of ^asberries, then put over a pottle of Milk, and when it boils, pour in your
ingredients aforesaid, stir it very well, season it with a little Salt, then
dish it and garnish it with Rasberries.

Potage of Parsnips.
Let those you choose be of the middle size for thickness, then cleanse them,
then boil them with Butter, and a faggot of sweet Herbs, season them with Salt,
and an Onion stuck with Cloves, then take them up, being boiled enough, and
peel them, then stove them with Butter and a little broth, by which means your
broth will be thickened, then soak your Bread, garnish it with your Parsnips,
and fill your Dish with the Potage.

Potage of Leeks.
Take the white end of your Leeks and cut them small, then take other whites
and cut them into lengths for garnish, boil these tied together, and your chopped
heads of Leeks in Pease-broth; being enough, soak your Bread, garnish it with
your Leeks, and strew on the top your Leeks cut in lengths.

You may either whiten your Potage with yolks of Eggs allayed with Verjuyce, or
put therein some Milk and Pepper. If you frye them without whitening, boil them
(...) Pease-broth, otherwise in Water, and ^ut to them some Capers, Broom-buds,
Pine-apple-seed, and Samphire cut small.

Potage of Barnicle farced.
You must uncase or skin your Barnicle, ^^en take the flesh and mince it well
with Butter, Mushromes, yolks of Eggs, Salt, Cinnamon beaten, Cloves, Mace,
Ginger, Pepper, fine Herbs, as Parsley, Chibbals and Time, with some raw Eggs,
to ^ind the flesh, then farce your Barnicle, and close it up with a Skuer or a
Thread, put it in the Pot, and boil it with Pease-broth the clearest you can
get, and boil it well, then garnish your Bread therewith after it is soaked.

Potage of Eel-pouts.
Take your Eel-pouts, flower and fry them, then soak your Bread in the best of
your broths, and garnish it, and your Potage with them; then strew on
Mushromes, Sparagus, Mel^s, and whiten them with Almond-broth, or the broth of
Craw-fish.

Potage of broken Sparagus.
Having dried your crusts, soak them in the best of your broths, then garnish
them with your Sparagus and Mushromes, with some Sparagus at length.

Potage of Colliflowers.
Whiten your Colliflowers a little, then boil them, and season them well, soak
your Bread in what broth you have, and garnish it with your Colliflowers fried
in Butter, Salt and Nutmeg, sprinkle your Potage with Almond-broth.

Another very good Potage.
Peel half a dozen Onions, mince them and boil them with Water and Butter,
after they are thoroughly boiled, strain them through a linen cloth, and seethe
some Fidels in the broth, then season them with Salt and Pepper, after they are
boiled soak your Bread, and garnish it with them.

Potage of Rice.
Blanch your Rice, and when it is very clean from dust, burst it in Milk, then
strain it, after that season it, and serve it garnished with Fleurons or
Puff-paste round the brims of the Dish. There is a very good Potage of Milk to
be made the same way, serving it sugared, and garnished with some Suckets sliced
or Macerons.

Potage of green Pease-broth.
Boil your Pease but a very little, then pound them in a Mortar, and strain
them with the broth of Herbs well seasoned with a bundle of Herbs, then take
Chibbals, Parsley and Butter, all being fried together, throw it into your
Pease-broth, garnish it with Lettuce well cleans'd, Succory, Cucumbers and
small Pease fried and sod with Butter, Salt and Pepper, and you may add the
bottoms of Artichokes.

Potage of common Pease served green.
First boil your Pease in Water, then take the clearest of your Pease-broth,
and when you intend to use it, fry into it Parsley, Charvel, young Sorrel,
Butter, Bran and Capers, then boil them thus seasoned, garnish your Dish with
fried Bread.

Potage of Barnicle with Turnips.
Dress your Barnicle, and lard it with Eel or Carp, then fry it, then boil it
with half Water, and half Pease-broth, well seasoned with Butter and a bundle
of sweet Herbs; when it is almost boiled, out your Turnips, flower and fry them
with Butter, when they are very brown, put them into the Pot with your
Barnicle, if your Potage be not thick enough, fry a little Flower into it, some
Capers, Samphire cut small, Pine-apple-seeds, the pulp of a Lemon cut small,
and a drop of Vinegar; when it is boiled enough, soak your Bread, and garnish
it with your Barnicle and Turnips.

If you would not have your Turnips to be seen, strain them and season them
with a bundle of Herbs, an Onion, and some sweet Butter, then garnish your
Potage with Mushromes and Artichokes.

Potage of Leeks with Pease-broth.
Whiten your Leeks a little, and boil them with Pease-broth well seasoned with
Butter and Salt, then soak your bread, and garnish it with your Leeks; in the
whitening, allay some yolks of Eggs with broth, and pour it on them; you may
add some Milk to them well seasoned, after that your Leeks are well boiled.

Potage of Burt.
Take the tails and heads of your Burts and half fry them, then put them into
Castrolle with a very long Sauce well thickened, then soak your Bread with some
of the best of your broths, and garnish it at the top with your Burts, with
Mushromes and Capers. If you have no Fish-broth, then use your Pease-broth.

Potage of Herbs garnished with Cucumbers.
Take all manner of Herbs that are used for Sallets, and take also a bundle of
sweet Herbs, as Time, Penniroyal, sweet Marjoram, Savory, etc. and soak them
with Butter over a soft fire, and by little and little pour into them warm
Water; after they are well seasoned and boiled, put in the first cut of a Loaf
with an Onion stuck with Cloves, the pill of an Orange minced, and some Capers,
and garnish it with boiled Lettuce, you may boil some Pease among the Herbs,
and strew over all some Cucumbers.

Potage of Onion and Milk.
Take some Onions and cut them thin, then fry them brown in Butter, after this
boil them in a little Water well seasoned with Salt and Pepper; when it is
enough, put Milk to it and boil it, then garnish your soaked Bread therewith.

Potage of Vives or Sea-dragons.
Cleanse them very well, then boil them with Pease-broth, and some White wine,
and a faggot of Herbs all well seasoned, then take out your Sea-Dragons, and
put them with Ragoust (that is a Sauce prepared with a high quick or sharp
taste) let them soak very well with Salt, fresh Butter, minced Capers and
Anchovies, then pass the broth through a strainer, and boil it with fresh
Butter, Paste, Parsley, and minced Capers, then soak your Bread, and lay over
it Mushromes, then garnish it with your Sea-dragons.

Potage of Mushromes farced.
It is made after the same manner as that of the Duchess of Anjou in the Table
of the Potages for Lent, garnish it with Mushromes farced, and with Melts, fill
it up with the best of your broth, and serve them up.

Cawdles, Soops, Drinks, etc.
Almond Cawdle.
TAke a pound of Almond-paste, and strain it with a quart of good strong Ale,
then boil it with slices of fine Manchet, large Mace and Sugar; when it is
almost enough, put in half a pint of Sack.

Oatmeal Cawdle.
Boil a quart of strong Ale and scum it, then put in Oatmeal and sliced Bread,
so much as will not make it too thick, with some Mace and Sugar, then dissolve
the yolks of half a dozen yolks of Eggs in a quarter of a pint of Sack, or
instead thereof use Claret or White wine, then put in a little grated Nutmeg,
give it a walm or two and dish it.

Egg Cawdle.
Take a pint and a half of good strong Beer, put it over the fire and scum it,
then put in four blades of large Mace, a sliced Manchet and Sugar, the yolks of
Eggs dissolved in Claret, let it boil a little and dish it.

Sugar-Sops.
Take what quantity of Beer or Ale you think fit, boil it and scum it, then put
to it some Currants (or none at all) slices of fine Manchet, large Mace, Sugar
or Honey.

Aleberry.
Having boiled your Ale and scum'd it very well, put in some Mace, the bottom
of a Manchet, boil it well, and sweeten it with some Sugar.

Butter'd-Ale.
Having scum'd your Ale very well, put therein some Liquorice and Annifeeds,
boil these well together, then have in readiness, either in a flaggon or a
quart Pot, some yolks of Eggs well beaten, with some of the aforesaid Ale, and
some good Butter, then strain your buttered Ale, put it into your Flaggon, and
brew it to and fro with your Butter and the Eggs a pretty while.

Or thus you may do it: Take some Ale, put it in a Skillet, and when the scum
rises take it off, then take the yolks and whites of Eggs, and beat them in a
quart Pot with their shells, with some Butter, Nutmeg and Sugar, being well
brewed drink it, it is best taken going to bed.

Others take Ale and strain it with the yolks of Eggs, and so set it to the
fire in a Pewter Pot, adding thereto a good quantity of Sugar, some beaten
Nutmeg, and as much Cloves with some beaten Ginger.

An excellent Gruel.
Boil fair Water in a Skillet, and put thereto grated White-bread, good store
of Currants, Mace and whole Cinnamon; being almost boiled, and indifferent thick,
put in a little Sack, some Sugar, and some strained yolks of Eggs, you may put
to it some Butter.

Another as good as the former.
Take a pottle of Water, a handful of Oatmeal of the biggest size, picked and
beaten in a Mortar, then let it boil; when it is half boiled, put in two
handfuls of Currants well washed, a faggot or two of sweet Herbs, half a dozen
blades of large Mace, a little sliced Nutmeg, and you may infuse a grain of
Musk a little while therein; when it is boiled, season it with Rosewater, Sugar
and a little drawn Butter.

Punnado.
Take three pints of Spring Water, and set it over the fire, then cut a French
roll into slices, and put it therein; having first dried them in a Dish on a
few coals, add also two handfuls of Currants well cleans'd, a little large Mace;
when it is boiled, season it with Sugar and Rosewater, with a little Salt, rub
the bottom of your Dish with Musk.

Lemon Cawdle.
Take a pint and a half of White wine, and the like quantity of Water, and boil
these together, then take a Manchet and cut it into thin slices, and put it
into your Pipkin with some large Mace, then beat into it the yolks of three
Eggs, let it boil a little while to thicken it, then squeeze the juice of four
Oranges or Lemons into it, and season it well with Sugar and Rosewater.

Barley Cruel.
Take a quarter of a pound of Barley, and let it boil in three or four Waters,
then pound it in a Mortar; after this boil it again with an ounce of
Hartshorn, ever allowing four ounces thereof to a pound of Barley; having
boiled about two hours, strain it through a strainer, then boil it again with a
quarter of a pound of Currants, with a faggot of cooling Herbs, as Sorrel,
Strawberry-leaves, and Violet-leaves, with a little Time, also three or four
blades of Mace, with some juice of Sorrel; when it has taken three or four
walms, remove it from the fire, and squeeze into it the juice of two Lemons,
season it with the infusion of Musk in Rosewater with a little Salt; if you
make this Gruel to serve to the Table, add unto your aforementioned materials
sweet Herbs instead of the faggot of cold ones, but if you intend it
medicinally, follow the former prescription, and assure your self there is
nothing better for one in a Fever.

Pearmain Cawdle.
Take Milk and make a clear Posset thereof with white wine, then take some
sliced Pearmains, and boil them in your Posset; being boiled enough, strain
them as long as the Apple will run, then set it on the fire again with blades
of large Mace, then thicken it with the yolks of Eggs, and season it with
Sugar, and the infusion of Musk in Rosewater.

A Coventry Posset.
Have ready in a Pot, Bowl or Basin some warmed Sack, Claret, Beer, Ale or
juice of Orange, then take your Milk, after it has boiled in a clear scoured
Skillet, and pour it into your Pot, Basin or Bowl, but let not your Milk be too
hot, for that will cause the Curd to be very hard, then Sugar it.

Or you may beat what quantity of Sorrel you think fit, and strain it with
either Sack, White wine or Ale, then boil some Milk, as aforesaid, and let it
stand a little to cool, and so pour it into your Vessel, and scrape on Sugar.

Lemonade a-la-mode de France.
THe French make a Lemonade several ways, sometimes by taking two handfuls of
Jalsomine, and infuse it in a pottle of Water, letting it steep twelve hours,
to every quart of Water put six ounces of Sugar: you may make it of
Orange-flowers or Gilliflower after the same manner.

Or take some Lemons, cut them and take out the juice, then put it in Water, as
aforesaid; then pare another Lemon, and cut it into slices, put it among the
juice with a due proportion of Sugar.

White and Red Hypocrast.
Take three quarts of the best White wine you can get, half a pound of Sugar,
an ounce of Cinnamon, some leaves of sweet Marjoram, two or three whole corns of
Pepper, strain these through your strainingbag with a grain of Musk, and four
or five slices of Lemon you must add; let these infuse together three or four
hour: if you will have your Hypocrast red, use Claret wine.

Vinegar several ways to make it.
FIll a Ferkin or a lesser Vessel three quarters full of White wine, then lay
it unstopt in some hot place against the Sun.

If you will make Vinegar in have, take White wine, and put it into an
Earthenpot, and stop the mouth with Paste, then boil it in a Brass-pan, and in
half an hour it will be sower; or you need not boil it all, but only put to it
a Beet-root, Medlers, Services, Mulberries unripe, Flowers, a slice of
Barley-bread hot out of the Oven, or the blossoms of Services in their season,
which you must dry in the Sun in a Glassvessel in the same manner as you do
Rose-Viengar, then fill up your glass with Claret or White wine, and set it in
the Sun, or a Chimney corner by the fire.

Thus you make Vinegar of sound Wine, but if you will make it of what is
corrupted, first boil it till one third be consumed, and scum it very clean,
then put it up into a Cask, and put some Churnel, then stop your Vessel very
close, and in a little time it will be very good Vinegar.

Ale-eager.
Take what quantity of strong Ale of the first running as you shall think fit,
set it a cooling, then head it very thoroughly with Barm; after this tun it up
in a Firkin, and lay it in the Sun; then take four or five handfuls of Beans,
and parch them in a fire-shovel, first splitting them in the middle, put these
into your Vessel, as hot as you can, with a handful of Rye-leaven, and a good
handful of Salt strained, then stop your barrel with Clay, and let it stand in
the Sun from May to August.

Rose-Vinegar, or Elder-Vinegar.
Keep Roses or Elder-flowers dried, and put them into several Glasses, and fill
them up with White wine or Claret, and let them stand in the Sun, or by the
fireside; as your bottles are empty; fill them again with wine and fresh
flowers.

Pepper-Vinegar.
Till your bottle with Wine, and infuse therein some whole Pepper tied up in a
cloth, for the space of eight days.

Wine-Vinegar in balls.
Take Bramble Berries when they are half ripe dry them and make them into
powder, then with a little strong Vinegar make it into balls, and dry them in
the Sun; when you would use them, beat up the balls with some White wine or
Claret, first warmed, and it will speedily become good Vinegar.

Verjuyce.
Take Crabs as soon as the kernels turn black, and lay them in a heap to sweat,
then clear them from their stalks or rottenness, then stamp them in a long
trough to mash with stamping beetles; when you have stamped them very well,
strain them through a course hair-cloth into your Barrel or Hogs-head.

How to draw Gravy.
WHen your meat is about half roasted, put underneath it a Dish with good store
of Onion-broth, which you must make by taking a pottle of strong broth, with a
dozen Onions sliced and infused therein, then cut and slash your meat, when you
think the Gravy will best run; so lade your broth on the meat to draw down the
Gravy, you may add to it a little White wine or Claret: when your flesh is
roasted, take it off the spit, and press it very well, then put to your Gravy
some Oyster liquor, a little Nutmeg, and to every quart of Gravy four
Anchovies: this Sauce will be much required in Feasts for most dishes,
especially your Range.

How to draw Butter.
TAke half a pint of strong broth, and put it into a Pipkin, and break into it
two pounds of Butter, then set it over the fire, and keep stirring of it with
your ladle, then break in three pound more, or as much as you have occasion
for, adding liquor proportionably, stir it continually till all be dissolved,
and that it looks white, thick and smooth; if it chances to look yellow, and
it is curdled, you will hardly recover it.

How to recover Butter when it is turned to Oil.
Take a Pipkin and put therein a ladleful of strong broth, and put thereto half
a pound of Butter broken in pieces, having drawn it white, put in your
Oily-butter, keeping it stirring as you pour it in leisurely, and be sure not
to overpower your other Butter with what is Oily.

Another way in case of necessity.
Having no other Butter in the house than what is turned oily in the melting,
you must then let it settle in some cool place for a little time, then pour out
the most oily part, leaving the dregs and whey behind, then add a little broth
to the said dregs, and put it on a hot heap of coals, ladle it well till it
become to drawn Butter in a body, then take it off the fire, and keep it still
stirring; in the mean time pour in the Oily-butter very softly, then set it on
the fire again, still stirring it till it become strong, thick and white.

Ancient and Modern terms of Art for Carving Fish or Flesh.
BArb a Lobster. Tame a Crab. Undertench a Parchpiss. Tranch a Sturgeon.
Transon an Eel. Fin a Chevin. Culmon a Trout Tusk a Barbel. Side a Haddock.
Splay a Bream. Sauce a Tench. Splat a Pike. Sauce a Place or Flounder. String a
Lamprey. Chine a Salmon. Tire an Egg. Timber the fire. Thigh a Woodcock or any
other small Fowl. Border a Pasty. Mince a Plover. Wing a Partridge or Quail.
Allay a Pheasant. Untach a Curlew. Unjoynt a Bittern. Disfigure a Peacock.
Display a Crane. Dismember a Heron. Unlace a Coney. Unbrace a Mallard. Trush a
Chicken. Spoil a Hen. Sauce a Capon. Lift a Swan. Break a Dear. Thigh a Pigeon
or Wood-quest. Rear that Goose. Leach that Brawn. Cut up a Turkey or Bustard.
Break an Egript. Untach Brew.
Particular Instructions how to Carve according to these terms of Art.
Thigh a Woodcock.
YOu must raise the Wings and Legs of a Wood-cock, as you do a Hen, only you
must open the head for the brains, and as you thigh your Hen, so must you a
Snite and Plover, also a Curlew, saving he must have no over Sauce but Salt.

Break a Sarcel.
Take a Sarcel or Teal, raise his Legs and Wings, and no Sauce but Salt, so
must you untach a Brew, with no other Sauce but Salt.

Vnjoynt a Bittern.
You must raise his Wings and Legs, and no other Sauce but Salt, so you must
break an Egrypt with no other Sauce but Salt.

Dismember a Heron.
Take a Heron and raise his Wings and Legs, and sauce him with Vinegar,
Mustard, Powder of Ginger, and some Salt.

Display a Crane.
Take a Crane and unfold his Legs, then cut off his Wings by the joints; after
this take up his Wings and Legs, and sauce him with Vinegar, Salt, Mustard, and
beaten or pulverized Ginger.

Wing a Partridge or a Quail.
Raise his Legs and Wings, and Sauce him with Wine, pulverized Ginger, and a
little Salt; a Pheasant you must serve in like manner, but with no other Sauce
but Salt.

Sauce a Capon.
Take a Capon and lift up his right Leg and right Wing, and so array forth and
lay him in the Platter, serve your Chickens in the same manner, and sauce them
with green Sauce or Verjuyce.

Unlace a Coney.
Turn the Back downward, and cut the flaps or apron from the Belly or Kidney,
then put in your knife between the Kidneys, and loosen the flesh from the bone
on each side, then turn the belly downward, and cut the back cross between the
wings, drawing your knife down on each side the backbone, dividing the legs
and sides from the back, pull not the leg too hard when you open the side from
the bone, but with your hand and knife neatly lay open both sides from the scut
to the shoulders, then lay the legs close together.

Unbrace a Mallard or a Duck.
Raise up the pinions and legs, but take them not off, and raise the
merry-thought from the breast, then lace it down each side of the breast with
your knife, rigling your knife to and fro, that the furrows may lie in and out.

Dismember a Heron.
You must take off both the Legs, and lace it down the breast on both sides
with your knife, then raise up the flesh and take it clean off with the pinion,
then stick the head in the breast, and set the pinion on the contrary side of
the carcass, and the leg on the other sideof the carcass, so that the bone ends
may meet cross over the carcass, and the other wing cross over on the top of
the carcass.

Cut up a Turkey or Bustard.
You must raise up the leg very fair, and open the joint with the point of your
knife, but take not off the leg, then lace down the breast on both sides with
your knife, and open the breast pinion, but take it not off, then raise up the
merry-thought betwixt the breast bone and the top thereof, then raise up the
brawn, then turn it outward upon both sides, but break it not, nor cut it off,
then cut off the wing pinions at the joint next the body, and stick in each
side the pinion in the place you turned the brawn out, but cut off the sharp
end of the pinion, and take the middle piece, and that will fit just in the
place; you may cut up a Capon or Pheasant the same way.

Lift a Swan.
Slit down your Swan in the middle of the breast, and so clean through the back
from the neck to the Rump, then part her in two halves, but neither break nor
tear the flesh, then lay the two halves in a charger, with the slit sides
downwards, throw Salt upon it, set it again on the Table; let you Sauce be
Chaldron, and serve it in Saucers.

Rear a Goose.
Your Goose being roasted, take off both legs fair like shoulders of Lamb, then
cut off the belly-piece round close to the end of the breast, then lace your
Goose down on both the sides of the breast, half an inch from the sharp bone,
then take off the pinion on each side, and the flesh you first laced with your
knife, raise it up clean from the bone, and take it off with the pinion from
the body, then cut up the merry-thought, then cut from the breast bone another
slice of flesh quite through, then turn up your carcass, and cut it asunder,
the backbone above the Loyn-bones, then take the Rump-end of the backbone,
and lay it in a fair dish with the skinney side upwards, lay at the fore-end of
it the Merry-thought with the skinney side upwards, and before that, the Apron
of the Goose, then lay your pinions on each side contrary, set your legs on
each side contrary behind them, that the bone-ends of the legs may stand up
cross in the middle of the dish, and the wing pinions may come on the outside
of them; put under the wing pinions on each side the long slice, which you cut
from the breast bone, and let the ends meet under the leg-bones and let the
other ends lie cut in the dish betwixt the leg and the pinion, then pour in
your sauce under the meat, throw on Salt, and serve it to the Table again.

Thus have I given you a taste of such terms and method of Carving as I have
met withal, if ought be wanting, you must supply it by your own industrious
inquiry.

Bills of Fare, as well for great Feasts as ordinary Services through the whole
year.
IN the right ordering of all Bills of Fare, you must consult your own reason,
and consider every thing in season, proper and peculiar to every Month: As for
example, Lobsters, Crabs, Crawfish, Salmon, Trouts, and a many Herbs and
Flowers are not fully in season in the beginning of the Spring, that is, in
March, but they are in May; so again Oysters, several Shellfish and Wild-fowl,
are seasonable in March, but out of season in May: therefore in the place of
what is gone out of season, you must choose what is in season, which you shall
understand if you will observe these following Bills of Fare suitable to the
four Quarters, or several Seasons of the year.

A Bill of Fare for a great Festival on Flesh-daies in the Spring.
A Bisk. A grand Sallet. A Shoulder of Mutton farc'd with Oysters. A dish of
stewed Carps. A great Chicken Pie. A grand Potage called Skink. A Turkey. A
Calves head hash'd. A Surloyn of Beef. A Lumber Pie. A dish of boiled Puddings.
A Westphalia-Ham, and Squobs or young Pigeons. A Jigget of Mutton stufft with
Oysters. A large Pike in the middle of fried small Fish, as Smelts, Gudgeon,
Roch, etc. A Hare larded. A fricasie of Chickens. Marrow-puddings. A Lamb Pie.
A whole Lamb larded with a Pudding in its belly. A souced Pig. A Rump of Beef.
Coller'd Veal souced and sliced. A dish of Hens roasted. A dish of Quails. A
dish of young Turkeys. A dish of large Soals fley'd and fried. A dish of rich
Tarts. A dish of Tanzies of four several colors. A dish of Cowslip-Cream. A
great dish of Chickens. A dish of Jellies. A dish of Leverets. Almond-Cream. A
dish of Pease in April. A dish of young Ducklings. A Potatoe Pie. A dish of
pickled Smelts. A Fricasie of Apples. A chine of boiled Salmon. A dish of young
Rabbets. A set Custard. Baked Venison cold. A Trotter Pie with Taffatee-tarts.
A dish o^ E^l souc'd and coller'd. A dish of ^^ter'd Beef.
For Fish-daies in the Spring, an extraordinary Bill of Fare.
A Bisk of diverse sorts of Fish. A dish of pickled Smelts. A dish of rich
Puddings boiled. A Spinach Sallet. A Carp Pie. A dish of fried Ling with poched
Eggs. A Salmon roasted whole. A dish of buttered Loaves. A Pike boiled. A dish
of Perches boiled. A dish of buttered Eggs. A dish of Mullets and Bace with
small Fish. A dish of Barrel-cod. A boiled Carp. A Salmon Pie.
A Second Course.
A dish of buttered Crabs. A dish of fried Smelts. A dish of fried Soals. A
Spitch-cock-Eel with Shrimps buttered. A Spinach Tart. An Eel Pie. A dish of
Skirrets fried green. A dish of boiled Breams. A dish of Anchovies. A dish of
boiled Perches. A dish of buttered Eggs. A dish of several Tarts. A chine of
Salmon broiled. A dish of fried Trouts. A Fraze of Shrimps. A Lampry Pie. A
dish of broiled Whitings. A dish of Craw-fish buttered.
A Bill of Fare for Fish-daies, Fasting-daies, Ember-week or Lent.
A Dish of Butter. Rice-Milk. Buttered Eggs. Boiled Gurnet. A boiled Sallet of
Herbs. A boiled Pike. Buttered Rolls. Stewed Trouts. Fried Smelts. Barrel-cod
buttered with Eggs. Salt-Eel or White-herring. Fried Flounders or Place. Carp
Pie. Salt Salmon.
Second Course.
Boiled Carp. Fried Stock Fish. Boiled Eels. Baked Puffs. A Custard. A roasted
Eel. Buttered Parsnips. Fried Oysters. Fried Manchet. Fried Rochet. An Oyster
Pie. Fried Smelts. A Pippin Pie. Fried Flounders. Buttered Crabs. Fried
Skirrets. A Spinach Pie. Pickled Oysters.
A French Bill of Fare for Fish-days out of Lent.
SOals, Pike and Tench with Ragoust. Tenches fried and picked. Stewed Carp.
Carp farc'd. Carp broiled. Bream and Salmon with Ragoust. Stewed Salmon.
Oysters in Fritters. Oysters broiled. Soals farced and broiled. Soals stewed.
Barbels roasted. Barbels stewed. Fried Burts with the juice of Oranges. Plaice
roasted. Lampry broiled. Eel roasted. Eel stewed. Eel fried. Pike farced and
roasted. Mackerel roasted. Fresh Herring broiled. Ray fried. Poor John fried.
Small Fish-Pyes. A Plaice or Flounder-Pye.
The Intercourse.
Mushromes fried. Mushromes stewed with Cream. A Cream Fraze. Fritters. Melts
of Carps fried. Livers of Eel-pouts. Jelly of Fish. Fried Artichokes. Sparagus
with Cream. Fritters of Artichokes. Almond-Pye.
A Bill of Fare for Summer, for Flesh-days.
First Course.
A Boiled meat of Cockerels. A chine of Mutton drawn with Lemon-pill. A dish of
young Turkeys larded. Stewed Carps. A Hanch of Venison boiled with
Colli-flowers. Leverets larded. A Venison Pasty. Capons roasted.
Marrow-puddings. A Lamb-Pye. Geese roasted. A hanch of Venison roasted. Udders
and Tongues boiled with Cabbidge. A piece of boiled Beef.
Second course.
Quails larded and roasted. Young Heron-sews larded. Young green Pease. A dish
of Soals. An Artichoke Pie. A dish of Cream. A dish of Ruffs. Buttered Crabs.
Cream and green Codlings. A dish of Chickens. A Kid roasted whole with a
Pudding in his Belly. A souced Turbet. A dish of Artichokes. A chine of boiled
Salmon. A cold jole of Salmon. A dish of Knots. A dish of Partridges. A jole of
Sturgeon. Goosberry and Cherry-tarts. Young Ducks boiled. Potten Venison. A
Westphalia-ham. Dried Tongues.
A second Course after the French Fashion.
Feet and Ears of Pork. Stags Feet. Venison Pasty. Gammon of Bacon Pasty.
Sweet-breads of Veal fried. Liver of Roe-Buck in Fraze. Udder of Roe-Buck.
Jelly of Hartshorn. Hash of Partridges. Marrow-Fritters. Artichoke-Fritters.
Fricase of Artichokes. Mushromes fried. Head of a Wild-boar. Green Pease. Rams
Kidneys. Pallates of Beef. Tanzies. Young Partridges.
A Bill of Fare for Fish-days in Summer.
First Course.
A Grand Olio of Fish. A dish of Barley Cream. A grand Sallet with a Rock of
Butter in the middle of it. A Carp Pie. Rice boiled in Cream with Almond-paste.
A roasted Pike. Buttered Eggs. Large Flounders stewed. Mullet souced. A boiled
Sallet. An Eel Pie. A Jole of Ling. A dish of boiled Whitings.
Quaking-puddings. Perches boiled. A dish of hot Rice-Milk. A dish of Barrel-cod
buttered with Eggs.
Second Course.
Large Soals skinned and fried. Buttered Craw-fish. An Artichoke Pie.
Strawberry-Cream. Salmon broiled. A dish of Anchovies. Eel souced in Collers.
Smelts fried. Potargo and Caveer. Salmon-peets boiled. Tenches jelly'd. Tanzies
of several colors. Buttered Crabs. Jole of Sturgeon. Lobsters. Egg-pye. A fat
silver Eel roasted.
Bills of Fare for Autumn.
First Course.
A Grand boiled meat with several sorts of Fowl. A chine of Mutton larded and
roasted with Oysters. A grand Sallet. A dish of roasted Pheasants. Hares
larded. A leg of Pork and Turnips. A Pasty made of Do Venison. Turkey larded.
A chine of roast Beef. A Marrow-pudding. A Fricasie of Chickens. A dish of
Capons. Stewed meat with a Potage. Fillets of Veal larded, farced and roasted.
Or thus:
Scotch-collops of Veal. A boiled breast of Mutton. A Fricasie of Pigeons. A
stewed Calves-head. Four Goslings in a dish. Four Capons.
A second Course of the same.
Two brace of Partridges. Half a dozen Quails. Taffatee-Tarts. Curlews.
Godwits. Warden Pie. Rabbets larded. Crammed Chickens. Tame Pigeons. Fried
Skirret. Stewed ^eaches. A dish of Wild-fowl. Westphalia Bacon and Tongues.
Or thus:
Larded Dotterel. Fruit-Tarts Royal. Wheat-ears. Heath-pout Pie. Smelts
marrinated. Gammon of Bacon. Rabbets. Larded Heron. Florentine of Tongues.
Roasted Pigeons. Pheasant-pouts. A cold Hare Pie. Tart Royal. A Custard.
A Bill of Fare for Winter Quarter.
First Course.
A Collar of Brawn. A chine of Veal larded. A pickled grand Sallet. Pheasants
larded. Wild-fowl boiled. An Almond pudding baked. Stewed broth about
Christmas. A dish of roasted Hens full of Eggs. A Venison Pasty. A Hash. A
chine of Beef. Minced Pyes. A Swan or Goose. Capons and White-broth. Chine of
Pork. A Brawns-head souced.
Second Course.
Half a dozen Woodcocks. A dozen Snites. A dish of Anchovies. A Bacon Tart. A
dish of Jelly. A Potatoe Pie. Half a dozen Plovers. Half a dozen Teals. Two
dozen of Larks larded. Tarts in Puff-paste. Fore-quarter of Lamb. Wild-goose
Pie cold. Wild-ducks roasted. Orangado Pie. Wigeons larded. Venison baked and
cold.
A Bill of Fare for All Saints day.
A Collar of Brawn and Mustard. A Capon in stewed broth and Marrow-bones. A
grand Sallet. A shoulder of Mutton stufft with Oysters. A chine of Beef
roasted. Minced Pyes. A Pasty of Venison. A couple of roasted Geese. A Loyn of
Veal. A Turkey roasted. A roasted Pig. Capons roasted. A Custard with a double
border.
A second Course.
Soust Pig. A whole Lamb farced and roasted. Herns larded, roasted. A Potato
Pie. A couple of Ducks enlarded. A Pike marrinated. Partridges stewed. A cold
Goose Pie. A Warden Pie. A jole of Sturgeon.
A Bill of Fare for Christmasday.
A Collar of Brawn with a large sprig of Rosemary iced. Stewed broth of Mutton
and Marrowbones. Boiled Partridge. A Sur-loyn of Beef. Minced Pyes. A made dish
of Sweet-breads. A roasted Swan. A Venison Pasty. A Steak Pie. Venison roasted.
A Turkey stuck with Cloves and roasted. Bran Geese roasted. Roasted Capons.
Custards.
Second Course.
A whole Kid roasted. Two couple of Rabbets, two larded. A Pig souc'd with
Tongues. Three Ducks, one larded. Three Pheasants, one larded. A Swan Pie.
Three brace of Partridges, one larded. Half a dozen Teal roasted. Half a dozen
Plovers, some larded and roasted. A Quince-Pye. Half a dozen Wood-cocks, some
larded. Two dozen of Larks roasted. Powdered Geese. Sturgeon. Dried Neats
Tongues.
From these Bills of Fare you may know what is proper to every season, and may
make any Bills from these forms, either for great Festivals, or private
entertainments.
A prudent Cook ought to have always by him these things pickled or preserved.
Melted Butter. Cucumbers. Lettuce. Sparagus. Succory. Coleworts or Cabbidge.
Oysters. Pallates of Beef. Pickled Pullets. Young Pigeons. Artichokes.
Purslain. Red-Beets Green Pease. Mushromes. Soals. Combs salted. Mutton
Tongues. Rams Kidneys. Butter salted.
The TABLE.
A
AShen-keys and Alexander-buds how to pickle page 202 Artichokes boiled, baked,
pickled p. 201 Almond Tarts p. 240. 242
B
Bream stewed p. 1. Soueed p. 226. Coller'd p. 227 Bafe boiled p. 2 Breast of
Veal boiled p. 22 Breast of M^^tton stewed p. 23 Beef collops stewed p. 24.
Baked p. 143. To Collers p. 144. 225 Bustard to boil p. 42. Bustard Pie p. 180
Brawn broiled p. 76. Baked p. 142 Bacon broiled p. 77 Battalia Pie of fish p.
114 Battalia Pyes of fish or flesh for all seasons of the year p. 141
Broom-buds, Burdock-roots, Bogberries, Barberries how to pickle p. 204, 205
Bullocks cheek souc'd p. 225 Blamangers p. 345. French and Italian fashion p.
346 Butter how to draw p. 423 Bills of Fare p. 431, etc.
C
Carps stewed p. 2, 3, 4. Roasted p. 52. Broiled p. 53. Carp Pie p. 117.
Marinated p. 187 Cods head stewed p. 5 Coekles stewed p. 4. Frigassied 51. in
Paste p. 115 Crabs stewed p. 4. Broiled and frigassied p. 55. Crab Pie p. 118
Conger roasted and broiled p. 59. Fried p. 55. Marinated p. 187. Souced and
pickled Ibid. Calves feet stewed p. 25. Fried p. 77. Roasted p. 79. in Pyes p.
147. Souced p. 228 Calves head stewed p. 26. Broiled p. 77. Roasted with
Oysters p. 78. in Pie or Pasty p. 144, 145. Calves Chathern minced in Pie p.
147. Capons boiled in Rice p. 38. in Paste p. 178. Boiled and larded with
Lemons p. 39. 101. Frigassi'd p. 102. Souced p. 229 Chickens boiled p. 40, 41.
Frigassi'd p. 102. Chickenpye p. 175, 176, 177 Cocks to boil p. 42 Cony livers
in Pie p. 147 Cream Pie p. 180. 179 Curlew and Hernshaw Tie p. 179 Caveer
pickled p. 189 Cambridge Pudding p. 321 Cucumbers, Clove-Gilliflowers,
Cowslips, Currants red and white, Cabbidge, Charnel how to pickle p. 207, 208
Crystal Jelly p. 265 Cream of Barley p. 278. Stone Cream Ibid. Cream with Snow
p. 279. Cheese Cream p. 281 Creams: red Currants, Rasberries, Almond, Rice and
Goosberry, clouted, Italian, Apple, Quince, and Sack Cream p. 282, 283, 284.
287. 293. Custards of Almond Cream p. 331. Custards without Cream p. 332.
Cheese-cakes the best way p. 333. French and Italian way p. 334, 335. 337
Covent Garden Posset p. 343 Cawdles, etc. p. 413. Carving, the terms of it, and
directions how to carve according to those terms p. 424, 425, etc.
D
Duck wild and tame to boil p. 43, 44, 45. Roasted p. 105. Duck or Mallard in
Pie. Ducklings frigassi'd p. 104. Dill how to pickle p. 208.
E
Eels boiled p. 6. Stewed p. 6. Roasted p. 56. Spich-cock p. 57. broiled p. 58.
in Paste p. 119, 120. Collar'd and souc'd p. 189, 190. Endive, Elder-tops, and
Elder-buds how to pickle p. 208.
F
Flounders, Plaice and Soals boiled p. 7. Stewed p. 7. in Paste p. 121.
Marrinated p. 191 Fawn or young Roe how to bake p. 148. To be eaten cold Ibid.
Flowers of all sorts how to pickle p. 210 French Sallets p. 221 Florentines of
Rice, of Pippins and Prunes, of Veal, of Spinach, of Potatoes and Artichokes,
of Barberries, of Marrow and several other ways of making Florentines p. 257,
258, 259, 260, 261, 262 Farcings of all sorts of Roots p. 322 Farcings and
stuffings for all sorts of fowl p. 323. For Veal, Mutton, Venison, Lamb p. 324,
325, 326 French Posset p. 342
G
Gurnet boiled p. 8 Goose tame to boil p. 45. Frigassi'd p. 106. baked to be
eat cold p. 175. Coller'd and souced p. 230. Goat Pasty p. 149. Gammon of Bacon
Pie p. 149 Grapes, Goosberries, green Figs how to pickle p. 210 Grand Sallet
for the Spring p. 218, 219 Goats flesh coller'd and souc'd p. 230 Grand forced
or farc'd dish p. 228 Good Friday service p. 384, 385, 386 Gravy how to draw p.
422
H
Hanch of Venison boiled p. 26 Heath-cocks and Wood-cocks how to boil p. 42
Hare to roast p. 81. in Pie p. 151. in minced Pie p. 153 Hen roasted p. 107.
Hen baked p. 181 Herring Pie p. 121 Haberdine and stock fish Pie p. 122 Hot
compounded baked meats p. 151 Hop-buds pickled p. 211
I
Jacks stewed and roasted p. 11. Boiled p. 17 Jelly for any kind of souc'd
meats p. 238. Jellies of John- Apples p. 264. Jellies for souc'd meats p. 164.
Of Raspisses p. 167. Of several colors Ibid. Of Pippins, of Oranges p. 268,
269. Of Hartshorn p. 171. Jelly for a weak back p. 272
K
Kid whole to roast p. 83.
L
Lobster stewed p. 9. Roasted p. 59. Broiled p. 60. Fried p. 61. in Paste p.
127. Marinated p. 191 Lampry boiled p. 9. Lampry Pie p. 123. Ling fried p. 59.
Ling Pie p. 125 Lump fried p. 60. Roasted p. 61. Lump-pye p. 124. Souc'd p. 192
Lambs head boiled p. 27. Stewed p. 29. Lamb Pie p. 155. Lamb Pasty p. 156 Leg
of Lamb boiled p. 29 Leg of Pork boiled p. 30. in Paste 157 Leg of Veal and
Bacon boiled p. 30 Legs, Necks and Chines of Mutton boiled p. 31 Land-fowl
large, how to boil p. 42 Land-fowl small, how to boil p. 48. 149. after the
Italian manner p. 48 Lambs head roasted p. 82. Sides souc'd p. 235 Larks
roasted with Bacon p. 107. in a Pie p. 182 Lumber Pie p. 154 Lemons how to
Pickle p. 211 Lemonade a-la-mode de France p. 418 Leaches the best manner p.
274. The French way Ibid. Of Almonds of Cream p. 276, 277
M
Mullets boiled p. 10. Fried p. 61. Broiled Ibid. Mullet Pie p. 127. Souc'd p.
193. Marrinated Ibid. Muscles stewed p. 11. Fried p. 62. in Paste p. 115. 128
Maids fried p. 62 Minced Pyes of Beef p. 143. 158 Marrow Pyes p. 157 Mutton
minced Pyes p. 157. Coller'd and souc'd p. 231 Minced Pyes of Veal p. 158
Maremaid Pie, alias Pig-pye p. 158 Mutton-steak Pie p. 168 Marshmallows, how
to pickle p. 211 Mellegotoons and Mushremes p. 213
N
Neats Tongues boiled p. 32. Stewed p. 87. Frigassi'd p. 88. Baked p. 159.
Neats tongue Pie p. 160. Minced in a Pie p. 160. 171 Neats feet frigassi'd p.
89. Roasted Ibid.
O
Oysters stewed p. 12. Roasted p. 63. Broiled p. 64. Fried p. 65 Oyster Pie p.
129, 130, 131. Pickled 194. Ox Cheeks boiled p. 33. To be eaten cold with
Sallets p. 34. in Pie p. 162 Ox Pallats stewed p. 90. Ox Pallat Pie p. 162,
163 Olive Pie p. 161
P
Pike boiled p. 12. Stewed p. 13. Roasted p. 65. Baked p. 131. Souc'd p. 195
Plaice boiled p. 14. Stewed Ibid. Broiled and Frigassi'd p. 68 Prawns, Shrimps
and Craw-fish stewed p. 14 Pearches boiled p. 15 Pig sucking boiled p. 34.
Roasted p. 91, 92. Souc'd p. 231 Pheasant, Peacock, Partridge, Plover to boil
p. 42. Roasted p. 108. or Baked in a Pie p. 181, 183 Pilchards, Herrings and
Sprats broiled p. 67. Prawns, Shrimps, Crawfish frigassi'd p. 75. Baked p. 132.
Pork, legs broiled p. 82.96. Baked to eat cold p. 166. Souc'd p. 233 Pigeons
Roasted p. 109 Pig Pie p. 164 Peacock Pie p. 179 Purslain to pickle p. 211, 214
Puddings quaking, white, black, shaking p. 295, 296, 297. Of Wine several
colors, of Marrow p. 297, 297 Polony Sausage, how to make p. 302 Puddings of
Liver, Oatmeal, Rice, hasty Puddings p. 306, 307, 308. Excellent boiled
puddings p. 310. Of Cream, Almond, Cinnamon, Haggus, Veal, Bread, Italian and
French Puddings p. 315, 316, 317, 318. Potages of all fashions, English,
French, and Italian, whether flesh or fish p. 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352,
353, 354, 355, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368,
369, 371 Potages of all sorts for Lent p. 373, 374, 375. 380, 381 Potages for
Fasting-days out of Lent p. 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, and to 412
Q
Quails roasted p. 110 Quinces how to pickle p. 214
R
Rabbets boiled p. 35. Roasted p. 84.111. Frigassied p. 93. Baked to eat cold
p. 167 Red Dear how to roast p. 80. Baked p. 167 Radish-tops, and red Cabbidge
how to pickle p. 215 Rams head souc'd p. 234
S
Salmon boiled p. 15. Stewed p. 16. Roasted whole p. 69. in pieces p. 70.
Frigassi'd p. 71. Fried and broiled p. 72. in a Pie baked p. 133, 134. Pickled
p. 196 Soals boiled p. 17. Stewed Ibid. Roasted p. 73. Souc'd p. 197 Sturgeon
boiled p. 18. Roasted p. 73. Broiled p. 74. Fried p. 34. Baked p. 135, 136,
137. Pickled p. 199. Smelts stewed p. 18. Marrinated p. 200 Scollops stewed p.
19. broiled p. 76 Shoulder of Mutton boiled p. 35. Stewed with Oysters p. 36.
84, 85 Sea-fowl of all sorts to boil p. 47, 49. or baked in a Pie p. 185 Scotch
Collops of Mutton the best way p. 94 Scotch-Collops of Veal p. 94 Snipes roast
p. 111 Steak-pye with a French Pudding in it p. 169 Sweet-breads baked p. 170
Sheeps-tongues baked p. 170 Swan Pie p. 184. Swan coller'd p. 235 Sparagus and
Samphire how to pickle p. 216 Sallets of Scurvigrass, boiled Spinach,
Greenpease, Alexander-buds, Watercresses, pickled Capers, Rose-buds,
Clove-gilly-flowers p. 220, 221, 222, 223 Sack Posset p. 340, 341 Sullabubs p.
344
F
Tortoise stewed p. 19 Turbut boiled and calvered p. 20. Fried p. 75. baked p.
139. Souc'd p. 201 Trouts stewed p. 20 Tripes fried the best way p. 37 Turkey
to boil p. 42. Carbonado'd p. 112 Turkey baked French fashion p. 185 Tongues of
Sheep, Deer and Calves fried p. 95 Tench baked p. 138. Souc'd p. 201 Taragon
and Turnips how to pickle p. 217 Tarts of Almonds p. 240.252 Tarts of damsins
p. 240 Tarts of Strawberries Ibid. Tarts of Cherry, Medler and Pineapple p.
242 Tarts for the Spring p. 243 Taffety Tarts p. 243 Tarts of Cowslips and
Cream p. 244 Tarts of green Pease and Prunes p. 245 Of Goosberries p. 246 Of
Puff-paste p. 247 Of Rice, Wardens and Pippins p. 248 Of Quinces Wardens, Pears
and Pippins p. 249. Of Spinach Ibid.
Tarts after the French fashion p. 251 Tarts of Bacon p. 251 Of Clary p. 252 Of
Apricocks p. 253

V
Venison stewed p. 37. Roasted p. 100 Pasty to make p. 174. Coller'd p. 236
Venison when tainted to recoves it p. 38. Baked to eat cold p. 174. Coller'd p.
236 Veal Fillet and Leg to roast p. 80. 98. The breast with a Pudding in it p.
96. Chine or Neck roasted p. 97,98. Broiled p. 99. in Pie p. 172. Breast souc'd
p. 236. Leg souc'd p. 238 Vmble Pie p. 173 Vinegars of all sorts p. 419, 420,
421
W
Whiting stewed and broth p. 21 Woodcocks roasted p. 113 Widgeons souc'd p. 238
White-Pots p. 337. Of Rice p. 338 Devonshire White-Pot p. 339. Norfolk Ibid.
Westminster fool p. 340 Worster Sullabub p. 343 A Wassel p. 345
Books Printed for, or Sold by Simon Miller at the Star, at the West End of St.
Paul's.
Quarto.
BIshop White upon the Sabbath. The Pragmatical Jesuit, a Play, by Richard
Carpenter. The Life and Death of the Valiant and Renowned Sir Francis Drake,
his Voyages and Discoveries in the West Indies, and about the World, with his
Noble and Heroic Acts: By Samuel Clarke, late Minister of Bennet-Fink, London.
The Life and Death of William the Conqueror, King of England and Duke of
Normandy by Samuel Clarke. Bagshaw of Christ and Antichrist. Astrology
Theologiz'd: Showing by the Light of Nature what influences the Stars have upon
men's bodies, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.
Large Octavo.
The Rights of the Crown of England, as it is established by Law; by E. Bagshaw
of the Inner Temple, Esquire. An Enchiridion of Fortification. The English
Horseman and complete Farriar; directing all Gentlemen and others, how to
breed, feed, ride and diet all kind of Horses, whether for War, Race or other
service; with a discovery of the Causes, Signs and Cures of all Diseases both
Internal and External incident to Horses, Alphabetically digested; with the
Humors of a Smithfield Jockey. By Robert Almond, a well known and skilful
Farrier of the City of London, practicing therein above forty five years. The
Loyal Prophet, a Sermon preached at the Summer Assizes at York in anno 1668. by
William Bramhall, Rector of Gouldsbrough, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains.
Small Octavo.
The Midwives Book, or the whole Art of Midwifry discovered, directing
Childbearing Women how to behave themselves in their Conception, Bearing,
Breeding and Nursing of Children: In six Books, viz. 1. An Anatomical
Description of the Parts of Men and Women. 2. What is requisite for
Procreation: Signs of a Woman being with Child, and whether it be Male or
Female, and how the Child is formed in the Womb. 3. The Causes and hinddrance
of Conception and Barrenness, and of the pains and difficulties of
Childbearing, with their Causes, Signs and Cures. 4. Rules to know when a
Woman is near her Labor, and when she is near Conception, and how to order the
Child when born. 5. How to order Women in Childbirth, and of several Diseases
and Cures for Women in that condition. 6. Of Diseases incident to Women after
Conception: Rules for the choice of a Nurse; her Office, with proper Cures for
all diseases incident to young Children. By Mrs. Jane Sharp, practitioner in
the Art of Midwifry above thirty years. Merry Drollery complete, in two parts;
or a Collection of Jovial Poems, Merry Songs, Witty Drolleries; intermixed with
pleasant Catches, collected by W. N. C. B. R. S. I. G. Lovers of Wit. Natural
and Artificial Conclusions. Daphnis and Chloe a pleasant Romance. Boteler of
War. Ramsey of Poison. Shephard of the Regulation of the Law. Knowls Rudiments
of the Hebrew Tongue. Herbert's Childbearing Woman; or Devotions, Meditations
and Prayers for Women in that Condition. The Rebellion of the rude Multitude
under Wat Tyler, paralleled with the late inhumane Rebellion against K. Charles
the First. The Rebels Arraignment, Conviction and Execution in three Sermons:
By Jo. Brookblanke. The Death of Charles the First lamented, and the
Restoration of Charles the Second congratulated by William Langley. The King
of Spain's Cabinet Council divulged. A Description of Jerusalem as it
flourished in the time of Christ. Observationes and Experientiae de Febribus,
Authore Gulielmo Drageo Medico. Nonnihil de Febribus, Authore Gulielmo
Statholmo Medico. Divine Poems by A. Nasmyth. The Life of Dr. Tho. Morten late
Bishop of Duresme. Morison on the Covenant. The Miraculous Visions of R.
Wortley, Minister of Edgworth in Bedford-shire. A Discourse of the Piety and
Charity of elder Times and Christians, paralleled to the Members of the Church
of England, by E. Water-house Esquire.
Large Twelves.
The English and French Cook, describing the best and newest ways of ordering
and dressing all sorts of Flesh, Fish and Fowl, whether boiled, baked, stewed,
roasted, broiled, frigassied, fried, souced, marrinated or pickled; with their
proper Sauces and Garnishes, together with all manner of the most approved
Soops, and Potages used either in England or France. By T.P. J.P. R.C. N. B.
and several other approved Cooks of London and Westminster. The Moral Practice
of the Jesuits, demonstrated by many remarkable Histories of their Actions in
all parts of the World; Collected either from Books of the greatest Authority,
or most certain and unquestionable Records and Memorials; by the Doctors of the
Sorbon. Oxford Jests Refined and Enlarged. Smith's Practice of Physic. The
Duty of every one that will be saved; being Rules, Precepts, Promises and
Examples, directing all Persons of what degree soever, how to govern their
Passions, and to live virtuously and soberly in the World. The Spiritual
Chemist, or six Decads of Divine Meditations on several Subjects, with a short
Account of the Authors Life; by William Spurstow, D.D. sometime Minister of the
Gospel at Hackney, near London. Witty Apothegms, delivered at several times by
K. James, K. Charles I. the M. of Worcester, the Lord Bacon and Sir Tho. More.
Man's Masterpiece; or Contemplations of Meditations on several occasions, by
Sir Peter Temple.
Small Twelves.
A new Method of Preserving and Restoring of Health by the Virtue of Coral and
Steel. A Help to Prayer. The Understanding Christian's Duty worthily to
commemorate the Death of Christ in the blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
pressed from 1 Cor. 11.28. The Pious Prentice; or Advice to the Apprentices of
London, concerning their behavior to God, their Masters and themselves: By A.
Jackson. The King Triumphant, or the Rebels ruined, by Capt. N. Foster.
FINIS.

