THE TRUE Mark of the Beast: OR THE PRESENT DEGENERACY OF THE Church of Rome
FROM THE FAITH once delivered to the SAINTS.

A SERMON on November 5. 1681.

By EDWARD PELLING, Rector of St. Martin's Ludgate, and Chaplain to his Grace
the Duke of Somerset.

Quid Romae faciam? Mentiri nescio. Juv. Sat. 3. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may Ye also do Good, that are accustomed
to do Evil. Jer. 13. v. 23. Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day
shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that Man of Sin be
revealed, the Son of Perdition: Who opposes and exalts himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that He as God sits in the
Temple of God, showing Himself that He is God. 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 3, 4. London,
Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh at the Black-Bull in Cornhill, and Walter Davis in
Amen Corner. 1682.

To his Grace, my ever Honored and Dear Lord, CHARLES Duke of SOMERSET,
Marquess and Earl of HERTFORD, Viscount BEAUCHAMP, and Baron of TROWBRIDG.
My Lord,
SEldom do some men make any Comments, but they choose me for their Text. Since
I presented to your Grace a little Sermon preached on the 30 of January,
Factious people have accused me of Partiality, for not Publishing this that was
Preached on the 5th of November last; and thence the Charity of our Modern
Blessed Saints, (who like the Old Nestorians are -- nati ad Calumniandum --
rarely gifted in those two Virtues, Lying and Slandering) has concluded, that
I am a secret friend to the Popish Interest.

Which manifest and gross injury I have yet the less reason to repine at, since
so many thousands of men who are far my betters, have an equal share of it, so
that all who are not given to change, all who are not weary of a Happy Peace,
all who Dread to be Slaves again to their Fellow Subjects, all that are true
friends to the Government Established in Church and State, all that love the
Person and acquiesce in the Wisdom and Counsels of the King, all Ranks and
Degrees of men, even Peers and Prelates, who Abhor the seditious practices of
Ambitious Revengefull and unquiet Spirits, are Libelled under the notion of
Tantivyes, Popishly affected, Papists in Masquerade, Irish Bog-trotters, and
under I know not how many Nick names more.

Little do they consider in the mean while, how they Dishonor the Reformed
Religion, and what great Service they do the Romanists, when they call every
Honest man a Papist, and make Knavery to be a Characteristical note of a TRVE
PROTESTANT.

And though the Sons of the Church of England be thus traduced as unfaithful
to their Mother, yet we hope the indifferent world will consider, that none but
they have effectually undertaken the defense of the Protestant Cause all a
long. And it is observable, that since the discovery of the late Popish Plot,
whereas the Church of England has both by Preaching and writing industridusly
Labored against Popery, the Dissenters have Labored with all their might and
main against the Church of England; which when men of Judgment and Integrity
shall consider, they will soon discern who they are amongst us, that are the
best friends to the Church of Rome.

As to mine own particular, My Lord, I do sincerely protest as in the presence
of the Eternal and Omniscient God, that I have ever lived, and by Gods grace am
resolved to die a true member of our Church as it is now Established. And for the
rest of my Brethren, the Conformable Clergy, they cannot be suspected but
either by Ignorant or by Ill men; it being impossible for those, who give their
Unfeigned Assent and Consent to our Liturgy, to entertain any kind or
favorable Opinion of those Errors and Corruptions, which we justly Condemn in
the Roman Church.

Therefore, to deal truly with your Grace; the only Reason why this Sermon was
not Published before, was, because I looked upon it as so inconsiderable a thing
in comparison of what has been done by men of Great Learning and True Worth,
that I could not take the confidence to show it the World. Some discourses may
be fit enough for the Pulpit, which may not be so fit for the Press; and such I
conceive this Discourse to be. However since it is going abroad, it will not
take up much room in the World; and this advantage I gain by it, an opportunity
of presenting my most Hearty Service and Duty to your Grace, and of professing
my self, what I am, My Lord,

Your Grace's most Obedient, Obliged, and Affectionate Servant and Chaplain,
EDWARD PELLING.
March 16, 1681.
A SERMON PREACHED ON The Fifth of November, 1681.
Romans 1. 8. First, I thank my God, through Jesus Christ, for you all, that your
Faith is spoken of throughout the whole World.
YOu see by the Verse preceding, that St. Paul directed this Epistle to the
Church of Rome that then was: and you may be sure, that the Modern Romanists
have not failed to make the most use of this Text (more indeed by far, than the
Apostle ever intended to give them occasion of making;) for as it is their
constant custom, when they Comment upon the Fathers, if they meet with any
little passage, though it be but the clink of a word, that seems to favor
their Errors, to catch hold on it presently, as if all the world were their
own, (whereas they abuse the Writer all the while, and either willingly
mistake, or studiously wrest the place contrary to the true sense of the
Author:) so when they are Commenting upon the Scriptures, if they light upon
any one Text, which with all their Art and Skill they can but take advantage
by, to plead from it, and to Hallow their Impieties, they run away strait with
an (...), glad that they have found a booty, a dainty and strong Argument for
their Cause.

But if St. Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, an Apostle, that together
with Peter preached and suffered Martyrdom at Rome, an Apostle to whose
Writings the Protestants do frequently Appeal, and whose Epistles some of the
Romanists have been very angry with, because they do too much favor the
Heretics (as they have been pleased to say;) if this Great man did so commend
the Faith of the Church of Rome, as he does in this Text; and if He spoke so
Honorably of it, as that it was admired by the whole world; we may reasonably
expect to hear enough of their Brags. And indeed, this is their Starting place,
whence they run out into very high Encomiums of their Church, and they tell us
of a great number of Ancient Fathers that join with them in their Applauses:
they would persuade us, that St. Paul here does not only Declare what the
Church of Rome was then, but moreover that he did Prophecy, that it should be
an Excellent Church unto the worlds End, and that his Commendation respects
as well the Christians at Rome in his days, as their Posterity and Successors
for ever. They tell us, that the Apostle points to their Church, as to the
Mother Church of the whole world, and that he extolleth their Faith, as that
which all other Churches were to look upon, and mind, and observe as their
Rule; that they were to account Her not their Sister, but their Mother and
Superintendent; that they were from thenceforth to say after Her, and to seek
for the Law of Christ at Her mouth, and in every particular to follow Her
Directions: so that whosoever in process of time should not be of Her
Communion, he ought not to be looked upon as a Catholic, or a Christian, but
as a Foreigner, and an Alien to the Covenant of Grace.

Can any thing be Higher than this? and yet what a slight Pedestal is it, which
this Tower of Babel stands upon? Indeed St. Paul had reason to Praise the
Church of Rome in His time, because its Faith was Pure, Entire, and Uncorrupted
then, and so continued for a considerable time after. Let it be granted too,
(because the words of Hegesippus Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. c. 22.
seem to argue it) that the Bishops of Rome were in His days of the same true
Faith with the Bishops of other Churches. Let it be allowed too, that even in
Iraeneus's time, that Church kept the Apostles Iren. adv. Haeres. lib 3. c. 3.
Tradition; meaning, that Doctrine which the Apostles had once for all
delivered unto the Saints. Nay, I see no danger if we go further yet, and
allow, that those Commendations which St. Cyprian, Cyp. Ep. 55. Hier. Apol. 3.
adv. Ruffin.
Jerome, and others of the fourth Century gave of that Church, were not mere
Complements; but that she was so Faithful in the main, that she could not
easily, or would not willingly be guilty of Persidiousness, especially in cases
of moment: I say, Let us suppose all this, that for some Ages, the Church of
Rome continued a Virgin not deflowered by any Heretics; yet it will by no means
follow, that she did not prostitute her Chastity in after Ages, or that it was
not Possible for her ever to turn Harlot. There is no reason for that Fancy,
that if men be once in a good State, they shall be so always; much less reason
is there for that conceit, that a Church which is once Pure, shall never be
defiled: and yet this is the thing which many unwary Romanists now take for
granted, that since the Faith of their Church was once right and sound (which
St. Paul does here intimate, and confess) she neither did nor could Adulterate
and Corrupt it, and so, that it is as Sincere and Pure now, as ever it was in
the Apostles days. And according to this rate Cornelius a Lapide the Jesuit,
does reckon in his notes upon my Text, That the Faith of the Roman Church was
sound in St. Paul 's time, amd so down to St. Jerome's time, and so by
necessary consequence unto this time; for never hitherto (says he) has any
Heresy tainted Rome, as it has other Cities.

This is a Point necessary to be Examined, or rather a Fallacy that highly
deserves to be Detected, for the good of such Souls as are willing to be
instructed. And therefore I shall take occasion from the Text, and the Day, to
show you these following things in Order:

1. What that Faith was which St. Paul here commends. 2. That it was possible
for this their Faith to be altered and corrupted in After-ages. 3. That the
Ancient Faith of the Church of Rome has been de facto Actually corrupted. 4.
That a Reformation of those Corruptions was on our side Justifiable.
And so in the last place we will leave it to the impartial world to consider,
whether those violent Methods are justifiable, which the Romanists have used
since the Reformation, for the Re-establishment of those Corruptions. And of
these as briefly as I can.

1. What the Faith was which the Apostle here commends the Church of Rome
for, and which he says was spoken of throughout the whole World. It is certain
in the general, that the Faith of the Church of Rome was not different from the
Faith of other Churches: for as there was but One Lord, so there was but One
Faith over the whole Christian World, Ephesians. 4. 5. And the Reason why St. Paul
with Thankfulness takes notice of the Romans Faith was, not because it was
Other, or more Excellent than that which was received in other places, but
because Rome, being the great Imperial City, whereunto the world was
necessitated to have recourse, the Christian Faith was likely thence to
Disseminate it self every where over all the parts of the Empire in a very
short time. Now if we enquire particularly what that Faith was, we shall find
it to have been this, viz. A Confession of the Necessary and Important
Doctrines of Christianity; A Belief of those Main and Fundamental Truths,
touching the Divine Nature and Authority of our Blessed Savior, touching the
things which he did and suffered for the Salvation of the world, and touching
those inestimable Blessings which wereconsequent hereunto, as the
Sanctification of our hearts by the Holy Spirit, the Remission of our Sins, and
the Hope of an Happy Resurrection to Eternal Life for Christ his sake. These
are the Grand Articles of the Christian Faith, and they are summed up in that
short Collection of Christian Verities, which we call the Apostles Creed,
because (whether they themselves compiled that Collection or no) it contains
those main Points and Doctrines which the Apostles preached at Rome, and in all
places beside, as the only Credenda, or matters of Faith, that were absolutely
Necessary to Salvation.

Of this we have Testimonies abundant: for when St. Paul preached at Athens,
they were the Fundamental and Substantial Doctrines of Christianity which he
taught, viz. Jesus, and the Resurrection, as St. Luke tells us, Act. 17. 18.
And when the great Apostle wrote to the Corinthian Church, he told them, what
that Gospel was which he had received himself, and which he had delivered unto
them, and by which they were to be saved; And what was that Gospel? why, a
Collection still of these Necessary matters of Faith, how that Christ died for
our sins, and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day,
according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. Nay, writing to That Church
of Rome, whose Ancient Faith we are now considering, he declares what that was,
which he and the rest of the Apostles made the common subject of their
discourses (to the Romans, and to all other people) and still it was of the
necessary and prime matters of Faith; for This, says he, is the word of Faith
which we preach, that if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved, Romans 10. 8, 9. Now can any thing be plainer than this, That the Faith
which all the Apostles preached, which all Christian Churches received, and for
which the Roman Church is here commended, was made up of those principal
Doctrines which at this day we find in our Creed?

To these, were it necessary to add the Testimonies Tert de veland. Virgin. and
de prascrip. Atkanas. in initio and fine Symbol.
of Church-writers, I might instance in Tertullian, Athanasius, and diverse
more, who speaking of the Creed, owned it to have been the One, only,
immovable and sufficient Rule which all Christians went by; the Catholic
Faith, and the Faith of all Churches in the world, which whosoever believed,
was a right Catholic and sound Believer. But to avoid prolixity, I shall only
take notice of what we meet with in Irenaeus, who lived in the Iren. adv. Haer.
lib. 1. c. 2, 3. and 4.
very next age to the Apostles; for, rehearsing the Articles of the Creed, he
tells us, that That was the Faith which the whole Church over the whole world
had received from the Apostles and their Disciples; that every Church held,
taught, and kept with all diligence and care, and that the Churches in Germany,
in Spain, in France, in the Eastern parts of Egypt, in Africa, and in the
mid-land parts of the world (which takes in Rome too) did in His days believe
no other Doctrines, than what were contained in the Apostles Creed, and that
the Universal Church was One, because the Faith of every Church in the world
was one and the same, and that none either taught more, or believed less, than
that One Faith did amount unto.

Alas! in those days the Creed of all Christians was a plain, easy and short
one; for they thought themselves obliged to this only, to believe the
Essentials of Christianity, and to lead good lives; and it had been well for
Christendom, had after-ages taken no other care: but by multiplying Articles
some have multiplied Errors too; and as Seneca observed of the old World, that
while men lived upon a Simple and Natural sort of Diet, they were very
healthful and strong; but multos morbos multa fercula fecerunt, when they came
to be Nice, and Luxurious, and would have variety of costly Dishes served up at
their Tables, many diseases followed: so it is observable in this Case; as long
as Christians contented themselves with a Simple Religion, and a plain short
Creed, so long the Faith continued in a good state; but when they came to be
wanton, and would needs have this and that Point set out according to their
Gusto, Religion became Sickly, and men Unsound, and by abusing their Learning,
they were the less Virtuous, and the less Orthodox, but yet the more Techy and
Imperious.

2. But (to come to our next Point) I know the Church of Rome will by no means
hear of this, that She has played any Tricks with the Ancient Faith, either by
Adding to it, or by Taking from it, or by Embasing it with any Novel Mixtures;
nor indeed that it was Possible for Her to do it, considering that Singular
Prerogative of an Un-erring Judgment which she pretends to have above all
Churches beside. But this is a most vain and ridiculous conceit: for, because
she was faithful once, it will no more follow, that she has been so ever
since, then it will follow, that because the Husbandman sows Wheat in his
Field, it shall bring forth no Tares; or, that because a Child is Innocent upon
his Baptism, he shall never grow up to be a Man of Sin; or, that because a
Virgin is yet unspotted, she will never turn Whore; or, that because a man is
yet in Health, he shall never be crazy; or, that because a Town is yet free
from the Plague, it shall never be visited with it; or that we shall not be
mortal, because our Climate is Temperate, our Air good, our Physicians skilful,
and our Food at present is wholesome. A long Tract of Time produces many and
great Alterations; for one Generation passes away, and another comes; and many
times we see, that the Posterities of men are not half so good as their
Predecessors were, and that Religion which was sprightly and visible in One
Age, may be almost Lost in another. Anciently the Faith of the Church of Rome
was Right, and her Bishops were Wise and Holy men; but because she had this
Honor in the Primitive times, was it impossible for her ever to lose it? Was
it Impossible, either for the Sheep in the fold to catch the Bane? or for the
Shepherds to fall asleep? or for Wolves to creep in unawares, or be encouraged
and invited to come in at Noonday? Why, look ye now, This is as great a piece
of Nonsense, as if you should believe, that because the City of London is now
well stockt with a Knowing and Honest Clergy, it may not be as ill stockt with
a pack of Illiterate and ill men, should Times alter, and our Laws and
Government be subverted. It Is true, Christ promised his Church, That the Gates
of Hell should not prevail against her: But this promise belongs not to any One
particular National Church, but to the Church in General. It Is true also that
Christ said, Lo I am with you always, even to the end of the world; but 'twas
spoken to All the Apostles, and to all their Successors for ever. It Is true
likewise, that Christ prayed, That Peter 's Faith should not fail: but this was
a Personal respect to Peter himself, but no security for those that came after
him; and we may well wonder, how it should come into the head of any Papist to
dream from that Text, that because Peter himself did not utterly forsake the
Faith, ergo, it was impossible for Marcellinus to become an Idolator, or for
Eleutherius to turn Montanist, or for Liberius to fall off to the Arians, or
for Honorius to be a Monothelite, or for Anastasius to turn Nestorian, or for
Pope John (the 23d. of that name) to teach, That there is no Future state of
Happiness, nor any Resurrection of the dead? And yet we have proved it upon
them, that these things were done and taught, and that the Faith of these and
other Bishops of Rome has actually failed either in whole, or in a very great
part. When St. Paul writing to the Church of Rome, gave her this warning, Be
not high minded, but fear, Romans 11. 20. and when he besought them, to mark such
as caused divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which they had
learned, Romans 16. 17. either the Church of Rome was then in danger of being
tainted with Scandalous Principles, and of Apostatizing from the Truth, and of
Falling from the favor of God; or else the Apostle was an Impertinent man, and
ill adviz'd, to give them such Needless admonitions, and to tell them of danger
when there was none.

3. But not to argue any longer at this rate. If it be made appear, that the
Primitive Faith of the Church of Rome is Actually corrupted and altered, that
will undeniably prove the Possibility of that thing. And because this is the
main point in debate, which (if proved) will at once take away all their pleas
of an Infallible Spirit, all their pretenses to Antiquity, all their Arguments
against our Reformation, and all those Insinuations whereby they beguile
Ignorant and Unwary men, I must desire your patience while I insist somewhat
largely and particularly upon it. And for proof hereof I might take notice of
one Modern Principle in the Church of Rome, which does plainly Intimate and
Argue a Confession out of their own mouths, that they have altered the Old
Faith; for the Principle is this, That it lies in the power of their Church,
not only to Declare New Articles of Faith, but to Make and Constitute New
Creeds, and to Impose them as necessary to Salvation. The most Learned Bishop
Tailor has showed this against them in his Excellent Disswasive from Popery,
wherein he observes too, that when Pope Leo the Tenth issued out his Bull
against Martin Luther, and condemned him, he condemned him for teaching this,
among other things, That it is not in the power of the Church or Pope to make
Articles of Faith. Now, says my Learned and Judicious Author rightly, It is
not Credible they would publish such Invidious and Ill-sounding Doctrine to no
purpose, and to serve no End; therefore, it may without further Evidence be
believed by all Discerning persons, that they have Need of this Doctrine, or it
would not have been taught, and that consequently without more ado it may be
concluded, that some of their Articles are parts of this New faith. But I shall
wave this for Brevity-sake; and so I shall wave also many Testimonies of some
of the Ancients, which are usually and with good Reason brought to prove the
plain Innovations in Religion, which are now Taught and Practiced in the Roman
Church. I am willing to take a shorter course (and that which will bring me
very home to them) to demonstrate that they have altered and adulterated the
Primitive Faith, even of their own Church: and this I shall show by men of
their own, and by using some Testimonies out of, and by making some Remarks
upon some of the most considerable men, whom they own to have been Bishops of
their Church in the Primitive ages.

1. First then, St. Peter and St. Paul are believed by them to have founded and
built their Church: Nor can it well be denied, but they were both of them at
Rome; and we may suppose the One to have been the Apostle of the Jewish, the
other of the Gentile-Church there. But now, when the One calls the Scripture a
sure word of Prophecy, and requires us to take heed thereunto, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
and when the other tells us, that The whole Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable for doctrine, 2 Timothy 3. 17.
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works; How can we
reconcile this with the late pretended Authority and Necessity of Tradition?

When St. Peter requires us, To be ready always 1 Pet. 3. 15.
to give an answer to every man that asks us a Reason of the Hope that is in
us; and when St Paul's manner was To Reason with men out of the Scriptures,
Act. 17. 3.
opening and expounding the meaning of them; How can we reconcile this with
those Doctrines, touching the Necessity of Hiding the Scriptures from the
Vulgar, and the Excellence of a Blind and Implicit Faith?

When St. Peter affirms, That there is no Salvation Act. 4. 12.
in any other, but in Christ only, and no other name under heaven given among
men, whereby we can be saved; and when St. Paul tells us, That Christ was by
his sufferings consecrated to be our High Priest, that He intercedeth for us,
and is the One only Mediator; how can we reconcile this with that Doctrine
touching the Invocation of, and trusting in the Intercession and merits of
Saints?

When St. Peter tells us, That Christ Suffered Once 1 Pet. 3. 18. Heb. 7. 27.
c. 9. 28. and 10. 10.
for Sins; and St. Paul agrees to it, That Christ offered up himself a
Sacrifice Once, that he was Once offered, and that That offering of his body
was once for All; How can we reconcile this with the Doctrine touching the
daily Sacrificing of Christ in the Mass?

When St. Peter taught, That through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we
shall be saved; and St. Paul argued in this very Epistle to the Church of Act.
5. 11. Romans 11. 5.
Rome, That if by Grace, then it is no more of works; How can we reconcile this
with that Doctrine, about Earning and Meriting Heaven by the intrinsic value
of our performances?

When St. Peter would have us to call upon the Father; and St. Paul would have
us Pray with the Spirit, and with the understanding also; How can we reconcile
this with that Doctrine of Praying in an Unknown Tongue? A thing so directly
repugnant to the Apostles order, as if it were done out of mere spite against
1 Cor. 14.

When One Apostle tells us, That we are redeemed not with corruptible things,
as Silver and Gold; How can it consist with that Doctrine, about redeeming
Souls out of pain by Eight-penny Offerings, and a Lusty Legacy, as if our
Savior's Vae were to be removed, and the Gospel were to run thus, Woe unto you
that are Poor?

And when the other Apostle so often calls the Solid Element in the Sacrament,
Bread; how can it be Natural and Real Flesh? and when he commands all men to
eat of that Bread, and to drink of that Cup, how can we reconcile it with the
Doctrine of Half-Communion, which they themselves have confessed to be contrary
to the Institution Licet Christus post coenam instituerit, and suis discipulis
administraverit sub utraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile sacramentum,
tamen hoc non obstante, etc. Council. Constant. Sess. 13. Et similiter, licet in
Primitiva Ecclesia hujusmodi Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque
specie, tamen, etc. ibid.
of Christ, and against the practice of the Primitive Church?

Briesly, when St. Peter teaches, That the King is Supreme, is it not New
Doctrine, that He has a Superior? yet this is a Popish Principle, whosoever
they be that believe it, that the King has any above him, whether it be Pope
or People. And when we hear both these Great Apostles preaching up the
Necessity of Obedience to the Government, the one peremptorily requiring us to
Honor the King, and to submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake; and the other pressing this very home, particularly to the Romans,
as if he had foreseen that in after-ages men of the Romish Faith would prove
Traitors, and to prevent it, if it were possible, we find him charging Every
soul, [no Priest or Bishop, or any other excepted] to be subject to the higher
powers, and that not only for wrath, but for conscience sake: I say, when these
Doctrines are so Plain before us, may we not think, that they who have
Sanctified Treason, and taught the world to be Base, did wholly overlook their
Bibles? or had a greater veneration for a Cursed Hildebrand, or an Ignatius
Loyola, than for that noble pair of Apostles who were the Founders of the
Church of Rome? To be sure, we may as soon make the Artick and Antartick Poles
to meet, as ever reconcile the Apostolic Faith with the Faith of our Romanists
(though it be not Theirs only) whereby it is made lawful, forsooth, to depose
and destroy Princes, to absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance (or to
Interpret Oaths in a sense that will serve their own Turn) to raise Rebellions,
to blow up Parliaments, to murder Magistrates, whom they call Heretical, and
Bishops whom they call Malignant, or Prerogative-men, and for the advantage of
a wretched cause, to do such other Barbarities, as render Nero, Domitian and
Dioclesian kind and good-natured Cutthroats in comparison.

I do not wonder, that the Papists care no more to look into the Scriptures,
than a Monkey cares to look into a Glass, so very ugly is the Picture in it.
But the Fathers, they say, are all on their side; and they say so the rather,
because their Writings are in Latin or Greek, which common people cannot
understand, and which every knowing man has not time to read. Now, though to
confute this pretense, enough has been said in the many Apologies and Appeals
for the Reformed Religion; yet let us Examine the Truth of this a little, and
setting aside all other Ancient Writers, let us see whether the Old Bishops of
Rome themselves, that succeeded the Apostles, will do them any good.

2. Now St. Clement is supposed immediately to have succeeded St. Peter as
Bishop of the Jewish Hammond. Dissert. 5.
Church at Rome; and we have extant two Epistles which go under his name, one
whereof is confessedly genuine, and it was written upon this occasion: There
had happened in the Corinthian Church sad Controversies and Schisms (such as are
now in the Church of England) about thlngs not appertaining to Salvation. Yet
these small matters occasioned a huge breach; for the healing whereof Clement
wrote them a most Excellent Epistle; yet not as their Primate, or Bishop, but
as a charitable good (...). p. 71.
Neighbor; for he expressed his desires touching the Criminals at Corinth, that
they would yield (or be in Subjection) not to Us (says He) but to the will of
God. This makes it clear, that he claimed no Primacy or Jurisdiction over any
Churches but his Own; and the whole Epistle is written, not in a Magisterial
style, savouring of any pretense of Dominion over the Corinthians, but is full
of Gentleness, Meekness, Entreaties, Prayers, Exhortations and Arguments from
the Word of God; all which had been needless had He had any Superintending
Power and Authority over them, for then he might (and we may well think, would)
have presently past a Definitive Sentence, and determined the Controversy
without any more ado. But he sends them to the Holy Scriptures, as to the Rule
which they were to judge things by; commends their knowledge of the Scriptures,
wishes them diligently Page 68.
to look into the Scriptures, and particularly Page 58.
he recommends to them the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians. He
tells them, That we are justified, Page 61.
not of our selves, nor by our wisdom, or knowledge, Page 41.
or piety, or works (though we do them with simplicity and purity of heart) but
by faith, and by the will and good pleasure of God. He exhorts them to submit
to their own Pastors and Governors; and Page, 63.
tells them, that the Greater a man is, either for Knowledge or Goodness, the
more Humble he ought to be. And in his other Epistle (which seems to be as
genuine as the former) he admires the goodness V. Bevereg. Cod. vindicat. l. 2.
c. 9.
of God to them, that they did no longer worship Stones, and Wood, and Gold,
and Silver, and Brass, the works of men's hands; and so entreats Page 1.
them to Repent while they had Time to Repent, and while they had an
opportunity of being healed; For (says he) after we are once gone out of This
world we cannot make confession of our Sins, or Page 5.
Repent of them (so as to be saved.) Here then let the world judge, whether
they that make the Bishop of Rome to be the Universal Pastor of all Churches
in the world, that suppress the use of the Holy Bible, that teach Blind
Obedience, that talk of Salvation by their own Deserts, that adore Images and
Pictures, that preach the Doctrine of Purgatory, and pretend to show us a
Trick, how we may be saved, and how we may be delivered out of Torments after
Death, though we die in Sin. Judge, I say, whether these men have not corrupted
the Faith, and changed it to another thing from what it was in the days of St.
Clement.

3. Another of the old Popes of Rome was Anicetus, in whose days that
Controversy arose, when the Lent Fast should conclude, and Easter be kept;
some arguing that it ought to be kept on the day of the Jews Passover (which
was the Custom in Asia;) others, that it should be kept on the
Resurrection-day, (which was the Custom at Rome, and in other Churches.) Upon
this, Polycarp (St. John's Scholar) goes to Rome, and disputes with Anicetus
about this and other matters; but neither party convinced the other, and so
after some little heats, they parted good friends, and in perfect charity, both
of them having received the Holy Communion. Now can any man in his Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 24.
Wits believe, that in those days the Popes Judgment was thought Infallible?
or that Anicetus himself thought it so, when he neither Presumed to determine
the Controversy, nor could do it, nor was able to satisfy any of the Eastern
Bishops?

4. Within a while after Him succeeded Eleutherius, in whose days the Doctrines
of Montanus made a filthy stir; and to stifle the spreading of that Plague the
Gallican Church wrote Letters into Asia, and another they sent to the Pope
himself, admonishing him to follow the things which made for Peace: For
Tertullian is witness, that the Pope Tertul adv. Prax. in initio.
was infected with Montanism. But yet so it was, that through Fear on the One
hand, and through the solicitations of Praxeas on the other, he was fain to
Reject Montanus and his followers. And can we imagine, that the world then
counted Eleutherius's Judgment Infallible, when they found him to have been
Haeretical? or that Eleutherius himself thought he could not Err, when he
Condemned Montanism, which before he had Embraced?

5. Pope Victor was the next, and of him I observe these two things: First,
That whereas it was provided by an Old Canon of the Church, That every Nation
should acknowledge (...), etc. Can. Apost. 34.
their Own Primate, and count him their Head, and do nothing without bis Order,
Pope Victor owned the Authority of this Canon, and claimed no Primacy over
Polycrates (the Metropolitan of the Proconsular Asia) when he wrote to him
about calling a Synod to consider of the Paschal Controversy. For (...).
inquit Polycrates ad Vict. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24.
though the Popes now challenge a power of Summoning all Councils, by virtue of
their pretended Primacy over all Churches, yet it was not so in Pope Victor's
days; for he did entreat and beseech Polycrates that He would call a Synod of
Bishops himself. Secondly, That when Victor purposed to Anathematize the
Asiatick Churches, for not complying with his Humor, Irenaus and many other
Bishops dealt very roundly and roughly with him, so that he was forced to Alter
his purpose. Whence it appears, that the Popes in those days were so far from
conceiving themselves to be Supreme, or free from a possibility of Erring, that
they stood in awe of their Fellow-Bishops, that could upon occasion Ruffle with
them, and make them keep the Peace, and bind them to their good behavior.

6. I might show too how St. Cyprian rated both those Popes in his time,
Cornelius and Stephen: but I forbear to gather any more instances of that
nature, because it is so well known, that for near 600 years after Christ the
Bishops of Rome never had the Title of Universal Pastors of the Church, till
the days of Boniface the Third, and he gat it basely, and by the grant of that
Bloody wretch Phocas, who had murdered the Emperor Mauritius, and all his
Children, and had no way to secure himself but by giving the Pope a Title that
pleased him; and ever since our Bishops of Rome have pretended to be the
Landlords of all God's Vineyard, instead of being Laborers in it; or rather
have been Wolves instead of Shepherds: and it is observable, that the Donor of
this title was a Bloody Tyrant and Traitor; and you may guess at the Father by
the Child, for generally since, the Love of Bloodshed and Treason has run
along in the veins of the Donees.

7. To which I shall only add the Testimony of one Pope more, not that he is
the next in Order, but because it is most pertinent to this point; and it is the
Testimony of Gregory the Great, who speaking of the Title of Universal Bishop
of the Church, does up and down in his Epistles call it a Title of Novelty,
Error, Blasphemy, Impiety, full of poison, contrary to the Ancient Canons, to
the Holy Gospel, and to god himself, and the forerunner of Antichrist.

8. And as touching the point of Infallibility, Pope Adrian the Sixth did
plainly assert (and Bellarmine owns it) that the Pope might be guilty of
downright Heresy, and the Cardinal does confess that for above 1400 years his
judgment was not esteemed Infallible; and the plain truth is, he was never
complemented under that notion, till he got the Empire over Princes, and the
Preferments of the Church into his clutches. Aeneas Sylvius (who himself was a
Pope) gave this reason, why the Clergy made him Infallible above all Councils,
because he could reward 'em well with fat promotions, which Councils could not,
and had he sued for this Title in farma Pauperis, and without a good Fee in his
hand, either his Cause would not have been pleaded at all, or, by the Verdict
of all the Fathers, he would have been presently Cast; but in the Church of
Rome, it is Money that does all.

I have been the longer upon these points, because they are some of the main
and most material points that are in controversy between us, which if they
would but part with, many other conceits (if not all) would soon fall to the
ground, which are now held up chiefly by the usurped Authority of the Church.

9. I will not except the conceit of Transubstantiation Gelas. de duabus
naturis in Christo.
(which if it were Ruined, would, like the Dragons tail, sweep down a great
many other admired Fancies with it.) For as touching our Faith in this
particular, we appeal to another of the Primitive Bishops of Rome, Gelasius by
name, who wrote an excellent Book which is yet extant, and he wrote it upon
this occasion. The Heretic Eutiches and his followers did believe that though
at. first Christ had two distinct Natures, yet upon the Union of 'em, the
Humane nature was wholly converted into the Divine, so that his Humanity
ceased, and was absorpt and turned into the substance of his Divinity (just as
our Adversaries pretend, that the Bread in the H. Eucharist cease and is
turned into the substance of Christ's Flesh.) Pope Gelasius undertook the
maintenance of the Catholic Faith against these Heretics, and (which is well
to be observed) to prove the real existence of our Savior's Humane nature, he
draws an Argument from the then received Doctrine concerning the nature of the
Elements in the Eucharist: And his words I render thus. Verily the Sacraments
of Christ's Body and Blood, which we receive, are a Divine thing, because by
means thereof we are made partakers of the divine Nature; and yet the substance
or Nature of the Bread and Wine does not cease to be: And indeed it is the
Image and Similitude of Christ's Body and Blood, which is represented in this
Mysterious action. It is evident enough therefore that we must think the same
of our Lord himself, which we profess, celebrate and take in the Image of him,
that as these Elements by the operation of the Holy Spirit, do pass into this,
that is a Divine condition, still nevertheless remaining in the propriety So I
conceive the words of Gelasius should be read, Sic illud ipsum (est) mysterium
principale, cujus nobis efficientiam virtutemque veraciter repraesentant (Scil.
Sacramenta) ex quibus constat (proprie permanentibus) quia Vnum Christum,
integrum, verumque permanere demonstrant.
of their own nature; so is the Principal mystery it self, the efficiency and
virtue whereof is truly represented unto us by the Elements which truly and
properly remaining still the same, it is manifest that they show one, entire
and true Christ to remain in the union of both natures. From these words of
Gelasius it is clear, that the real union of both Christ's natures is the
Principal mystery which is here represented; and that this is represented by
the Sacramental union between the Bread and the Wine, and the Body and Blood of
Christ. And hence he concludes, that the Nature of Christ's Humanity does still
remain, because the Nature of the Elements does still remain. But this would
not have been Argumentative or Conclusive at all, had not the Church then
believed, that the nature of the Bread and Wine is not abolisht in the
Sacrament; for 'tisfrom that Principle, that received and common Principle,
that he argues against those deceivers: So that if We are Heretics for denying
the doctrine of Transubstantiation, Pope Gelasius himself was an Heretic also;
for Teaching that which is the Faith of all Protestants: But indeed neither was
he, nor are we to be blamed; for it was the Faith not of Pope Gelasius alone,
but of all the Primitive Catholics.

10. Should I now tell you, that the same Gelasius, condemned the
administration Comperimus autem, quod quidam sumpta tantummodo corporis sacri
portione a Calice Sacri cruoris abstineani. Qui proculdubio (quoniam nescio qua
superstitione docentur obstringi) aut Integra Sacramenta percipiant; aut ab
integris arceantur, quia divisio unus ejusdemque mysterii sine Grandi
Sacrilegio non potest provenire. Papa Gelas. in Gratiani Decret. de Consecrat
distinct. 2. c. 12.
of the Sacrament in one kind only, as contrary to the usage of the Church of
Rome it self in his time; that Leo the first condemned all Adoration of any
Creature; that St. Gregory disclaimed the worshipping of Images and Pictures,
and overthrew the Doctrine of Purgatory; and so go on searching into the times
of old, and making such other Collections, as it is no very hard matter to Leo
ser 2. in Nativit.
make, I should soon return more than a Full Jury of the Primitive Bishops of
Rome (and those good Greg or. Ep. ad Seren.
men and true, in comparison) to try and clear this grand point, that the
Errors of the modern Romanists Et in 7 Job. l. 8. c. 8.
which we have rejected are such, as are not to be reconciled with the
Primitive Faith of the very Roman Church; which was the third thing I undertook
to show.

4. But we will forbear to walk further among the Monuments of the dead.
Instead of that, we will, in the next place take a short view of the vanity of
their Pretenses, who charge us with Noveltie, Heresy, and Schism, for
embracing and sticking to that Reformation, which by the wonderful good
Providence of God has been wrought in many parts of the Christian world, and
more especially here in this Realm. Had we broached any Doctrines which are
really New, we had been guilty of Innovation: Had we violated the integrity of
the Apostles Creed, we had been guilty of Heresy; or had we bid defiance to
the Communion of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, we had been guilty of
Schism, and our condition would be sad. But the old Sages of the Church, and
our own Consciences do bear us witness, that in every of these respects we are
not only Innocent but Righteous; for our Faith bears the same date with
Christianity, and we have forsaken the Church of Rome in no material point, but
where she has for saken the Ancient Church, and indeed her own Primitive self.
And how are we to blame, if we have done this, tho it be against her humor? Is
it not very hard that the Governors of a Family shall not be permitted to
cleanse their own house from filth and cobwebs, because the next Neighbor will
choose to let his habitation ly like a Dunghill? or is it not unreasonable that
one Church must not be allowed to be a cleanly Matron, because another is
resolved to be a dirty Slut? why, thus stands the case between us and our
Imperious and Unconscionable Neighbors. Our Bishops (as to their just
Authority) stand upon the same Level with the Bishops of Rome, and so do all
the Bishops in the world beside: And this is according to the 34th Apostolic
Canon. Now, if he will not suffer a Beesome to come near his door, the fault is
not ours (and much good may his stye do him, so he do but ly in it quietly:)
but neither ought it to be an offense to him, if our Prelates have taken the
first and fairest opportunity they could take, to sweep our Church, and set it
to rights, as all the Churches of God were of old. They commonly ask us where
our Faith was before Luther? and we say, 'twas in the Creed, which our
Ancestors before Luther's time believed, as well as we do Now; and as far as
they believed that, so far they were Christians and Catholics; and so far we
allow our Adversaries to be Christians and Catholics too: For this is the
necessary and common Faith of all Christians. But before the Reformation, many
Errors did bear this Faith company, and made the Table fowl wherein the Creed
was written; and when we took it down to cleanse it, we only brusht off the
dust from it, so that still our Faith was and is the same, though our Errors in
other matters are thrown out of doors. They ask us, where our Church was before
King Hen. the 8th? and we tell 'em 'twas here in England, where it is still.
But before King Henry's time 'twas abused and filled with superstition, and
Legends, and a great deal of Trumpery and unlawful Stuff, which either the
ignorance or the knavery and secular designs of some Priests hadfoisted in
(and, which we hope, God in mercy did pardon to our forefathers, who did not
know the unlawfullness of those Wares.) And when in King Henry's days a
Reformation was begun, and after was completed, we did not pull down the
Church over our heads, but only flung out of it such things as had been amiss
in it; so that our Church is the same still, only then it was Nasty, and now it
is Neat; We neither destroyed the old fabric, nor built a New one; but we
cleansed that which was, and purged the Sanctuary from its Pollutions, letting
the Pillars and the Walls, the Creed, the Commandments, and the Pater Noster,
and what else was necessary or fitting for God's Worship, to stand still as
they did, and indeed better. Now if this was a Crime, truly it might have been
laid to our Savior's own charge, when he went about to Reform those abuses and
innovations which had crept into the Jewish Church by the Artifice of the
Pharisees, as these did into our Church by the help of the Priests. Did he not
tell them, that from the beginning it was not so? and did he not thereby direct
them to Primitive practice, as the Rule of Reformation? and would it have been
a good plea against him, should the Jews have said, Thus we have formerly
believed, and done from the days of yore, therefore to teach otherwise is to be
guilty of Novelty and Schism, and to set up another Church? or would it have
been a sufficient plea against his Disciples, those great Reformers of the
world, should the Pharisees have demanded of them, where was your Church before
Christ? is it not a Mushrome of yesterday? and had not the answer been easy,
that they had brought Religion to that purity which God anciently intended? why
this is our case, that we have Restored the Catholic Faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints, and have laid aside that Hay and Stuble and Trash
which had been piled upon this Foundation; and if the Purifying of the Ancient
Faith be Heresy, if the cleansing of our Church from Litter be Innovation, and
if the professing and practicing of those things that were in the Apostolic
Ages be Schism, then we must own our selves guilty; but own too, that Christ
and his Apostles were our Precedents, only they had Miracles to speak on their
side, we have (beside the Cannon of H. Scripture) the Books of the Old Fathers
to speak on our behalf, and the credit of the Old Roman Church it self to
testify for us; and to those Testimonies we Appeal.

5. Lastly, what would not the Romanists give, could they at half such an easy
rate be able to justify those evil methods, whereby they have expressed their
implacable enmity against Us, for no other reason but because We have told them
the truth, and will not be persuaded to shake hands with them in their
Impieties? if the spirit of Love and Goodness be the spirit of Christ; If the
calling for Fire from Heaven (or the fetching of it from Hell) be utterly
inconsistent with the temper of a Christian; If our Holy o Lords Kingdom be not
of this world; If the weapons of our warfare be not Carnal; and if that be the
only true wisdom from above which is Pure, Peaceable and Gentle: Then they have
reason to blush and hide their faces (but that Impudenoe is the Daughter of
Lewdness and Apostasy) who talk so much of their Catholic Faith, which has
nothing to support it but their Catholic Villainies. Even as to this point too,
if we look into the Ancient Faith of the Roman Church, we shall find it to have
been expressed by self-denial, by bearing the Cross, by Subjection unto Princes,
and suffering Persecutions to that degree, that a great number of their
primitive Bishops were successively made so many glorious Martyrs. And how
comes it to pass, that whereas Loyalty and Love was once a great part of that
Churches Honor; at last the lawfulness of Treason, and Rebellion and Cruelty
should get in to be part of her Creed! For, are not these her Doctrines, That
she can divest Princes of their Regalities? that she can (without Sinning)
expose and Sacrifice their very lives? that she can free her Children from all
the most Sacred ties of subjection? that all the Kingdoms of the world and the
glory of them are hers, and that she can give them to whomsoever she pleases
(as if she had been trucking for a bargin with the Devil himself?) That men by
being Heretics (in her account) do ipso facto forfeit all their Rights Sacred
and Civil? and that to Kill and Butcher such Heretics is an act highly
Meritorious of Salvation? let her deny these Doctrines, if she can, or Disclaim
them, if she dare; but you shall never find her so Honest, because she is
Conscious to her self, that did she not hallow these and the like Principles to
keep the world in awe, her Court would soon want Attendants, and her cause an
Advocate. And is there not a most perfect Harmony between her lewd Faith, and
her villainous Practice, whereby she has rolled her Garments, not in her own,
but in the blood of Peers, Prelates, Princes; an unaccountable Host of Martyrs,
whose blood she has abundantly shed over the whole Christian and Reformed
world? witness the streams drawn in the upper and lower Germany, and in the
neighboring Countries; witness the former Massacrees in France, and the Fresh
Persecution there now, which is likely enough in a little while to end in Blood
too. Witness the Barbarous Executions in Ireland, which are not quite lost out
of our own memories: And, witness the continual Diabolical attempts which have
been made against This Kingdom in every age since the beginning of the
Reformation; as the Troubles under King Hen. the 8th. the Insurrections under
King Edward the 6th. the huge Sacrifices and Offerings by fire under Q. Mary;
the Spanish Invasion, and Domestic Conspiracies under Q. Elizabeth, and (which
we commemorate our deliverance from THIS DAY) the Powder Plot under King James,
when nothing would satisfy those Sanguinary Catholics, but the destruction of
the whole Race Royal and of the Representatives and Flower of the whole Realm.
And (to say no more) witness that Hellish and damnable Conspiracy, which has
been lately Levelled against the Gentlest and Kindest of Princes, against our
Laws, Government, Religion, and the Common safety of us all.

But blessed be God that has Providentially and Marvellously brought to light
the hidden things of darkness. Blessed be God for the Miraculous Deliverance
which his own Goodness and Immediate hand wrought for us This Day. And for ever
blessed be his name, that since that Time he has kept us all along out of the
hands of all our enemies, that he has delivered us yet, and we hope will
deliver us yet still. And God of his mercy grant, that as our Faith is Pure,
Primitive, and Holy, so we may study not only to Contend for it, but to Adorn
it too, by the Simplicity of our hearts, by the Unity of our Affections, by a
perfectly Honest and Peaceable deportment, and by all the Necessary and
Laudable instances of a Godly and Righteous Conversation; that Our Faith also
may be spoken of and renowned throughout the whole world, and that the God of
mercy and compassion may Protect and bless us for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

