THE Sheepherd's NEW Calendar: OR, THE Citizens and Country Man's Daily
Companion: Treating of most Things that are Useful, Profitable, Delightful, and
Advantageous to Mankind.

Being the Thirty Years Study, and Experience, of a Learned Sheepherd in the
West of England.

Printed by A. M. for I. Blare, at the Looking-Glass on London Bridge. 1700.

Price Bound One Shilling.

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
Reader,
IN this Labored Work you will find so many Useful and Profitable things, that
I am Persuaded you will be Constrained to acknowledge, you never before found
the like in any (of what Volume soever) and I have digested them into so Plain
and Easy a Method, that any ordinary Capacity may Comprehend what has so long
been handled in Ambiguous Sentences, Dark, and Abstruse, to keep all but those
that are very Learned in Ignorance: As for the truth of what is here set down,
in Relation to Prognostics of Weather, or any other matters, in the vast
variety contained in this BOOK, a very Long and Large Experience has Confirmed
it to me; so that, if I may speak in General Terms, I may truly say, there is
no Ground left for a Scruple: But not to Commend what must Infinitely Applaud
it self, being so Universally useful, not for Limited Years, but all or the
greater part of it for ever; I shall only Presume to Affirm, it is the best of
the kind that ever was Exposed to the World, and cannot but gain a General
Esteem. It Is true, it was mainly Calculated for the Meridian of Rural Affairs;
but contains so many different matters, that it cannot but be Helpful to all
sorts of People, of what Quallity or Degree soever: As not only giving the True
Account of Time, but Moveable Feasts; likewise when the Moveable Terms begin
and end; also the Fixed Terms in like manner, with the Returns of every Term:
Eclipses, and the Nature of them: Remarkable Days (in relation to Weather)
throughout the whole Year: Also as to Diseases in Man or Beast: Scarcity and
Plenty, etc. Days Lucky, and Vnluckly, to begin or do any Business on: Signs of
Weather in all particulars: Prodigies, Meteors, and Blazing-Stars; what they
Prognosticate, and their Causes: Rules for the Management of Husbandry, for
every Month in the Year: Signs of Diseases in Cattle, and how to prevent and
Remedy them: The Curious Art of telling Good and Bad Fortune, by the Rules of
Astrology: The whole Mystery of LOVE; and finding out Thieves that Rob you:
Also to prevent Affrighting Dreams and Fears in the Night: To Travel in Safety:
How to tell any Number one shall Think, be it never so Great: To know the
Planet that has Dominion in the Nativity of any Person: The Art of discovering
Truth from Falsehood: How to know whether you shall be Successful in any
matters you engage in against another: To know whether the Party you Love be
Virtuous and Chaste: To prevent or take Vermin, that come to destroy Poultry,
or Coney Warrens: To know what place is best to Live and Thrive in whether one
shall be Rich or Poor, Long Life or Short, what Sickness, or Crosses shall
befall one: The Urinal Doctor, or Astrological and Physical Observations on
casting Urine, relating to health or sickness, with cautions to prevent
threatened Evils: A treatise of Bees, how to Order, Preserve, Swarm, Gather
their Honey, and all other Matters relating to them: the Warreners Instructor,
or a Treatise of Coneys, their ordering to Preserve or Increase them: the
Falconers choice Instructor, or the best way to Manage, Feed, Purge, Succor,
and keep Hawks to Fly at all sorts of Game, and to do whatever is requisite for
their Preservation, well Ordering, and to make them Expert in what they are
designed for, or required to perform: A plain and easy Introduction to the
most curious Art, and healthful Exercise of Ringing Musically on 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. or 9 Bells: How a Countryman may know how much Hay or Corn his Barn will
hold before it be put into it: How to know the Measure that ought to be in
Cords or Stacks of Wood: to tell what a Clock (when the Sun Shines) by ones
Hand: A Catalogue of the Markets, and the days they are kept on in the several
Counties and Shires in England and Wales: Also an exact Catalogue of the Fixed
and Moveable Fairs held Yearly in England and Wales; the days and time of their
continuance; the like for Exactness never before Published: Likewise a Table
for reducing Pounds into Shillings, Pence; and Farthings; and the Contrary: And
many other Matters, too tedious to be mentioned in a Preface; but more at Large
expressed in the Table or Contents of this Book; which, by casting your Eye
over them, will give you such Satisfaction, as you can in any Reason desire.

I need not (as I think in this place) say any more in Commendation of this
BOOK, but that you have in it, Profit and Pleasure united; and a more Useful
One (of this kind) you cannot expect; for when you find any that Equals, or
Exceeds it, you may conclude you have found a Phoenix.

Therefore, Relying on the Merit of what is here Written, I shall Close with
Recommending it to my Countrymen in general, and to Lovers of Art, and
Critical Observators in particular; in which they may find the greatest
Mysteries of Art and Nature; and such other Matters as are exceeding Edifying:
So that (take it altogether) it cannot but be wonderfully satisfactory to the
Reader; as for me, I covet no Praise, as many do:

For he who Writes to get himself a Name,
In this dull Age, is indigent of Fame.
And so only sending it Abroad for the Benefit of All, I Subscribe my self

Yours to Serve You, C. P.

THE Shepherd's Calendar, etc.
A Computation of Time, in Minutes, Hours, Days, Weeks, Months, Years, divided
into Quarters, with Signs Governing; as also of the Planetary Dominions.
IT is not fit (in this useful Work) to Omit any thing that may prove
profitable and advantageous to the Reader; and since the Exact knowing of
Times, and Seasons, is one main thing Requisite, I shall here set it down, not
only for the present, but future Years, that (without the help of any other
Kallender) it may be easily found out.

First then, The Measure of Time arises from Minutes, 60 of them make an Hour,
24 Hours natural Day, etc. 7 Days go to a Week. 4 Week to a Month, 13 such
Lunar Months, a Day, and Hours to a Year, though the Year is commonly divided
into 12 Solar Months, or so many Signs, which the Sun passes through, in the
Circle of a Year; so that one Month carrys more days than another, as in this
Ancient observing Verse is seen: Thirty Days has Fruit-bearing September;
Moist April, Hot June, and Cold November:
Short February Twenty Eight alone;
The other Months, have either Thirty One;
And February, when the Fourth Years Run,
Does gain a Day from the swift moving Sun!
So that by this it is plain, that every fourth Year, called Bissextile, or
Leap-Year, there is allowed to February 29 Days.

The Year again is divided into 4 Quarters, viz. The Feast of the Annu. of the
Blessed Virgin Mary, called Lady Day; March 25 from its beginning, under the
Signs of Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces: The next, the Feast of St. John
Baptist, called Midsummer-day, June 24 extending from the former, under the
Signs of Aries, Taurus, and Gemini; the next Quarter, is the Feast of St.
Michael, the Arch Angel, called Michaelmas-day, September 29. extending from
Midsummer, under the Signs of Cancer, Leo, and Virgo. The last Quarter-day, is
the Feast of the Nativity of our Blessed Savior, called Christmas Day,
December 25; extending from Michaelmas, under the Signs of Libra, Scorpio, and
Sagitarius; and these, as I shall hereafter show, have great Influence, Joined
with the Seven Planets, viz. Sol, Luna, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and
Saturn; each of these latter, governing a several Day in the Week.

And now, because there are some Festival, and other Days, that are not fixed,
but Vary, and fall Higher and Lower, according to the Change of the Moon, I
shall show you, without the help of a common Kallender, how you may find out on
what days or times they fall out for ever.

To know what Month and Day the Moveable Feasts and Terms will fall on for many
Years to come.
THE next Tuesday, after the New Moon, in February, is Shrove Tuesday; and the
precedent Sunday, is Shrove Sunday, let it fall out sooner or later in the
month; but if the Moon happen to Change on a Tuesday, Shrove Tuesday falls not
on that Day, but on the Tuesday following; and some times, by Reason of there
being no New Mood, or a very late one, it falls in march; but the Rule is the
same.

The seventh Sunday, after Shrove Sunday, is Whitsunday, and the Thursday next,
save one, before Whitsunday, is Ascension-Day, or Holy-Thursday: But to make it
yet plainer, I shall give you a Table, how they fall out for several Years to
come.

Year. Shrove-sund. Easter Day. Ascen-day Whit-sunda. School march 6 April 2 June
2 June 12 99 Febru. 19 April 9 may 18 may 28 1700 Febru. 11 march 13 may 9 may
19 01 march 2 April 20 may 29 June 8 02 Febru. 15 April 5 may 14 may 24 03
Febru. 7 march 28 may 6 may 16

And thus may you proceed to know, for a Thousand, or more Years to come. And
now, because the Terms are two of them moveable, I shall say but a little of
the two fixed Terms; but of the other, I shall lay down Rules how they may be
found out in any Year, with their Returns.

As for the fixed Terms, that called Hillary Term, always begins the 23d. of
January, and ends the 12th. or 13th. Day of February; and has four Returns,
viz. Quin. Pas. Tree. Pas. Quin. Pas. Cras. Pas.

Michaelmas Term, is the other fixed Term, beginning the 23 d. Day of October,
and ends the 28 th. of November, and has 6 returns, viz. Tres. mich. men's.
mich. Cras. An. Cras mar. Oct. mar. Quin. mar.

As for the two moveable Terms, they are Trinity Term, and Easter Term; Easter
Term always begins 17 Days after Easter Day, and ends the monday after
Ascension Day, and has five returns, viz. Quin. Pas. Tree. Pas. men's. Pas.
Quin. Pas. Cras. Pas.

Trinity Term begins the friday next after Trinity Sunday; and the Wednesday
fortnight after it ends; and has four returns, viz Cras. Tri. Oct. Tri. Quin.
Tri. Tree. Tri. but of the falling out of the moveable Terms, to make it yet
more plain, I shall give a brief Table how they fall, for some years to come.

Year. Easter Term Trinity Term Begins Ends Begins Ends School may 11 June 6 June
24 July 13 99 April 26 may 22 June 9 June 28 1700 April 17 may 13 may 31 June
19 1 may 7 June 2 June 20 July 9 2 April 22 may 18 June 5 June 24 3 April 14
may 10 may 28 June 16 4 may 3 may 29 June 16 July 5 5 April 25 may 21 June 8
June 27

And, according to this Table, you may proceed, by the afore-given Directions,
to any number of Years, which will be very useful on many Imergencies; this
Book being the best of Kallanders, for all useful Directions; containing a
great deal more than any, may save the Yearly charge and trouble of buying, and
carrying about you any other; and by the way farther Note:

Eight Days before any Term begins, the Exchecquer opens, except Trinity
Term; before which it only opens Four Days, and no more.

Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, how caused, with Rules to know when they will
Happen.
AS for the Moons being Eclipsed, it is when the Earth Interposes (in a direct
Line) between it, and the Sun; so that the shadow arises so high, as to reach
the Opacus, or nether part of the moons Orb; which only happens at a time or
Opposition of a Full moon, or a little before or after the Full; and this is
when they are in the Sign of the Dragons Head or Tail, which is only the
Insection of two Circles, viz. The Ecliptic, and the Different; which Circle,
the moon moves about in.

The Eclipse of the Sun is caused, by the Interposition of the moons dark Body
between us, and it; so that, till they depart from Opposition, there is an
Eclipse, more or less; but the Sun being far bigger than the moon, cannot
suffer a Total Eclipse, though the moon often does, because the Earth is bigger
than the moon; and so the shadow many times Totally covers it from the Sun,
for a time.

If the moon at the time of her true Opposition to the Sun, shall be different
from either of the named points, less than 10 Degrees, 21 Minutes, and 20
Seconds; then the moon cannot avoid suffering an Eclipse.



If this Latitude of the moon, at the time of a visible Conjunction, be less
than 30 minutes, 4 seconds, she will Eclipse the Sun; but if the Apparent
Latitude of the moon exceed 40 minutes, 5 seconds; then can there be no Eclipse.

Therefore the apparent Latitude, being more than 30 minutes, 40 seconds, and
less than 34 minutes, 51 seconds; then in all probability there will happen an
Eclipse of the Sun, though not to a verygreat degree: And by the Rules at all
times, may the Eclipses be found out, as to the time of their happening; and to
save your Eyes in gazing on the Sun Eclipsed, take the Image of it in a Mirror
or Looking-glass, and by that means you may plainly see how the Eclipses
Increases, and Diminishes, etc.

Prognostics, or Predictions, on the Days of the Week, that New Years Day
shall fall on; Relating to the Weather, to fall out, throughout the Year:
Scarcity and Plenty: Diseases, that will happen to People; also to Cattle.
MAny have considered the whole Year, upon the Day it enters on, viz. The first
of January, being the Circumcision day of our Savior, commonly called New
Years day; and many Things are Drawn from it, throughout all the Months of the
Year, as they fall out, or begin on this day: So that being proper to my
Matter, and a stress laid upon them, by many prudent people, knowing in this
Art and Science, I shall give my Opinion or Judgment on them, from long
Observation.

Observations on the Years entering on Sundays.
If New Years day (the first of this month) fall on a Sunday, it denotes, the
rest of the Winter will be very cold and sharp, with Frost; but of little
continuance; the greater part moist, with cold Rains. The Summer hot, but
pestered with violent Rains; yet not so-often, but the Earth will kindly bring
forth great Plenty of Corn, Roots, Herbs, and Fruits; Meat will be cheap; among
young people Fevors, and Agues will be Rife; and the greater number of those
that dye, will be of the younger sort; for Cattle, it will be a healthy Year.

Observations on Monday.
If the Year enter on monday, it is observed, That the Winter will be mild; not
afflicted with sharp Frosts, or bleak Winds; yet somewhat Rainy: So that great
over-flowings shall happen, and much harm be done (by Floods:) The summer
however shall be temperate, but Blasts in the Spring; and Caterpillars (brougth
with the East wind) much spoil the Fruits of the Earth: many Ship-wrecks will
be heard of, and some Great Men promoted to Higher Dignities and Honors, for
their good services; and this Year, more women than men will dye, traveling in
Childbirth, proving very fatal to many of them: Pasture will be scarce; yet
plenty of Corn, and provisions reasonably cheap enough. Griping of the Guts, if
not the Bloody Flux, and the Smallpox, will be very Rife.

Observations on the Years entering on a Tuesday.
In this Case, the Winter will be variable; the Weather often given to Change,
from Wet to Frost; then to Sleet and Snow; then Rain, Cloudy, open Weather;
Sunshine, and the like: So that the Frosts so happening, will be much
prejudicial to the Fruits of the Earth, by reason of the often Freezing, the
Snow-water at the Corn, Plants, Flowers, Herbage, Roots, etc. As for the
Summer, it will be hot and dry, scorching up tender Things, which will produce
a scarcity of all things, but Wheat and Barley; the Air will be thick and gross,
because little Winds or Thunder will be stirring, to Purge it: So that many
Diseases will (in all likelihood) happen, particularly the Bloody Flux; of
which many will dye.

Observations on the Year, beginning on a Wednesday.
The Year entering on this Day, produces a temperate Winter, yet somewhat wet
and moist, though free from high boisterous Winds; some small matter of Snow
and Frost, may be expected toward the latter end: The Spring, however, will
produce much Grass, and the Corn spring up well: The Summer will be (for the
most part) close, and Cloudy weather, hot, and sultery; making it sickly,
subject to Fevors, Inflammations, and other hot Diseases; yet Handycrafts, and
Husbandmen, shall gain Riches, and Trading flourish more than at other times;
there will be breakings-out, blains, botches, and boils on Cattle; and many
Dye: So that Flesh will be dear; but to make amends, Corn cheap.

Observations on the Year, beginning on a Thursday.
This produces a long Winter, mostly dry, with cold winds, yet wholesome and
healthy. The Summer (a good part of it) temperate, though (in Harvest time)
much Rain will fall, with Thunder and Lightning, doing much mischief (by the
overflowing of Rivers, and Land-floods) to the Corn; yet there will be no want
of Plenty: murmurings, and discontents will be among some people, and mischief
ensue thereon: people much given up to Vice, particularly that of Whoredom;
Taxes will decrease, and Trade revive: For the most part, the season will be
healthful, but many troubled with Catarrs, Astmas, and Consumptive Coughs, in
the fall of the Leaf, and most part of the Winter, to their no small
Affliction; yet fewer dye, than the last Year.

Observations on the Years beginning on a Friday.
If the First day of January happen on a Friday, expect the Winter dry, for the
most part, many Black Frosts, but of no long Continuance; the Winds blowing
moderately, will so Purge the Air, that it will prove very Healthful; but the
Spring coming in Wet, it will be but an indifferent Harvest-time; yet Grass,
Garden, and Orchard Fruits, shall escape tolerably well; but Poor People will be
in Need, and much Distress, for want of Employment; Diseases in the Eyes will
be very Rife, as also the Spotted Fever, Calentures; Cattle will likewise be
Diseased, and many Dye, making Flesh Dear.

Lastly, Observations on the Years beginning on a Saturday.
New-Years-day falling on a Saturday, the Winter will be pretty moderate,
though accompanied with Frosts, but not extreme in holding long at a time, yet
the frequent Thaws, and Freezing suddenly upon it, will do more Hurt, than if
it had held: However, the Earth mellowed by this, will produce a Fruitful
Summer, Gso that there will be good store of Corn, and other Fruits, and much
Fodder for Cattle, so that Flesh will be Cheap: The Diseases, this Year, will
much fall on Aged People, so that many will Dye, more than usual, in other
Years: Tertian Feavors will be very Rife; many Roberys, and other Outrages;
will be Committed in the Face of the Sun; some Murmurings, and Repinings, will
happen, but not to any Effect.

Thus, Reader, have I given you Prognostics for the Year, from the day it
begins, very Remarkable among the Learned and Wise Men of the Caldeans,
Arabians, Egyptians, and many Europians, leaving the Event to take Effect,
from your making Remarks on what has been Hinted, as you find it come to pass.
I proceed now to other matters of moment.

Unluckey Days in every Month, Dangerous to begin any Business on, Fall Sick,
Blood, Purge, Journey, etc.
THE Observation of the Ancient Physicians and Astrologers, have found out (by
long Experience) that many Days, by the malevolent Effects of the Planets, have
proved Dangerous to men, Women, and Children; and, therefore, to Caution them
(from Enterprizing any thing of moment on them) have set them down in their
Order, as follows.

In January are Eight Days which ought to be avoided, and these are they, 1. 2.
4. 5. 10. 15. 17. and the 19.

In February only 3. viz. the 8. 9. 17. In March 3, viz. the 15. 16. 21. In
April there are only 2, viz. the 15. and 21. In may there are 3, viz. the 7.
15. and 20. In June there are but 2 bad days, viz. 4. 7. In July 2, viz. the
15. and 20. days. In August there are 2 Unluckey days, 19, and 20. In September
there are 2, viz. the 6. and 7. In October there is but 1, viz. the 6. day. In
November there are 2, viz. 5. and 19. In December there are 5, viz. the 6. 7.
11. 15. 16.
The Canicular, or Dog Days, are ever held Perilous, to fall Sick, to Bleed,
take Physic in, or take too much Love Posset between the Sheets, Over-heat
ones self with Labor, Travel, or the Like; These begin the 19 th day of July,
and continue to the 28. day of August.

As for the other days (not mentioned as Bad days) proceed in your Affairs, and
Prosper; but, on any of the Ominous days, to fall Sick, is a sign of a Doubtful
Recovery, if at all; and those that take a long Journey, beginning it on any one
of them, will be in danger to fall sick, or get some great hurt by the way, if
not die, and never return home: Who ever Weddeth a Wife, on any of these days,
will find sorrow and crosses in such a Wedlock, if not be forced to part in a
little time; any great work begun, will not prosper, nor come happily to an
end, as expected.

The most remarkable Days in the Year, that are accounted Fortunate, to begin
any weighty matter on.
SInce the Ancients have laid great stress, as well upon the Luckey days, as
the Unluckey, it will be Convenient to place them in Order, one after another;
and Note (by the way) that though I shall name but some few, as exceeding Luckey
days, for marriage, Bargains, going a Journey, or beginning a Voyage; and what
ever else is of weight and moment: Yet all the rest, not marked before to be
Unluckey, in each month, are indifferent Luckey, and not to be Neglected, when
your Occasions require you to Employ them, lest you be either taxed with
sloth, or superstition, in times and seasons.

Lucky Days, etc.
Twelth-day, or Epiphany, January 6 The Conversion of St. Paul. January 25 The
Purification of the Virgin Mary, Febru. 2 Valentines-day, Febru. 14 The Annun
of the Virgin Mary, march 25 St. Mark the Evangelist, April 25 St. Philip and
Jacob. may 1 St. Barnabas, or the Longest day, June 11 St. John Baptist, June
24 St. Peter the Apostle, June 29 St. James's day, July 25 St. Bartholomews
day, August 24 St. Michael's day, september 29 St. Luke's day, October. 18 St.
Simon and Judes day, October. 28 All Saints, November. 1 St. Andrew's day, Novem.
30 St. Thomas's day, December. 21 Christmas Day, December. 25 St. Steven's day,
December. 26 St. John the Evangelist, December. 27

These are looked on as Days that bring Blessings with them; yet, over and above,

Ordinary Days through the Year, more successful than others, not Named,
already for Luckey Days,
IN January are 3 more particular Happy days, beside what I Named, though the
Rest not marked Ill (as I have said) are successful enough, viz. the 16. 18. 26.

In February there are 4, viz. 10. 19. 27. 28. In march there are 2, viz. 14.
28. In April there are 3, viz. 13. 22. 27. In may there are 5, viz. 3. 5. 7.
11. 19. In June there are 4, viz. 10. 17. 20. 27. In July there are 6, viz. 1.
13. 19. 21. 27. 30. In August there are 3, viz. 3. 7. 9. In september there are
5, viz. 4. 8. 11. 15. 19. In October there are 3, viz. 1. 8. 13. In November
there are 4. viz. 3. 9. 11. 15. In December there are 3. viz. 9. 13. 17.
And on these Days (favored by the more Immediate Influence of the Planets)
many Wonderful Actions; and Things, have been done, to an Accomplished success,
as well by the mighty of the World, as the Ordinary sort: Insomuch, that they
have been Caelibrated by the Ancients, and Festivals Appointed on them with
songs, in praise of what great Achievements have been done on them; and these
Festivals Promulged only for the sake of the Good Luck these days produce: but
let me tell you by the by, however, that if you undertake any Unlawful
Enterprise, it will not Prosper on these Days: Therefore let your Designs be
Good, and fear not the success to your Wish, according to this Prophetic Verse.

Good Days, Good Deeds do still beget;
But Bad Deeds, the bright Angels Let,
Dark Influence, to Dark Acts give Birth,
But here the Stars Light Joy and mirth.
Observations on Remarkable Days, to know how the whole Year will succeed, in
Weather, Plenty, etc.
IF the Sun shine Clear and Bright on Christmasday, it promises a Peaceable
Year, from Clamours and Strife, and Fore-tells much plenty to Ensue: But if the
Wind Blow stormy, toward the Sun set, it betokens sickness, in the spring,
and autumn quarters.

If it be Lowering, or Wet, on Childermas or Innocents-day, it threatens
Scarcity, and a Mortality among the Weaker sort of Young people; but if the day
be very Fair, it promises plenty.

If New-Years-day in the Morning, open with Duskey Red Clouds, it denotes
Strifes and Debates among Great Ones, and many Robberys to happen that Year.

If January 25, (being St Paul's day) be Fair, it promises a happy Year, but if
Cloudy, Windy, or Rainy, otherways: hear in this Case what an Ancient Judicious
Astrologer.

If St. Paul be Fair and Clear,
It promises then a happy Year:
But if it chance to Snow, or Rain,
Then will be Dear all sorts of Grain.
Or if the Wind do blow aloft,
Great stirs will vex the World full often:
And if Dark Clouds do muff the Sky,
Then Fowl, and Cattle often will Dye.
It is Remarkable on Shrove Tuesday, that as the Sunshines little or much, on
that day, or as other weather happens, so shall every day participate more or
less, of such weather till the end of Lent.

Mists, or Hoar Forsts, on the Tenth of March, betoken a plentiful Year, but
not without some Diseases.

If the Sun shines clear on Palm Sunday, or Easterday, or either of them, there
will be great store of fair Weather, plenty of Corn, and other Fruits of the
Earth.

If it Rain on Ascension-day, though never so little, it fore-tells a Scarcity
to Ensue that Year, and Sickness particularly among Cattle: But if it be fair
and pleasant, then the contrary, and pleasant weather mostly till Michaelmas.

If it happens to Rain on Whitsunday, much Tounder and Lightning will follow,
Blasts and Mildews, etc. but if it be Fair, great plenty of Corn.

If Midsummer-day be never so little Rainy, the Hazel and Wall-nutt will be
Scarce: Corn Smutted in many places, but Apples, Pears, and Plumbs, will not be
hurt.

If on St. Swithen's-day it prove Fair, a temperate Winter will follow: But if
Rainy, stormy, or Windy, then the contrary.

If St. Bartholomew's-day be Misty, the Morning beginning with a Hoar Frost,
then Cold weather will soon ensue, and a sharp Winter, attended with many
biteing Frosts.

If Michaelmas-day be Fair, the Sun will shine much in the Winter, though the
Wind at North East will frequently Reign long, and be very sharp and niping.

If in the Fall of the Leaf, in October, many of them Wither on the Boughs, and
Hang there, it betokens a Frosty Winter, with much Snow.

Other Curious Observations on the seasons of the Year, as to the Weather that
will happen, and such like Matters.
GReat Observations to predict what will fall out, have been made upon Oak
Apples in September: if Cut, they have Spiders in them, it betokens Blast, and
Infection: if Flys, a dry Season, if Maggots, a great increase of the Fruits of
the Earth, if spongy and hollow, without any thing in them, scarcity of the
Fruits of the Earth the ensuing Year, if early Ripe, the Winter will soon
advance very sharp, if dry, a dry Winter, if very Moist, much Wet, drisling
Snow, Rain, and Cold Moist Winds ensue; if the inner part (between both) fair
and clear, then a plentyful Summer will ensue, the Weather Fair and Temperate.

Another Observation is made on the Beech Tree, which note on this manner: On
All-hallows-day, Cut off some of the Bark, and after that a Chip, or little
piece of Wood, cut it, if it be very dry, then the ensuing Winter will be dry,
but pretty warm and temperate, if moist, a wet Winter.

If on St. Andrew's -day, in the Evening, much Dew or Wet remain on the Grass,
it betokens a wet season to follow, if dry, then the contrary.

If the Nutt Trees Flower much, it betokens great plenty of Corn that Year: yet
a sickly season in Autumn, and a cold Winter.

Infallible signs of Weather in all seasons throughout the Year, by the
Planets, Elements, Creatures, etc.
SInce many have made Conjectures of weather, and frequently failed in their
Predictions, I have now thought fit, for the advantage of the industrious
Husband Man, and others, to lay down unerring Rules and Observations, whereby
the various sorts of Weather, with their sudden Changes may be known at all
times, not only for one Year, but for Ever, viz. Rain, Wind, excessive Heat or
Cold, snow, Hail, Frost, Thunder and Lightning; sudden Whirlwinds and Tempests,
etc. and of these in their order.

Infalliable signs of Rain, and drisling wet Weather, taken by Observation of
the Planets, and other stars, Elements, Creatures, etc.
MArk the Sun Rising, and if it looks broader than usual, then many moist
Vapors are gathering from the Sea, the Air is thickening, and the Sunbeams
diffused in it, makes the Face of that Planet show greater than usual, and in a
little time you will see the Clouds muster, and spread the face of the Heavens,
and the Air densing into a watery Body, and if this happen in Hot Weather, viz.
summer or autumn, violent showers will fall, but not of long continuance: But
if in Winter or Spring, settled Rains, but more moderate.

If the Sun Rises with a bluish Circle enclining to white, the Air is gross,
and Rain will soon ensue.

The Sun setting in a black Cloud, and diffusing or spreading its Beams pailish
to the North, and South, Prognosticates a Rainey Night and Morning.

The Sky of a Dusky-red in the Morning, and the Sun Rising pale, an
Over-casting will soon Ensue, and Rain quickly follow upon it, attended with
whisking Winds and Florreys.

The often shifting of the Wind is a sign of Rain, especially in Winter and
Spring.

Many small Clouds at North-West in the Evening, show that Rain is gathering,
and will suddenly fall.

The Moons Horns blunt at its Rising Three Days after the Change, denotes Rainy
Weather for that Quarter, but the other Quarters seasonable Weather.

The Stars seeming bigger than usually, pale, dull, and not twinkling, show the
Air is thickening to Rain, which will soon fall.

Many Stars appearing in the Night, seeming a greater Number than usual, the
Wind at East in Summer, fore-shows sudden Rain.

The signs of Rain by Creatures, etc.
WHen the Heron or Bitron flys low, the Air is Gross, and thickening into
showers.

When Kine view the Sky, stretching up their Heads, and snuffing the Air, moist
Vapors are Engendring; and the cause of their doing so, is their sensibleness
of the Airs sudden alteration from Dry to Wet, and sudden Rain will ensue,
though at that time the Sun may shine out.

The Chattering of Swallows, and their Flying low about Pounds and Lakes,
denotes Rain.

The Froggs much Croaking in Ditches and Pools, etc. in the Evening, foretell
Rain in little time to follow: Also the sweating of stone Pillars, or Tombs,
denotes Rain.

The Ants Removing their Eggs, denotes Rain, for by a secret Instinct in
Nature, finding the Air changed into much Moistness, they carry them to a place
of dryer security.

The Crows flocking in large Flights, holding their Heads upward as they Fly,
and Crying louder than usual, is a sign of Rain, as also their stalking by
Ponds and Rivers, and sprinkling themselves.

The often Doping and Diving of Water Fowls, fore-shows Rain is at hand.

The Peacocks much Crying, denotes Rain.

Cattle leaving off to Feed, and hasting to shelter under Hedges, Bushes,
Trees, Outhouses, etc. show sudden showers of Rain are coming.

And of this to conclude Rainy weather, I shall tell you a pleasant, but true
story.

A Gentleman who Traveled much, seeing a Sheepherd by the Road side tending
his Flocks, and other Cattle, demanded of him, if it would continue that Day as
it then was, for the Sun shown out: The Sheepherd looking on his Cattle, told
him, it would Rain very much in an Hour, and extremely Wet him, unless he got
shelter: The Gentleman smiled at this, and would not believe him, but as he
said, so it proved, for immediately a little Cloud Rising at South-West, came
driving on with the Wind, and spread it self, so that the Sky was covered with
prodigious blackness, and though the Gentleman Rid hard to get to a Town, about
five Miles from him, the Rain ever he reached it, poured down so prodigiously,
that he was Wet to the Skin, and remembering what the Sheepherd said, upon his
Return finding him in the same place, he Requested he would tell him how he
came so precisely to know the Change of the Weather; the Sheepherd at first
Refused it, but for Half a Crown (after much Importunity) consented, and when
the Gentleman expected he should Express himself in Astrological Terms, he only
said, Sir, do you see yonder Py'd Colt, pointing to him, well said the
Gentleman, and what of that, why says the Sheepherd, when he Runs his Head into
the Hedge, and Turns his Arse to the Weather-gage, then it will certainly Rain,
though the Weather promises at that time otherways to those that are Ignorant
of Skill in Prognosticating: This may be (says the Gentleman) but what will it
signify to me on my Journey, seeing I cannot carry such an Almanac as your Colt
in my Pocket; however the Gentleman was highly pleased, and concluded his Money
well laid out: But here I have Outdone the Sheepherd, in giving so many
Prognostics, that be where you will, you cannot miss of some of them to Inform
you.

Signs of Wind, and sudden Storms arising, Prognosticated by the Planets,
Elements, Creatures, etc. in all seasons of the Year for ever.
I^ the Moon blushes, and is Redder than usual, Winds are engendering, and
storms will arise.

If at Sunrising pale spots seem to appear in its Orb, and dazzle there, strong
Winds will ensue from the South, the Wind soon shifting thither in what ever
Quarter before it was.

Meteors, or as some call them, Stars shooting swiftly, and spreading a long
Train of Light, forerun Winds that will soon ensue.

Chaff Leaves, Feathers, Thistle Down, or such light things, whisking about,
and turning round, foreshow Tempestuous Winds.



A murmering noise in the Woods, when little Wind is stiring, foretells a storm
is Engendering.

Cormorants, and other Sea Fowl flocking to shore, and often Crying, denotes
great storms to ensue.

Cattle on a sudden hasting to their stalls, housing-places, or other shelter,
do the like.

The Herns exceeding high flying, denotes the Air is moved with Winds, in the
Upper Region, and that sudden storms will ensue.

The much Whispering, and Rusling among Reeds and Flaggs, in Meadow-Ditches,
and Marshes, Prognosticates the Wind is gathering in the Air.

Small scattered Clouds to the South West, that fly high, lie as it were in
Ridges, and seem not to move, engender Winds, often producing Whirl-Winds.

A kind of a Murmering of Thunder from the North, foretells great Tempests will
arise.

A Reddish Circle about the Moon at the Full, denotes much Wind.

A Red Lowering Morning, is the Forerunner of Wind.

If in a Lamp, the Oil purls and sparkles, the Wick grows hard, that it Burns
dimly, it foretells a strong Wind engendring, and will suddenly Rise.

If there appear Fiery spots, or those of a Reddish Color in the Sun upon its
Setting, much Wind will ensue speedily.

Signs of the Winds shifting or Changing in the several Points of the Compass.
When the Sun Rises with many pale spots, appearing in its Orb, and part of
it Veiled in a Cloud, the Wind in what Point soever, it will soon shift to the
South.

When the Wind has been settled 24 Hours or more, in any of the Full Points, as
North, East, West, and South, when it begins to shift, it will not settle till
it comes to the opposite Point, as from the North to the South, and so from the
Full East, to Full West, and so of the Angular Points, as from North East, to
South East.

Let the VVind be in what Quarter it will, upon the New Moon it presently
shifts.

When the Generallity of the Clouds Rack, or Drive with the wind, yet many in
little Fleeces or long strakes, lying higher, and appear not to move, the wind
is Flagging, and will quickly shift.

Signs of storms Ceasing.
A Hasty shower of Rain falling when the wind has Raged for some Hours, soon
Allays it.

If a storm Rise with the Sun, at the Falling of the Sun it will begin to
Decline, and about Midnight Cease.

If the Water Ruckles much, and frequent Bubles arise, the storm is of a short
continuance.

If a Halcyon or Kings Fisher, a Bird so called, Attemps the Seas when the wind
Blows hard, it is a sign it is Abating, and will soon Cease.

The uneasiness of Swine in their stys, and their endeavoring to be Enlarged,
denotes the Wind in a little time to Cease.

The Merry Chiriping of Sparrows does the like, as also the Moles coming out of
their Holes.

Signs of Excessive Hot Weather.
LIttle strings like Cobwebs, flying in the Air in a Morning show the Heat will
be much, especially for the season.

A Glissening on the Grass at the Sun Rise, like the Threads of Spinners,
denotes much Heat in Summer, or Autumn.

The steeming and smoking of standing Waters, when the Sun is about setting,
foretells a Hot Day to ensue; for then the Mineral Fires are forcing their way
to add to the Suns Enflaming the Air.

Great swarms of Gnats abroad in Marshes and Fenny Places in the Evening,
foretells Hot weather to ensue.

Many Frogs coming out of the water on the Banks of Ditches, Ponds, etc.
presage Hot weather to ensue.

The Plover or Lapwing Flying high, and then low, making almost continual Cries,
foreshows much Heat to follow.

Signs of Cold weather, or hard winter.
THE Suns setting in a Mist, looking Red, and Broader than usual.

The Clearness of the stars, and their much Twinkling.

Starlings, Feldefars, and other Birds of a Hot Nature, hastening in great
Flocks or Flights from the Northern to the southern Climates.

Cold Dews, and Morning Rymes on St. Bartholomew's Day; and the three
succeeding Days.

A Hoar Frost on Michaelmas Day in the Morning, denotes a hard winter.

The Swallows going away soonner than usual, denotes a Cold season to ensue.

The Birds laying up Haws, slows, and other stores in Old Nests, or Hollows of
Trees, foretells a Hard winter.

Sea-Pys Flocking from Salt water about Fresh Rivers, or Lakes, signify a
sudden alteration of the weather to much Cold.

The Owl much Hooting in the Night, at Michaelmas Tide, denotes a Hard Frosty
winter.

Ignis Fatuus, or Will with whisp; much and often appearing in Moorish Ground,
fore-runs a Cold season.

Prognostics of Fair weather by the Planets, Elements, and Creatures, etc.
THE Moon at four Days Old having her Horns sharp and pointed, very Bright, it
predicts fair weather till the Full, if not to the Months End.

The stars shine Clear and Bright, seeming to Dart or Shoot out pointed Rays.

Little Clouds sinking Low, as into Valleys at South East, and South West.

The Sun Rising in the Morning Fair and Bright, and setting at Night Blushing,
without Spots or Black Clouds near it.

The Larks Rising very high, and continuing singing a long time.

The Halcyons, and other Sea Fowl leaving the shores, and Flocking to sea.

Mists or smoakings on the top of the water.

The Rainbow appearing after a shower, and the Blew and Yellow part of it very
Bright, and Lightish Color.

Fish often Rising, and Bubbling at the top of of the water; Cattle Feeding
without often looking up, or about them.

Scattering white Clouds, like Fleeces of Wool to the North West.

Spiders VVebbs on the Grass, and Trees, foretells much fair weather.

Bees flying far from their Hives, and coming late Home, do the like.

A Bright, Clear, or Shineing Circle about the Moon at the Full, promises fair
weather, predicts many fair Days to ensue.

Much Dew on sheeps wool in a Morning, is a sign of fair weather.

Signs of Hail (violent and moderate) by the Planets, Elements, etc.
IF the Sun at Rising cast a Glittering Light, as if it Reflected on some Lucid
Matter, though few or no Clouds at that time appear, the Vapors are Condensed
in the Cold Region, and fore-runing into Clouds, that will scatter Violent Hail.

If (in the Morning) the Eastern Skys before the Suns Rising look pale, and
Refracted Beams appear in Thick Clouds, great storms of Hail will ensue, to the
great Damage of Corn, Vineyards, Fruit Trees, etc.

If the Clouds look Fleecy, Dusky, White enclining to Yellowish, and move but
Heavily, though the wind is pretty stiff, the Vapors Composing them, are
Engendered and Frozen, as Virgil says:

Ah then, but I Will defends her Grapes,
Such horrid Hail on House tops Rattling Leaps.
If the Clouds appear of a whitish blue, and Expand much, it will be small
Hail, or Drizling; for that happens in VVinter, or the Spring, when it cannot
be carried high enough to be Condensed with a greater quantity of Cold, because
the Refracted Sun Beams, are weak in their Operation, and this appears by a
Curling, or Curdling in the Clouds as they Rise, and in appearance Expand
themselves.

Signs of Snow, and Drisly sleet, etc.
CLouds like Woolly Fleeces, appearing high, and moving heavily, the middle a
darkish pale, and the edges white, carry Snow in them, that in winter Frozen in
Sheets, by Cold East, North East, or North West Winds, pressing hard on the
Air (no longer able to bear them up) shiver in the Fall, and break into Flakes,
resembling many Figures, as Stars, Leaves of Trees, Flowers, etc. If the Clouds
be pressed nearer the Earth, the Vapors so Frozen is Grosser, and the Flakes
are Larger, but more Remote, thiner, and so fall in a Sleet, or little Flakes.

The Suns looking pale at Rising, the much Lowing of Cattle in the field; the
Croaking of Ravens, and Birds flaging their Wings, fore-show it.

Drisle is a kind of a Ryme or Mists Ascending, and Freezing, and to be
foreseen as the aforegoing.

Prognostics of Forsty Weather by the Planets, Elements, Creatures, etc.
THE Stars looking bright, and twinkling much, shows a Cold Air, Engendering
Erosts.

The Sky seeming fuller of stars than usual, and the wind suddenly shifting to
the East, or North East, after the Change of the Moon, in the Winter, denotes a
settling Frost of long continuance.

The Owls Hooping often, with a louder Note than usual, denotes a Frost at
hand.

The Suns setting Red in a Mist, and a white Fogg creeping low in Marshy and
Moorish Ground, shows the Air is Condensing into Cold.

The Seacole Fire Burning Blue (that is) a great part of the Flame, and
scorching more than usual, foretells a frost at hand, or if it be begun, its
continuance.

The Moon shineing bright, with sharp Horns after the Change, denotes the Air
is Rarefying, and Cold winds will soon set in to freeze the Earth.

A Hoarey Ryme sticking on Trees, Bushes, and Pales, in the Morning, foretells
sharp bleak winds will soon set in, and contract a bitter frost.

Little Clouds hovering low in the North, when none any where else appear,
fore-runs Cold freezing Winds and Snow.

Signs of a Thaw in any great hard frost, etc.
THE Suns looking waterish at its Rising, is a sign the frost will break.

The wind having held long and extreme sharp in one Point, suddenly shifting;
brings a Relenting, if not a through Thaw.

The Suns setting in Blueish Clouds; and casting Refracted Beams into them,
bids the frost prepare to be gone.

The stars looking dull, and the Moons Horns blunted, foretells a Change in
this Nature.

Of wonderful signs in the Heavens, and on the Earth, whence they Proceed; and
what they Prognosticate of strange Events.
I now come to treat of Meteors, and strange sights, and Impressions in the
Air, and on the Earth; Prognosticating many Wonderful and Amazing Things to
ensue; so far I conceive Proper to the Subject in Hand.



Comets, or Blazing-stars; with Astrological Observations, what they are, and
Prognostics on them.
A Comet or Blazing-star is formed of an Exhalation, hot and dry, being a great
quantity of Unctious Vapors, drawn up into the highest Region, and there, by
their own Agitation, and the Heat they meet with approaching the Region of
fire, are Kindled, appearing when the Sun Beams are of it, like a real star,
with a Blazing Tail, though it be many Thousand Miles beneath the stary Region,
and sometimes it moves after the motion of the Air, which is Circular, but it
never goes down out of the Compass of sight, and so continue till the matter
that feeds them is Consumed, and then Expire; the time of their Generation is
oftenest in Harvest, or Autumn, for in the spring there is too much Moisture,
and too little Heat to Generate them: In summer there is too much Heat, that
will Disperse and consume the matter, that it cannot be Joined together; and in
winter, the Cold and Moisture contrary to the Nature of a Comet opposes it.

These fore-run many Calamitys, and the Reason is this:

1st. Great Droughts ensue, because the Comet cannot be Generated without great
Heat, and much Moisture is Consumed in the Burning of it.

2d. Barrenness of the Earth, because the fatness of the Earth is drawn up,
where of the Comet chiefly consists; so that the Earth wanting that Oily
substance, grows sterile, and produces not as other times.

3d. Pestilence, for as much as this kind of Exhalation in long Burning,
Expiriug or going out, Diffuseth it self, and Corrupts the Air with a
Poisonous Infection, and that drawn in by us as our common Breath, Infecteth
the Bodies of Men with Plagues, Violent Feavours, or other Excessive Hot
Diseases; and the like Effects they consequently have on the bodies of Beasts
that suck in the same Airs, working on them by Murrens, swellings, Breakings
out of Boiles, Blaiues, and the like, proceeding from Poisonous Infection.

The Learned have Noted that after the appearing of Comets, other great
Calamitys befall; as Wars, Seditions, Changes in state; the Death of Princes
and Noble Men: And thus Virgil:

As in moist Night a Blazing Comet streams,
With Bloody Omens Red, and Syrius beams,
Brings to sad Mortals, Sicknesses and Thirst,
And Heaven in Mourning hangs, with Influence Cursed.
For (say they) at what time the Comets do shine, there be many Hot and Dry
Exhalations in the Air, which Influence the Natural Temper of the Hot, Dry, and
Choleric Persons, whereby they are quickly stirred to Anger, to Raise Wars,
Tumults, or Contentions: Also those Nice Bodies, Living at Ease, are of a soft
delicious Temper; so the Infection seizes them sooner than Labourious
hard-fareing Bodies, for in Plagues it has been Observed, that the most delicate
Fed and Tender Bodies, are soonest Infected and swept away: I mighs enlarge on
this, but my proposed Brevity constrains me to Desist, and proceed to other
Matters.

Many Suns appearing in the Heavens at once, the Cause, and what they Predict:
OFten to the Appearance of Men, two, or many times three Suns have appeared in
the Firmament at once, though in reality but one real Sun, the other being the
Images or Impressions of it, indensed Air, or watery Clouds, for they are
nothing but the Idols, or Image of the real Sun, that daily enlightens the
World, Represented by its Beams, Impressing in an equally thick and smooth
gross Air, or Cloud, placed on the side of the sun, and sometimes on both
sides, into which the sunbeams being Received, as into a Glass, expresses the
likeness and fashion of Light, which is in the sun so appearing to us, who are
a vast distance beneath it, as if there were many suns.

This thick and watery Air or Cloud, is not directly under the sun, for when it
is, it makes the Circle about it called the Crowns or Garlands, or if it were
opposite to the sun, it would form the Rainbow, of which I shall speak
hereafter, but on the sides where the Images may be best Reflected and
Represented.

These are oftnest seen in the Morning and Evening, about the Rising and Going
down of the sun, though sometimes at other Hours, and sometimes there Appear
many little suns, like unto stars, which are caused by many little divided
Clouds, as the Reflection of a Man's Face appears in all parts of a broken
Glass; or as a Multiplying Glass makes one thing seem many.

The appearing of these Phenomenas, naturally betoken Tempests, and much Rain
to ensue; because they cannot appear but in a Watery disposition of the Air.

Also if they appear on the south side of the sun, they signify more Violent
showers than on the North, and the reason is the hot southern Vapor is sooner
resolved into Water, than the colder Northern ones.

As for a Supernatural signification, they have been Noted to have portended
the Contention of Princes for Kingdoms, as not long before the Contention of
Galba, Otho, and Vitellus for the Empire Rome, three Suns appeared; also a
little before the Slaughter of Lewis, King of Hungary, in a Battle against the
Turks, were seen three Suns, denoting the three Princes that afterward
Contended for the Kingdom, viz. Ferdinand King of Bohemia, John Vayvode of
Transylvania, and Solomon Emperor of the Turks.

The appearing of many Moons in the Night, and what they Prognostic of Good or
Bad.
AS for the cause of many Moons appearing, or seeming to do so at once, I need
not repeat it again but only tell you the cause is the same as that of the
Suns; Plyne calls these Night suns, because they join with the Light of the
Moon, and Augment its Light in wonderful measure, whilst they continue.

They foretell great Rains, and a wet season to follow, producing Land Floods,
and doing much Harm to Corn and Grass, if grown up; also the Overflowing of
Rivers, and the Breaking in of the sea; and in general a moist wet Year (or
part of a Year as they fall Earlier or Later) to ensue to the End; which will
occasion scarcity of Corn, and other Fruits of the Earth.

Of the Rainbow (how caused) and what it Prognosticates.
HAving promised to say something more particularly of the Rainbow, which gives
a great insight to the weather, immediately to follow; I shall Treat of it
here, as it most Probably follows in Order.

The Rainbow is the Apparition of certain Colors, in a Cloud Opposite against
the sun, in a half Circle, as Virgil seems to Hint, when he makes Iris or the
Rainbow Messengers to Juno, viz.

From Heaven then Dew-rose winged Iris flew, She against the Sun a Thousand
Colors drew, Placed on her Head, etc. The sun Reflecting on a Cloud at a
distance from it side-ways, and Refracting its Beams there lively by its Light,
shows the various Colors the Clouds is Composed of; Posidonius Terms the
Rainbow the Suns Looking-glass, wherein its Image is Represented, and that the
blue Color is the proper Color of the Air or Cloud, and the red of the sun,
that the other are mixed Colors, or Colors of Comixtion; and indeed the
Colors more admirably lively than can be Represented any where else; but since
Rainbows are so often Visible, I think I may spare the Labor of a particular
Description of them; therefore I proceed to what they Prognosticate in Relation
to Weather, viz.

From that part the Rainbow first begins to break, or vanish, winds will arise,
and bring great showers.

If the Rainbow vanishes as it were altogether, fair weather will ensue.

If it be broken in many parts, Tempestuous winds are gathering in the Air.

If (after it appears) the Colors wax grosser and darken, Rain is gathering,
if lighter, and the Colors fairer, the contrary; and guess of other Asspects
in the Rainbow.

Of the Ignis Fatuus, or Fires that lead People astray in the Night time,
called the Will with the Wisp.
THese in Popish, and superstitious times, were held to be Souls that had
escaped out of Purgatory, to desire the prayers of the living, upon the earth,
for their admission to Paradise, because they were often seen in Church yards,
where Unctious vapors arise from the steem of dead bodies, since they are
called Will with the Wisp; or as the Latins call them, Ignis Fatuus, foolish
fire; because they are rather a fire in show, than a real one in truth.

It is a Fire, or a resemblance of it, that seems to go before men, or follow
them in the Night, and lead them out of their way into waters, or other
dangerous places; it is a weak exhalation kindled by reason of a violent motion
in a cold night, in the lowest Region of the Air; for in the hot season they
appear not: It is imbodied by the cold, and shut in as it were in a bladder,
and its motion is from that of the Air; for that being as it were of a piece,
though in innumerable particles, is agitated with violent motions, and as the
body of a Man moves in breaking it, the whole sensibly suffers, which makes
this Nocturnal Light move swiftly, and press toward the Party moving, it
dancing and playing about him: So that the afright, and the many times, by that
means in a dark Night, makes him wonder, and being once out, he knows not how
to get into the right way again, and often Mischief ensues, by his tumbling
into one bad place or another.

When these Exhalations rise much, which they mostly do in moorish or foggy
Grounds: In Autumn, and the beginning of Winter, they fore-run a cold sharp
winter, but a fruitful summer to ensue, because it shows the cold Vapors will
not rise high, but remain nearer the Earth, and oppress it with still Frosts,
more than blustering Winds; and again, in so doing the Earth in Winter will
spend little of its heat, or Evaporate its Unctious quality to any great
degree, which working with its nitrous part, is the cause of Fertility, and
causes increase of all kind of Vegetives, to a very great degree more than
ordinary.

Of the Flame that appears on the Hair and Beards of Men, and upon that of
Beasts.
THis by some has been taken to be wonderfully strange, and of such Terror,
that some has been extremely frighted by it, supposing it was the Devil come
to involve them in sulpherous flames, when the cause is really natural; for
these Fires are sometimes clamy Exhalations scattered abroad in the Air in
small parts, which in the night, by the resistance of the cold, agitating in a
violent motion, are kindled, and rushing on where they find opposition, by
reason of their clamy nature, stick, and appear a blue fire, very affrighting
to those at a distance, when the persons on whom they fasten, perhaps perceive
them not, or at least not presently.

When they are much abroad, they foretell high Winds, and a blustering stormy
Winter, a wet Spring, and a dry Summer, very sickly, but fruitful.

Strange Apparitions of Armies, and other wonderful sights in the Air, how
caused.
Apparitions in the Air, are only Exhalations in the lowest or highest Regions
of it, not really Fires, but seem so by the Sun or Moon reflecting Light on
them.

The Light in this case is instead of white, and the dark shadow sets off the
Figures; such Apparitions seem terribly to represent, and (diversely mixed
accordingly to the diverse dispositions of the Exhalation, they cause variety of
colors, according to the thickness or thinness of the Exhalation, presenting
to the imagination of fond fanciful Mortals) Armies in Battle, Seas, and Navys
engaging on them, spacious Fields, Houses, Castles, and the like; though indeed
but Airy Phantoms: However they fore-run Storms, and are accompanied with
flashes of Lightning very often, and in the hotter weather, with prodigious
claps of Thunder, if the Clouds are gross, and full of water, looking a
greenish dark in the middle, though about the edges, the Light may as in the
thinner parts, paint various Colors, being composed of hot and moist
Exhalations; and though these are looked on as supernatural causes, they are no
more than the effect of Nature.

The Kinds of Earthquakes, their cause, and signs, fore-running them, and what
they pontend.
IN this Treatise I cannot but make some Observation on the Causes of
Earthquakes, considering of late Years, we have been so much alarumed with
their prodigious Effects, and so few people know what natural Effect produces
them, for wonderful Things are related by Historians concerning them; but the
best Opinions given of their Causes, and the most probable, is, That
extraordinary quantities of heat and cold, shut up in the vast Caverns of the
Earth, contending for mastery, and pressing violently to get out, but find
Opposition by the too much dryness or moisture of the Porus parts of the Earth,
seek a way to vent themselves by force, and break their way through all
Opposition.

The Signs of an Earthquake being at hand, is, the much tosing of the Sea, or
other great Waters, when no visible cause is seen to occasion it, for then the
Vapors laboring to force their way to open Air, first finding a more easy
passage there, than on the firm Land, first make their way, and boil up the
Waters, as it were to force through them.

Also a cold Calmness of the Air is another Sign; for then the Exhalation that
should be abroad, is forcibly pent up in the Earth, and struggling to get out
with violence.

Others Observe, that when the Sky is as it were Clear, some long strakes of
Clouds are however seen; but the most certain, is a rumbling murmuring Noise in
the Earth, and a kind of whistleing Wind whisking about the Air, being
troubled; for then the forerunner, or thinest part of the Vapor is spining
out, to make way for the greater Shock; and more violent gross shock of it; yet
however, the Cause is the same, notwithstanding the manner of shaking the Earth
is different; as I shall briefly Note.

The First is when the Earth is shaken Laterally or to one side, which is when
the whole force of the enclosed Vapor drives to one side or place, and there
is no contrary Motion to Let it, if the Vapor be weak, it only makes a Rocking
or Trembling; but if violent, breaks out, overthrowing the mightiest Buildings
from their Foundations; and by such an Earthquake (in the Reign of Tyberius
the Roman Emperor) twelve great Cities in Asia were levelled in one, and most
of their Inhabitants buried in their Ruins, and sad have those been of late at
Naples in Italy; also in the Island of Scicily, at Lima, and Jamaica in the
West Indies; I will not mention what happened in England lately; which was
rather a Trepidation, than an Earthquake: Yet it caused much Consternation;
and the excessive quantity of Vapors, that then effused, in all probability,
have occasioned the Climate to be the Colder to this day.

A second kind of Earthquake lifts up the Earth, so that falling on a sudden,
and lets it fall again; this happens when the Wind in a great Mass struggles on
a sudden to Evaporate; but the Opposition is too strong, and forces it down
again.

The Third is that which breaks its way violently through, causing openings,
and gaupings of the Earth; so that Towers, Cities, Mountains, and huge standing
Waters have been swallowed up and lost: All these are very Terrible, and are in
the hot season accompanied with prodigious Thunders and Lightnings; and the
Vapors pressing too much infection upon the Air, before it can be refined and
purged, it Infects the Bodies of Men and Beasts, causing mortal Diseases; and
the Earth having spent so much, that it cannot in a plentiful manner assist to
produce fertility, a scarcity ensues not only for the present, but for some
Years after, till the Recruit comes to make the Ground more fertile, etc.

Signs fore-running Thunder, Lightning, etc.
MEteors shooting in the Night in summer time, denotes the Air Inflamed with
much Heat, and that Thunder and Lightning will ensue.

Many Clops and Clefts in the Ground, signify that the fiery Vapors are
Ascended from the Earth, and have so Dried and Parched it in their passage; so
that the fire being mounted so soon as thick Clouds Over-cast the Sky, the
grosser part of the fire Descending, and struggling with the watery Clouds to
get a passage through, is that which is called the Lightning.

If no Clouds appear in sultry Weather, and the Sun sets Red and Fiery, great
Flashes will appear in the North, and North West, which is called Fulgetrum,
and is Lightning; but not meeting with Opposition, it carrys no Thunder with
it, though springing from the same Cause, but wanting Opposition, the Noise is
not heard.

Of sudden Whirl-winds, and surprising Tempests.
VVHirl-winds are Vapors suddenly Rising out of the Earth, and gathering in
the Air, imbodyed in Clouds, and stretching them, break forth Violently; so
forcing their way to the Earth, with much Fury in a Narrow Compass, as it were
enclosed, they Circle Round, and Hurry things about Violently, often
Over-turning Houses, Barns, Sheep Cots; and Lifting People, and Cattle into the
Air, letting them Fall again many times to their Destruction, though in these
Countries they are not so Violent, as others nearer the Line, where Vapors are
carried up more violently by the Heat.

The sings that fore-run them, is a troubled Sky, the Whisking and Circling
Light Things about, when as yet there appears little or no Wind, a Murmering
heard in the Air, the Air beating down right, as it were upon the Water, and
making it Wrinkle; Trees Whisking in one place, and not in another.

Approved Rules for Manageing Husbandry, or Rural Affairs, during the Twelve
Months of the Year for ever.
In JANUARY.
LAY Warm Dung to the Roots of your Young Choice Trees and Plants; Lop and take
off Superfluous Branches in the New Moon; if the weather be Open set Beans, sow
Pease, Parsnip, Seeds, dig and trench your Ground, especially in Gardens; give
your Cattle gentle Drenches; and to the more Sickly, and Weak,, warm Mashes of
Bran and Malt sodden in Water, keep them warm Housed, if the weather be
extreme Cold, and Cover your Choice Plants and Flowers.

In FEBRUARY.
Cut Quicksets, and supply the Decayed places with New Ones, Plant Vines, Hops,
Liquorish, and all Shrubs bearing Fruit, sow Oynions, Pease, Beans, Salleting,
for the spring, and Pot Herbs, Moss Fruit Trees, and Prune them, take off
Superfluous Branches, not yet Removed, Graft on Young Stocks, and Manure Barren
Soil with Dung, and other Manure, to Render it Fertile, lay Traps for Vermino.

In MARCH.
The Weather being open, and the Wind not in the Cold Quarters, Cover the Roots
of Fruit. Trees that before were Open with Dung, Set Quicksets, and Graft
choice Siens, Sow Barley, Oats, Oynions, Parsnips, Carroots Cucumbers, Mellions;
Set Artichoaks, Sage, and all kind of Pot Herbs; Bleed and Geld Cattle in the
Waine of the Moon; Sow all manner of Garden Seeds for the Spring and Summer
store.

In APRIL.
Sow Flax, Hemp, and Pole your Hops, set and sow what Plants and Herbs were
before wanting, open the Mouths of your Be Hives, clean their stools, and rub
them over with sweet Herbs to Cherish, Cheer, and Enable them to take the more
Pleasure in their Labor, upon their first coming out; weed Gardens and Corn,
prepare for Dary-work, Bark Trees, and Raise Choice Flowers.

In MAY.
In the beginning of this Month, sow and set all manner of tender Summer Herbs;
continue to weed, trim up your Hop Gardens, cut off Superfluous Branthes, weed
Corn, Distill Cordial Waters, make Conserves, drive Rivers, and drain Plashes.

In JUNE.
Shear your Sheep the Moon Increasing, Geld Lambs and Calves the Moon
Decreasing, sow Lettice, and Radishes, three or four Days after the Full Moon,
gather such Herbs as you would keep Dry for the winters Use, in the Full of the
Moon when the Sun has drawn up the Dew and Moisture from them; set Rosemary and
July-flowers, and stake up weak Plants and Flowers.

In JULY.
Gather forward Summer Seeds, when the Sun has dried them; cut off needless
suckers, drive Bees, Mow, Inoculate, Inarch, in the Full Moon, gather the Seeds
of such Flowers as are Ripe, Dry them in the Sun, then Hang them in the Pods to
Harden: To Kill Fleas and Bugs, strew Powder of Rue, Wormwood, and Nut-gals,
under your Bed.

In AUGUST.
Take the Opportunity of the fairest weather to Reap in, from the before
mentioned Directions relating to weather, neither Reap nor Mow Corn too early;
let the Sun be pretty well Risen when you begin, and it will prevent much the
danger of Musting and Sweating, gather Garden seeds within a Day or two of the
Moons Full, lay Traps for Vermin; gather Fruit in Dry Days; sow Seeds for
Winter, Salleting and Pot Herbs.

In SEPTEMBER.
Gather Hops, the weather being dry, and the Dew off from them; take Honey,
make Verjuce, Sider, Perry, and other Liquors of Fruits; remove and set Slips
of Flowers, remove Young Trees and Plants, marking them, that in the
Transplantation they may stand to the same quarters of the Wind they first
grew; do this in the New of the Moon, the Wind at South or West; cut Quicksets,
and gather Winter Fruit without Bruising; sow Wheat and Rye, sow Parsnips,
Carroots, and Turnops for Winter store.

In OCTOBER.
Continue to sow Wheat and Rye, remove young Trees and Plants in the New of the
Moon, cut Rose Trees, Cyprus, Juniper, and Box; set Kernel Stones and Nuts,
gather Grapes in the beginning of the Month; the weather being dry, make an end
of gathering Winter Fruit, lay Open the Roots of Fruit Trees, and Trench your
Ground; Kill Swine for your winter store.

In NOVEMBER.
Fell Timber, Moss Fruit Trees, Geld Calves, Purge your Cattle to prevent
Diseases, set Crabb stocks to Graft on; in the last Quarter of the Moon set
Pease and Beans, sow Parsnips and Carroot Seeds, Trench Garden Ground with
Dung, make Drains to carry the water off.

In DECEMBER.
Continue to Fell Timber, set Traps, Sprunges, etc. for Hares, Rabbits, and
Wild Fowl; cover your choice Flowers and Plants with Mats or Straw, coat or
double cover your Bee-hives, Bleed Horses if the weather be Open, and Drench
your other Cattle; keep good Fires, Hospitallity, and Wholesome warm Diet; and
thus much in general Observations what is to be done relating to Husbandry
throughout the Year, which cannot but be of Use to the Honest Country Man, etc.

Signs of Murrein, Rot, or such like Destroying Diseases in Cattle; how to
Prevent or Remedy them.
CAttle are one main Support of the Nation, affording so many Commodities to
Man, so that without their doing Well, and Multiplying, we should be but in a
Bad Condition; therefore it ought to be the Care of those who are most
Concerned with them, and to whose particular Advantage they more Immediately
Redound, to look Carefully to them, and secure their Health as much as may be;
and because Murreins among Larger Cattle, and Rots among the Smaller, are the
most Fatal of Diseases, and sweep them away by Herds and Flocks, I shall (from
long Experience) show the nearest way to foresee the approaching Danger, which
coming for want of such Precaution, or Foresight, has Ruined many; and having
fore-shewed it, tell how it may be Helped, if in spite of Care it takes
Effect; which sometimes it will do.

Signs of Murrein that do befall Cattle.
IF the Moon change 3 days before St. Bartholomew's Day, it will be a sickly
Year amongst Cattle; but this is not the Rule I intend to Direct you by, for
the observance of the particular abovementioned; but after that Day is over,
and no Rain fallen in the Night, go as soon as it is day into the Fields of
Pasture, where your Cattle are to be kept, and lying down with your Eye against
the Suns rising, as even as you can with the surface of the Earth, and if you
perceive a glistning, like Spider threads, or a white jelly froth or foam on
the Grass then Infectious Vapors are beginning to Rise out of the Earth, and
to fall down in poisonous Dews, threatening Infection to the larger sort of
Cattle especially; therefore (for a while) feed them on high and dryer
grounds; but if no such thing at this time can be discerned, by reason the
weather may be hot and draw up that Jelly, or whiteness of corrupted Dew, look
immediately at the time ordered on Michaelmas day in the morning; and if you
observe it, then it will have the like effects, though somewhat weaker, and the
Air less Corrupted: To prevent therefore this Murrein, Long-sought; or as some
call it, Gurget: If you are constrained to Pasture your Beasts, bleed them as
soon as ever the Leaf begins to fall; peg their Ears and Dew-laps with
Helebore, or Bears-foot, a Plant so called; drench them with Savin and Rue,
boiled in strong Ale, and give-them a scowring; and this will prepare them to
resist the pestilential Air, and mainly contribute to the preserving them.

If you find however that any of your Beasts (after the aforementioned Caution) be
swelled under the Jaws, ogainst the Throat-boul; then draw forth its Tongue,
and open a Vein that lies under it, an Inch and a half long-ways, and there
will corrupt blood, and infectious water issue out; then having burnt Bay Salt
and Alum, mix them with Vinegar, and rub it well into the wound; this done,
slt the Hyde where the swelling outwardly appears, and draw the Skin, so that
you make a hollowness between that and the swelled Flesh; beat together
Spear-grass, burnt Salt, and Butter, put this kind of Poultis into the hollow,
between the Skin and the Flesh, and stitch it together; but not so close, but
the infectious Matter may evacuate.

This done, take a lump of the bluest Clay you can get, about four pound
weight, boil it in two quarts or more of Man's stale Urine, so much as (the
whole being stirred, after well boiling) will become thick, bruise a good
handful of the under bark of young Elder, add this with a handful of Salt, and
a quarter of a pound of rasty Bacon, well mashed and beaten to pieces, stir
them continually, till the Ingreedients be as thick as pap; then bath the
Beasts Face from the Ears downwards, toward the slit, as hot as he may endure
it; so do three times a day, till the swelling is abated, separating the
Infected from the Sound Cattle, for fear of its spreading among them, more than
otherwise it would: Then with an Ointment made of Butter, Tarr, and Beeswax,
Anoint the Sore Place as hot as may be; and in so ordering the Beast will
Recover, unless exceeding far gone before taken in hand.

The like measures may be taken with Swine, for the violent swellings in their
Throat and Jaws, contracted by an Infection through foul feeding, and bad Airs,
disearned by the like symptoms.

Prognostics of a Rot which fall upon Sheep.
IF it has been a hot close Summer, great heat drops often falling, and little
Thunder, then on St. Luke's Day, which is the 18. of October, make the
Observations as before directed in the morning, if the Sun rise clear,
otherwise do it as well as you can, and taste the Dews upon the Grass, if they
be bitter or brackish, the sign is apparent, that it is likely to be an
unhealthy year for Sheep, and a forerunner of the Rot amongst them, if great
precaution be not had to prevent it, especially if they be suffered to feed
among old Grass that has not been mowed, in moist wet low Grounds; for then
taking in a great deal of water, it makes their Skins loose, and their Lungs
full of a Phlegmatic water that Rots them. Consider then in the first place,
how they ought to feed to preserve them, which are so necessary in many
Circumstances to us.

The Grass good and wholesome for Sheep, is that among which grows a good
quantity of Melilot, Claver, Selfheal, Cinquefoil, Broom, Pimpernel, and white
Henbane; also Sparrow-wort, Knott-grass, Pennywort, and Middleweed-grass: For
here the Soil promises, not only wholesome Grass, but these are Medicinal, to
preserve them against the Infection, that not only causes the Rot, but many
other Diseases.

High Grounds, dry and fruitful, are the best Pasture for them, the Grass there
being usually short and sweet; but if you cannot avoid putting them in low
Grounds, for want of other convenience, take care not to bring them from the
Fold, till the Sun be risen, and then with your Dog, or otherways chase them
about, till they are well heated, and then let them feed or rest.

This Chasing is many ways advantageous; first it beats the Mildews from the
Grass, and other Dews very hurtful to them in their feeding; likewise kettles,
webs, and flasks, which the Sheep licking up in feeding, Contribute to the Rot;
it also stirs the Humors in them that wastes the Moisture, and prevents the
Effects of Rottenness: They Feed also more deliberately, and not so greedily as
otherways they would do, choosing their Food, which is most Healthful and
Propper.

Once a Month, and oftener in the Raw wet season, Rub their Mouths with Bay Salt
and Vinegar, which in a great Measure is a preservative against sickness; and
thus much to the Ordering them in general; for now I come nearer to particulars.

Rot in Sheep, how to provent it and other Diseases, and Cure it when taken.
AS to the Rots particular to sheep that are for Grazing, the Hunger Rot that
Putrefies the flesh and skin, and the Pelt Rot that comes after great store of
Rain to sheep new shorn, Mildewing the skin, and Corrupting the blood, are the
most sweeping and Mortal.

To prevent these then, and all others, the Danger sore-seen, take the salt
called Adracei, and once a Week Rub their Mouths with it, and it is a great
Prevention, and Preserver of them against Rots; but if the Rot is got amongst
them, separate the Infected, immediately Bleed the rest in their Ears, under
the Tongue, and in the Vain between the Laws; give them Bay Salt, Fennel, and
Ash Keys Boiled in their Water, and every one of them a Brandy Cup full of Aqua
Vitae, sweetened with Honey.

As for the Infected, Bleed them in the Temple Veins, then take Fulsilago,
Colts Foot, and Lungwort, each an equal quantity, stamp them, and strain the
Juice into Water pretty well sweetened with Honey, and early in the Morning
give it them warm to Drink, to each a quarter of a Pint, and they will soon
Recover, unless their Lungs be utterly Perished; Feed them with short dry Hay,
and Tares; the latter a little sodden in fair Water, in which Fennel has been
Infused; let their Housings be free from any Moisture, or Ill scents, and let
them Lie Warm on clean dry Straw or Fernn, for a Sheep is a Nice Creature, much
affecting Cleanliness and Wholesome Airs: Take Care likewise to drive away all
Venomous Creatures from them; and this may be done by Burning Galbanium,
Hartshorn Shaveings, or Woman's Hair; you may also give them (in their Troughs)
Barley and Beans Ground together, or dried Pease and Acorns Ground, mixed with
Bran, and if the Elm continues Leafy, give them the tender Boughs to Brouze
on, and thus you will Preserve your own, whilst others not Regarding these
Rules, will have theirs swept away by Scores, if not by whole Flocks when the
Rot comes amongst them, therefore seeing you are well advised, neglect it not.

How to Calculate Nativities, to know Good or Bad Fortune: Introducing to that
curious Art, plainly describing it by the Complexions, Humors, etc.
ALL the Sager, and Wise men of the World have held, and yet do hold, that the
Influence of the Planets, other Stars, and signs of the Zodiac have a great
power and force in disposing the Affairs of men and Women, in the contingencies
of their Lives, as well as to their bolily^ Health, and Sickness; this granted,
I proceed to show you how this may be fore-known, and many Incommodities
prevented thereby.

Consider first then to know the Day and Hour of the Birth of the Party, whose
Nativity you would Calculate; as suppose on a Monday, at half an hour past five
in the Morning, then you find the Moon has Dominion of that Birth; the Person
so born will be of a pale complexion, soft, flaxen, or whitish hair, subject to
cold diseases, inconstant, of no great capacity or understanding, and in peril
of losing his or her Life by drowning: See in this Case in the Scheem, the Moon
ascendant in Gemini,) II in the third Angle.

If on Tuesday, when Mars predominates the Person be born, it is discovered by
a wide mouth, a fiery countenance, great lips, a high Nose and forehead,
threatening eyes, a swarthy complexion, black or dark hair, the disposition of
that Party is furious, given to brawls, from which much Trouble arises, and in
the end danger of Life, seldom attaining to extreme old Age; see his Character
in the second Angle, thus.

If on Wednesday, at any hour under the Dominion, is under Mercury, and then
the Party has a little Nose, a bright brownish, or red Hair, a little Mouth,
quick sparkling Eyes, a flat Forehead, and little Head, subject to much
talking, a lover of company, subtle, deceitful, and by ill practices frequently
threatened with an untimely Death, by entering on Plots and Stratagems, obnoxious
to Great Ones, his Character is thus to be known.

If born of a Thursday, Jupiter predominates, and you find his Character in the
second Angle, thus ascendant in Leo, the Party born under this constellation,
if of a ruddy, fair, and sanguine Complexion, a high-forehead, but of a round
plump Visage, a little enclining to an oval, the Nose indifferently standing
forth, the Hair a lovely brown, or enclining to lightish, the Eyes hazle, but
of a cheerful Aspect, his or her behavior is cheerful, full of obligement,
true to trust, and a good Friend, his or her Fortune will rise by the help of
Great Ones, and his Sicknesses, which will not be many, proceed from over
abundance of Blood, causing Fevours, and the Like; a long Life, and much Riches
is promised to those under this Influence.

Those born on a Friday, under the Dominion of Venus, whose Character stands
thus in the depressed, or undermost Angle of the body, or point of the Scheme;
in Taurus the person born under her Influence, is of a fair complexion, flaxen
hairs and many times bright, enclining to red, affable of temper, black
sparkling Eyes, dimpled a little in cheek or chin, fortunate by Marriages, and
greatly beloved, many Children in wedlock; and others without it, yet often
afflicted with hot diseases, and very old Age is not promised, but Danger
threatened of Mortal Wounds, in lustful contentions.

If born under Saturn's dominion, that is on Saturday, whose Character is thus,
in the fourth Angle, opposite to Taurus and Leo deprest, the Party will in this
case have red or dusky Hair, a sallow or melancholy Complexion, slow to
speech, blue Eyes, a long Visage, and straight Mouth, subject to Melancholy,
secret Revenge, studious and thoughtful, no Riches is promised; but Afflictions
and Trouble; wife and prudent, but unfortunate in undertakings, wear out a long
and troublesome Life.

If born under the Sun, Charactered thus, in the sixth Angle, in the sign
Aries, the Party will be of a cheerful countenance, a ruddy Complexion,
enclining a little to dusky, of a humor affable, and very fortunate by favor.

How to tell any Number one shall Think, be it never so great.
THIS is a pretty Device, and some have been thought to Conjure, or Divine,
when they did so exactly know the Thoughts of others, etc. and it is no more
than this; When the Party has Thought of any Number, bid him or her Multiply
the Number thought, by Five, and give you the product, by which means the
Number Thought, will be so far above that thought on, that he will never
scruple it, concluding it is impossible to Reduce it; and this product being
infallibly a five, or a cipher, that taken away, the number Thought on will
remain:

As suppose the Thought-Number were 53. which doubled, produces 106. and this
Multiplied by 5. is 530. The Cipher then taken away, it is 53. the Number
Thought on: And thus you may do (observing this Rule) by what Number soever any
One shall cast in their Mind.

To know the Planet that has Dominion in the Nativity of any Person.
THis is a very nice Point, yet conducing to abundance of Advantage, in knowing
what shall befall one in the course of Life; for as the Planet is Good or Bad,
so our Fortune will be; but before I give further Directions, Observe the
following Alphabetical Table, with their agreeing Figures.

1 A 2 B 3 C 4 D 5 E 6 F 7 G 8 H 9 I 0 K 20 L 0 M 4 N 50 O 60 P 70 Q 10 R 0 S
100 T 200 V 300 X 400 Y 500 Z

In this Case take the Number of every Letter of the Christian Name of the
party enquiring, and the like of their parents Names, apply them to the Letters
of the Table, and their Figures; then bring the several Numbers into one Sum
total, then divide by 9. and then 1. or 4. remains, it Denotes the Sun to have
domination in the Nativity, promising long Life, Riches, and Honor: If 7. or
2. then its the Moon, and your Life will be inconstant and changeable: If 9.
Mars, promising a troublesome Life, by reason of Jarrs, Strifes, and a restless
Spirit: If 5. Mercury, Denoting the getting of Wealth, but not the Art of
keeping it, unstable, deceitful, etc. If 3. Jupiter, promising Riches, and
Favor of Great Ones: If 6. Venus, promising in Love successful: If 8. Saturn,
bringing a sullen bad Fortune.

The Art of Discovering Truth from Falsehood.
IF you suspect you take a Servant, or any other in a Lie, or False Story, that
may be to your prejudice, or otherways, be not presently so Rash as to Charge
them with it, but try the following Rule of Art, to inform you in a certainty,
of what you can but at present surmize or suspect, without any real Ground.
Write the parties Name, and the name of the day the Discourse was, or is made
on, that you cannot believe, and then mind the following Alphabet and Figures.

A 10 B 2 C 20 D 4 E 14 F 6 G 16 H 7 I 18 K 11 L 11 M 12 N 4 O 14 P 6 Q 16 R 8
S 18 T 10 V 2 X 2 Y 4 Z 14

Take the Letters and Figures properly belonging to them, as the Letters make
the Name of the Party suspected, also add those of the name of the day, and
when you have put them into a Sum Total, add 26. then by 7 devide the Sum
Total, and then take the Remainder, and if it proves odd, you may be confident
the Party has told you an Untruth or Aesop's Fable, instead of a Veracity: But
if ever you may Rely upon what he or she has said, and in case of an Untruth,
you may positively Charge the Party with it, and either by an open Confession,
Blushes, or some evident Signs, you may easily come to the knowledge how you
had like to have been deceived.

How to know whether you shall be Successful in any Matters you Engage in
against another.
IF you would know whether you shall have the Advantage against your Adversary,
in any Matter of Controversy, as a Suit of Law, Love, Raceing, Gameing,
Bargaining, or the like; to do this, consider the Names of each Party, and
rarely they happen alike; having well considered them, set down the following
Alphabet (with Figures) under the Letters, viz.

A 13 B 3 C 22 D 24 E 22 F 3 G 7 H 6 I 20 K 1 L 10 M 33 N 13 O 8 P 13 Q 7 R 13
S 9 T 8 V 2 X 6 Y 6 Z 4

And now to Amaze the Party more that comes to be Resolved, put the Christian
Names into Latin, in the Nominative Case Singular; as suppose Peter is
Contending, or to Contend in any of these Matters with Paul, set down Petrus
and Paulus; and so of any other Name, then according as the Alphabet directs,
join unto every Letter of the Names proposed, the Figure, or Figures under the
Letter, as they stand in Order; then Cast up the Numbers to each Party by it
self, and being put together, proceed to Divide by 9. and so doubt not to find
(the Division being made) what Remains to the one Party, and to the other; and
this gives a sight of the Victor, and the Vanquished; and if it so happen, that
in the Division of the whole 9. nothing Remains, then take the last Number of
9. to serve for your purpose; as I shall more fully Explain in the Close: And
thus I begin with the Names Mentioned, as by the same Rule you may do with any
other.

P 13 P 13 E 22 67 makes seven times nine. A 1 37 makes four times nine. T 8 U
2 R 13 L 10 U 2 U 2 S 9 Remains 4. S 9 Remains 1. Sum 67. Sum 37.

And by this Rule, the Planets give their Favorable Influence to Peter; and
promise him the Advantage over the other, as having 4. to 1. against him in the
Remainder; that is, three odds to give him a good Lot: But yet to make this
more Manifest, take the following Table according to the foregoing Rule.

1 He that shall Overcome is of 3 5 7 9 2 1 4 0 8 3 2 5 7 9 4 1 3 6 8 5 2 4 7 9
6 1 3 5 8 7 2 4 6 8 8 1 3 5 7 2 4 6 8

And thus may you know what is proper without any Frivolous Conceits of
Conjuration, or Dealing with the Black Art, to Injure or Hurt your self by
Diabolical Charms or Enchantations.

To know whether the Party you Love be Virtuous and Chaste.
THIS is a Nice Secret, and may do much Good in preventing much Evil and Strife
after Marriage; Write down the Proper Name of the Party, either Man or Woman,
with his or her Mothers Name, and put the Number to each Letter, as the
foregoing Experiment, add 15 to the Sum Total, divide it then by 9. and so the
Sum Remaining, or the Remainder of that Sum being even, then Conclude the
Person Chaste, Honest, and Virtuous; but if it appear odd, then you may, with
all Imaginable reason Conclude the Contrary.

The Mosaic Wand to find out Hidden Treasure:
THIS has been a secret put in Practice to great Advantage, in this Order; Cut
a Hazle wand Forked, at the upper end like a Y, Peel off the Rhine, and dry it
in a moderate Heat, then steep it in the Juice of Wake Robin, or Night Shade,
and Cut the single lower End sharp, and where you suppose any Rich Mine, or
Hidden Treasure is near, place a piece of the same Metal you conceive is Hid,
or in the Earth, to the top of one of the Forks by a Hair or very fine Silk or
Thread, and do the like at the other end, pitch the sharp single end lightly in
the Ground, at the going down of the Sun, the Moon being in the Increase, and
in the Morning at Sunrise (by a Natural Sympathy) you will find the Metal
enclyning, and as it were pointing to the Place where the other is Hid.

Choice Secrets in Astrology on several Useful Occasions.
MANY have been desirous to know (as a great Secret) the Power that is given to
the Planets, and other Stars, to prevent Thefts and Depredations on Houses, Out
Houses, Orchards, Parks, Warrens, Fields of Corn, Cattle, Timber, and the like:
How either to stop and take the Thief, or scare him from coming thither, and
since Wonders have been wrought in this, to Secure Honest People in their Just
Rights, and it being hitherto an Occult Faculty, or Rare Secret, I shall give
the Reader such an Insight into the Matter, as few have hitherto done.

A safe way to secure a House.


IF you suspect your House will be Robbed, and would secure it from Thieves, as
no doubt but you are desirous, consider the Night what Planet Reigns, and is
Lord of the Ascendant, and these are their Characters, the Sun on Sunday, the
Moon on Monday, Mars on Tuesday, Mercury on Wednesday, Jupiter on Thursday,
Venus on Friday, Saturn on Saturday: Now consider on what Night you do this, as
to these Planets, and Write on fair Parchment these Characters, and suppose it
be on a Sunday, add the Planetary Character with this Number. 1. 3. 5. 1/7. and
that Night, lay this under the Earth, or covered with a Tile in the middle of
the House, as near as may be, sprinkle it over with the Juice of Night shade,
and so go to Sleep as soon as you have thrice Repeated them over, and if the
Thieves have power to Enter the House, they shall have no power to get out
again, or to carry any thing away till the Sun Rises, and if you be Watchful,
then you may easily Apprehend them before they are able to depart.

And this you may do any Day of the Week, adding the Character of the Planet
that Rules that day, as I have set it down, to what is beside set down in Order.

A Safegaurd for all Outhouses, to secure Poultry, Cattle, Corn, or what else
is shut up therein.
COnsider the Day, as in the former, and set down in a piece of Clean Parchment
these Characters, add the Character of the Planet, as for Monday and these
Figures, 9. 8. 5. 3., lay this sprinkled with the Juice of Hemlock under the
Threshold of the Out-house, or if there be none, in some secret Corner, and if
any Thieves Enter, they will be so Blinded and Amazed, that they will not find
their way out again, but groap in vain till the Sun Rise, before which time you
must be Watchful to come thither; for the Sun shooting its Beams through the
Air, the Guardian Virtues Retire, and the Force is dissolved for that time; but
with Changing the Planet will serve for the next Night, and so on.

A Safegaurd for an Orchard, Park, Warrin, or Field, to take a Thief, etc.
THE several Places being Guarded by one and the same Planet, not to be too
tedious to you, one and the same thing will indifferently serve to secure any
of them from Thieves that come to make Robbery or Depredations, whether it be
of Fruits of the Earth, or any kind of Cattle, or to steal away Timber in
Fields or Woods; to make which, take the following Direction, have a piece of
curious clean Parchment, made of a sleek Skin, Cut it with five Points or
Corners, in the Form of a Star, but so large, that you may well Write in the
Center of it, what is to be Written, viz. II the Characters of the Celestial
Signs Governing these Affairs, add the Character of the Planet for the Day, as
before Directed, and suppose it be Tuesday, Mars that Governs that Day has this
Character, which set down thus, and this Number 1. 7. 11. 12. 1/7, close it up
with Virgins Wax, as I should have told you, you ought to have done the former,
and sprinkle it with the Juice of Fumitory, and place the same (if in a Garden)
in the hole of a Wall, if in a Field, Forest, Park, or Wood, in the hole of a
Tree, having laid it before in Goose Tausey; and so whatever any Thief takes
in these several Grounds, he shall not be able to carry off till the Sun
Rising; but then if not Watched he may do it.

To drive away Ghosts or Spirits that haunt a House, and prevent the night Mare.
THis is a curious Secret, and I think never before made public, or privately
practiced, but by a few: To do this, take the wool that grows between the two
Eyes of a black Sheep, burn it to powder, after it has been steeped a night and
a day in Man's Urine, mix this with the Powder of Nightshade, or Wake Robin, an
Herb so called, boil them in a quarter of a Pint of Aqua Vitae, sprinkle the
Walls of the Chamber you fancy is Haunted with it, and no disturbance will
happen if you turn your Face when you go to repose, to the Eastward, when in
Bed, and say your Prayers.

This to be carried about One, for the prevention of Witchcraft, being under an
Ill Tongue, or Planet struck.
THese Misfortunes generally happen under the power of the Moon, who (as
Ancients hold) is the Favourour of Majeck, or Enchantment, then take the most
Opposite Planet to her, in Allaying her Force this way, which is Jupiter, Write
his Character thus on a piece of Parchment, and add to it the following
Characters, that are signs of the Zodiac, viz. and this Number, 1. 3. 7. 5. 7.
1/7. after this, set down the Number the Figurative Letters in your Name make,
wrap it up in as small a compass as you can, and sewing it up in a piece of
black silk, that has been steeped in the Juice of Veruine, hang it about your
Neck, when the Moon changes, and you will be Secure from any Danger of this
nature, if you lead a Good Life.

To prevent affrighting Dreams, and take away fear in the Night.
YOU must take Laudanum a drahm, Frankincence the like quantity, of Bezora
stone as much; beat these into powder, and write upon a piece of parchment
these Characters, and under them your Name; put the Powder in the paper you
write on, and when you Repose, bind them to your Forehead and stomach; for you
must have two papers, ordered one and the same way, as directed, putting half
the powder in the one, and the other half in the other.

To help a Person under an Ill Tongue, and make the Witch appear, or the
Effects cease.
CUT off some of the Parties hair, just at the Nape of the Neck, clip it small,
and burn it to powder, put the powder in salt-Armoniack, write the Parties Name
you suspect backwards, and put the paper dipped in Aqua-Vitoe into the other two,
then set it over a gentle Fire; let the Party afflicted sit by it, and
diligently watch it, that it run not over to catch flame, speaking no word,
what Noise soever is heard, but take Notice of what Voice or Roaring is heard
in the Chimney, or any part of the Room, and then write how often you hear it,
and fix before each writing, this Character, and if the Party who Afflicts you,
appears not visible, though you may know the Voice, repeat it again, and if she
appear in no visible shape, it may make her Charm impotent, and give Relief to
the afflicted Party.

To prevent or take Vermin, that come to destroy Poultry, or Coney warrens.
YOU must take a piece of a Woolfs skin, the Hair on, the breadth of the palm
of your hand, or somewhat more, prick a great many holes in it with a bodkin,
in the three corners, but leave the middle entire, scrape the middle part on
the fleshey side, so that it may be smooth enough to write on; then write these
Characters 2 3 4 7 5 D s L P G this done, write the Guardian Name underneath
them, viz. Azmeros, then burn the Wool of a Foxes tail, with some Featherfew,
and the Seeds of Henbane, lay the Powder on the Characters, that it may cover
them pretty well, then sold the corners, and stitch them up close with the
Powder in it; and this done, sprinkle it with the juice of Hysop, and hang it
up with a couple of Horse hairs drawn out of the middle of the Tail of a live
Stone Horse, and hang it up in your Henhouse, Dove-cot; or for a Warren, on a
Pole, or a Tree, as near as you can in the middle of the Coney Burrows, and the
Vermin will either fear to approach, scenting it at a distance, or being come
near it, will continue snuffing, and endeavoring to get at it, then you may
come and destroy them with a Gun, Dogs, Crossbow, or otherways, as you find
most practicable; instead of a Woolfs skin, you may use a Badgers, if the other
cannot be had.

To prevent a Dogs barking at you in the Night time.
YOU must take the skin off the Forehead of an Hyena, a Beast so called, which
may be had at the Furriers Shop, boil it in the Urine of a young stone Colt,
and smoke it over the burnt Hoof of a Cow, twice or thrice, till it is dry, and
so carry it about you, and so long as you do this, wherever you come in the
Night, the Dogs will not only be silent, but run away from you as fast as they
can, when you approach any thing near them: For if they once Scent it (as
certainly they will) the great aversion they have to it, will make them
tremble, and avoid you, without being able to open at you.

To draw Cats together, so that they shall not escape your Hands.
SO soon as ever the New Moon appears, gather the herb Nepe, and dry it a
little in the heat of the Sun: when it is temperately hot, then take a fair
piece of Parchment, and cut it in the shape of a half Moon, write on it these
Characters * wrap the parchment up close, and put it amongst the Herb, which
hang up in a Net, in a convenient place, and when one of them has scented it,
her Cry will soon call all those about her, that are within hearing, and there
they will rage and run about, leaping and capering, to get at the Net, which
must be so hung, or placed, that they cannot easily do: for they will certainly
tear it to pieces, and in this you will have pleasant pastime, as well as to
take and destroy them, if they are offensive to your Gardens, Houses,
Dove-Cots, etc.

A Pleaget to wear about ones Neck, to prevent Bugs, Flens, or Gnats biting in
the night time.
THis to many people may prove no less advantageous than any, especially where
these Insects are a second plague of Egypt to people: To do this, Gather
Asmart, or Hounds Tongue, an Herb with a long, sharp pointed, little Leaf that
grows in Ditches, in moist places in Summer, dry it to a powder, add to it as
much of the powder of Sarsafrax Wood, as will lie upon a Shilling, sprinkle
them a little with Juniper Water, mix it with the Wool of a black Sheep, cut
off betwixt the Horns, in the wain of the Moon, write on a piece of paper these
Characters * Sprinkle the paper when you have foulded it up, with the Juice of
Rue, and sew it up in a thin silk Bag, and with a little small Cats Guts hang
it about your Neck, when you go to sleep; and if you are awake the power is the
same: you will Rest without being disturbed with these, or other Insects.

To drive away Mice or Rats; in a House or Grainery.
IF you can get a He Weasel about the increase of the Moon, kill him, and take
out his Fat, then dry his Skin, that you may write on the fleshey side of it,
these Characters, * do it over with the Weasels Fat, and stuff up the Skin with
Moss, taken from the Root, or lower part of an Oak-Tree, and place it on a
sharp Haw-thornstick, put the sharp end into it Belly wards, and stick the
other end into the Floar, in a little hole made with a Gimblet, in the place of
their resort; let it not be placed more than six Inches above the Floar, and as
many as come there, will immediately avoid the House, or out-house; and if you
would kill them there, it is but strewing potashes on the Floar, and it will
work so powerful, that they cannot get away; but there you may kill them at
pleasure.

To prevent being Robbed on the Road, or meeting with any bad Accident.
COnisider (in this Case) what Planet you set out under, Ruling as to the days,
and its influence: The Moon ruling Monday, denotes inconstancy in Success: Mars
Tuesday, violence: Mercury on Wednesday, deceit and fraud: Saturn on Saturday,
envy, and malignaminity: But the Sun, Jupiter, and Venus, Governing Sunday,
Thursday, and Friday, are very Friendly Planets, promising Success: However,
other Days are proper enough, with the Cautions I shall give you hereafter; and
that is as follows, to prosper, and prevent Ill Fortune, it being Robbed,
Falling from your Horse, or Sick falling into any Pit, Water, or the like.

Now Note, That the Malignant Planets are friendly to others, and befriended of
them again; Sol is friendly to Jupiter, and Venus; Luna to Jupiter, Venus, and
Saturn; Mars is friendly to Venus; Mercury is friendly to Jupiter, Venus, and
Saturn; Jupiter is friendly to Sol, Luna, Mercury, Venus, and Saturn; Venus is
friendly to Sol, Luna, Mars, Mercury, and Jupiter; Saturn is friendly to
Jupiter, Sol, and Luna: And these are temporizing to hinder the Malignancy of
each other; therefore the premises considered, now as to what you are to put in
practice for your security.

Gather Veruine, an Herb so called, in the New of the Moon, hang it up in the
Chimney to dry, then powder it, and steep it in the water of Agnus Castus, then
dry it again, and reduce it to fine powder; these temporize with the Planets
Venus and Mercury, which are so powerful in their influence for the protection
of Travelers; put this Powder into a Hollow Ring, of any kind of Metal, and
have these Characters engraved on the inside of it then you may go or ride
safe, without danger of any violence, keeping your Mind on good things.

To find out a Thief, or make him or her bring back the Goods stolen.
YOU must set down the day, hour, and minute, if you can, when the Goods were
stolen, and the name of the Planet ruling the day, as I have before set down,
to direct you: This being done, set down these following Characters, in a fair
piece of Parchment * D S this done, Turn Round thrice, and if you hear no News
in 44 Hours of the Thief, as ten to one you will, then Prick the Parchment full
of Holes, and hang it up in the Chimney, where the Heat of the Fire may a
little Scorch it, and the Thief is held to be so restless in his mind, and
tormented, that he or she will discover the Theft to be at Ease, or bringing
Home the Goods, throw them privately into your House, or some place
appertaining to you.

A Pleasant Device or Stratagem to find out any Person Suspected to have Robbed
you.
IF you Suspect a Servant, or any other, not being Positive, you may first (to
Amuse them) threaten to send for the Cunning Man, to know by his Art what is
become of the Things Lost, and soon after have a Stranger come unknown to them,
and order the Pary you Suspect, with some others for Company, to come into a
Room, being Ignorant of what is Intended, then the Stranger Whelming a Kettle
very Sooty, or Black at Bottom, muttering hard Words, the Room must be made
quite Dark, then he must bid them Walk three times Round the Kettle, Hand in
Hand; then suddenly say, Lay each of you your Hand upon the Kettle, as hard as
you can, and when he that has Stole the Goods, comes to do it; for it must be
done in Turns, one after another, the Cock will Crow, and Discover him or her;
those that are Innocent will do it without Scruple, but the Guilty Person, if
he be Ignorant of the Trick, being in the Dark, will Refuse it, because it
cannot be seen whether he does it or not; and when they all say they have done
it, asking them severally over, the Party must begin to admire the Cock Crows
not, for you must not expect he will do it upon this Account unless by chance,
and say He believes the Party is not here that has Stolen the Goods, when
making all Light again, he must require to see their Hands, to be more
perfectly Instructed in the Matter, and then, by then if any of their Hands are
not Smutted, or have no Mark of Blackness, it is plain that Party has not
Touched the Kettle, and then being home Charged with the Matter, he will
doubtless Confess it, and the Reason he Declined it; by which Means you may
come by your Goods again, if they have not been so long Lost, that they are
altogether Wasted or Embezelled.

To know what Place is best to Live and Thrive in, whether one shall be Rich or
Poor, Long Life or Short, what Sickness, or Crosses shall befall one.
ONE Considerable thing has been desired by many, and that is to know the
Places where they may Thrive best, or the Employments Destined by the Heavenly
Constellations, whereby they may best Thrive in the World: This is to be
considered by the Constellation, or Planet the Party is Born under, and the
Sign in which at that time it is, which gives the Influence in Affairs of Life;
and Note that the Moon passes through the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac in 28
Days, some odd Hours, and Minutes; and by Observing the Birth whilst she is in
these several Signs, the following Conjactures are to be made.

If in Aries, or Taurus, thus Charactered, the Party shall Thrive best in
Inland Countries, Manageing Rural Affairs, as Breeding Cattle, Tilling Ground,
Planting Fruit Trees, leading a happy contented Life, amidst great Plenty and
Increase, and Live to a good Old Age, have many Children.

If the Moon be in Gemini at the Nativity, thus Charactered then shall there be
great Advantages by Marriages, and in populous Towns or Citys is the best place
of Living, Dealing in Crafts, or Working in Manufactures; but Sickness will
happen, and a Vigorous Old Age hardly be Obtained.

If the Moon be in Cancer, thus Charactered the Party shall deal in Minerals to
Thrive best, or Silver, Brass, Copper, Tin, Lead, or Iron, and Gain much by the
Crafts and Trades they are properly used in, Working in Fire, or else Profess
Chemistry, or Alchymy, and Citys or other Great Places of Trafick, are the best
to Settle in for Thriveing, and growing Rich, though at first the Party will
not fail to meet with some Misfortunes, and Disencouragements; however be not
Disheartened, they will Blow over, and a more Prosperous Sceen appear; yet will
the Party Born so be troubled with Hot Diseases, as Feavours, continual
Intermiting Feavours, Epylepsies, Fluxes, etc.

If the Moon be in Leo, when the Nativity happens, it is thus Charactered it
betokens the Party Stout, Generous, and Born to great Fortune, Rising by the
Favor of Princes, and Great Men. If a Male, Heroic and Valiant Actions shall
get him Fame and Renown; if a Female, she shall have Honorable Marriages; but
neither of their Lives are promised to continue to Old Age, by reason they will
be of a dry fiery Constitution; the most Thriveing Place to Live in, will be
near Princes Courts, the Houses of Great Men in populous Towns or Citys, or
Traveling in Foreign Countries to get Fame and Riches.

If the Moon be in Virgo, at the time of the Nativity, it denotes the Man or
Woman shall be loving, affable, and of a winning Behavior, gaining the Love of
all, have Increase of beautiful Children, though to Women, it denotes Pains and
Perril in Childbirth: The best way to Thrive is by Manual Occupation,
Manufactures in Linen, Woollen, and the like; but they will be troubled with
Phlegmatic Diseases, as Colds, Coughs, Consumption, Dropseys, Rheumatisms, and
the like; coveting a Country Life, where it is Allotted for Persons Born under
this Caelestial Sign, and Dominion of the Moon, best to Thrive; however they
shall Live long, but get no great store of Wealth: This Sign is thus
Charactered,

If the Nativity fall in the Moons Ingress to Libra, thus Charactered the Party
shall best Thrive in Citys, or Towns, by Selling Trades, or Merchantdize,
dealing much in Wares, and growing Rich thereby, of a temporate moderate
Constitution, not over scraping, or Covetuous of Riches, though much Plenty
shall be gotten by Industry; the Diseases that attend such Persons, shall be
indifferently mixed, some times Hot, at other times Cold; and they are promised
mostly to see a middle Age, with Comfort of many Children.

If the Nativity falls out when the Moon is in the Sign Scorpio, thus
Charactered the Party shall have but an indifferent Being, forced to move from
Place to Place, by reason of Malicious Enemies, and be in Danger to Dye at last
by Poison, or some Malignant Infection.

If the Moon be in Sagittarius, thus Charactered near Woods and Forests is the
properest Place to Live in, the Party shall be much delighted in Hunting,
Shooting, be very Hardy, Dexterous, and Ingenious in Understanding, and the
Trust Reposed, whereby the Party shall gain Favor, and be Advanced, either in
Service or Marriage; but in the end shall be in danger of Life, if not Dye of
some Wound gotten in a Quarrel, or Privately given by a Treacherous Enemy, or
Furious Beast.

If the Moon Cast the Nativity of a Person in Capricorn, the Person shall be
given much to Lustful Desires; it is thus Charactered delighting in Rural
Affairs, yet subject to Remove often from Place to Place, and not long
Contented with any fixed Abode, however disappointments happening at the first,
the End shall be more Favorable, and Fortutunate by Marriage, though no great
store of Children; yet Hot and Dry Diseases will much Afflict the Party, and
extreme Old Age is not promised him or her Born under this Influence.

If the Moon be in the Signs Aquarius, or Pisces, thus Charactered it denotes
the Party to be of an Unstable, Roving Mind, yet very Industrious, given to the
desire of Travel, and to Marine Affairs, Thriveing best by Merchantdize, and
delighting in Seaport Towns, and Places near Great Waters, most commonly
Successful, gaining great Riches; but of a phlegmatic Constitution, subject to
Agnes, Dropseys, and other Distempers, occasioned by Cold and Moisture, but has
a promise of long Life, though not over Fruitful in Children.

And thus may many other things be Conjectured, or Gathered from this, that I
have not set down: And to be Informed when the Moon is in any of these Signs,
and Predominant to compare it with the time of Birth, for the more assurance of
its Influence, it may (upon first view) be found in many Common Almanacks, each
Sign Governing a Solar Month, of which there are but Twelve to the Year, though
of Lunar Months Thirteen.

How to Resolve all Lawful Questions, Relating to Marriage, Friendship,
Journying, Life Long, or Short, Business, Success, or any others truly stated.
TO be informed in curious Questions, better than if you go to those that
Imprudently are called by the Vulgar, Cunning-men, I shall put you into such a
Method, as you will be Enabled to do it your self, without Trouble or Expense
of money, or being Scared or Affrighted with their pretended Conjuration, being
the same Rule they take, to make their Guesses, and Conjectures, which often
hit Right: The Planets and other Stars Considered in their Proper Motion,
Positions, Oppositions, and Conjunctions; for so they have a great Influence on
Earthly Things, and over the Action of Men, to Dispose and Order them in their
Affairs, and Moderate many Matters that would other ways be Violent and
Destructive.

In Order to this I have Erected a Scheme, and when you would consider any
Question, to know it, first view well this Scheme Erected, and Calculated for
the Resolving all Lawful Questions, Mark how the Signs and Planets are Posited
in their Government of the Celestial Houses, and then the Figures in the
Square.



To understand this the better, take in the Number of the Day of the month, and
Mark what Planet Rules that Day you state your Question to be Resolved, and
these are their Characters, as to the Governing the Days of the Week, as you
find in the Angles or Houses of the Scheme Erected, on Sunday Governs, on
monday, on Tuesday, on Wednesday, on Thursday, on Friday, on Saturday, this
being Noted, pitch upon any Number that exceeds not 30, add to it the Number of
the Day of the month, and the Letter that begins your Name, if it be a Figure,
if it be not, it stands but for 1. then gather the Number thought on, and the
Number of the Day of the month, with that of your Name Letter, into one Sum,
and divide it by 30, and then if you find what Remains in the upper part of the
Square, in the Figures placed, there assure your self of Good Luck, but if it
fall out in the under part, it promises but an Indifferency of Fortune.

As for Example, you would be certified whether you shall have the Party you
are in Love withal, and desire to marry, take the Number of the first Letter of
your Name, and the Number of the Planet that Governs the Day you enquire,
reckoning from Sunday, as to the Days of the Week, till Saturday, in order, and
then divide them by 30, and if it appears in the upper part, it promises you
Success in what you desire to know; but if in the under part of the Table, you
will be Crossed in your Expectation: If there Remains neither under nor over,
it Remains in the Blank Houses of the Scheme, where neither Good nor Bad
Fortune is signified; then being put off with a Blank, you must think again,
and proceed in the same order, till it comes up to a Figure or Sum, over or
under; that is, as you find it above or below in the Table; and upon this Rule
depend all Questions that can reasonably be thought on to be Demanded.

As Success in Love Affairs, Portions, great or small, Law suits, Absence of
Friends, whether Dead or Alive, or when Return, if ever, whether you shall gain
the Preferment you desire, whether you shall escape Sickness or not, also in
Wagers, Combats, Children, Childbirth, overcoming Troubles, good or bad
Debts, true Friendship, News, or storys, true or false; if a thing stolen be
Recoverable or not; and indeed what ever your Occasion requires, as to Worldly
Matters; which for Brevitys sake, I here forbear to Innumerate, as being too
many, and too tedious to set down in all their particulars.

What Diseases in the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children, are more Immediately
caused by the Influence of the seven Planets, with Astrological Remarks as to
their Cure.
SAturn Reigning, causes Cold Diseases, as the Gout, Leprofy, Palsy Quartan
Agues, Dropsys, Catarrhs, Coughs, Rheumatisms, etc.

Jupiter causes Cramps, Numbness, Inflammations of the Liver, Head Aches, Pains
in the shoulders, Windyness in the Body, Sanguin Feavours; and all Diseases
caused of Putrefaction, the Appoplexy, Caxidiac Passions, Squincyes, etc.

Mars causes Acute Feavours, and Tertian Agues, continual Intermiting Feavours,
Impostumes, Erisipelas, Carbuncles, Fistulas, Bloody Flux, and such like hot
and dry Diseases.

Sol causes Rheums in the Eyes, Coldness in the stomach and Liver, swooning,
Chollar, Catarrhs, Pustles in the matrix, and the like in the Lower Parts.

Venus causes scabs, and Venerial Diseases, Lientery suffocations in the Womb,
sickness in the stomach, from Cold and Moist Causes, Infirmitys of the Liver
and Lungs, etc.

Mercury causes Hoarsness, and Distempers in the Senses, Impediments in speech,
and its passions, Falling sickness, Goughs, Jaundice, Vomiting, Catarrhs, etc.

The moon causes Palsy, Chollick, the Whites, Dropsey, phlegmatic,
Impostumes, Dissenteries, and all Diseases coming from Obstructions in the
Veins.

Now having given you a sight of what Diseases the Influence bring upon the
Bodies of Men and Women, it is their Business to consider under what particular
Planet each Individual was Born, which may be known several ways, treated on in
this Book; and therefore I need not here give further Instructions as to that
particular, but come to more general Terms, to know how the Bodies ought to be
ordered, to prevent these Diseases, and herein (as one main Expedient) I
recommend Temperance, moderate Bleeding, and purging in seasonable times, when
a Friendly Planet, Opposite to the Malignancy of the planet you was Born under,
has Dominion, which will much abate the Effect of their Influence, and give
Nature a Power to Oppose the Malevolency, which (if well heeded) may be a main
prevention of Dangerous sickness.

Observe also to gather all your Physical Herbs in the Hour of the Friendly
planet, that temperizes with that you are Born under, and in so doing they will
have more Strength, Power, and Virtue to Opporate in the Medicines; but neither
physic nor Bleed on the 3d. of January, the 1st. of July, the 2d of October,
the last day of April, the first of August, and the last; for Astrologers (with
whom Physicians join) conclude Perilous, by reason of the bad Influence then
Reigning; and if it change not the Distemper into another Worse, it will
Augment it, and put the Party in great Danger of Death; if he or she in this
Case be not so Luckey to escape it.

The Urinall Doctor, or Astrological and physical Observations, on Casting
Urine, Relating to Health or sickness, with Cautions to prevent threatened
Evils.
CAsting of Urine is now become a great Trade, and many People much Rely upon
it, to know the Constitution of their Bodies, as to sickness or health, and
though there is something in it, yet they many times go to Ignorant Pretenders,
who will take their Money, and tell them a plausible story, though they know
nothing of the Matter; therefore among these many useful things, I shall give
the Reader an Insight to know it himself,, and in this very one thing, save him
or her the money, this whole Book fraught with so many Rarities will Cost them.

First, Then if the Urine be Red, it signifies the Blood is Heated, and you
must either Bleed, or Allay that Heat with Cooling things, to prevent sickness.

2d. The Urine White, shows Rawness, and phlegmatic Indigestions in the
stomach, which must be Remedyed by Gentle purges, to Cleanse it, and Restore
lost Appetite.

3d. Thick and Muddy Urine betokens the Body surfeited, by over Heating in
Labor, Walking, or other Exercise, or by excessive Drinking; and then to
prevent a Fevour, take Cooling Cordials.

4th. A White and Red Settling, Gravelly, or sandy in the Urine, betokens the
stone, beginning to putrify in the Reins or Bladder; Drink to prevent it the
Juice of parsley in Rhenish or White Wine.

5th. A clear Perspicuous or Transparent Urine, shows a good Concoction, and
perfect Digestion, and withal a Healthful Constitution.

6th. Bloody spots in Urine, denotes an Ulceration in the Reins, or Neck of the
Bladder.

7th. The Urine Blackish, shows much a Dust, melancholy, and fore-runs some
Violent Disease, that often brings Death, or a Long Tedious Sickness.

8th. The Urine Clammy-and Sweet, denotes a Consumption of the Internal parts,
by bad Digestion.

9th. Urine of a Lead Color, signifies the Body to be in an Ill Habit (and
threatens Death) without speedy Remedys Applied.

10th. Urine that has Yellow sparkles, or sediment in it shows Choler has the
Predominancy, and much Afflicts the Body, threatens Feavours, and other hot
Diseases; and by these kinds you may perfectly learn the state of the Body, as
to Health or Sickness, present or approaching, for the Urine passing through
those parts where the Distempers are Generating, carry a Tincture along with it
of the Humors Predominant, that is Increasing or Propagating the Disease, or
on the contrary shows a healthful Constitution, though few are so Skilful to
descern it, which puts me in mind of a pleasant Story, viz. A Woman whose
Husband had a Bruise by a fall down Stairs, carried his Urine to a Urine
Casting Doctor, who pretended likewise to be a Conjurer; he (after shaking)
seeing little specks of Blood Float in it, had so much Understanding to tell
her the Party had Received some Internal Hurt; the Woman agreed to this as
Truth, but demanding by what means he came by it; upon this he erected his
Scheme, and in the mean time asked her so many Questions, that by the drift of
her Discourse, he gathered he had Tumbled down Stairs; the Woman not minding
well what she had said (in the Consternation she was in at the hard Words he
uttered) supposing he was Conjuring up the Devil to be Resolved in the Matter,
told her her own Words again in a different Style; the Woman acknowledged it
True, with some Admiration, but desired to know how many Pair of Stairs he
might fall down (she had told him before where she Lived) and he considering
the place consisted mostly of Low Buildings, answered, Two Pair; nay now (said
she) you are out in your Art, he fell Three Story I Will promise; this put our
Doctor to his Trumps, when having Mused a while for an Excuse, he shook the
Urinal again, and asked her if there was all the Water her Husband made, No
(Replied she) I spilt a little in pouring it in: O hoe, did you so? (said he)
why, that Woman is the business, that made me Mistake, for there went away the
other Pair of Stairs in the Urine you spilt.

Cautions against much Bleeding, and Physicking, and what necessary Rules are
to be taken to supply the Defect.
THough I have often in this Book set down Rules for Health, and particularly
Blood Letting, with the Times and Seaesons proper (since Health is the Rarest
Jewel of Life) yet for once let me give a Caution, that none by Ignorance, or
too much Forwardness, instead of Preserving, Prejudice their Health.

Though Physical Medicines are properly Good in their Order, and helpful to
Nature, whose Handmaid they are, to help her expel any Noxious Humor that may
produce a Virulent Distemper, yet over-doing may be more Injurious than under
doing; therefore my Advice is, that none do Accustom themselves overmuch to
Purging Medicines, or Blood-letting, except without them there will be some
great Prejudice, or Defect in Nature; for when once the Body is often
accustomed to them, they will be worse if it be not continued, which by often
Repitition, must waste the Vital Spirits, as well as they carry off the bad
Humors.

Therefore choose rather to take such apt things as are proper to keep the Body
open, and a wholesome moderate Diet.

Bread and Butter strewed with Rosemary, Sage, Rue, or Scurvygrass, is an
excellent preservative of Health, and in the Spring, or at other Convenient
Seasons, Pottage, with Clivers, Water-crosses, Elderbuds, Nettle-tops,
Brooklime, Smallage, and such like cooling and moderate refreshing Herbs, are
great Refreshers of Nature, gently Cooling and Purging the Blood, and keep off
Sickness for a long Season, though the Bodies of Men and Women have before been
Accustomed to them; but above all things be Temperate in Eating and Drinking,
Moderate-in Labor and Exercise, for these are main Contributers to Health; and
indeed we need not be beholding to Outlandish Drugs, if we rightly consider we
have sufficient of our own, and that God in his Goodness has so Ordered it,
that Nature in every place produces Remedys, suitable to the Diseases of the
Climate.

How to Diet, and Order our Bodies, for the preservation of Health, for every
Month in the Year; the most Approved Rules.
IT will (among these useful things) be highly Necessary to speak something of
the Ordering of Man's Body, during the Circle of the Year, under the several
signs and planets that Govern them, and dispose to Health or Sickness, more at
one time than another: The first part of the Year, that is from the 25th. of
December, till the 25th. of March, is under Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces,
Signs partly Moist, and partly Dry; and those born under them, are subject to
Diseases of that Nature: Therefore from

DECEMBER to the end of the Month.
Take wholesome Diet, and neither Eat nor Drink Immoderately, for fear of
Fluxes, Rhumatisms, Catarrhs, or Husky Dry Coughs, that Waste and Consume the
Lungs; let not Blood, unless in great Necessity, then do it Moderately, and
keep very Warm; rather Bleed often, if Necessity require it, than two much at
once, left the Veins filling with Cold Air, cause dangerous Diseases, and in
this, as in all the following Months, take Care not to Bleed nor purge on the
Unfortunate Days, which are set down in this Book, properly for every Month;
let your purgings be Gentle, and take great Care of Catching Cold.

In JANUARY.
If the Weather be open (Necessity requiring it) Bleed Moderately, as in the
former Month; but if hard Frosts set in, forbear it if possible, and Cheer up
your Spirits with Wine, and Cordials; but not to any Excess, taking them (for
the most part) in a Morning Fasting, and be Temperate in Diet, with Moderate
purgations, if Necessity require it, and so shall you (with God's Blessing)
prevent and escape Sickness, observing the Critical Days.

In FEBRUARY.
You may this Month, if there be no hard Frosts, be more bolder in bleeding than
before, but not over much; purge gently, with purging Ales, and other purging
Drinks; and in the Morning Fasting Eat warm Broaths, into which such wholesome
Herbs as the Season affords have been shred, which will purify the Blood,
Cooling and Refreshing the Body, to prepare it for a Healthful Constitution in
the Spring, and keeping off such Diseases, as then are Rife Abroad.

In MARCH.
This Month brings in the Vernal Equinox, and from the 25th. of this Month to
the 24th. of June the Signs Arises, Taurus, and Gemini, Govern, and Produce
Moist and Hot Diseases, as Agues, Fevours, Dropseys, Dissenterys, Fluxes, and
the like: In this Month therefore, to keep your Body in good Condition,
throughout the Quarter: bleed freely, if you are of a Sanguin Complexion, and
the Veins full of Blood, having moderately purged 3 or 4 Days before, to stir
the Humors, that the more Gross and Noxious may the better be carried off; and
for a Week after take a Drink, about a Quarter of a Pint in a Morning Warm,
made of Figgs, Rasins, Liquorish, and a little Cardus, Boiled in Ale, and
strained well; so you will prevent Agues, and Fevours, and other Diseases
incident to this Month.

In APRIL.
This is the most proper Month to bleed and purge in, but do it when the Air is
Dry and Serene, so shall Headaches, pains in the Eyes, sore Throats, and
Diziness, with their Concomitants, be prevented; Eat Wholesome Warm broths, but
not too much of Raw Herbs; lest you are Afficted with pains in the stomach, and
in bleeding, purging, and other weighty Matters; observe to avoid the Bad Days
that are Perilous to Health and Business; as I before have set down.

In MAY.
In this Month Walk abroad Eatly in the Fields, for your Health sake, but not
Fasting, nor upon too full a Stomach; bleed as you see Occasion, if you have
not been Blooded in the foregoing Month; Eat wholesome Warm Meats, pretty
freely; and if the Weather be Seasonably Warm, Bath in Clear Water, but if your
Health permit not, then you may do it in Warm Water at Home, in which Mallows,
Chamomil, and Groundsil have been Boiled, and it will much refresh and
strengthen the Body; purge with Senna, Rhuburb, or such like Harmless
Refreshing purgations, to Cleanse the stomach, Liver and Lungs; and so prevent
Distempers in the Hotter Season; Eat not Raw Trash, for fear of a Fiux, or
pains in the bowels, keep to a wholesome Diet, and take such Cordials Fasting,
as may strengthen the Heart, and keep out pestilential Infectious Aires, etc.

In JUNE.
In this Month be sparing of Blood Letting, unless it be upon urgent Necessity,
now Drink purging Waters (Morning and Evening) to Cleanse the stomach and
bowels, and keep the body Cool and Temperate; but Drink not Hot Liquors upon
it, lest the two struggling Opposits throw you into a Fevour, or surfeit, or
cause breakings Out, with troublesome sores, be Temperate in Meats and Drinks.

In JULY.
Refrain this Month from any Violent Exercise, because the Humors are much
stired, and the Blood is apt to be put into a Ferment; Bleed not but upon great
Necessity; Bath often, and Rise Early in the Morning to take the Fresh Air; but
be not much Abroad in the Heat of the Day, Eat Cooling Things, but not over
much.

In AUGUST.
Bleed not this Month, because of the Canicular, or Dog Days, unless Necessity
Urge it, and then but a little; forbear Eating-much Green Herbs or Fruits,
Drink Cooling, Purging Waters, Ales, or such Liquors in the Morning, and Sleep
not over much, and forbear Purging till the next Month.

In SEPTEMBER.
I should have told you (according to my Method) that from the 24th. of June,
to the 26th. of this Month, that the Signs Cancer, Leo, and Virgo, are
Predominant, which are Hot and Dry, and suitable Diseases attend them, as the
Small Pox, Fevours, Squincys, Spotted Fevours; and some times the Plague:
Therefore it is proper to be very Cautious, as I have Hinted, in temperate
Diet, bleeding, Physicking, and the like; however, you may Eat (this Month)
Cooling Fruits, yet with Moderation; now purge, and bleed, that the body
(Evacuated so of bad Humors) may be the better Enabled to hold out against
Winter Diseases, as Dropsy, Palsy, Falling Evil, and sometimes Phransy, and
other Defects in the Head and brain; Sweat Moderately, and Walk much when the
Weather is Fair. The Signs that Rule from the 25th. of This Month, the rest of
the Year not already mentioned, are Libra, Scorpio, and Sagitarius, and they
are Cold, Moist, and Dry; their Attendant Distempers are Dropsys, Rheumatisms,
Colds, Catarrhs, Coughs, Defects in the Lungs, and Affliction of the brain,
also of the Nerves and Sinews, Pains in the Joints, etc.

In OCTOBER.
Drink Cordials (Fasting in the Morning) or good Wine, Eat Temperately; forbear
bleeding, unless some Uneasiness in your Body obliege you to it, and then do it
on the Luckey Days, when the Sign is well Posited, that is neither in the Head,
Neck, Shoulder, nor Arms; Eat wholesome Diet, and be not Late Abroad in Foggy
Unhealthy Aires.

In NOVEMBER.
Go not Abroad if you can help it, in Wet Drisling Days or Nights; bleed not
but for Necessity, and then but a little; for the blood and Humors are
necessary to Fortify the Body against the ensuing Colds; Eat Seasonably, and
Temporately, and avoid being Abroad in Foggy Mornings, above all things Hurtful
to the Lungs.

In DECEMBER to the 25th. of the Month.
Take care to keep good Fires, and wholesome Diet; bleed not at all, take
Caudles, strengthening broaths, and Cheer your Heart with a Glass of Wine,
Humming Ale, Beer, or Cider, or any good Warm Refreshing Liquor, as you can
come by it: Forbear much going Abroad, unless in a Clear Day, when the Foggs
and Damps are sucked up, or dispersed by the Sun, especially if you be not of a
very Healthful Constitution; and thus you may (in a great measure) keep your
self free from all Griefs, and Sickness, and preserve a Healthful Constitution,
to extreme Old Age, as in the following Lines are Discribed by the Poet;

Nature is Kind, if we her Rules Obey,
And stubbornly don't throw our Health away,
It Is Life's Chief Jewel, yet we many find,
When they Possess it, do it little mind:
But when it is gone, O what they then would give,
That Temporately they had been Wise to Live.
Of BEES.
A Treatise of Bees, how to Order, Preserve, Swarm, Gather their Honey, and all
other Matters Relating to them.
THE Be though a Creature Numbered among Insects, is exceeding useful to Man,
their Wax and Honey being Commodities, Trafficable in all Nations; yet are they
a Nice, Choice Creature, and without much Diligence and Care, cannot be
brought to any extraordinary Perfection, to the Profit and Advantage of the
Owners, which being proper to this Undertaking (for the general good) I shall
for the Instruction of those that are Ignorant in it, lay down Choice Rules and
Directions how they should be Ordered, to Preserve and Increase their Stocks,
that so in a little time they may turn to the great Profit of the Owners.

First, In the Choice of your Stock, see they be Little, Lively, and Smooth;
for those that are Rough and Unsightly will never prove well; above all, if you
can see the Master Be, or King, consider if he be Long and Shining, bedashed
with Golden Spots, and Cheerful; for on him mainly depends the Welfare of the
whole Stock; for if he be Rough, Drooping, and Sluggish, the Rest will be
Discouraged, Loyter, and never Work Cheerfully to fill their Combs.

Secondly, Observe the Swarm be Whole and Great, which you may know by looking
into the Hive, or observing great Numbers, clustering about the Mouth of it;
but if this way fail, put your Mouth to the Mouth of the Hive, and Blow in, and
if you are Answered by a great Humming Noise, then it is a Full. stock; but
with a Little Faint one, then but a Weak Thin stock.

Thirdly, Beware how you Transport them far, for the Change of the Air
frequently Incommodes them; and if you cannot avoid this, to Remedy it, place
the Hives on convenient Stools, in pleasant Gardens, or scatter sweet smelling,
and wholesome Herbs, and Flowers, about their Hives, in Removing, beware of
Josling, for that Disorders their Combs, and puts them so out of Humor, that
they will scarcely stay where you place them, to carry them in Sheets on Poles,
cross Men's shoulders, is the easiest way; the best time to Remove them is in
April, and let the place you Remove them to, be as like that in Situation you
Removed them from, as may be; and upon a Remove, open them not in the Day time,
that so Resting in the Night, they may settle themselves, and finding their
Hive open the next Morning go the quieter to Work: However, for two or three
Days observe them, that finding themselves in a strange Place, they take not
Wing, and leave you; for if they go all Out of the Hive, it is an Ill sign they
are gadding.

Fourthly, In placing your Bees, observe it be so, that in Winter and Spring,
the Face of the Hives they are to come out at, may stand to the Rising Sun; and
so order the Matter, that in Winter they be not exposed to too much Cold; nor
in Summer to too much Heat, place them (above all things) in a Wholesome Air,
where such Plants, Herbs, and Flowers are Growing near, as best agree with
them; as Time, Cassa, Rosemary, Wild Marjarum, Wild Time, Saffron, bean
Flowers, Mellilot, Poppys, Roses, etc. As for Yew Cornel, Sprig-lawrel,
Cucumbers, Goards, Elins, and all bitter Herbs and Flowers are Enemies to them.

Fifthly, They Thrive better on Rising Ground, where the Air is free and open,
than in close Valleys, yet love to be near Springs of purling Waters, that are
not deep, and in such places where they Sip, throw in Spray Wood, that they may
lie above the Water; so that if they chance to drop in, they may get out again
by that help.

Sixthly, Place their Hives in three Ranks, standing a Yard one above the
other, and keep from them as much as may be, all hurtful Creatures, that
Destroy the Bees, or Spoil their Honey; as Red-brests, Toads, Wood-peckers,
Moths, Hornets, Lizards, Swallows, Spiders, Sparrows, butter-flys, Snakes,
Snailes, Wasps, and the like; and so profitable are these little Creatures,
that if it be a seasonable Spring and Summer, their Honey may he taken three
times a Year, as in some Countries it is frequently observed, viz. The latter
end in May, the end of July, and the beginning of september; but to leave them
a Winter Supply, the best is only to take it in May and August, for then they
Rest, and Live upon part of what they got in Summer; and if they Want, you must
be compelled to Feed them, by putting gingerly in little hollow Canes or Kexes,
shivered like Troughs, filled with Honey or sugar, and Water Boiled together,
or they will Perish (ever they can get out to Work again) for want of Food; you
may also put in for their Food, bruised Raisons, Figgs, Currants, or any Sweets
that are Wholesome in Taste and Scent: If the Weather be open, after the 10th.
of March, you may let them Abroad, then will they Frame New Combs; and that
done, begin to Breed, then they Labor hard for their Honey.

Seventhly, If the Hive, by reason of the Young Brood, be overcharged, which
is perceived by their Clustering about the Mouth of it, and the great Humming
Noise within; prepare New Hives, rubed with sweet herbs, and Watch the coming
forth of the Young Fry, from 8 to 12 in the Morning, lest they take Wing, and
be gone; and if they refuse to come forth, with the Fume of Galbanum, you may
Drive the whole stock; and if they have two Kings, they will settle separate
from each other, and so Hive each by themselves; or if the stock be Decayed,
you may Incorporate two hives in one, if you Kill one of the Master Bees, else
there will be continual Wars, till they Consume one another: If at any time you
see them draw out to Flight, it is but casting up some Dust among them, and the
Fray will end.

Ninthly, To know when the Combs are full, Watch if they Drive out the Drones,
which is a sign, and soon after you will see them Playing about the hive,
Rejoicing and Neglecting their Work; but in no wise take the Combs before full,
for that Displeases the Bees.

The Warreners Instructor; or a Treatise of Coneys, their Ordering to Preserve,
and Increase them, Diseases, and Remedys.
SInce many times (in Coney Warrens) many Misfortunes happen to that little
Creature so useful to Man, I shall (in this Useful Book) set down what must
needs be grateful to such as have the Care of them, that their Wool may be
good, they Breed kindly, and abundantly, be Fat, and preserved from the
Diseases Incident to them, which generally are but two kinds, viz. Rot and
Madness.

To preserve them then in the Frosty winter, when the Snow lies much on the
Ground, and they cannot well come at the Grass, or any Herbs, to sustain them,
provide your self well with the Sprigs of Birch, Oak, and Hazle, to scatter in
the Warren; for this Bark, before the Sap be much gone out of it, is the best,
not only to feed them in some degree, but proves Physical and binding, to keep
them from watery Distempers, making them also thrive, by giving them an Appetite
to such other food, as they can get, Turnit Tops, Peashame, with dried Pease in
the pods, and sprinkling of Parsley is Exceeding good for them; for in the
sharpest time of Winter, when least is to be got, they feed best, and the
reason is; because then the Frost biting the Foggy Grass, makes it sweeter, and
more pleasant to them, than at other times, besides the sharpness of the Air
whets their Appetites.

In their Increase they are abundant, bringing forth their Young once every
Month, usually Three or Four at a time, and sometimes more; for as soon as the
Do is Disburthened, she presently takes Buck again, and when she has Kindled,
conceals her Young from the Buck, as secretly as she can, lest he should
destroy them, which, when they are very Young he is apt to do, but so soon as
they can run about, they are out of that danger; I need not tell you what
profit their Furs, and flesh, bring to man, every one (in a manner) knowing
there is great advantage by it; they are on all hands concluded to be creatures
of much hardiness, but not long Lived, they much delight to Earth themselves in
a Loamy Ground, mixed with Sand; so that it is very well binding, and no
Springs in it to hinder their working or earthing themselves, for wet is a
great enemy to them, and moist Burrows, with their Dampness, or Mustiness,
cause the Rot amongst them, which soon thins the Warren, by sweeping them away
in great Numbers, though, in a Clay mixed with a little Gravel, Exempted from
such Wet or Dampness, they thrive best, and are the Largest, and Fullest; fine
short sweet Hay, in Winter, laid near the mouths of their Holes, is a great
comfort to them, both to preserve them from Diseases, by drying up the over
much moisture they contract, and making them feed the better, so Exempted from
Sickness: The cause of Madness is caused by wind and wet, which getting in
great quantity into the porous parts of the Body, arises by Vapors, to the
Brain, and causes a Frenzy, or Madness in the Creature, which is known by its
tumbling and rolling about, when out of the Burrow, and particularly tumbling
over its Head, and bouncing about in an unusual posture: and this Kills many of
them; therefore, when this Sign appears, apply the following Remedy, and the
Distemper will cease.

A Cure for Madness in Coneys.
TAke Sweet Hay, cut it a little, but not too short, let it be as dry as
possibly you can get it, mix with it Hare-Thistle, an Herb so called, and
scatter a little fine dry Bran amongst it, and lay it near their Burrows, if it
be in Winter, Snowey weather, sweep the Ground clean where you lay it, or put
it into the mouth of the Burrows lightly, so as not to stop them up, that they
may come to it without coming abroad to Expose themselves to the Cold Air, and
this will restore them from this Distemper.

A Cure for the Rot in Coneys.
THe other Disease Incident to these Creatures, is the Rot, the more dangerous
of the two, because it sweeps more fatally: This comes when it is very Moist
and Rainey, in the Spring or Autumn; for then much water hanging on the Grass
(in their feeding) they suck it in, which softening their Flesh with a kind of
a Dropsical Watery Humor, which also gets between the Skin and the Flesh,
putrefying the Liver, etc. and so causes them to dye of the Rot; to Remedy
this, give them Parsley, dried Hay, and Hare-Thistle, lay warm Litter near
their Holes, with Boughs over it to shelter themselves in at pleasure, against
the wet and fogs, or moist winds, etc. and renew it as often as it grows wet or
musty; and when the Snow lies on the ground, Shovel and sweep it from their
Burrows, that they may come at the Grass: And thus have I briefly showed you
how to manage these profitable Creatures, to keep them in good case, cause them
to Breed well, and to be free from the sickness incident to them; which cannot
but prove profitable to one or other of my Readers, though not to all.

To keep and order Hares in Warrens, or Tame them in all respects as the Coney.
AS for Hares, if kept Tame, or in Warrens, they may be ordered in all respects
as the Coney, they being much of the same nature, and their Diseases the same;
but seeing many are desirous to find them wild in the Fields for their Sport,
and advantage of getting them, and are Ignorant of their haunts, and there
forms, whereby they lose much labor in a fruitless fearch, and are often
disappointed, I thought in convenient to say something as to this particular, a
thing desired of me by so many.

When you go about to find a Hare, that you may not lose your Labor, but be
more certain in the Event; If you attempt to do it, go not into the thickest of
the Cover, but to be more certain, beat the Bushey close, or Shruby Ground
Adjacent: For if you should find a Hare in a close Woody Cover, you will hardly
bring her out to show you Sport, and consequently lose her; but if you find her
in the Shrubs, she will, when Started, or Chased, immediately take to the
Champion ground, because a Hare naturally delights not in Cover, till she is
tired, and therefore the Champion grounds are the most likely places to find
them, and Run them down; and in such grounds resort to the Goss, Brakes, low
Brambles, or Broom; and if they afford no such shelter, repair to the Stubble
at the beginning of Hunting time, and about Christmas to the Fallows, and in
March to the Green Corn, and in these places the best Hares haunt, and are
usually to be found, and many times you may find a Form when the Hare is
absent, or gone abroad a feeding, and if you would know whether she haunts it,
or has left it, take these Directions.

To know the New or Old Form, whether Retained by a Hare or left, her Shifts,
etc.
THis is a main point to be Discovered, therefore mark in your search very
narrowly the following Directions, to know if it be New or Old, observe if the
form or seat be plain and smooth, the Pad before it flat and worn, and the
Pricks of her feet so New and Plain to be discovered, that the Earth appears
black, or so Newly broken, that the Hare cannot be long gone, then the Form is
new, she is not far from it, nor will delay long returning, unless frighted
away by some Accident; but the contrary appearing, it is old, and if you expect
any advantage by it, you will in all likelihood lose your labor; and another
thing is worthy of Remark, and that is, the Hare has diverse Slights and Shifts
to avoid pursuit, as her Windings and Doublings, you must also, when she is
pursued, observe her Leaps and Skips, before she Squats, and beat the places
most likely to give her shelter, for being reduced to these hard shifts, she is
tired, come, to her last cast, and can hold out but a little longer for she
never uses them till she finds her strength so failing her, that she grows
heartless, and has but this way to hope avoiding the pursuers.

To know whether a Coney or Rabit be Old or Young, or New or Stale Killed, etc.
THis is a Nice point, and many have been deceived in it, and therefore having
treated of these Creatures in other matters, this as very useful, will be
convenient enough to set down in the close of it.

If a Coney be old, her Claws are very long and rough, and long greyish hairs
will stand out amongst the wool; but young, and a right Coney or Rabit, it will
have a small gristly knot on the out side of the Foot, a little above the
Joint, the Claws middleing and smooth, and no gray hairs appearing; pinch the
inside of the Belly, and it will break tender, but if it be old, in pinching it
will be tough and ruckle up.

If stale killed, it will be limber, the Skin taken off, the Flesh look
blueish, and have a kind of a slime upon it; but if new killed it will be
stiff, and the Flesh white and dry.

To know whether a Hare be old or young, new or stale killed, and whether a
Hare or Leveret?
A Hare if New and Clean Killed, will have the Flesh of it White and Stiff, but
if Stale, in many places will be Blackish and Limber, if the Cleft of her Lips
spread much, and her Claws be blunt, and ragged, she is Old, but if the
contrary appears, then is she Young.

As for the Leveret, as to her being New or Stale Killed, the Marks and Signs
are the same with the Hare; but to know whether she be a true Leveret or a
Hare, requires another Mark to distinguish it, viz. Feel with your Thumb and
Finger on the fore Leg, near the Foot, and if there you find a small Knob, or
Bone standing out, it is then a true Leveret; but if no such thing appear, then
it is a Hare, and if you take it otherways, however it may be vouched to the
contrary, you are infallibly imposed on, if you take it for any other than what
I have mentioned; And thus much for these sort of Creatures, bringing great
profit and pleasure to this Nation, more particularly than to any other.

The Faulconers Choice Instructor, or the best way to Manage, Mew, Feed, Purge,
Succor, and Keep Hawks to Fly at all Sorts of Game, and to do what ever is
Requisite for their Preservation, well Ordering, and to make them Expert in
what they are Designed for, or Required to Perform.
Of Hawks in General, and what Game they most Properly Fly at.



AS for Hawks, they are properly held to be of two Kinds, the Long and Short
Winged; the first of these are Comprised in the Ger-Faulcon, Faulcon Gentle,
the Sare, and Lainer, the Merlin; Hobby, and Barbary Faulcon; the latter in the
Goss Hawk, Terril, or Tarcell; of the Goss Hawk, the Musket, and Sparrow Hawk.

The Faulcon Gentle is accounted the best, and is indifferently Trained either
at the River or Field, for his Flight at Water or Land fowl, as at the Mallard,
Duck, Pheasant, Partridge, etc. The Ger-faulcon, is proper for the Heron; the
Sare, at the Bittern, or Crane; the Lainer at the Pheasant, Partridge, and such
like Birds; the Barbary Faulcon Flys seldom well at any thing but the
Partridge; the Hobby and Marlin make their Flights at the Partridge, but
chiefly at the Lark, and other Small Birds; the Sparrow-hawk will take the
Partridge, Blackbird, Thrush, and other Small Birds; the Goss Hawk or Tercell,
Flys at the Hare, Pheasant, Partridge, etc. The Musket is only proper to Fly at
the Bush; and thus much for their Flights: The next thing to be Considered, is,
the well Ordering and Manageing them.

How to Order Hawks taken from the Cage, etc.
HE that has the Ordering of Hawks from the Cage, must Bath them with Warm
Water and Pepper; which will free them from Lice, Nits, or any Vermin they
Breed, that hinders their Thriving; then Feed them well, that they may grow
Lusty, to Oppose incroaching Diseases Incident to them, and then Observe (after
every Flight) whether at their proper Prey, the Lure or Train give the Hawks a
Casting, if a long Winged Hawk, Flannel is proper, if short Winged, let it be
Phumage, and keep them very Sweet and Clean, then, unless in the Days of
Bathing Weather, take the Hawk abroad in the Evening, and take Care that you
Feed him not on two several Meats at once, and above all let him have no Salt
Meat, nor that which is too Fat.

If you intend to make a Flight at the Field upon the first Springing of the
Game, Cast off your Hawk, especially when he has a Ready Judgment to prevent
the Stealing away of the Prey, and his Eyes quick about him to Discern the
least Motion.

If you intend to make a Flight for Prey at the River, Cast him off before he
comes, near the Fowl, neither let him see it before he is at his full Pitch,
then after the Fowl has been twice or thrice Enewed cross it, and after the
Hawk has Killed her, give him for Encouragement the Head, Gizard, Heart, Neck,
and Legs.

To Manage your Hawk after the best way, to keep him from Sleeping, you must
frequently carry him upon your Fist, often Stroaking him, and to Please him the
better, have constantly with you the Wing of a Dead Fowl, that the may Tug at
it, Cheer him with your Voice and Looks, and so he will become Pleased, and
Familliar, and use him in the like Manner to be Acquainted with the Horse and
Dogs, so that he may become Bold and Fearless.

How to bring your Hawk to the Lure.
TO bring your Hawk to the Lure, do it by Degrees, and not Hastily, as in the
first place, to Jump on your Fist, and after that to the Lure, then Cherrish
him with your Voice, and give him something to Encourage him, that in time he
may be Obedient to every Call, so that upon the sound of your Call, or the
sight of the Lure, he may readily comply with your Desire; and when he does it,
give him some part of the Fowl, but if he Refuses, Fasting will bring him to
Obedience, by abating his Stubbornness for self Interest.

As for the Short Winged Hawks, you need but only Call them to your Fist, and
as for the Lure and Variety of Loud Voices, requisite to the other, it is
Indifferent to them, for Cheriping will bring them to Fist, and make them
Familiar and Obedient.

The Proper time for Lureing, is Morning and Evening, when the more to Tempt
and Delight him, hang Bloody Meat about the Lure, and when he is Perfect at
these things, Carry him abroad, the Weather being Fair, and let him Bath
himself in some Clear Spring, as Deep as will take him to the middle of the
Thighs, taking off his Hood, and Padling to make him the apter to Sprinkle
himself, or you may set a shallow Vessel of Water, covering the bottom with
Gravel and Sand, and so it may be done in any Place.

To Enseam Hawks, and otherways Order them: To Enure them to Flight, etc.
TO Enseam your Hawk, take the following Directions, viz. Give him two or three
Bits of Hot Meat in the Morning, but none at Night, and in this Case the Flesh
of Rooks or Crows is exceeding good, first washed in Water, and every four Days
a Hens Neck, Washed and Cut, and so Order him till the Pynions of his Wings
feel soft, then give him a Casting (as before Directed) and sometimes a Live
Trained Pidgeon, let him be long and often upon the Wing, so that his Grease
and Foulness may Dissolve, when that is done.

Take three Pellets of the Roots of Sallendine, an herb so called, steep them
in Syrup of Roses, and let him Swallow them, which will Purge away the Foulness
and Overplus of Grease, Enabling him thereby to be Lively, Nimble, and make a
good Flight.

When he is Maned, Lured, and Enseamed, then is your proper time to bring him
to the Flight, which if it happen to be at the Pheasant or Partridge, in Woody,
or much Enclosed Ground, then upon Lureing him, Cast the Lure into some Bush,
or low Tree, that you may bring him to a stand, then draw it out, and give him
Notice, that he may Sieze it: Feed him daily on the Ground, under some Shrubs
or Bushes.

When you first Fly him at the Game, it must be at such as are Young, the
Easier to be Taken and Mastered for his Encouragement, but if it be a Long
Winged Hawk you Fly in Champion Ground, do what you can to keep him from the
Stand, and Maintain him on the Wing, till you or your Dogs have Sprung the Game
under him, when having the Advantage of Stooping, he may the easier Strike and
Subdue it; but if you would be for sure Killing, more than for Sport, to
Encourage your Hawk, first Spring the Game, and Mark it; when being come to the
Mark, Cast him off, and when he is got to his Height, lay in your Spannels,
that so you may Retreive the Game Underneath him; and after this Rule, with
little Variation, Fly all Manner of Long Winged Hawks.

The Management of Hawks in their Flight, and Particularly to Fly at the River.
AS for Short Winged Hawks, it will be Proper to Fly them from the Fist only,
and to make them Bold and Courageous, Hide a Partridge, or such Fowl as they
take, under a Hat, or some such thing, and when you have well Managed the Hawk,
let go the Train, and Cast off the Hawk, whilst your Spannels are upon the
Range.

To make the Flight at the River, and the Hawk Expert at it, Whistle off a
Hawk, that has been well Experienced, and is a Sure Killer, suffering him so
long to Enew the Fowl, till he bring her to the Plunge; then having taken him
down, Reward him for his Encouragement, then set him by to be ready on
Occasion, and Whistle off the Young Hawk, and when he is at the Height of his
Gaile, and make him (by often showing it him) Familiar with the Water, and at
any time when he Looks out to make him more Inward, Call him with the Gibbit
Call, and so Order him, till you have brought him over the Fowl, and make in,
on both sides the Water, where the Game is, with your Company, and lay forth
your Fowl, which if the Hawk Strike and Truss, make presently in, and helping;
so Crossing or Breaking the Wings of the Fowl, that he may Secure her, and take
his Pleasure of her; but if on the first stoop he Kill her, not suffer him
again to take his Gail, lay the Fowl forth as you did before, and Continue so
to do, till it is Landed, then for his Encouragement Reward him with the Neck,
Gizard, and heart; butifit happen the first Fowl (by strength) Escape him,
flying him Immediately on another more weak, lest, by being baulked, he grow
faint hearted, and Dastardly in the attempt for ever after.

A Plain and Easy Introduction to the most curious Art, and Healthful Exercise
of Ringing Musically on 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. or 9. Bells.


SInce the Knowledge of this Art has been much desired by many, and is a very
healthful as well as Pleasant Exercise, I have placed an Introduction to Young
Ringers in this so useful a Book of Rarityes, though at first sight it may
appear a Digression from the rest, however, since I designed this work to fit
every one as near as may be, I cannot but Conclude that this will be desired by
many, and can be hurtful to none.

The Invention of Ringing is Mathematical, produceing wonderful Effects, as I
shall show in the Sequel.

Of the Changes.


THe Number of Changes are thus to be Ordered, Two must first be Admitted to be
varied two ways, and so to find out the Changes in Three, Two must be
Multiplied by Three, and so the Product will be Six, and that multiplied by
Four, will produce Twenty Four; which, for the Changes of Three, is the
complete Number, and the Six Multiplied by Four will produce Twenty Four, the
complete Changes on Four, and these Multiplied by Five, produce 120, the
complete Changes on Five, and Multiply that 120 by Six, it will produce 720.
And that makes the complete Changes on 6 Bells, multiply this 720 by 7 and it
produces 5040, and consequently as the Changes rise and fall, the Numbers are
more or less, and may be carried so high, that Arithmatick wants a Number to
Name them; for an Age is not sufficient to Ring them out, though every Change
shall Vary to Admiration.

As for Example, we admit the Figures 1 and 2 may be crossed in this manner 1.
2. and then 2. 1. thus allowed, though the Numbers are never so many, as on 3.
4. 5. 6. 7. 8. or 9 Bells, the same figure thus set down a Thousand times, will
Vary particularly on the three latter.

Of Peals.
THe Musicalness of the Changes not being very Intelligable to ordinary
Ringers, and the best many times Puzzled, and at a loss to find them out, the
more Judicious Professors concluded it necessary to cast Peals, that so the
Musical Notes might the better strike the Fancy, and lead them more sensible
and easier to a true understanding in Ringing, rendering it (for their
encouragement) the more taking and delightful; for every Peal on Bells Tuned to
the Principals of Music, express the Notes, for in a Peal of six Bells, you
have exactly the six Musical Notes, viz. La. Sol. Fa. Mi-Re. Ut. but to make
them charming and harmonious, they must be struck with Skill and deliberation,
gradually striking or leading with the lowest Note, and so rising up to the
highest; and then down again to the lowest, causing the Fourth Bell to Hunt up
to the Seventh, and then dodg, unless prevented by the Treble, and so any other
of the number Seven; so that, in the complete number of Changes of the first
striking, there shall not be rung over twice the same; and in this doing, you
must have a Musical Ear, and a steady hand, to observe the least Defect, and
mend it; to mend or reverse it by dodging, or falling in course, as the Bells
hunt up or down, by putting in between, or taking place in a complete Harmony.

Of Cross Peals.
HAving already laid the ground work for plain Peals, to introduce the Learner,
I now proceed to Cross Peals; These are so Termed, because of their intricacy,
or Cross method, wherein diverse Notes moving, as it were, at once, Cross each
other, some moving up, and others down, at the same time; and that the Learner
may the easier find it out, and Comply with it, let him observe, that One Note
called the Hunt, is a Guide to the rest, making one constant motion, and
uniform throughout the Peals, differing from that of the other Notes, though
keeping a continual Motion through the several Notes stricken, viz. From the
leading to the striking behind, and so thence to the Lead; which Motion up and
down, is reckoned the complete Course, though some Peals on Five Bells, as the
old Doubles, etc. consist only of single Courses, every single Course admitting
to Changes; and twelve Courses are a complete Peal: Other Peals on five Bells,
as the London Paradox, etc. consists of Double Courses, 20. Changes going to
every Course, and 6 double Courses to the Peal; but on 6 Bells there are double
and single Courses, viz. 12 Changes in every single Course, as in Grandsire
Eob, etc. The Change wherein the Hunt leaves Leading, is properly the first
Change in every Course, and in Cross Peals all the Courses agree in three
Respects (1) in the Motion of the Hunt, (2) in the Motion of the remaining
Notes, (3) in making the Changes, which being exactly taken Notice of, may
serve as a certain Guide to the Rest, some few Changes in each Peal Excepted.

The Example.
IN this Example I present the Learner with a Peal of New Doubles, only on 5
Bells, they being First Course. Second Course. Third Course. 12345 13524 15432
21354 31542 51423 23145 35124 54132 32415 53214 45312 23451 35241 54321 32541
53421 45231 23514 35412 54213 32154 53142 45123 31245 51324 41532 13254 15342
14523 13524 15432 14253 the 3 First Courses of the Peal, wherein observe, that
the last Change of the first Course, viz. 1. 3. 5. 2. 4. is set down again at
the Top of the second Course, and likewise the last Change of the second
Course, (...). 1. 5. 4. 3. 2. takes place at the top of the third Course; so
that Note, the lower-most Changes are the ten Changes of eace Course, and as to
the Motion, properly the first, the Hunt directly moves up behind, where twice
lodging, it proceeds down again to lead, and there also lodges twice, as in the
3 Courses is demonstrated, also throughout the Peal, as the second, third,
fourth and fifth Bells move through the first Course; so those Bells that are
lodged in the second, third, fourth, and fifth places in the last Change of
every Course, moves in like Manner, as through the next following Course, and
by Moving, Change Places, as to the Rest not so well to be showed in Words, as
Practice; for you must consider, in every cross Peal the Courses equally agree,
viz. first, in the Motion of the Hunt; secondly, in that of the rest of the
Notes; and thirdly, in the making the Changes.

Of Doubles and Singles on four Bells.
TO Ring 24 Doubles and Singles on 4 Bells, take Notice the Peal Consists
equally of Double and Single Changes, the one Change double, and the other
single throughout the Peal; the first is the Hunt, to the remaining 3 Extreme
Bells; the double Change is every time likewise made of the two first, and the
two last Bells, every single Change of the two Middle ones, except when the
first Leads, and then we term the Bells that are behind, the Extremes: All
these Bells have direct Hunting Courses up and down, till the first Leads, then
whilst the two hindermost make a Dodg, the Second lies still, and by this
Method all the Bells proceed again in their Hunting Course, there being after
this Manner 3 Extreme Changes made: That is to say, the first every time the
Hunt leads; the second, always when it lies behind; and the third, every time
it leads, and lies behind.

The Peals called the Old Doubles and Singles on Five Bells.
IN performing this, observe that one Change must be Double, the next Single,
and so in their Turns, till the Treble has the Direct Hunting Course, as in
Case of the Plain Changes, every Double Change struck on the Four First Bells,
considering the Treble to be One of the Two that makes every single Change,
unless when it Leads, and then the single is in the Third and Fourth Place; but
when the Two Bells lie next to the Treble, you must consider that behind to be
the single Bell, which is called the Extreme; and observe, that every time the
Treble leaves Leading, the Two first Bells are to continue Slow Dodging, till
it be altered by the coming down of the Treble, which displaces them; and the
Treble Moving down out of the Fifth Place, the Bell that comes into it must
Remain Silent, till the Treble Hunts up to it again, except when the Extreme
Change is made behind, every Bell lys twice together in the Third and Fourth
Place, except upon the Trebles Leading, and likewise when it hinders them in
Hunting.

The Old Trebles and Doubles on Six Bells.
HERE Mark that one Change is Treble, and the other Double, and so in Order,
except One single at the End of every sixth Change, every Treble Change being
made on the Two First, Two Middlemost, and the Two Last Bells, and every Double
on the Four Middle Bells, except in Case when the Hunt Leads, for then it must
be upon the Four hindermost, the Treble here being the Hunt, making a Direct
Hunting Course up and down, as in plain Changes, as likewise must be considered
in the Rest, unless when the Treble Leads, and then such Bells as were Hunting
up, except that in the Second Place, makes a Dodg with the next Bell beneath
it, and so again proceeds forward in its Course up, and every Individual Bell,
that at the same time was Hunting down, makes a Dodg with the next Bell that is
above it, and then proceeds downward in its Course; and such a Method carrys on
the Peal five Courses of the Hunt, which makes 60 Changes: And thus having
briefly given you the Ground Work of Ringing, with a little Variation and
Practice you may Frame your self to any sort of Ringing, and carry the Matter
as high as you will, upon 7. 8. or 9. Bells, having a Musical Ear, and a Steady
Hand, and being Circumspect in what you are about, and Marking those that are
Expert in it, how they Order the Management of it.

So the Bells Sound, often Reaching distant Ears,
Seems to them as the Music of the Spears;
For pressing on the Air it is Mounted High
And in Rebounding, Ecchos from the Sky;
Harmonious Numbers Tuned by Aires, that Beat
Upon the Sounds, as they to Hills Retreat
And so Deceived, they give a Story Birth,
They Heavenly Music hear, when it is from Earth.
How a Countryman may know how much Hay or Corn his Barn will hold before it
be put in.
THIS has been desired by many, especially upon taking Barns, and Outhouses,
where they desire to know how they will Answer the Stores Desinged to be laid
up in them; and for their Satisfaction, I have here found out an Easy way to
Inform them, if they know never so little of Arithmatick.

To be Satisfied herein, Multiply the Hight to the Beam into the Breadth, and
that Product by the Length, the whole Divided into 20. and so the Quotient
readily shows the Loads to the Beam; and then for the Roof, Multiply half the
Depth into the Breadth at the Beam, and that Product by the Length, then Work
as before, and adding it to the other, you will soon be satisfied in what you
Desire; and those that Understand not Figures, may Easily get any Body that
does to do it (by this Rule) in a few Minutes, and Inform them to their
Satisfaction.

The Measure that ought to be in Cords or Stacks of Wood.
TO Measure Wood for Fuel, Plank, or Timber going to a Load, is Necessaary to
be known in the Management of Country Affairs, for at one time or other the
Honest Countryman cannot but stand in Need of such Knowledge to Advantage him;
wherefore I here set it down.

A Cord of Wood ought to be 4 Foot Over, 8 Long, and 4 Deep, making in all 128
Cubick Feet.

A Stack of Wood ought to be 3 Foot Over, 3 Deep, and 12 Foot in Length, which
makes 108 Cubick-feet, and to a Load of Solid Timber there goes 50 Foot, a
Cubick-foot Contains 1728 Inches, a Cubick-yard, 27 Cubick-feet, or 46656
Inches.

200 Foot of 2 Inch Plank, 200 Foot of 3 Inch Plank, 115 foot of 4 Inch Plank,
400 foot of One Inch and half Plank, or 600 foot of 1 Inch, make either of them
a Load of Plank, in True Account, etc.

To tell what is a Clock (when the Sun Shines) by ones Hand.


TAKE a Small Straight Stick of about Four Inches Long, and hold it between the
Forefinger and the Thumb, of the Left Hand, and turn about toward the Sun,
till the Shadow of the Ball of the Thumb touch the Line of Life, and then the
Shadow of the Stick will appear on that part of the Hand, which tells the Right
Hour of the Day etc. Approved by Mr. Saunders.



A Catalogue of the Markets, and the Days they are kept on in the several
Counties and Shires in England and Wales.
In Middlesex.
AT Brainford, Tu. London, M. W. F. S. Uxbridge, Th. Stanes, F. Edgware, Th.
Westminster, M. W. F. S. Enfield, S.

Hartfordshire.
Barkhamstead, M. Barnet, M. Buntingford, M. Ware, Tu. Hitching, Tu. Watford,
Tu. Rickmansworth, S. St. Albans, S. Hertford, S. Sabsworth, W. Hemstead, Th.
Hatfield, Th. Bishops-Safford, Th. Stevenedge, S. Tring, S. Stondon, S.
Hodsdon, Th. Boldock, Tu.

Barkshire.
Reading, S. Abbington, M. and F. Wanting, S. Wallingford, Tu. and F.
New-Windsor, S. Faringdon, Tu. Newbury, Th. Oakingham, Tu. East-Esledg, W
Maidenhead, W. Hungerford, W.

Bedfordshire.
Tuddington, S. Bedford, Tu. and S. Patton, S. Luton, M. Shefford, F. Leighton,
Tu. Bigleworth, Tu. Dunstable, W. Ampthil, Th. Wobowrn, F.

Buckinghamshire.
Risborough, S. Great Marlow, S. Oulney, M. Amersham, Tu. Colebrook, W.
Chesham, W. Newport, S. Alesbury, S. Winslow, Th. Wendover, Th. Beconsfield,
Th. Stonistratford, F. Buckingham, S. Juingo, F. High. Wickham, F.

Cambridgeshire.
Ely, S. New Market, Tu. Royston, W. Caxton, Tu. Linton, Th. March, F. Wisbich,
S. Cambridge, S.

Cornwall County.
Stratton, Tu. Penzance, Th. St. Columb, Th. Falmouth, Th. Market-Jew, Th. St.
Germans, F. Camelford, F. Foy, S. Listithiel, F. Grampound, S. Padslow, S.
Tregonye, S. Helstone, S. Launston, S. Bodman, S. Liskard, S. Truro, W, and S.
St. Joes w, fr, Penrin, W. F. S. East looe -- Soltash --

Cheshire.
Altrincham, F. Maxfield, M. Frodsham, W. Malpas, M. Northwich, F. Sambich, Th.
Stopford, F. Nantwich, S. Middlewich, sa. Congleto, sa. Huntsford, sa.
Westchester, W. and sa. Tarvin.

Cumberland.
Brampton, Tu. Cockermouth, M. Wigton, Tu. Alleyholm, sa. Keswick, sa Perith,
Tu. Bootle, W. Widt-Haven, Th. Ravenglass, sa. Egremont, sa. Longworth, Th.
Ashton-Moor, sa. Carlisle, sa. Ireby, Th. Kirswald, Th. Longtown, Th.

Derbyshire.
Bakwell, M. Allfrt ton, M. Wirksworth, Tu. Ashborn, sa. Tedeswal, W.
Dronfield, Th. Derby, fr. Chesterfield, sa. Bosover, fr. Drawfield --

Devonshire.
Tiverton, Tu. Bedford, Tu. Ottery, Tu. Exeter, W. and fr. Axminster, sa.
Plimpton, sa. Honiton, sa. Crediton, sa. Columpton, sa. Southmoston, sa, Great
Torringcon, sa. Holsworth, sa. Tevestock, sa. Morton, sa. Okehampton, sa.
Chidley, sa. Ashburton, sa. Plymouth, sa. Totness, sa. Kingsbridge, sa.
Barnstable, fr. Dartmouth, fr. Colliton, Th. Hatburly, fr. Chumley-Bow, Th.
Dodbrook, W. Newton-Abbey, W. Medbury, Th.

Bishopric of Durham.
Durham, sa. Darlington, M. Bernard-Castle, W. Sunderland, fr. Bishops Auklend,
Th. Stainthorp --

Dorcetshire.
Cern-Abbas, W. Cranbrow, W. Crofts-Castle, Th. Abbotsbury Th. Sturminster Th.
Dorchester W. Frompton Th. Wemborn-Minster fr. Shaftsbury W. Worham W. Blanford
W. Pool M. and Th. Weymouth Tu. and fr. Melcom-Regis Tu. and fr. Sherbourn Th.
and

Essex.
Eppin fr. Chipping-ongar sa. Harwich Tu. Maintree Tu. Waltham-Abby Tu.
billerikey tu, Braintree W. Brentwood Th. Rumford W. Haulsteed fr. Colchester
fr. Chelmsford fr. Thackstead fr. cogshal sa. Maldon sa, Walden sa. Hatfield
sa. Dunmore sa. Raleigh sa. Barkin sa. Horndon, sa.

Glocestershire.
Wickware M. Deanmag M. Minchinhampton Tu. Priswick Tu. Horton Tu. Letchlad Tu.
Marshfield Tu. Blackley W. Campden W. Tedbury W. Cheltenham Th. Dursley Th.
Stow on the Would Th. Chipping-sadbury Th. Newent fr. Fairford Th. Newham fr.
Tukesbury W. and sa. Stroud fr. Wotton-Underedge fr. Leonards-standley sa.
Winchcomb sa. Thornburry sa. Cirencester M. and fr. Gloucester sa.

Hantshire.
Basinstoke W. Kingsclere Tu. Alceston Th. Ringwood W. Newport in Wight Isle W.
and sa. Portsmouth Th. and sa. Winchester W. and sa. Southampton Tu. and fr.

Kent.
Dover W. and sa. Sandwich W. and sa. Eltham M. Wortham Tu. St. Mary Cray W.
Lenham Tu. Wye Th. Westram W. Lydd Th. Rumney, Th. Brumley th. Foxton th.
Maidstone th. Rochester fr. Tunbridge fr. Smarden fr. Tenderden fr. Woolwich
fr. Malinge sa. Milton sa. Crainbrook sa. Hyth sa. Sevenoke sa. Dartford sa.
Gravesend W. and sa. Feversham W. and sa.

Herefordshire.
Hereford W. fr. and sa. Bromyard M. Lidbury tu. Pembridge tu. Kyneton W.
Webley th. Ross th. Lemster fr.

Huntingtonshire.
Toxley tu. St. Ives M. St. Neots th. Ramsey VV. Huntington sa. Kimbolton fr.

Lancashire.
Blackbourn M. Boulton M. Cartmill M. Pounton M. Hawkshead M. Hornby M.
Rochdale tu. Ormkirk tu. Charley tu. Prescot tu. Holsington VV. Coln VV.
Warinton VV. Bury th. Gasting th. Ulverstone th. Lancaster sa. Clithero sa.
Manchester sa. Darlton sa. Liverpool sa. Preston VV. fr. and sa. Wiggan M. and
fr.

Leicestershire.
Ashby de la Zouch sa. Hinckley M. Leicester sa. Mountsorrel M. Melton Mowbray
tu. Harborow tu. Bosworth VV. Loughborough tu. Hallaton th. Waltham-would th.
Lutterworth th. Billesden fr.

Lincolnshire.
Gainsbury tu. Sleaford M. Barton M. Castorspilsby M. Market-stanton M.
Market-rason tu. Bulkingbrook tu. Spalding tu. Alford tu. Great Grimsby VV.
Glamford th. Binbrook VV. Burgh th. Market-deeping th. Holbich th. Folstinham
th. VVragby th. Naverby th. Tattershal fr. Lincoln fr. Kirton sa. Thoncaster
sa. VVaynfleet sa. Bourn sa. Horncastle sa. Grantham sa. Demington sa. Stamford
M. and fr. Lowthe VV. and sa. Boston VV. and sa.

Norfolk.
Norwich VV. fr. sa. Eastharling tu. Foulsham tu. caston tu. Harlstone VV.
Attlebury th. watton VV. Fakingham th. Northwalsham th. Dis fr. wymondham fr.
East-Dereham fr, suetsham fr, walsingham fr, Yarmouth sa. hingham sa. Thetford
sa. Swafeham sa. New-backingham sa. Downham sa. holt sa. burnham Mar sa. cromar
sa. Repham sa. Alesham sa. worfled sa. Sechby every second Monday.

Northamptonshire.
Thrapston tu. Rothwell M. Kingscliff tu. VVellingborough VV. Daventry VV.
brackley VV. Kettering fr. Peterborough sa. Northampton sa. Oundle sa.

Northumberland.
Newcastle tu. and sa. hexam tu. weller th. Morpeth VV. Alerwick sa, berwick sa.

Oxfordshire.
Tame tu. woodstock, bampton VV. chipingnorton VV. witney th. henley th.
banbury th. burford sa. burchester fr. Deddington sa. watlington sa. Oxford VV,
and sa.

Rutlandshire.
Upingham VV. Okenham sa.

Shropshire.
Oswestree M. Great wenlock M. Ludlow M. Elsimeere tu. Shipton tu. braiton VV.
Stretton th. wem th. bishops-castle fr. VVidington th. VVhitchurch fr.
Bridgnorth sa. Shrewsbury W. th. sa. Newport sa.

Somersetshire,
Chard M. Somerton M, Glassenbury M. wivescom tu. Pensford tu. VVriton tu.
North-Petherton tu. VVincaunton VV. Ilchester VV. Axebridge th. Frowmselwood
VV. St. Petherton th. wellington th. Bridgwater th. Canisham th. shipton-Mallet
fr. Dunstar-winton sa. Langport sa, Yeovil fr. Crookhorn sa. Ilminster sa.
Vetchers sa. Dalverton sa. Taunton W: and sa: N: cinry tu: and sa: Bristol VV
and sa: Bath VV and sa: Wells VV and sa:

Staffordshire.
Stow tu: Newcastle under line M: Pagets Browledg tu: Betles tu: Tutbury tu:
VValsal tu: Ridgley tu: Pancridg tu: breewood tu: Leeke w: VVolverhampton VV:
Utoxeter VV: chickley th: Litchfield tu, and fr: stafford sa: burton on Trent
th: Eccleshall fr:

Suffolk.
Woodbridge VV: Needham VV: biddleston VV: haverill VV: Orford, M: hadleigh m:
Mendlesham tu: halesworth tu: lestofh VV: bury VV: stowmarket th: Tansdale th:
saxmundham th: sowley th: bungay th: Ikesworth fr: New Market th: Maldenhall
fr: clare fr: Neyland fr: Debenham fr: sudbury sa: Aye sa: Framglingham sa:
Aldborough sa: Dunwick sa: Ipswich w: fr: sa: beckles sa:

Sussex.
Sattel th: East-Grinstead th: brighthelmiston th: Petworth VV: steuington VV:
Midhurst th: steneing VV: hastings VV and sa: coxfield fr: horsham sa: Jews
sa: chichester sa: Arundel VV and sa: Rye w and sa:

Surry.
Southwark M, W, F, S. Rygate Tu. Darking Th. Farnham Th. Croydon S. Kingston
S. Guilford S.

Warwickshire.
Tamworth S, Henly M. Southam M. Sutton-Cofield M. Aulcester Tu. Symeton Tu.
Atherstone Tu. Stratford Th: Colshil W: Bromicham Th: Coyentry F: Warwick F:
Shipton S: Nun-Eaton S: Rugby S:

Westmoreland:
Ambleside W: Burton Tu. Burgh W: Orton W: Kerbylaundale Th: Kerby-stephen F:
Kendale S Appleby S: Fardondike, --

Wiltshire:
Sundon M: Bradford M: Swyndon M: Calne tu: Ashburn tu: Lavington W: Wilton W:
Highworth W: Hindon Th: Devises Th: Wootonbasset Th: Dunston F: Mersbury F:
Westbury F: Warminster S: Troubridge S: Chipnam S, Malmsbury, Marlborough S,
Salisbury Tu, and S, Creeklad S:

Worcestershire.
Worcester W, F, S, Sturbridge F, Bewdley S, Evesholm M, Parshore Tu,
Broomsgrove Tu, Droitwich F, Shipton F, Kidderminster th, Upton th, Tenbury tu:

Yorkshire East-Ridings;
Hedon sa, Wigton W, Kilham th, Bridlington sa, Packlington sa, Howder sa, Hull
tu, and sa, Beverly W, and sa;

West-Ridings;
Selby M, Rotheram M, Otley tu, Settle tu, Sheffield tu, barnsby W,
Knaresborough W, bradforth th, Halifax th, VVetherly th, Wakefield th, fr,
Leeds tu, and sa, Shipton sa, borroughbrigs sa, Pontefract sa, Tedeaster th,
Rippon th, Snathe fr, Ripley fr, Tickley sa, Bantrey sa, Doncaster sa, Sherborn
sa;

North-Ridings;
Gisborough M, Pickering M, Thrusk M, Beda tu, Masham tu, Kerby-moreside w,
North-Alerton w, Abberforth w, Scarborough th, Malton sa, Yarum th, Helmly sa,
York th, and sa, whitey sa, Stokeley sa, Richmond sa;

Market Towns and their Days in WALES,

Brecknockshire,
BRecknock w, and sa, Hay m, Coecowell th, Bleath m, and sa;

Anglesey;
Newbury tu, Bewmaris w;

Cardiganshire,
Aberysthway w, Llanbeder tu, cardigan, sa, Tregeron th,

Carnarvanshire;
Kreekych w, Bangor w, Newin sa, Carnarvan sa, Palbely w, Alberconway fr;

Caremardenshire;
Llanesly tu, Kidwelly tu, Llandilmawre tu, New Castle fr, Llangadock th,
Caremarden w, and sa, Lantharne fr, Llanynodissy w, and sa;

Denbighshire;
VVrexham m, and th, Ruthen m, Llanrest tu, Denbigh w;

Flintshire;
St Asaph sa, Holy-well sa, Cairvise tu;

Glamorganshire;
Carephilly th, cowbridge, tu, Powrise th, bridgends sa, Llintrissent fr, Neath
sa, cardriff w, and sa, swansy w, Glamorgan sa;

Radnorshire;
New Radnor th, Knighton th, Prestain sa;

Merionethshire;
Harlech sa, belgele tu, bala sa;

Monmouthshire;
Carelyon th, Monmouth sa, Abergavenny tu, Port-pool sa, Usk m, and fr, Newport
sa;

Montgomeryshire;
Machinelth m, VVelshpool m, Newtowr m, Montgomery th, Llanvilling th,
Llanidloes;

Pembrookeshire;
Rillgarven w, Teuby w, and sa, Nowbeth w, Fishguard fr, Pembrook sa, Newport
sa, wiston sa, Haverford T, and S,

Note, In this case, that M. stands for Monday, Tu. Tuesday, W: Wednesday, Th.
Thursday, F. Friday, S. Saturday; and according as they are thus marked, the
Markets are held:

An exact Catalogue of the fixed and moveable Fairs, held Yearly in England and
Wales; the days and times of their continuance; the like for exactness, never
before Published.
THE Fairs are of two sorts, as to the Times of their being held; some are
fixed to a certain day; others change their days, or are moveable with the
Feasts: Therefore, since no exact Account, as we know of, has been hitherto
given, we shall labor to satisfy the curiofity of those, whose Pleasure or
Advantage tends that way; and for those that are fixed, take them, for the more
regular way, in their Month.

Fairs in JANUARY.
3 At Llanbither. 5 at Hickford. 6 at Salisbury. 7 at Llanginny. 6 and 25 at
Bristol. 13 at Derby. 25 at Gravesend and Churchingford. 31 at Llondysle.

Fairs in FEBRUARY.
1 At Bromley, Lank. 2 at Bath, Ashbourn, Bicklesworth, Budworth,
Bricklesfield, beconsfield, Farington, Godlemew, Hedon, Leominster, Lyn,
Maidstone, Reading, the Vizes. 3. at Boxgrove and Brin^^^, 14 at Feversham and
Oundley. 24. at Whit^^^^ Upingham, Walden, Tukesbury, Highamfen^^^, Henly on
Thames, Froom, Bourn, Baldock. 9. at Llandaff. 6 at Stafford for 6 days, 26 at
Stafford for Horses. 8 at Targaron. 28 at Chesterfield. At Winterbourn the
second Thursday in the Month, and at Weldonnorth the first Wednesday.

Fairs in MARCH.
1 At Madrim. 12 at Alsom, Norfol. 13 at Mounthow. 20 at Alesbury. 25 at
Montgomery, Malden, St. Albans, Midhurst, Malpus, New Castle, Northill 3 days,
Northampton, Onabuck, Ashwel, Harif. Burton, Cardigan, Great Chart, huntington,
St. John's worst, Whiteland, Woodstock, Walden. 12 at Wigbourn, Woubourn,
Wrexham. 13 at Wye. 7 at Worksep. 8 Tragarron. 18 Sturbridge. 12 Strudbury,
Stopford. 3 Seavenoke. 25 Pyobus. 17 Patrington. 4 Orham. second Thursday at
Okehampton. 20 at Northmore. 24 at Llamerchemic. 1 at Lanlegevellah and
Langadog. 5 at Lancaster. 27 at Derby. 20 at Durham, at bromeyard the Thursday
before 25 at bromeyard. 12 at bodman. 13 at bodwin. 4 at bedford. 3 at
brinwell, brakes. 27 at Atherstone and backwell.

Fairs in APRIL.
The third Thursday in the Month at Yarmouch. 25 at Winchcomb. 23 at Wilton,
Woodley, Tamworth and Wortham. 26 at Tenterden. 25 at Uttoxiter. 5 at
Wallingford. 11 and 12 at Warminster; Sudbury the last thursday and saturday in
the Month. 21 at-Aberforth. 25 at Iving. 23 at Amptill, Ipswich, Killborough,
Lougnor, Mevemot, bewdley, brewton, birdstock, bilson, bury Lanc. Northampton,
Nullay, Suff. 12 at Aberforth. 25 at Abington. 26 at Alborough. 9 at
billingworth. 25 at bourn. 11 at Nuport Pagnel. 23 at Saint Pombs. 3 at Leek,
staff. 2 at North fleet. 13 at Orleton. 25 at buckingham. 27 at bosworth. 25 at
Okeham. 30 at beverly. 23 at Castle-Comb. 2 at Rochford. 23 at Charing cliff,
Chichester, and Rileborough. 20 at Stonehouse-Green. 22 Stafford. 23
Sadbridgworth and sapphire, hatfield. 25 sawley. 28 at soham; at sudbury the
last thursday and saturday in the Month: At Crilade the third wednesday. 25 at
Clave in wilts, Cliff in sussex, and Colebrook. 26 at Clare. 7 and 25 at Derby.
25 at Dun. mow. 2 and 3 at Epping. 13 at Englesfield, sussex. 16 at
East-Greenstead. 23 at Gravesend for 4 days. 23 at Guilford. 2 at hitchin. 23
at harbin. hatfield, bish. and heningham.

Fairs in MAY.
1 At Llatrifient, Louth and Andover. 3 at Arundel, Abergavenny. 3 and 10 at
Ashburn-Peak. 16 at Llangarranag. 26 at Lenham. 1 and 9 at Maidston. 6 at
Amesbury, 13 at Albrington. 3 at Merthyr. 27 at montgomery. 3 at Mounton and
Merchenleth. 1 a brickhil and blackburn. 3 at bala. 3 and 25 at bromyard. 7. at
bath and beverly. 9 at Mayfield. 20 at Malmsbury. 3 at Nuneaton. 7 at Newton 1
at black heath 13 at blackwell 13 at basa, Mering 3 at bickington 25 at
backburn 1 at Chelmsford 3 at clifton 1 at congerton 5 at caxton 7 at Orford 1
at Oswestry 19 at Odehill 1 at Perin, Pembridge, Philips-Norton, and Pombridge
31 at Parshore, 3 at Poutheley. 1 at Reading, Rippon, Radsdale, Stoke nail and
Stanstead, Stow in the Od, and Wendover. 19 at Rochester, 3 at Stafford and
Streton Church. 7 at Stratford Avon. The first wednesday at Weldon-North. 2 at
Workesworth. 15 at Welsh-Pool, at Winterborough the second thursday. 3 at
Wadbridge. 9 at Wellow. 1 at Uske and Warwick. 3 at Waltham. 8 at Whemerly, 1
at Tuxford. 3 at Thetford and Tidswell; From 8 to 25 at Tollerwilm Downs: 7 at
Thunderly; 12 at Thork 1 at Kimar, Leighton, Leicester, Lexfield, Lichfield,
Ledbury, and Linfield: 2 at Leominster 6 at Knighton 3 at Chersey, Chipenham,
and Cowbridge; the second Friday at Charlebury. 4, 5 and 6 at Chatham: 4 at
Chesterfield, Chappelfrith: 29 at Crainbrook: 3 at Denbigh and Darby 5 at Derby
1 at Enfield, Hounslow, Greenstreet, Fockingham, Grighowel, and Haveril-hope:
11 and 19 at Dunstable: 4 at Foresham: 10 at Fring: 2 at Fairford: 3 at
Henningham, and Huddersfield: 6 at Hay: 19 at Hereford. 7 at Hanslop and
Hatesbury

Fairs in JUNE.
11 At Newport-Pagnel 3 at Alesbury 24 at Gloucester 9 at Abbington 11 at
Newport-knees 29 at Gorgang, Lanc: 22 at St. Albans 11 at Holt 20 at Hereford
24 at Newbury 22 and 24 at Ashburn 26 at Northop 17 at Hadstock 11 at Okingham
24 at St, Anns 17 at Higham-ferries 29 at Onay-24 at Awkidborough and Halifax
29 at Ashwell 24 at Pensey, and Horstone 11 at Bremel, Norf, 15 at pershore 24
at Hertford 14 at Bangor. 24 and 29 at Peterborough 24 at Horsham, Hurst 28 at
Hescorn 24 and 28 at St. pombs 16 at Bleath, Breckn, 24 at Preston 19 at
Bridgenorth 29 at Hodsdon 23 at Barnet 29 at Petersfield, Holdworth, Horden,
and pontstephen 24 at Barnwell, Bedford-bedle, Beverly, bishops-Castle,
bromsgrove, brecknock, bosworth, Great boughton, Kingston, War, Reading,
Ramford, Shaftsbury, Stranstock, and Knotford lower 29 at Haderfield, Iver and
Sarstrange 11 at Knowillgate 22 at Kinrkih, Aund 11 at Lanibyther 28 at Royston
17 at Greenstow 22 at Shrewsbury 11 at selby 24 at burford 29 at bala, senock,
southam, stafford, stockworth, sudbury, buntingford, buckingham, bolton,
brumley, barhemstead and benington 11 at Ledbury, Llanwist, Llandibandor 17 at
Llangivilling 24 at lancaster, lincoln, ludlow, leicester 27 at landogain, the
first monday and tuesday at Thorn 29 at Tring, Upton, and Thorock 19 and 20 at
Thwayte, first wednesday at Carlisle 23 at Castle-Ebichen 1 at Chapel frith 21
at Uffranmerick 24 at warminster, wakefield, wallingford, and warwick 29 at
Llamorgan, Llambender, leominster, and lemister 24 at Chester, Colchester,
Croydon, Craybrook, wenlock, and windsor 9 at Maidstone 18 at Marchenlenth 6,
7, and 8, at Milton 11 and 30 at Maxfield 11 at wellington 29 at Mount-sorrel,
Marleborough, Mansfield, westminster, wimey, woodhurst 24 and 29 at
wolverhampton 11 at Newborough and Newcastle 13 at great Newton 24 at York 29
at Cardriff 19 at Derby 22 at Dereham, Norf, 23 at Derby, Dogeby 19 and 20 at
Fairford 28 and 29 at Garstrange 24 at Farnham

Fairs in JULY
2 At Rickmansworth 7 at Richmond 20 at Neath 22 at Newark, Northwich, and
Ponterly 20 at Odiham 11 at Parmeg 15 at Pinchback 2 at Ashton underline 23 at
cheston, and caernarven 25 at campden, chichester, chilbolme, Aldergam, and
Abbinton 7 at Albrighton 20 at Alferton 25 and 27 at Ashwell 29 at chappel-hago
22 at stockbury, and stonystratford 17 at stevenage 7 and 25 at Roystone 22 at
Hocking 25 at Ravenglass, Reading, Rosse 26 at Raiadargway 2 at smeath, swansey
7 at shelfo-sweaten 5 at burton upon Trent 7 at brentwood 21 at
bernards-castle, battle-field, and bicklesworth; the thursday before the 21 at
broomyard 20 at betley, bowling, and Olton 7 at Denbigh 25 at Doncaster 23 at
Davenet 25 Dodly, Dover, Erith 7 at Emlin 13 at Fodrin 28 at Fairfax 2 at
Huntington 10 at Foulness 15 at Greenstead 3 at Harderst 6 at haveril 7 at
haverford west 6 at heddon 30 at harfield 27 at horsham 9 and 10 at Ingatestone
25 saint James Northampton, saint James London, saint James Ipswich 17 saint
Kelms 22 Kingston, Kimbolton, Keswick, and Kidwalley 25 Kingstone, Lisle,
Kerkham 6 lambither, Llamidlas 11 Lyiid 17 Llangvillin, leek 25 louth,
leverpool, Llandervigan 20 saint Marg. Midhurst 22 Maudlin, hill, Melenborough
25 and 2 at Molpas 25 Mochenbeth 28 Meuhemot 22 Colchester 21 clean, clethero
20 catesby, cuimmock, colidg 7 and 27 chappel-frith 21 billericay, bridgnorth,
and broughton 25 buntingford, broomsgrove, brodoack, bromley, boston, bristow,
bilson, bistower, barhamstead, baldock 26 bewdley 2 and 3 at Congerton 7 at
carington, castlem, canter. The third wednesday at cricklade 25 at shemal,
stock-pool, and stamford-stone 26 at skipton in cr. 30 at stafford 7 at
Treshevimio and Tenbury 20 at Teuby 22 at Turbury 25 at Thembley-Gre. Tilbury,
Thrapstone, Thickham, and Trowbridge 26 at Tiptery 7 at the Vizes, Upingham 20
at Uxbridge 2 at wooburn 2 and 5 at welnw. 11 at wanton 25 at wilon 17 at
winchcomb 22 at witheral, winchester, whergrig, Yadlard, and Yarn 7 at weald.
25 at walden, wigmore, wetherby, and wigmore.

Fairs in AUGUST
24 At Dover 15 at Dunmow and Dryfield 10 at Differingolwick and Doncaster 24
at crowland 1 at Dunstable 15 and 29 at croby 15 at cambridge, carlisles, and
cardigan 10 at chotley, cudlew, and croley, Lanc, 1 at chepstow 9 at Aberlew 4
at Dantrey 10 at Alchurch 24 at Aberconway 15 at saint Albans 24 Alborough, and
Ashby-de-la-Zouch. 28 at Ashford 1 at banbury and bath 1 and 10 at bedford 10
and 24 at banbury 10 at brampton 6 at bardney 10 at brainford, bodwin, and
blackmore 15 bolton and blackwell 29 at caerwis 24 at beggars-bush, brigstock,
and bromly-pag, 25 at brecknock 1 at Nortemchurch 15 at Newin 20 at Northmore
10 at Newborough 15 at Newport-more, Northampton, and Raiadarg- way 24 at
Norwich, Northiderton, Newbury, Nantwich and Oxford 10 at Owndle 29 at
Okingham, Ormskirk 6 at peterburg 15 at preston, Linc, 1 at Rumney 10 at Rugby
1 at selby 15 at Rosse 1 at selborn and shrewsbury 19 at Yminth, the third
thursday at Yarmouth 1 at York and Yeland, at wakefield the third thursday,
weldon north the first wednesday, at winterbourn the second thursday 28 at
welshpool 24 and 29 at watford 15 at whiteland 10 at weldon, waltham, weldon,
warminster, weydon, and winstow 10 at sedolo, and sherburn 15 at stroud,
swansey and stow 24 at sudbury 28 at sturbridge, w. 4 at Thunderly 1 at
Thaxsted 10 at Torcester 13 at Turbury 13 at Tollerwilme Downs 28 at
Tuddington, and Talistang green 28 at Tukesbury 1 at wadebridge, wisbich,
Newton, Lanc. newcastle outer, Excester, saint Eedes, Feversham, Flint, hay,
hornsea, higworth, Iver in bucks, caremartken, Karewilley, Llanthissent,
Llarwin, loughborough, ludford, and melling 24 at Montgomery and Monmouth 10 at
Marras, and melton mowbray 15 at marleborough 24 at London and Leominster 10 at
Farnham, Foresham, Trodsham, Chesh, Fullsea, harleigh, hatley, hawkhurst,
hungerford, horncastle, Kenwilgal, Kellow and Killgarron 15 at Egleswisbully
and Elesinere 24 at Farrington 15 at Gainsborough, Godhurst, hinkley and
huntington 24 at honywood and Kidderminster 29 at saint John's bridge 15 at
luton 4 at luton, ludlow

Fairs in SEPTEMBER
8. At Srreton church, stratford-Avon, smalding, sturbridge in cambridgeshire;
southwark; snynde; sneath; gisborough; haulton; hartford; huntington;
Atherstone; Abbington; brewood and beumaris 8 and 29 at blackburn 29 at
Aberforth, Averconway; saint Albans; Ashburn peak; hay; headly, higworth 14 at
Avergavenny 21 at saint Abergwylly; helmsley and holden 14 at hitsbury; hidowne
and Ross 29 at higham ferries 17 at stopford 26 at soham 24, 25 and 26 at
sudbury 29 at Tuddington; stonehouse green; selby; shelford; stow, Lancast.
Tame; Torrington and Tukesbury 21 at shrewsbury and stafford 8 at Teuby and
Tuxford 23 at Towcester 25 at Inglest wait 21 at Katharine; hill and Kingston,
War. 29 lancaster; laveinham 24 at Llanvilling 20 at Llanvelley 17 at
Llanidlasse 21 at ledbury 8 at Llidissel 29 at Kingston on hull; Kingstand and
Kingstan 21 at Knighton 8 at Kington 28 at Caremarthen 8 at berry; Lanc. 14 at
barsley 21 at buckingham; bedford; baldock; bradle; Maid. braintree; bulwick;
birkinton 10 and 11 at basing-stoke 29 at bla^stock; bishop-stortford;
bremingham and buckland 27 at basingstoke 8 at Utoxeter Wakefield, waltham,
weld, west-mean, whitland 13 at Valyley 21 at the Vizes 1 at whitehaven 7 at
ware 29 at Uxbridge, weyhill, weymer. 7 days, witham, woodham-ferry 7 at
woodbury-hill 29 at leicester, Llanidlas, lanthangle, lochyr, ludlow 8 and 21
at malden 14 at moucton 21 at marlborough and midnal 24 and 29 at malton w. 29
at marcherbeth 8 Northampton 13 Newton 14 Newport and Newborough 21 Nottingham
2 Neathyr 14 at burford 1 at capple sieve 29 at burwel, black heath 8 at
cardiff, cardig and chatton 14 at chesterfield 17 at cliffe 29 at charlebury 12
and 29 at canterbury 21 at croydon and chappon 25 and 26 countess-court fair 29
at chester, chichester, crisle and cockermouth 21 at cricklade 24 at woodstock
8 at worseworth and woolpit 11 at wookin 14 at waltham-Abby, wibley and worton
29 at wendover 18 at wallingford 20 at weathera 8 at Draiton, Dryfield 29 at
Newbury 14 at Denbigh 4 at Okeham 13 at Orlton 21 at Daintry, Dover, the first
thursday at Okehampton 22 at Derby 28 at Dolgeth 8 at Parthne and poultheley 29
at Deeping, mark. 21 at peterborough and Easterland 29 at Dean 14 at penhade 5
at probus 2 and 3 at Epping 12 at Enfield 23 at pancridge in staffordshire 8 at
Reculver 8 and 13 at Rockingham 14 at Richmond and Rippon 8 at Greenstreet 25
at Greenstead.

Fairs in OCTOBER
2 At Salisbury 9 at Ashborn-peak 6 at Havent 13 at Aberstow 18 at Ashweel 30
at Abermals 20 at Abrighton 28 at Ashby-de-la-Zouch and Aberconway 18 at
Farringdon 29 at saint Friswid in Ox. 9 at Gainsborough 9 and 21 at hereford 13
at gravesend 16 at grays 23 at preston 31 at powltheley 18 at Radnor 23 at
Ratsdale 31 at Rathin 13 at Royston 8 and 9 at Yarmouth 18 at York 13 at
wakefield 28 at warminster, warwick, wilton, Newmarket, Oxford 26 at whemerly
13 at Newport in Mon. 18 at Newcastle 21 at Newport 18 at Newark 8 at
pontstephen 13 at Draiton 16 at Daventre 13 at saint Edmunstone 18 at Ely 24,
25, 26 and 27 at Elvest 6 at saint Faiths by Nor. 18 at Ewell 1 and 18 at
Banbury 9 at harborough 8 at swansey 1 at Sevenock 9 at sabridgworth 13 at
Hitchin and hedner 3 at Boltonmore 13 at stow on the would 18 at hatfield 8 at
Bishops-stratford, and blyth in Not. 18 at henley, Arden 13 at staunton and
stotford 18 at holt 28 at hartford 12 at bolton, For. 5 at bosworth 18 at
barnet 28 at halton 21 and 31 at stokesley 28 at stamford 18 at Kidwelly 18 at
brickhill and bridgnorth, the thursday before the 18 at bromyard 23 and 28 at
Knotsford, Low 9 at Throckgrais 18 at burton on Trent 23 at bricklesworth 8 and
21 at Llanibither. 13 at Tamworth 18 at Thirst and Tisdale 25 at beverly 12 at
Llangeves: first monday and tuesday at Thorn 18 at Tidswell 28 at biddern 13 at
leighton 18 at Towcester, Tunbridge and lowhadon 1 at Castor and Carton 5 at
Chaple-frith 21 at lentham 28 at Talisam-green, lempster, leominster and
Llanedy 8 at chichester 10 at clift 13 at charing 9 at the Vizes 18 at Uphaven
4 at saint Michaels 13 at churstone and colchester 6 at mainstone and wantage 4
at weald 18 at charney 13 at marshfield 7 at worksep 13 at windsor 18 at
wellenborrow, marlow, charleton, cliff Regis, midleway, midhurst, wiggan and
wrickley 22 at wye 23 and 28 at whitchurch 21 at coventry 31 at chelmsford, and
the second tuesday at marsh

Fairs in NOVEMBER.
1 at Kellom, Bicklesworth, Montgomery, castlemain, Fairford, ludlow, Swaley 2
at highborough, Blechingly, bishop-castle, buckle and Elesmere, Kingstone on
Thames, Wilton, maxfield, mayfield, leek 23 at ludlow 6 at Andover 10 at
Aberwin-green, lenton in Not, and Llanibether 13 Llanithinery 17 at lincoln 30
at St, Austell 11 at Aberkennen 29 at Ashbornpeak and lawrest 30 at Abbington
and Amptill 6 and 30 at bedford 6 at brecknock, malling, morton 13 at monmouth
and marchenleth 11 at botingham 23 at bangor and bwelch 30 at maidenhead,
maiden bradly, baldock, bewdley, boston, bedford 6 at Newportpannel 28 at
carlin 11 at Newcastle under line 17 at Northampton 13 at chelinsford 30 at
collinsborough, Newberry, Oswestry, petersfield, pecorces, preston, cobham,
cibley 11 at Dover 20 at Dolton 11, 13 and 20 at St. Edmondsbury 6 and 11 at
Pembridge 2 at Pennibout 30 at Enfield 11 at Folkingham 10 at Rugby 30 at Ross
and Rochester 6 at Salford and stanly 23 at Froom 10 and 11 at Garstange 11 and
13 at Guilford 10 at shaftsbury and shesnal 30 at Greensteed 6 at hertford 11
at skipton in Cravan 17 at spalding, harlow, and hide 19 at horsham 22 at
swathey 23 at sandwich 25 at hedon and higham-ferries 20 at health 6 at Trigney
in Lanc. 30 at harleigh 11 at Tream 15 and 16 at Thwayt 20 at Ingenstone 23 at
Tuddington 5 at Welsh-pool 6 at wetshod and wellington 10 at wem 11 at withgrig
13 at wellington 30 at wakefield and warington 2 and 11 at York 6 at lesford in
Lanc. 3 at caremarthen 1 and 23 at ludlow 23 at Ketters-cross 30 at Kimbolton.

Fairs in DECEMBER.
4 At Atherstone 5 at Dolgeth, Newtown and puchley 6 at Arundel, Exeter, St.
Edes, cased, Grantham, heningham, hethin, hornse, Northwich in Chapter sevenock,
spalding, wallingford and woodstock 7 at sandhurst 8 at bewmaris, Clithero,
Cardigan, Kimar, leicester, malpus, Northampton and whiteland 21 at charlbury
29 at canterbury 21 at Hornbury 22 at Llandilawer 29 at Royston and salisbury
11 at Northampton

Note, Where you find words standing for the beginning of a County after any
Place Named; as Lanc. for Lancashire, Not. for Nottinghamshire, etc. then the
Place is in that County: And this is to distinguish them, there being more of
the same Name.

An exact Catalogue of the Moveable Fairs, with their exact Times and Places.
AT Northampton from Christmas to June every wednesday. Monday after
Twelfth-day at Buckingham. At Hinkley three mondays after twelfth-day. At
Melton-mowbrav and Salisbury the tuesday after Twelfth day for horses: the
thursday after Twelfth-day at Banbury and Lutterworth, and for three weeks
every thursday after at Litchfield: the friday after Twelfth-day at
Newcastle-under-line. On Shrove-monday at Candene. In Glocestershire on
Ash Wednesday; and the same day at Dunstable, Chichester, Eaton, Exeter,
Folkingham, Litchfield, Royston, Tamworth, Tunbridge. On the first thursday in
Lent at Banbury: the first monday in Lent at Abington, Winchester, Chichester,
Chersey: the first tuesday in Lent at Bedford.

At Charlebury on Michaelmas day, St. Thomas's day, second friday in Lent. On
the third monday in Lent at Stamford for horses: On midlent sunday at Odiham,
Saffron-Walden and Stamford: the friday and saturday before the first sunday in
Lent at Hartford: the first sunday in Lent at Hexcomb, Grantham, Sudbury and
Salisbury.

The tuesday after midlent-sunday at Leominster: the monday before Lady day at
Wisbich, Kendale and Denbigh: wednesday before Ladyday at Dolton: the thursday
before Lady day at Yarmouth: On St. Matthew's day at Cricklade.

The tuesday seven-night before Palm Sunday, St. Luke's day at New Market: the
wednesday before Palm-thursday at Drayton; and the thursday before it at
Landissel.

On Palm Sunday at Leicester, Newport, Alesbury, Wisbich, Skipton and Pomfract:
On the same at Billinsworth, Lancaster, Kendale, Worcester, Llaundaren: the
tuesday after at Wakefield.

The monday before Easter at Ledbury: tuesday before Easter, and St. Barnaby's
day at Selby.

Monday, tuesday and wednesday before Easter at Marsh, the same day at Ludlow:
the thursday before Michaelmas: the thursday before Easter, and the thursday
before St. Thomas's day at Kettering: the monday before St. John Baptist at
Soham: the wednesday in Easter week at Mass-Gate; monday, wednesday and
thursday in Easter week at Sosings: On saint Peter and saint Paul at Ridbury.

On the Eve and Feast of saint Peter and saint Paul at Barkstrange; Also on the
Eve and Feast of saint Martin.

On the monday in Easter week, and monday before saint Thomas's day at
Thornbury.

At Cateline and Llanvillan on the wednesday before Easter, and on the
wednesday and thursday before at Wallingford, Kettering and Sudminster.

On Good friday at Burnhil, Amptil, Brewerton, Charing, Berry, Enfield,
Guilford, Huntington, Hatfield, Ipswich, Melian, Lougher, Nutley, saint Pombs,
Risborough and Roborough.

On Easter monday at Onay, Buck, Dryfield, and Gainsborough: On tuesday at
Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Dantry, Braleis, Dorchester, Oxen. Northstreet, Hitching,
Roachford and Sambich.

On Easter wednesday at Wellingborough and Beverly: On friday in Easter at
Derby, the next day at Skipton in Craven. The second monday after Easter at New
Malton

Monday, tuesday and wednesday after Easter at Chudley, and on the wednesday at
Hereford.

At Lodness every wednesday after Easter, Martlemas day. At Inglestwait, monday
before Holythursday. Buckland, All Souls day, tuesday after Pentecost.

At Bricklesworth, Evesham and Newcastle-under-line, on monday after Low-sunday.

At Lough in Lincolnstire the third sunday after Easter.

At Beverly, Englefield, Lane. Rech in Rogation week.

On Enmore Green the first tuesday in every month.

Green street on tuesday before Ascension day. At Weobly on Ascension day, and
thursday three weeks after.

At Ross on Ascension day, and the thursday after Trinity sunday.

On Ascension Eve at Abergelly and Darkin.

On Ascension day at Bread-street in Kent, Bewmaris, Bridgend, Brimmingham,
Chapple-Frith, Burton on Trent, Eccleshal, Chapple-Kinnow, Egglestrew, St.
Eedes, Hallaton in Leicest. Lutterworth, Kidderminster, Middlewich, Newcastle,
Newbury, Penhole, Rone, Rippon, Stopport, Stratford upon Avon, Sudminster,
Yarnwigg and the Vizes.

At Burlington and Thaxsted the sunday after Ascension day.

At Shrewsbury the wednesday after, and at Ruthin the friday after.

On Whitsun-Eve at New-Inn, Rats-dale, Wisbich, Skipton in Craven.

On Whit-sunday at Kirk by Stephen, Cribby, Lenham, Rutsdale, Ryhill and
Salisbury.

On Whit-monday at Bromyard, Kingston and Grays tuesdays and wednesdays.

At Ormiskirk monday and tuesday in Whitsunweek, and on the monday at Lambyron,
Chipping, Agmondsham, Appleby, Amersom, Bradford, Bricklesworth, Burton in
Lane: Chichester, Cockermouth, Datterington, Evesham, Exeter, Dyfield, Linton,
St. Ives, Harts-green, Rigate, Owndle, Midlome, Sleford, Salford, Sittingboun,
Whichurch and Stockelter.

On Whit-tuesday at Canterbury, Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Elesmere, Daintree, Epping,
Leighton -Buz. Knotsford high. Louguir, Lewis, Llaninthebury, Midhurst,
Monmouth, Melton Mobray, Oringstock, Rochford, Perith.

On the wednesday in Whitsun-week at Royston, Sand-Bar, Pont-Stephen, Newark on
Trent, Libedon, Llandeby and Leek

On thursday the same week at saint Austel, Kingstone and Chacklefield.

On the friday at Stow in Guillin, Derby and Cogshal.

On Trinity Eve at Skipton in Craven, Rowel and Pomfract.

On Trinity sunday at South haven, Stokely, saint Mary Awk, Kemdale, Rowel.

On Trinity monday at Raleigh, Houndslow, Ruilly, Cresswell, Waterford, Usk,
the Vizes, Spilsby and Tunbridge.

On the tuesday after at Radnor and Abergavenny, and the wednesday after at
Aberfrow.

On the day of Corpus Christi at Sanbury, saint Anns, Bishop-Stratford,
Catewid, Bremicham, Hallatan, Egiestrew, Haligh, Kidderminster, Hampstead,
Llanwist, Llammerchimeth, Newbury, Neath, saint Neots, Newport in
Montgomeryshire, Stopport, Prescot and Ross.

On the friday after at Coventry and Chepstow.

On the sunday after at Stamford and Bolton.

The sunday after the third of July at Haveril, and the sunday fortnight after
Midsummer at Fothering Hay.

On the first sunday after saint Bartholomews day at Samphbick and Ashford, and
the thursday before at St. Michaels at Kettering. The monday after saint Mich.
at Faseley, saint Faith's by Norwich. Saint Michaels, and on the tuesday after
at Salisbury. On the thursday at Banbury, and the friday before Simon and Jude
at Litchfield; and on the thursday before saint Thomas's day at Ketterring;
Stafford, saint Peter's day.

Pounds. Shillings. Pence. Farthings. 1 20 240 960 2 40 480 1920 3 60 720 2880
4 80 960 3840 5 100 1200 4300 6 120 1440 5760 7 140 1680 6720 8 160 1920 7680 9
180 2160 8640 10 200 2460 8600

This Table is easy, and wants no Explanation, and turned backward, it is
Farthings into Pence; Pence into Shillings; and Shillings into Pounds, which at
first sight may be thus computed.

FINIS
THE CONTENTS.
A Computation of Time, in Minutes, Hours, Days, Weeks, Months, Years, divided
into Quarters, with Signs Governing; as also of the Planetary Dominions Page 1
To know what Month and Day, the moveable Feasts and Terms will fall on for many
Years to come 3 Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, how caused, with Rules to know
when they will Happen 5 Prognostics, or Predictions, on the Days of the Week,
that New Years Day shall fall on; Relating to the weather, to fall out,
throughout the Year: Searcity and Plenty: Diseases that will happen to People;
also to Cattle 7 Unluckey Days in every month, Dangerous to begin any Business
on, fall Sick, Blood, Purge, Journey, etc. 12 The most remarkable Days in the
Year, that are accounted fortunate, to begin any weighty matter on. 13 Ordinary
Days through the Year, more successful than others, not Named, already for
Luckey Days. 15 Observations on Remarkable Days, to know how the whole Year
will succeed, in Weather, Plen^y, etc. page 16 Other Curious Observations on
the Seasons of the Year, as to the Weather that will happen, and such like
Matters. 18 Infallible signs of Weather in all seasons throughout the Year, by
the Planets, Elements Creatures, etc. 19 Infalliable signs of Rain, and
drisling wet Weather, taken by Observations of the Planets, and other Stars,
Elements, Creatures, etc. ibid The signs of Rain by Creatures, etc. 20 Signs of
Wind, and sudden Storms arising, Prognosticated by the Planets, Elements,
Creatures, etc. in all seasons of the Year for ever. 22 Signs of the Winds
shifting or changing in the several Points of the Compass. 24 Signs of storms
Ceasing. 25 Signs of Excessive Hot Weather. ibid Signs of Cold Weather, or Hard
Winter. 26 Prognostics of Fair Weather by the Planets, Elements, and
Creatures, etc. 27 Signs of Hail (violent and moderate) by the Planets,
Elements, etc. 28 Signs of Snow, and Drisly sleet, etc. 29 Prognostics of
Frosty Weather by the Planets, Elements, Creatures, etc. ibid Signs of a Thaw
in any great hard Frost, etc. 30 Of wonderful signs in the Heavens, and on the
Earth, whence they Proceed; and what they Prognosticate of strange Events. ibid
Comets, or Blazing-stars; with Astrological Observations, what they are, and
Prognostics on them. 31 Many Suns appearing in the Heavens at once, the cause,
and what they Predict. page 33 The appearing of many Moons in the Night, and
what they Prognostic of Good or Bad. 35 Of the Rainbow (how caused) and what
it Prognosticates. ibid Of the Ignis Fatuus, or Fires that lead People astray
in the Night time, called Will with the Whisp. 37 Of the Flame that appears on
the Hair and Beards of Men, and upon that of Beasts. 38 Strange Apparitions of
Armies, and other wonderful sights in the Air, how caused. 39 The Kinds of
Earthquakes, their cause, and signs, fore-running them, and what they portend.
ibid Signs fore-running Thunder, Lightning, etc. 42 Of sudden Whirl-winds, and
surprising Tempests. ibid Approved Rules for Manageing Husbandry, or Rural
Affairs, during the Twelve Months of the Year for ever. 43 Signs of Murrein,
Rot, or such like Destroying Diseases in Cattle; how to prevent or remedy them.
47 Signs of Murrein that do befall Cattle. 48 Prognostics of a Rot which fall
upon Sheep. 50 Rot in Sheep, how to prevent it and other Diseases, and Cure it
when taken. 51 How to Calculate Nativities, to know Good or Bad Fortune:
Introducing to that Curious Art, plainly describing it by Complexions, Humors,
etc. 53 How to tell any Number one shall Think, be it never so great. 56 To
know the Planet that has Dominion in the Nativity of any Person. ibid The Art
of Discovering Truth from Falsehood. 57 How to know whether you shall be
Successful in any Matters you Engage in against another. Page. 59 To know
whether the Party you Love be Virtuous and Chaste. 61 The Mosaic Wand to find
out Hidden Treasure. ibid Choice Secrets in Astrology on several Useful
Occasions. 62 A safe way to secure a House. 63 A Safeguard for all Outhouses,
to secure Poultry, Cattle, Corn, or what else is shut up therein. 64 A
Safeguard for an Orchard, Park, Warren, or Field, to take a Thief, etc. 65 To
drive away Ghosts or Spirits that Haunt a House, and prevent the Night Mare. 66
This to be carried about One, for the prevention of Witchcraft, being under an
Ill Tongue, as Planet struck. ibid To prevent Affrighting Dreams, and take away
fear in the Night. 67 To help a Person under an Ill Tongue, and make ^he Witch
appear, or the Effects cease. ibid To prevint or take Vermin, that come to
Destroy Poultry, or Coney Warrens. 68 To prevent a Dogs Barking at you in the
Night time. 69 To draw Cats together, so that they shall not escape your Hands.
ibid A Pleaget to wear about ones Neck, to prevent Bugs, Fleas, or Gnats Biting
in the Night time. 70 To Drive away Mice or Rats, in a House, or Grainary. 71
To prevent being Rebbed on the Road, or meeting with any bad Accident. ibid To
find out a Thief, or make him or her bring back the Goods stolen. Page. 72 A
Pleasant Device or Stratagem to find out any Person Suspected to have Robbed
you. 73 To know what Place is best to Live and Thrive in, whether one shall be
Rich or Poor, Long Life or Short, what Sickness, or Crosses shall befall one.
74 How to Resolve all Lawful Questions, Relating to Marriage, Friendship,
Journying, Life Long or Short, Business Success, or any other truly stated. 78
What Diseases in the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children, are more Immediately
caused by the Influence of the seven Planets, with Astrological Remarks as to
their Cure. 81 The Urinall Doctor, or Astrological and Physical Observations,
on Casting Urine, Relating to Health or Sickness, with Cautions to prevent
threatened Evils. 83 Cautions against much Bleeding, and Physicking, and what
Necessary Rules are to be Taken to Supply the Defect. 85 How to Diet, and Order
our Bodies, for the preservation of Health, for every Month in the Year; the
most Approved Rules. 87 A Treatise of Bees, how to Order, Preserve, Swarm,
Gather their Honey, and all other Matters Relating to them. 93 The Warreners
Instructor; or a Treatise of Coneys, their Ordering to Preserve, and Increase
them, Diseases, and Remedys. 96 A Cure for Madness in Coneys. 98 A Cure for the
Rot in Coneys. 99 To keep and order Hares in Warrens, or Tame them in all
respects as the Coney. ibid To know the New or Old Form, whether Retained by a
Hare or left, her Shifts, etc. Page. 101 To know whether a Coney or Rabit be
Old or Young, or New or Stale Killed, etc. ibid To know whether a Hare be old
or young, new or stale killed, and whether a Hare or Leveret? 102 The
Faulconers Choice Instructor, or the best way to Manage, Mew, Feed, Purge,
Succor, and Keep Hawks to Fly at all Sorts of Game, and to do what ever is
Requisite for their Preservation, well Ordering, and to make them Expert in
what they are Designed for, or Required to Perform. 103 Of Hawks in General,
and what Game they most Properly Fly at. ibid How to Order Hawks taken from the
Cage, etc. 104 How to bring your Hawk to the Lure. 105 To Enseam Hawks, and
otherways Order them: To Enure them to Flight, etc. 106 The Management of Hawks
in their Flight, and Particularly to Fly at the River. 108 A Plain and Elisie
Introduction to the most curious Art, and Healthful Exercise of Ringing
Musically on 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. or 9. Bells. 109 Of the Changes. 110 Of Peals.
111 Of Cross Peals. 112 The Example. 113 Of Doubles and Singles on four Bells.
114 The Peals called the Old Doubles and Singles on Five Bells. 115 The Old
Trebles and Doubles on Six Bells. 116 How a Countryman may know how much Hay
or Corn his Barn will hold before it be put in. 117 The Measure that ought to
be in Cords or Stacks of Wood. Page. 118 To tell what is a Clock (when the Sun
Shines) by ones Hand. 119 A Catalogue of the Markets, and the Days they are
kept on in the several Counties and Shires in England and Wales. 121
Market Towns and their Days in WALES, 128 An exact Catalogue of the fixed and
moveable Fairs, held Yearly in England and Wales; the days and times of their
continuance; the like for exactness, never before Published. 130 An exact
Catalogue of the Moveable Fairs, with their, exact Time and Places. 142 A Table
for reducing Pounds into Shillings, Pence, and Faithings, and the contrary. 147
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, lately Printed for Josiah Blare, Bookseller, at the
Looking-Glass on London Bridge.
A Yres's Arithmatick: A Treatise designed for the Use and Benefit of
Tradesmen; wherein the Nature and Use of Fractions, both Vulgar and Decimal,
are Taught by a New and Easy Method, Also, the Art of Measuring.

The Accomplished Ladys Rich Closet of Raerities; or, The Ingenious
Gentlewomans and Servant-Maids Delightful Companion: Containing many excellent
Things for Accommodation of the Female-Sex; as, The Art of Stilling, Preserving,
Conserving, Cookery. With Directions to Young Gentlewomen, as to their
Behavior, and seemly Deportment in Conversation.

The Famous and Pleasant History of Parismus, the Valiant and Renowned Prince
of Bohemia. In Two Parts. I. Containing his Triumphant Battles fought against
the Persians, his Love to the Beautiful Laurana, the great Danger he passed in
the Island of Rocks, and his strange Adventures in the Desolate Islands. II.
Containing the Adventurous Travels, and Noble Chivalry of Parismenos, the
Knight of Fame, with his Love to the Fair Princes Angelica, the Lady of the
Golden Tower. In Octavo. Price Bound, 1 s.

The Essex Champion: or, The Famous History of Sir. Billy of Billerrecay, and
his 'Squire Ricardo; showing the Renowned Achievements and Valiant Acts of the
Invincible Knight, Sir. Billy of Billerrecay, with his Love to his Lady
Dulcina; as also the Commical Exploits, and Amourous Adventures of Ricardo his
'Squire; their Tilts and Turnament in Honor of Ladies; their Battles with
Giant and Monsters. Written by William Winstandly, Gent. of Saffron-Walden, in
Essex.

The Famous History of Amadis of Greece: or The Renowned Knight of the Burning
Sword.

The Complete English Secretary; and Newest Accademy of Complements: Containing
the true Art of Indicting Letters suitable to the Capacity of Youth and Age,
Relating to Familiar Conversation between Friends and Acquaintance, Husbands
and Wives, Children and Parents, etc. Likewise Instructions for Directing,
Superscribing Letters; also the Titles of Persons of Quality, and all other
Degrees. With Dialogues very witty and pleasant, Relating to Love, Familiar
Discourse, and other Matters, etc. To which is added. I. The Art of Good
Breeding and Behavior; together with Instructions for Carving Fish, Flesh, and
Fowl, after the Newest manner. II. The English Fortuneteller, as to what
Relates to Good or Bad Fortune in Maids, Widows, Widowers and Batchellors. III.
Joyful Tidings to the Female Sex. IV. A Treatise of Moles. V. The
Interpretation of Dreams. With a Collection of the Newest Play Songs.

A Companion for Children and Youth: or, A Little Book for Children. In Three
Parts. I. Good Counsel and Instructions for Children. II. Describing who they
are that are Good Children. III. A Dialogue between William and Betty, on
serving God, etc.

Aristotle's Legacy: Or, his Golden Cabinet of Secrets, etc.

FINIS.

