FOUR SMALL COPIES OF VERSES UPON SUNDRY OCCASIONS

Hei mihi! quam multis sic quoque longus eris? Mart. Epigr. lib. 2. By Richard
Pee^^ of Christ-Church.

OXFORD, Printed by W. H. for Thomas Bowman, 1667.

READER,
NEither the Interest nor Importunity of Friends extorted these few lines from
me: it was the publication of some former verses, too much mine and the worlds
enemies. I am troublesome to you at present because I have been infinitely so
already; and the reason of this bold appearance is not that I do well now, but
that I have before done worse. Repentance is the ready way to pardon, and
amendment (how weak soever) is the best symptom, (because the natural effect)
of Repentance. I need not give you a list of my former errors: they were too
gross not to be notorious; and bad Poetry is a sin against too many, to hope
for indulgence. Besides as Music (and Poetry is Music set to Reason) is a
pleasure which few men are insensible of; so is there no aversion comparable to
that which makes us fly from the harshness of notes, and the gratings of
irregular sounds. But to come to a more solemn confession, it was with me as
with most young Rhymers, who seem to make good the assertion of their
adversaries; that they sweat at the Anvil, and that toil and Industry, is the
very essence of their skill, because their study is only to hammer out a few
thin vanishing flashes, and their productions nothing else but the ordinary
mechanic results of fire and water. Indeed when they might write easier, and
write better, they love to be painfully ridiculous, and to expose themselves
with a great deal of Care. I mean not that accuracy of judgment which often
passes sentence with too much rigor, when the Author sits upon every word he
writes: It is the unnecessary toil and travel of the fancy which is culpable
here; for certainly it must needs be less troublesome to make use of such
pertinent thoughts as upon a free and easy meditation naturally arise from the
subject, and (as it were) meet the imagination half way; then after a tedious
research under pretense of hoping for somewhat that is new and extraordinary, to
huddle together such things as being infinitely distant in nature, will not
easily be connected in speech: where besides, that this wandering abroad is
often accompanied with the neglect and loss of our Mother Tongue, we commonly
bring home the outlandish Gallantry of Duelling; love dearly to make one word
give another the lie, teach every period to affront his next neighbor, and are
infinitely pleased with the scuffle of two jarring elements; while in the mean
time the expression proves an unfortunate stickler between two irreconcilable
enemies, and seldom comes off better then maimed or wounded. Another fault
incident to young Scriblers is (more bold and daring then the former) their
downright falsifying the natural circumstances of their subject; (and the
circumstances of a subject are the materials of invention) like pitiful
Archers, still shifting the mark, just as their roving fancy chances to direct
them: they seem to endeavor that their productions may bear so near a
resemblance to the Immortality they vainly pretend to, as not to be tied to the
Accidents, nor limited or circumscribed by the conditions of their matter: so
bodly dare they venture upon the most impertinent Improbabilities, for the
ushering in of a few empty Equivocations; which is little better then the
impudent asserting of one lie, by the dexterous forging of another. And now it
is very probable that ere this I have sufficiently displeased my Reader, who
may impute that to Arrogance and Presumption which I term a serious
acknowledgment. But if his malice be not concerned before his Judgment, I think
he will easily perceive that though I may seem to intend the guidance of other
men's Pens, yet my real design is no other then to fashion a Rule for my own
lines, heretofore crooked, unequal, and wholly irregular. And the incivility of
those men, methinks, is very strange, who will not give me leave to condemn my
self, only because it seems a diminishing of their right, and an entrenching
upon their pretended Privilege and Jurisdiction. Indeed I shall subscribe to
the severest Judgment they can possibly pass upon my former notorious
Criminals, which I could wish were not mitigated with the least tincture of
mercy; so necessary is the reservation of all the power and force of the most
entire candor for the acquitting of my ensuing pages; which I am really
sensible have no luster in them but when those extravagant impertinencies
become their foil. Indeed considering the generality of Readers, it would seem
not at all for my Interest to prejudice my following Verses, by the bold
errors of foregoing Prose, did I not a little consult my own satisfaction
(which though it may resemble what we term a Woman's reason yet is the rule by
which every man squares his actions) and did I not likewise know that it is
ordinary in Commonwealths (especially that we attribute to Learning) to have
the many pride themselves in the gilded Liberty of voting what they please,
but in the mean time the issue and success of affairs, (yea even the opinions
of the People) are regulated by the Judgment of a very few. Not but that I have
been too great a sinner in this kind, to be assured of my thorough conversion:
And therefore as my faith bids me quit the Romish new fangl'd absurdity of
thinking any thing deducible from the practice or opinion of a multitude; so my
reason tells me, I must become a Protestant in Poetry, confess that when I have
done the best I can, there is no confiding in my own merits, and wholly cast my
self upon the mercy of my Reader. To conclude, I know well that the nature of
Virtue consists not in a mere negation of what is notoriously bad; it must be
distinguished by its opposite qualities, have its positive and real
perfections; and that Zealot was very impudent, who challenged acceptance upon
the account of his being not quite so bad as the very worst.

TO THE REVEREND DR FELL, DEAN of Ch: Ch: at his return in May 1666 from the
WEST MINSTER ELECTION.
AS a wise Victor still pursues new Fame,
Adds to his Empire, and extends his Name:
Because he knows and dreads the certain Fate
Of whatsoever's Eminent or Great;
Which if their farther progress be delayed
(As Planets when they stop) prove Retrograde.
(For States and Kingdoms are reversed and hurled
Like those great Lights that influence the world.)
So (worthy Sir) that new access and gain
Your acquired Empires greatness may maintain,
Fresh Plots and Stratagems your wisdom finds
To conquer Hearts and captivate new minds.
While the designs of your unstinted soul,
Nor War can cross, nor Pestilence control.
Such fervent zeal did Priests of old incline
To quench a God or grasp a burning shrine.
And you Sir, like devout Metellus came
To snatch a Pallas from surrounding flame:
Your virtues rightly timed, you wisely thence
Enhance their value at the same expense.
You grasp short lived occasion ere she dies.
Prevent address, and rescue by surprise.
Others Devotion only comes, and flits;
And their zeal warmes them but like Ague fits:
Yours constant is, its motion still the same.
Nimble and restless like aspiring flame.
So the Suns Heat and active Influence,
Do Life and Vigor constantly dispense.
And when from us his cheerful Beam declines,
It Is to hatch Gold, and ripen Indian Mines.
Through Sickness, Tumult, and whatever waits
On factious Cities, and diseased States,
To pass so free, secure, and unconfined;
Argues the greatness of your Godlike Mind.
Thus the Heavens Progress undisturbed appears
'Midst humane troubles, and disordered fears.
Earths low disasters no obstructions bring
To stop their Bounty or retard the Spring.
And now (Great Sir) while Orators enclose
Their Gratulations in looser Prose.
Will not their boundless Liberty resign,
Shackle their Duty, or their Joys confine,
But long Pathetick Sentences rehearse:
Your Obligations fetter me in Verse.
Their grave Harangues with Interest combine;
And their set-speech courts trivial design.
Our Thoughts are Innocent, and are secure;
Like unmixt Elements both Calm and Pure.
Music that does Poetic Souls employ,
Is the most natural result of Joy.
Then welcome (Sir) unto a place is grown
To be a structure every way your own.
Whose few years Bounty has improved it more
Then tedious Reigns of profuse Kings before.
Your Glory it is to Build so brave a Pile:
And them the Founders we may truly Style.
With far less Structures Pilgrim Princes buy
The favor of an angry Deity.
And Superstitious deceasing Kings
(Who think that every Quarry Blood-stones brings)
Less costly Piles to staunch the wounds intend
Of a slain Brother or a murdered Friend.
How shall we guess your Pieties intent?
At once so liberal and Innocent!
Had the Great Woolsey's soul Prophetic been,
And a so near succeeding Age foreseen;
Should harbor a Devotion so profuse,
Such a stupendous Piety produce;
As void of Ostentation calmly drowns
The Gifts of Kings and largesses of Crowns;
And free from Noise and Tumult, has overcome
The wealth of England and the pride of Rome.
And (though it have, nor State nor Kingdom drained,
Nor is by lavish Majesty maintained)
Outvies the Greatness of his Power and Mind;
All that he did, and all that he designed:
This had restrained his Pride, and made him know
His projects mean and his ambition low.
Disguised his great looks in a bashful frown;
And clad his face more Scarlet then his gown.
But (Sir) your Modesty your Fame displayes,
And puts no limits to your spreading rays.
(Which far transcend the narrow laws of Verse,
And must be boundless as the Universe.]
Your Merits all Encomiums debar,
He still shoots low that levels at a Star.
And he that will your meanest action tell,
Under your nearer influence must dwell.
This may the poorest thoughts exalt, and raise
To the sublime Ideas of your Praise.
Instruct our verse from your great works to draw
A Maid-like Beauty, and a Man-like aw.
With graceful Majesty our numbers stream:
Both smooth and stately like their lofty Theme,
This may at length inform us how to Sing,
A Cardinal transcended and a King.
The mighty Maro (while in Country cells)
Thus writes as low and narrow as he dwells.
Till Romes high fabrics elevate his Style,
And teach him build a like Majestic Pile.
He Is to her greatness Parallel and just,
While Caesar's Palace makes his Muse august.
AN EPITAPH Upon a Gentleman aged above Sixty, he died as he lived, Faithful to
the Church, and Loyal to the King, lies Buried with a Son of about nine years
of Age.
I.
IF to be Good, when Virtue was a Crime,
If on abandoned Piety to wait,
Pity and prop those ruins others climb,
Were to be Famous, Popular and Great:
(Reader,) this weeping Marble had confined
The universal sorrow of Mankind.
II.
For here lies one, whose Faith unshaken stood,
By mighty Interest though often alarmed.
Not threescore Icy winters chil'd his blood:
While true Devotion loyalty still warmed.
(Like Wines when they of youthful fume abate)
Time gave him vigor, and more useful heat.
III.
Led by a clearer Zeal, he shunned those lights,
Which in Religion's night misguide the most.
Whom fear deceives, and ignorance affrights;
At length in dismal Precipices lost.
Never followed a blind faith's fantastic guess,
Never courted Faction in a Modish dress.
IV.
Nor wants the verdure of a happy Spring,
(The constant, Pious wish of weeping Verse.)
Here no vain pomp needs loaded baskets bring.
That just Solemnity might Crown his Hearse,
Death cropped his Son, and ere it was full blown,
That flowery sweetness on his Grave was thrown.
An Epitaph upon three Sisters, buried together. Their Education was wholly at
home; They lived Virtuous, and died Marriagable.
I.
HOld Stranger, let no hasty tear
Profane the greatness of our loss:
Light signs of sorrow dis-appear
When serious woes the Soul engross.
And weeping passion while with published Grief,
It pities others, seeks its own Relief.
II.
Here lie three Sisters, had what e're
The Triple Spring of Beauty gives.
Color, Proportion; and an Air
Such as with Beauty breaths, and lives.
Their number, friendship, and perfections bore
Marks of the Trinity they still adore.
III.
No public Envy e're alarmed,
No flattery their Beauties fed:
No Paint belied, no Passion warmed
Their cheeks into a borrowed red.
Deaf to the tempting noise of Court and King;
And pure as waters in their Native Spring.
IV.
Grown up to kindle chaste desire,
Unfit for frozen sheets of Lead,
Their youthful, sprightly flames expire;
And the Grave cheats the Marria'ge Bed.
Just so descending Goddesses draw near,
And midst poor man's Embraces dis-appear.
V
How frails Perfection, and how vain!
The crooked Oak's deformed and old.
Can to a thousand years attain
Through summers heat and winters cold.
While amidst Tempests that securely grows,
Heavens warm approaches parch the budding Rose.
VI.
Declining Nature now grows old
No doubt, for she through fond presage
Of future poverty lays hold
On the Avarice of thrifty Age:
Only poor Beauties now abroad are found,
Her Gold and Gems lie treasured under ground.
TO THE Memory of the Incomparable Mr. Abraham Cowley, lately Deceased.
I.
AS when some matchless Monarch dies, straight all
Adjoining Kings resent his hasty fate:
With grave Solemnity deplore his fall,
Which yet their Power enlarges and their State:
II.
So while the mighty Cowley yields his breath
His Neighbors sorrow in Poetic guise;
In frequent Elegies lament his Death,
Though on his Ruins they exspect to rise.
III.
And I, whose small Estate will scarce support
A mean Repute by Vulgar Poets won,
Like a profuse Retainer of the Court
Must keep the Fashion though I be undone.
IV.
May he whose dawning light of early Day
Outvy'd the splendor most Meridians have
Deign that a Tapers faint officious Ray
Do a small act of Duty to his Grave.
V.
Though vain's the Zeal which Richest Gums bestows,
Or strews the Flowers of no common Verse.
For his each leaf does nobler sweets disclose,
And his own Garden best adorn his Hearse.
VI.
Those happy Simples rescue from the Grave,
When Physics Rules but empty succors bring.
From their fresh bloom his constant Glories have
A lovely Verdure and a lasting Spring.
VII.
Nor him unwilling Histories record,
Amongst those who at great Fame not good arrive;
Whose Names are only read to be abhorred,
As Civil Wars and signal Plagues survive.
VIII.
But such a blessed Eternity attends
His works, as is from Spicy Odours bred,
Which some famed Herbalist together blends
At once to sweeten and preserve the dead.
IX.
A ruined * Palace first he raised, and then Sommerset House.

Described a Garden worthy such a Pile.
To Build and Plant with failing Age in ken
Deaths fatal Omen wise observers style.
X.
Yet must Experience cancel here her Laws;
Those very works shall make him deathless grow:
Thence he new life and youthful vigor draws;
Themselves obstructing what they would foreshow.
XI.
Hence then we date our Mighty Lyricks Birth,
While with him rival Emulation dies.
Heavens Harp never sets, but seems to touch the Earth;
Still brighter thence, and greater in its Rise.
XII.
In Solemn Duty to his Princely Grave,
Concern and Prejudice do now expire:
With the observance of an Eastern slave
First light his Pile, then leap into the fire.
XIII.
For even they, who (while he lived) oppressed
His growing Merits and his worth defamed,
Confess him now of Modern Wits the best,
And next Immortal Buried between Chaucer and Spencer.
Spencer to be named.
XIV.
So Romes repenting Senate Altars rears
And their yet bleeding Romulus adore;
He their Devotions object straight appears
Who fell the Victim of their Fuisse quoque tum credo ali quos qui discerptum
Regem Patrum manibus taciti arguerent Live.
Rage before.
XV.
How just (ye Gods) was He! though often arraigned,
Though often condemned by Wars severest Laws;
His Hopes discarded, and his Honor stained Accused for his ready compliance
with the late Usurpers.

For a too quick * Surrender of his Cause.
XVI.
See what weak Crimes do his first Faith oppose,
Which Interest and base design attest:
Like Pious David down his Harp he throws
When those that hear him are by Rage possessed.
XVII.
For first in happy Verse he did design
The A History of the Civil Wars.
seeds of Faction, and the source of War:
How Piety can with Ambition join,
And more then Hell contrive, Religion dare.
XVIII.
But after In the Preface to his Book.
Newburies twice dismal Field
Rebellions Conquest he no longer sings.
His measures unto wild disorder yield,
And Englands weeping moisture cracks his strings.
XIX.
Strong fate the vulgar unto Ruin led,
Disease their Meat, distemper was their Drink:
Now over the Body was it too far spread
To deem the Tetter curable by Ink.
XX.
Bold Treasons matchless Triumphs he had seen,
Ere from the War his Loyal Pen retired:
Thought Poetry had real fury been,
And no feigned madness, now to be Inspired.
XXI.
And therefore knowing Time alone defeats
The force of Floods by hasty Torrents fed,
(Like a foiled Prince) with Rebels wisely treats:
By feigned Compliance unto Conquest led.
XXII.
Unhappy man, whose miseries never cease!
On whom kind Fortune scarce bestows one smile!
His Loyalty is paid with Court-disgrace,
And a Retirement bitter as Exile.
XXIII.
Yet he is never changed by Sorrows or by Time:
His revered Prince does in his weeping Eyes
Appear more Sacred still, and more sublime;
As heights at distance seem to reach the Skies,
XXIV.
He thought on Pious David's mighty Name,
Whom once his Muse so happily did Sing:
And deemed it Treason against his Princely Theme
Ought should divide the Poet and the King.
XXV.
Cursed those, who (like the German Who found our Gunpowder,
Monck) invent
The seeds of Ruin in their fatal Cells:
Whose Leisure's on designs of Tumult bent,
And on the Deaths of tardy Ages dwells.
XXVI.
While naught those Rebel discontented Souls.
But dismal thoughts of Stabs and Drugs possess,
By Physics aid, Deaths Empire he controuls,
And does those ills which they design, redress.
XXVII.
He from the Noise and Injuries of Court,
Does only so to silent Groves repair,
As half-tir'd Passengers to Shades resort
From the offensive fury of the Air.
XXVIII.
Here his Pindarick Muse so bravely foar'd,
Commended others and her own fate mourned,
Long absent virtue seemed to Earth restord,
And Poetry unto the Woods returned.
XXIX.
Nor did the Learned World e're think him less;
(The fate of all great Persons in disgrace)
None there did his commanding worth depress,
Or his Supreme Authority displace.
XXX.
Him still their Guide succeeding Wits propound,
And those that best approach him Fame commends.
His Royal stamp on basest Metals found
Together value and resemblance lends.
XXXI.
So, near his Death some recluse Prince gives Law,
When Virtue's heightened by Romantique Lore:
His cloistered Majesty retains that aw
By which his Edicts ruled the world before.
FINIS.

