Gods Call to Unconverted SINNERS To turn to the Lord.

Plainly showing every poor Sinner the miserableness of his estate, and how
great an enemy he is to himself; that though the Lord be daily calling him, to
turn and live, and professes he delights not in the death of a sinner, yet for
all this he will go and die.

ALL SO The Happy Condition of the People of God, in that they have such a
Father that had rather see their Conversion, then Condemnation.

And lastly, to the Terror of Wicked and Ungodly men is set forth: That if they
will not turn to God that they may live with him in Heaven, they shall dye, and
be tormented with the Devil and his angels in hell fire. Matthew. 18.3. Except
you be converted, and become as little children, you shall in no wise enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

By T. P.

Printed for Charles Tyus. at the three Bibles on London Bridge. 1662.

Gods Call to Unconverted SINNERS.
Ezekiel. the 3. Chap. 11. verse. Say unto them, as I live says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that he turn from his evil
way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will you dye O
house of Israel!
THe Great God that made the Heaven and Earth, and all the living Creatures
therein, and has Redeemed you by his Son Christ Jesus; You that were lost and
undone sinners, to you has he sent his Gospel, the glad tidings of peace, and
to you has he given this privilege, that as many as believe on him shall have
eternal life; as many as turn to him shall live, and those that turn not, shall
dye. This is the unchangeable will and Law of God, that wicked men must turn or
dye. For see the very words of Christ Matthew. 18.3. Verily I say unto you,
except you be converted, and become as little Children, ye cannot enter into
the Kingdom of heaven. And John 3.3. Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord. And in the 11. Psalm. ver. 5. The Lord loves the Righteous, but the
wicked his soul hates. So that it is brought to this, that wicked men must
turn or dye.

1. From which words you must observe, First The pity and love of Ood to lost
undone souls; that he condescends to reason the case with them thus, Why will
you dye? That the Almighty and powerful God should stoop to dust and ashes;
Marein is his great love shown; That he delights not in the death of a
sinner, but rather that he would turn and live. God would not have them go in
the way that leads to Hell, but calls to them daily by the mouth of his
Prophets, to turn and live; and tells them, there is no peace to the wicked,
Isa 48.11. Isa. 37.21. God tells them, the love of the world is enmity with
God, and if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Yet
for all this, worldly they are, and worldly they will he: If the way to hell be
through the world, then to hell they will go.

Oh that men would she the folly of their own ways, and turn to the Lord! Then
should they see the Loveliness and Beauty that is in the ways of God; and the
Torment and Anguish that follows the love of the World! Oh that wicked men
would thus converse with their own souls! Is it so, that I must turn or dye,
must be converted, or condemned? 'Its time for me then to look about me; how
have I foolishly dentured the loss of my precious soul these many years? how
comes it to pass that God should take more care of my soul, then my self? Oh
God for bid that I should neglect this any longer? Must I turn, or dye? Oh
happy day! oh happy hour that is that is lest me to Repent in! Now will I set on
a resolution to get assurance of my salvution, before I give any sleep to my
eyes, or slumber to my eye lids. By the grace of God I Will resolve presently to
turn, and to forsake my former courses, and give my self up to goioance of the
Lord God. Shall the Lord be thus compassionate to my poor Soul as to delight in
my Salvation? And shall I Miserable Wretch delight in my Damnation? shall God
say unto me, turn? and shall I not resolve to turn.

1. Consider first. That it is the inviolable and unchangeable Law of God, that
wicked men must turn or dye. Romans 8.8. Now, if any man be in the flesh, he
cannot please God. Psalm. 11.5. The Lord loves the righteous, but the wicked
his soul hates. Psalm. 7.16. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the
Nations that forget God. These Texts are plain enough to the view of every poor
soul; If thou art one that believe, here is enough to satisfy thee, that
wicked and ungodly men they must either turn or dye; be converted or condemned;
if you see not, 'its because you are wilfully blind: To what purpose does God
send his Messengers to warn you? if you will not beliede God by the mouth of
his Prophets, who does entreat you to us reconciled, yet you lend the deaf ear
to them; Yet let me tell you, if you will not hear the voice of God here
pronouncing sentence of Salvation to you, yet you shall hear his voice
pronouncing the Sentence of condemnation against you hereafter.

I beseech you therefore as you love your souls, not to quarrel with God and
his word, but stoop to it. Are you yet unconverted? know this, that ers long
you must be converted or else condemned. I beseech you therefore neglect not
your own happiness any longer, least you be guilte of your own blood, Read but
the 8. verse of this 33. of Ezekiel, and you shall see how the case stands;
When I say to the wicked, wicked man thou shall surely dye. If thou do not
speak to warn the wicked man of his way, the wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hands. You see there that the
Ministers of the Gospel must preach. and you must hear; and let me tell you, it
is easter to hear of hell then feell it, and yet though you think it a
unwelcome Doctrine, that the Ministers of the Gospel should galt your tender
ears with truths that seem so harsh and grievous: Yet it is the duty of every
faithful Minister of Christ, to deal truly and faithfully with souls; for we
shall in no wise escaps, unless we strive to enter in at the narrow way which
leads unto life: For Salvation or Condemnation will suddenly bring all things
to an end; and when it is too late, we shall here some crying out (What have I
done? what foolish courses have I taken? upon what low accounts have I ventured
the eternal welfare of my poor soul? would I had but considered this a little
before? but alas now it is too late, the Sentence is past, and I am hurryed
into everlasting destruction.) Consider this all you that forget God; That your
day of pleasure will last but a little while; your Laughing will be turned to
Mourning: your Joy to anguish, your small and short pleasure here will be
turned to eternal pains and torments hereafier.

2. Consider this all ye wicked and ungodly sinners, that if you will but yet
unfainedly turn to God, it is his promise that you shall live and not dye. The
Lord professes that he takes no delight in the death of a sinner, he had
rather they would turn and live. God does not shut up the door of mercy against
you, but you shut it against your selves: mercy stays for you; patiently waits
for you, yea Christ himself waits for you: Oh how happy might you be, if you
would but turn to him! and if you turn not, here is a massenger of wrath, death
to be pronounced against you; there is a wrath that you are already under, and
a death you are born under, and it is you have brought this death upon your
selves: There is also another death, which is a remediless death and a much
greater torment then the first Death, and this death falls on all those that
are unconverted. God first offers you mercy, if you will turn? and to those
that will not turn, he sends this message, that they must expect nothing but
condemnation. If you will come at the call of Christ, you shall be converted?
If you will become new creatures, God has not a word of Damning Wrath or Death
to speak to you? but on the contrary, Life, and Iay, and Peace, Heaven and
happiness: the oldest sinner, the worst sinner of you all, if he will but turn,
he shall have Mercy and Salvation. Oh then if you love your Sovles turn! build
on Christ the Rock and New Foundation, Learn to mortify the flesh and live
after the Spirt.

If you will but turn, and come into a way of mercy, the Lord will be ready to
entertain you. If you trust in God for Salvation, he is engaged by his promise
to save you.

The Lord will be a Father to none but his children; he will save none but
those that forsake the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and that come into his
family, to be members of his Son, and have communion with his Saints. But if
they come not to Christ, and are condemned, it is long of themselves, for Gods
doors are open, and he is still ready to receive you if you turn to him with
all your heart, for his promises are yea and Amen, and he will not fail in the
least titils of what he has said; if you repent, you shall be saved; and if he
has said, they that repent not shall be damned, his word shall be fulfilled;
For God is truth, and in him there is no lie.

3. Consider this, That God takes delight in men's Salvation, but not in their
Damnation; He had rather they would turn and live, then go on in sin and dye:
the conversion of sinners is the delight of his soul, yet that Justice might be
executed, and his Truth fully vindicated; God is resolved, if you will not be
converted you shall be condemned; Yet God is so far your friend and against
your Condemnation, as he befeecheth you to be recontiled; warns you of the
donger you lie in; sets before you Life and Death, and destres you to accept of
his mercies, and not to damn your own souls; but if this will not do, then he
is resolved on your Condemnation, and commands his Prophets to say unto you
these words (O wicked man thou shall surely dye!) It is in rain for you to look
for heaven, or to hope for it, for it can never be while you remain in this
unconverted, dark and dead condition for in this state you are his enemies by
nature. Yet for all this, the Lord takes pltasure in the conversion of his
enemies: F^or if God had rather you were Damned then Saved, he would not then
so much entreat you by his daily kindnesses, by giving you all the means of
this life to lead you to Repentance; he would not set so many Examples before
your Eyes, no nor wait on you so patiently as he does from day to day, from
year to year; these be not signs of one that takes pleasure in your death.

If it had been his delight to have seen you go to Hell, how easily could he
have done it long ago? how eastly before this time could he have catched thee
away in thy sins, with a Curse, or an Oath, or a Lie in thy mouth in thy Pride
in thy Drunkenness, in thy deriding the ways of God? how eastly could he have
stopped thy breath, or tamed thee with his Plagues, and made thee sober in
another world? how easy a matter is it for God to rule the songue of the
Prophanest Rayler? tie the hands of the most Malieious persecutor; God can make
them know that they are but Worms: If God should but frown upon any sinner how
soon would he drop into the Gave?

If God should give Commission to Angels to go and destroy ten thousand
sinners, it would quickly be done? how ^astly can God snatch sinners away in a
moment, and set them before his Dreadful Majesty, where he shall see ten
thousand times ten thousand glorious Angels waiting at his Throne, and thou at
the Bar pleading thy cause. Should then a^k thee these words (What have thou
now to say against thy Creator? his Truth, his Servants or his holy ways; now
plead thy cause, what can thou say in excuse of thy sins? now give an account
to thy Maker of thy life, of thy time, and of all the merci^^ thou have had,)
Oh how would thy stubborn soul have melted, thy proud looks have been beaten
down, thy stont and proud words turned into speechless silence. A word of his
mouth would take thee off this present life; If he should say unto thee, live
no longer? or l^ve in hell, tho^ could not disobey? what can thou say? does
the Lord take pleasure in thy death? surely he does not. If he did, he would
not, he could not have given his Son to redeem us from death. Christ then would
not have sweated crops of blood for us had be taken pleasure in our death, he
would not have been so long in fastings, praying all night; not her would he
have suffered his bitter and cursed death upon the Cross, pouring out his soul
a Sacrifice for our sins, if ^e had delighted in our death. If you had but
heard Christ bemoaning the estate of disobedient and impenitent people, in
Matthew. the 23. and 27 verse. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thee as a Hen gathers her Chickens, but ye would not. If you had
heard Christ on the Cross praying for his persecutors, (Father forgive them,
they know not what they do) would you thought he had delighted in the death of
the wickd. If you will not believe this, you have the Word and the Oath of the
Lord for it, and dare you question the Word of God, or the Oath of God: for God
has sworn that his pleasure is not in their Death, but in their Life, as in
Hebrews 6.13 16 17, 18, verses.

Be entreated therefore, oh thou unconverted sinner that hear these words,
to ponder a little with thy self, who it is that takes pleasure in thy
damnation: Certainly it is not God he has sworn he takes no pleasure in it.
You dare not say you swear, and curse, and lie, and blaspheme, and drink, and
dee all this to please God: neither do any that bare the image of God, take
pleasure in your death: God known it is small pleasure unto his servants the
Ministers of the Gospel to see how madly you venture your Eternal Estate, and
how wilfully you run into the very flames of Hell.

'Its small pleasure for any of the servants of God for to see your
carelessness in the ways of God. Who is it than that takes pleasure in your
death? none but the three deadly Enemies of your Souls, the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil.

The Devil takes pleasure in your sin and death and you cannot please him
better then to see you run into all manner of uncleaunesse, to see you Drunk,
to hear you Curse, and Swear, and Lie, this is his delight. It is the delight
also of wicked men, and it is pleasing to your flesh; It is the flesh that
would be pampered, that delights in Sports, in Lust, in Ioleness, this is the
God you serve.

Oh wretched Sinners! Oh miserable undone Souls! should the Flesh be pleased
before your Maker? will you displease the Lord, to please your brut^ish
Appetites? Is not God worthy to rule the flesh? if he shall not rule it, he
will not save it? then what win become of it? I fear it is preparing for its
own Displeasure. Do thou love strong Drink, and sweet Morfels, and thy Ease,
and Sports, and to be some body in the World? But do you love the Curse of God
with it? Do you love to stand trembling at the Bar of God, and to be judged to
everlasting fire, and to be tormented with Devils for over: Are thy pleasures
here on Earth which endures but for a time, worth the suffering of Eternal
fire.

Consider these before you go any further, which I am sure every man has
reason to consider, that has a soul to sav^ or lose.

Therefore if you will go on and dye, rather then turn and live: Remember it
was not to please God, but the De^ill, the World, and the Flesh; And if men
will damn themselves to please themselves, and run into endless torments for
delight, and have not the^ wit, nor grace to bearken unto God or man that would
reclaim them, what remedy, but they must take what they get.

4 Consider this also, That she Lord has quit himself of the death of sinners;
It they are condemned, it is long of themselves, they dye, because they will
dye. Oh unprofitable, rebellions Children, that will not bear the voice of
their Father. May not God say to you as he said concerning his unprofitable
Vine-pard, Isa. 5. Chap. and 1, 2, 3, 4, verses, Judge I pray betwixt me and my
Vineyard: What could I have done more that I have not done in it? I planted it
in a fruitful Soil, I fenced it and gathered out the stones, and set the
choysest Vines, yet it will not grow and bring forth fruit. Th^^ may God say,
and lament over England. Oh unprofitable England, what shall I do with you? I
have planted you a glorious Church; I have watered you with the dew of the
glorious Gospel; I have made you Men, and enoued you with Reason, I have given
you a Righteous Perfect Law, and you have broken it; you have despised my
Gospel, you have undone your Souls: may not God in Justice take the Light of
his Gospel from us, and give it unto others that may make better improvement
of it, to his Honor and their eternal welfare. What could God have done more
then he has dohe for us? Has be not waited long on us? has he not entreated
us to turn by the mouth of his faithful Ministers? has not his Holy Spirit
been often stirring with our hearts, and saying to our Souls, ( turn, turn,
sinner, whether art thou going? What art thou doing? Do thou know what will
be the end? How long will thou hate thy friends, and love thy Enemies? when
will thou deliver up thy self unto God, and give Christ Jesus thy Redeemer full
possession of thy Souls? When shall that once he?) Has not the Spirit thus
pleaded with thee? has not Life been set before you, and the Joys of Heaven?
And has not the certainty of the everlasting torments of the Damned been
declared to you. If you dye now, it is because you will dye: You will not have
this Man to reign over you, Luke the 19. Chapter, and the 14. verse.

O you foolish people, and unwise, Why do you requite the Lord thus? Isaiah
1.2, 3, 4. verses. Why do you forsake the Lord for nothing? why do you
neglect Eternal Life, to hunt after the Chaff and Feathers of this World?
Wherefore do you spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor
for that which profits not. Isaiah 55. Chapter, 1, 2, 3. verses. Awake now
and see your own folly; Seek the Lord while he may be found: Call upon him
while he is near. It is the Lords promise, If the wicked man will forsake his
evil way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the Lord, he will
have mercy on him, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon. The Devil
cannot pardon sin, no, it is in Gods power only: And as it is in his power only
to pardon, so he has a wilt to pardon, for often has he proclaimed his free
invitations, to poor sinners. Revelations the 22 Chapter, the 17. verse, Let
him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him come and taste of the
water of life freely.

Oh stiff: necked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, that thus are willing
to ruin themselves; when God has called, you would not come: How know you how
soon you may provols God to resolve you shall not taste of the Wedding Supper?
If you dye unconverted, all the world cannot save you. Oh wretched sinners! why
will you be so cruill to your selves? Know you not this which is a real truth,
that you must turn, or burn? If you keep your sins, you must keep the curse of
God with them: You love your Lusts, your Drunkenness, your Gluttony and will
not let them ^o; would you have them bring you to Heaven: If you expect that,
it is impossible; for there ^ntreth none that is unclean. Revelations 21
Chapter, 22. verse. For what communication has light with darkness? Or what
concord has Christ with Belial. You see then I hope by this time the case to
clear, that you must resolve to turn, or dye.

Object. But you will ask me, how shall we turn, we have no power of our
selves? I will therefore give you a few helps by the way, before I conclude.

A Poor sinful soul that would be converted, and turn to the Lord, Consider
the necessity and nature of conversion, you must h^re consider,

1. From what you must turn, that is in a word, from carnal self, from the
flesh that would be pleased before God; from the World that is the enticing
bait to alure your souls; from the Devil the secret Angler for your soul^; and
from all wilful sins: and then you must turn to God the End, and to Christ the
way to the Father.

2. Help is this, Attend upon the word of God, that is the ordinary means to
turn souls to God; be often in hearing, Reading, and Meditating upon the holy
Scriptures.

3. Be srequent in Prayer to God, confess and lament before God your former
lives, beseech God to pardon what is past, and to give you his Spirit to lead
you into his ways, and beg of him to be your guide and your keeper to save you
from all the subtle temptations of the Devil, who watch: th for your souls.

4. Give up your self wholly to the Lord Jesus Christ, the true Physician of
your souls. John 13.6. For there is no other Name under Heaven by which you can
be said. It Is he is the way, the truth, and the life, there is no coming to
the Father but by him.

5. If you mean to turn to Christ, do it believingly; trust God with all you
have; entertain no low thoughts of God: let this be upon you hearts
continually; That God is able to save to the uttermost, all that come unto him
by faith.

6. And lastly, Be sure to neglect no time, but do it speedily. To day wh^le it
is called to day, hear the Lords voice, and harden not your hearts: If you be
not willing to turn to day, you will not be willing to turn to morrow: call
this to mind, that as long as you neglect this work, you are under the guilt of
many thousand sins, and under Gods wrath, and you stand at the very brink of
hell. Up then presently and fly as for your lives, for you have staid too long
already, and wronged God too long. For God sake therefore turn, it not for his,
oh for your own precious soul sake resolve to turn and live: stand not
wavering any longer, for it is not a matter of trifling, but of Eternal
moment, for if you dye in your fine, you dye eternally, and then you are undone
for ever.

Let me add one Use more, which shall be of Terror to affrighten those that are
not resolved yet to turn.

Use. You unconverted sinful wretches that always vex the Holy Ghost, as your
Fathers did, so do you. Know assuredly, that the righteous God will not be
mocked: For if you turn not, you shall surely dye, and be damned? its as sure
as if it were already done, at the dreadful day of the Lords appearing: the
Hills nor the Mourtains shall not hide you from the presence of the living God.
Are not you one that has neglected the tender offers of the Gospel? have not
you turned your backs against God? Is it not just then that God should turn
his-back against you? when you call and cry unto him, have you not deserved
this sentence to be pronounced against you. Go ye cursed into everlasting
burnings? What shall I say to you? Oh you careless unregarding souls that
wilfully run into your own destruction! what can you say when you appear before
the great God? can you lay the blame on him? no, you cannot, he has left you
without excuse, for he ^ath done his part as to our salvation, if we dy^ then,
it is because we will ^y^, and will be damned: Had you been but willing to have
been saved: you might have lain with Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, but now you
must to the grief of all your friends, be tormented in hell with Dives, and
shall not have this request granted you. To have one drop of water to cool your
tongue: Whereas you might have enjoyed heaven and happiness after death, if
converted; now you shall enjoy nothing but hell and horror, because you dye
unconderted.

Therefore he persuaded, all ye poor miserable souls that are as slaves of
Satan, be persuaded while you have a day of grace to turn and live, and not to
go on in sin and dye.

Which shall be the daily prayers of your poor and unworthy Servant for the
sake of Christ.

T. P.

The end of all is, Sinners turn,
Lest in hells flames thou ever burn.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are sold by Charles Tyus at the three
Bidles on London Bridge.
The wise Merchant, or the Pearless pearl by T. Calvert, Minister of Gods Word
in the City of York.

The Christian Combat, or, his true spiritual warfare, by C. Love, L. M. of
Gods Word in the City of London.

The book of Graces, with Prayers for morning and Evening: all but three pence
price.

The Sinners Warning-piece, or, Heavens Messenger, by Tho. Robins B. of D.

Man's chief Guide to Salvation, by T.R. B. of D.

The Scholars Winter Garment, or the the Garment of Righteousness, by T. R. B.
of D.

A Wonder of Wonders, or Gods people the worlds wonder, by K. Hough.

Englands Golden Legacy, or a brief, description of the mercies of God bestowed
upon England, by L. P.

Gods Message from Heaven to Sinners on Earth. by T. P. B. of D. L.

These five last are but pence a piece, and very seasonable for these sinful
times in which we live.


