A SERMON PREACHED Feb. 2. 1689/90. WITH An Addition of what was further
designed on that Subject.

By RICHARD PEARSON, Rector of St. Michael Crooked-lane.

Tenere non potes, potes non perdere. LONDON, Printed by J. Redmayne. 1690.

THis Discourse was preached only to page 17. the further Prosecution and
Continuance of it (which you are here also presented with) being interrupted
through some Circumstances which need not be now repeated. God Almighty grant
that the Whole may find Success with the Reader, answerable to the sincere
Intentions of the Author.

ROMANS II. XXI. Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy
self?
THIS whole Chapter consists mostly of a severe Invective against the seducing
Teachers of the Gnostick Sect, who though to avoid Persecution, and to keep
themselves in a whole Skin, they basely temporized and sided, as they saw
Occasion, with each of those Three disagreeing Parties, were yet indeed
themselves neither Sincere Christians, nor Honest Jews, nor Good Pagans. And
though they vaunted themselves for the only Knowing, and most Profound Doctors,
yet their Lives were no other than a manifest Contradiction even to their own
Doctrins; whilst they both practiced and freely allowed the same Things in
themselves, for which they most sharply Condemned others. A thing so extremely
Unnatural and Ridiculous, that the Apostle here in my Text, Appeals to their
Consciences, and is willing, even in their own Case, to make themselves the
Judges of the monstrous Folly and Absurdity of such Proceedings. -- Thou
therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self?

In Discoursing of which more than Self-answering Question, I shall follow this
Method; and observe,

First, That they who undertake to be public Teachers and Instructors are
indispensably bound, never to deliver any Doctrine unto others, but such only,
both the Truth of which they do first most firmly believe, and are ready also,
in spite of the utmost Hazards to put in practice their own selves: And that to
be contrarily affected, or disposed is monstrously Absurd and Unnatural, most
Shameful and Abominable.

Secondly, That notwithstanding this, and as Absurd as it is, yet this is so
far from being impossible, or any new Thing, that scarce any Thing is, or has
been more common, almost in all Ages of the World, than instances of such
Persons, whose Lives and Practice have been a flat Contradiction to their own
Doctrins.

Thirdly, I shall consider some of the great Evils and mischievous Effects upon
others, that are too naturally consequent from the Consideration of a multitude
of such Offenders.

Lastly, I shall offer to you some proper Considerations and Advice, by way of
Antidote or Remedy against the Poison, and Infection of such most scandalous
Examples.

First I am to show, That they who undertake to be public Teachers and
Instructors are indispensably bound, never to deliver any Doctrine unto others,
but such only, both the Truth of which they do first most firmly believe, and
are ready also, in spite of the utmost Hazards to put in practice their own
selves: And that to be contrarily affected, or disposed is monstrously Absurd
and Unnatural, most Shameful and Abominable.

It Is agreeable to the course of Nature, as well as the Rules of Christian
Simplicity; and such for which we have our Blessed Savior's own Example, That
we should first do our Duty our selves before we presume to teach others. He
who Preaches experimentally, and not merely from his Head, but what comes from
his very Heart and Life; nothing but what he himself verily believes and
practifeth, such a one will far more effectually work upon his Hearers; who
well perceiving that the Man himself is in good earnest, will easily be moved,
by what he says, to the love of Virtue, and the practice of their Duty; as
powerfully encouraged to the same, by the most evident Demonstration both of
the Necessity, Happiness, and Possibility of the Thing, from the very Example
of him who exhorts thereto. And how acceptable is the Speech of such a one,
whose Heart, and Tongue, and Hand, (Men know) do mutually agree and go
together? And how apt are all tolerably well disposed Persons to hang upon the
Lips of such a one? Whilst what he says has quite another kind of Relish and
Success, than the very self-same Words would have, if delivered to them by any
other Person not so qualified: From whose Mouth, perhaps, they would have no
other Effect upon them, than an eloquent Oration repeated by a Parrot; which
could serve only to move Laughter. There is scarce any Object more Shameful or
Absurd, than a Person altogether rude and unpractised in the particular Art, or
Science, which he publicly professes. He appears ridiculous in the Judgment
of all, and every Man is apt to treat such a one with deserved Contempt and
Scorn. And by how much any Profession happens to be in it self the more
generally useful and beneficial, by so much the more ridiculous still does that
Man render himself, who without any Skill or Practice therein, sets up for a
Master; and having never sufficiently learnt himself, does yet take upon him to
teach the same to others. But of all others, an immoral Philosopher, and much
more a vicious Christian Divine, who Preaches one Thing to others, and himself
Acts the quite contrary to it, is certainly the most fulsom Contradiction, and
absurd Spectacle in the whole World. So that, in this case, the Poet spoke the
common Sense of all Mankind, when he said; (...), I abominate such a Teacher,
as has not yet taught himself. That of Eliphaz to Job, had it been a true one,
would indeed have been a very shameful Accusation, Job 4. 3, 4, 5. Behold, thou
have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak Hands. Thy Words have
upholden him that was falling, and thou have strengthened the feeble Knees. But
now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it touches thee, and thou art
troubled. Nor indeed can any one, who is to correct the Manners of others, and
pretends to be a Spiritual Doctor, have a more sharp and reprochful Reflection
cast upon him, than the just Application of that Proverb in the Gospel;
Physician, heal thy self. To hear Vice correct Sin; one who is himself in
actual Rebellion, Preach up to others Loyalty and Obedience; to behold a
practical Atheist, or a debauched Epicure, reading to others a serious Lecture
of Conscience, or a Homily of Mortification and Selfdenyal, are certainly
Things naturally apt to make a Man's Blood boil within him, and his Breast to
swell again, with a most just Indignation, at the intolerable Pride and
Injustice, at the extreme Folly, Vanity, and most Damnable Hypocrisy of such a
Monster. For indeed, of all these, and of several other detestable Vices and
Follies, there is always in every such Person a most accursed Complication.

For First, How strangely unjust is it for a Fellowmortal to prescribe such
Rules and Abstinences, to endeavor to impose such Shackles and Restraints upon
others, as he can by no means endure to be concluded by his own self? This is,
in him at least, no other than a manifest Usurpation upon the supposed
Liberties of his Fellow-creaturrs, and looks as if his design therein were only
to monopolize and ingross Vice, and that he would not have others to offend,
merely to gain a larger Field for his own Lust; and for fear he should not
otherwise have room enough to Sin himself. Again, what can be more Proud, Vain
and Arrogant, than a behavior that argues as if such Men thought themselves
Creatures merely designed to dictate to the rest of Mankind? Or, as if by
ascending up into the Pulpit, they were withal so far Elevated above the
Condition of their Hearers, as to be wholly exempt from all those common
Obligations of Men and Christians: Or that their Souls were quite of another
Make, and might be made happy upon far easier Terms, and by quite different
Methods, than those of other Morals.

Nor are such Monsters less full of the most abominable Hypocrisy. For, to be
sure, they who make it so their business, to inform others what they are to
believe and do, would, by their so doing, fain seem themselves both to believe,
and to be very ready also to practice their own Duty. They would be thought
likewise to have their Hearts glowing hot with Charity for other Men's Souls,
and full of Zeal for God's Glory. Whereas, alas! they are mere Insidels and
Painted Sepulchers, and there is really nothing of all this in them. For all
Charity begins at home; and no Man can Love another more than he does himself:
So that he who is so negligent of himself, as to be wholly regardless of his
own Souls welfare, can have no true regard for that of his Neighbor. And
therefore, after all their Profane Eloquence and Religious Cant (for how True
and Orthodox soever it may be in it self, to such Men themselves it is no
better) after all is done, let them pretend what they will, It Is not Charity or
true Zeal that puts them upon the Performance, but some other base and much
inferior Motive; which can be nothing else but either a desire of filthy Lucre,
or a principle of Ambition and Vainglory.

In short, The Proceeding of those who Preach well, and yet Live ill, is most
ridiculously Foolish and Absurd, and their Condition extremely Miserable and
Desperate, upon many accounts and reasons.

For First, Suppose such Men could indeed have Charity enough to design therein
any thing of their Neighbors welfare: (as I have shown they cannot) Yet what
reason have they to expect, that any thing they say, should ever prove
Successful to that purpose, or tend in the conclusion to any thing else but
their own Reproach? For who, I pray, would ever be persuaded by that Man, who,
after he has done Preaching should plainly tell his Auditors, That he himself
did not belief one Word of what he had delivered to them? But now every Man,
whose habit and course of Life is a manifest contradiction to his own Doctrine,
does, in effect, say as much as this comes to. Several of the Ancient Emperors
of China were so weak, as to believe a sort of Physicians, who made it their
business to study, and ever and anon pretended to have found out an Expedient
to make them become Immortal here; but should any one of those Juglers, when he
himself lay just a Dying, have affirmed, though with never so much confidence,
That he had indeed found out Secret, but would not discover it, unless the
Emperor would first setle such a certain Estate upon the Discoverer's Children:
I suppose, in this case, that none of them could have been so Foolish, as to
credit the Asseveration; but must needs have seen through the ridiculousness of
the Imposture: In that had the Man really found out any such Matter, he would
certainly have first made use of it himself to prevent his own Death. So those
Persons do enough perfectly to discredit their own Doctrine, who tell other Men,
that the practice of such and such Virtues, is the only way to be happy here,
and to obtain eternal Life hereafter; whilst yet they notoriously neglect to
practice the same themselves. And, indeed, this Doctrine could not reasonably
have been believed, even from our Savior himself had he himself lived ill. But
yet here now I would not be so understood, as if I affirmed, that a bad Man can
never be instrumental toward the Conversion of others; (for the same Motives,
which for want of belief, or consideration, prevail not upon himself, may yet
from his Mouth be Successful upon others; and God does sometimes so bless his
own Word, though conveyed through such impure Conduit-pipes, as to render it
effectual) but my meaning is only this; That the quite contrary practice of the
Preacher does very much discredit the best Doctrine, and is such a very great
disadvantage thereto, that, considering how the generality of Men stand
affected, it does but seldom prove Successful; nor can Men well Credit or
Embrace what such a one says, merely upon the score of his own Authority. And
though such Men do happen to persuade some, yet

Secondly, in the mean time, They must needs upon other accounts, make their
Profession become extremely Difficult and Unpleasant to themselves. For every
thing that is Forced and Unnatural is always so: But what can be more
Unnatural, than to Force their Heads to be almost continually taken up with
such matters, as their Hearts are not at all affected with, but have really the
greatest aversion to? To which I may also add, whilst they are Meditating what
to say to others, how impossible it is for them to avoid being ever and anon
tormented with the severe Stings and Lashes of their own accusing Conscience.
To say nothing, how their Employment Forces them to provoke others, to be
continually Scoffing at, and Reviling them with their own Doctrins; whilst all
their Exhortations and Reproofs and naturally recoyl upon themselves, and are
made to fly in their own Faces, and turned into so many bitter Satyrs against
their own selves. There being nothing more true than that of Seneca, who
pronounces concerning such Philosophers, as instruct others well, but
themselves live ill; Ad suum ipsorum esse convitium disertos, That they are
Eloquent only to their own Reproach.

Thirdly, The Condition of such Persons is very Desperate, and they must needs
be extremely hardened against Repentance, as well by their having got a habit to
contemn all the Holy Directions, and by their having so frequently resisted and
despised all those Powerful Motives and Considerations, which they have made it
their Trade to suggest to others: As also because their Pride of Heart, in
being professed Teachers, makes them wholly Deaf to the Pious Exhortations and
Remembrances, and perfect Proof against all the Charitable Rebukes of others;
whilst any thing of this Nature is usually rejected by them with the highest
Contempt and Scorn. Just as the Pharesaick Doctors treated the poor Man in the
Gospel -- Thou were altogether conceived and born in Sin, and do thou
presume to teach us? John 9. 34.

Fourthly, Another great Misery is, That such Persons cannot (in all
probability) long continue to preach True and Orthodox Doctrine unto others, but
(as most other Heretics have been moved to do, upon this very score) will find
themselves forced, at last, to change the Truth they have all along asserted,
for some vile Lie or other, that may better agree with their own vile Lust. And
this, as well the better to avoid the Stings of their own Consciences, as also
hoping thereby to silence the Outcries of others, who are apt to be
continually upbraiding them with the great absurdity of living against what
they Teach; though, at the same time, they fall into no less ridiculous a
Contradiction; being forced to say one Thing to Day, and the quite contrary
thereto the very next. And however, if nothing of this prevails with such a one
to broach Error; yet if there happen any extraordinary Revolution, or such an
Alteration of public Circumstances, that his former found Doctrine may chance
to cost him dear, or prejudice him in his Worldly Interest, it is then
impossible for him any longer to hold out; nor can he find in his Heart to
espouse a Persecuted Truth, but is easily frighted into the most shameful
Recantation, or Abjuration of all he had said before.

Lastly, Though such a one could continue always to teach Truth only; yet
whilst he Acts quite contrary to his Preaching, all his own Sermons will be
sure to rise up in Judgment against him, and serve only to give Sentence
against himself, and plunge him into all the Shame and Misery of
Self-condemnation at the last Day; when it shall be said to every one no better
qualified -- Out of thy own Mouth shall thou be judged, thou wicked Servant.
Thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art that judge: For wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same
things. And think thou this, O Man, that judge them who do such things,
and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? These now are
some of the great Mischiefs which these Wretches bring upon themselves, by thus
taking God's Law into their Mouths: (for as to the Evils which they bring
thereby upon other Men, I shall speak of them hereafter under another Head) And
in short, there is so much Folly and Disgrace, so much Misery and Absurdity
attending the Circumstances and Condition of the Persons I am now describing,
that there is not the most sordid Trade or Occupation you can think of (though
so mean and trivial, that it is not fit so much as to name it in this place) but
'twere both far more Happy and Honorable for a Man to be of it, rather than be
an Infidel Divine, or Self-contradicting Preacher. And, indeed, did not sad
Experience testify the contrary, one would be tempted to think it a thing
wholly impossible, that any reasonable Creature should ever find in his Heart
to be guilty of such Monstrous absurdity. But this now brings me to

The Second general Thing I am to show, viz. That notwithstanding all this, and
as Absurd as it is, yet this is so far from being impossible, or any new Thing,
that scarce any Thing is, or has been more common, almost in all Ages of the
World, than instances of such Persons, whose Lives and Practice has been a flat
Contradiction to their own Doctrine. The Heathen Philosophers made it their
Profession to instruct others in the Paths of Virtue; and yet how little some
of them observed their own Rules, and how grossly defective several of them
were in their own Morals, is a Thing acknowledged by most Writers of their
several Times, and indeed too Evident and Notorious to need any Elaborate
insisting on. For the Proof of this, a Man need go no farther than the witty
Lucian, who sufficiently Scoffs at, and Exposes most of them upon this very
account. And every one who has been the least conversant in Books, knows how
full the Poetical Satyrists are of the severest Invectives to this purpose. Nay
Seneca himself, that most celebrated Philosopher, could find reason to complain
of several of the same Profession in his time, Qui Philosophiam Ostentationem
scientioe, non legem morum putant; hoc turpiores, quod in eo ipso peccant,
cujus magistri esse volunt, artemque vitoe professi, delinquant in vita. Who
take up the profession of Philosophy merely as an occasion to show their
Learning, rather than that they esteem it necessary to square their own Actions
thereby; in this, so much the more abominable, because they offend in that very
thing of which they would fain be thought Masters; and live ill themselves,
even whilst they profess to teach others the Art of living well. Nor was the
very Author of these Words himself altogether free from the severe Censure
contained under them: Since, if we may Credit that excellent Historian Dio, the
very same Seneca, who had written so much about the contempt of Riches, was
guilty of the most horrible Extortion; excited Nero to the Murder of
Agrippina, (...), as many, and those Person most worthy of belief, relate,
says the same Writer. And still, after he spoken so many great Things relating
to the contempt of Death, when at last he was commanded to die, for having
conspired against that Tyrant, he showed himself so much a Coward, and so
Fearful to try the grand Experiment, that he was fain to persuade (or rather
force) his Wife Paulina to show him the way to die, by first cutting her Veins
with his own Hand; as the before mentioned Historian still gives us the
Account. But why do I speak of poor Heathen? When we find God himself so
frequently complaining in Holy Scripture, even concerning the Jewish Priests
and Doctors, whose Lips should have preserved Knowledge, that they caused his
People to err, by their ill Example. And how does our Blessed Savior tax the
Scribes and Doctors of the Law, For binding heavy burdens upon others, and
grievous to be born, whilst they themselves would not touch them so much as
with one of their Fingers? Matthew. 23. 4. i. e. They did not so much as once
think of practicing those Things, which they commanded and prescribed to
others. How often does he inveigh against them for saying, and not doing? For
pretending to see, and to pull out the Mote in their Brothers Eye, whilst a
Beam was in their own? In short, the frequent Occasion of their observing such
Doctors, whose Words and Actions, whose Speech and Lives agreed not, made it
become an usual Proverb among the Hebrews concerning such Persons -- Their
Voice is the Voice of Jacob, but their Hands are the Hands of Esau. So true is
that of the Son of Syrach, Eccles. 37. 19. There is one that is Wise, and
Teaches many, and yet is unprofitable to himself. Nor shall we find the times
of Christianity to have been so happy, as to want Examples of this kind. For
though in the Age of the Apostles, and for some time after, as the common sort
of Christians lived much better, so the Ministers of the Gospel did generally
both believe, and live up to what themselves taught others; yet in process of
time, and by degrees, the case began to be much altered; especially at, and
after the times of Constantine: Insomuch that that Wise and Religious Emperor
was often forced to remind many of the grave Bishops themselves concerning
their Profession, and roundly enough to reprehend them for their Contentious
and Ambitious Tempers; as Eusebius and others may inform us.

And too many others well deserved that severe Censure, which the Heathen
Historian Ammianus Marcellinus (with no less Honor to the Christian Religion
than with Disgrace, if justly applied, to the Person) passes upon one of them;
who speaking of George of Alexandria, says, That he did this and the other ill
Thing, Professionis suoe oblitus, quoe nihil nisi justum suadet and lene, etc.
Being forgetful of his Profession, which dictates nothing but what is mild and
righteous. And still if we come home to our own Country, we may find the Pious
and Learned Gildas sadly complaining of the same Scandal, and attributing the
fatal Excision of the Ancient Britans, and their being Overrun and Conquered
by the Pagan Saxons, chiefly to the Greediness and Ambition, and general
Corruption of the then Bishops and Pastors of the Island; such, he shows, was
the notorious Repugnancy of their Actions to their own Doctrins which they
taught others.

It would be endless and invidious, as well as unnecessary for me to descend to
later Times: And I could heartily wish, that every Man were not furnished with
too great a variety of Instances to this purpose, even within the compass of
his own Observation. I shall therefore conclude this unpleasant Theme with this
following Remark; (and I pray God avert the Omen, as to our own particulars)
There is not a more fatal sign of the approaching Ruin of any Church and
Nation, than when the generality of her Spiritual Guides, do by their practice
grossly Contradict, and give the Lie to the Truths which they have constantly
maintained: Which makes them ready for any Innovation, and usually obliges
them, for their supposed Credit and Defense, at length publicly to change and
renounce their former Right Principles also, and Orthodox Doctrins; both which
are necessarily attended with such ill consequents upon other Men, as are of
the most dreadful Apprehension.

And so this brings me now to my

Third general Head, viz. To consider some of the great Evils and mischievous
Effects upon others, that are naturally consequent upon the consideration of a
multitude of such Offenders.

And here now, as well for brevity sake, as better order, I shall reduce what I
have to say under these Three Heads.

First, The Evils relating to the Atheistical and Profane. Secondly, To the
Weak and Ignorant sort of Christians. And Thirdly, To those who are sincere and
constant in the profession of the Truth.

First, As to those who are already Atheistical and Profane; this must needs
tend very much to confirm and strengthen them in their Wickedness and
Infidelity; give them no small occasion of Joy and Triumph, and mightily
increase their Number. To Argue and Dispute, does well in its place, and is
both very useful and cessary. And it is easy enough, even at these Weapons, to
basle the stoutest Atheist; but yet (as St. Paul speaks in another case) there
is to be shown a far more excellent way than this; and, when all is done, the
most effectual expedient is not so much to Dispute, as to Live down Atheism and
to Confute it, by Holy Conversation. It Is easy for the Preacher to silence the
Profane Wit, and put him to a nonplus, by what he may say in the Pulpit: But
it is what he does, when out of it, that must effectually convince him. Which,
if it happens to be notoriously disagreeable, this of it self, the Atheist is
apt to conclude, is a sufficient Answer to all the former Arguments; since if
the Preacher himself did really believe them, he could never find in his Heart
(as he observes he does) so to live in the plain contempt of any of those
Commands, which he acknowledges to have God for their Author. And I could tell
you, to this purpose of certain Atheists, who in some relenting Fits a little
before their Death, plainly acknowledged to their Friends, That even in the
time of their highest Infidelity, the sight of any Person, who they had reason
to believe, did really live up to his own Preaching, did constantly strike
terror into their Minds, and was apt to put them into a fit of Trembling:
Whereas, on the contrary, nothing (they found) tended more to harden and
confirm them in their Atheism and extravagant Courses, than the observation of
several Churchmen, who showed such a Greedy and Ambitious Temper, and lived
after such a manner, that they could not be thought to be in good earnest, or
to believe themselves when they talked to others of the absolute necessity of
Holiness, Mortification and Self-denial; when they who in the Pulpit would seem
Religion's main Champions, do yet show themselves mere Runnagadoes-in their
Lives and Actions, then begin all the professed Enemies thereof to Applaud and
Hug themselves, they delight to fix and dwell upon the pleasing Object; such
Persons become their continual Theme, and Argument, both of Discourse and
Recreation; nor is there any other Spectacle so perfectly Reviving and
Delicious to them. And accordingly all the Traps and Snares, and Temptations
imaginable are commonly made use of, by Men of this Spirit, to bring in as many
as every they can of the Sons of Lew to a Sinful compliance with them. In
which, when they happen to be Successful, they are apt with the greatest
ecstasies of Joy and Triumph to cry out (like the great Mathematician upon his
new Discovery.) We have now found out the way to quiet and appeace our own
Minds; and let these Black-coats, for the time to come, say what they please,
their Doctrins or Reproofs shall never any more trouble or torment us. For
since we see they can afford to act the very self-same Things, from which they
have made it their business to deter others, we may certainly enough conclude
(say they) that they themselves believe not what they Teach; but as to matters
of Religion are perfectly of our Minds, and would be sure as plainly to declare
no less, did not their Trade and Interest hinder them. Thus if the major part
of Spiritual Guides can be at any time induced to transgress, these Men readily
conclude therefrom, concerning all the rest of the same Profession. And as for
those who keep their Garments unspotted, and continue in their Uprightness and
Sincerity; the Atheist endeavors all he can to persuade himself, that they are
really no better than the rest at bottom, only more secret and reserved
Sinners, and a sort of more cunning and demure Hypocrites.

So that Ministers, by what they Act, do of necessity either the most Good, of
the most Mischief to Religion of any other People in the whole World. And an
Apostasy in them either from the Faith, or good Manners, is always attended
with a general Defection of others. Nor are Atheists and Infidels, and all the
black Squadrons of the Prince of Darkness so much countenanced, or encouraged
by any Thing to march on boldly in open Triumph, as by the Revolt and Accession
of such Men to their Party. And accordingly, you may observe, That as no where
do Church Men Live more loosely, or are more Ambitious or Fond of the World,
that in Rome and Italy, so no where are the People more generally Atheistical
and Profane, than in those very places. Nay, indeed, when in any other place,
the main Body of the Clergy suffer themselves to be hooked in, or engaged to
act quite contrary but to any one Truth, which they have before constantly
Professed and Maintained; this of it self is a mighty advantage to Irreligion,
and Naturally makes all else they have, or can assert fall into Discredit;
whilst they give thereby but too great occasion to Men of thinking, that they
say, or do nothing at all out of a true Principle of Conscience: But that they
may easily be induced to offend, also in any other particular, upon the like
Trial or Temptation so to do: Which will always be sure in like manner to be
excused, and termed by them a case of absolute Necessity.

And thus much now may suffice to show how much the practice of
Self-contradicting Preachers tends to confirm, rejoice, and increase the Number
of Atheists.

But then Secondly, As to the Weak and Ignorant sort of Christians, the
consideration of this creates many, and most dreadful Evils. For, either First,
It is apt to make them take up with a stupid and brutish Imitation, and content
themselves without any more a do, or farther scruple, securely to follow the
bad Examples of such Teachers. And how ordinary is it to hear many simple and
tollerably well meaning People after this manner Arguing with themselves? It Is
very true, that if I were left to my self, I should be very apt to startle at
this, or that Action, and could hardly find in my Heart to venture on it. But
now when I see so many great and good Men, the famous Doctors of the Church,
hitherto so generally renowned for their Piety and Learning, securely leading
me the way, in the self-same Thing; Why should I poor Wretch, think my self so
much Wiser or Better than these great Lights, as to be afraid to follow them?
Or why should I be so Foolish to scruple it? Especially, since withal my
compliance therewith does so evidently tend to my Secular Interest and
Advantage? I cannot but confess indeed, That I have often heard many of the
same Persons heretofore seem most severely to condemn the self-same Action, as
a Crime most Heinous and Abominable: But yet now, they tell me, that the
different Circumstances quite alter the nature of the Case; and they bring
themselves off with several other nice distinctions. Which though, I confess,
(dull Soul that I am) I cannot understand; yet they themselves doubtless do,
whose Learning is so much transcendent. However, since they who know so much
and have done so well in other particulars, seem to be so well satisfied about
the Lawfulness of this, as to venture their own Souls, Why should not I
likewise venture mine upon the same bottom?

Thus weak Judgments are naturally apt to be led more by precedent than
precept. And what Solomon observes of the wicked Man in general, is
Emphatically true of the Persons I am now describing; They speak with their
Feet, and teach with their Fingers, Prove. 6. 13. And how many Thousands of poor
Souls, who might be for ever Happy, would they but take more safe Methods,
continually run headlong upon their own Ruin, by securely relying upon the
erroneous Examples of their admired Teachers, in spite of all their former
Doctrins to the contrary?

Or Secondly, If notwithstanding all the little Salvo's, false Colors, and
Palliations that can be made use of by such Spiritual Jugglers to amuse them,
some People happen to be of such natural good parts, or unprejudiced
Understandings, as plainly to discover, both the heinous Nature of the matter
of Fact, and the evident Repugnancy and Inconsistence between the practice
thereof, and the former Principles and Doctrins of their present Teachers; then
the notorious Prevarication and Insincerity of those Guides and Pastors, whom
they observe complying therewith, is apt to create such a mighty Scandal and
Offense in the Minds of such Persons, as to tempt them utterly to forsake the
Church and Profession they are of, (though in it self the best and purest in
the World) and to betake themselves into the Tents of the Adversaries on the
one Hand, or the other, and to join Communion with any Heretics or
Schismatics they shall most fancy. Among whom (they are apt to persuade
themselves) that though they may not perhaps find so much Truth, yet they shall
meet with much more Honesty and Sincerity: Since, they think, they have always
observed a far better Consistency and Agreement between their Practice and
Principles, than at present in the generality of those, whose Communion they
are therefore now tempted to forsake.

Or, Lastly, If some Men's better Experience and Observation of the World
happens so far to acquaint them likewise with the gross Error, Deceit, and
Insincerity, that is too generally in other Parties and Professions, as that
they are forced to despair of mending their Pasture, and as bad as they are at
present, know not where to better themselves by a removal; then presently they
are from hence tempted to run into downright Skepticism and Libertinism, and
to set down in a perfect Disregard and Contempt of all Religion in general. And
what more natural in this case, than for them after this manner to argue with
themselves: Since the several Spiritual Guides, who pretend themselves
appointed to conduct us, cannot agree about the way themselves, nor are at all
consistent in their Practice and Doctrine, either with others, or even with
their own selves; Why should we therefore any more trouble our Heads or Hearts
about any thing of Religion? For do not these Men themselves by their Practice,
as good as tell us, that they do not believe there are any Rewards or
Punishments to be expected hereafter? And why should we therefore imagine, that
there is either Right or Wrong, either Good or Evil in any Actions, any farther
only than as the same may tend to our present Pleasure, Honor, or Advantage
here in the World, or to the contrary? Commend us therefore, for the time to
come, to the most Excellent and Divine Hobs, whose several Golden Volumes, in
our Judgments, well deserve to be chained up, and supply the place both of the
Bible, Homilies, and Book of Martyrs, and his Memory to be duly celebrated, as
the only true Confessor, and Father of our Church. Such a fatal Influence now,
and most sad Effect as this, is such Men's Practice too apt to have upon weaker
Christians and enough to stumble all others, but those only, whose thorough
Acquaintance with Religion, and well grounded Experience both of the Truth and
Happiness of the same, had placed them above the force of such Temptations, and
sufficiently secured them against the Scandal of such Examples.

But, yet Thirdly, Even as to those who still remain Sincere and Constant in
the true Profession, a Multitude of such Apostatical Offenders must needs
create to them extreme grief of Heart, and bring upon them many other Evils and
hard Trials. And though they, I confess, who are yet Strangers to the true
Power of Godliness, may perhaps be apt to wonder, that I should here rank their
Grief upon this account in the very First front of their severe Sufferings; yet
they whose Hearts are inflamed with Christian Charity toward their Brethren,
and have a quick Sense of the honor of Religion, and are endued with a true
Zeal for God's Glory, will easily perceive that this is no such slight matter.
For if David was so highly concerned, that, as for his own Sins, he mingled his
Drink with Weeping, so he used to send forth whole streams of Tears for other
Men's, Ps. 119. 136 Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes, because Men keep not
thy Law; If Isaiah likewise grieved so much for the People, That he would have
none so much as to attempt to comfort him, Is. 22. 4. If the Prophet Jeremiah
professes, That his Soul should weep in secret Places for their Pride, and his
Eyes weep sore, and run down with Tears; Nay, if still, as if all this were too
little, he wishes for new Springs to supply the course of his Grief, and to
keep the Current running, Jer. 9. 1. O that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes
a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep Day and Night, etc. And all these did
this only for the Sins of the Common People: Oh! what Rivers then, nay what
whole Oceans of Tears will not a truly Devout Soul be ready to shed, to see
those who should be the prime Directors and main Sheepherds of the Flock, cause
others to stray and wander by their ill Examples? No Words certainly are
sufficient to express, nor can any other Man imagine what Heart breaking Pangs,
and highest accents of Sorrow this sad consideration must needs create, but
only the Soul it self that feels the same. Such Grief as is almost
insupportable, and would be beyond all possibility of comfort, were it not (as
I shall hereafter show) somewhat alleviated by some other considerations. But
still, besides this Grief of Heart it costs them, it occasions also many other
hardships to come upon them.

For, First, All the Hatred and Contempt, all the Malicious Slander, Obloquy
and Scorn, all the Hardships, Inconveniences and Persecutions, which the
smaller number of those who are Sincere, and still remain True to their
Principles, are usually forced in such cases to suffer from the common Sort,
for refusing to swim with the Stream, and because they cannot in Conscience
comply with the general practice; all these Evils, I say, are originally owing
to the Multitude of their false and revolted Brethren of the same Order with
them. Without the countenance and encouragement of whose numerous Examples, the
rest of their now Enemies would never, in all probability, have had either the
Will or Power, either the Opportunity or Boldness, to cast upon them such
Indignities and Affronts, and to treat them with such very hard entertainments.
Nay, indeed, however such lapsed Doctors may, for ends best known to
themselves, for some time fain some Courtesy and Civility toward their poor
afflicted Brethren, from whom they have so shamefully departed, and may,
perhaps, at first entertain a real compassion for the hard Circumstances of
their Condition; and cannot, for the present, so much as suspect that ever they
shall be worse affected toward them: Yet this seldom lasts long, but they fall
by degrees, first to a less Respect, then to a Coldness, and at last to an
absolute Hatred of their Persons. Which also first discovers it self in
disparaging Language -- A small company of pitiful inconsiderable Men; a few
self-conceited, four, obstinate Fellows, who must needs make themselves Wise
and Righteous over much, and more Conscientious than all their betters. Anon
the very name and sight of the Men becomes Odious to them and intolerable, as
giving occasion to their Consciences of upbrading them; so that they find
themselves obliged, in order to their more Tranquillity, to endeavor far enough
to remove such troublesome. Eye-sores: And accordingly enter into consultation
with those in Wisd. 2. 12. and following Verses. Let us lie in wait for the
Righteous: because he is not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our
doings; he upbraideth us with our offending the Law -- He was made to reprove
our Thoughts. He is grievous unto us, even to behold. And thus they usually
proceed on, till at last they turn the most furious and implacable Enemies to
them in the whole World; and if they have an opportunity become the Authors
and Fomentors of the most severe Persecution against them: As we are supplied
with sufficient Instances of this nature, both in the Arian and Donatist
Bishops and Pastors, and other Primitive Apostates. And how cutting a thing
now, think you, must it needs be to receive such treatment from the Hands of
those very Persons, who were formerly their intimate Companions and most
familiar Friends? Who used both to enter into, and take sweet Counsel in the
Houses of God together with them: But now are turned their mortal Foes, merely
because they Honestly persevere in the practice, as well as profession of those
very Truths; which the others also no less constantly taught in the same Holy
Places, and made a shift to practice too, till such times as they found
themselves likely to be loosers, if they continued to do so any longer.

Thus having shown you some of the mischievous Effects of such scandalous
Examples upon others; I now proceed to that which is indeed the most useful and
necessary part of my Talk, and what I accordingly at first did chiefly design;
viz. To offer to you some proper Considerations and Advice, by way of Antidote
or Remedy against the poisonous infection of such Examples.

In the performance of which Task, I am in hopes to make both my self and the
well disposed Reader some part of amends, for that former great grief of heart,
without which (I Am confident) neither he nor I have been hitherto conversant in
the foregoing speculations; on which, I profess I should never once have
entered, much less now troubled the World with them, had it not been merely for
the sake of what ensues, and (as it is always necessary first to discover the
causes, nature, and effects of a Distemper, in order to its Cure) wholly to
make way for, and in order to the better success of this my last both more
pleasing and profitable undertaking. To which therefore I shall now apply my
self, with all imaginable cheerfulness and Alacrity: as deeply mindful of that,
excellent Rule of Plutarch, (...) It becomes not a good man to spend his time
so much in complaints of athers failings, as in endeavoring to correct, and
prescribe Remedies.

And first, Then this very consideration of the commonness of this evil, may it
self very well be made use of, as no contemptible Remedy or Antidote against
the scandal of such examples. And since, as I showed before, this is so far
from being any new thing; that scarce any thing is, or has been, more common
almost in all Ages of the World, than instances of such Persons, whose Lives
and Practices have been a flat contradiction to their own Doctrins; so much the
less reason then have thou to take offense, from thy own particular Observation
of the same frailties. For, in this Case, no temptation is suffered to befall
thee, but such as has been common also unto others before thee. All holy men
have been (more or less) exercised with, gone through, and nobly Conquered the
same Trials. No Age, or place affords not some such Doctors, who act quite
contrary to the Truths which they Teach others. And if the Observation of this
were indeed a sufficient reason to make men fall out with Religion and their
Duty, there could then scarce ever have been in the whole World from the very
beginning of it, so many Righteous Persons as that small number which would
have saved Sodom; and Heaven must have been without People. So that whoever
thou art, that from hence endeavourest to excuse thy self from Duty, and art
resolved never to commence Saint thy self till thou can first see all
Ministers become such; know this, that thou art sure to continue both wicked
and miserable for ever; and would no less certainly have been so, even though
thou thy self had had the liberty of choosing any other time, or place of the
World, almost ever since the Creation of it.

But still you will say, the extraordinary unhappiness of some particular Ages,
may perhaps enable a Man, to object farther after this manner, I confess
indeed, that what you have said is very true; and were they only some few
inconsiderable Persons whom I saw thus acting quite contrary to their own
avowed Doctrins, this I could have made a shift to have born with, as being no
more than what I should in reason have expected, nor could I therefore have
been so much offended thereat. But now that Case is quite different, and when I
behold a very great multitude of such offenders, nay, when I observe the far
greater number of those who have been generally accounted the most eminent for
Piety as well as Learning, notoriously guilty of such a Defection; What would
you have me to say, or think of this matter? And how can I choose, but be most
grievously startled and offended at such an amazing sight, and monstrous
conjunction of examples?

To which I Answer in the general, that when the Case really happens to be
thus, (as sometimes, I confess, though more rarely, it does) this is indeed
enough to shock an ordinary Faith, and greatly to stagger the weaker sort of
Christians in their Religion, and course of Duty; nay, perhaps, it may well
prove one of the greatest scandals and temptations, that even the most
experienced and best resolved Christian can likely be exercised with: But yet
when all is done (I shall show) not such as is so altogether insuperable, but
that by God's Grace, and the impartial use of reason, and a thorough
consideration of things, we may be able to overcome, and be gloriously
triumphant over it. In order to which blessed end, I shall distinctly consider
in the Objection three several things. The Piety, the Learning, and the
Multitude of such offenders.

First, Their supposed Piety and Holiness. In judging of which you may
consider, how very liable men are to be deceived. For all is not presently Gold
that glisters; and it is very possible that they whom thou so admiredst for
their Piety, were all along from the very beginning, no better then mere
Hypocrites. Since even such many times are prompted, through their Ambition and
vain Glory, industriously to make a greater show and glare, as to the external
exercise of some Virtues, than those modest and humble Souls, whose Hearts are
really endued with a sincere principle of Holiness and Religion. And though
thou and others did well, and according to the Rules of Charity, in believing
them to be holy and sincere, so long as in their Lives and Actions you could
not discover any plain Arguments to the contrary; yet after once these
evidently appear, and the rough hands of Esau give the lie to the smooth voice
of Jacob, the Hypocrisy of such Teachers is then sufficiently discovered, and
they become self-condemned, nor does any Charity oblige us any longer to
conclude that they were truly Pious before, but rather mere Hypocrites; who
would have long before also have shown themselves to have been no better, had
they been assaulted with the same powerful temptations; which are now suffered
to beiall them, on purpose to unmask them to the World; and that (as I shall
hereafter show) for the great benefit and the advantage of the Church of God,
and that they who are approved may also be made more manifest.

Or else, if we will needs suppose such Teachers to have been formerly truly
Pious and Sincere, yet we may well credit our own Eyes, and safely conclude,
that they are now ceased to be so. For certainly, it is possible for Men to fall
from Grace. To be naturally and necessarily Good is the sole privilege of God
himself; whilst no Creature is naturally impeccable; nor has God made any sort
of Men any more indefectible, than infallible to their Understandings, as to
their Manners; the Righteous may leave off to be Good, and do that which is
Wicked and Abominable; and when he does so, all his former Righteousness is to
be no more remembered either by God, or Man. And when all is done, that of St.
John is the only firm and lasting Rule, whereby we are to judge in these cases;
He, and he only who does Righteousness is Righteous: And since even the best
have sometimes their failings, we are not to follow them any farther, or to be
led by the influence of their Examples, but only whilst we see them walking
according to the Rules of God's holy Word: But when we behold them acting
contrary thereto, to be so far from thinking this any license for us to
imitate, as on the contrary to be excited therefore to greater fear and
caution, lest we also offend in like manner.

Secondly, As to the Learning of such Men you may consider, That Knowledge does
not always, or necessarily make Men Good; nor is it any new Thing in the World
to see Men very Learned, and yet at the same time very Wicked. Nay indeed, in
many cases, Men could not Sin so against Conscience, nor arrive at such a
Superlative degree in Wickedness, were they not first furnished with a more
than ordinary share of Knowledge and Understanding.

Moreover, What more ordinary, and therefore what less strange, than to see a
great deal of Knowledge without Charity? Which yet when unaccompany'd with
this, can serve only to puff Men up with Pride to make them extremely Restless
and Ambitious, and become so much the more like Devils to themselves and others.

And where is the Man, who, unless he has mind to expose his own Ignorance,
will not easily allow both Celsus, Porphyrius, and even Julian the Apostate to
have been Men of no ordinary degree of Learning? Nor can we deny very many, if
not most, of the ancient Heretics to have been Persons profoundly both Knowing
and Eloquent. Nay there is one I could name, who might he be permitted to appear
in a Pulpit, and 'twere consistent with his Interest to deliver sound Doctrine,
would be able enough by his Learning and Eloquence, easily to put down all Men
for well preaching; nor is there the most accomplished Doctor living, but must
resign up his Chair even to the Devil, and allow him the precedence, if mere
Knowledge were the only Thing to be regarded: And yet that grand Apostate, with
all his Learning, became, and still remains no less, but so much the more a
Devil; nor do I know of any Man who is scandalized at him for so continuing.

Besides, it may help to hinder thy being over much offended at the bad
Examples of such revolted Teachers, when thou shall observe, (as it always
happens in such cases) that they themselves with all their Learning, are not
able to answer their own former Arguments, either for the Truth, or necessity
of practicing those sound Doctrins, which they before delivered and maintained:
But when they attempt any thing of this nature, they usually do it so aukwardly
and unhappily, and with such an evident bias upon them, as may sufficiently
convince any impartial considerer, That they themselves give no credit to their
own disproofs; nor are at all satisfied in what they say or write to the
contrary of their first assertions. Whilst their whole proceedure commonly
amounts to no less, in the Eyes of all judicious Observators, than if they
should make a plain Confession after this manner; such a Doctrine was indeed
once very true, when we first delivered it; and though afterward the same
became, for some time very false, whilst it was not for our interest to
observe, or be guided by it; yet now our turn is served, it is very true again,
and will never be false any more, till such time as it shall happen in like
manner, to be for our present advantage, to have it thought so. Thus, when
learned Men are forced, to play fast and loose after this manner, and to fall
into all the absurdities of self-contradiction, whilst they suffer themselves
to be wholly guided by Secular motives; all their latter feeble attempts to
destroy and discredit, may very well serve (if rightly considered) for the
greater Establishment and Confirmation of those Truths, which they formerly
maintained in their more calm and unprejudiced Temper. In short, since it is so
ordinary, Why should it surprise you, or seem strange to behold Men very
Learned, and yet at the same time extremely fond of the World? How many have
there always been since the declining times of Christianity who have searched
and studied hard, and taken a great deal of pains to be skilful in the
Scriptures, and knowing in the mysteries of Religion, not out of a love to
Truth, or any right Intent to please God the better, but merely that they might
be applauded, and had in admiration by others or that they might grow rich by
their Knowledge? The ingenious Picus Mirandula sadly complains of this fordid
Temper, as that fatal Disease with which some learned Men of his Age were
grievously infected. Who could not believe (says he) that any one studied for
Knowledge, out of any other design than such filthy Lucre. And he speaks of
Two, with whom he himself had some acquaintance, the one of which (though
reputed a learned Man) was not ashamed to confess to him, That he could be
heartily pleased to part with all his Knowledge, if he could sell it for such a
sum: And the other, That he had rather be a Horse than what he was, if he could
but have as much to live upon, as he desired; when yet that Person (says the
same Author) had already enough in reason for any contented Mind.

Now, since it is alas, but too common even for learned Men to be of this sordid
Temper; Why should you then be so much offended to behold such Men, upon
occasion, selling their Learning, and the Truth, by unsaying and contradicting
what they had before said, and done rightly, when by their so doing, you
plainly perceive them to get, or secure that very thing which they always
prised more, and for the sake of which alone they at any time before put any
value upon Truth or Knowledge? Thus, that of St. Paul, Demus has forsaken us,
having loved this present World, may be generally applied also to all other
Apostates howsoever learned.

But I now proceed, in the Third place, to the Multitude of such Examples.
Where, first, you may consider that all things rightly weighed and accounted
for, they are not really so very numerous, as is usually pretended in such
cases. For generally there are no more than Three or Four, or some such number
of cunning and designing Men who have made it all along their business to be
very Popular, and happening to be placed in higher Stations than ordinary, get
thereby the advantage of looking big, and of having their Learning and
Integrity measured by the greatness of their preferments: These Men commonly
are the sole Authors of such revolts; whilst most of the rest of the same
Cloth, without any sufficient use of their own Reason, or due Consideration,
suffer themselves to be wholly led and prevailed upon by the mere force of the
others great Name and Authority, and the hopes of rising higher by their means:
being scarcely able when they come from them to give another any account, or so
much as barely to recite those Arguments, by which yet they pretend themselves
to have been converted. Now all these, (maugure their outward shape and habit)
will certainly have too great an honor done them, if they be allowed to pass
so much as but for half men. They are to be looked upon only as a sequacious
sort of mere Animals, or rather indeed as so many several Ciphers which signify
and stand for just nothing at all in themselves, but serve only to show how
considerable a Figure the others make in the World, and how much value
themselves put on them, upon that account. So that you see, take but away all
these, (as in all justice they ought to be subtracted from the account) and
there will be no great cause to brag of Multitude. And however, let even all
these also go into the Tale, and help to make up the Dead weight; yet the total
Sum of such lapsed Teachers in any particular Age, or Place (which is the only
matter of scandal I am now endeavoring to remove) would be found very
inconsiderable, and just next to nothing, in comparison of the far greater
numbers of those, who in all other Ages and Places, have stood firm and
constant, to the very last, in the same right principles and practices,
notwithstanding all the severest trials and temptations to the contrary. Add
but all these, I say, to the smaller Catalogue of those survivors, who still
tread in the same holy steps, (as all holy men whether living, or dead, are to
be looked upon to belong to, and make up the same general Communion and
Society) and then, what a glorious Army of Martyrs? what a noble Company of
Confessors will you behold, for your comfort and encouragement? Enough, for
number as well as quality, to dazzle the Eyes, and confound the Hearts, of all
those, who may for the present happen to join hand in hand in wickedness, and
endeavor to countenance and encourage one another therein, from the
consideration of their so much vaunted of Multitudes.

But still, suppose the far greater numbers were really on that side, on which
they are pretended; yet what force or prevalence ought this consideration to
have upon any wise man's mind, who is resolved to deal faithfully with his own
Soul, and to be true to his own Spiritual Interest? Certainly, none at all;
unless it could be first proved, That the major part of Pastors, do always, in
all particulars, necessarily determine themselves according to the measures of
Truth and Righteousness. Than which (though I could heartily wish it were true)
nothing is more notoriously false, according to all Experience. For do we not
find that the Priests and Scribes, and the whole Jewish Sanhedrim in general
agreed together upon the condemnation even of our Blessed Savior, whilst
Joseph of Arimathea was the only person we read of who consented not thereto?
And who knows not, what, and how many gross errors, both in matters of Belief
and Practice, were for several hundred years together, promoted and maintained
in the Christian World, by the far greater part of Doctors generally had in
reputation for their Piety as well as Learning; some few only in their several
Ages, still gain saying and withstanding the same?

So that Protestants, of all others, ought by no means, in any case of this
nature, to admit of Arguments drawn from this Topic, the weakness of which
upon other occasions, themselves have so abundantly exposed, and therefore most
deservedly exploded.

In merely civil Affairs, indeed, there is some reason, that things should be
carried according to the majority of Votes; because where there is the greatest
number, there is generally also on the same side, the greatest force and
interest, which is much to be considered in such matters: But in a case of
Conscience, or in matters of Right and Wrong, Truth and Falsehood, numbers are
not at all to be regarded; nor does it behoove a man, to tell Heads, but only
to weigh Arguments. Nay, indeed Multitude is so far from being always a good
Argument of Truth, or of the Righteousness of a cause, that considering the
general frailty and corruption of man kind, it is rather to be looked upon, as
the quite contrary; and we have some reason, at least to suspect (where the
case is before any thing doubtful) that, that may be the wrong way, in which we
behold most men walking; especially when it happens to be very manifest, how
much their secular Interest is also to be met with in the same paths. Besides,
we are assured from Christ himself. That his Flock is small, in comparison of
others, who are therefore called the World; That the many go in the broad, but
wrong way; whilst straight is the Way, and narrow is the Gate that leads unto
Life, and few there are that find it. And God himself forewarns us, that in any
case, We follow not a Multitude to do evil. Moreover, we may remember for how
long time together Gods Church consisted within the narrow compass of one small
Nation; and before that, how 'twas scarcely visible any where else, save in the
one Family of the Father of the faithful. Nay, in the time of Athanasius, it
seemed to be reduced to a single man, whilst the whole World was turned Arrian:
And though I doubt not, but that there were several others who believed
rightly; yet that Bishop was the only Person, who durst at that time so openly
appear for the Truth; and was often removed from his place, severely
persecuted, and banished for doing so.

Now, all this being well considered, what reason have thou, to be at any time
scandalized at the fewness of those who stand to their principles in the time
of trial? Or rather, why should not those few no less learned and far more
pious persons, whom thou well perceivest to be in good earnest about Religion,
in that they persist in the belief and practice of what themselves have taught,
even when it is quite contrary to their worldly Interest, and they meet with
nothing but reproach and persecution for so doing; why should not the example of
these few, I say, be far more powerful to confirm thee in the truth, than that
of the other to scandalize thee out of it, especially; when it shall happen to
be very notorious, by what fordid motives they were prevailed upon, either to
renounce their first principles, or grossly contradict the same by their
following practice; consider likewise, that they who continue firm and
constant, and help to make up the small, but Blessed number, are not themselves
at all staggred, but rather (in some respects) rejoice and triumph at their
very sewness: And why then should thou be ready to take so much offense
thereat? Or, since they are already so few, how can thou find in thy Heart,
to make them still fewer, by thine own revolt? These considerations now may I
hope, serve to answer the usual Objections, and prove a good Antidote against
those scandals which are apt to arise from the Observation of the supposed
Picty, Learning, and far greater number of those who are at any time, lapsed
from the truth.

But Secondly, As the most essectual Remedy against the poison of such
examples, endeavor above all things, sufficiently to sortify your Hearts with
godly sincerity; look that you espouse right principles out of right ends, and
be sure you perform every Duty for God's sake, and as in his presence. For when
once a firm Habit of rectified Intentions and singleness of Heart has (as
certainly it will) enabled a Man thoroughly to relish Duty, and to Taste, and
see how good the Lord is, he will be sure to experience such unspeakable Joy,
solid Pleasure and satisfaction therein, that he would not for the whole World
part with it; and they must first persuade him out of his very Senses, as well
as his Reason, who would prevail with him, to do any thing by which, he knows
he must forfeit the same. So that after thus antidoted with Godly sincerity,
let other men, in whole sholes together, or (if you please) in the most
affected processions, go to make shipwreck of their Faith, and of a good
Conscience; let thousands daily fall on thy right hand, and ten thousand on thy
left, the Plague shall not come nigh thee, the Infection of such examples shall
never once touch thee.

Thirdly, Let the matter of scandal be in it self never so great, yet consider,
that, in such cases, God many times permits a powerful occasion to be
administered, whereby so many Doctors and of so great a name (though all along
no better than close Hypocrites) should at last unmask themselves and fall so
foully, on purpose to try the strength of thy Faith; to make thee become a
Spectacle to Men and Angels; and that it may appear how sincere and
well-grounded thou art in the Truth, who can not be shaken out of thy Duty
and Religion, by all the contrary Winds of false Doctrine, or the greatest
Earthquake of a general Apostasy. Why should thou therefore be so much
troubled or offended at that, which (if it be not thine own fault) will
certainly tend to the great increase of thy Renown and Happiness? For the more
difficult thy Trial and Temptation, so much the more eminent and remarkable
will be thy Virtue in the Conquest, so much the greater the Honor of the
Triumph, and so much the more Glorious thy Reward and Happiness hereafter.

Fourthly, It may very much help to abate thy Scandal, when thou shall consider
the many and great benefits, which usually redound to the Church of God in
general, whilst they who are approved, or the contrary, are hereby made
manifest.

For, First, such discovery does, for the time to come, more effectually secure
pious Persons from being any way misled out of their Duties, by the corrupt
examples or persuasions of concealed Hypocrites. Familiar converse with ill men
is very dangerous and infectious, and apt insensibly to taint, and make a man
tread awry, even before he is aware. And when many secret Hypocrites are mixed
together in the same Comunion with the Faithful, and seem to worship God at the
same Altar; good men are apt to suspect no harm from them, but to give ear to
their Insinuations and Advices; whilst false Friends are always, upon this very
account, most dangerous to the Church, and the true Members of it in
particular: But now when such men have discovered and unmasked themselves by
their open Apostasy, every sincere person is enabled to look upon them as
downright Enemies, and is accordingly sufficiently prepared and antidoted
against their Poison.

Secondly, When sincere persons come once generally and certainly to know one
another, (as by this means they always do) they then become hereby the better
enabled, to love, value, and trust, each other; and have a fitter opportunity
most closely and securely, to combine their several Prayers, Counsels, and
pious Endeavors, for mutual edification, and the Churches welfare.

Thirdly, When, by such Lapses, the Chaff is well sifted and winowed from the
Wheat, so that they who still continue in their Integrity, and stand to their
Principles, have sufficiently discovered themselves to be sincere and hearty;
then may that particular Church, (howsoever greatly decreased in the numbers of
its outward Members) upon good reason, conclude it self in a more safe and
hopeful Condition, than it was before; as more immediately entitled to God's
favor and protection; and now, by such purgation, become more strong, sound,
and healthful, in its Constitution, is therefore far better qualified for a
prosperous State.

Fourthly, The discovery and manifestation which such Lapses make, is of
singular benefit to the Church of God, as it tends most effectually to secure
them from that dangerous error and folly, by which even many well-meaning men
are sometimes liable to be overtaken, whilst they are too apt to forget, that
their spiritual Treasures are conveyed to them, through the mediation of
earthen Vessels as the Instruments: By the experimental frailty of which, they
are sufficiently instructed, for the time to come, not to depend so much upon
any man's mere Authority, or Example, howsoever had generally in repute, both
for Piety and Learning; to call, or make no mere man on Earth the absolute
master of their Faith, nor to have men's persons so in admiration: But to learn
to esteem of Teachers chiefly for their Works sake. In short, when they, who
before were too apt to favor and follow sly Seducers, shall evidently
perceive how grossly they contradict themselves, how foully they have fallen,
and that they really mind nothing but the World; such men are from hence,
presently moved to forsake them, and to betake themselves to more sincere
Guides. So that God's faithful Ministers, notwithstanding (as it sometimes
falls out) the weakness of their bodily presence, or their less share of
Eloquence, become at last, by this means, to be more loved valued, and duly
relied upon by their respective Flocks.

Fifthly, When God sees fit that such a Church shall come afterward to be well
settled and composed again, that manifestation which the former Lapses and
Revolts have made both of men's Integrity and Abilities, or of the contrary,
must needs prove of admirable use; the better to direct those, who are in
Authority so to do, toward the choice of fit Spiritual Officers, and
Governors, and to enable them to know, what particular persons are to be
rejected, and who most safely to be promoted to places of greatest Trust and
Eminency in the Church: then which scarcely any thing can be of greater
Consequence or Importance. And accordingly, they who either Lapsed from the
Faith in the times of Persecution, or were guilty of any heinous Crime, were
hereupon, in the Primitive times for ever after held incapable (though they did
repent) of coming to any Office in the Church, or were excluded and deposed
therefrom, if before they happened to enjoy such Dignity. Whilst, on the
contrary, no Persons were thought so fit, to be promoted to Places
Ecclesiastical, (though perhaps, at the same time, less eminent in Learning) as
they who had manifested their Firmness and Integrity under such Trials. For the
first of these, we may give credit to St. Augustine, whose words are these in
his 50. Ep. to Boniface; Ut enim constitueretur in Ecclesia, ne quisouam post
alicujus criminis paenitentiam, clericatum accipiat, etc. That Constitution of
the Church, by which it is provided, that they who have been guilty of any
heinous Crime, should never, even after their Repentance, be suffered to take
upon them, or return to the Office of a Minister, does not proceed from any
despair of their Forgiveness, but only from a necessary rigor and strictness
of Discipline. By which (he says) they more effectually consulted both the
safety and humility of such Persons; intimating likewise, a little afterward,
what he thought was the reason that induced the Ancients to make so severe a
Canon. Experti, credo, aliquorum fictas paemtentias, per affectut as honorum
potentias. Having experienced the counterfiet Repentances of same, merely to
attain to, or regain such honorable Stations. Which they thought might far
better be suppled, by those whose approved constancy and fidelity might more
securely be relied upon. And remarkable to this purpose is the Epistle of St
Cyprian, concerning his having Ordained one Cilerinus, to be a Reader in the
Church of Carthage; for this was an Office, in those days, highly honorable
This Cilerinus had shown himself an approved Soldier of Christ, glorioussy
Triumphing over a long Imprisonment, and all the most exquisite Torments.
Concerning whom therefore the Holy Bishop, writes to his Flock in these Words
of Commendation. Hunc ad nos, fratres dilact sstini, cum tanta Domini
dignatione venientem, etc. This Man, most beloved Brethren, coming to us with
such singular Approbation of our great Lord, and most Illystrous even according
to the Testimony of his very Persecutors, How can we more fitly dispose of,
than by placing him in the Reading Desk, that is, upon the Tribunal of the
Church, that so, by the advantage of a higher Place, become, according to his
deserved Honor, the more conspicuous to the whole Congregation, be may read
those Precepts and that Gospel of our Lord, which he does so faithfully and
courageously follow? Let that Voice of his, which has so manfully confessed
Christ, be daily heard in the Repetition of those holy Words, which our Lord
himself has spoken. Nor is there any thing, in which a Confessor can be more
profitable to the Brethren, than in this, that, whilst the Gospel is pronounced
out of his Mouth, whosoever hears the same, may be thereby invited, to imitate
the Faith of the Reader.

But I am sensible I have made too long a Digression. To return therefore to
what I more immediately designed. Since, in all these respects, the discovery
of those who are Sincere and Faithful, and who are not, is a thing so highly
advantageous to the Church of God, How can we then suffer our selves to be so
much troubled and offended at those previous Lapses and Revolts, which tend to
make so profitable a manifestation?

I shall now mention but one Remedy more; and yet I know not, whether or no it
be so proper for me to do it, because it is such, as is not within the compass
of their own reach or power to be furnished with who are liable to take the
offense. But however, when ^^^'s Providence as sometimes it does) is pleased to
administer the same, it proves as efectual an Antidote against such Scandal as
any of the former. If any number of such lapsed Persons, could, upon better
consideration, be brought in due season, publicly to acknowledge and confess
their Error, and the corrupt motives which induced them thereto; and that
whilst they still continue under the same Circumstances and powerful
Temptations, which first prevailed upon them to fall into it; this, above all,
would mightily tend to satisfy the minds of weaker Christians, and take off
the former Scandal. And how thoud any thing of Foolish Shame, or Worldly
Interest be able to hinder them from this performance? If they would but
seriously consider, that nothing is, even for the present, more truly
Honorable in the judgment of all Wise Men, than for them to do this, and
withal call to mind that eternal Shame and Confusion, which will be sure to
cover their Faces at the last Day, if now they do neglect it. Let that
astonishing Question of our Savior continually dwell upon their minds; What
will it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and loose his own Soul? Let them
think how many Thousands of poor Souls they must one Day answer for, who are
like to be undone for ever by their bad Examples; and let them also reflect,
when they shall come (as very shortly they must) to lie upon a Deathbed, and
all that either they have kept, or gotten by their shameful Prevarication must
be parted with for ever; what an unspeakable comfort it would then be for them
to have the Witness of a good Conscieece, and to be able to say, truly, with
St. Paul, I am clear from the Blood of all Men. To conclude, I shall leave all
such revolted Teachers to consider with themselves how nearly they may be
concerned in that Exhortation, as well as severe Threatening of Christ to the
Angel, Bishop or Pastor, of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works, or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except
thou repent. And thus I have done with the last general thing I designed, viz.
To offer to you some proper Considerations and Advice, by way of Antidote or
Remedy, against the Poison and Infection of such most Scandalous Examples.

And now, perhaps, some may expect from me (a Task which I as easily could, as
I heartily wish I could not perform) that I should still descend to a
particular Application of what I have hitherto delivered only in a more general
way. But I desire herein to be excused; not that I dare not, for if (all
Circumstances considered.) I could apprehend this to be such, I thank God, I
dare do any thing, that I think to be my Duty, whatsoever it may happen to cost
me for so doing. But I wave it, because it seems to be a thing altogether
unnecessary to bestow any Labor that way, where the case is so evident and
notorious, that every one, I know, has already prevented me therein, and can
easily make the Application himself, without any other help: And besides,
because (to speak sincerely) I look upon this as an Argument far more fit for
Tears than Speech. And therefore one thing only I shall venture to add, as to
my own particular; which as (God be praised) I can say with much Truth, so I
hope I may say it also, at this time, without Vanity; nor do I doubt,
notwithstanding the general Apostasy, but that many others are able to say the
same. -- I thank God, I have been hitherto so happy, is that I have never
delivered to you any Doctrine, but what I first both firmly believed, and
endeavored also, as well as I could, to practice my own sefi. And this I
affirm, with a more particular respect to the true Church of England Doctrine
concerning Loyalty and Non-resistance. Of which whatsoever has been lately
said, or done by some Men to the contrary, has served only (if possible) still
more to confirm me in the Truth of my own Principles. And if, upon this very
account, I must be at length so unhappy, as to be forced from my Place and
Function, God's will be done. I hope I am prepared to bear this also (like all
other mere Misfortunes) both Patiently and with Thansgiving.

And, indeed, if there were no more in the case than this, it is, I think, even
high time to have done Preaching in that Place, where a Man can be no longer
permitted to do so, but upon such hard Conditions only, after the performance
of which he cannot reasonably expect to be ever any more believed in what he
says: Whilst for my own part, I shall ever look upon this of my Text to be both
true Gospel and sound Reason too: And shall therefore be far from making any
Question of it, but that he Who teaches another, ought to teach himself also.

And accordingly, I shall conclude all with that excellent Prayer in our Church
Litany, which, I am confident, needs no mending, but would effectually serve to
mend them, who may think it does, did they but as heartily make use of it, as I
desire you all to join with me therein at present. --

May it please thee, O Lord, to illuminaue all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
with true Knowledge and Understanding of thy Word, and grant, that both by
their Preaching and Living, they may set it forth and show it accordingly; and
that thy Church, being always preserved from false Teachers and Apostles, may
be ordered and guided by faithful and true Pastors, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Some of the more material Faults of the Press.
PAge 12. line 10. for he spoken read he had spoken. p. 26 l. 28. f. that case
r. the case. p. 28. l. 24. f. indifectible, than infallible to their
Understandings, as to their Manners; r. indifectible as to their Manners than
infallible as to their Understandings. p. 29. l. 6. f. therefore r. therefrom.


